A BSTRACT Human anatomy and physiology classes for pre - nursing students at Gordon State College are taught using the body systems approach , focusing on one organ system in each learning unit . The body systems approach does not always generate a deeper understanding of the interdependence of organ systems . To address this issue we developed an analogy - based lab activity consisting of four modules ( Module 1 , cranial bone markings ; Module 2 , cranial nerves ; Module 3 , facial and neck muscles ; and Module 4 , inter - relationships that produce common activities , such as smiling , frowning , chewing , olfaction , vision , eyeball movements , gustation , etc . ) . Unlike traditional lab exercises that follow the body systems approach , this set of lab activities can emphasize the specific interactions between body systems for common body functions , such as smiling . This linking method utilizes a number of the hands - on lab activities featuring text , diagrams , and models . Assessment of these activities demonstrates that students can effectively learn the relationships between different organ systems by using a series of lab activities that emphasize creativity and fun . Key Words : pre - nursing students ; modular systems approach ; linking organ system interaction ; analogy ; effector functions ; hands - on lab activities of cranial bone markings ; facial muscles ; cranial nerves . Introduction Human Anatomy and Physiology lab is often taught using a systems approach that presents the anatomical features and physiological pro - cesses particular to each body system . The body systems approach provides a focus for students to concentrate on one set of structures and functions at a time with a sharper focus . However , this approach may cause students difficulty appreciating the interrelationships that occur between organ systems . An analogy can provide a conceptual framework for assimilating new ideas . Students connect what they are learning to what they already know ( Ambrose et al . , 2010 ; Aubusson et al . , 2006 ) . Anal - ogy , if used effectively in anatomy laboratory activities , provides a successful strategy to help students understand structures and processes that are often foreign to everyday experience . Aubusson et al . stated that thinking without metaphors is like a world without pictures or a colorless landscape . Whether your interest be learning , teaching , or research , metaphor and analogy offer new ways of thinking and the potential to revitalize science teaching , teacher edu - cation and professional development , curriculum and research ( Aubusson et al . , 2006 ) . The activity described in this paper uses analogy to describe a set of anatomical structures and functions in the cranial and neck region . For the purposes of this exercise , the brain and related structures in the head and neck are described as a walled city — the city of Brainington . Brainington is the capital city of the country Humaneous Anatomeous . The country of Humane - ous Anatomeous consists of other regions . These regions include Thoraconeus ( thoracic region ) , anchored by the twin cities of Car - diacus ( heart ) and Respironia ( lungs ) ; inferior to Thoraconeus lies the region of Abdominous ( abdomen ) ; within this region lie the cit - ies of Hepaticus ( liver ) , Alimentarius ( intestine ) , and the twin cities of Renae ( kidneys ) . Using this analogy , we developed four laboratory modules that relate to a set of motor and sensory functions of the head and neck . These modules were posted to an online learning platform prior to the lab activities . First , students completed the three individual anatomy laboratory modules focused on the cranial bone markings , cranial nerves , and facial muscles . Second , students submitted the fourth “ putting it all together ” module . Third , students performed the hands - on laboratory group activities using the laboratory mod - els of cranial bones , facial muscles , and pipe cleaners as cranial nerves labeled I – XII for matching into the proper cranial bone openings . Finally , students created and submitted lab activity post - ers composed of figures provided for the first three modules and pictures of their hands - on lab activity demonstration . These lab modules are designed to aid students in learning about the interrelationships of the body systems ; the foci of these lab activi - ties are common functions such as smiling , smelling , seeing , eyeball movement , tasting , etc . Based on student responses , these basic mod - ules provided an effective hands - on teaching and learning experience . The American Biology Teacher , Vol . 80 , No . 9 , pp . 661 – 667 , ISSN 0002 - 7685 , electronic ISSN 1938 - 4211 . © 2018 National Association of Biology Teachers . All rights reserved . Please direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press ’ s Reprints and Permissions web page , www . ucpress . edu / journals . php ? p = reprints . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1525 / abt . 2018 . 80 . 9 . 661 . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER WHAT ’ S BEHIND THAT SMILE 661 R E S E A R C H O N L E A R N I N G What ’ s Behind That Smile : Using Analogies , Facial Expressions , and Special Senses to Demonstrate the Interactions Between Body Systems in Anatomy and Physiology Lab Classes (cid:129) JAMES WILLIAMSON , CATHY LEE Goals The exercises that are presented in our modules were developed with three goals in mind : 1 . To expose students to hands - on active learning modules using an analogy - based approach . 2 . To help students link body systems in ways that highlight their interactions using anatomy models of skull , head muscles , and pipe cleaners as cranial nerves . 3 . To evaluate student learning and gather student responses con - cerning the ease and effectiveness of these learning activities . Instructional Methods : Use of Analogies Analogies can be powerful teaching tools because they can make new material intelligible to students by comparing it to material that is already familiar ( Orgill & Bodner , 2004 ) . Analogy provides a con - ceptual framework on which new information can be absorbed and assimilated . Effective use of analogy in laboratory activities provides a successful strategy to help students understand structures and processes that are often foreign to everyday experiences . Instructors frequently make the mistake of expecting their students to easily understand complex information that we have accepted as common knowledge . We must have high expectations for our students ( Wong & Wong , 2005 ) , but we as instructors must present the information in ways our students can effectively process it . Materials and Methods The four modules introduce students to the relevant anatomy of the skull , facial and neck musculature , and cranial nerves that innervate the muscles . The skull , through this on - going narrative , is compared to a city , the city of “ Brainington , ” which is the capital of the country “ Humaneous Anatomeous . ” The structure and func - tion of each body system is explained in terms of city services . This comparison , despite the limitations of analogy , will help learners assimilate new concepts more effectively . The first module introduces the skull ; students identify the cranial bones , their locations , and their features . The second module introduces students to pertinent functional brain areas and the cranial nerves that innervate the facial muscles , including each nerve ’ s origin and pathway through the skull . The third module explains the musculature of the skull as well as the muscles ’ functions . The fourth module links the first three mod - ules in relation to particular cranial nerve functions such as wink - ing , smiling , and frowning . Normally one week prior to the relevant lab sessions , these modules are posted in an online plat - form for the students to submit their finished work as an extra credit assignment before coming to the relevant lab sessions . The modules supplement the required pre - lab study , which is based on the lab manual ( Marieb & Smith , 2016 ) . This series of lab activities is used to reinforce and enhance what is learned in lecture . Students are exposed in lecture to the basic anatomy and physiology of the skeletal system ; in lab they identify the bones making up the cranium . Likewise , they focus , in lecture , on the muscles of the face and neck as a component of the unit on the muscular system , and identify the major muscles of the face and the neck in lab . The Brainington activity is included as a part of the lab work associated with the Central Nervous Sys - tem and is completed as an aid in learning the structure and func - tion of the cranial nerves . In addition , the Brainington activity affords students the opportunity to review the skeletal and muscu - lar anatomy of the region and to explore the structural and func - tional connections that exist between structures . These activities are completed both at home and in lab . In lab , students access the human skull , torso , and brain models . Relating anatomical structures on models to the diagrams from their textbooks help them build a 3D perspective of the body . The Brainington student handouts for all four modules can be accessed through this link : http : / / faculty . gordonstate . edu / clee . The City of Brainington : Module 1 — Skeletal System This module guides students to identify cranial bone markings in terms of the Brainington analogy . The city of Brainington is sur - rounded and protected by a sturdy wall composed of plates of cranial bone , collectively known as the skull . The skull provides effective pro - tection for the city and its inhabitants . There are a series of openings in the wall to allow for the passage of vital structures . In this module we will explore those openings in the skull , especially those that provide passageways for the twelve pairs of cranial nerves . ( See Figure 1 . ) Figure 1 . Frontal view of cranial bones . An exercise example of Module 1 : Students are given key words to match the numbered cranial bone markings ( Marieb & Smith , 2016 ) . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER VOLUME 80 , NO . 9 , NOVEMBER / DECEMBER 2018 662 The Information Highway : Module 2 — Functional Brain Centers and Cranial Nerves This module guides students to identify the name , pathway , and functions of each of the twelve pairs of cranial nerves , which sup - port the inhabitants of Brainington in terms of the governmental municipal offices of the town . ( See Figure 2 . ) The Labor Force : Module 3 — Musculature This module introduces students the muscles of mastication and deglutition as well as for facial expression . The rocky ( bony ) terrain of Brainington is populated by the city workers — the skeletal muscles and the receptors for special senses . ( See Figure 3 . ) What ’ s Behind That Smile : Module 4 — Putting It All Together This module provided students the opportunity to “ put the pieces together ” as they explored the interactions between skeletal architec - ture , cranial nerves , and cranial musculature . An accurate understand - ing of body system interactions is critical for medical professionals to correctly evaluate pathology and plan interventions . In this module , students focused on motor functions of facial expressions , mastication and deglutition ( Table 1 ) , and the sensory functions ( Table 2 ) related to cranial nerves . Provided with an action , such as smiling , students have to identify the cranial nerves involved and which cranial bone markings serve as passageways through the skull to reach the effector muscles ( see Table 1 ) . For each sense , students fill in the cranial nerve , and the location where the nerve passes through the cranium . ( See Supplemental Materials for blank Tables 1 and 2 . ) Students Laboratory Hands - on Activities and Poster Presentation Working in groups at the lab , students use skull models and pipe cleaners to identify the pathway for cranial nerves I – XII . Figure 4 shows a student - generated model that demonstrates the spatial rela - tionships between cranial nerves and cranial openings . Figure 5 shows the student ’ s poster project depicting skeletal , nervous , and muscular system interaction during smiling . Figure 6 shows an example of a student - generated presentation that demonstrates their understanding Figure 2 . Inferior aspect of brain showing names and functions of cranial nerves I – XII . An exercise example of Module 2 : Students are given matching questions for names and motor and sensory functions . Cranial nerves I – XII are shown to reach their areas of innervations shown at the tip of the arrows ( Encyclopædia Britannica , 2016 ) . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER WHAT ’ S BEHIND THAT SMILE 663 Figure 3 . Muscles of the anterolateral neck and throat ( on the left ) and lateral view of superficial muscles of head ( on the right ) . An exercise example of Module 3 : Students are given questions that ask them to match names of facial and neck muscles with functions ( Marieb & Smith , 2016 ) . Table 1 . Facial Movements . Action CN involved Passageway through cranium Distribution : Muscle & areas involved Smiling VII Stylomastoid foramen Zygomatic major & minor Rolling Eyeballs III , V , VI Superior orbital fissure Extrinsic eye muscles Winking III Superior orbital fissure Levator palpebrae superoris Chewing V (cid:129) Ophthalmic , superior orbital fissure (cid:129) Maxillary , foramen rotundum (cid:129) Mandibular , foramen ovale masseter Swallowing IX , X , XII (cid:129) Jugular foramen (cid:129) Hypoglossal canal Tongue & pharyngeal muscles , soft palate Head & Shoulder Movement XI Jugular foramen (cid:129) Cranial portion - muscles of pharynx , larynx . (cid:129) Soft palate (cid:129) Spinal portion , sternocleidomastoid & trapezius Swallowing & Speech IX Jugular foramen Tung , pharyngeal , soft palate Table 2 . Special Senses . Sense CN Involved Passageway through Cranium Distribution : Areas involved Vision II Optic foramen Eye Olfaction I Olfactory foramina of cribriform plate Nasal mucosa Salivation V (cid:129) Ophthalmic , superior orbital fissure (cid:129) Maxillary , foramen rotundum (cid:129) Mandibular , foramen ovale Cutaneous sensations of three areas Hearing & Equilibrium VIII Internal auditory meatus Semicircular canals & cochlea of ear Taste & Somatic Sensation IX , X Jugular foramen Tongue , pharyngeal muscles , parotid gland THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER VOLUME 80 , NO . 9 , NOVEMBER / DECEMBER 2018 664 of the interactions between the skeletal , nervous , and muscular sys - tems that produce common functions . Results Of the 28 students enrolled in Anatomy and Physiology I class in the Spring Semester of 2016 , 20 ( 71 . 4 % ) provided feedback and rated the activity after completion of modules . No incentives were given for the students ’ responses to the modules . Surveying was done using the Likert scale from 1 to 5 , with 1 being strongly dis - agree and 5 being strongly agree . Table 3 shows the questions that were asked for the survey and the students ’ responses . Discussion Students submit their finished work on each lab module before starting their lab activities on the same topic . The majority of the students agree that Module 1 ( skeletal structures ) , Module 2 ( cranial nerves ) , and Module 3 ( facial and neck muscles ) are relatively straightforward . However , Module 4 ( putting it all together ) requires more time to com - plete . In addition , students comment that the actual hands - on group lab activity using skull bone models with pipe cleaners as cranial nerves ( Figure 4 ) is very informative . The process of making posters using all the resources from Modules 1 – 4 and pictures taken from the lab activ - ities reinforces their understanding of the linkage between the three organ systems of skeletal , nervous , and muscular functions in the head for specific actions such as smiling ( Figures 5 & 6 ) . Students ’ responses to the survey on the modules show that they saw improvements in their understanding of anatomical relationships and physiology based on the activities described in this paper . Students find linking form and function of different body systems to be challenging . This is partic - ularly true in the head region , which has diverse sensory and motor functions taking place in a relatively small area as well as numerous bone markings to be mastered . After activities structured around the city of Brainington , students said that they better understood anatomy and physiology of the region . They said that the activities helped their understanding more than the lecture or textbook study . In conclusion , linking different anatomical structures for effec - tor functions can be very complex to Anatomy and Physiology I students . The four modules presented a creative way of developing an understanding of body system interactions . This method pro - vided students an enjoyable way of understanding effector func - tions in the cephalic region by the interactions of different organ systems . If desired , the Brainington analogy could be extended to other body regions and systems . For example , the environment of the city of Brainington makes contracts with other areas of the Figure 4 . Laboratory hands - on activities using anatomy model of the skull and pipe cleaners as cranial nerves . Superior view of cranial floor of cranial cavity is shown . Pipe cleaners were labeled with cranial nerve numbers of I – XII , and students positioned them through the correct cranial foramina ( Marieb & Smith , 2016 ) . Smiling Action : Nervous : CN VII : Facial Nerve Skeletal : StylomastoidForamen Muscular : Zygomatic Major Figure 5 . Smiling action by linking three organ systems of cranial nerves , skeletal markings , and facial muscles for sensory and motor functions of the head and neck ( smiling action shown ) ( Marieb & Smith , 2016 ) . THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER WHAT ’ S BEHIND THAT SMILE 665 country ( Humaneous Anatomeus ) , such as with the respiratory and renal systems to regulate the pH of body fluids . Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge Adam Davis , Linda Hyde , and Chris Swars at Gordon State College , ChulHee Kang at Washington State University , and Brian Ciliax at Emory School of Medicine for helpful suggestions on the manuscript , and the students enrolled in Anatomy and Physiology I class during Spring Semester of 2016 at Gordon State College . This work was presented at the 2016 and 2017 Teaching Mat - ters Conferences hosted by GSC , University System of Georgia . References Ambrose , S . , Bridges , M . W . , DePietro , M . , Lovett , M . C . , & Norman , M . K . ( 2010 ) . How Learning Works : 7 Research - Based Principles for Smart Teaching . San Francisco : John Wiley & Sons . Figure 6 . Student ’ s poster showing the selected figures from four modules to link three organ systems for the actions of cranial sensory and motor functions : smell , vision , eyelid and eyeball movement , chewing , taste , facial expression , salivation , equilibrium and hearing , swallowing , taste , and somatic sensation from body , head and neck movements , and speech . Table 3 . Mean score of students ’ survey of the modules . Statement Mean 1 Before the semester began , I did not know how skeletal markings linked with nerves . 4 . 2 2 Overall , I understand how cranial nerves pass through skeletal marking to get to the effectors . 3 . 9 3 Before the semester began , I was familiar with skeletal , muscular and nervous system . 3 . 2 4 Overall , this exercise improved my understanding and appreciation for the processes and techniques used to analyze each organ system ’ s contribution for smiling , chewing etc . 4 . 3 5 I have a better understanding of the relationship between the anatomical structures and processes of physiology after performing those exercises than if I had just heard about them in lecture or read a textbook . 4 . 5 6 Linking organ systems was easier than I initially thought it would be . 4 . 1 7 I feel more comfortable using the online resources and hands - on activities at anatomy lab now than I did before starting this exercise . 4 . 6 THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER VOLUME 80 , NO . 9 , NOVEMBER / DECEMBER 2018 666 Aubusson , P . J . , Harrison , A . G . , & Ritchie , S . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Metaphor and Analogy in Science Education . Netherlands : Springer Science and Technology Library . Encyclopædia Britanica . ( 2016 ) . Cranial Nerve Anatomy . www . britannica . org ( accessed 2016 ) . Marieb , E . N . , & Smith , L . A . ( 2016 ) . Human Anatomy & Physiology Laboratory Manual , CAT Version ( 12th Ed . ) . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson . Orgill , M . K . , & Bodner , G . ( 2003 ) . What research tells us about using analogies to teach chemistry . Chemistry Research Education Practice , 5 ( 1 ) , 15 – 32 . DOI : 10 . 1039 / B3RP90028B Stroke Network . ( 2014 ) . Stroke Education : Locations of the Cranial Nerves ( see image ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . strokeeducation . info / brain / brainstem / cranialnerves / index . htm Wong , H . K . , & Wong , R . T . ( 2005 ) . The First Days Of School : How To Be An Effective Teacher . Mountainview , CA : Harry K . Wong Publications . JAMES WILLIAMSON is a Biology Instructor in the Department of Arts and Sciences , Southern Crescent Technical College , Griffin GA 30223 , USA . CATHY LEE ( clee @ gordonstate . edu ) is a Professor in the Department of Math and Natural Sciences , Gordon State College , University System of Georgia , Barnesville , GA 30204 , USA . Communication about this article should be addressed to Prof . Lee . Affiliate Members The National Association of Biology Teachers supports these affiliate organizations in their efforts to further biology & life science education . Biology Teachers Association of New Jersey ( BTANJ ) Colorado Biology Teachers Association ( CBTA ) Cleveland Regional Association of Biologists ( CRABS ) Connecticut Association of Biology Teachers ( CTABT ) Delaware Association of Biology Teachers ( DABT ) Empire State Association of Two - Year College Biologists ( ESATYCB ) Hong Kong Association of Biology Teachers ( HKABT ) Illinois Association of Biology Teachers ( IABT ) Illinois Association of Community College Biologists ( IACCB ) Indiana Association of Biology Teachers ( IABT ) Kansas Association of Biology Teachers ( KABT ) Louisiana Association of Biology Teachers ( LABT ) Massachusetts Association of Biology Teachers ( MABT ) Michigan Association of Biology Teachers ( MABT ) Mississippi Association of Biology Educators ( MSABE ) Missouri Association of Biology Teachers ( MOBioTA ) New York Biology Teachers Association ( NYBTA ) South Carolina Association of Biology Teachers ( SCABT ) Tennessee Association of Biology Teachers ( TNABT ) Texas Association of Biology Teachers ( TABT ) Virginia Association of Biology Teachers ( VABT ) THE AMERICAN BIOLOGY TEACHER WHAT ’ S BEHIND THAT SMILE 667