Skewed Use in the Steady - State For Electronic Mail and Other Groupware Raymond R . Panko University of Hawai ' i Abstract After an electronic mail system or other groupware tool survives the " critical mass " dzoger and reaches steady state use , its use may be highly skewed . At the individual level , there are likely to be heavy users , light users , nonusers , delegators , and intermittent users . At the system level , an electronic mail system may delivery anywhere from a couple of messages a week to dozens of messages a day to the average user . This paper explores skewed use and its implications for both design and implementation . Introduction If an electronic mail system fails to attract a " critical mass " of users , it will die . The few people who join the system initially find that they have few colleagues to talk with . They begin logging in less frequently , making the system even less attractive . The early users begin dropping out entirely , inaeasing the downward spiral . Eventually , there are few people left , and the system is formally cancelled . Sometimes , death comes in only a few weeks [ Tucker , 19821 . In other cases , the system may linger for a year or more [ Galleta , 19861 . In either case , the system is a failure . Although the critical mass danger has been known for many years [ Hiltz , 1984 ; Panko , 1983 , 1985 ; Tucker , 1982 ; Uhlig , Farber , & Bair , 19791 , it has recently been the subject of a good deal of research [ Markus & Connolly , 1990 ; Rice , 1990 ; Rogers , 1989 ; Thorn & Connolly , 19871 , thanks largely to the critical mass theory developed by Markus [ 1987al . Steady - State Use But what happens if a system has enough users to survive the critical mass danger and reaches a mature " steady state , " in which use pattems are stable ? While a good deal has been written about critical mass , little has been written about steady state dynamics . The purpose of this paper is to begin to address this lack of information about the dynamics of steady state systems . Specifically , we will focus on the phenomenon called " skewed use , " which occurs at the level of both individuals and systems . Individual Level Skewed Use At the level of individuals , some people will use the system a great deal , others very little , and others not at all . This phenomenon has long been seen in ansumer and industrial product purchasing . Skewed use at the individual level is important because one size rarely fits all . Heavy users , light users , nonusers , intermittent users , and delegators ( who let others do the " terminal work " ) all have very different needs for product features and support services . As electronic mail and other forms of " groupware " grow in complexity , these differences are likely to be increasingly critical in product design and implementation . System - Level Skewed Use At the system level , some mail systems deliver 20 to 50 messages a day to the average user [ McKay , 19871 , while others deliver only one or two messages a week [ Danowsky & Edison - Swift , 1985 ; Eveland & Bikson , 1988 ; Markus , 1987b ; Rice , Hughes , & Love , 1989 ; Rice & Shook , 19901 . In the middle , others deliver several messages a day [ Karahana & Straub , undated ; Liffman , 1985 ; Panko & Panko , 1981 ; Rice & Case , 1983 ; Rice & Shook , 1990 ; Steinfield , 19901 . Moving from the individual to the system level , differences in the average number of messages per user and in the percentage of potential users actually using the system have a number of implications for design and implementation . moderately related to system - level use . If this is true , then very lightly - used systems may be , to some extent , " stunted , " delivering only a fraction of electronic mail ' s potential benefits . While there may be legitimate First , it is plausible to expect that benefits are at least 0 - 8186 - 1060 - 3425 / 93 $ 03 . 00 0 1993 IEEE 42 reasons for low use in some systems , the question of benefits remains an important one . Second , systems at both extremes of use place considerable demands on users that may need to be addressed in systems design . Users of heavy systems are literally swamped with message tM1c [ McKay , 19871 . Under these conditions , special tools may be needed to help users prioritize and filter their incoming mail . At the other extreme , users of low - use systems have to prepare messages twice ( once for users , once for nonusers ) and may have to cope with slow pickup by people for whom traffic does not justify checking mail daily or more often . Third , system - level skewed use raises serious questions for research design and interpretation . Since the early lWO’s , many studies have been done on electronic mail . Yet strong use differences in the systems studied make it difficult to compare results from different studies . Certainly , the impacts of a system that delivers two dozen messages a day to nearly every employee are likely to be different from those of one that delivers a couple of messages a week to a fraction of the employee population . Yet many studies do not even report use or report it in ways that are difficult to interpret . For example , Fuk and Steinfield [ 19901’s widely - read anthology , Organizations and Communication Technology contains large numbers of results that refer to unpublished papers and other difficult - to - obtain writings . Rarely are usage data presented in the book , so readers concerned about stunted use problems have to ignore stunted use or dig up unpublished speeches , working papers , and other rare sources . Organization of the Paper This paper begins by looking at managerial and professional “discretion , “ which is the organizational mechanism that gives rise to individual - level skewed use and , to some extent , system - level skewed use . Afterward , the paper looks more closely at individual - level skewed use and system - level skewed use . The body of the paper concludes with a number of technical issues regarding the measurement of use . The paper does not provide new empirical research results on skewed use . Rather , its purpose is to lay out some of the key issues that skewed use raises for researchers and , to a lesser extent , designers . Figure 1 : Range of Discretion ColbRequirtmanSS U m i t n o f D i a ” I or not to use the company’s computerized order entry system is rarely a choice for an order entry clerk . In contrast , managers and professionals are usually accorded a great deal of discretion in their work . They typically choose what tools they will use and how they will use them . While this discretion is never complete , it is often relatively broad . As shown in Figure 1 , there is usually a range ofdiscretion . Within this range , knowledge workers have considerable discretion in what they do and how they do . Beyond that range , they must follow orders . professionals are given a good deal of discretion in how they work and even in which tasks they take on . Some writers have suggested that discretion is a luxury to pamper knowledge workers , but most writers view it as essential to managerial and professional work . Probably the best explanation for discretion was given by Benveniste [ 1987 ] . He notes that if work can be reduced to procedures , it can be performed efficiently by clerical workers . But if the application of the methodology is complex or uncertain , if it is not clear what methodology should be used , or if it is even unclear what the goal should be , then the task must be delegated to a manager or professional , who must be given considerable discretion over how to do the task . Discretion , in other words , is a necessary corollary of the unstructured nature of knowledge tasks . Many writers have noted that managers and Discre tion For clerical workem , many work processes are mandatory - - basic conditions of employment . Whether 43 Table 1 : Skewed Use for Consumer Products Product Lemon - lime soda colas Burbon Beer Dog Food Sausage Paper towels Shampoo Soaps & detergents Toilet tissue Ready - toet cereals Percent of nonusers 42 % 22 % 59 % 67 % 67 % 4 % 3 % 34 % 18 % 2 % 2 % Percent purchased half 91 % 90 % 89 % 88 % 87 % 87 % 84 % 83 % 81 % 81 % 74 % by heavy Source : Twedt [ 1964 ] Note : Based on one - year household spending diary sponsored by the Chicago Tribune in 1 % 2 . Individual - Level Skewed Use The Existence of Skewed Use Marketers have long known that when consumers have discretion Over what they buy and how mu & they buy , there use will be highly skewed , with nonusers , light users , and heavy users [ Twedt , 19641 . There is even a probability distribution , the Negative Binomial Distribution , that fits the distribution of spending for many products [ Ehrenberg , 19751 . Table 1 shows the purchasing distribution for a sampling of consumer products . While these data are old , data in the most recent Survey of Consumer Expenditures shows that skewed use continues to mark consumer spending . and professional use of information technology . It has been observed for both stand - alone products and group communication systems [ Panko , 19901 . In fact , no study known to the author that has measured the use of an IT product has failed to find skewed use . Skewed use has also been observed in the managerial Heavy Users The existence of heavy users , light users , and nonusers has a number of implications for design and implementation . Most centrally , light and heavy users have somewhat inconsistent desires in system complexity : heavy users normally desire more functionality to cope with the flood of messages coming in each day . Users who receive 20 to 30 messages a day may be under considerable stress [ Denning , 1982 ; Hiltz & Turoff , 1985 ; McKay , 1987 ; Steinfield , 19901 . They must develop ways to handle their mail in the most efficient way possible and to do extra things , such as file main by topic [ McKay , 1987 ; McKenney , 19851 . also need computer tools to automate some of their tasks . It is no accident that the first electronic mail reading program was created not by a programmer but by a user - - Larry Roberts , who later went on to found Telenet . Several research projects have sought to develop mail systems that can do such things as filter incoming messages and direct message to the most logical people , based on its content [ Malone , er aL , 19871 . Some commercial products , such as Beyond Mail and Notes , have already incorporated some of these ideas . In addition to working more efficiently , heavy usecs Light Users Light users , in contrast , often want simple systems . In the consumer world , this was illustrated by 35 mm cameras . Early 35 mm cameras were designed for professional use . They had many settings . But 35 mm cameras did not become popular until automatic features , including auto - focus , were offered . Basically , research showed that people just wanted to take better pictures than their cheap 110 cameras . But they didn ' t want to get involved with " photography . " Similarly , light users just want to send and receiver their mail without learning a lot of bells and whistles . While graphical user interfaces have extended useability of somewhat complex mail systems , the p i b i l i t y of hiding advanced features from simple users needs to be taken seriously . Yet it is typically the heavy users that have designers ' ears . This is tending to increase functionality and may necessitate the creation of " lite " electronic mail systems and other groupware tools . Lax Use Light users are often ' ' lax users , " picking up their mail infrequently . In most organizations , electronic mail users are expected to pick up their mail at least once a day . But lax users may pick up their mail only two or three times a week . One way to get around this problem is to " bounce " messages that have not been picked up in a day or so to the mailroom for printing and delivery through interoffice mail [ Panko , 1982 , 19901 . Or , the message might be " bounced " instead to 44 a subordinate , such as a seaetary , if such a person is available [ Panko , 1982 , 19901 . Serving Nonusers While it may seem paradoxical , nonusers could also benefit h m support . One of the most frequent complaints of users is that not everyone they need to reach is on the system [ Panko & Panko , 19811 . As a result , they have to prepare many messages twice - once for users and once for nonusers . An obvious solution is to give everyone a mail account initially , with mail for nonusers routed to printers in the mailroom or to a responsible secretary [ Panko 1982 , 19901 . This has actually been done at the RAND corporation , which has many nonusers . Delegation In addition to the basic continuum from heavy use to nonuse , at least two specialized patterns of use occur in electronic mail and many other IT products . The first is delegation - - delegating " terminal work " to a subordinate . In many early electronic mail systems , there were more delegators than direct ( hands - on ) users [ Panko & Panko , 19811 . For information retrieval , the use of intermediaries is still very widespread [ Sieck , 19841 . While pure delegation is less important today than it once was , many electronic mail users continue to delegate some electronic mail tasks to secretaries . This partial delegation tends to be more complex than pure delegation . Unfortunately , delegation tools are rarely designed into mail systems . A secretary with several delegators must log individually into several accounts used by people for whom he or she handles messages . And there are no tools to handle complex partial delegation , in which , say , a manager may have a secretary pre - read incoming mail or type long out - going messages . In one study of electronic mail users , both direct users and delegators gave high marks to electronic mail ; but secretaries , who expressed considerable frustration over delegation , gave the system much lower marks [ Panko & Panko , 19811 . Intermittent Users Also important are intermittent users , who use the system in brief spurts separated by periods of nonuse . Research has shown that intermittent users have very different support needs than regular users or novice users [ Santhanam & Wiedenbeck , 19911 . They usually knew the system well but have forgotten how to do specific tasks . They need reminders that are very different from the kinds of training tools given to novice users . System - Level Skewed Use Mainstream Systems Most normal mail systems seem to deliver two to five messages a day to the average user and to have only moderate percentages on nonusers , say 20 % to 30 % . These figures , however , are based on a non - random sample of firms known to the author . Unfortunately , there has not been ( to the author ' s knowledge ) a good sampling of companies using electronic mail . We call such systems " mainstream systems " because they seem to have become accepted mainstream ways to communicate , like the telephone system or memos . In fact , in several cases systems managers mentioned a major change that occurred when the system finally became able to connect most people in the firm [ Panko , 1981al . While the presence of a significant percentage of nonusers complicates things somewhat , electronic mail becomes a normal way to communicate . Receiving several messages a day would put electronic mail on par with other media . The average residence places about four telephone calls a day [ Mayer , 19771 and probably receives about as many because of the symmetry of telephone calling . In addition , use of time studies suggest that managers spend about five percent of the day on the telephone , and in the newer use of time studies , the average is closer to ten percent [ Panko , 19921 . If an average telephone call is about three minutes , the average manager would place and receive a total of eight to sixteen calls . Several electronic mail systems known to the author report roughly that users are online an average of twenty to thirty minutes a day . At five to ten minutes per message received [ Panko , 1981b ] , this would be two to six messages received per day . Hyperuse Systems At the high end , some systems deliver many messages a day . Several systems have been documented to deliver 20 or 30 messages a day [ e . g . , McKay , 19871 . Typically , these high levels of traffic are generated by the extensive use of distribution lists , in which messages are broadcast to groups of users instead of being addressed individually to one or a few individuals . A department head , for instance , may have a distribution list for all department members . Some writers have discussed heavy distribution list use as generating a great deal of junk mail . Other writers have argued that this unprecedented communication modality is extremely valuable . We need to understand whether the extensive use of 45 distribution lists is a benefit or a detriment to organizations . As noted above , heavy usem typically need extra computer support tools . In systems whose average use is very high , the need for these tools would probably be more widespread . Stunted Systems A number of studies have been done on an unnamed R & D organization [ Rice , Hughes , & Love , 19891 . This system is very lightly used . Rice , Hughes , and Love [ 19891 measured actual system use in five 4 - week time periods . They found that the average account received only about a message a week and that 42 % of the mailboxes sent no messages in the last time period . Only 17 % of the users sent a message in any two consecutive time periods , and 19 % sent a message in only one time period . In a study of a different system , Danowsky and Edison - Swift [ 19851 found that use averaged only four messages a month per user . The author would tend to label such systems as " stunted , " because they offer only a small fraction of electronic mail ' s potential benefits . At the same time , there may be very legitimate reasons for having limited use , in terms of corporate goals and objectives . Sometimes , a conscious decision is made to limit or discourage electronic mail use . Stunted ( low - use ) systems tend to have many nonusers , users with lax pick - up problems , intermittent users , and delegatom . The system design and implementation needs of these users were discussed above . Measuring Use So far , we have discussed " use " without spending time on the details of its measurement . It is now time to address that glass . We will see that use measurement is anything but easy . We will look at some common pitfalls in the measurement of use in electronic mail . Estimated Versus Actual Use The first problem is whether estimated use is a good proxy for actual use . In estimated use , respondents merely guess how much they use the system . Studies that measure how managers and professionals spend their days have found that people are not good at estimating how much time they spend in various activities such as face to face contact [ Panko , 19921 . Williams , Rice & Rogers [ 19881 discuss several behavioral theories arguing that people are not good at reporting their behavior . They also report specifically that computer - monitored measures correlate only 16 % to 36 % with self - reports . Mayer [ 19871 reports that people badly overestimate the number of telephone calls they place each day . So estimated data are highly Suspect . In general , studies comparing actual and estimated electronic mail use have not been reported . Rice and Shook [ 19901 compared estimated time spent reading electronic mail with measured connect time and found that measured connect time was much larger ; however this is potentially explainable if many users remained logged in for long periods and read their mail only occasionally . Traffic Versus Connect Time and Log - ins per Day In electronic mail , another issue is whether to measure message traffic or connect time . Connect time is attractive because it can be measured in many systems . Yet as just noted , the emerging pattern of remaining logged in all day makes the use of connect time data useless in many cases . As a result , many studies focus on traffic , that is , messages sent or received per day . But few systems measure traffic , so traffic reports are normally based on estimation . The practice of remaining logged in also makes it hazardous to use number of log - ins per day as a measure of use . Is a person logging in once a day for eight hours less of a user than someone logging in three times for ten minutes each time ? Sent Versus Received Traffic Another problem is whether to measure messages sent or received . In a many electronic mail systems , about three message are received for very message sent , due to multiple addressees . Panko and Panko [ 1981 ] found this pattern at DARCOM , and the author also found this pattern in a unpublished study of data from nine ARPANET mail systems in the 1970 ' s . In some systems , however , the extensive use of distribution lists can produce ratios of 20 : l or higher . At the other extreme , some systems generate as many messages as they deliver . In some cases , this is because a message sent to three people is counted as three messages sent , rather than one message sent . Unfortunately , many studies only measured sent or received messages , and some merely cite " traffic " without specifying whether they are studying messages sent or received and whether a message sent to three people is three outgoing messages . Skewed Use The best way to measure use might be to report the entire distribution of message traffic in a histogram . 46 For consumer products , there is almost always a pattem of " skewed use " in which there are individual nonusers , light users , and heavy users . Beyond this simple trichotomy , experience has shown that the Negative Binomial Distribution often gives a good fit to the data [ Ehrenberg , 19751 . Skewed use makes the calculation of traffic means highly problematic . First , there is the ancem with whether a single statistic can summarize a highly skewed distribution . More pragmatically , a mean is calculated by dividing traffic by number of users . But the Negative Binomial Distributions count of nonusers is sensitive to the period of time over which data are collected . If the @ od is short , there will be many nonusers , so the mean will be high . But if the period is long , there will be many occasional users in the denominator , so means will be low . Cutting Off the Tail In stunted systems , there are likely to be many nominal users who have accounts but whose real use is negligible or at best intermittent . If they are not separated from actual users , then mean usage will be extremely low and may have almost no bearing on patterns of use amount actual users . Every research study in which real usage is less than 100 % must cut off the tail of nominal users . Unfortunately , there is no simple mechanical algorithm for doing this . Intermittent users , who use the system only occasionally present special problems for cutting off the tail . Many systems with high percentages of nonusers have average traffic levels of about one message per day per user . In a study of nine electronic mail systems with many nonusers in the 197O ' s , the author found that all had average uses of about one message per day per user . For commercial systems , such as MCI Mail , the same value often appears [ Bairstow , 19871 . But there is nothing magical happening . Closer examination of the seven systems indicated a " cutting off of the tail , " in which people who receive less than about two messages a week drop out of the system . This tends to keep the average about one message a day . As the system increases in usefulness , more marginal users join the system , keeping its average low . In general , for systems with many nonusers , the number of messages per day per user can be a poor estimator of use . Detailed Patterns of Use While amount of use is important , it is critical to go beyond use levels and look at the details of how the tool is being used . As Rogers [ 19831 has pointed out , many innovations are so complex that it is very difficult to communicate its " meaning " to adopters . As a result , using it in novel ways . In addition , users rightly feel that they " own " the tools they use them and can use them any way they choose . In effect , the use of groupware is an example of end user computer . These complex use patterns are important . Unfortunately , we la & the space to discuss tbe measurement of such patterns and will continue to focus on simple quantitative measures of use . Future Research The purpose of this paper has been to identify the stunted use phenomenon , warn of its potential dangers , and discuss the measurement of use in general . We would also like to identify a number of directions for future research in this area . Stunted Versus Mainstream Systems An obvious next step will be to study a number of stunted and mainstream systems , to determine if there are , in fact , any differences between them . Some limited data in this area are available from studies by Erlich [ 1987 ] and McKenney [ 1985 ] , but these studies were not designed specifically to distinguish between mainstream and stunted systems . Social Presence and Media Richness Although we have not gathered all available studies on media richness and social presence , a large majority appear to have been done on populations using stunted systems , no electronic mail systems , or systems with no reported use data . In their survey of this literature , Steinfield and Fulk [ 19891 found that perceptions of electronic mail compared to written communication are inconsistent across studies , and where people have more use , their rating of electronic mail tends to be higher . This would be consistent with the plausible hypothesis that once a system reaches mainstream status , it is viewed as being suitable for a wide variety of uses . Assimilation Continuing the last point , limited anecdotal evidence indicates that something appears to happen when a system reaches mainstream status . At Texas Instruments in the 1970s ' when the corporate electronic mail system went worldwide , its use blossomed , and users began to use it in many complex new ways [ Panko , 1981al . Similarly , Erlich [ 1987 ] found that voice mail users in the company using voice mail heavily developed unexpected and complex new ways of 47 using the system , including for core corporate uses such as customer support . innovation for ways not intended by the developer as reinvention . Johnson and Rice [ 19871 have shown that reinvention occurs with new media . Poole and Desanctis Cl9901 studied the process of users using a system in novel ways under the heading of appropriation . We prefer the term assimilation to indicate that , just as foods are taken into the body and then used for new things , companies assimilate new technologies for their own purposes and make them part of themselves . What the developer intended literally doesn ' t matter at all . Only by studying the rich complexities of use for mahitream can we really understand impacts . Rogers [ 19831 called the process of using an Toward a Full Theory of Adoption The Greek playwright Archiolus once said " the fox knows many things , but the hedgehog knows one big thing . " Philosophers are sometimes divided into foxes and hedgehogs depending on whether they focus on one central dynamic or have a complex view of things . Critical mass theory has tended to focus attention on a single reason for individual adoption , namely the number of others with whom a person can correspond . But while there is ample evidence that the existence of many correspondents affects electronic mail adoption , empirical studies have consistently shown that many other things correlate with use . When we discuss media adoption , we need to develop " foxy " explanations that take in a host of task , implementation , social influence , and other factors . Hyperufe We have focused on problems stemming from stunted systems that fall far below mainstream systems in use . But some electronic mail systems have the opposite problem . Thanks to the extensive use of distribution lists coupled with the absence of the kinds of facilities found in computer conferencing systems to handle topiosegmented traffic , users are literally deluged with mail . Some research has been done in this area , and current research on message filtering and on the selective dissemination of information in electronic mail is helping in this area , but more research and problem clarification n & to be done . Other Groupware Space has forced us to focus only on electronic mail , but stunted use is likely to be a problem in other forms of groupware as well . A good deal of information is available for computer conferencing , and in several other areas , we may be able to assess how much of past research has been done on stunted systems . While electronic mail is the first popular groupware tool and should surpass word processing and spreadsheeting as the dominant use of computers by the mid 198O ' s , it is merely the first important groupware tool . In a sense , all of our electronic mail systems are currently crippled by lack of functionality . Half of all documents sent in business are forms [ Panko , 19771 , and longer documents ( which most electronic mail systems handle poorly ) account for half of all prose communication . Other common electronic mail uses , such as meeting scheduling , project management , and , as just noted , conference - like communication through distribution lists , are also poorly supported . If these problems were fixed , so that electronic mail could be used easily for a much wider portion of total communication , its acceptance into the mainstream of corporate life might be greatly expanded . Conclusion Although is almost a tautology to say that benefits and design requirements are linked to use levels , use levels often go unreported in groupware studies , and electronic mail has taught us that use levels vary widely from organization to organization . The basic argument of this paper is that use levels need to be reported and that conclusions drawn from studies with very high or low use rates must be interpreted with great caution . We would like to close by suggesting several rules that should be adopted in future studies reporting on electronic mail and other groupware systems . First , basic levels of use must be reported , including penetration , traffic , and connect time . Second , whether the use level is estimated or actual should be reported . Third , in reporting connect time , live connect time when work is actually being done should be reported . Fourth , when traffic is reported , both messages sent and messages received should be reported . It should also be disclosed whether a message sent to three people is counted as one message sent or three messages sent . 48 Fifth , studies in which penetration or average traffic is low should be reported to be stunted systems , and a caveat on the potential applicability of the results to mainstream systems should also be reported . References Bairstow , J . ( 1987 , January ) . The electronic mailbox : As close as your PC , High Technology , 16 - 22 . Benveniste , G . ( 1987 ) . Professwmlkhg the Organization : Reciucing Bureaucracy to Enhance Effcectiveness . Jossey - Bass Publishers . Connolly , T . & Thorn , B . K . ( 1990 ) . Discretionary databases : Theory , data , and implications . In Fulk . J . & Steinfield , C . W . ( eds . ) Perspectives on Organizations and New Information Technologies . Newbury Park , C A Sage Publications . Culnan , M . J . & Bair , J . H . ( 1983 ) . Human communication needs and organizational productivity : The potential impact of office automation . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 215 - 221 . Dankowski , J . A . & Edison - Swift , P . ( 1985 ) . Crisis effects on inter - organizational computer - based computer communication . Communication Research . 12 , 251 - 270 . Ehrenberg , A . S . C . ( 1975 ) . Data Reduction . London : John Wiley & Sons . Erlich , S . F . ( 1987 ) . Strategies for encouraging successful adoption of office communication systems . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems . 5 , 340 - 357 . electronic communication networks : An empirical assessment . Office : Technology andpeople . 3 , 103 - 128 . Fulk , J . and Steinfield , C . W . ( Eds . ) ( 1990 ) . organizations and Communication Technology . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Galleta , D . F . ( 1986 ) . A longitudinal view of an office system failure , SIGOA Bulletin , 7 ( 1 ) , Association of Computing Machinery . Hiltz , S . R . ( 1984 ) . Online Communities : A Case Study of the Ofice of the Future . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Hiltz , S . R . & Turoff , M . ( 1985 ) . Structuring computer - mediated communication systems to avoid information overload . Communications of the ACM , Eveland , J . D . & Bikson , T . K . ( 1988 ) . Evolving 23 ( 3 ) , 136 - 165 . Johnson , B . M . & Rice , R . E . ( 1987 ) . Managing Organizational Innovation : The Evolution fiom Word Processing to Office Information Systems . New York : Columbia University Press . Karahana , E . & Straub , D . W . ( undated ) . The new media in the workplace : Modelling the effects of communications media choice , unpublished manuscript . with the author . Rosenblitt , D . ( 1987 ) . Semistructured messages are surprisingly useful for computer - supported coordination , ACM Transactions on Ofice Information Systems , 5 ( 2 ) , 115 - 131 . Markus , M . L . ( 1987a ) . Toward a critical mass theory of interactive media : Universal access , interdependence , and diffusion . Communication Research . I4 ( 5 ) , 491 - 51 1 . implementation tactic for office comm unication systems . Interfaes , 17 ( 3 ) , 54 - 63 . Markus , M . L . & Connolly , T . ( 1990 ) . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ' 90 Proceedings . Mayer M . ( 1977 ) . The telephone and the uses of time . in Pool , I . de S . , The Social Impact of the Telphone . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cited in Fielding , G . & Hartley , P . ( 1987 ) . The telephone : a neglected medium . Chapter 8 in Cashdan , A . & Jordin , M . ( eds . ) Shtdies in Communicarion . Basil Blackwell . McKenney , J . L . ( 1985 ) . The influence of computer based communication on the organization . Working paper . Harvard university . Panko , R . R . ( 1977 ) . The outlook for computer mail . Telecommunications Policy . 1 , 242 - 253 . Panko , R . R . ( 1981a ) . The cost of EMS . Computer Networks . 5 ( 1 ) , 35 - 46 . Panko , R . R . ( 1981b ) . Standards for electronic message systems . Telecommunications Policy . 5 , 181 - 183 . Panko , R . R . ( 1982 ) . Electronic Message and Document Delivery . Conference Digest : 1982 Ofice Automation Conference . American Federation of Information Processing Societies , San Francisco . Panko , R . R . ( 1983 ) . Directions in electronic mail . Ofice Systems Research Journal . 2 ( 1 ) , 18 - 28 . Panko , R . R . ( 1985 ) . Electronic mail . In Quinn , K . T . ( ed . ) . Advances in Office Automation , Volume 1 . Chichester , UK : John Wiley & Sons . pp . 191 - 228 . Panko , R . R . ( 1990 ) . Skewed Use in Groupware . In Kaiser , K . M . & Oppelland , H . J . ( Eds . ) , Desktop Informarion Technology . Amsterdam : North - Holland . pp . 177 - 191 . Liffman , Bert ( 1975 , January ) personal communication Malone , T . W . ; Grant , K . R . ; h i , K . Y . ; Rao , R ; & Markus , M . L . ( 1987b ) . Chargeback as an 49 Panko , R . R . ( 1992 ) . Managerial communication patterns . Journal of Organizational Computing , ( 2 ) 1 , Panko , R . R . & Panko , R . U . ( 1981 ) . A Survey of EMS users at DARCOM . Computer Networks . 5 , 19 - 23 . Poole , M . S . & DeSanctis , G . ( 1990 ) . Understanding the Use of Group Decision Support Systems : The Theory of Adaptive Structuration . In Fulk , J . & Steinfield , C . e . ) , 0rganizatwn . s and Communication Technology . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , pp . 173 - 193 . Rice , R . E . & Case , D . ( 1983 ) . Journal of Communication . 131 - 152 . Rice , R . E . ( 1990 ) . Computer - mediated communication system network data : theoretical concerns and empirical examples . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies . 32 , 627 - 647 . outcomes of electronic messaging in an R & D organization . Office : Technology and People , 5 ( 2 ) , Rice , R . E . & Shook , D . E . ( 1990 ) Relationships of job categories and organizational levels to use of communication channels , including electronic mail : a meta - analysis and extension . Journal of Management Studies . 27 , 195 - 229 . ed . ) . New York : The Free Press . diffusion of interactive technologies in organizations . Proceedings of the Workshop on Survey Research in MIS , Irvine , CA , February 10 - 11 . Santhanam , R . & Wiedenbeck , S . ( 1991 ) . Modeling the intermittant user of word processing technology . Journal of the American Society of Information Science , 42 ( 3 ) , 185 - 195 Sieck , S . K . ( 1984 ) . Business information systems and databases . Chapter 10 in Williams , M . E . ( ed . ) , Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , Vol . 19 , Knowledge Industry Publications , Inc . Steinfield , C . W . ( 1990 ) Computer - mediated communications in the organization : using electronic mail at Xerox . Chapter 19 in Sypher , Beverly ( ed . ) . Case Studies in Organizational Communication . NY : Guilford . 282 - 294 . bases : A theory and some empirical findings . Communication Research . 14 , 512 - 528 . Principles and an electronic mail example . 95 - 122 . Rice , R . E . ; Hughes , D . ; & Love , G . ( 1989 ) . Usage and 141 - 161 . Rogers , E . M . ( 1983 ) . TheDiffusion ofhnovatbns . ( 3d Rogers , E . M . ( 1989 ) . The " critical mass " in the Thorn , B . K . & Connolly , T . ( 1987 ) . Discretionary data Tucker , J . H . ( 1982 ) . Implementing office automation : Proceedings of the SIGOA Conference on Office Information Systems . June 21 - 23 , pp . 93 - 100 . Twedt , D . W . ( 191 % ) . How important to marketing strategy is the " heavy user ? " Journal ofMarkering , 28 , 71 - 72 . Williams , F . ; Rice , R E . & Rogers , E . M . ( 1988 ) . Research Methods and the New Media . New York The Free Press . 50