ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE published : 06 February 2014 doi : 10 . 3389 / fmicb . 2014 . 00041 Assessing the advantage of morphological changes in Candida albicans : a game theoretical study Katarzyna M . Tyc 1† , Clemens Kühn 1 , Duncan Wilson 2 and Edda Klipp 1 * 1 Department of Biology , Theoretical Biophysics , Humboldt - Universität zu Berlin , Berlin , Germany 2 Department of Microbial Pathogenicity Mechanisms , Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology , Hans Knöll Institute , Jena , Germany Edited by : Jessy L . Labbé , Oak Ridge National Laboratory , USA Reviewed by : Florence Abram , National University of Ireland , Ireland Stefan Schuster , University of Jena , Germany * Correspondence : Edda Klipp , Department of Biology , Theoretical Biophysics , Humboldt Universität zu Berlin , Invalidenstr β e 42 , D - 10115 Berlin , Germany e - mail : edda . klipp @ rz . hu - berlin . de † Present address : Katarzyna M . Tyc , Department of Biochemistry , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT , USA A range of attributes determines the virulence of human pathogens . During interactions with their hosts , pathogenic microbes often undergo transitions between distinct stages , and the ability to switch between these can be directly related to the disease process . Understanding the mechanisms and dynamics of these transitions is a key factor in understanding and combating infectious diseases . The human fungal pathogen Candida albicans exhibits different morphotypes at different stages during the course of infection ( candidiasis ) . For example , hyphae are considered to be the invasive form , which causes tissue damage , while yeast cells are predominant in the commensal stage . Here , we described interactions of C . albicans with its human host in a game theoretic model . In the game , players are fungal cells . Each fungal cell can adopt one of the two strategies : to exist as a yeast or hyphal cell . We characterized the ranges of model parameters in which the coexistence of both yeast and hyphal forms is plausible . Stability analysis of the system showed that , in theory , a reduced ability of the host to speciﬁcally recognize yeast and hyphal cells can result in bi - stability of the microbial populations’ proﬁle . Inspired by the model analysis we reasoned that the types of microbial interactions can change during invasive candidiasis . We found that positive cooperation among fungal cells occurs in mild infections and an enhanced tendency to invade the host is associated with negative cooperation . The model can easily be extended to multi - player systems with direct application to identifying individuals that enhance either positive or negative cooperation . Results of the modeling approach have potential application in developing treatment strategies . Keywords : Candida albicans , host - pathogen interactions , pair - wise context , mathematical modeling , evolutionary game theory INTRODUCTION The yeast Candida albicans is a normal inhabitant of the human microﬂora . It is a harmless commensal in healthy individuals , but can cause severe infections ( invasive candidiasis ) when the bacterial ﬂora is removed or unbalanced ( for instance , upon antibiotic treatment ) or when epithelial barriers are disrupted . Additionally , immunocompromised patients are especially sus - ceptible to fungal infections ( Mavor et al . , 2005 ) . The interactions of C . albicans with its human host are highly complex and only partially understood . The fungus can grow in a number of different morphological forms ( yeast , pseudohyphae , hyphae , chlamydospores ) ( Odds , 1998 ; Berman and Sudbery , 2002 ; Miller and Johnson , 2002 ) . The two most widely studied morphologies are yeast and hyphae , which play different roles during com - mensal growth and infection . For example , ovoid yeast cells are the predominant form during the commensal stage or systemic dissemination ( Moyes et al . , 2010 ) , while ﬁlamentous hyphae , initiated by the formation of germ tubes , are crucial for tissue invasion ( Wächtler et al . , 2011 ) . A balanced epithelial microﬂora helps to control the Candida population size and possibly inhibits the formation of hyphae . An unbalanced microﬂora and a mal - functioning immune system are unable to control the C . albicans population size and the host becomes susceptible to candidiasis ( Macphail et al . , 2002 ; Perlroth et al . , 2007 ) . In these situations , the fungal burden increases and various environmental cues , such as nutrient availability , pH , and temperature stimulate hypha formation ( Biswas et al . , 2007 ; Whiteway and Bachewich , 2007 ; Shapiro and Cowen , 2010 ; Sudbery , 2011 ) . This may lead to life - threatening infections where the fungi disseminate to differ - ent internal organs ( Macphail et al . , 2002 ; Pfaller and Diekema , 2007 ) . Indeed , Candida species are now the fourth most common cause of hospital - acquired bloodstream infections ( Wisplinghoff et al . , 2004 ) . C . albicans yeast cells acquire nutrients provided from the host ( e . g . , in the gut ) and the surrounding microbial ﬂora . Hyphae can additionally invade host cells and therefore may feed directly on nutrients inside the host cells . On the host side , a critical mass of hyphae is sensed by the epithelium ( Moyes et al . , 2010 ) . Infected epithelial cells secrete different cytokines , which act as chemo - attractants to stimulate activation of the innate immune system of the host . In turn , immune cells are recruited to the site of infection to ﬁght the invading microbe . Although it is not fully understood which immune cells are crucial in preventing fungal dissemina - tion , neutrophils ( PMNs ) have been shown to be successful in www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 1 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes killing C . albicans , preferentially target C . albicans hyphae ( Fradin et al . , 2005 ; Wozniok et al . , 2008 ; Soloviev et al . , 2011 ) and are more effective than macrophages in killing C . albicans ( Lehrer and Cline , 1969 ) . These observations are supported by the fact that neutropenic patients have an increased risk of suffering from candidemia ( Perlroth et al . , 2007 ; Koh et al . , 2008 ) . Here we have studied the impact of host neutrophil activity on the microbial population proﬁle . We considered that within the fungal population both yeast and hyphal cells are plausible morphologies and that a cell’s morphology could be inﬂuenced by the states of other cells in the population . To model the sys - tem , we used game theory principles to describe each cell as a player with two possible strategies : yeast or hypha . Such a game theoretic approach has previously been applied to describe decision - making processes in biological systems ( Gore et al . , 2009 ; Hummert et al . , 2010 ) . In the game , a player’s payoff depends on the choice of the individual and the choice of the other player . A payoff becomes a measure for the successful sur - vival and proliferation of a cell in the human microﬂora [ similar to the deﬁnition of ﬁtness in Renaud and de Meeus ( 1991 ) or in Hummert et al . ( 2010 ) ] . The solution to the game is Nash equilibrium—a situation whereby neither player can improve payoff by changing its own strategy , whilst keeping the strategic choices of the remaining players ﬁxed . In this work we only considered two possible changes to the players’ payoffs when moving away from the Nash equilibrium . ( 1 ) Deviation from the Nash equilibrium by either player causes a decrease in payoff to both agents ( the Nash equi - librium is good for both players ) . We will refer to a game with such Nash equilibrium as exhibiting positive cooperation . ( 2 ) In the other game that we considered , a change from Nash equi - librium by one player causes a decrease in its own payoff ( by deﬁnition of Nash equilibrium ) and an increase in the payoff of the opponent . This Nash equilibrium was attained at the expense of one player . In this study we refer to this type of equilibrium as negative cooperation between the players . Using this game and the above deﬁnitions of positive and nega - tive cooperation , we identiﬁed parameter ranges in which either morphological state has an advantage . Extension of the two - cell game to fungal populations allowed us to infer dynamics of the yeast / hypha ratio in a C . albicans population , along with the changes in the total population size . Although we do not explicitly model host dynamics , our model depends on param - eters describing the host response , which allows us to deduce the effect of immune activity on a C . albicans population . We inter - pret the effect of host activity on the type of fungal interactions and demonstrate that both positive and negative cooperation inter - action dynamics are likely to arise in fungal populations in the course of invasive candidiasis . From the perspective of the host , our model suggests that a differentiated host response toward the distinct fungal morphologies is necessary to keep the fungal population in the least pathogenic state . MATERIALS AND METHODS MODELING APPROACH We used game theory principles to study morphological transi - tions in a fungal population during invasion of the host . In our model , host and fungal pair - wise interactions determine the state of the fungus . Pair - wise interactions are viewed as interactions between two single C . albicans yeast cells , C 1 and C 2 . While inter - acting , each cell can adopt two strategies : it can either remain as a yeast form ( strategy y ) or undergo the morphological transition , becoming a hyphal form ( strategy h ) . The choice of the strategy will determine the cell’s payoff , which we denote by E ( S 1 , S 2 ) . E ( S 1 , S 2 ) describes a cell’s payoff for playing strategy S 1 against another cell’s strategy S 2 . For instance , a yeast cell’s payoff when playing against a hypha is denoted by E ( y , h ) . Such pair - wise inter - actions are considered a 2 - player game and a similar game has found application in another study on C . albicans survival strate - gies ( Hummert et al . , 2010 ) . Here we describe the 2 - player game in order to familiarize the reader with our choice of parameters and the role of the parameters in later analysis . A 2 - cell game theoretical model Initially , we assumed that payoffs to either yeast or hyphal cells depend only on nutrition and are denoted by E 0 ( y ) and E 0 ( h ) , respectively . In this case , each payoff corresponds to the maxi - mum ﬁtness a player can obtain in a given condition ( Renaud and de Meeus , 1991 ) . We calculated a yeast cell’s payoff using an expression stemming from population dynamics ( logistic growth ) E 0 ( y ) = u y , 1 n σ u y , 2 + n σ . ( 1 ) Here , n denotes nutrition provided in the microﬂora , u y , 1 , u y , 2 , and σ are morphology - dependent parameters . E 0 ( y ) can also be interpreted as the yeast’s growth rate with rela - tion to the level of nutrients available . As such , the yeast growth rate is negligible under conditions of sparse nutri - tion ; increases to the maximal growth rate of u y , 1 , and the inﬂection point of the increase is approximately the half - maximal speed at a nutrition provision of u y , 2 . σ determines the steepness of increase in growth rate around the inﬂec - tion point . As hyphal cells tend to penetrate tissue while yeast cells do not ( Dalle et al . , 2010 ) , the payoff for hyphal cells is given by E 0 ( h ) = u h , 1 n σ u h , 2 + n σ + i , ( 2 ) where i describes the hyphal cell’s ability to invade and subsequently feed on host cells . Both measures of the iso - lated fungus’ payoff , E 0 ( y ) and E 0 ( h ) , indicate which mor - phological state is favorable under speciﬁc nutritional condi - tions . We assume that in a healthy individual’s microﬂora , yeast cells are predominant ( Jacobsen et al . , 2012 ) . To ensure preferential yeast growth under rich nutritional con - ditions ( Biswas et al . , 2007 ) , we assume that yeast’s maxi - mal growth rate is higher than hyphae ( u y , 1 > i + u h , 1 ) and that yeasts require more nutrition for optimal growth ( u y , 2 ≥ u h , 2 ) . Figure 1 depicts an according parameterization . We set these parameters arbitrarily since , as long the above inequali - ties are conserved , the qualitative results of this study remain valid . Frontiers in Microbiology | Systems Microbiology February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 2 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes Hyphae - triggered activation of the innate immune system strongly affects the success of C . albicans cells . Because PMNs are the key immune cells in ﬁghting C . albicans infections ( Fradin et al . , 2005 ; Perlroth et al . , 2007 ) , we restricted our model to interactions between C . albicans and PMNs . Depending on the strategic choices of C . albicans cells , we distinguished three sce - narios , which are depicted in Figure 2 : ( 1 ) yeast cells only ; ( 2 ) a mixed population of yeast and hyphal cells ; ( 3 ) a pure hyphae population . We constructed the payoff matrix for the different strategies using the following considerations : • Since hyphae are preferentially recognized by PMNs ( Wozniok et al . , 2008 ; Jacobsen et al . , 2012 ) , the increased attraction of PMNs toward hyphal cells deﬁnes a cost for cells in the hyphal state . This cost is incorporated into the model by subtract - ing k —a parameter that indicates the efﬁciency of the host immune system to recognize , target , and kill hyphae—from the hyphal payoff . Thus , in a mixed scenario , i . e . , when only one cell turns hyphae , the hyphae cell will score the payoff E ( h , y ) = E 0 ( h ) − k . FIGURE 1 | Fungal maximal payoffs under different nutritional conditions independent of host immune activity . Green line , E 0 ( y ) , indicates the yeast cell’s payoff in environmental conditions indicated by n . Red line , E 0 ( h ) , indicates the hyphal cell’s payoff under given nutritional condition n . As the nutrient availability decreases , the hyphae payoff exceeds yeast payoff and , hence , the hyphal state becomes advantageous . See Table 2 for the parameter values . • Yeast cells are also exposed to neutrophil activity when hyphae are in their vicinity ( Figure 2 ) , but there is less attraction of neutrophils toward yeast cells ( Biswas et al . , 2007 ; Sudbery , 2011 ) and hence , the payoff E ( y , h ) = E 0 ( y ) − k · b with b ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] applies . Parameter b explicitly describes the neutrophil’s lower attraction toward yeast compared to hypha . • We consider that each hyphal cell contributes to the activa - tion of the immune system and hence , E ( h , h ) = E 0 ( h ) − p · k with p > 1 applies . Here , p reﬂects the effect of two interacting hyphal cells on the immune system activation . For simulations , we use p = 2 . The payoff matrix of this game is given in Table 1 . The values of p and b strongly affect the outcome of this game . By requir - ing b ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] and p > 1 , we account for the neutrophils’ stronger attraction toward hyphae . For p = 2 and b ∈ [ 0 , 1 ) the following Nash equilibria were established : 1 . All players choose “yeast” if E ( y , y ) > E ( h , y ) and E ( y , h ) > E ( h , h ) ; 2 . Both yeast and hyphae are present if E ( y , y ) < E ( h , y ) and E ( y , h ) > E ( h , h ) ; 3 . All players choose the strategy “hypha” if E ( y , y ) < E ( h , y ) and E ( y , h ) < E ( h , h ) . In Figure 3A we depict the payoff values E ( y , y ) , E ( y , h ) , E ( h , y ) , E ( h , h ) in dependence of n and k for an arbitrary parame - terization ( see Table 1 ) . For example , for k = 0 . 15 and n = 0 E ( y , y ) < E ( h , y ) and E ( y , h ) > E ( h , h ) , and hence , the Nash equilibrium establishes when both yeast and hypha coexist . All possible Nash equilibria of the game , in relation to nutrient sta - tus ( n ) and immune activity ( k ) , are presented in Figure 3B : under rich nutritional conditions and high neutrophil activ - ity , the Nash equilibrium is where both players choose to play the yeast strategy . Under poor nutritional conditions and weak neutrophil activity , the Nash equilibrium is where both players Table 1 | Payoff matrix for cell C 1 ( row ) playing against cell C 2 ( column ) in the 2 - cell game . 2 - cell game Y H Y E 0 ( y ) E 0 ( y ) – b · k H E 0 ( h ) – k E 0 ( h ) – p · k FIGURE 2 | Possible scenarios in the game . ( 1 ) Both cells play yeast strategy . ( 2 ) Cells play distinct strategies . ( 3 ) Both cells play hyphal strategy . www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 3 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes FIGURE 3 | Payoffsof Candida cellsandNashequilibriaofthegamewith respect to k and n . ( A ) Red plane shows the payoffs E ( h , h ) for hyphae in the case where both cells form hyphae . Orange plane indicates the payoffs E ( h , y ) , i . e . , for a hypha when coexisting with a yeast cell ; in that case , yeast cells will gain E ( y , h ) ( yellow plane ) ; green plane gives E ( y , y ) , i . e . , payoff for a yeast cell coexisting with another yeast cell . ( B ) By varying immune strength k andnutrient n theoutcomeofthegamechanges . Redindicateswherepure hyphae deﬁne the Nash equilibrium , green indicates where pure yeasts deﬁne the Nash equilibrium , and orange indicates parameter values where the presence of both yeast and hyphae deﬁne the Nash equilibrium . See Table 2 for model parameters . choose the hyphal strategy . For intermediate conditions , Nash equilibrium establishes whereby one player chooses yeast and the other hypha strategy . These observations are independent of the actual parameter values and remain valid whenever E 0 ( y ) and E 0 ( h ) fulﬁll all the constrains listed above , and b ∈ [ 0 , 1 ) and p > 1 . DERIVATION OF REPLICATOR EQUATION In order to study fungal morphogenesis on a population level , we used a replicator equation . We introduced the number of yeast cells n 1 and the number of hyphal cells n 2 in a C . albicans population . N = n 1 + n 2 gives the total population size . Hence , x 1 = n 1 N and x 2 = n 2 N represent the fraction of yeasts and hyphae , respectively . We use x = ( x 1 , x 2 ) to express the population proﬁle , i . e . , composition of yeasts , x 1 , and hyphae , x 2 , in the population . We can describe the changes in the yeast subpopulation by the following equation : dn 1 dt = n 1 · E (cid:2) y , x (cid:3) . Here , E ( y , x ) = x 1 · E ( y , y ) + x 2 · E ( y , h ) is the average payoff to yeast cells given the current fraction of yeasts and hyphae in the population . Similarly , the changes of the hyphae subpopulation are described by dn 2 dt = n 2 · E ( h , x ) , where E ( h , x ) = x 1 · E ( h , y ) + x 2 · E ( h , h ) is the average payoff to a hypha in the population . The overall changes in the fungal population size are given by dN dt = dn 1 dt + dn 2 dt . Since x i = n i N we calculate dn i dt = x i · dNdt + N · dx i dt . We obtain a general expression for dynamic changes in the yeast subpopula - tion by deriving dx 1 dt and , after a few straightforward calculation steps , we obtain : dx 1 dt = x 1 · ( 1 − x 1 ) · (cid:2) E (cid:2) y , x (cid:3) − E ( h , x ) (cid:3) . Since x 1 + x 2 = 1 , we set x 1 = x and x 2 = 1 – x . For more details see Webb ( 2007 ) . For the simulation and analysis of the mod - els described in this work , we used Mathematica 8 ( Wolfram Research , 2010 ) . RESULTS PAIR - WISE INTERACTIONS IN THE C . albicans POPULATION ( MODEL A ) Analysis of the model Starting from the 2 - cell game we derived the replicator equation for a fungal population . In this model , each strategy is played by a certain fraction of a population . Given x = ( x , 1 − x ) , a vector describing the C . albicans population proﬁle , where x is the fraction of yeast cells and 1 – x the fraction of hyphal cells in the population , the replicator equation given below describes the dynamic changes of the yeasts to hyphae ratio in the popula - tion ( see Materials and Methods , section Derivation of Replicator Equation , for derivation of the equation ) : dx dt = x ( 1 − x ) (cid:4) E (cid:2) y , x (cid:3) − E ( h , x ) (cid:5) , where E (cid:2) y , x (cid:3) = x · E (cid:2) y , y (cid:3) + ( 1 − x ) E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) , and E ( h , x ) = x · E (cid:2) h , y (cid:3) + ( 1 − x ) E ( h , h ) ( 3 ) From the host perspective , the population of C . albicans cells can be in three different states characterized by three different ranges of the value of x : Frontiers in Microbiology | Systems Microbiology February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 4 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes • a commensal and non - invasive state whenever x = 1 ; • a state moderately hostile to the host when both yeast and hyphal forms can be isolated from the population , i . e . , 0 < x < 1 ( mild infection ) ; • a hostile population that is entirely composed of hyphal cells , i . e . , x = 0 at steady state ( severe infection ) . The C . albicans population proﬁle will evolve toward the steady state of the system given in Equation 3 , which depends on the parameterization of the model and , more precisely , on the qualitative difference between payoffs . Targeting yeast cells does not payoff to the host Since the conclusions remain valid for all parameters that main - tain the inequalities 1 , 2 , and 3 , we set the parameters arbitrar - ily ( Table 2 ) and discuss the qualitative behavior of the model ( Equation 3 ) , letting the model dynamics depend on inputs n and k only . When constructing the game we reasoned that host immune cells , neutrophils , tend to target hyphae cells . But what is the host’s advantage from targeting yeast cells to a lesser extent in this game ? Is the differential fungal recognition a result of com - promise or conﬂict between the host and the fungi ( Renaud and de Meeus , 1991 ) ? The model analysis revealed the following : an increase in the PMN targeting rate of yeast cells [ i . e . , by increasing the numer - ical value of parameter b in the yeast payoff E ( y , h ) ] would result in an increase in the hyphal fraction of the population ( Figure 4A ) and this mixed population would become more hos - tile . Therefore , in our model , via parameter k , the host directly affects the interactions within the microbial population . One of the classic examples in game theory is a Snowdrift game . This game models a situation where no player wants to yield to another . However , the worst possible outcome of the game is when neither player yields ( Smith and Price , 1973 ; Hauert et al . , 2006 ) . For some ranges of parameter values , we observed Table 2 | Choice of parameters for simulations presented in this work . Deﬁnition Comment Numerical value y 0 Initial yeast cell number y 0 = 1 × 10 − 1 h 0 Initial hypha cell number h 0 = 1 × 10 − 2 n 0 Initial nutritional conditions n 0 = 5 × 10 − 1 k Immune system strength k = 1 . 5 × 10 − 1 p Maximal immune system activation p = 2 × 10 0 b Immune system’s attraction toward yeast cells b = 2 . 5 × 10 − 1 i Nutrients from tissue penetration i = 2 × 10 − 1 v prod Nutrient restoration rate v prod = 2 × 10 − 1 δ Death processes in the model independent of a game δ = 1 × 10 − 1 u y 1 , u y 2 , u h 1 , u h 2 , σ Parameters deﬁning nutrient uptake u y 1 = u y 2 = 2 × 10 0 u h 1 = u h 2 = 1 × 10 0 σ = 3 × 10 0 The numerical values listed have arbitrary units . increased payoffs to both players when only one of the interact - ing cells formed hypha and the other remained as yeast . However , the development of hyphae has associated metabolic , and other , costs , which have to be invested into hypha formation ( Hummert et al . , 2010 ) . This situation would correspond to a yielding strat - egy described in the above Snowdrift game . Our construction of the payoff matrix ( described in section A 2 - Cell Game Theoretical Model ) led to the conclusion that , for some ranges of values for parameter k , the host imposes Snowdrift game dynamics on the C . albicans population , enabling the coexistence of the two distinct morphologies . In this context , PMN activity can induce positive cooperation in the mixed microbial population , whenever E (cid:2) y , y (cid:3) < E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) and E (cid:2) y , y (cid:3) < E (cid:2) h , y (cid:3) (cid:2) or E ( h , h ) < E (cid:2) h , y (cid:3) and E ( h , h ) < E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3)(cid:3) . ( 4 ) In other words , it would require the payoffs of both yeast and hyphal strategies to be increased in the mixed scenario , compared to when both players choose the same strategy . If the inequalities in Equation ( 4 ) are satisﬁed , a degree of hyphal development is good for the population , as the yeast form will also beneﬁt , i . e . , yeast payoff increases . On the other hand , negative cooperation takes place whenever E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) < E (cid:2) y , y (cid:3) < E (cid:2) h , y (cid:3) (cid:2) or E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) < E ( h , h ) < E (cid:2) h , y (cid:3)(cid:3) . ( 5 ) This means that the coexistence of yeast and hyphal cells pays off only to the hypha , whilst the yeast cell would lose in a mixed scenario . The Prisoner’s dilemma game [ ﬁrst formalized by Albert Tucker in 1950 ( Poundstone , 1992 ) ] , another classic example from game theory , models a situation where players will choose to cheat , irrespective of the strategies of the opponent ( Doebeli and Hauert , 2005 ) . Cheating can be viewed as a way for improv - ing a player’s own payoff and at the same time worsening the opponent’s payoff , i . e . , our deﬁnition of negative cooperation . By increasing the immune response activity ( expressed by b · k ) , the strength of negative cooperation in the population increases and can lead to Prisoner’s dilemma dynamics . In other words , the C . albicans population will evolve to a pure hyphae population , even though the overall payoff would be higher if the whole population remained in the yeast morphology . We performed a stability analysis to assess which payoff values determine different evolutionarily stable fungal populations ( Figure 4B ) . From this , we can conclude that a stable pure hyphal population will occur whenever : ( i ) the difference between payoffs to isolated hyphal cells and yeast cell , E 0 ( h ) – E 0 ( y ) , is larger than the host immune strength k ( E 0 ( h ) − E 0 ( y ) > k ) , and at the same time ( ii ) E 0 ( h ) − E 0 ( y ) > k · ( p − b ) . In contrast , a stable pure yeast population will occur whenever E 0 ( h ) − E 0 ( y ) < k and E 0 ( h ) − E 0 ( y ) < k · ( p − b ) . We also distinguish conditions for which both yeast and hyphal forms are present in the population and when the fractions of cells playing the different strategies are stable . This will occur whenever k < E 0 ( h ) – E 0 ( y ) < k · ( p – b ) , which implies p – b > 1 . In other words , a stable mixed population will be established whenever www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 5 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes FIGURE 4 | Effect of immune system on a population proﬁle . Yeast fraction isgivenby x . ( A ) Populationproﬁlesfordifferent n and k . Greenplanerepresents pure yeast population , x = 1 , and red plane refers to the population consisting solelyofhyphalcells , x = 0 . Theswitchtopurehyphaepopulationisinﬂuenced by the values of b . Yellow surface for b = 0 . 25 ; gray surface for b = 0 . 5 ; black surface for b = 0 . 75 . ( B ) Stability analysis of the steady states . Parameter space is divided into α and β ( see Figure labels ) . The pure yeast or pure hyphal populations are possible evolutionary stable steady states ( ESS ) but coexistence of the two forms may also arise ; in these cases , it is independent of the initial yeast / hyphae ratio . By altering PMNs’ attraction toward yeast and hyphaeforms ( d and b ) , bi - stabilityinthesystemmayoccurandtheﬁnalsteady state is dependent on the initial fractions . ( C ) Simulation of model A . Parameters are set to the values given in Table 2 . Population proﬁle dynamics fordifferent valuesofparameter b intheyeastpayoff E ( y , h ) = E 0 ( y ) – b · k . For low host activity , b = 0 . 25 , yeast cells are initially favored , as they increase in frequency ( green line ) and both cell types will coexist , as hyphal cells persist in thesystem ( redline ) . Populationresponsetime , PRT , indicatesthetimeneeded for yeast cells to reach 50 % of the ﬁnal steady state fraction . ( D ) The immune systemstrength , b · k , inﬂuencesthehyphalfractionandPRT . Byincreasingthe yeast’s cost , by setting the value of b to one indicated in the ﬁgure , the PRT initially increases , but after reaching a certain threshold , b ∗ , the PRT decreases dramatically . The game dynamic interactions switch from Snowdrift game dynamics to Prisoners’ dilemma game dynamics . ( E ) Variations in yeast maximal payoff , E 0 ( y ) , inﬂuence the hyphae fraction and PRT . A scalar a has been introduced in E ( y , h ) = a · E 0 ( y ) − b · k . By setting the value of a to one , as indicated in the ﬁgure , yeast payoff is increased and PRT decreases whilst the fraction of hyphae in the population drops . At the same time , fungal interaction types change from negative cooperation to positive cooperation . immune activation against a population consisting of yeast and hyphal cells is weaker than immune activation against a pure hyphae population , i . e . , p · k > k + b · k . Bi - stability can occur in the system whenever k > E 0 ( h ) – E 0 ( y ) > k · ( p – b ) , meaning p · k < k + b · k or equivalently p – b < 1 . This implies that a system is bi - stable whenever the penalty imposed by the immune system on yeast cells , in a mixed scenario , approaches that imposed on hyphae in a pure hyphae population . Does the host immune activity also inﬂuence the time the fungal population needs to reach a steady state ? To address this question , we inspected the time needed for a population to reach half of the steady state yeast fraction . We call this the population response time , PRT ( see Figure 4C , for illustration ) . Interestingly , small increases of the host attraction toward yeast cells , b , increases the PRT , so that the accumulation of hyphae in the pop - ulation takes more time . However , once PMN attraction toward yeast cells passes a certain threshold , b ∗ , we observed a dramatic decrease in PRT and a rapid switch to a pure hyphae population ( Figure 4D ) . At the same time , game dynamics changed from Snowdrift to a Prisoner’s dilemma game . This result suggests that the strength of the immune response determines both hyphae content and the time required to establish the stable microbial population proﬁle . From a biological perspective , our model indicates that , in order to maintain a commensal - host relationship ( predominantly yeast cells ) , PMN attraction to yeast cells , b , must remain low to prevent a rapid , population - wide transition to hyphal growth . Prisoners’ dilemma does not payoff for a fungal population The payoff matrix of the game discussed here is symmetric ( Table 1 ) . Games where Nash equilibrium is given by the mixed scenario deﬁne a win - lose situation [ i . e . , whenever E ( y , h ) < E ( y , y ) and E ( h , y ) > E ( y , y ) and E ( h , y ) > E ( h , h ) ] . Figure 4A shows simulations of such games . The bigger the distance of the Nash equilibrium payoffs in the win - lose game ( by increasing the effect of immune response b · k ) , the more the hyphal form Frontiers in Microbiology | Systems Microbiology February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 6 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes is favored . When b · k exceeds E 0 ( y ) , the yeast fraction of the population becomes unsustainable and the game will result in Prisoners’ dilemma where all cells will undergo the transition to hyphae , even though it would be beneﬁcial for all to remain in the yeast form . The higher the payoffs to cells that keep the same strategy , the lower the probability that the fungi will undergo a transi - tion ( either yeast - to - hypha or hypha - to - yeast ) . We introduced a scalar a in the payoff to the yeast cell : E ( y , h ) = a · E 0 ( y ) – b · k . This allows us to manipulate yeast’s payoff E 0 ( y ) whilst keep - ing other parameters in the payoff matrix ( Table 1 ) unchanged . If we increase the yeast’s beneﬁt , E 0 ( y ) , by 1 . 5 , 2 , 3 , 4 , or 5 fold ( Figure 4E ) , we generate games where positive cooperation is favored , since here both yeast and hyphae are winning . However , the stronger the positive cooperation is ( through an increase in fungal payoff ) the less likely the switch to the hyphal form becomes ( Figure 4E ) . From these simulations we can conclude that it is crucial for C . albicans to ﬁnd a balance between yeast and hyphae bene - ﬁt [ E 0 ( y ) and E 0 ( h ) ] to cost ( b · k and k , respectively ) . If we relate the fraction of hyphae to the severity of infection , we can hypothesize that positive cooperation occurs only in mild infec - tions . An enhanced tendency to invade the host ( as expressed by enhanced hyphae formation ) is always accompanied by neg - ative cooperation game dynamics . It is important to note that if hyphae outcompete yeast cells , the whole C . albicans population will enter a Prisoners’ dilemma . Furthermore , games deﬁned by positive cooperation appear to result in more rapid adaptation of the population’s morphological states ( Figures 4D , E ) . EVOLUTIONARY DYNAMICS IN C . albicans POPULATION ( MODEL B ) So far we have only considered the relative changes in the yeast to hypha ratio . In the following , we drive the analysis of the system further and analyse how the different interaction types inﬂuence the overall population size . To this end , we allowed for variations in nutrient levels , which are fed into the system at a constant rate and are consumed by fungal proliferation in order to prevent unbounded exponential fungal growth . When modeling changes in the population size of interacting fungi , we describe changes in yeast and hyphal subpopulations as follows . We assume that the yeast subpopulation increases proportionally to the yeast payoff described by E ( y , x ) ( see Equation 3 ) . We also consider a possibil - ity for C . albicans cells to be excluded from the game independent of the interactions with immune system , and we account for that by introducing δ . Since yeasts and hyphae have similar replicative life spans ( Fu et al . , 2008 ) we assume δ to be the same for both subpopulations . This leads to the following expression to describe changes in the yeast population size : ˙ y ( t ) = y ( t ) · (cid:2) − δ + E (cid:2) y , x (cid:3)(cid:3) . ( 6 ) Analogously , changes in the hyphal population size are expressed by the following formula : ˙ h ( t ) = h ( t ) · ( − δ + E ( h , x ) ) , ( 7 ) where the term E ( h , x ) describes the hyphal payoff . The decrease in nutrient levels is proportional to the C . albi - cans population size . We include the inﬂux of nutrients into the system by v prod . This gives us a formula for nutrient changes in the system : ˙ n ( t ) = − y ( t ) · E 0 ( y ) − h ( t ) · (cid:2) E 0 ( h ) − i (cid:3) + v prod . ( 8 ) Equations 6 – 8 describe model B . Games where negative coop - eration takes place are necessary for establishing a hostile pure hyphae population ( Figure 4D ) . On the other hand , if we anal - yse the population size ( model B , Equation 6 , Figure 5A ) , we observed that positive cooperation , obtained by setting a = 5 in E ( y , h ) = a · E 0 ( y ) – b · k , leads to a higher total population size ( compare Figure 5B with Figure 5A ) . This result is in line with other studies , for instance , it was observed that in bacte - rial bioﬁlms , the presence of a cooperative strain increases the population density ( Popat et al . , 2012 ) . Slight changes in the host immune response [ by varying b in E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) = E 0 ( y ) − b · k ] lead to game dynamics dominated by negative cooperation and a subtle decrease in the total C . albicans population size ( Figure 5C , b = 0 . 75 ) . The overall C . albicans population decreases due to a decrease in yeast cells while a small increase in hyphae numbers is observed . Further increases of b lead to even more pronounced negative cooperation where hyphae outcompete yeasts ( Figure 5D , b = 1 ) . In accordance with the results for the PRT from model A ( sec - tion Targeting Yeast Cells Does Not Payoff to the Host ) , the time needed to reach steady populations decreases with an increase in b ( compare Figures 5C , D ) . We observed that the temporal behavior of the population proﬁle is also dependent on the nutritional con - ditions . Figure 6 shows that a low nutrient restoration rate may lead to dampened oscillations in the system but it also reduces the total population size . The extended analysis of the system , where we accounted for population size , indicates that the overall C . albicans popula - tion is higher when positive cooperation takes place . Moreover , positive cooperation results in a lower hyphae population size . In summary , positive cooperation might take place in order to increase colonization levels by C . albicans yeast cells . Negative cooperation could then occur to promote accumulation of hyphae . Consequently , the hyphal state can be interpreted as a state that promotes C . albicans population survival in nutritionally stress - ful conditions or that allows the translocation of the pathogen to different habitats . DISCUSSION The work presented here is focused on the application of evo - lutionary game theory to study the effect of host immunity on changes in microbial population proﬁle dynamics . Our analysis suggests that both pathogen and host beneﬁt from the immune systems’ differential attraction toward the different morpholog - ical forms of C . albicans . The reason for this mutual beneﬁt is twofold : • the host efﬁciently minimizes the number of invasive fungi • the host favors the positive cooperation among yeast cells lead - ing to a relative increase in yeast density . www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 7 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes FIGURE 5 | Switch from positive cooperation to negative cooperation dynamics results in a decreased fungal burden . Parameters are given in Table 2 . ( A ) Simulations for a default parameter set , given in Table 2 . ( B ) The yeast payoff E (cid:2) y , h (cid:3) = a · E 0 ( y ) − b · k modiﬁed by setting a scalar a to 5 ( see themaintextandlegendof Figure 4 ) . Thisincreasestheyeastpayoffandfavors gamedynamicinteractionstriggeredby positivecooperation . ( C ) Byincreasing the strength of immune system from b = 0 . 25 to b = 0 . 725 , the hyphae fraction in the population is increased ( see also Figure 4C ) , along with the total number of hyphae [ compare with ( A ) ] and establishes interactions with negative cooperation at the same time . Negative cooperation leads to a subtle decrease in total cell numbers [ compare with ( A ) and ( B ) ] . ( D ) An increase of the immune system activity from b = 0 . 25 to b = 1 increases negative cooperation between the cells and decreases the time needed for hyphae to outgrow yeast cells [ compare with ( C ) ] . FIGURE 6 | Simulation of a population model with modiﬁed rates of nutrient restoration . Changing the nutrient restoration rate by a factor of 0 . 01 induces dampened oscillations . The total population size decreases by two orders of magnitude . POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS One possible strategy for an extension of the current model would be to incorporate other existing models ( Renaud and de Meeus , 1991 ; Gore et al . , 2009 ; Hummert et al . , 2010 ) . Gore et al . ( 2009 ) , for instance , reported experimental data supporting a model for budding cells establishing cooperative interaction strategies in order to coexist in given conditions . Hummert et al . ( 2010 ) , on the other hand , presented a model of survival of C . albicans cells ingested by macrophages , and discussed evolutionarily sta - ble populations related to the cost for adopting a silencing ( yeast ) or a piercing ( hyphal ) strategy . Renaud and de Meeus ( 1991 ) described a model for host - pathogen interactions where they deﬁned strategies and payoffs for both pathogen and the host . Here , we focused on games within a heterogeneous fungal popu - lation . We focused our analysis on PMN activity as these immune cells play a dominant role in controlling fungal infections and killing C . albicans ( Fradin et al . , 2005 ; Perlroth et al . , 2007 ) . However , in principle , models A and B presented in the current study could be extended to other host cell types or immune com - ponents , or joined with other models ( e . g . , Hummert et al . , 2010 ) Frontiers in Microbiology | Systems Microbiology February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 8 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes to investigate the interplay of different host defense strategies . Our models largely focus on intraspeciﬁc interactions . To anal - yse interspeciﬁc interactions , as described for instance in Renaud and de Meeus ( 1991 ) , and their impact on system’s dynamics , the models may be extended to systems with more interacting cell types . In principle , one could consider a model where C . albicans yeast and hypha are playing against PMNs , macrophages , and / or other host cell types . Using a game theoretic approach , we have identiﬁed situations where C . albicans cells engage in either positive or negative coop - eration . Given experimental data on population dynamics alone ( Gore et al . , 2009 ) , one can directly estimate values in the payoff matrix and extract information on what type of interactions indi - viduals are involved in e . g . , Hummert et al . ( 2010 ) and this work . Being able to infer information on microbial interaction types from mixed populations , consisting of a multitude of cell types , is of utmost importance ( Tyc and Klipp , 2011 ) . Such information could contribute to our understanding of C . albicans behavior at the population level , such as during bioﬁlm maturation or the formation of lesions within host tissue . Moreover , the models pre - sented here could be extended to describe interactions between microbial cells from different species ; for example , interactions between C . albicans and bacteria of the commensal microbiota . EXPERIMENTAL STRATEGY TOWARD MODEL VALIDATION The main prediction made in this study is that the host immune system’s lower targeting of the yeast morphology beneﬁts the host ( and the C . albicans commensal population ) . It may be possible to test this prediction by colonizing mice ( White et al . , 2007 ) with C . albicans wild type yeasts and yeasts over - expressing a factor which attracts PMNs . The surface - associated and secreted factor , Pra1 , may be suitable for such an approach because it serves to attract PMNs to C . albicans ( Soloviev et al . , 2007 ; Losse et al . , 2011 ) . The fungal burden and morphology of wild type vs . PRA1 - overexpressing cells could then be assessed to determine whether heightened PMN attraction to C . albicans yeast cells resulted in : ( 1 ) a reduction in overall C . albicans population size and ( 2 ) a switch to the hyphal morphology . Simultaneously , host fac - tors , such as cytokines or calprotectin , a marker for inﬂammation ( Konikoff and Denson , 2006 ) , could be measured to determine whether the increase in targeting of yeast cells is detrimental to the host . Using such an approach , it may be possible to experi - mentally verify whether the host’s differential targeting of fungal morphologies beneﬁts both the fungal population and the health of the host . APPLICATION OF GAME THEORY TO HOST - PATHOGEN INTERACTIONS There are many modeling strategies suitable to study host - pathogen interactions . For instance , agent - based modeling tech - niques are appropriate to understand the general dynamics of the interactions governed by main rules , rather than molec - ular details . Agent - based modeling is also useful for deter - mining dynamics in relation to the spatial distribution of the system components ( Tyc and Klipp , 2011 ; Tokarski et al . , 2012 ) . Our game theoretical models provide phenomenologi - cal , rather than mechanistic descriptions of the biological sys - tem . In the absence of sufﬁcient quantitative experimental data , the qualitative characteristics of the system were stud - ied based on relative differences rather than exact numerical values of the parameters in the model . This allowed the inves - tigation of the different types of interactions occurring within populations in a given environment . We analyzed the biolog - ical system stemming from the characterization of the fun - gal strategies ( 2 - cell game , section A 2 - Cell Game Theoretical Model ) , through population proﬁles ( model A ) , to predictions on the relative changes in fungal burden in different conditions ( model B ) . Optimization from the pathogen perspective Here , we have considered C . albicans population dynamics at a single site of infection . However , similar principles may apply during systemic disseminated infections . Considering that yeast cells presumably favor dissemination to different body parts ( i . e . , are capable of populating distant sites ) ( Jacobsen et al . , 2012 ) , but that hyphae are essential for epithelial and endothelial invasion ( i . e . , providing access for dissemination ) , we propose that yeast and hyphae favor positive cooperation in a C . albicans population in order to increase the total cell numbers ( fungal burden ) during a systemic infection . Additionally , as yeast cells are less immuno - stimulatory , these cells may disseminate within the bloodstream without causing an extensive host immune activation , compared to hyphae . However , in the ﬁnal stages of systemic infection in mouse models , development of hyphae is favored ( Lionakis et al . , 2011 ) . Optimization from the host perspective Systemic candidiasis can begin via the traversal of host barriers and entry into the vascular system , followed by escape to infect internal organs . The host immune system is activated in order to prevent this and , according to the model presented here , it also monitors and controls hyphae levels by adjusting the effect of immune responses against each cell type in the microbial population . PMNs tune their response , allowing for a certain population size and tolerating yeasts , so that the hyphae fraction ( and invasion and damage ) can be effectively controlled . Hence , the host would not gain an advantage from killing yeast cells more efﬁciently and keeping the total population size smaller . If the host cells were to target yeast cells more aggressively , hyphae would accumulate and the overall probability of infection would increase . GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE In summary , our model proposes the following interactions between the two C . albicans morphologies and the PMNs of the host immune system : 1 . The PMN attraction rate toward different C . albicans cell types ( Soloviev et al . , 2007 , 2011 ; Wozniok et al . , 2008 ) can have a direct effect on the morphological make - up of the fungal population . 2 . A low PMN attraction toward yeast cells allows for the coex - istence of the two morphologies , but favors the yeast mor - phology , and thus favors both the C . albicans ( commensal ) population and the health of the host . www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 9 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes 3 . A higher PMN attraction rate toward yeast cells would cause the population to evolve to pure hyphae , which would be damaging to the host . 4 . During dissemination , both morphologies are required to increase the total population size . There remain several outstanding questions . For instance , does the PMNs’ attraction toward fungal cells change at different stages of infection or anatomical niches ? Do PMNs lose their hypha - over - yeast speciﬁcity as the infection proceeds ? Our modeling results imply that this may be the case if yeast cells cause damage inside these niches . However , host cell damage by C . albicans yeast cells has , as yet , not been observed . In mouse models of systemic candidiasis it has been observed that hyphal cells are predominant in the kidney ( Lionakis et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , our model suggests an increased cost of cooperation in internal organs . It is likely that , once reaching normally sterile organs , such as the kidney , both morphological forms will be targeted by the immune system ; therefore , yeast cells may lose their immune - evasion advantage here . Moreover , there are likely fundamental differences in the nature of nutrient availability . Unlike mucosal surfaces , where nutrients may be readily supplied extracellularly , host cell inva - sion may be essential for optimal nutrient acquisition within the kidney . Therefore , according to our model , the hyphal property of cellular invasion increases their advantage within the kidney . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the European Commission ( Marie Curie Initial Training Network , FINSysB , PITN - GA - 2008 - 214004 , and SysteMTb , HEALTH - 2010 - 241587 , both to Edda Klipp ) . Duncan Wilson was supported by the ERA - NET PathoGenoMics Program ( Candicol ; BMBF 0315 901 B ) . REFERENCES Berman , J . , and Sudbery , P . E . ( 2002 ) . Candida albicans : a molecular revolu - tion built on lessons from budding yeast . Nat . Rev . Genet . 3 , 918 – 930 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg948 Biswas , S . , Van Dijck , P . , and Datta , A . ( 2007 ) . Environmental sensing and signal transduction pathways regulating morphopathogenic determinants of Candida albicans . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 71 , 348 – 376 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 00009 - 06 Dalle , F . , Wachtler , B . , L’Ollivier , C . , Holland , G . , Bannert , N . , Wilson , D . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Cellular interactions of Candida albicans with human oral epithe - lial cells and enterocytes . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 248 – 271 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2009 . 01394 . x Doebeli , M . , and Hauert , C . ( 2005 ) . Models of cooperation based on the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the Snowdrift game . Ecol . Lett . 8 , 748 – 766 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1461 - 0248 . 2005 . 00773 . x Fradin , C . , De Groot , P . , MacCallum , D . , Schaller , M . , Klis , F . , Odds , F . C . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Granulocytesgovernthetranscriptionalresponse , morphologyandpro - liferationof Candidaalbicans inhumanblood . Mol . Microbiol . 56 , 397 – 415 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2005 . 04557 . x Fu , X . H . , Meng , F . L . , Hu , Y . , andZhou , J . Q . ( 2008 ) . Candidaalbicans , adistinctive fungalmodelforcellularagingstudy . AgingCell 7 , 746 – 757 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1474 - 9726 . 2008 . 00424 . x Gore , J . , Youk , H . , and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2009 ) . Snowdrift game dynamics and facultative cheating in yeast . Nature 459 , 253 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature07921 Hauert , C . , Michor , F . , Nowak , M . A . , and Doebeli , M . ( 2006 ) . Synergy and dis - counting of cooperation in social dilemmas . J . Theor . Biol . 239 , 195 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2005 . 08 . 040 Hummert , S . , Hummert , C . , Schroter , A . , Hube , B . , and Schuster , S . ( 2010 ) . Game theoretical modelling of survival strategies of Candida albicans inside macrophages . J . Theor . Biol . 264 , 312 – 318 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2010 . 01 . 022 Jacobsen , I . D . , Wilson , D . , Wachtler , B . , Brunke , S . , Naglik , J . R . , and Hube , B . ( 2012 ) . Candida albicans dimorphism as a therapeutic target . Expert Rev . Anti Infect . Ther . 10 , 85 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1586 / eri . 11 . 152 Koh , A . Y . , Köhler , J . R . , Coggshall , K . T . , Van Rooijen , N . , and Pier , G . B . ( 2008 ) . Mucosal damage and neutropenia are required for Candida albicans dissemination . PLoS Pathog . 4 : e35 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 0040035 Konikoff , M . R . , and Denson , L . A . ( 2006 ) . Role of fecal calprotectin as a biomarker of intestinal inﬂammation in inﬂammatory bowel dis - ease . Inﬂamm . Bowel Dis . 12 , 524 – 534 . doi : 10 . 1097 / 00054725 - 200606000 - 00013 Lehrer , R . I . , and Cline , M . J . ( 1969 ) . Interaction of Candida albicans with human leukocytes and serum . J . Bacteriol . 98 , 996 – 1004 . Lionakis , M . S . , Lim , J . K . , Lee , C . C . , and Murphy , P . M . ( 2011 ) . Organ - speciﬁc innate immune responses in a mouse model of invasive candidiasis . J . Innate Immun . 3 , 180 – 199 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000321157 Losse , J . , Svobodova , E . , Heyken , A . , Hube , B . , Zipfel , P . F . , and Jozsi , M . ( 2011 ) . Role of pH - regulated antigen 1 of Candida albicans in the fungal recognition and antifungal response of human neutrophils . Mol . Immunol . 48 , 2135 – 2143 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molimm . 2011 . 07 . 007 Macphail , G . L . , Taylor , G . D . , Buchanan - Chell , M . , Ross , C . , Wilson , S . , and Kureishi , A . ( 2002 ) . Epidemiology , treatment and outcome of candidemia : a ﬁve - year review at three Canadian hospitals . Mycoses 45 , 141 – 145 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1439 - 0507 . 2002 . 00741 . x Mavor , A . L . , Thewes , S . , and Hube , B . ( 2005 ) . Systemic fungal infections caused by Candida species : epidemiology , infection process and virulence attributes . Curr . Drug Targets 6 , 863 – 874 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 138945005774912735 Miller , M . G . , and Johnson , A . D . ( 2002 ) . White - opaque switching in Candida albicans is controlled by mating - type locus homeodomain proteins and allows efﬁcient mating . Cell 110 , 293 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00837 - 1 Moyes , D . L . , Runglall , M . , Murciano , C . , Shen , C . , Nayar , D . , Thavaraj , S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . A biphasic innate immune MAPK response discriminates between the yeast and hyphal forms of Candida albicans in epithelial cells . Cell Host Microbe 8 , 225 – 235 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2010 . 08 . 002 Odds , F . C . ( 1998 ) . Morphogenesis in Candida , with Special Reference to C . albicans . London , UK : Ballière Tindall . Perlroth , J . , Choi , B . , and Spellberg , B . ( 2007 ) . Nosocomial fungal infec - tions : epidemiology , diagnosis , and treatment . Med . Mycol . 45 , 321 – 346 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13693780701218689 Pfaller , M . A . , and Diekema , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Epidemiology of invasive candidia - sis : a persistent public health problem . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 20 , 133 – 163 . doi : 10 . 1128 / CMR . 00029 - 06 Popat , R . , Crusz , S . A . , Messina , M . , Williams , P . , West , S . A . , and Diggle , S . P . ( 2012 ) . Quorum - sensing and cheating in bacterial bioﬁlms . Proc . Biol . Sci . 279 , 4765 – 4771 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2012 . 1976 Poundstone , W . ( 1992 ) . Prisoner’s Dilemma . John von Neumann , Game Theory , and the Puzzle of the Bomb . New York , NY : Anchor books . Renaud , F . , and de Meeus , T . ( 1991 ) . A simple model of host - parasite evolutionary relationships . Parasitism : compromise or conﬂict ? J . Theor . Biol . 152 , 319 – 327 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 5193 ( 05 ) 80197 - 3 Shapiro , R . S . , and Cowen , L . ( 2010 ) . Coupling temperature sensing and develop - ment : Hsp90 regulates morphogenetic signalling in Candida albicans . Virulence 1 , 45 – 48 . doi : 10 . 4161 / viru . 1 . 1 . 10320 Smith , J . M . , and Price , G . R . ( 1973 ) . Logic of animal conﬂict . Nature 246 , 15 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 246015a0 Soloviev , D . A . , Fonzi , W . A . , Sentandreu , R . , Pluskota , E . , Forsyth , C . B . , Yadav , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Identiﬁcation of pH - regulated antigen 1 released from Candida albicans as the major ligand for leukocyte integrin alphaMbeta2 . J . Immunol . 178 , 2038 – 2046 . Soloviev , D . A . , Jawhara , S . , and Fonzi , W . A . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of innate immune response to Candida albicans infections by alphaMbeta2 - Pra1p interaction . Infect . Immun . 79 , 1546 – 1558 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 00650 - 10 Sudbery , P . E . ( 2011 ) . Growth of Candida albicans hyphae . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 9 , 737 – 748 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2636 Tokarski , C . , Hummert , S . , Mech , F . , Figge , M . T . , Germerodt , S . , Schroeter , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Agent - based modeling approach of immune defense against spores of opportunistic human pathogenic fungi . Front . Microbiol . 3 : 129 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fmicb . 2012 . 00129 Frontiers in Microbiology | Systems Microbiology February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 10 Tyc et al . Pair - wise interactions among colonizing microbes Tyc , K . M . , and Klipp , E . ( 2011 ) . Modeling dissemination of pathogenic fungi within a host : a cartoon for the interactions of two complex systems . J . Comput . Sci . Syst . Biol . S1 : 001 . doi : 10 . 4172 / jcsb . S1 - 001 Wächtler , B . , Wilson , D . , Haedicke , K . , Dalle , F . , and Hube , B . ( 2011 ) . From attach - ment to damage : deﬁned genes of Candida albicans mediate adhesion , invasion and damage during interaction with oral epithelial cells . PLoS ONE 6 : e17046 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0017046 Webb , J . N . ( 2007 ) . Game Theory : Decisions , Interaction and Evolution . London : Springer . White , S . J . , Rosenbach , A . , Lephart , P . , Nguyen , D . , Benjamin , A . , Tzipori , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Self - regulation of Candida albicans population size during GI colonization . PLoS Pathog . 3 : e184 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 0030184 Whiteway , M . , and Bachewich , C . ( 2007 ) . Morphogenesis in Candida albicans . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 61 , 529 – 553 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . micro . 61 . 080706 . 093341 Wisplinghoff , H . , Bischoff , T . , Tallent , S . M . , Seifert , H . , Wenzel , R . P . , andEdmond , M . B . ( 2004 ) . NosocomialbloodstreaminfectionsinUShospitals : analysisof24 , 179 cases from a prospective nationwide surveillance study . Clin . Infect . Dis . 39 , 309 – 317 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 421946 Wolfram Research , I . ( 2010 ) . Mathematica Edition : Version 8 . 0 . Champaign , IL : Wolfram Research , Inc . Wozniok , I . , Hornbach , A . , Schmitt , C . , Frosch , M . , Einsele , H . , Hube , B . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Induction of ERK - kinase signalling triggers morphotype - speciﬁc killing of Candida albicans ﬁlaments by human neutrophils . Cell . Microbiol . 10 , 807 – 820 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2007 . 01086 . x Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was con - ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Received : 29 September 2013 ; accepted : 21 January 2014 ; published online : 06 February 2014 . Citation : Tyc KM , Kühn C , Wilson D and Klipp E ( 2014 ) Assessing the advan - tage of morphological changes in Candida albicans : a game theoretical study . Front . Microbiol . 5 : 41 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fmicb . 2014 . 00041 This article was submitted to Systems Microbiology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology . Copyright © 2014 Tyc , Kühn , Wilson and Klipp . This is an open - access article dis - tributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this jour - nal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . www . frontiersin . org February 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 41 | 11