Oncotarget 28755 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget / Oncotarget , Vol . 6 , No . 30 Triple - layer dissection of the lung adenocarcinoma transcriptome – regulation at the gene , transcript , and exon levels Min - Kung Hsu 1 , I - Ching Wu 2 , Ching - Chia Cheng 3 , Jen - Liang Su 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , Chang - Huain Hsieh 7 , Yeong - Shin Lin 1 , Feng - Chi Chen 1 , 2 , 8 1 Department of Biological Science and Technology , National Chiao - Tung University , Hsinchu , Taiwan 2 Institute of Population Health Sciences , National Health Research Institutes , Zhunan , Taiwan 3 National Institute of Cancer Research , National Health Research Institutes , Zhunan , Taiwan 4 Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology , China Medical University , Taichung , Taiwan 5 Department of Biotechnology , Asia University , Taichung , Taiwan 6 Center for Molecular Medicine , China Medical University Hospital , Taichung , Taiwan 7 Cloud Computing and System Integration Division , National Center for High - Performance Computing , Taichung , Taiwan 8 Department of Dentistry , China Medical University , Taichung , Taiwan Correspondence to : Feng - Chi Chen , e - mail : fcchen @ nhri . org . tw Jen - Liang Su , e - mail : jlsu @ nhri . org . tw Keywords : lung adenocarcinoma , transcriptome analysis , alternative splicing , differential expression , transcript - specific regulation Received : February 27 , 2015 Accepted : August 21 , 2015 Published : September 02 , 2015 ABSTRACT Lung adenocarcinoma is one of the most deadly human diseases . However , the molecular mechanisms underlying this disease , particularly RNA splicing , have remained underexplored . Here , we report a triple - level ( gene - , transcript - , and exon - level ) analysis of lung adenocarcinoma transcriptomes from 77 paired tumor and normal tissues , as well as an analysis pipeline to overcome genetic variability for accurate differentiation between tumor and normal tissues . We report three major results . First , more than 5 , 000 differentially expressed transcripts / exonic regions occur repeatedly in lung adenocarcinoma patients . These transcripts / exonic regions are enriched in nicotine metabolism and ribosomal functions in addition to the pathways enriched for differentially expressed genes ( cell cycle , extracellular matrix receptor interaction , and axon guidance ) . Second , classification models based on rationally selected transcripts or exonic regions can reach accuracies of 0 . 93 to 1 . 00 in differentiating tumor from normal tissues . Of the 28 selected exonic regions , 26 regions correspond to alternative exons located in such regulators as tumor suppressor ( GDF10 ) , signal receptor ( LYVE1 ) , vascular - specific regulator ( RASIP1 ) , ubiquitination mediator ( RNF5 ) , and transcriptional repressor ( TRIM27 ) . Third , classification systems based on 13 to 14 differentially expressed genes yield accuracies near 100 % . Genes selected by both detection methods include C16orf59 , DAP3 , ETV4 , GABARAPL1 , PPAR , RADIL , RSPO1 , SERTM1 , SRPK1 , ST6GALNAC6 , and TNXB . Our findings imply a multilayered lung adenocarcinoma regulome in which transcript - / exon - level regulation may be dissociated from gene - level regulation . Our described method may be used to identify potentially important genes / transcripts / exonic regions for the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma and to construct accurate tumor vs . normal classification systems for this disease . INTRODUCTION As the most deadly human cancer in the world , lung cancer was responsible for 1 . 59 million deaths in the year 2012 alone [ 1 ] . Lung adenocarcinoma is the most common subtype of non - small cell lung cancer [ 2 , 3 ] , which accounts for ~ 85 % of lung cancer cases . Gene dysregulation plays an important role in the Oncotarget 28756 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget development of lung adenocarcinoma [ 4 , 5 ] . Multiple oncogenic pathways , including those pertaining to apoptosis and cell cycle control , are activated in lung adenocarcinoma tissues [ 6 ] . Accordingly , gene expression profiles have been suggested to be a good indicator of lung cancer prognosis [ 6 – 8 ] . Associations between gene dysregulation and tumorigenesis indicate that transcriptomic profiles could be suitable for distinguishing normal from tumor tissues [ 9 ] . A major goal of lung cancer studies is early clinical detection of the disease . Numerous molecular methods have been developed for this purpose . For instance , the serum concentrations of CEA and CYFRA 21 - 1 have been proposed as markers of lung cancer [ 10 , 11 ] , although they have not been successful in clinical trials [ 12 ] . Other approaches for diagnosing lung cancer include immunobiomarker tests [ 13 – 15 ] and the detection of DNA methylation of specific genes [ 16 – 18 ] . A few of these tests have been clinically investigated , but most of the proposed biomarkers for lung cancer , whether genomic , transcriptomic , epigenomic , or proteomic , have failed to yield satisfactory outcomes [ 12 ] . One important difficulty in biomarker selection regards the biological variation among tumor samples . Such variation has limited the sensitivity and specificity of the proposed methods [ 19 – 21 ] . Biomarkers and mathematical models to account for these variations have remained elusive . Recently , transcriptomic approaches have been widely applied to the identification of biomarkers in lung cancer [ 22 ] . Most previous transcriptomic approaches have compared the gene expression profiles between tumor and normal tissues without considering the expressions of individual transcript isoforms . However , because most multiexon human genes are alternatively spliced [ 23 ] , it is crucial to understand the contribution of transcript - specific regulation to the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma . The expression level of a gene is the summation of the expression levels of all of its transcript isoforms . Theoretically , the relative abundance of these transcript isoforms may differ substantially between tumor and normal tissues without affecting the overall gene expression level . Furthermore , during tumorigenesis , the expression level of a specific transcript may fluctuate more or less dramatically than that of the corresponding gene . Indeed , recent publications have highlighted the importance of transcript - specific regulations in tumorigenesis [ 24 – 29 ] . Aberrant splicing has been implicated in apoptosis , evasion from immune surveillance , cell proliferation , the Warburg effect , angiogenesis , metastasis , and response to anticancer drugs [ 30 , 31 ] . The Cancer Genome Atlas ( TCGA ) Research Network revealed that somatic mutations could lead to important alterations in mRNA splicing in lung adenocarcinoma patients [ 20 ] . These findings suggest that mRNA splicing may represent a critical regulatory system in tumorigenesis worthy of further exploration . Studies on the roles of splicing in tumorigenesis have mainly relied on exon array technology [ 32 – 37 ] . Unlike general microarray technology , exon arrays detect changes in exon - or transcript - level expression during cancer development [ 33 , 38 ] . For example , four of the 5183 alternative exons examined by Misquitta - Ali et al . were differentially expressed between lung cancer and normal tissues [ 36 ] . Langer et al . used exon arrays with redesigned probes to identify 330 differentially spliced exons between non - small cell lung cancer and normal tissues [ 33 ] . The large difference between these two studies illustrates the limitation of exon array - based studies . These arrays rely on predesigned probes that can detect only a subset of exons / transcripts that were annotated at the time of probe design . In contrast , RNA sequencing ( RNA - seq ) does not rely on predefined probe sets and , therefore , is less biased in terms of transcript isoform detection . The development of RNA - seq technology has permitted the identification of numerous previously undiscovered transcript isoforms [ 39 ] , many of which were undetectable or undistinguishable by exon arrays . Therefore , it is necessary to reexamine transcript - / exon - level regulation in lung adenocarcinoma by using RNA - seq data . Some methods have been developed for transcript - specific expression analyses . The most widely used of these methods is the Cufflinks package [ 40 ] , in which mappable RNA - seq reads are assigned to gene transcript isoforms based on a likelihood model . The tool calculates the number of fragments or reads per kilobase per million reads ( FPKM or RPKM ) for each transcript based on the “effective transcript length” . According to Cufflinks , the expression level of a gene is equal to the sum of the expression levels of all of its transcript isoforms . The Cuffdiff module of Cufflinks detects genes / transcripts that are differentially expressed between conditions ( e . g . , tumor vs . normal ) according to a negative binomial distribution model [ 40 , 41 ] . The DESeq / DEXseq package detects differentially expressed genes / exonic regions by applying a similar distribution model [ 42 , 43 ] . Whereas Cuffdiff relies on effective length - corrected FPKM / RPKM values , DESeq / DEXseq detects differential expression based on “read counts” that are mapped to the genes / exonic regions of interest . Cufflinks provides the expression levels of “complete transcripts” for detection of differentially expressed transcripts by Cuffdiff . In contrast , DEXseq evaluates the read count - based differential expressions of individual “exonic regions” . Therefore , these two tool sets may yield very different results . Some exon - level information may be omitted in transcript - focused analyses because 1 ) an exonic region can be shared by multiple transcript isoforms , and 2 ) variations in exonic expression can be leveled off in the calculation of transcript - level expression . By applying both tool sets ( Cufflinks / Cuffdiff and DESeq / DEXseq ) to the analysis Oncotarget 28757 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget of lung adenocarcinoma transcriptomes , we may be able to compare the performances of different approaches and to evaluate the contributions of three different regulatory levels ( gene , transcript , and exon ) to the tumorigenesis of this deadly disease . In this study , we identify transcriptional changes at these three levels between tumor and normal tissues by analyzing RNA - seq data from 77 lung adenocarcinoma patients . This “base dataset” is fairly heterogeneous , comprising paired normal and lung adenocarcinoma tissues of different pathological stages from patients of both genders of various ages with or without smoking history . Thus , the transcriptomes of different individuals are expected to vary considerably . We demonstrate that the differential expressions of genes , transcripts , and exonic regions can be used to differentiate tumor from normal tissues with high accuracies ( 0 . 9 – 1 . 0 ) , despite the heterogeneity in tumor samples . Our results support the importance of transcript - / exon - level regulation in the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma . They also support the use of individual transcripts / exons as potential drug targets and biomarkers for lung adenocarcinoma diagnosis . We suggest that further studies be made to explore the yet - unclear biomedical effects of , and molecular mechanisms underlying , these differential expression events . RESULTS Differences in expression at the transcript and exon levels are prevalent between lung adenocarcinoma and normal tissues Figure 1 presents the analysis procedure of this study . We randomly divided the transcriptomes of 77 patients ( Supplementary Table S1 ) into training and validation subsets of approximately equal sizes . We compared the transcriptomes of paired tumor and normal tissues across 77 patients and used DEXseq and DESeq to identify differentially expressed exonic regions ( DEEs ) and genes ( DEGs ) , respectively , in the training subset . For comparison , we used Cuffdiff to identify differentially expressed transcripts ( DETs ) and DEGs . Identified DEGs / DETs / DEEs were trained on the training subset to yield Random Forest models , and then tested on the validation subset for tumor vs . normal tissue classification accuracy . The random assignment of patients was repeated five times ( referred to as “five - replicate experiments” ) to account Figure 1 : Analysis process of the study . Oncotarget 28758 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget for between - individual variations in the transcriptome ( Supplementary Table S2 ) . When the Bonferroni - corrected cutoff P value was set as 0 . 05 , we identified 5541 to 7313 DEGs and 28 , 789 to 36 , 986 DEEs by DESeq / DEXseq , and identified 6725 to 7643 DEGs and 7935 to 10 , 674 DETs by Cuffdiff in the five - replicate experiments ( Figure 2 ) . Intersections of the five replicates accounted for approximately 50 % to 75 % of the identified DEGs / DETs / DEEs . This between - patient heterogeneity in expression profile occurred at all three of the examined biological levels , suggesting that the sampling scheme could markedly influence the outcome of cancer - related transcriptome studies . Theoretically , DEGs / DETs / DEEs that occur recurrently in different sampling schemes should be important for lung adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis , and should be suitable features for constructing tumor vs . normal classification models . Thus , we used the DEGs / DETs / DEEs shared by the five replicates for subsequent analyses . The expression level of a gene is the sum of the expression levels of its exons / transcripts . Thus , the identified DETs / DEEs could reflect the differential expressions of the corresponding genes . If so , then the DETs / DEEs should be located mostly in DEGs , and transcript - / exon - level regulation should be functionally unimportant for lung adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis . To distinguish between gene - level and transcript - / exon - specific regulations , we mapped the selected DETs / DEEs to the corresponding genes ( designated as DET - Gs and DEE - Gs , respectively ) . The 18 , 871 DEEs in the five - replicate intersection ( Figure 1 ) could be mapped to 7769 DEE - Gs . Only 1105 ( 14 . 2 % ) of the DEE - Gs overlapped with the DESeq - identified DEGs ( Figure 3A ) . Meanwhile , the 5151 DETs in Figure 1 corresponded to 3402 DET - Gs , of which 2784 ( 81 . 8 % ) overlapped with Cuffdiff - identified DEGs ( Figure 3B ) . We found that 182 of the 2784 DEGs were single - transcript genes , for which gene - and transcript - level regulations were virtually equivalent . The large difference between DET - Gs and DEE - Gs in overlapping with DEGs ( 81 . 8 % vs . 14 . 2 % ) might have resulted partly from tool discrepancy and partly from the large variations in the estimation of exonic expression levels . Nonetheless , at least hundreds of transcript - / exon - specific regulatory events could be found in lung adenocarcinoma tissues . These observations suggest the existence of at least two layers of gene regulation in lung adenocarcinoma : ( 1 ) gene - centered regulation , in which genes are differentially expressed without changes in the relative abundance of transcript isoforms , and ( 2 ) transcript - / exon - specific regulation , in which transcript isoforms ( or exonic regions ) are differentially regulated without changing the overall gene expression level . We also compared the results generated by different tool sets . At the gene level , Cuffdiff and DESeq significantly overlapped by 2681 genes ( Figure 2 , , hypergeometric test ) . These genes accounted for 54 . 6 % and 64 . 0 % of Cuffdiff - and DESeq - identified DEGs , respectively ( Figure 3C ) . At the transcript level , DETs and DEE - Ts ( the transcripts in which DEEs were located ) significantly overlapped by 1 , 711 transcripts ( Figure 3D , , hypergeometric test ) , accounting for 33 . 2 % of the Cuffdiff - identified DETs . The number of DEE - Ts was relatively large because one exonic region might be shared by multiple transcripts . The significant overlaps suggest that DESeq / DEXseq and Cuffdiff converged on differential expression events that are important for lung adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis . Many differential expression events were identified by only one of the two tool sets . At the gene level , 2229 or 1510 DEGs were detected only by Cuffdiff or DESeq , respectively ( Figure 3C ) . At the transcript level , 3440 Cuffdiff - identified DETs did not overlap with any DEXseq - identified DEEs , and 27 , 832 DEEs did not map to any DETs ( Figure 3D ) . Therefore , the between - tool differences were substantial . Gene - and transcript - / exon - level regulations affect lung adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis through different mechanisms To investigate the biological implications of the identified differential expression events , we conducted Model - based Gene Set Analyses ( MGSAs ) separately for the DESeq - identified DEGs and DEXseq - identified DEE - Gs in the five - replicate intersection ( Figure 1 ) , with reference to Gene Ontology ( GO ) , Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes ( KEGG ) pathways , and Oncogenic Signatures ( OSs ) [ 44 ] . Results are shown in Supplementary Table S3 . The DEGs were enriched in five GO terms ( multicellular organismal development , plasma membrane , cell cycle , cell proliferation , and receptor activity ) , and the DEE - Gs were enriched in six GO terms ( nucleus , cytoplasm , transferase activity transferring phosphorus containing groups , biopolymer metabolic process , protein complex , and cell surface ) . Unexpectedly , none of the GO terms overlapped between DEE - Gs and DEGs . DEGs and DEE - Gs were enriched in 18 and 55 KEGG pathways , respectively , with six overlapping pathways ( vascular smooth muscle contraction , pathways in cancer , axon guidance , cell cycle , extracellular matrix receptor interaction , and glutathione metabolism ) . DEGs and DEE - Gs were significantly associated with 27 and 39 OS genes / characteristics , respectively , with seven being shared by the two gene groups ( YAP conserved signature , MEK , CSR , VEGF - A , E2F1 , EGFR , and RB ) . We conducted a similar analysis for Cuffdiff - identified DEGs and DET - Gs ( Supplementary Table S3 ) . Cuffdiff DEGs and DET - Gs were enriched in one and three GO terms as well as 18 and 10 KEGG pathways , respectively , and were significantly associated with 22 and Oncotarget 28759 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget 26 OS genes / characteristics , respectively . Cuffdiff DEGs and DET - Gs shared one GO term ( cell cycle process ) , seven KEGG pathways ( cell cycle , axon guidance , ABC transporters , purine metabolism , extracellular matrix receptor interaction , arginine and proline metabolism , and complement and coagulation cascades ) , and 17 OS genes / characteristics ( Supplementary Table S3 ) . Collectively , the above observations suggest that DEE - Gs and DESeq - identified DEGs generally serve different biological functions . Although the biological functions of DET - Gs and Cuffdiff - identified DEGs overlapped considerably , the two gene groups actually diverged from each other by numerous biological features . Thus , we conclude that gene - level and transcript - / exon - Figure 2 : Numbers of DESeq - identified DEGs A . DEXseq - identified DEEs B . Cuffdiff - identified DEGs C . and Cuffdiff - identified DETs D . in the five - replicate experiments ( I – V ) . Oncotarget 28760 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget level regulations can affect the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma through different molecular mechanisms . Ensembles of differentially expressed genes , transcripts , and exonic regions can differentiate tumor vs . normal tissues with high accuracy Next , we prioritized the DEGs / DETs / DEEs for construction of tumor vs . normal classification models . We submitted individual DEGs , DETs , and DEGs identified in each of the five - replicate experiments to the Random Forest - based training process on the training data subsets . Then , we evaluated the accuracy of the resulting classification models on the validation data subset ( Figure 1 ; Methods ) , and we ranked the DEGs / DETs / DEEs according to the accuracy of classification . Individually , DESeq - identified DEGs performed better than DEEs in classifying tumor vs . normal tissues ( Figure 4A , Supplementary Figure S1 ) , whereas the Cuffdiff - identified DEGs and DETs had very similar Figure 3 : Intersection between DESeq - identified DEGs and DEXseq - identified DEE - Gs A . between Cuffdiff - identified DEGs and DET - Gs B . between DESeq - identified and Cuffdiff - identified DEGs C . and between Cuffdiff - identified DETs and DEXseq - identified DEE - Ts D . Numbers in parentheses in ( A ) and ( B ) indicate the numbers of genes that are associated with cancer genes / characteristics according to MGSA . Oncotarget 28761 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget performances to each other ( Figure 4B , Supplementary Figure S1 ) . These similar performances may be attributable to the large overlap between the two sets of differential expression events ( Figure 3B ) . Most ( 90 % ) of the single DEGs / DETs / DEEs yielded accuracies of less than 0 . 8 , with single DEEs yielding the lowest accuracies ( Figure 4 ) . Thus , the level of exonic expression was generally more volatile than that of gene / transcript expression . In most cases , single DEGs / DETs / DEEs did not yield satisfactory tumor vs . normal classification results . Combinations of multiple differential expression events appear to be required . The numbers of DEGs / DETs / DEEs analyzed were so large ( > 4 , 000 genes / transcripts and > 18 , 000 exonic regions ; Figure 2 ) that subsequent validation / discovery experiments would be difficult . In addition , some of these DEGs / DETs / DEEs might represent biological noise or sample - specific events . To obtain smaller but more biologically relevant sets of DEGs / DETs / DEEs , we applied more stringent selection criteria . Specifically , we reduced the cutoff P values for DEG / DET / DEE identification from 0 . 05 to 0 . 01 or 0 . 001 , and retained only those that were ranked at the top 10 % , 5 % , or 1 % of classification accuracy based on individual DEGs / DETs / DEEs . The three P - value cutoffs and three accuracy ranking cutoffs constituted nine different combinations of selection criteria ( Supplementary Table S4 ) . A “feature set” of DEGs / DETs / DEEs was derived under each combination of selection criteria . The combinatorial effect of each feature set on tumor vs . normal classification was evaluated in random assignment experiments . We then conducted 100 random assignment or replicate experiments ( in addition to the five - replicate experiments mentioned above ) on the 77 patients . The 100 replicates were not gender - , smoking status - , or tumor stage - biased . For each replicate , the selected feature sets were trained on the training data subset , and the derived classification models were evaluated for accuracy on the validation data subset . One classification model could be obtained for each feature set in one replicate ; therefore , each feature set could yield 100 classification models . Collectively , 100 models of one differential expression event ( DEG , DET , or DEE ) constituted a classification system . The models could “vote” to determine whether a specific sample should be classified as a “tumor” or as “normal” ( Methods ) . Median accuracies of the DEG - , DET - , and DEE - based classification models were all higher than 0 . 95 across the nine selection criteria ( Figure 5 , Supplementary Table S4 ) and were substantially higher than accuracies based on individual DEGs / DETs / DEEs ( Figure 4 ) . For the Cuffdiff analysis , the P < 0 . 001 cutoff was so stringent that no DETs could be found . Therefore , only DETs obtained with cutoffs of P < 0 . 05 and P < 0 . 01 were analyzed . One of the DESeq - identified DEG feature sets yielded significantly lower accuracies than the other Figure 4 : Cumulative frequencies of tumor vs . normal classification accuracy based on A . individual DESeq - identified DEGs or DEXseq - identified DEEs , and B . Cuffdiff - identified DEGs or DEGs . This figure only shows the results derived from replicate I in the five - replicate experiments . Results of replicates II – V are given in Supplementary Figure S1 . Oncotarget 28762 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget sets ( Figure 5A ) . The lower accuracies probably resulted from information loss because this feature set ( cutoff of P < 0 . 001 , top 1 % ) included only two member genes ( Supplementary Table S4 ) . The highest classification accuracies were not necessarily derived from the most stringently selected feature sets . For the DESeq - and Cuffdiff - identified DEGs , the best - performing feature sets were derived from the P < 0 . 05 ( top 1 % ) criterion , whereas the same selection criterion yielded the worst results for DETs . For DEEs , the highest accuracy was obtained under the criterion of P < 0 . 001 ( top 5 % ) . Three conclusions can be drawn from these observations . First , combinations of DEGs / DETs / DEEs perform substantially better than individuals do in classifying tumor vs . normal tissues ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , especially for DEEs . Second , such combinations should include a sufficient Figure 5 : Violin - plot accuracy distribution of tumor vs . normal classification in 100 - replicate experiments according to A . DEG - identified DEGs , B . DEXseq - identified DEEs , C . Cuffdiff - identified DEGs , and D . Cuffdiff - identified DETs . White dots denote median classification accuracies . Oncotarget 28763 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget number of DEGs / DETs / DEEs for accurate classification , but the accuracy may decrease if the number exceeds a certain threshold . Third , rationally selected DEGs / DETs / DEEs may reflect biological differences between tumor and normal tissues , at least in the base dataset . The best - performing DEGs ( cutoff of P < 0 . 05 , top 1 % ) are listed in Table 1 . Under this criterion , DESeq and Cuffdiff identified 13 and 14 DEGs , respectively , 11 of which were shared between the two feature sets . This high between - tool consistency implies that the regulation of these 11 genes is important for the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma . Moreover , some of these genes ( e . g . , ETV4 , RSPO1 , and TNXB ) have been implicated in other tumors . Other molecular functions of the listed genes include roles as mediators , modifiers , activators , effectors , and inhibitors ( Supplementary Table S5 ) . DEG - based classification systems outperform DET - and DEE - based systems on independent validation datasets As the gene regulation of lung adenocarcinoma was heterogeneous between patients , we investigated whether classification systems derived from the base dataset could perform well when applied to other lung adenocarcinoma transcriptome datasets . We evaluated the accuracies of the DEG - , DET - , and DEE - based classification systems on two independent datasets : the “nonsmoker dataset” GSE37764 and the “ KRAS dataset” GSE34914 ( see Supplementary Table S1 for details ) . GSE37764 is composed of RNA - seq data of paired tumor - normal tissue samples from six nonsmoker female lung adenocarcinoma patients , with each sample being sequenced twice ( 24 transcriptomes in total ) . GSE34914 includes RNA - seq data of tumor samples ( no normal samples ) from 16 lung adenocarcinoma patients with or without KRAS mutations ( one transcriptome per patient ) . Using both datasets , we evaluated the accuracies of the 100 - model classification systems based on the rationally selected DEGs / DETs / DEEs . A sample in the independent dataset was predicted to be tumor tissue if more than 50 of the 100 models in a system classified it as “tumor” . Otherwise , this sample was considered to be “normal” . Because the tumor - normal distinction is a binary variable , we used a continuous variable , system performance index ( SPI ) , to evaluate the overall consistency of the four classification systems ( DESeq DEG - based , Cuffdiff DEG - based , DET - based , and DEE - based systems ) . SPI was defined as the average proportion of models that correctly assigned a sample to “tumor” across all samples in a test dataset ( Methods ) . An SPI value of 1 . 0 indicates that all 100 models correctly classify a tumor sample as “tumor” . An SPI value of ~ 0 . 5 indicates that the tumor vs . normal classification is no better than random chance . Table 1 : DESeq - and Cuffdiff - identified DEGs selected for the tumor vs . normal classification systems ENSEMBL ID Identified by Gene name Associated cancer gene or pathway ENSG00000144891 Cuffdiff AGTR1 EZH2 [ 53 ] , ESR1 [ 54 ] ENSG00000132680 Cuffdiff KIAA0907 KRAS [ 55 ] , TBK1 [ 55 ] ENSG00000169241 Cuffdiff SLC50A1 ENSG00000254244 DESeq PAICSP4 ENSG00000135604 DESeq STX11 KRAS [ 55 ] , STK33 [ 56 ] , IL2 [ 57 ] ENSG00000162062 Both C16orf59 EDD [ 53 ] , ALK [ 58 ] ENSG00000132676 Both DAP3 cAMP [ 59 ] ENSG00000175832 Both ETV4 EZH2 [ 53 ] , SUZ12 [ 53 ] , KRAS [ 55 ] , IL15 [ 57 ] , CCND1 [ 60 ] , WNT [ 61 ] ENSG00000139112 Both GABARAPL1 ENSG00000128059 Both PPAT NFE2L2 [ 62 ] , PIGF [ 63 ] ENSG00000157927 Both RADIL ENSG00000169218 Both RSPO1 WNT [ 61 ] ENSG00000180440 Both SERTM1 ENSG00000096063 Both SRPK1 cAMP [ 59 ] , EIF4GI [ 64 ] ENSG00000160408 Both ST6GALNAC6 WNT [ 61 ] , AKT [ 65 ] ENSG00000168477 Both TNXB KRAS [ 55 ] , E2F1 [ 66 ] Oncotarget 28764 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget SPI values for the nonsmoker and KRAS datasets were 1 . 000 and 0 . 996 for the DESeq DEG - based classification system , 1 . 000 and 0 . 991 for the Cuffdiff DEG - based system , 0 . 995 and 0 . 948 for the DET - based system , and 0 . 998 and 0 . 919 for the DEE - based system , respectively ( Table 2 ) . For the nonsmoker dataset , the DEG - , DET - , and DEE - based systems all had SPI values of ~ 1 . 000 ( all of the tumor and normal tissues were correctly classified by all four systems ) . For the KRAS dataset , the two DEG - based systems had slightly higher SPI values ( 0 . 991 – 0 . 996 ) than the DET - or DEE - based system ( 0 . 919 – 0 . 948 ) . These results imply that gene expression as a whole was more consistently regulated across tumor samples than either transcript isoform or exonic region expression . However , the biological significance of transcript - / exon - specific regulation in the pathogenesis of lung adenocarcinoma is not negligible , given the high accuracies of the DET - and DEE - based classification systems . One tumor sample ( SRR396813 ) in the KRAS dataset was erroneously predicted to be normal by both DET - and DEE - based systems ( Supplementary Table S6 ) . This result may be because this particular sample was an outlier in terms of its transcript - level expression profile ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . To investigate whether our method could be applied to other cancer types , we tested the method on prostate adenocarcinoma transcriptomes from The Cancer Gene Atlas website . This dataset included 104 tumor and normal tissue samples . We used 40 paired tumor - normal tissues ( 80 samples ) to construct classification systems , as described above . The other 24 samples were used for validation . The resulting SPI values were comparable to those obtained from the lung adenocarcinoma analysis ( Supplementary Tables S7 and S8 ) . However , unlike in the lung adenocarcinoma analysis , the DEE - based system yielded the highest average SPI value ( 0 . 974 ; Supplementary Table S9 ) among the four classification systems . The DEE - based system correctly classified all 24 samples , whereas the other three systems misclassified one to three samples ( Supplementary Table S8 ) . These observations suggest that our method can be applied to other cancer types , although the overall consistency of tumor vs . normal classification and the relative performances of individual systems may differ between cancer types . The ETV4 gene is associated with cancer cell stemness in lung adenocarcinoma We examined whether our method could be used to identify genes important for the tumorigenesis of lung adenocarcinoma . Using the Ets variant 4 ( ETV4 ) gene ( Table 1 ) for functional analyses , we examined whether this gene is upregulated in lung adenocarcinoma by using an in silico approach based on the Oncomine database ( https : / / www . oncomine . org / resource / login . html ) [ 45 ] . We observed significant upregulation of ETV4 in lung adenocarcinoma compared to normal lung tissues ( Figure 6A – 6E ) . Furthermore , ETV4 upregulation was significantly associated with recurrence ( Figure 6F ) and poor survival ( Figure 6G ) . Next , we analyzed whether ETV4 is correlated with cancer cell stemness or proliferation . After overexpressing ETV4 using the pcDNA6 vector system or knocking down expression using ETV4 - specific small interfering RNAs , we measured the mRNA expression levels of three stemness markers , ALDH , CD133 , and Sox2 ( Figure 7A ) . ETV4 overexpression or knockdown significantly increased or decreased , respectively , the expression levels of all three markers ( Figure 7B – 7D , left and right panels ) . Moreover , ALDH activity , a hallmark of cancer stem cells , was significantly increased or decreased in cells with overexpression or knockdown of ETV4 , respectively ( Figure 7F ) . Table 3 reports the correlations between the expressions of ETV4 and the three biomarkers . Changes in ETV4 expression did not significantly affect the proliferation of lung adenocarcinoma cells ( Figure 7E ) . Taken together , these findings support the idea that ETV4 could increase the stemness of lung cancer cells . Table 2 : SPI values of different classification systems on the nonsmoker and KRAS datasets Feature set ( # DEGs / DETs / DEEs ) Non - smoker ( 24 samples ) KRAS ( 16 samples ) DESeq DEGs ( 13 ) 1 . 000 0 . 996 Cuffdiff DEGs ( 14 ) 1 . 000 0 . 991 Cuffdiff DETs ( 50 ) 0 . 995 0 . 948 * DEXseq DEEs ( 397 ) 0 . 998 0 . 919 * DEXseq DEEs – Naïve FPKM ( 28 ) 0 . 930 1 . 000 * In the KRAS dataset , the DET - and DEE - based systems each made an error by assigning a tumor sample to the “normal” group , even though the SPI values were fairly high . All other predictions in this table reached 100 % accuracy . Oncotarget 28765 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget Figure 6 : Association of ETV4 expression with tumor , recurrence , and clinical outcomes of lung cancer patients . A – E . ETV4 mRNA expression in lung adenocarcinoma compared to normal lung tissues ( Oncomine datasets : Beer , Okayama , Selamat , Stearman , and Wei Lung ) . F . ETV4 mRNA expression as a function of lung cancer recurrence ( Oncomine datasets : Kuner Lung ) . G . ETV4 expression as a function of lung cancer patient survival ( Oncomine datasets : Kuner Lung ) . Oncotarget 28766 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget DISCUSSION By comparing the transcriptomes of paired tumor and normal tissues , we identified hundreds to thousands of DEGs , DETs , and DEEs from tissues derived from 77 lung adenocarcinoma patients . In most cases , the identified DEEs did not coincide with the DEGs ( Figure 3A ) , and hundreds of DETs did not correspond to DEGs . These observations imply that there is substantial exon - / transcript - specific regulation in lung adenocarcinoma . However , we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the identified DETs / DEEs represent background variations or biologically irrelevant events . Therefore , stringent criteria for the identification of DETs / DEEs are necessary . With the differentially expressed events identified in the initial five - replicate experiments ( Figure 2 ) , we constructed classification systems ( each comprising 100 Random Forest models ) to differentiate tumor from normal tissues in lung adenocarcinoma patients . The DEG - , DET - , and DEE - based systems all yielded average accuracies not lower than 0 . 95 when tested on the validation data subsets ( Figure 5 , Supplementary Table S4 ) . When applied to the nonsmoker dataset , all four systems reached 100 % prediction accuracy , with slightly different consistency levels ( SPI : 0 . 995 – 1 . 000 , Table 2 ) . When applied to the KRAS dataset , the DET - and DEE - based systems misclassified one tumor sample , but the two DEG - based systems classified all samples correctly . The SPI values of the DET - and DEE - based systems were lower than those of DEG - based systems for this validation dataset . The high classification accuracies of all four systems for the nonsmoker dataset were not surprising , as the nonsmoker validation dataset was entirely derived from female nonsmoking Korean patients ( Supplementary Table S1 ) . Similar samples were included in the base dataset . The observation that DEGs could better overcome between - dataset variations implies that the regulatory flexibility of splicing and the variations in estimating transcript / exonic expression are larger than those of the overall gene expressions . Estimates of transcript - or exon - level expression may be reliable only for highly expressed genes [ 46 ] . Thus , removing transcripts of genes with lower expression might help to improve the consistency of DET - / DEE - based classification . Large variations in transcript / exonic expression levels might have led to overfitting in the construction Figure 7 : Effects of ETV4 expression on lung cancer cell stemness and proliferation . A – D . mRNA expression levels of ETV4 ( A ) , ALDH ( B ) , CD133 ( C ) , and Sox2 ( D ) . E . ALDH activity as measured by flow cytometry . F . Percentage of cell proliferation as measured by the MTT assay in ETV4 - overexpressed H1435 ( left panel ) and ETV4 - knockdown CL1 – 5 cells ( right panel ) . Results are shown as the mean ± standard deviation based on triplicate experiments . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , and * * * P < 0 . 001 ( Student’s t test ) . Oncotarget 28767 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget of classification models in the lung adenocarcinoma analysis . This overfitting may explain why the DET - and DEE - based systems made an error in the KRAS dataset . Furthermore , many more DETs and DEEs were selected for the classification systems compared to DEGs . This disparity could have aggravated the overfitting problem . We further clarified how the classification error occurred by examining the expression profiles of SRR396813 . Expression levels of DEGs in this specific tumor sample were closer to the medians of all samples than in the case of DETs , for which the expression levels were mostly at the high extremes ( Supplementary Figure S2 ) . This example illustrates that although the expression levels of individual transcripts may vary considerably , the expression levels of genes as a whole are relatively stable across patients . Nevertheless , we identified large numbers of DEG - independent DETs / DEEs in lung adenocarcinoma ( Figure 3 ) , which could be used to improve the characterization of the tumor tissues ( Figure 5 , Table 2 ) . Studying the biological roles of these DETs / DEEs might advance our understanding of lung adenocarcinoma pathogenesis and aid researchers in identifying specific transcripts / exonic regions for the development of more precise therapeutics . In the above analyses , the expression level of a DEXseq - identified DEE was represented by the expression level of the corresponding transcript , which , in turn , was estimated by using the effective length - correction algorithm implemented in Cufflinks [ 40 ] . This algorithm could assign reads to the supposedly “correct” transcripts , thus avoiding errors in estimating transcript expression levels . Cufflinks considers a transcript as a unit of expression . Thus , estimates of transcript expression can level off the variations in exonic expressions , which may be biologically meaningful . We were interested in whether the uncorrected exonic expression levels could be helpful in classifying tumor vs . normal tissues . We substituted the FPKM values calculated by Cufflinks with the FPKM values that had not been corrected for effective length ( naïve FPKMs ) ( Methods ) . Using the naïve FPKMs as inputs to DEXseq analyses in the five - replicate experiments , we identified 28 DEEs for the construction of another tumor vs . normal classification system . Of the 28 DEEs , 26 DEEs corresponded to alternatively spliced exons , whereas only two DEEs were constitutively spliced exons . Moreover , 18 of the 28 DEEs ( 64 % ) were found in only one of the transcript isoforms of the corresponding genes ( Supplementary Table S7 ) . Next , we validated the 28 - DEE – based classification system by applying it to the nonsmoker and KRAS datasets , revealing SPI values of 0 . 930 and 1 . 000 , respectively ( Table 2 ) . This system correctly classified all of the tumor and normal samples in the KRAS dataset ( Supplementary Table S6 ) , in contrast to the 50 - DET - and 397 - DEE – based systems that erroneously assigned one tumor sample to “normal” . These 28 DEEs did not fall within any of the 13 DESeq - or 14 Cuffdiff - identified DEGs in Table 1 . These observations indicate that the naïve FPKMs for DEEs could provide useful information for the tumor vs . normal classification . One limitation of this study is that the base dataset included only patients of one single ethnicity ( Korean ) . The uniform genetic background might limit the applicability of the classification models . This limitation is probably one reason why , in addition to the outlying expression profile of the specific sample , the DET - and DEE - based systems made an erroneous prediction in the KRAS dataset . However , both DEG - based systems correctly classified all of the samples . This result seems to Table 3 : Associations between expression levels of stem cell markers and ETV4 in lung cancer datasets Stem cell marker Dataset † r ‡ P ALDH1A1 Bhattacharjee ( n = 203 ) 0 . 3904 < 0 . 0001 Bild ( n = 111 ) 0 . 2164 0 . 0225 Broet ( n = 72 ) 0 . 3614 0 . 0018 CD133 Broet ( n = 72 ) 0 . 2689 0 . 0224 SOX2 Beer ( n = 96 ) 0 . 2996 0 . 0051 Bhattacharjee ( n = 203 ) 0 . 1844 0 . 0117 Ding ( n = 75 ) 0 . 3304 0 . 0038 Lee ( n = 138 ) 0 . 3201 0 . 0001 Stearman ( n = 39 ) 0 . 5059 0 . 0219 † r , Pearson’s correlation coefficient , ‡ P value for two - tailed Student’s t test of individual dataset ( Oncomine database [ 45 ] ) . n , total sample size , including cell lines and normal and cancer tissues . Correlation was only assessed in the cancer sample . Oncotarget 28768 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget suggest that DEG - based classification systems are more robust than DET - / DEE - based systems against genetic and biological variations in differentiating tumor vs . normal tissues . Although the DEE - based system outperformed the DET - / DEG - based systems for the TCGA prostate adenocarcinoma dataset , relatively few DEEs / DETs / DEGs were identified in this dataset ( only 2 – 9 events ; Supplementary Table S8 ) . The disparity in the numbers of identified DEEs / DETs / DEGs might have resulted from the difference in sample size between the two analyses . The number of tumor / normal samples for classification system construction was ~ 50 % smaller in the analysis of prostate vs . lung adenocarcinoma ( 80 samples vs . 154 samples ) . The high accuracy of the DEE - based system in the prostate adenocarcinoma analysis highlights the advantage of exploring exon - level transcriptional regulation . When limited numbers of differential expression events are available , DEEs could be useful for identifying tumor vs . normal differences with better accuracy than DETs or DEGs . Overall , our analyses demonstrate that , in addition to genes , transcripts and exons can also serve to differentiate between tumor and normal tissues reliably . Furthermore , exonic expression levels might convey important regulatory information that is not observable in gene - or transcript - level expression . This triple - layered view of the cancer transcriptome can help to identify previously unexplored regulatory events that may be important for tumorigenesis , thereby facilitating future diagnostic / therapeutic developments . MATERIALS AND METHODS Data source RNA - seq datasets of lung adenocarcinoma were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database under series numbers GSE40419 [ 47 ] , GSE34914 [ 48 ] , and GSE37764 [ 49 ] ( Supplementary Table S1 ) . The base dataset , GSE40419 , was used to identify DEGs , DETs and DEEs between normal and tumor tissues . These differentially expressed events were submitted to the Random Forest module of the R package for construction of classification models to distinguish normal from tumor tissues based on the training data subsets ( Figure 1 ) . The base dataset contained RNA - seq data derived from adjacent normal and tumor tissues from 77 Korean patients , and RNA - seq data from tumor tissues of 10 patients . Only the transcriptomes of the 77 paired tissues were used for model training . Non - paired tissues were included for model validation only . GSE34914 ( the KRAS dataset ) included 16 lung adenocarcinoma tumor samples , including eight samples that contained KRAS mutations and seven samples that did not . GSE37764 ( the nonsmoker dataset ) included paired tumor and normal tissues from six Korean female nonsmokers , with each sample being sequenced twice . The KRAS and nonsmoker datasets were used as independent validation datasets to evaluate the performances of the DEG / DET / DEE - based classification systems . RNA - seq data processing Raw data retrieved from the Gene Expression Omnibus ( in SRA format ) were converted to the fastq format by using fastq - dump . RNA - seq reads were mapped to the human reference genome ( GRCh37 ; Ensemble Version 70 ) by using TopHat2 with default parameters [ 50 ] . Expression levels ( FPKM values ) of genes and transcripts were generated by Cufflinks [ 40 ] . The expression level of an exonic region was calculated by summing the FPKM values of transcripts containing the exonic regions of interest . To ensure data quality , we excluded two types of genes and the corresponding transcripts : 1 ) genes with multiple FPKM values ( 12 genes ) , and 2 ) genes for which some of the annotated transcripts were “absent” , rather than being assigned zero FPKM values , according to Cufflinks results ( 776 genes ) . For the five - replicate experiments ( Figure 1 ) , one additional filter was applied : the FPKM of a gene / transcript must be a non - zero value in the tumor and normal tissues of at least 39 patients . This filter was used to ensure the success of the Random Forest training process . If more than 38 ( ~ half of the patients ) zero FPKM values were assigned , to one single training data subset , then Random Forest training would be infeasible . After these exclusions , 31 , 234 genes and 150 , 132 transcripts were included in the subsequent analyses of 100 random assignments . Detection of regions with differential expression Cufflinks can be used to estimate transcript / gene expression levels , but not the statistical significance of differential expression . Therefore , differential expression between tumor and normal tissues was evaluated by using DESeq ( for genes ) and DEXseq ( for exonic regions ) [ 42 , 43 ] . We calculated the read counts of the genes / exonic regions of interest with the HTSeq python package , using the TopHat2 mapping results . The DESeq / DEXseq algorithm approximates a negative binomial distribution model based on the number of “counts” of mappable RNA - seq reads in multiple samples , and tests the statistical significance of the difference in read count between two conditions ( in this study , tumor vs . normal tissues ) . To reduce variation in the read - count estimates , we discarded exonic regions that were shorter than 100 bp . For comparison , we used Cuffdiff to identify DETs and DEGs [ 41 ] . Cuffdiff employs a negative binominal distribution model based on Cufflinks - derived FPKM values to detect the differential expressions of genes / transcripts . Bonferroni - corrected P values of 0 . 05 , 0 . 01 , and 0 . 001 were used as cutoffs to identify DEGs , DETs , and DEEs . Oncotarget 28769 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget Calculation of naïve FPKM values and functional analysis of differential expression events We calculated the naïve FPKM values from the RNA - seq reads that mapped to the DEEs detected by DEXseq , using the formula , where is the naïve FPKM of exonic region , is the number of reads mapped to exonic region , is the total number of mapped reads ( in millions ) , and is the length of exonic region ( in kbp ) . The R package “mgsa” was used to analyze the functional effects of identified differential expression events [ 44 ] . MGSA is a Bayesian modeling approach for gene set enrichment analysis with reference to GO , KEGG pathways , and OSs . Construction of tumor vs . normal classification systems The R package “randomForest” [ 51 ] was used for the construction of tumor vs . normal classification models . Using this algorithm , we randomly selected candidate DEGs / DETs / DEEs to construct multiple decision trees with controlled variances . The trees then “voted” to determine whether a sample was a tumor or a normal tissue . Classification models were constructed from the training data subsets and tested for accuracy on the validation data subsets generated in the random assignments of the base dataset . Each random assignment could yield a Random Forest - trained classification model based on the input feature set of DEGs , DETs , or DEEs . A classification system was the combination of all 100 models based on the same type of differentially expressed events , which were derived from 100 random assignments of the base dataset . Calculation of SPI The SPI value reflects the average consistency of a system in classifying tumor vs . normal samples . The confidence ( ) of sample assigned to “tumor” was de fined as , where is the number of models that classify test sample to tumor , and is the total number of models ( in this study , 100 ) . If was larger than 0 . 5 , then the sample was assigned to “tumor” ; otherwise , the sample was assigned to “normal” . Precision index was defined as : Finally , was defined as , where is the number of samples . Cell lines for experimental validation Human cell lines used in this study included the lung adenocarcinoma cell line H1435 ( American Type Culture Collection [ ATCC ] CRL - 5870 ) , the embryonic kidney cell line HEK - 293T ( ATCC CRL - 3216 ) , and the lung adenocarcinoma cell line CL1 - 5 ( provided by Dr . Cheng - Wen Wu [ 52 ] ) . Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium / Nutrient Mixture F - 12 ( DMEM / F12 ; for H1435 and CL1 - 5 cells ) or high - glucose DMEM media ( HEK - 293T cells ) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5 % CO 2 . Media were supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin . Plasmid constructs and small hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) clones Full - length human ETV4 ( NM _ 001986 ) was amplified from the cDNA of CL1 - 5 cells by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) , using forward primer ( F ) gggaattcGG ATGGAGCGGA GGATGAA and reverse primer ( R ) gggcggccGC TGGGGGCTAG TAAGAGT , where gggaattc and gggcggcc were sequences including the restriction enzyme cutting site . The gene was cloned into the EcoR I and Not I sites of pcDNA6 ( Invitrogen ) . ETV4 shRNA clones ( TRCN0000013933 and TRCN0000013936 ) and the luciferase shRNA control clone ( TRCN0000072244 ) were purchased from the National RNAi Core Facility at Academia Sinica , Taipei , Taiwan . All plasmids were confirmed by DNA sequencing . Transfection and lentiviral infection For overexpression of ETV4 , H1435 lung cancer cells were transfected with ETV4 - overexpressing plasmid or control vector ( pcDNA6 ) for 48 h by using the Fugene Reagent ( Roche ) . For lentiviral production , the envelope plasmid ( pMD2 . G ) , packaging plasmid ( pCMV - deltaR8 . 91 ) , and target gene ( ETV4 shRNA clones and luciferase shRNA control clone ) were transfected into HEK - 293 cells by using Polyethylenimine Reagent ( Sigma ) for 24 h . The media was changed to Complete Medium , which included 10 % FBS , 2 mM L - glutamine , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin . After 48 h , the supernatant was collected and filtered by a 0 . 2 - μm syringe filter ( Pall Life Sciences ) . For lentiviral infection , CL1 - 5 cells were infected with 2 ml of lentiviral supernatant and 2 μl of polybrene ( hexadimethrine bromide , Sigma ) for 48 h . These transient transfectants were further assayed according to the purpose of each experiment . RNA isolation and quantitative reverse transcription PCR ( qRT - PCR ) Total RNA was isolated by using Trizol ( Invitrogen ) and used as a template for reverse transcription into cDNA by using the M - MLV Reverse Transcription Oncotarget 28770 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget Kit ( Invitrogen ) . To quantify mRNA expression , qRT - PCR was performed with a LightCycler 480 ( Roche ) for the following genes ( primer pairs ) : ETV4 ( F : gcagtttgtt cctgatttcc a , R : actctggggc tccttcttg ) , ALDH ( F : ccaaagacat tgataaagcc ataa , R : cacgccatag caattcacc ) , CD133 ( F : ggaaactaag aagtatggga gaaca , R : cgatgccact ttctcactga t ) , SOX2 ( F : atgggttcggtggtcaagt and reverse primer : actctggggctccttcttg ) , and GAPDH ( F : agccacatcg ctcagacac , R : gcccaatacg accaaatcc ) . Relative gene expression was calculated by 2 −ΔCT ( ΔCT = CT of target gene – CT of GAPDH gene ; CT is the cycle threshold ) . Cell proliferation assay Cell proliferation was assessed by the MTT ( 3 - ( 4 , 5 - dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide ) assay . Cells ( 4 × 10 3 cells ) were seeded in 96 - well tissue culture plates and incubated for 6 h . MTT ( 5 mg / ml ) was added for further 4 hours after the indicated time points . Supernatant was removed , and 100 μl DMSO were added to dissolve the crystal . The absorbance at 570 nm was measured with an enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay reader , with subtraction of background at 630 nm . ALDH activity assay The ALDH activity of cells was measured by using the Aldefluor Kit ( StemCell Technologies , Vancouver , BC , Canada ) , followed by flow cytometric analysis in the green fluorescence channel , FL1 . The aldefluor - specific inhibitor , diethylaminobenzaldehyde , was added to the sample as a control to define the gates of ALDH + region . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The computational facilities were partly supported by the Taiwan Bioinformatics Institute Core Facility and the National Center for High - Performance Computing , Taiwan . We thank Dr . Ren - Hua Chung for technical assistance . We thank Dr . Jeong - Sun Seo’s group for providing the lung adenocarcinoma transcriptome data , and The Cancer Genome Atlas for providing the prostate adenocarcinoma transcriptome data . We are grateful to two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments . FUNDING This study was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology ( MOST - 103 - 2311 - B - 400 - 003 ) and the National Health Research Institutes ( IPHS - PP - 06 ) of Taiwan . REFERENCES 1 . International Agency for Research on Cancer . 2012 . GLOBOCAN 2012 : Estimated Cancer Incidence , Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide in 2012 : World Health Organization . 2 . Subramanian J , Govindan R . Lung cancer in never smokers : a review . Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology . 2007 ; 25 : 561 – 570 . 3 . Kenfield SA , Wei EK , Stampfer MJ , Rosner BA , Colditz GA . Comparison of aspects of smoking among the four histological types of lung cancer . Tobacco control . 2008 ; 17 : 198 – 204 . 4 . Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . The hallmarks of cancer . Cell . 2000 ; 100 : 57 – 70 . 5 . Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . Hallmarks of cancer : the next generation . Cell . 2011 ; 144 : 646 – 674 . 6 . Neumann J , Feuerhake F , Kayser G , Wiech T , Aumann K , Passlick B , Fisch P , Werner M , Zur Hausen A . Gene expression profiles of lung adenocarcinoma linked to histo - pathological grading and survival but not to EGF - R status : a microarray study . BMC cancer . 2010 ; 10 : 77 . 7 . Daigle SR , Olhava EJ , Therkelsen CA , Majer CR , Sneeringer CJ , Song J , Johnston LD , Scott MP , Smith JJ , Xiao Y , Jin L , Kuntz KW , Chesworth R , Moyer MP , Bernt KM , Tseng JC , et al . Selective killing of mixed lineage leu - kemia cells by a potent small - molecule DOT1L inhibitor . Cancer cell . 2011 ; 20 : 53 – 65 . 8 . Director’s Challenge Consortium for the Molecular Classification of Lung A . Shedden K , Taylor JM , Enkemann SA , Tsao MS , Yeatman TJ , Gerald WL , Eschrich S , Jurisica I , Giordano TJ , Misek DE , Chang AC , Zhu CQ , Strumpf D , Hanash S , Shepherd FA , et al . Gene expression - based survival prediction in lung adenocarci - noma : a multi - site , blinded validation study . Nature medi - cine . 2008 ; 14 : 822 – 827 . 9 . Guan P , Huang D , He M , Zhou B . Lung cancer gene expression database analysis incorporating prior knowledge with support vector machine - based classification method . Journal of experimental & clinical cancer research : CR . 2009 ; 28 : 103 . 10 . Wieskopf B , Demangeat C , Purohit A , Stenger R , Gries P , Kreisman H , Quoix E . Cyfra 21 - 1 as a biologic marker of non - small cell lung cancer . Evaluation of sensitivity , speci - ficity , and prognostic role . Chest . 1995 ; 108 : 163 – 169 . 11 . Salgia R , Harpole D , Herndon JE 2nd , Pisick E , Elias A , Skarin AT . Role of serum tumor markers CA 125 and CEA in non - small cell lung cancer . Anticancer research . 2001 ; 21 : 1241 – 1246 . 12 . Hassanein M , Callison JC , Callaway - Lane C , Aldrich MC , Grogan EL , Massion PP . The state of molecular biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer . Cancer prevention research . 2012 ; 5 : 992 – 1006 . 13 . Lam S , Boyle P , Healey GF , Maddison P , Peek L , Murray A , Chapman CJ , Allen J , Wood WC , Sewell HF , Robertson JF . EarlyCDT - Lung : an immunobiomarker test as an aid to early detection of lung cancer . Cancer preven - tion research . 2011 ; 4 : 1126 – 1134 . 14 . Chapman CJ , Healey GF , Murray A , Boyle P , Robertson C , Peek LJ , Allen J , Thorpe AJ , Hamilton - Fairley G , Parsy - Kowalska CB , MacDonald IK , Jewell W , Maddison P , Oncotarget 28771 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget Robertson JF . EarlyCDT ( R ) - Lung test : improved clinical util - ity through additional autoantibody assays . Tumour biology : the journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine . 2012 ; 33 : 1319 – 1326 . 15 . Macdonald IK , Murray A , Healey GF , Parsy - Kowalska CB , Allen J , McElveen J , Robertson C , Sewell HF , Chapman CJ , Robertson JF . Application of a high throughput method of biomarker discovery to improvement of the EarlyCDT ( ( R ) ) - Lung Test . PloS one . 2012 ; 7 : e51002 . 16 . Dietrich D , Kneip C , Raji O , Liloglou T , Seegebarth A , Schlegel T , Flemming N , Rausch S , Distler J , Fleischhacker M , Schmidt B , Giles T , Walshaw M , Warburton C , Liebenberg V , Field JK . Performance evalu - ation of the DNA methylation biomarker SHOX2 for the aid in diagnosis of lung cancer based on the analysis of bron - chial aspirates . International journal of oncology . 2012 ; 40 : 825 – 832 . 17 . Darwiche K , Zarogoulidis P , Baehner K , Welter S , Tetzner R , Wohlschlaeger J , Theegarten D , Nakajima T , Freitag L . Assessment of SHOX2 methylation in EBUS - TBNA specimen improves accuracy in lung can - cer staging . Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology / ESMO . 2013 ; 24 : 2866 – 2870 . 18 . Nikolaidis G , Raji OY , Markopoulou S , Gosney JR , Bryan J , Warburton C , Walshaw M , Sheard J , Field JK , Liloglou T . DNA methylation biomarkers offer improved diagnos - tic efficiency in lung cancer . Cancer research . 2012 ; 72 : 5692 – 5701 . 19 . Chen Z , Fillmore CM , Hammerman PS , Kim CF , Wong KK . Non - small - cell lung cancers : a heterogeneous set of diseases . Nature reviews Cancer . 2014 ; 14 : 535 – 546 . 20 . Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network . Comprehensive molecular profiling of lung adenocarcinoma . Nature . 2014 ; 511 : 543 – 550 . 21 . Ma S , Sung J , Magis AT , Wang Y , Geman D , Price ND . Measuring the effect of inter - study variability on estimating prediction error . PLOS ONE . 2014 ; 9 : e110840 . 22 . Chen HY , Yu SL , Li KC , Yang PC . Biomarkers and tran - scriptome profiling of lung cancer . Respirology . 2012 ; 17 : 620 – 626 . 23 . Pan Q , Shai O , Lee LJ , Frey BJ , Blencowe BJ . Deep sur - veying of alternative splicing complexity in the human tran - scriptome by high - throughput sequencing . Nature genetics . 2008 ; 40 : 1413 – 1415 . 24 . Oltean S , Bates DO . Hallmarks of alternative splicing in cancer . Oncogene . 2013 ; 33 : 5311 – 5318 . 25 . Zong FY , Fu X , Wei WJ , Luo YG , Heiner M , Cao LJ , Fang Z , Fang R , Lu D , Ji H , Hui J . The RNA - binding protein QKI suppresses cancer - associated aberrant splicing . PLoS genetics . 2014 ; 10 : e1004289 . 26 . Warzecha CC , Carstens RP . Complex changes in alternative pre - mRNA splicing play a central role in the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Seminars in cancer biol - ogy . 2012 ; 22 : 417 – 427 . 27 . Pal S , Gupta R , Davuluri RV . Alternative transcription and alternative splicing in cancer . Pharmacology & therapeutics . 2012 ; 136 : 283 – 294 . 28 . Sveen A , Johannessen B , Teixeira MR , Lothe RA , Skotheim RI . Transcriptome instability as a molecular pan - cancer characteristic of carcinomas . BMC genomics . 2014 ; 15 : 672 . 29 . Pal S , Bi Y , Macyszyn L , Showe LC , O’Rourke DM , Davuluri RV . Isoform - level gene signature improves prog - nostic stratification and accurately classifies glioblastoma subtypes . Nucleic acids research . 2014 ; 42 : e64 . 30 . David CJ , Manley JL . Alternative pre - mRNA splicing regu - lation in cancer : pathways and programs unhinged . Genes & development . 2010 ; 24 : 2343 – 2364 . 31 . Wojtuszkiewicz A , Assaraf YG , Maas MJ , Kaspers GJ , Jansen G , Cloos J . Pre - mRNA splicing in cancer : the rele - vance in oncogenesis , treatment and drug resistance . Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology . 2014 : 1 – 17 . 32 . Sadeque A , Serao NV , Southey BR , Delfino KR , Rodriguez - Zas SL . Identification and characterization of alternative exon usage linked glioblastoma multiforme sur - vival . BMC medical genomics . 2012 ; 5 : 59 . 33 . Langer W , Sohler F , Leder G , Beckmann G , Seidel H , Grone J , Hummel M , Sommer A . Exon array analysis using re - defined probe sets results in reliable identification of alternatively spliced genes in non - small cell lung cancer . BMC genomics . 2010 ; 11 : 676 . 34 . Zhang XZ , Yin AH , Zhu XY , Ding Q , Wang CH , Chen YX . Using an exon microarray to identify a global profile of gene expression and alternative splicing in K562 cells exposed to sodium valproate . Oncology reports . 2012 ; 27 : 1258 – 1265 . 35 . Guo X , Chen QR , Song YK , Wei JS , Khan J . Exon array analysis reveals neuroblastoma tumors have distinct alterna - tive splicing patterns according to stage and MYCN ampli - fication status . BMC medical genomics . 2011 ; 4 : 35 . 36 . Misquitta - Ali CM , Cheng E , O’Hanlon D , Liu N , McGlade CJ , Tsao MS , Blencowe BJ . Global profiling and molecu - lar characterization of alternative splicing events misregu - lated in lung cancer . Molecular and cellular biology . 2011 ; 31 : 138 – 150 . 37 . Lapuk A , Marr H , Jakkula L , Pedro H , Bhattacharya S , Purdom E , Hu Z , Simpson K , Pachter L , Durinck S , Wang N , Parvin B , Fontenay G , Speed T , Garbe J , Stampfer M , et al . Exon - level microarray analyses identify alterna - tive splicing programs in breast cancer . Molecular cancer research : MCR . 2010 ; 8 : 961 – 974 . 38 . Xi L , Feber A , Gupta V , Wu M , Bergemann AD , Landreneau RJ , Litle VR , Pennathur A , Luketich JD , Godfrey TE . Whole genome exon arrays identify differ - ential expression of alternatively spliced , cancer - related genes in lung cancer . Nucleic acids research . 2008 ; 36 : 6535 – 6547 . 39 . Chen FC . Are all of the human exons alternatively spliced ? . Briefings in bioinformatics . 2014 ; 15 : 542 – 551 . Oncotarget 28772 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget 40 . Trapnell C , Williams BA , Pertea G , Mortazavi A , Kwan G , van Baren MJ , Salzberg SL , Wold BJ , Pachter L . Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA - Seq reveals unanno - tated transcripts and isoform switching during cell differen - tiation . Nature biotechnology . 2010 ; 28 : 511 – 515 . 41 . Trapnell C , Hendrickson DG , Sauvageau M , Goff L , Rinn JL , Pachter L . Differential analysis of gene regulation at transcript resolution with RNA - seq . Nature biotechnol - ogy . 2013 ; 31 : 46 – 53 . 42 . Anders S , Reyes A , Huber W . Detecting differential usage of exons from RNA - seq data . Genome research . 2012 ; 22 : 2008 – 2017 . 43 . Anders S , Huber W . Differential expression analysis for sequence count data . Genome biology . 2010 ; 11 : R106 . 44 . Bauer S , Gagneur J , Robinson PN . GOing Bayesian : model - based gene set analysis of genome - scale data . Nucleic acids research . 2010 ; 38 : 3523 – 3532 . 45 . Rhodes DR , Kalyana - Sundaram S , Mahavisno V , Varambally R , Yu J , Briggs BB , Barrette TR , Anstet MJ , Kincead - Beal C , Kulkarni P , Varambally S , Ghosh D , Chinnaiyan AM . Oncomine 3 . 0 : genes , pathways , and net - works in a collection of 18 , 000 cancer gene expression pro - files . Neoplasia . 2007 ; 9 : 166 – 180 . 46 . Li B , Ruotti V , Stewart RM , Thomson JA , Dewey CN . RNA - Seq gene expression estimation with read mapping uncertainty . Bioinformatics . 2010 ; 26 : 493 – 500 . 47 . Seo JS , Ju YS , Lee WC , Shin JY , Lee JK , Bleazard T , Lee J , Jung YJ , Kim JO , Shin JY , Yu SB , Kim J , Lee ER , Kang CH , Park IK , Rhee H , et al . The transcriptional landscape and mutational profile of lung adenocarcinoma . Genome research . 2012 ; 22 : 2109 – 2119 . 48 . Kalari KR , Rossell D , Necela BM , Asmann YW , Nair A , Baheti S , Kachergus JM , Younkin CS , Baker T , Carr JM , Tang X , Walsh MP , Chai HS , Sun Z , Hart SN , Leontovich AA , et al . Deep Sequence Analysis of Non - Small Cell Lung Cancer : Integrated Analysis of Gene Expression , Alternative Splicing , and Single Nucleotide Variations in Lung Adenocarcinomas with and with - out Oncogenic KRAS Mutations . Frontiers in oncology . 2012 ; 2 : 12 . 49 . Kim SC , Jung Y , Park J , Cho S , Seo C , Kim J , Kim P , Park J , Seo J , Kim J , Park S , Jang I , Kim N , Yang JO , Lee B , Rho K , et al . A high - dimensional , deep - sequencing study of lung adenocarcinoma in female never - smokers . PloS one . 2013 ; 8 : e55596 . 50 . Kim D , Pertea G , Trapnell C , Pimentel H , Kelley R , Salzberg SL . TopHat2 : accurate alignment of transcrip - tomes in the presence of insertions , deletions and gene fusions . Genome biology . 2013 ; 14 : R36 . 51 . Breiman L . Random forests . Mach Learn . 2001 ; 45 : 5 – 32 . 52 . Chu YW , Yang PC , Yang SC , Shyu YC , Hendrix MJ , Wu R , Wu CW . Selection of invasive and metastatic sub - populations from a human lung adenocarcinoma cell line . American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology . 1997 ; 17 : 353 – 360 . 53 . Bracken AP , Dietrich N , Pasini D , Hansen KH , Helin K . Genome - wide mapping of Polycomb target genes unravels their roles in cell fate transitions . Genes & development . 2006 ; 20 : 1123 – 1136 . 54 . Creighton CJ , Hilger AM , Murthy S , Rae JM , Chinnaiyan AM , El - Ashry D . Activation of mitogen - activated pro - tein kinase in estrogen receptor alpha - positive breast can - cer cells in vitro induces an in vivo molecular phenotype of estrogen receptor alpha - negative human breast tumors . Cancer research . 2006 ; 66 : 3903 – 3911 . 55 . Barbie DA , Tamayo P , Boehm JS , Kim SY , Moody SE , Dunn IF , Schinzel AC , Sandy P , Meylan E , Scholl C , Frohling S , Chan EM , Sos ML , Michel K , Mermel C , Silver SJ , et al . Systematic RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS - driven cancers require TBK1 . Nature . 2009 ; 462 : 108 – 112 . 56 . Scholl C , Frohling S , Dunn IF , Schinzel AC , Barbie DA , Kim SY , Silver SJ , Tamayo P , Wadlow RC , Ramaswamy S , Dohner K , Bullinger L , Sandy P , Boehm JS , Root DE , Jacks T , et al . Synthetic lethal interaction between onco - genic KRAS dependency and STK33 suppression in human cancer cells . Cell . 2009 ; 137 : 821 – 834 . 57 . Marzec M , Halasa K , Kasprzycka M , Wysocka M , Liu X , Tobias JW , Baldwin D , Zhang Q , Odum N , Rook AH , Wasik MA . Differential effects of interleukin - 2 and inter - leukin - 15 versus interleukin - 21 on CD4 + cutaneous T - cell lymphoma cells . Cancer research . 2008 ; 68 : 1083 – 1091 . 58 . Wiederschain D , Chen L , Johnson B , Bettano K , Jackson D , Taraszka J , Wang YK , Jones MD , Morrissey M , Deeds J , Mosher R , Fordjour P , Lengauer C , Benson JD . Contribution of polycomb homologues Bmi - 1 and Mel - 18 to medulloblastoma pathogenesis . Molecular and cellular biology . 2007 ; 27 : 4968 – 4979 . 59 . van Staveren WC , Solis DW , Delys L , Venet D , Cappello M , Andry G , Dumont JE , Libert F , Detours V , Maenhaut C . Gene expression in human thyrocytes and autonomous adenomas reveals suppression of negative feedbacks in tumorigenesis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 2006 ; 103 : 413 – 418 . 60 . Lamb J , Ramaswamy S , Ford HL , Contreras B , Martinez RV , Kittrell FS , Zahnow CA , Patterson N , Golub TR , Ewen ME . A mechanism of cyclin D1 action encoded in the patterns of gene expression in human cancer . Cell . 2003 ; 114 : 323 – 334 . 61 . Ziegler S , Rohrs S , Tickenbrock L , Moroy T , Klein - Hitpass L , Vetter IR , Muller O . Novel target genes of the Wnt path - way and statistical insights into Wnt target promoter regula - tion . The FEBS journal . 2005 ; 272 : 1600 – 1615 . 62 . Malhotra D , Portales - Casamar E , Singh A , Srivastava S , Arenillas D , Happel C , Shyr C , Wakabayashi N , Kensler TW , Wasserman WW , Biswal S . Global mapping of bind - ing sites for Nrf2 identifies novel targets in cell survival response through ChIP - Seq profiling and network analysis . Nucleic acids research . 2010 ; 38 : 5718 – 5734 . Oncotarget 28773 www . impactjournals . com / oncotarget 63 . Schoenfeld J , Lessan K , Johnson NA , Charnock - Jones DS , Evans A , Vourvouhaki E , Scott L , Stephens R , Freeman TC , Saidi SA , Tom B , Weston GC , Rogers P , Smith SK , Print CG . Bioinformatic analysis of primary endothelial cell gene array data illustrated by the analysis of transcriptome changes in endothelial cells exposed to VEGF - A and PlGF . Angiogenesis . 2004 ; 7 : 143 – 156 . 64 . Ramirez - Valle F , Braunstein S , Zavadil J , Formenti SC , Schneider RJ . eIF4GI links nutrient sensing by mTOR to cell proliferation and inhibition of autophagy . The Journal of cell biology . 2008 ; 181 : 293 – 307 . 65 . Majumder PK , Febbo PG , Bikoff R , Berger R , Xue Q , McMahon LM , Manola J , Brugarolas J , McDonnell TJ , Golub TR , Loda M , Lane HA , Sellers WR . mTOR inhibition reverses Akt - dependent prostate intraepi - thelial neoplasia through regulation of apoptotic and HIF - 1 - dependent pathways . Nature medicine . 2004 ; 10 : 594 – 601 . 66 . Ma Y , Croxton R , Moorer RL Jr , Cress WD . Identification of novel E2F1 - regulated genes by micro - array . Archives of biochemistry and biophysics . 2002 ; 399 : 212 – 224 .