CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 DESIGN BRIEFINGS KidPad : A Design Collaboration Between Children , Technologists , and Educators Allison Druin , Jason Stewart , David Proft , Ben Bederson , Jim Hollan Computer Science Department / College of Education University of New Mexico Farris Engineering Center Albuquerque , New Mexico 87131 + 1 - 505 - 277 - 3 112 ( allisond , jasons , proft , bederso ~ hollan ) @ cs . umn . edu ABSTRACT We established an interdisciplinmy , intergenemtional collaboration in the fidl of 1995 , between the University of New Mexico’s Computer Science Departmen4 the College of Fducatiou and local Albuquerque elementary school children . The goal of this reaeamh was to develop an expressive digital medium with an intuitive zooming - to support a learning environment tbr children . In the _ of this eollaboratio ~ design methodologies that support a child’s role in the development of new technologies WE explored . What follows is a summary of our iterative design experience , collaboration , and the results of the resuch to date . Keywords childrm design techniques , cooperative design , educational applications , evaluation participatory design , social issues , Pad + + , KidPad . THE COLLABORATION In the fall of 1995 , an interdiseiplinary , intergenerational collaboration was begun betswm the University of New Mexico’s Computer Scienee DeparhnenL the College & Educatiou and local Albuquerque elementmy school children . The fm of this collaboration was to use emerging new technologies developed by computer science mearche ~ to create new learning environments h elenmtary school children . Rather than developing new technologies and then later asking children fir their fmdbaek long past the completion of the initial design stages , we chose to establish a collaboration with children at the onset of our reaeamh . Traditionally , members have observed children using technology tools , and when appropriate , asked them to take tests using stamiardizxl instruments [ 8 , 9 , 13 , 18 ] . Such technology evaluations may be well - suited to understand @ the impact a specifk technology can have on permission to make digiLtl / lmrd copies of fill or part of this nmlerid for personal or cltssroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for prolit or commercial advw ] tage , the copy - right notice , the Iitle of the publimtion and its d ~ te appew , nnd notice is given that copyngbl is by permission of the ACIM . Inc . To copy otherwise , to rcpuhlish , 10 post on servers or to redistribute to lists . requires specific permission and ! or I > C a childs learning , but it can do little to tell resea . mhers what new technologies should be created tin the tldwe . While children may not be programmers or engineers , they are experts in what they want and why they want it . We believe that children have a great deal to say about the world they live in and the technologies they use [ 7 ] . Therefore , it is critical to tind methodologies that support a child’s role in the design process . We have begun to combine participant obsemation techniques with participatmy design experiences . In this way , we believe we can better understand what children may do with technology , and what they may want to do with it in the firtum With this in mind , remrchem fiorn the College of Education and the Computer Science Depar @ ent worked fbr six months with 48 local elernentmy school children ( ages 8 - 10 ) . Initially , as a way to explore the ehildmn’s interests , we had them use an existing version of Pad + + : soflware developed by reseamhem at the University of New Mexico and New York University which replaces windows with a zooming tiormation environment [ 2 ] . Instead of double - clicking through piles of folders and icons , the children drew , mote stories , and zoomed through their information space . While Pad + + was not designed to be a tool fir children , resxmhers saw the possibilities fbr fhture changes and developments appropriate fbr chiklnm . Part @ ant observation % video taping , and macmckw notes were used to understand the children’s technology experience . From these observations , a new set of Pad + + tools ( initially called KidPad Local Tools ) was developed [ 3 ] . Children then worked with these new tools to continue their story - writing experiences . After a fw months , the KidPad child users were asked to describe their own “dream” KidPad environments . The children brainstormed with researchers , drew storyboards , wrote explanations , and presented their work . These concrete design suggestions motivated a new version of KidPad . With this new versiou again , mmrchem worked with children to analyze the potential ibr fixture development . In the design briefing that follows , a summary of our iterative design experience , ~ HI 97 . Atlm ) t ~ GA ( ISA Copyright 1997 ACM [ J - X979 1 - $ KJ2 - 9 / 97K ) 3 . . $ 3 . 50 463 DESIGN BRIEFINGS CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 interdisciplinary / intergenerational collaboration . and the results will be discussed . GOALS FOR APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT We have focused on three goals in the development of new learning environments fir children 1 ) To develop integrated learning environments that suppon visual and verbal literacy . Children like to tell stones ; they love to draw . We observed this time and again among the children we worked with in schools . In addition , teachers and parents find it crucial that children learn to express themselves with words and pictures . A new type of literacy is being stressed by educators that asks learners to be literate verbal and visual thinkers [ 9 , 13 , 14 ] . With the advent of multimedia technologies , children and adults must come to make sense of their world in words , pictures . sound , video and more [ 15 , 18 ] , 2 ) To supporl learners in constructing their own paths to knowledge . All too often , when a computer application is labeled “educatioti verses ‘ < a game” , it comes to mean “drill and ptim” instruction or an interactive textbook . Flashcards which prompt children tbr the “right” answers are not the only way to create manir @ d learning environments [ 8 , 16 ] . Recently , educational environments fix children have focused on more open - ended , tools - oriented environments . These are often called “ccmstructivist” or “constructionist” applications which * children tools to explore ditlkmt content areas by constructing their own paths to knowledge [ 8 , 10 , 11 , 17 ] . Examples of such environments are Logo ( a children’s programming language ) , H ~ erStudio ( a multimedia authoring tool fix children ) , and PageMuker ( a desktop publishing tool often used by children ) . 3 ) To develop methodologies that offer a better understanding of what children want or need when using new technologies . A majority of the current litemture that discusses children’s input in the technology development process consists cf anecdotal descriptions of how children have offend feedback ( e . g . , suggestion fix button changes , add ~ n _ etc . ) . While this type of interaction with children is valuable in short - term technology development , it does not ollix possibilities for genemlization and lasting impact on new technologies . If children can be heard betbre technology has begun to be develow more profound technology innovations may be possible . For example , at CHI’95 , 50 tutorial attendees worked with 25 children in small design groups to prototype new multimedia environments h children . From this experience , the adult participants ofbxi such comments as : c’Kids really know what they like . . . ” “The childm . n seemed to be catalysts and sparked ideas I wouldn’t have thought of . . . “ “I underestimated the kids . . . “ “I think the chikkn definitely changed the group dynamics and our design . . . ’’ [ 8 ] . At the University of New Mexico we believe it is important to develop methodologies that support collaboration experiences with chikiren as our design partners . THE USER PROFILE We anticipate users of our new educational technology environments will be elementary - schoo - aged children with a wide range of abilities , experience , and age . children with bilingual needs , simple motor coordination skills , little mmputer experience , strong writing skills , intuitive visualization abilities , extensive computer experience ml more - - are all considaed potential KidPad users . This wide range of users was seen in the collaboration begun in the fall of 1995 . The 48 local elementary school children that we partmmd with were extremely diverse in their skills d backgrounds . These children included participants in basic literacy programs and participants in gifted child programs . Their ethnic backgrounds ranged from Native Americans to recently immigrated Vietnamese , Chinese , and Hispanic children . THE DESIGN PROCESS An Interdisciplinary Design Approach As new technologies take advanta ~ of more fbms of media ( e . g . , sound animatioxL video , etc . ) , professionals with experienms outside of a technical discipline are needed to contribute to the development of these technologies [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 ] . When we began our collaboratio ~ we looked to work with students , @ and pmf & ors from both the Computer Science Department and College of Education . We believe that both computer scientists and educators can make significant contributions to the development of educational technologies . In working with our child collaborators , we were caretid to have both education aod computer science mearchm experience significant contact hours in the classroom . In this way , there were finv questions about the field reaeamh that was conducted , Different researchers with di & ent points of view contributed to the data collected . What we found was that mearchers from each discipline were sensitive to ditlkmt issues , observations , and experiences . For example , educational resmdem wm more awme of when the children gmw bored , excited , or cow with the technology . On the other Itar @ computer scientists were more sensitive to how the children used the software and quickly saw where new technologies could be developed . Together , mearchers developed a knowledge base of information HOIE even one line of new code was generated . Only after two and a half months of collaboration with children , was the beginnings of a new tedmolo ~ environment developed . This made some of the computer scientists nervous . They were much more used to titing code than they were spending their xeswmh time with children . At the onset of our field work in classrooms , there were days when some computer scientists klt unsure of what to look fir when working with the classroom children . They fdt uncomfortable that they had been thrust into the role of teacher rather than ~ her . In those days , it was the educational reswchers that wm more at home working with the children , developing activities and coaching the students along until they found some proficiency with the 464 CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 DESIGN BRIEFINGS technology . But as time went on , confidence grew in many of the computer scientists when it came to working with chikhen . One technique that seemed to put both adults and children at ease was that researchers worked in small groups with students ( e . g . , one researcher to two or thee children ) . Slowly , both adults and children began to feel more cumhtable with the technology and each other . Eventually , children were able to oflkr design suggestions and point out problems with the software . It was then that the computer scientists took the lead and began to develop the first versions of KidPad . It should be noted however , that even at sofhue design sessions , back at the labs in the university , educational mearchers were present and considered to be full partmrs in the design of the sofbare . This however , did not mean that the ~ was full consensus in what to work on and when . There were times that the educational reseatchets wanted much more than what was possible with the limited programming resources available . Eventually however , thanks to some insightful discussions , a common undemanding was established . What we f ~ interesting about the development process as a whole , was that each research discipline took turns leading the activities , depending upon the expertise that was needed in the cxmtext of the work . However , at no time were rmeamhm from either discipline excluded tkxn the ~ activities . While there were moments of tiustmdon when resemch activities WE @ iunil & or not clear , we finmd that an interdisciplinary reseamh partnership can bean exceptionally supportive , creative , and productive Wence . , . , ‘ . o ) ~ . - , , ’ . . ; ’ . , . ; . , . , y , . - . , , , . , ‘ . . , . , . ; , . : ’ . . ‘ . , “ : . , * - Q . ~ . , , : ’ ; * : ” , . “ : ; ’ . . . . . . : } , . . , , , . , . ~ , . . . 1 ‘ , . . . . : , . . - . . . . . . . . . , / , , , “ , , . , . , . , , ? , - . . , . , . . , . , , , . , . , > : . - , , , , ‘ . , . , : . . . , , . J , . , , , “ - . . , . , * : . Z , , . , , . , , > - ’ . . . ’ . , Ud . , - . , . . , , , , , . . ! ’ . . . : f’s . . , . , . . ; + ; , , . : : , . , . . . . , . . $ . @ . . . . - Figure 1 : A Pa & - t drawing and zooming activity Children As Our Design Partners Collaborating with children is very MTerent than collaborating with adults . Generally , when a user is brought into the design process , he or she can offir discipline expertise ( e . g . , in law , medicine , music , etc . ) . Children ate experts at being kids ; but exactIy what that means is hard to say . They can’t dkx you a list of the five important things you must include in your technology . Oftem children me not that self - aware or vedxd about their needs . They must be given opportunities fix communication and self - awareness , either through experience with technology or through participatory design exercises that ask them to see possibilities using low - tech prototyping tools . For example , one design exercise early on asked children to begin brainstorming on paper by using a game board . On one side of the board they selected cards containing a short description of the technology they were to design ( e . g . , house - building software , letter - writing software , a trip to the New Mexico State Fair ) , and on another side of the board they selected the various interke devices they thought th ~ d use ( e . g . , keyboard , mouse , joystick etc . ) . Lastly they were given a few blank squares to draw their thoughts about the software they were designing . Thanks to this exercise , we saw software “features” we could never have anticipated ( e . g . , a “window bars” option in the house - building software , because according to one child designer “no one wants to have their house stolen on the computed ) . Through this exercise , our child collaborators became more sensitive to the ingredients that they were asked to consider with the real softwzue they used and discussed with adult researchers . What we tbund in our collaboration with clikhen was change and growth . We began our work together , as unequal partners . We as adults had to facilitate the children’s use of the technology . We had to explain how things work ~ and what possibilities they might try . While many of the children had used computers M % none had ever used a zooming software interfhce . It took some tine to get used to , and some time to start asking questions . While we adults were fkilitators and advisors , we were also observers . We immediately saw what activities the chikhen enjoyed ; we immediately saw what CO - them . However , as the children’s expertk giew , so too did the number of suggestions and design ideas they offiatxl . Eventually , as their confidence grew we asked directly fbr design ideas , as opposed to waiting to be told them . We asked the children to develop storyboards of design ideas for the fidure . By the time the children were done , they had grown into Ml - fledged design partners . They needed time , experience , self—awareness , and confidence in our design relationship . With adult design partners , time , experience , and self—a ~ may not be something necessary to develop ; with children it may be critical . THE DESIGN EVOLUTION OF KIDPAD The Ibllowing stages can be seen in the iterative design of KidPad : The Pad + + Interface Used with Children Children and researckrs began by using the Pad + + sofiwam to tell stories . As the children became immersed in this zooming environment we saw that they LOVED to zoom . When let ? to their own devices , the chi . khvn spent hours zooming the Pad + + surhce , Their tionte activity 465 DESIGN BRIEFINGS CH197 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 was to draw a b , then zoom closer to draw another b inside the eye ; then to do the same again and again . Once they had enough , they would zoom from t % ceto t % x [ W Figure 1 ] . The smooth zooming and extremely large surke ofikredchildren an experience they called “a ride” . Many times while zooming , the children would make what they called “zooming noises” ( e . g . , bmmmrrr , . . . . . . znnummg , zOoooom ) . In additio % they would tell stories while zooming : “Once there was a boy who had lots of friends . When you zoomed into his eye you could see his friend Fernando . When you zoomed into Fernando you could see his friend Jean . And when you . . . ” Figure 2 : A Pad + + “X - Ray” of a Cow ( step one ) - r , : . “ , ” / 1 , . ~ , , , , ) ” . . , , , : , , , * . ‘ , . , ~ . , < Figure 3 : A Pad + + “X - Ray” of a Cow ( step two ) Another activity the children continually wanted to do was create “X - Ray” stories . What they were _ to was the lens technology in Pad + + . To the children . lenses helped them see what information was inside of a picture or text . Children simply placed what looked like au empty box over a picture . When the box was placed over that picture some “hidden information” was seen [ see Figures 2 and 3 ] . For example in the case of a cow picture , when a lens was dragged near or over it the word “moo” appeard . Thanks to these very basic activities . we saw a number of possibilities fm the development of a zooming environment that supported children’s learning activities . First and tiremom we saw that children wanted to tell stories . And what came as a surprise to us , was that the activity of zooming strongly supported the creation of non - linear stones . It seemed to be a very natural way tbr children to tell their stories . They enjoyed the fivedom of piecing together their thoughts and comecdng them any which way they wanted to by zooming . This zooming approach to story - telling also strongly supported collaboration between children . Many times one child would begin the story by typing or drawing , and another child would add the next part of the story in another part of the Pad surf & e . In this way , children would work together endlessly writing , drawing zooming , and telling their stories . For the children , these activities developed and exercised their visual and verbal literacy skills , and enabled some proficiency with their use of new technologies . For us as rwearehers , these experiences made clear that the children nefded zooming story - telling tools that suited their needs . To begin with , they wauted a better way to “program their zooms” between story elements . It was far too easy for the children to become lost on the Pad + + surface when zooming in the wrong direction . The children also seemed to need diffatnt drawing tools for their story - telling . When using the existing palette of drawing tools in Pad + + , they easily became ccmhed with all the extraneous tools not necessary for their drawing or writing . They also had a difficult time when they would zoom on the Pad + + smface and weren’t sure why the drawing tools “lived in a differmt box from the rest of the things in the zooming world’ . They didn’t like moving the floating menus around the Pad + + Sul - kx . “ They’re always in the way of our zooming , ” said one child . In addition , there were times that the children also seemed to need our help in getting started on their stories . They often would ask , “ Start me a picture , PIease’ ? ” With this in mind , we also tried to consider new ways of offering story resources . The Local Tools and KidPad After a short intense period of development , tesearchem came back to the classroom with the first version of what we called “KidPad . It included a new interhm paradigm we called “Local Tools” [ 3 ] . Instead of traditional floating palettes of tools , there were large , simple tools that sat directly on the Pad + + wrtl % ce [ see Figure 4 ] . They reminded a number of children of the “fat pencils they could write with if they were good” . With local tools , 466 CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 DESIGN BRIEFINGS children could select a tool ( by single - clicking on it ) , and the cursor would turn into that tool in both size and shape . If the child wanted to drop that tool and use another , the child would double < lick in the place they wanted to drop it and the tool would remain in that place on the Pad + + surfhce . These tools included what the children called a “crayon” to draw with , an” a - awry’ to delete objects , and an “anew” to select objects [ see Figures 4 , 5 and 6 ] . The arrow was used in combination with the picture scrapbook . This scrapbook consisted of a slider to move through pictures which ranged km green dinosaurs to red hats . Once the child saw what they wanted , they chose a picture with the arrow , and cirwwed the Picture onto the Pad surke . Automatically a Cofi - of the picture would be placed on the Pad surface . “ Figure 4 KidPad Local Tools Another local tool was the “nuwic wand” . In restmnse to the children’s love fir zoomin ~ and their ~ : on with getting lost “on along zoom” the magic wand was created . When children selected the wand , then selected anywhere else on the Pad + + surtkce , a link was started . The next place children selected was the place that would be “linked to” . These two places could be seen easily because a bright yellow line comected the two selections . When children de - selected the magic wand , they could zoom between links by touching a “hot zooming spot” with another tool . Children seemed to love this tool . While similar functionality was available in the Pad + + substrate , the interfkcx was not intuitive to childre % and therefbre was used very little . Once this became a magic wand with “yellow magic lines” showing where there would be zoom paths , the children used this tool repeatedly to tell stories . In addition to these local tools , there was a “tool box” . This box was placed in the bottom right corner of the screen . When children clicked on it , all the local tools would zoom back to where they started , lined up along the bottom of the screen . This turned out to be extremely useful when children would zoom around the Pad + + surhct and forget where they left their tools . Figure 5 : Using the KidPad Local Tools Figure 6 : Using the KidPad Local Tools Children’s KidPad Design Ideaa The children seemed to enjoy this new zooming environment . Their stories became more complex and richer in content and structure , thanks in pm we believe , to the local tools they used . Once the children had spent some time with this new environment we asked the children to brainstorm with us on how to make a better technolo ~ fix them [ see Figures 7 , 8 and 9 ] . What we heard tiom them in conversations , drawings , and writing were the following suggestions ( these suggestions are only listed if a majority of the children we worked with raised the issue ) : 467 DESIGN BRIEFINGS CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 Hardware . l They wanted to draw directly on the screen ( a . k . a . a touchscreen ) . l They wanted to turn the mouse into something else besides your ~ ical mouse ( e . g . , a rocketship , car , an animal ) to make it easier to zoom ( many children with small hands found it ditlicult to use a 3 - button mouse ) . l They did not like to double < lick the mouse ( it was a diflicult motor - coordination skill tbr childmm ) . They wanted an easier way to “drop tools” . Software : l They wanted sound fix their stories . l They wanted zooming to take you back in time instead of space ( zoom through history ) . l They wanted to use zooming , to zoom into dil % rent worlds ( e . g . , a game worl ~ a story world , a numbers world , a drawing world ) . l They wanted additional drawing timctionality : a writing ( typing ) local tool , a ruler ( to make straight lines ) , more colors for the crayon , and paint brushes . s They wanted dictionaries to help spell their words . l The wanted to animate their drawings . l They suggested additional types of pictures be added to the scrapbook : animals , outerspace planetdcreatum , plants , people ( from difkxent ethnic backgrounds ) , CIOtheS , hearts , houses . Figure 7 : Design Suggestions tiom Children Figure 9 : Design Suggestions iiom Ctuldren Up until this brainstorming experience , we had genemily chosen to fm our development efibrts on “the biggest problem of the week” . A ; our classroom sessions with children ( usually an hour , thm times a week ) they would show us where they had difficulties , or suggest new possibilities . These were generally not large development projects , but small areas that could quickly be implemented and tested with the children . However , once examining the results of our children’s brainstorming work the team went back to the lab to decide what features seemed to suggest important new directiom fbr the fidwe . What follows is a discussion of where the children’s ideas have taken us , 468 CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MA RC } i 1997 DESIGN BRIEFINGS Figure 10 : On - Screen Zooming Tools Figure 11 : A Panning Frmne KidPad for Preschool Children Thanks to the abundance of ideas from our child design partners , we found ourselves ( due to limited programming resource @ having to fbcus on a fw ams of development . One important area that the children pointed out was zooming . We heard and observed that the 3 - button mouse was Confilsing and diflicult to use for many of our children , By making the left button the select button , the middle button the zoom - in button , and the right button the zoom - out button , we found that children usually had to depend on trial - and - error to mnember which button did what . The mice that the children drew had whiskers and noses h zooming , which we suspected might be much easier to remember than right button or middle button . Many of them just wanted to get rid of the mice all together and point at the screen , Listening to their concerns . we began to focus on alternative zooming and panning tools that lived on the screen . We created a “zoom in” and a “zoom out” local tool [ see Figure 10 ] . By picking up a zoom tool , the cursor became that tool . Moving and pressing it would zoom at that spot . We also developed a “panning fian # which enabled children to merely move the mouse over the tie in the direction they wanted to go and the pad surke would pan in that direction [ see Figure 11 ] . Each of these tools had the additional featwe of animating when the cursor w over it . We came to the conclusion that local tools should not have a text label , thus accommodating younger children . We decided that these tools should only be icons , and that animating the icons would replace the need fm text [ 1 ] . The zoom and pan tools proved to be excellent in their self - explanatory nature . In addition to these tools , we tried developing a “drop bucket” , one which would replace the need fir double - clicking to drop a tool . However , we quickly saw and heard fmm chikhen that this drop bucket was not the right solution . The “dropping” was an unnecessary step to the children . Instead , they wanted to “swap tools” They wanted to merely click on another tool and have that tool become the cursor and have the previous tool be put on the Pad + + surfhce . We took this to heart and quickly implemented this intmfm suggestion . Interestingly enough , our preliminary results with this version of KidPad show that these new f = tum , ( except fix the drop bucket ) seemed to be much more intuitive for children . In h $ it appears tiom our pilot tests with a small number of children ages three and four , that much younger children were able to use these KidPad tools . KidPad for the Future What does the fhture hold for KidPad ? There is still a great deal of work ahead , even to fidfill the initial design suggestions we received from the children . In a pedkct world , we would love a 1 , 000 more hours with hundreds of more childre ~ in a relaxed setting outside of the structme of a typical classroom . But without more resourm fbr personnel and facilities , we have continued on with our small group of ~ hers , finding access to classrooms and children where possible . Currently , our energies = fmused on more short - range areas of development that support the needs and desires of our child design partners . We are in the process of expanding the drawing tools , developing sound capability , simpli $ ing the “X - Ray” interfke , and adding animation functionality . We also would like to see two more long - range additions to KidPad . The first addition would be in automating the drawing process . We call it the “DrawMe” tool . It is envisioned that a child could use this to xeplicate and mod @ existing objects more easily . A child could select the DrawMe tool and place it over a given drawing . When the child clicks on the drawing all the local tools that were used to create this drawing would gather right below the picture selected . For example , a child might select a picture of a pumpkin . And what sihe might get with the DrawMe tool would be an orange crayon , black ruler , and the eraser gathaed below the pumpkin . This would help the child remember what tools dhe used to create that 469 DESIGN BRIEFINGS CHI 97 * 22 - 27 MARCH 1997 picture , In addition . it would also show the child how other children created their drawings . thus spurring on new ideas to pursue . Once any of the tools gathenxi directly below a picture were used , they would timction as in the past to create a new pictwe . The second set of timctionality we see as important , is to support new forms of collaboration between children . In much of our work we saw children sharing one computer . Many times they were frustrated when they could not agm who would get to use the mouse to zoom or to draw . We observed that more assertive children would tend to monopolize the use of the computer , frustrating mo ~ passive children . Them % ore , we hope to implement software and hardwme support br two mice on one computer . In this way , a computer might better support the work of two children sharing the same Pad surfke . This is interesting to us , not only horn the standpoint of children’s story - telling endeavoxs , but in terms of new collaboration fimctionality for the Pad + + substrate . SUMMARY In summary , WEbelieve that not only has our research been finthmd in the ma of new technologies fir childr ~ but our undemanding of how to work with children as our design partners has been expanded as well . In addition , our development work on the Pad + + substrate has also benefited . Thanks to suggestions tiom our child design partners , we have simplified the hyperzoomiug tool and the “X - Ray” or lens tools in Pad + + . In addition , we have continued our exploration of “Local Tools” in new areas such as layout and design for adults . We have found that children have a lot to olltr , not only when it comes to helping design new technologies fbr them , but in designing new technologies for adults as well . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank DARPA’s Human - Computer Interaction Initiative ( # lJ66001 - 94 - C - 6039 ) , fir its continued tiding of the Pad + + nsearch at the University of New Mexico . We a also indebted to our design partners at the Lowell Elementary School , in Albuquerque , New Mexico . In additio ~ we would like to thank David Rogers fir his KidPad Scrapbook drawings . Finally , we would like to acknowledge the on - going support , inspiratio ~ and collaboration of the Pad + + development teams at both UNM and New York University . REFERENCES 1 . Baecker , R . , Small , I . , and Mander , R “Bringing Icons to Life” . In Proceedings of CHI’91 ( New ( Mans Loui - April 1991 ) , ACM Press , 1 - 6 . 2 . Bederson , B . B . , Hollan , J . , Perlin , K . , Meyer , J . , Baco ~ D . , and Furnas , G . “Pad + + : A Zoomable Sketchpad fbr Exploring Alternate Inter & e Physics” . Journal of Visual Languages in Computing . 7 : 3 , ( 1996 ) , 3 - 31 . 3 . Bederso ~ B . B . , Hollan , J . , DruiL A . , Stewart J . , Rogers , D . , Pro % D . “Locrd Tools : An Alternative to Tool Palettes” . h Proceedings of UIST’96 ( Seattle Washington , November 1996 ) ACM Press , 169 - 170 , 4 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , Catterall , B . J . , Harker , S . , Klein , G . , Notess , M . , and Tang , J . C . “Group HCI Design : Problems and Prospects” . SIGCHI Bulletin . 22 : 2 , ( October 1990 ) , 37 - 41 . Daytoq T . with Barr , B . , Burke , P . A . , Cohill , A . M . , Day , M . C . , Dray , S . , Ehrlic ~ K . , Fitzsimmons , L . , Hermeman , R . L . , Hornste @ S . , Ka @ J . , Klinger , J . , Lowgren , J . , Rensch , J . , Sellers , M . , Smith , M . R . , “Skills Needed by User - Centaed Design Practitioner in mal Software Development Environments : Report on the CHI’92 Workshop” . SIGCH7 Bulletin . 25 : 3 , ( July 1993 ) , 16 - 31 . Dix , A . , Finlay , J . Abowd , G . , and Beagle , R Hwnan - Computer Interaction . P ~ ntice Hall , Englewood Clitik , New Jersey , 1993 . Dr @ A . “A Place Called Childhood” . Interactions . 3 : 1 , ( January 1996 ) , 17 - 22 . Drui ~ A . and Solomon , C . Designing Multimedia Environments for Children : Computers , Creativity , and Kids . John Wiley & Sons , NY , 1996 . Eisner , E . W . Cognition and Curriculum Reconsidered , 2nd Edition . Te & hers College Press , NY , 1994 . 10 . Harel , 1 . and Papert , S . “Sofhvare Design as a Learning Environment” . In I . Hard ( cd . ) Constructionist Learning . MIT Media Lab Publication Cambridge , M & 1990 . 11 . Harel , I . Children Designers : Interdisciplinmy Constructions for Learning and fiowing Mathematics in a Computer - Rich School . Ablex , Noorwood , NJ , 1991 . 12 . Kim , S . “Interdisciplinary Cooperation” . In B . Laurel ( cd . ) The Art of Human - Computer Inte ~ ace Design . Addison - Wesley Publishing Company , Reading , MA , 1990 , 31 - 44 . 13 . Moore , D . M . , R . J . Myers , and J . K . Burton . ccWhat Multimedia Might Do . . . ad What We Know About What It Does” . In A . W . Ward ( cd . ) Multimedia and Learning : A School Leader’s Guia2 . National School Boards Association % Alexan @ VA 1994 , 2941 . 14 . NortoK P . “Literacy By Design” . Pre - published Book Chapter 2 , New Mexico , 1995 . 15 . Norton , P . “When Technology Meets Subject - Matter Disciplines in Education . Part Two : Undemanding the Computer Discourse” . Educational Technology . 32 : 7 , ( holy 1992 ) , 36 - 46 . 16 . Pape % S . Mindstotms : Children , Computers and Powerfid ldeus . Basic Books , NY , 1980 . 17 . Papert , S . The Children’s Machine : Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer . Basic Books , NY , 1993 , 18 . Spoehr , K . T . “Enhancing the Acquisition of Concepti Structures Through Hypermedia” . In K . McGilly ( cd . ) Classroom Lessons : Integrating Cognitive X4eoqvand Classroom Practice . MIT Press , Cambridge , M . & 1994 . 470