Reading Spatial Hypertext Catherine C . Marshall Microsoft Corporation Introduction Critics of hypertext have expressed skepticism about whether people could or indeed would sit down at a screen and read hypertexts . They may cite the more general problems of reading from the computer screen ( see , for example , [ 15 ] ) or they may place the blame partially at the feet of the authors ( see , for example , Birkerts’ indictment of hypertext fiction [ 3 ] ) . They may even make usability arguments , that it’s simply more efficient to use paper texts ( see , for example , [ 14 ] ) , avoiding the problematic idea of reading altogether . In spite of their lack of consensus on the whys and wherefores of why hypertext is not a good vehicle for reading , critics of hypertext usually agree on how it all turns out : hypertext does not represent how they themselves want to read anything . At all . Not a novel , not a reference manual , not a magazine . On this point , they’re emphatic , and they will not attend to the hypertext theorists as they wax enthusiastic in their postmodern embrace of the medium . One can picture them with their eyes squinched shut , hands over their ears , saying , “Neener , neener , neener . I can’t HEAR you ! ” Evaluation of hypertext for reading has been sparse ; generally this evaluation has relied on controlled lab studies that use metrics related to effectiveness ( speed , comprehension , and the like ) . Because reading is so difficult to observe in practice ( it’s considered almost creepy to watch someone read ) , few detailed field studies of reading hypertexts have been performed . Most of those have been more focused on other kinds of documents ( see , for example , [ 1 ] ) and have looked to taxonomies of types of reading and the activities that surround reading , such as annotation or note - taking . What might we start to see if we looked in greater detail at real people reading real hypertexts ? It’s a worthwhile endeavor that still has yet to be done . Moreover , we might learn quite a lot about spatial hypertext if we looked at it from a reader’s viewpoint . Some studies have been done in this area , but they’ve been more directed at how people structure spatial hypertext ( see , for example , [ 18 ] ) , and trade - offs in different kinds of structuring functionality . Understanding how people read hypertexts and spatial hypertexts , given the inherent invisibility of reading and how complex these everyday activities are , may yield some important new conceptual and technological directions for us . In this short paper , I’m going to “follow my nose” and apply intuitions gathered from several other ethnographic projects , my own informal and undocumented observations , and some other studies to the controversial act of reading spatial hypertext . I have two main things I want to bring up . One comes from watching people read and navigate ; the other comes from watching people not read and not navigate . Navigation , anticipation , and compulsion I never quite understood what I saw when I watched people read hypertexts . They’d click on a link before they were quite ready to leave where they were and they’d go merrily on their way , without completing the lexia they’d just left . It wasn’t for lack of rhetoric of arrival and departure [ 9 ] ; there was something less conscious ( and less self - conscious ) going on . What was it ? Readers complained about fragmentation , yet it seemed to be their own damned fault . They’d click reflexively , not bothering to gather the context from the text that followed . Some even characterized this fragmentation ( and the attendant anxiety ) as a symptom of our interruption - prone lives [ 10 ] . We’re moving too fast , they seemed to say . We just need to slow down . In fact , when we started talking about spatial hypertext , it was partly a reaction to the all - or - nothing nature of the click . Relationships between lexia – and the action of moving among them – seemed too binary , too unambiguous . Surely the relationships authors and readers perceived were not that cut - and - dried . So spatial hypertext gave us the ability to play with juxtaposition , emergence , and simultaneity [ 16 ] . It gave us a forum for arguing about the meaning of proximity and the semantics of space [ 8 ] . And it didn’t demand that readers hop around from one place to go to another . This was all fine in theory , but it still didn’t explain what I saw when I watched people read hypertexts ( both as a surreptitious onlooker and as an authorized observer with signed consent forms clutched in my hand ) . They’d click before they were ready to go . Jane Yellowlees Douglas had a compelling explanation of people’s relationships with hypertexts in terms of immersion , engagement , and flow [ 6 ] , but I what I saw still didn’t fit . Then I watched two other – seemingly unrelated – kinds of interaction as part of ethnographic projects . One project centered on observations of gamblers playing video poker ( which is now a fully electronic experience ) and the second on observations of people reading magazines ( specifically , the New Yorker ) , both on paper and on a tablet computer . These were detailed observations of human interaction with the two different forms of engagement . What did they have to do with each other ? Moreover , what did they have to do with reading hypertexts ? When people read works on paper , they engage in a variety of anticipatory gestures . The act of turning the page is more subtle than moving paper through air ( as the simulation presented by [ 4 ] would suggest ) . Readers have many ways of getting ready to turn a page without actually doing so , and will often pause midway through the action in an unconscious bid for continuity . Or they can be momentarily distracted ( say , in the case of the New Yorker , by a cartoon in the upper left corner or an ad along the side of the page ) , but seem to be able to resume reading without even noticing the distraction . In a traditional node - link hypertext , the gesture is compressed into a single action , clicking . We might also predict that spatial hypertext systems that use reduced document representations ( like VIKI or VKB ) might suffer the same fate , but spatial hypertext ( like Intergrams ) with gestural interfaces might not . Interestingly , a magazine layout is somewhat hypertextual , even if a single article is linear . Insets , sidebars , photos , interleaved ads , cartoons , and other page design elements make it unlikely that a reader will approach linear text in a strictly linear manner . In fact , readers will jump ahead or back in a linear text , so reading is seldom completely linear , the idealized immersive or active experience suggested by [ 13 ] or [ 2 ] . We don’t need eye - tracking to see that a reader’s attention shifts and returns , or that they jump over or return to text they’ve already read . Interviews with these readers later make us realize that these hypertextual shifts are not notable to ( or sometimes even noticed by ) the reader . Let’s look at the flip side , video poker . By contrast to reading complexly organized material on paper , when people play video poker , the action may be physically compulsive . You can observe a player at a machine engaging in stylized card - playing gestures at regular intervals , but the intervals are very short . It’s clear that the cards aren’t on the screen long enough for the player to “take in” what’s been dealt . Yet , the player goes ahead with game . In this case , the gesture has taken precedence over the results . Anticipatory motions are not encouraged ( or indeed possible ) when a player is using a video poker machine . In much the same way , page - turning buttons ( as one would see in e - book devices ) or link - clicking screen presentations are subject to all - or - nothing , compulsion - prone actions . Even in the case where link - clicking opens a new window , it is still a relatively significant action compared to the subtle motions people use when they are shifting among paper pages . Not reading and not navigating Spatial hypertext goes a long way to remedying the tyranny of the click . But it still might cause inadvertent fragmentation as readers seek to minimize interruptive context switching . Here’s how . Frank Shipman’s group has performed controlled studies on study participants performing information triage tasks using , in one condition , the VKB spatial hypertext system [ 18 ] . Although the original task was designed to further our previous investigation of spatial hypertext’s role in the triage task [ 12 ] and to examine participants’ use of different kinds of information resources , a look at the screen - capture data suggests two other areas of further investigation as well : ( 1 ) readers expend much time and effort on managing the switches between the VKB space and the presentation of Web pages in the browser and , in fact , seem to tire of doing this ; and ( 2 ) readers are willing ( or gradually become willing ) to work from metadata - only reduced document representations , even if the data seems less than adequate to meet the needs of the task at hand . The first observation , that readers grow frustrated with the management of screen real - estate , seems hardly surprising and readily solvable . Bigger higher - resolution displays , multiple monitors , and secondary displays all address this as simply a real estate problem . Furthermore , people who don’t have the capital equipment budgets to spend on more display horsepower can also resort to that old - fashioned solution , a print copy of what they can’t see on the screen . When they’re not in the controlled study situation , it seems very likely that they’d find a workaround . Yet I’m proposing – as Levy and others before him ( most notably Thorngate [ 19 ] and James [ 7 ] ) have suggested – that it’s an attention problem . Attention is really what both the reader and the hypertext system are trying to manage . And what of the second observation , that people resort to metadata - only approaches to doing work ? Is this necessarily a problem ? After all , most of us read a large portion of our email just this way : We warily examine the metadata that our email application shows us , and then we may delete multiple messages without even looking at them . While many of us may recall inadvertently deleting important messages from our friends and colleagues , most of us hasten to add that the sender then alerted us to our mistake . But good metadata is unusual . In fact , our wary examination of email metadata is tuned to look for bad metadata , metadata that signals deception , rather than judging the content by using the metadata at face value . We can usually tell when people have been driven by metadata - only approaches . Upon reflection , most of us can name an instance in which one of our papers has been cited based on its title alone ; the paper itself hasn’t been read . So spatial hypertext may not be the whole solution to the perils of clicking . Finding a better solution : Reading surfaces and new modes of interacting with them The hardware and software requirements of a computer for reading have been noted by many researchers ( for example , the XLibris project had this as its focus [ 17 ] ) . But a focus on page - based reading isn’t enough ; reading – especially reading hypertexts – is more complicated than that . At least four other factors come into play : o anticipatory gestures and partial actions we observe when we watch people read complicated paper forms like magazines ; o the compulsive nature of apparently simple physical actions like clicking or button - pushing ; o the fact that human attention is difficult to manage in the absence of fixity ; and o the observed situation that metadata often isn’t rich enough , right enough , or sufficiently trustworthy to act upon . We need to begin to look at a range of spatial hypertext solutions that incorporate both the physicality of the act of reading and the realities of human attention . One way may be to provide the reader with a reading surface , a stable display that is dedicated to presenting the material that corresponds to the metadata presented on another display surface ; such a reading - oriented display would use the principles that drove the creation of systems like XLibris ( e . g . mobility ) and Microsoft Reader ( in particular , readability ) . Another may involve investigating new modes of interacting with these reading surfaces that would acknowledge anticipatory gestures and the potential breakdown of binary actions . Reading spatial hypertext need not continue to be invisible and secondary to structuring and manipulating spatial hypertext . References [ 1 ] Adler , A . , Gujar , A . , Harrison , B . , O ' Hara K . and Sellen , A . A diary study of work - related reading : design implications for digital reading devices . In Proceedings of CHI98 ( Los Angeles , CA , April 1998 ) , ACM Press , 241 - 248 . [ 2 ] Adler , M . and van Doren , C . How to Read a Book . New York : Simon & Schuster , 1972 . [ 3 ] Birkerts , S . The Gutenberg Elegies : The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age . Boston : Faber and Faber , 1994 . [ 4 ] Chu , Y - C . , Bainbridge , D . , Jones , M . and Witten , I . Realistic books : a bizarre homage to an obsolete medium ? In Proceedings of JCDL 2004 ( Tuscon , AZ , USA , June 7 - 11 , 2004 ) , ACM Press , pp . 78 – 86 . [ 5 ] Crawford , W . Paper Persists : Why Physical Library Collections Still Matter . Online Magazine . January / February 1998 , 42 - 48 . [ 6 ] Douglas , J . Y . and Hargadon , A . The pleasure principle : immersion , engagement , flow . In Proceedings of Hypertext 2000 ( San Antonio , Texas , USA , May 30 - June 3 , 2000 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 153 – 160 . [ 7 ] James , W . The Principles of Psychology . New York : Dover Publications , 1950 . [ 8 ] Kaplan , N . and Moulthrop , S . Where no mind has gone before : ontological design for virtual spaces . In Proceedings of ECHT’94 ( Edinburgh , Scotland , June , 1994 ) . New York : ACM Press , pp . 206 – 216 . [ 9 ] Landow , G . Relationally encoded links and the rhetoric of hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’87 ( Chapel Hill , North Carolina , United States 1987 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 331 – 343 . [ 10 ] Levy , D . M . Scrolling Forward : Making Sense of Documents in the Digital Age . New York : Arcade Publishing , 2001 . [ 11 ] Marshall , C . C . and Shipman F . M . III . Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext ` 93 ( Seattle , WA , November 14 - 17 , 1993 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 217 - 230 . [ 12 ] Marshall C . and Shipman , F . Effects of Hypertext Technology on the Practice of Information Triage . In Proceedings of Hypertext ' 97 ( Southampton UK , April , 1997 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 124 - 133 . [ 13 ] Nell , V . Lost in a Book : The Psychology of Reading for Pleasure . New Haven : Yale University Press , 1988 . [ 14 ] Nielson , J . The matters that really matter for hypertext usability . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’89 ( Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA , 1989 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 239 – 248 . [ 15 ] O’Hara , K . and Sellen , A . A comparison of reading paper and on - line documents . In Proceedings of CHI ’97 ( Atlanta , Georgia , USA , March 22 - 27 , 1997 ) New York : ACM Press , pp . 335 – 342 . [ 16 ] Rosenberg , J . The Structure of Hypertext Activity . In Proceedings of Hypertext ’96 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 22 - 30 . [ 17 ] Schilit , B . N . , Price , M . N . , Golovchinsky , G . , Tanaka , K . , and Marshall , C . C . As We May Read : The Reading Appliance Revolution . IEEE Computer , Vol . 32 , No . 1 , January 1999 , pp . 65 - 73 . [ 18 ] Shipman , F . M . , Hsieh , H . Moore , J . M . , and Zacchi , A . Supporting personal collections across digital libraries in spatial hypertext . In Proceedings of JCDL 2004 ( Tuscon , AZ , USA , June 7 - 11 , 2004 ) , ACM Press , pp . 358 - 367 [ 19 ] Thorngate , W . On Paying Attention . In Recent Trends in Psychology . W J . Baker , et al . , Eds . 1988 , Springer - Verlag : New York . p . 247 - 263 .