1 MBC E05 - 07 - 0644 REV October 25 , 2005 Ena / VASP proteins can regulate distinct modes of actin organization at cadherin adhesive contacts . Jeanie A . Scott 1 , 2 , Annette M . Shewan 1 , Nicole R . den Elzen 1 , Joseph J . Louriero 3 , Frank B . Gertler 3 , and Alpha S . Yap 1 , 2 , 4 1 Division of Molecular Cell Biology , Institute for Molecular Bioscience ; 2 School for Biomedical Science ; The University of Queensland , St . Lucia , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia 4072 ; 3 Department of Biology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , U . S . A . 02139 Running title : Ena / VASP proteins and E - cadherin Key words : E - cadherin , actin , cytoskeleton , Mena , Ena / VASP , epithelia 4 Author for correspondence : Alpha S . Yap Phone : 61 - 7 - 3346 - 2013 Fax : 61 - 7 - 3346 - 2101 e - mail : a . yap @ imb . uq . edu . au http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2005 / 12 / 21 / E05 - 07 - 0644 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : 2 Abstract Functional interactions between classical cadherins and the actin cytoskeleton involve diverse actin activities , including filament nucleation , cross - linking and bundling . In this report we explored the capacity of Ena / VASP proteins to regulate the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin adhesive contacts . We extended the observation that Ena / VASP proteins localize at cell - cell contacts to demonstrate that E - cadherin homophilic ligation is sufficient to recruit Mena to adhesion sites . Ena / VASP activity was necessary both for F - actin accumulation and assembly at cell - cell contacts . Moreover , we identified two distinct pools of Mena within individual homophilic adhesions that cells made when they adhered to cadherin - coated substrata . These Mena pools localized with Arp2 / 3 - driven cellular protrusions as well as at the tips of cadherin - based actin bundles . Importantly , Ena / VASP activity was necessary for both modes of actin activity to be expressed . Moreover , selective depletion of Ena / VASP proteins from the tips of cadherin - based bundles perturbed the bundles without affecting the protrusive F - actin pool . We propose that Ena / VASP proteins may serve as higher - order regulators of the cytoskeleton at cadherin contacts through their ability to modulate distinct modes of actin organization at those contacts . 3 Introduction Cadherins are a family of calcium - dependent cell - cell adhesion molecules that regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Upon productive ligation of their adhesive ectodomains , classical cadherins activate cellular responses necessary for a range of morphogenetic processes , including cell sorting and tissue cohesion ( Tepass et al . , 2000 ) , cell - upon - cell locomotion ( Brieher and Gumbiner , 1994 ) , and the coordination of cell migration in dorsal closure and wound repair ( Danjo and Gipson , 1998 ) . These morphogenetic responses likely reflect complex functional and biochemical interactions between the cadherin , its associated catenins , cell signalling pathways and the cytoskeleton . Dynamic activity of the actin cytoskeleton , in particular , must be coordinated with surface adhesion to provide local protrusive force and mechanical stability at cell - cell contacts ( Takeichi , 1991 ; Gumbiner , 1996 ; Yap et al . , 1997 ) . The challenge , then , is to define key molecular regulators responsible for these functional inter - relationships . The capacity for cadherins to regulate actin was first suggested by the extensive alterations in actin filament distribution that occur when epithelial cells adhere to one another ( Yonemura et al . , 1995 ; Adams et al . , 1996 ) . It subsequently became evident that multiple forms of actin activity occur at cadherin contacts , including de novo nucleation and cross - linking , that must presumably be stringently coordinated with the dynamic state of adhesive contacts ( Yonemura et al . , 1995 ; Adams et al . , 1996 ; Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ; Waterman - Storer et al . , 2000 ; Kobielak et al . , 2004 ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . Indeed , a growing corpus of actin – regulatory proteins have been identified at cadherin - based cell - cell contacts . These include actin nucleators , such as the Arp2 / 3 complex and formin - 1 ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Kobielak et al . , 2004 ) ; proteins that can modulate actin assembly , such as cortactin ( Helwani et al . , 2004 ) ; potential actin - bundling proteins such as α - catenin and vinculin ( Nagafuchi et al . , 1991 ; Rimm et al . , 1995 ; Watabe - Uchida et al . , 1998 ; Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) ; as well as a range of other proteins , such as KLEIP ( Hara et al . , 2004 ) , that may influence actin organization . It is increasingly apparent that actin organization and dynam ics are controlled by hierarchies of regulatory molecules . In addition to the core machinery responsible for actin assembly , turnover and cross - linking , a range of higher - order regulators have 4 been reported that may coordinate different modes of actin organization ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . One such set of potential regulators are the Ena / VASP proteins ( Gertler et al . , 1990 ; Gertler et al . , 1995 ; Krause et al . , 2003 ) . In mammals these comprise Mena , the homolog of Drosophila Ena , VASP and EVL ( Reinhard et al . , 1992 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ) . All members of the Ena / VASP family have a tripartite structure , consisting of an EVH1 domain , a central proline - rich domain and a terminal EVH2 domain ( reviewed in Krause et al . , 2003 ) . The EVH1 domain binds to FP4 motifs found in proteins such as vinculin , ActA and zyxin . The central proline - rich region binds to SH3 domains and the actin - binding protein , profilin , while the terminal EVH2 domain supports tetramerization and F - actin binding . Both the EVH1 and EVH2 domains mediate Ena / VASP targeting within cells . Ena / VASP proteins localise to the tips of actin bundles and to the leading edges of migratory fibroblasts ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Bear et al . , 2000 ) and in growth cones ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Goh et al . , 2002 ; Lebrand et al . , 2004 ) , where they regulate filament elongation and branching and , consequently , force production and cell surface protrusiveness ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Several recent observations suggest that Ena / VASP proteins also affect cadherin - based actin organization . Ena / VASP proteins are found at cell - cell contacts between follicular cells of the Drosophila egg chamber ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) and between cultured murine keratinocytes ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) , their localization in the latter case depending on the integrity of those contacts . In Drosophila ( Baum and Perrimon , 2001 ) , ena mutants decreased F - actin throughout cell cortices , including that found at cell - cell contacts . Furthermore , a genetic interaction between Abelson and ena controls the balance of actin assembly within Drosophila epithelial cells . Abelson mutants promote accumulation of F - actin at the apical surfaces of cells at the expense of F - actin at cell - cell contacts in an Ena - dependent fashion ( Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ; Grevengoed et al . , 2003 ) . Nonetheless , how these genetic effects might be expressed at a cellular level to affect actin cytoskeletal regulation by cadherins remains to be elucidated . In this study we therefore sought to further explore the potential for Ena / VASP proteins to mediate higher - order regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by E - cadherin . 5 MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture , transfections and hE / Fc hE - CHO cells and MCF - 7 cells were described previously ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Paterson et al . , 2003 ) . MV D7 and D7 - FLM cells were cultured as previously described ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . hE / Fc , a recombinant protein bearing the complete ectodomain of E - cadherin fused to the Fc region of human IgG , was purified and coated onto either latex beads ( 6 μ m ; Sigma ) or onto glass coverslips as previously described ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) . Plasmids EGFP - Mena was described previously ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . For transient expression in mammalian cells , the coding sequences for EGFPMena , EGFP AP4 - cyto , EGFP FP4 - cyto , EGFP AP4 - mito , and EGFP FP4 - mito were subcloned from pMSCV ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) into pCDNA3 . 1 ( - ) by digestion with EcoR1 and HindIII . For the creation of stable cell lines the inserts was moved to an intermediary plasmid , pTRE2 , by digesting with Not1 and HindIII ; subsequent digestion with EcoRV generated the insert sequence for ligation into pIRESpuro ( Clontech ) . The Arp3 - EGFP vector , constructed by Dr Matt Welch , was a gift from Dr Dorothy Schaefer ( Washington University , St Louis , MO ) ( Schafer et al . , 1998 ) . The EGFP - IRSp53 construct was a kind gift from Drs H . Miki and T . Takenawa ( University of Tokyo ) ( Miki et al . , 2000 ) . The plasmid encoding full length human E - cadherin was a gift from Dr . Cara Gottardi and has previously been described ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) . All transfections were performed using lipofectamine ( Invitrogen ) in accordance with manufacturers’ instructions . Antibodies and immunochemicals Primary antibodies and immunochemicals were as follows : ( 1 ) Rabbit pAb against Mena ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . ( 2 ) Mouse mAb raised against the c - terminal domain of Mena ( Transduction Laboratories ) . ( 3 ) Mouse mAb raised against the cytoplasmic tail of human E - cadherin ( Transduction Laboratories ) . ( 4 ) Rabbit pAb raised against the cytoplasmic tail of mouse E - cadherin . In western blots this antibody recognised a peptide at ~ 120 kDa in both hE - CHO and MCF - 7 cell lysates , but not in lysates from 6 cadherin - deficient parental CHO cells ( not shown ) . Pre - bleed samples failed to detect any bands in western blots . ( 5 ) Mouse mAb HECD1 raised against the ectodomain of human E - cadherin ( provided by Dr . M . Wheelock [ University of Nebraska , Omaha , NE ] , with the permission of Dr . M . Takeichi ) . ( 6 ) Rabbit pAb directed against the ectodomain of human E - cadherin ( Helwani et al . , 2004 ) . ( 7 ) Mouse mAb 4F11 directed against the repeat region of cortactin ( a kind gift from Dr . Scott Weed ) . ( 8 ) F - actin was visualised using phalloidin conjugated to TRITC ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , Alexa - 488 ( Molecular Probes ) or Alexa - 350 ( Molecular Probes ) . ( 9 ) Mouse mAb directed against vinculin ( Sigma ) . ( 10 ) Anti - GFP mAb ( Roche ) and rabbit anti - GFP pAb ( Molecular Probes ) . ( 11 ) Alexa - 594 - labelled G - actin ( Molecular Probes ) . Secondary antibodies were species - specific and conjugated with Alexa - 350 , Alexa - 488 , or Texas Red ( Molecular Probes ) . Immunofluorescence Microscopy Specimens were fixed for immunofluorescence microscopy as described previously ( Kovacs et al . , 2002a ; Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) . Epi - illumination fluorescence microscopy was performed using Olympus IX - 81 microscopes equipped with x100 and x60 1 . 4 NA objectives . Images were acquired using Hamamatsu Orca 1 - ER cameras driven by Metamorph software version 5 . 0 . For live cell microscopy cells were plated onto hE / Fc - coated substrata in an incubation chamber maintained at 37 o C . Image collection was commenced when cell spreading had begun . Image processing was performed in Adobe Photoshop ( Version 7 ) . Drug inhibition studies Drug inhibition studies were performed by allowing MCF - 7 cells to spread on hE / Fc for 60 min . Cytochalasin D ( 25 nM final concentration from 1 mM stock in DMSO ) or Y27632 ( 10 μ M ) were then added and the cells incubated for another 30 min before fixation . Control cells were incubated in 1 : 4000 DMSO . F - actin accumulation assay F - actin accumulation at cell contacts was measured using the line scan function in Metamorph ( Version 5 . 0 , Universal Imaging ) to quantitate the intensity of phalloidin fluorescence at cell - cell contacts . A total of 40 lines , each 220 pixels in length , were 7 drawn through each contact and the average pixel intensity for each position along the line was determined . A minimum of 20 junctions were analysed per experiment and the areas under the curves determined using Excel . Experiments were repeated 3 times . G - actin incorporation assay G - actin incorporation assays were performed in saponin - permeabilized live cells as described previously ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) . Fluorescence intensity of G - actin incorporation was measured by tracing the contacts of cells and measuring pixel intensity with Metamorph . As for actin accumulation assays , contacts between cells both expressing GFP were chosen for analysis . RESULTS Homophilic ligation recruits Mena to cadherin adhesive contacts . We found that Mena localized at E - cadherin - enriched contacts between MCF - 7 mammary epithelial cells ( Fig 1A ) , as has also been observed in Drosophila embryos and primary keratinocytes ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ; Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ) . However , whereas E - cadherin distributed in an extensive linear pattern throughout the contacts , Mena staining was less continuous , often being found in prominent puncta ( Fig 1A ) that were particularly evident in cells extracted with non - ionic detergents prior to fixation ( Fig 1B ) . Mena puncta often coincided both with detergent - resistant puncta of E - cadherin and with the termini of perijunctional actin bundles ( Fig 1B ) . Mena staining at contacts was also more prominent as cells reassembled contacts following chelation of extracellular calcium ( Supplementary Fig 1 ) as well as in subconfluent islands of cells ( not shown ) . This suggested that Mena might preferentially accumulate in specific regions within cadherin contacts in response to cellular context . E - cadherin adhesion can regulate cytoskeletal organization by recru iting actin regulatory proteins to the cell cortex ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . To test whether the localization of Mena at cell - cell contacts might reflect a similar instructive influence of E - cadherin , we first compared the distribution of Mena in monolayers of CHO cells stably expressing E - cadherin ( hE - CHO cells ) and parental CHO cells which do not express classical cadherins ( Supplementary Fig 2 ) . Similar to 8 MCF - 7 cells , Mena and E - cadherin co - accumulated in puncta at cell - cell contacts between hE - CHO cells . In contrast , less Mena staining was seen at contacts between parental CHO cells , where instead it principally stained at the free margins of cells and at the termini of actin stress fibers , presumably at focal adhesions . The expression of E - cadherin thus appeared to promote Mena recruitment to cell - cell contacts . We then tested whether cadherin homophilic ligation alone could recruit Mena to sites of adhesion . For these experiments we used latex beads coated with a recombinant cadherin ligand ( hE / Fc ) that make spatially - defined cadherin adhesions when they bind to the dorsal surfaces of hE - CHO cells . As previously reported ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Gavard et al . , 2004 ; Helwani et al . , 2004 ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) , hE / Fc and similar recombinant ligands support cadherin - specific adhesion and activate cell signalling . Both cellular E - cadherin and Mena efficiently co - accumulated at sites of adhesion with hE / Fc - coated beads ( Fig 1C ) . In contrast , control beads coated with Concanavalin A bound robustly to the cell surface but failed to recruit either Mena or E - cadherin ( Fig 1C ) . Together , these observations identify Mena as one of several functionally distinct actin regulators that can be recruited to adhesions in response to E - cadherin homophilic ligation alone , a process likely to contribute significantly to the junctional localization of Mena that we observed at cell - cell contacts . Ena / VASP protein activity regulates actin filament density and assembly at epithelial cell - cell contacts . We next tested the impact of Ena / VASP activity on the actin cytoskeleton at native MCF - 7 cell - cell contacts . For these studies we transiently - expressed a mitochondrially - targeted construct that contains four FP4 motifs from Listeria ActA ( EGFP - FP4 - mito ) . By binding their EVH1 domains , this construct sequesters Mena and other Ena / VASP proteins to mitochondrial surfaces and away from their normal cellular locations ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) including cell - cell contacts ( not shown ) . As a control we used a construct with tandem AP4 motifs that is targeted to mitochondria but does not bind Ena / VASP proteins ( EGFP - AP4 - mito ) . Fluorescent phalloidin staining appeared significantly reduced at contacts between cells expressing EGFP - FP4 - mito compared with either cells expressing EGFP - AP4 - mito or untransfected control cells ( Fig 2 ) . This evident reduction in F - actin content was confirmed by quantitation of fluorescence intensity at cell - cell contacts ( Fig 2 ) . 9 Ena / VASP proteins may regulate the actin cytoskeleton by a number of mechanisms , including both modulation of actin filament assembly ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) as well by contributing to the formation of actin filament bundles ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Cadherin - based cell - cell contacts are sites of actin assembly that can be detected by incorporation of fluorescently - labelled G - actin ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . To determine if the observed changes in F - actin content at cell - cell contacts might reflect changes in actin assembly , we performed G - actin incorporation assays in these cells ( Fig 3 ) . Live cells were lightly permeabilised prior to incubation with Alexa594 - conjugated G - actin , then washed and fixed to identify the incorporated pool of G - actin . Control untransfected cells or cells expressing EGFP - AP4 - mito showed clear fluorescent labelling at the cell - cell contacts themselves as well as in perijunctional bundles ( Fig 3 ) . In contrast , G - actin incorporation at the cellular contacts as well as in perijunctional bundles was much less intense between cells expressing EGFP - FP4 - mito , being reduced by ~ 40 % compared with the negative controls as assessed by quantitation of fluorescence intensity ( Fig 3 ) . Together , these findings confirmed that Ena / VASP proteins act to regulate the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin - based cell - cell contacts . They further implied that this regulation occurs , at least in part , through control of actin filament assembly . Mena localizes in two distinct patterns within individual cadherin homophilic adhesions . Given the suggestion that Mena might preferentially accumulate at specific regions within cell - cell contacts ( Fig 1 ) , we sought to examine more closely the spatial relationship between Mena and E - cadherin at adhesive contacts . Since homophilic ligation sufficed to recruit Mena , we used cadherin planar adhesion assays for these experiments ( Fig 4 ) . Cells expressing E - cadherin adhere to hE / Fc - coated substrata in a cadherin - dependent fashion with no detectable contribution from integrins ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) . As they adhere , cells extend contact zones through the generation of broad cadherin - based lamellipodia , thereby providing an optically - amenable way to assess the subcellular localization of molecules within individual homophilic adhesions . As previously described ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Gavard et al . , 2004 ; Helwani et al . , 2004 ) , cellular E - cadherin was found distributed throughout the adhesive 10 contact zones in these assays , typically forming lateral clusters of varying size , both fine puncta and large streaks and clusters ( which we refer to as “macroclusters” ; Fig 4A ) 1 . Cadherin macroclusters superficially resemble integrin focal adhesions , but are integrin - independent ( Kovacs et al . , 2002a ; Kovacs et al . , 2002b ) and persist in the presence of inhibitory RGD peptides ( not shown ) . Mena localized in two distinct patterns within these homophilic adhesions . Fine bands of Mena were seen at the outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia which often , but not invariably , overlapped small clusters and peripheral streaks of E - cadherin staining ( Fig 4A ) . Strikingly , Mena also precisely co - localized with E - cadherin in the macroclusters . It should be noted that many small cadherin clusters did not display detectable Mena staining . This suggested that Mena was specifically recruited to particular regions even within individual adhesive contacts , reminiscent of our observation that Mena localized selectively to subregions within cell - cell contacts ( Fig 1 ) . We then used time - lapse digital videomicroscopy to further compare these two distinct patterns of Mena as hE - CHO cells transiently expressing EGFP - Mena adhered to hE / Fc - coated substrata ( Fig 4B , Supplementary Movie 1 ) . Consistent with earlier findings ( Verma et al . , 2004 ) , the outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia were very dynamic structures that displayed periodic extension and retraction . EGFP - Mena at the outer margin strictly localized to regions undergoing protrusion , being promptly lost when the margins began to retract . In contrast , EGFP - Mena in macroclusters displayed less dynamic lateral movement , typically persisting in place for the duration of the movies , although some remodelling was observed . Thus quite different motility patterns distinguished these two pools of Mena that coexisted within individual homophilic adhesions . These two pools of Mena also co - stained with distinct Ena / VASP binding proteins . IRSp53 ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ) co - localized precisely with Mena at the outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia but was not detected in Mena macroclusters ( Supp Fig 3A ) . In contrast , vinculin co - localized consistently with Mena in macroclusters , but was more intermittently found at the outer margins of lamellipodia ( Supp Fig 3B ) . Taken together , these findings suggest that within individual cadherin homophilic adhesions Mena is recruited into 1 Gavard et al . ( 2004 ) describe these structures as “cadherin adhesions” by analogy with integrin - based focal adhesions . We prefer to use the less elegant term , “cadherin macroclusters” , because the smaller cadherin clusters may also mediate adhesion . 11 two distinct cortical pools , which differ in subcellular location , dynamic morphology and localization with potential associated proteins . Ena / VASP activity supports distinct modes of actin organization at cadherin homophilic adhesions . The two pools of Mena identified within individual homophilic cadherin adhesions also coincided with two distinct patterns of F - actin organization ( Fig 5A ) . Prominent bands of F - actin characteristically demarcated the outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia , while the contacts were traversed by dense actin bundles that terminated in cadherin macroclusters ( not shown ; Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . Mena at the outer margins of lamellipodia co - localized exactly with the broad peripheral bands of F - actin ( Fig 5A ) and also with transiently - expressed GFP - Arp3 ( Fig 5B ) , consistent with our recent observation that this pool of actin reflects Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation ( Verma et al . , 2004 ) . Because Arp2 / 3 activity drives lamellipodial protrusion in cadherin planar adhesion assays ( Verma et al . , 2004 ) , we will refer to this pool of Mena as a “protrusive” pool . In contrast , the pool of Mena that accumulated in cadherin macroclusters formed termini for the actin bundles ( Fig 5A ) . This second ( “macrocluster” ) pattern resembled the Mena - enriched puncta found at the termini of perijunctional actin bundles in epithelial monolayers ( Fig 1B ) . These observations suggested that Mena might be common to different modes of actin organization within individual homophilic adhesions . We then asked whether Ena / VASP activity was necessary for these two forms of actin organization to be expressed . We tested this using murine fibroblastic MV D7 cells that lack Mena , VASP and EVL ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 , Bear et al . , 2000 ) and MV D7 cells complemented with EGFP - tagged full - length Mena ( MV - FLM cells ) . Although MV D7 cells possess low levels of endogenous N - cadherin ( not shown ) , they did not spread well upon hE / Fc - coated substrata . Accordingly , to facilitate analysis , human E - cadherin was transiently expressed in both MV D7 and MV - FLM cells ( Fig 6A ) . MV D7 cells expressing hE - Cadherin attached to hE / Fc - coated substrata , but failed to make broad lamellipodia and actin bundles were scant ( Fig 6B ) . Furthermore , although E - cadherin stained in fine puncta , the prominent streaks and macroclusters seen in MCF - 7 and hE - CHO cells were conspicuously absent . In contrast , MV - FLM cells expressing hE - Cadherin spread much more extensively on hE / Fc - coated substrata , and displayed Mena both at the outer margins 12 of protrusions and in macroclusters ( Fig 6C ) , similar to the patterns of endogenous Mena seen in MCF - 7 cells and hE - CHO cells . Mena - complemented cells also generated cadherin - based lamellipodia with prominent peripheral F - actin bands ( Fig 6C ) that were much broader than those seen in MV D7 cells , an observation that was confirmed by quantitation of adhesive surface area ( Fig 6D ) . Furthermore , actin bundles were restored in Mena - complemented cells . Interestingly , cellular E - Cadherin also reaccumulated to form macroclusters that co - localized precisely with EGFP - Mena , as seen with MCF - 7 and hE - CHO cells . Together , these observations indicated that Ena / VASP activity supported both the peripheral actin bands and actin bundles found at homophilic adhesive contacts . We also asked if actin organization might be affected by selective displacement of Mena from one of the pools found at homophilic adhesions . We used a cytosolic form of FP4 ( FP4 - cyto ) that displaces Mena from focal adhesions but not from leading edges in migrating cells ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Similarly , in hE / Fc planar adhesion assays FP4 - cyto depleted Mena staining in macroclusters but did not affect the protrusive pool of Mena ( not shown ) . In contrast , Mena staining in cells expressing a cytosolic form of AP4 ( AP4 - cyto ) was indistinguishable from mock - transfected controls . MCF7 cells expressing either construct displayed prominent peripheral bands of F - actin upon attachment to hE / Fc - coated substrata ( Fig 7 ) . However , cadherin - based actin bundles were much less evident in cells expressing FP4 - cyto compared with cells expressing AP4 - cyto . This suggested that the selective presence of Mena in the macrocluster pool influenced significantly the assembly of actin filament bundles at cadherin homophilic adhesions , but was less critical for F - actin organization in cadherin - based protrusions . Actin filament barbed ends are necessary for th e protrusive pool of Mena . Multiple mechanisms can determine the subcellular localization of Ena / VASP proteins , including the free barbed ends of actin filaments themselves . To pursue the molecular requirements that target Mena to different regions within individual cadherin adhesive contacts , we first tested the impact of filament barbed ends on Mena recruitment ( Fig 8 ) . Used at low concentrations , cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) caps the barbed ends of actin filaments and displaces Mena from the tips of fibroblast lamellipodia and growth cone filopodia ( Cooper , 1987 ; Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Accordingly , cells were 13 allowed to adhere to hE / Fc - coated substrata , then treated with CytoD in a range of low concentrations ( 10 – 50 nM ) for a further 30 min before being immunostained for endogenous Mena ( not shown ) . We found that 25 – 50 nM CytoD effectively displaced Mena from the protrusive pool at the leading edges of cadherin - based lamellipodia , but Mena staining in macroclusters was not disrupted by any of the concentrations used ( Fig 8A illustrates data using 25 nM CytoD ) . Time - lapse movies of cells expressing EGFP - Mena revealed that CytoD ( 25 nM ) decreased EGFP - Mena at protrusive leading edges within ~ 5 min of applying the drug to the incubation chamber ( Fig 8B ; Supplementary Movie 2 ) , but localization in macroclusters persisted . This implied that intact barbed ends of actin filaments were more important to support the protrusive pool of Mena than to support the macrocluster pool . In contrast , cortactin ( Helwani et al . , 2004 ) staining at the peripheral margins was not affected by CytoD in these concentrations ( Fig 8A ) . Therefore not all actin - binding proteins were de - localized by CytoD in these experiments , implying that capping barbed ends might exert a relatively selective effect on Mena localization in the protrusive pool . Mena incorporation into macroclusters requires Rho kinase signaling . Finally , we sought to identify factors that might influence the localization of Mena in the macrocluster pool . Given the apparent relationship between Mena macroclusters and actin cables , we focused on Rho kinase signaling , which we recently found influences cadherin - based actin bundling ( Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . To test the impact of Rho kinase on Mena localization at homophilic adhesions , we allowed cells to first adhere and spread on hE / Fc , then treated them briefly with the Rho kinase inhibitor , Y27632 , in a range of concentrations ( 1 - 50 μ M ) . Clear changes were seen using 10 μ M Y27632 , a concentration that we previously found to perturb cadherin - based actin bundles ( Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . Mena staining in macroclusters was no longer identifiable , being replaced by finer punctate staining that was more diffusely distributed throughout the adhesive contacts ( Fig 9 ) . However , peripheral staining at the leading edges of cadherin - based protrusions was still detectable at all the drug concentrations used . This suggested that the macrocluster pool of Mena was more sensitive to Rho kinase inhibition than was the protrusive pool . 14 DISCUSSION It has long been recognized that classical cadherins cooperate closely with the actin cytoskeleton to assemble and remodel cell - cell contacts ( Adams et al . , 1996 ; Adams and Nelson , 1998 ; Bershadsky , 2004 ) . Recent developments indicate that such cooperation involves more actin - regulatory proteins than previously appreciated ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Helwani et al . , 2004 ; Kobielak et al . , 2004 ) and also multiple potentially distinct modes of cytoskeletal activity ( Vaezi et al . , 2002 ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . In this report we focused on analysing the cellular contribution of Ena / VASP proteins to actin regulation at cadherin contacts . Our interest in this highly conserved family of cytoskeletal regulators was prompted both by their ability to participate in many different actin - dependent cellular processes as well as earlier evidence that they localize to cell - cell contacts . Indeed , genetic studies in Drosophila indicate that Ena participates in a signal - regulated pathway to control the regional distribution of F - actin within epithelial cells ( Grevengoed et al . , 2001 ) . Our findings extend these earlier studies to demonstrate that Ena / VASP activity critically influences the actin cytoskeleton at established cell - cell contacts between mammalian cells . Thus , sequestration of Ena / VASP proteins using the FP4 - mito strategy reduced the density of actin filaments at MCF - 7 cell - cell contacts by ~ 50 % . This effect on the perijunctional actin cytoskeleton is likely to reflect a major impact of Ena / VASP proteins on processes of actin assembly , since Ena / VASP sequestration also significantly reduced the local incorporation of fluorescent G - actin at contacts . This is consistent with the well - documented capacity for Ena / VASP proteins to modulate actin assembly ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) , notably by acting at post - nucleation steps to control filament length ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . However , potential contributions of Ena / VASP activity to other processes , such as filament bundling ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) , are not excluded . It should also be noted that though we principally followed Mena in our experiments , both VASP and EVL can also be found at cell - cell contacts ( Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ; J . A . Scott , unpublished ) and are sequestered to mitochondria by FP4 - mito ( J . A . Scott , unpublished ; Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Given the high degree of functional redundancy among mammalian Ena / VASP proteins , our findings then define an important requirement for Ena / VASP activity to 15 regulate the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin contacts without necessarily identifying specific contributions of individual members of this protein family . How , then , are Ena / VASP proteins recruited to regulate the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin contacts ? We suggest that this reflects a critical influence of E - cadherin adhesion itself . This possibility was first prompted by the observation that Mena accumulated more prominently at contacts between cadherin - expressing cells than between cadherin - deficient cells , implying that expression of the cadherin could influence the subcellular localization of Mena . This notion was reinforced by the demonstration that binding of cells to immobilized cadherin ligands recruited Mena into sites of adhesion , both when ligands were presented on beads and also as planar adhesive substrata . This indicated that homophilic ligation of E - cadherin receptors was sufficient to recruit Mena to the cell surface independently of other juxtacrine signals that are likely to exist at native cell - cell contacts . By implication , the junctional localization of Ena / VASP proteins at cell - cell contacts may then reflect the action of cadherin adhesion itself , perhaps acting through signaling pathways triggered by homophilic ligation ( Yap and Kovacs , 2003 ) . The ability of homophilic ligation to recruit Mena to the cortex gave us the opportunity to explore in greater detail how Mena may distribute within individual adhesive contacts . Strikingly , we found that Mena localized in two clear and distinct patterns when cells adhered to hE / Fc - coated substrata : at the very margins of cadherin - based protrusions as they were extending , as well as in large clusters that precisely co - localized with macroclusters of cellular E - cadherin . In addition to their subcellular localization , these pools differed in their motile behaviour and in their co - localization with different potential Mena - binding proteins . Furthermore , the protrusive pool of Mena appeared to preferentially require intact barbed ends of actin filaments , as Mena was readily displaced from the protrusive pool , but not the macrocluster pool , by low concentrations of cytochalasin D . This is consistent with evidence from other cellular and in vitro systems that Ena / VASP proteins can interact with uncapped actin filament barbed ends ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ) . In contrast , inhibition of Rho kinase signaling more readily perturbed Mena localization in macroclusters than its localization in the peripheral pool . Taken together , these findings indicate that Mena can recruit into two distinct pools within homophilic cadherin adhesions . Interestingly , the locations of these two pools of Mena also corresponded to morphologically distinct patterns of F - actin at homophilic adhesions . The protrusive 16 pool of Mena co - localized with broad peripheral bands of F - actin while the macrocluster pool localized at the termini of prominent actin bundles . Several recent observations indicate that these patterns correspond to two pools of F - actin that are distinct and experimentally separable . Thus , the protrusive pool appears to involve Arp2 / 3 - driven actin assembly : the Arp2 / 3 complex specifically localizes in this region of homophilic adhesions and the peripheral bands of F - actin are lost when Arp2 / 3 activity is inhibited ( Kovacs et al . , 2002b ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . Indeed , in our present studies we found that Mena in the protrusive pool co - localized with GFP - Arp3 . Moreover , the ability of cells to extend protrusions when they adhere to cadherin - coated substrata is severely compromised when Arp2 / 3 is inhibited , indicating a critical contribution of Arp2 / 3 to forming these protrusions ( Verma et al . , 2004 ) . In contrast , Arp2 / 3 was not seen associated with the cadherin - based actin cables . Instead , Myosin 2 is necessary for the actin bundles , but not for the peripheral pool of actin filaments , suggesting a preferential role of actomyosin contractility in generating these cadherin - based actin bundles ( Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . These findings then suggest that Mena may be common to distinct pools of F - actin found at cadherin homophilic adhesions . Importantly , Ena / VASP activity played a critical role in the expression of both these modes of actin organization . Thus Ena / VASP - deficient MV D7 cells expressing E - cadherin adhered to hE / Fc - coated substrata but failed to assemble cadherin - based actin cables ; nor did they display the broad lamellipodial protrusions that characterize Arp2 / 3 - driven actin in this assay system . Expression of Mena restored both cadherin - based lamellipodia and cables , indicating that Mena activity alone could support both Arp2 / 3 - dependent cell protrusion and actin bundle assembly in this assay system . These observations are consistent with evidence in other systems that Ena / VASP proteins can affect biochemically distinct modes of actin regulation . For example , Ena / VASP proteins influence both the length of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated filaments at the leading edges of motile cells ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) as well as participate in generating parallel actin bundles ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Similarly , ectopic accumulation of Ena in Abelson - mutant Drosophila embryos caused the mislocalization of both Arp2 / 3 and the formin , Diaphanous , actin nucleators associated with different modes of filament organization ( Grevengoed et al . , 2003 ) . Taken together , these findings indicate that Ena / VASP activity can critically regulate two potentially distinct modes of actin organization made by cells at cadherin homophilic adhesions . 17 Several observations further suggest that these two modes of actin organization may also exist at cell - cell contacts . Thus , actin cables are well - described in the perijunctional regions of cell - cell contacts . During the biogenesis of contacts , these bundles often appear to terminate at nascent adherens junctions ( Yonemura et al . , 1995 ) , suggesting that they may be anchored to cadherin adhesions . We postulate that the cadherin - based actin bundles found in homophilic adhesion assays may correspond to these perijunctional actin cables . Consistent with this notion , we recently found that inhibition of Myosin 2 perturbed actin bundles both in homophilic adhesion assays and at native cell - cell contacts ( Shewan et al . , 2005 ) . In terms of the protrusive F - actin pool , the Arp2 / 3 nucleator that is responsible for generating these filaments is also found at cadherin - based cell - cell contacts , where it contributes to actin assembly ( Verma et al . , 2004 ) . Taken together , these observations imply that the capacity of Ena / VASP proteins to modulate both Arp2 / 3 - generated actin structures and actin cables may also exist at native cell - cell contacts . Thus the observed impact of Ena / VASP proteins on the perijunctional actin cytoskeleton may arise from contributions to distinct modes of actin regulation at those contacts . It is important to note , however , that in our experiments Ena / VASP activity exerted an important but not essential influence on cytoskeletal regulation by cadherin . Actin assembly and bundle formation persisted , albeit to a reduced extent , despite loss of Ena / VASP function . This is consistent with genetic evidence that UNC - 34 , the sole Ena / VASP gene in C . elegans , is not essential during development ( Withee et al . , 2004 ) , as well as with cellular and biochemical evidence that these proteins act in concert with other mechanistically - distinct molecules to regulate actin filament dynamics and organization ( Krause et al . , 2003 ) . It is likely , then , that the impact of Ena / VASP proteins on cadherin - actin cooperation will be influenced by cellular context . Indeed , our observation that Mena localizes most prominently in newly - forming contacts suggests that these proteins may exert their action preferentially at dynamic contacts that are forming or remodelling . In conclusion , our findings demonstrate the capacity of Ena / VASP proteins to regulate the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin - based adhesive contacts . These proteins contribute in significant part by forming part of an ensemble of distinct actin regulators that are recruited to contacts as a direct or indirect response to cadherin adhesion itself . We further postulate that Ena / VASP protein activity may be common to , and important for , the expression of distinct modes of actin organization at 18 cadherin contacts . An interesting question is whether differential regulation of Ena / VASP activity may control the balance between expression of Arp2 / 3 - driven protrusions and actin bundling at contacts . While our data do not speak directly to this issue , our observation that selective depletion of Ena / VASP proteins from macroclusters affected actin cables more than the protrusive actin bands , suggests that Ena / VASP proteins might be able to act semi - independently in these two actin pools . Thus , Ena / VASP proteins may act as higher - order regulators of the actin cytoskeleton at cadherin cell - cell adhesions . Acknowledgements . We thank our afore - mentioned colleagues who generously provided us with reagents and all the members of our lab for their unfailing encouragement , friendship and support , which we cherish . The research in Australia was funded by the Australian Research Council , JAS was supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award and ASY was a Wellcome Trust International Senior Research Fellow . REFERENCES Adams , C . L . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Cytomechanics of cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 , 572 - 577 . Adams , C . L . , Nelson , W . J . , and Smith , S . J . ( 1996 ) . Quantitative analysis of cadherin - catenin - actin reorganization during development of cell - cell adhesion . J Cell Biol 135 , 1899 - 1911 . Barzik , M . , Kotova , T . I . , Higgs , H . N . , Hazelwood , L . , Hanein , D . , Gertler , F . B . , and Schafer , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polym erization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 , 28653 - 28662 . Baum , B . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2001 ) . Spatial control of the actin cytoskeleton in Drosophila epithe lial cells . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 883 - 890 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 - 728 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 - 521 . Bershadsky , A . ( 2004 ) . Magic touch : how does cell - cell adhesion trigger actin assembly ? Trends Cell Biol 14 , 589 - 593 . 19 Brieher , W . M . , and Gumbiner , B . M . ( 1994 ) . Regulation of C - cadherin function during activin induced morphogenesis of Xenopus animal caps . J Cell Biol 126 , 519 - 527 . Danjo , Y . , and Gipson , I . K . ( 1998 ) . Actin ' purse string ' filaments are anchored by E - cadherin - mediated adherens junctions at the leading edge of the epithelial wound , providing coordinated cell movement . J Cell Sci 111 ( Pt 22 ) , 3323 - 3332 . Gavard , J . , Lambert , M . , Grosheva , I . , Marthiens , V . , Irinopoulou , T . , Riou , J . F . , Bershadsky , A . , and Mege , R . M . ( 2004 ) . Lamellipodium extension and cadherin adhesion : two cell responses to cadherin activation relying on distinct signalling pathways . J Cell Sci 117 , 257 - 270 . Gertler , F . B . , Comer , A . R . , Juang , J . L . , Ahern , S . M . , Clark , M . J . , Liebl , E . C . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1995 ) . enabled , a dosage - sensitive suppressor of mutations in the Drosophila Abl tyrosine kinase , encodes an Abl substrate with SH3 domain - binding properties . Genes Dev 9 , 521 - 533 . Gertler , F . B . , Doctor , J . S . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1990 ) . Genetic suppression of mutations in the Drosophila abl proto - oncogene homolog . Science 248 , 857 - 860 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . , and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microfilament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 - 239 . Goh , K . L . , Cai , L . , Cepko , C . L . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Ena / VASP proteins regulate cortical neuronal positioning . Curr Biol 12 , 565 - 569 . Grevengoed , E . E . , Fox , D . T . , Gates , J . , and Peifer , M . ( 2003 ) . Balancing different types of actin polymerization at distinct sites : roles for Abelson kinase and Enabled . J Cell Biol 163 , 1267 - 1279 . Grevengoed , E . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Jesse , T . L . , and Peifer , M . ( 2001 ) . Abelson kinase regulates epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 155 , 1185 - 1198 . Gumbiner , B . M . ( 1996 ) . Cell adhesion : the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis . Cell 84 , 345 - 357 . Hara , T . , Ishida , H . , Raziuddin , R . , Dorkhom , S . , Kamijo , K . , and Miki , T . ( 2004 ) . Novel kelch - like protein , KLEIP , is involved in actin assembly at cell - cell contact sites of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 1172 - 1184 . Helwani , F . M . , Kovacs , E . M . , Paterson , A . D . , Verma , S . , Ali , R . G . , Fanning , A . S . , Weed , S . A . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin is necessary for E - cadherin - mediated contact formation and actin reorganization . J Cell Biol 164 , 899 - 910 . Kobielak , A . , Pasolli , H . A . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2004 ) . Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 6 , 21 - 30 . Kovacs , E . M . , Ali , R . G . , McCormack , A . J . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2002a ) . E - cadherin homophilic ligation directly signals through Rac and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase to regulate adhesive contacts . J Biol Chem 277 , 6708 - 6718 . Kovacs , E . M . , Goodwin , M . , Ali , R . G . , Paterson , A . D . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2002b ) . Cadherin - directed actin assem bly : E - cadherin physically associates with the Arp2 / 3 complex to direct actin assembly in nascent adhesive contacts . Curr Biol 12 , 379 - 382 . Krause , M . , Dent , E . W . , Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 , 541 - 564 . Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Hall , A . ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 , 1645 - 1655 . 20 Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , A . S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neuron 22 , 313 - 325 . Lebrand , C . , Dent , E . W . , Strasser , G . A . , Lanier , L . M . , Krause , M . , Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2004 ) . Critical role of Ena / VASP proteins for filopodia formation in neurons and in function downstream of netrin - 1 . Neuron 42 , 37 - 49 . Loureiro , J . J . , Rubinson , D . A . , Bear , J . E . , Baltus , G . A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Critical roles of phosphorylation and actin binding motifs , but not the central proline - rich region , for Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) function during cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 2533 - 2546 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 - 735 . Nagafuchi , A . , Takeichi , M . , and Tsukita , S . ( 1991 ) . The 102 kd cadherin - associated protein : similarity to vinculin and posttranscriptional regulation of expression . Cell 65 , 849 - 857 . Paterson , A . D . , Parton , R . G . , Ferguson , C . , Stow , J . L . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2003 ) . Characterization of E - cadherin endocytosis in isolated MCF - 7 and chinese hamster ovary cells : the initial fate of unbound E - cadherin . J Biol Chem 278 , 21050 - 21057 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Reinhard , M . , Halbrugge , M . , Scheer , U . , Wiegand , C . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Walter , U . ( 1992 ) . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP purified from human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin filaments and focal contacts . Embo J 11 , 2063 - 2070 . Rimm , D . L . , Koslov , E . R . , Kebriaei , P . , Cianci , C . D . , and Morrow , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Alpha 1 ( E ) - catenin is an actin - binding and - bundling protein mediating the attachment of F - actin to the membrane adhesion complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 , 8813 - 8817 . Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . , and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 , 321 - 322 . Shewan , A . M . , Maddugoda , M . , Kraemer , A . , Stehbens , S . J . , Verma , S . , Kovacs , E . M . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2005 ) . Myosin 2 is a key Rho kinase target necessary for the local concentration of E - Cadherin at cell - cell contacts . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 4531 - 4532 . Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J Cell Biol 155 , 89 - 100 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 , 409 - 421 . Takeichi , M . ( 1991 ) . Cadherin cell adhesion receptors as a morphogenetic regulator . Science 251 , 1451 - 1455 . Tepass , U . , Truong , K . , Godt , D . , Ikura , M . , and Peifer , M . ( 2000 ) . Cadherins in em bryonic and neural morphogenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 , 91 - 100 . Vaezi , A . , Bauer , C . , Vasioukhin , V . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2002 ) . Actin cable dynamics and Rho / Rock orchestrate a polarized cy toskeletal architecture in the early steps of assembling a stratified epithelium . Dev Cell 3 , 367 - 381 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2000 ) . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 , 209 - 219 . 21 Verma , S . , Shewan , A . M . , Scott , J . A . , Helwani , F . M . , den Elzen , N . R . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2004 ) . Arp2 / 3 activity is necessary for efficient formation of E - cadherin adhesive contacts . J Biol Chem 279 , 34062 - 34070 . Watabe - Uchida , M . , Uchida , N . , Imamura , Y . , Nagafuchi , A . , Fujimoto , K . , Uemura , T . , Vermeulen , S . , van Roy , F . , Adamson , E . D . , and Takeichi , M . ( 1998 ) . alpha - Catenin - vinculin interaction functions to organize the apical junctional complex in epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 142 , 847 - 857 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Salmon , W . C . , and Salmon , E . D . ( 2000 ) . Feedback interactions between cell - cell adherens junctions and cytoskeletal dynamics in newt lung epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 11 , 2471 - 2483 . Withee , J . , Galligan , B . , Hawkins , N . , and Garriga , G . ( 2004 ) . Caenorhabditis elegans WASP and Ena / VASP proteins play compensatory roles in morphogenesis and neuronal cell migration . Genetics 167 , 1165 - 1176 . Yap , A . S . , Brieher , W . M . , and Gumbiner , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Molecular and functional analysis of cadherin - based adherens junctions . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 13 , 119 - 146 . Yap , A . S . , and Kovacs , E . M . ( 2003 ) . Direct cadherin - activated cell signaling : a view from the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol 160 , 11 - 16 . Yonemura , S . , Itoh , M . , Nagafuchi , A . , and Tsukita , S . ( 1995 ) . Cell - to - cell adherens junction formation and actin filament organization : similarities and differences between non - polarized fibroblasts and polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 108 ( Pt 1 ) , 127 - 142 . 22 FIGURE CAPTIONS Figure 1 . Mena localises to cadherin - adhesive contacts . ( A , B ) Mena localizes at epithelial cell - cell contacts . MCF - 7 cell monolayers were co - stained for Mena , E - cadherin or F - actin ( phalloidin ) . ( A ) In cells permeabilized after fixation Mena accumulated with E - cadherin at cell - cell contacts ( arrow ) , but did not precisely co - localize with cadherin . ( B ) In cells extracted with TX100 prior to fixation , Mena co - stained with E - cadherin in prominent puncta at the cell - cell contacts ( arrows ) . These Mena - enriched cadherin puncta formed termini for prominent perijunctional actin bundles ( arrowheads ) . Overlay panels on the right of each row represent magnified views of regions identified by the boxes . ( C ) Cadherin ligation is sufficient to recru it Mena to the cell surface . Latex beads coated with either hE / Fc or ConA were allowed to adhere to the dorsal surface of hE - CHO cells for 90 min . Cells were then co - stained for Mena and E - cadherin . Both proteins show an intense accumulation around sites of adhesion with hE / Fc - coated beads but not with control ConA beads . Scale bar ( A ) , 20 μ m . Figure 2 . Ena / VASP proteins modulate the actin cytoskeleton at cell contacts MCF - 7 cells were transiently transfected with EGFP - AP4 - mito or EGFP - FP4 - mito constructs and stained for GFP and F - actin ( phalloidin ) . Cells expressing the transgenes were identified by EGFP expression and cell - cell contacts defined with E - cadherin staining ( not shown ) . F - actin staining was less prominent between cells that expressed EGFP - FP4 mito compared with control cells . F - actin accumulation between cells expressing transgenes was measured using the line scan function in Metamorph to quantitate phalloidin fluorescence intensity ; representative lines for analysis are shown . Data are means + S . E . M . ( arbitrary fluorescence units ; n = 20 ; p = 0 . 006 , Student’s t - test ) ; a representative of three independent experiments is shown . Scale bar , 20 μ m . Figure 3 . Ena / VASP proteins regulate actin assembly a t cadherin - based cell - cell contacts . Actin assembly was measured by incorporation of fluorescent G - actin in live cells . MCF - 7 cells were transiently transfected with EGFP - AP4 - mito or EGFP - 23 FP4 - mito . Cells were lightly permeabilised and exposed to Alexa594 - conjugated G - actin prior to fixation . Transfected cells were identified by EGFP expression . Fluorescence intensity of incorporated G - actin at cell contacts was measured using the ROI tool in Metamorph . Incorporation of Alexa594 - G - actin into perijunctional bundles ( arrows ) and at cell - cell contacts ( arrowheads ) was significantly reduced in cells expressing EGFP - FP4 - mito compared with controls . Alexa594 - G - actin that accumulated at mitochondria in cells expressing EGFP - FP4 mito , but without corresponding accumulation of phalloidin staining ( Fig 2 ) , may represent binding of actin monomers or short filaments that are not recognized by phalloidin . Data are means + S . E . M . ( n = 20 ; p = 0 . 0002 , Student’s t - test ) ; a representative of three independent experiments is shown . Scale bar , 20 μ m . Figure 4 . Mena accumulates in two distinct pools at the cadherin homophilic - adhesive interface . ( A ) hE - CHO cells were plated onto hE / Fc and allowed to adhere for 60 min , then fixed and co - stained for Mena and E - cadherin . E - cadherin localized in clusters of varying size throughout the adhesive interface . Mena accumulated both in a linear pattern at the very outer margins of cadherin - based lamellipodia ( arrowheads ) and with large streak - like clusters ( “macroclusters” ) of E - cadherin located proximal to the outer margins ( arrows ) . Higher magnification views of the regions enclosed by boxes are shown in the lower right - hand panel . ( B ) hE - CHO cells were transiently transfected with EGFP - Mena and imaged using time - lapse video microscopy . EGFP - Mena also displayed localization at the protruding outer margins of cells ( arrowheads ) as well as in more proximal macroclusters ( arrows ) . EGFP - Mena at the outer margins displayed dynamic movement , typically localizing to protruding margins , whereas Mena in macroclusters showed less dynamic lateral mobility . The original position of the outer margin ( 0 s ) is outlined in the 80s frame to illustrate the degree of protrusion . The full movie is displayed as Supplementary movie 1 . Scale bar ( A ) , 10 μ m . Figure 5 . Spatial relationships between Mena , F - actin an d Arp2 / 3 at cadherin homophilic adhesions . 24 ( A ) hE - CHO cells adherent to hE / Fc - coated substrata were costained for Mena and F - actin . Linear Mena staining co - localised with the thick rim of actin seen at the outer margins of the adhesive zone ( arrowheads ) . Additionally , Mena in macroclusters formed termini for prominent actin bundles that traversed the cells ( arrows ) . A magnified view of the boxed region is shown in the right - hand panel . ( B ) hE - CHO cells were transiently transfected with EGFP - Arp3 and allowed to adhere to hE / Fc - coated substrata for 90 min . Mena and EGFP - Arp3 co - accumulated with Mena at the outer margins ( arrowhead ) but EGFP - Arp3 was not observed in Mena - enriched macroclusters ( arrows ) . Scale bar ( A ) , 10 μ m . Figure 6 . Mena is necessary and sufficient to support contact zone extension and actin bundling at cadherin homophilic adhesions . MV D7 and MV - FLM cells were transiently transfected with hE - Cadherin and allowed to adhere to hE / Fc for 90 min . Cells were triple - labelled for E - cadherin , Mena and F - actin . ( A ) Western blot analysis confirmed E - cadherin expression in both cell lines . ( B ) MV D7 cells spread very poorly on hE / Fc and displayed few actin bundles . Fine puncta of E - cadherin formed , however , no prominent macroclusters were detected . In contrast , MV – FLM cells displayed broad lamellipodia and actin bundles which terminated in Mena - and E - cadherin - enriched macroclusters ( C , arrow ) . ( D ) Adhesive contact areas in MV D7 and MV - FLM cells transiently expressing hE - Cadherin were quantitated by measurement of pixel number . Data are means + S . E . ( n = 20 ) . Scale bar ( B ) , 10 μ m . Figure 7 . Selective displacement of Ena / VASP proteins from the macrocluster pool ablates cadherin - based actin bundles . hE - CHO cells transiently expressing either FP4 - cyto or AP4 - cyto were allowed to adhere to hE / Fc - coated substrata . Actin cables ( arrows ) that terminated in cadherin macroclusters ( arrows ) were seen in cells expressing AP4 - cyto were much less evident in cells expressing FP4 - cyto . Scale bar . 10 μ m . Figure 8 . Effect of cytochalasin D ( CytoD ) on Mena localization at cadherin adhesions . ( A ) Cells were plated onto hE / Fc and allowed to adhere for 60 min , before being exposed to Cyto D ( 25 nM ) or DMSO carrier for a further 30 min . Cells were then fixed and stained for Mena and F - actin or cortactin . Mena localisation at the 25 outer margins was substantially reduced by CytoD ( arrowhead ) , but staining in macroclusters was unaffected ( arrow ) . Cortactin localization at cell peripheries was not affected by CytoD . ( B ) Cells transiently expressing EGFP - Mena were allowed to adhere to hE / Fc - coated substrata and imaged by time - lapse digital fluorescence microscopy . CytoD ( 25 nM ) was added at the indicated time . EGFP - Mena at the peripheries of protrusions ( arrowheads ) was less prominent after ~ 5 min , whereas Mena localization in macroclusters ( arrows ) persisted . The full movie is shown as Supplementary Movie 2 . Scale bar ( A ) , 10 μ m . Figure 9 . Rho kinase signaling is necessary for the macrocluster pool of Mena at cadherin homophilic adhesions . Cells were plated onto hE / Fc for 60 min and then treated with Y27632 ( 10 μ M ) for a further 30 min . Y27632 disrupted the prominent accumulation of Mena in macroclusters , but linear staining of Mena persisted at the outer margins of cells ( arrowhead ) . Scale bar , 10 μ m .