Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Thinking Skills and Creativity journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / tsc The interaction of DRD2 and parenting style in predicting creativity ☆ Si Si , Shun Zhang ⁎ , Qi Yu , Jinghuan Zhang ⁎ Department of Psychology , Shandong Normal University , Jinan , China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Creativity Genetic DRD2 Parenting style Gene - environment interaction A B S T R A C T The present study examined the interaction of dopamine D2 receptor gene ( DRD2 ) and parenting style on creativity . Participants were 427 Chinese undergraduate students from a project de - signed to identify the genetic basis of creativity . The result showed that there was signi ﬁ cant interaction between DRD2 and authoritarian parenting when predicting creativity . Speci ﬁ cally , it was found that the negative e ﬀ ect of mother / father authoritarianism on creativity was only present when individuals were carriers of DRD2 Del ( rs1799732 ) allele . No signi ﬁ cant interaction of DRD2 and authoritative or permissive parenting was found . In conclusion , the present study provides the ﬁ rst preliminary evidence for the e ﬀ ect of DRD2 - parenting interaction on creativity ; future studies are warranted to validate these ﬁ ndings . 1 . Introduction Creativity refers to the ability to produce something that is both novel and useful ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1999 ; Plucker , Beghetto , & Dow , 2004 ) . It is of great importance to human development and achievement at both the individual and societal level ( Sternberg & Kaufman , 2010 ) . Despite its importance , the scienti ﬁ c research of creativity has not received enough attention until P . J . Guilford delivered his famous speech on creativity in the 1950s . Since then , the creativity research began to ﬂ ourish , and great e ﬀ orts have been made to reveal how creativity works . Among the topics of creativity research , one central issue is the individual di ﬀ erences in creativity . Like other human behaviors and psychological traits , the origin of individual di ﬀ erences in creativity could be attributed to the in ﬂ uence of genetic and en - vironmental factors . Through the investigation of great eminences , Galton ( 1874 ) ﬁ rst put forward the question of nature or nurture , and declared the importance of heredity ( genetic properties ) to creativity . However , in the following years much of psychological research was still permeated by the environmentalist perspective , and only the role of environmental factors in creativity was emphasized . In the 1980s , as behavioral genetics became more main stream , a more balanced view emerged , in which both genetic and environmental factors were crucial to achieve creativity . To elucidate the roles of genetic and environmental factors to creativity , twins study design has been employed to assess the relative contributions of genetic and environmental factors , and it has been shown that there were modest genetic in ﬂ uences and substantial environmental e ﬀ ects on the development of creativity . However , one potential de ﬁ ciency of the twins study design is that it assumes there is no gene - environment interaction ( Plomin , DeFries , McClearn , & McGu ﬃ n , 2008 ) . Since creativity is an emergenic trait that determined by the interaction of genetic and environmental factors , the exact mechanism by which genetic and environment factors coordinate to in ﬂ uence creativity is still unknown . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2017 . 11 . 001 Received 26 July 2016 ; Received in revised form 23 August 2017 ; Accepted 6 November 2017 ☆ This research was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31470999 , 31771235 ) , MOE ( Ministry of Education in China ) Project of Humanities and Social Sciences ( 16YJC190030 ) , Science and Technology Projects of Shandong , China ( ZR2014CQ017 ) . ⁎ Corresponding authors at : Department of Psychology , Shandong Normal University , No . 88 East Wenhua Road , Jinan 250014 , China . E - mail addresses : yinxingren1986 @ hotmail . com ( S . Zhang ) , zhangjinghuan @ sdnu . edu . cn ( J . Zhang ) . Thinking Skills and Creativity 27 ( 2018 ) 64 – 77 Available online 13 November 2017 1871 - 1871 / © 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . T Fortunately , recent advances in molecular genetics have permitted direct testing of hypotheses regarding the genetic basis of individual di ﬀ erences , and psychologists have begun to explore genes that related to creativity . This further makes it possible to directly examine the interactions of speci ﬁ c genes and environmental factors . However , to the best of our knowledge , no such study has been published although there is urgent need for such information to reveal the potential mechanism by which genetic and environmental factors work together to in ﬂ uence creativity . To ﬁ ll this gap in the literature , the present study was designed as the ﬁ rst attempt to investigate the e ﬀ ect of gene - environment interaction on creativity . And it is hoped that the ﬁ nding of the present study may lead to a better understanding of the origin of individual di ﬀ erences in creativity . 1 . 1 . DRD2 and creativity The searching of creativity - related genes was largely inspired by the cognitive neuroscience study of creativity . Since ﬁ ndings from cognitive neuroscience studies generally support the involvement of dopamine ( DA ) and DA - related brain regions ( such as prefrontal cortex and striatum ) in the cognitive processes of creativity ( Flaherty , 2005 ; Chermahini and Hommel , 2010 ; Takeuchi et al . , 2015 ) , genes involved in DA transmission have been of particular interest to explain individual di ﬀ erences in creativity . Among the candidates , the dopamine D2 receptor gene ( DRD2 ) has been studied most extensively ( Murphy , Runco , Acar , & Reiter - Palmon , 2013 ; Reuter , Roth , Holve , & Hennig , 2006 ; Runco et al . , 2011 ; Zhang , Zhang , & Zhang , 2014 ) . The DRD2 gene is located on chromosome 11q22 - 23 . The DA receptor encodes by this gene is highly expressed on the dopa - minergic neurons of striatum and prefrontal cortex , and plays an important role in mediating synaptic DA signaling . By employing divergent thinking tests as a measure of creativity , several attempts have been made to investigate the association of DRD2 with creativity . Reuter et al . ( 2006 ) ﬁ rst examined the in ﬂ uence of DRD2 on creativity , and demonstrated that DRD2 was associated with total creativity score . And this ﬁ nding has been further replicated by Zhang , Zhang et al . ( 2014 ) and Takeuchi et al . ( 2015 ) . However , there have also been studies providing negative results . For example , Runco et al . ( 2011 ) extended Reuter et al . ’ s work by in - vestigating the e ﬀ ect of DRD2 on the three common indexes ( ﬂ uency , originality , and ﬂ exibility ) of divergent thinking tests , but the result indicated that there was no association between DRD2 and creativity . 1 . 2 . Parenting style and creativity Parenting style refers to the child - rearing practices and interactive behaviors developed and implemented by parents . As one of the most important factors contributing to a person ' s development , parenting style has consistently been shown to be related to various outcomes such as child psychological problems and academic performance ( Baumrind , 1967 , 1991 ; Dornbusch , Ritter , Leiderman , Roberts , & Fraleigh , 1987 ; Querido , Warner , & Eyberg , 2002 ) . Baumrind ( 1978 ) described three major di ﬀ erent parenting styles : authoritative , permissive , and authoritarian . The authoritative parenting style is characterized as high levels of warmth and autonomy encouragements toward the child . Authoritative parents often set clear standards for their children but also encourage independence and open communication between the children and parents . Conversely , the permissive parenting style is characterized as high levels of warmth but lacking in control toward the child . Per - missive parents are often extremely tolerant of the impulses of the child , and allow high degrees of self - regulation . The authoritarian parenting style tend to fall somewhere between the two extremes , and is characterized as low levels of warmth but high levels of control toward the child . Authoritarian parents often exhibit highly directive behaviors , high levels of restriction and rejection behaviors . According to previous research , authoritative parenting style was the optimal choice for a variety of individual positive outcomes ( Carlson , Uppal , & Prosser , 2000 ; Steinberg , Elmen , & Mounts , 1989 ; Uji , Sakamoto , Adachi , & Kitamura , 2014 ) while authoritarian and permissive parenting were often associated with negative outcomes ( Barton & Hirsch , 2016 ; Georgiou , Fousiani , Michaelides , & Stavrinides , 2013 ; Hinnant , Erath , Tu , & Sheikh , 2016 ; Pong , Johnston , & Chen , 2010 ; Wischerth , Mulvaney , Brackett , & Perkins , 2016 ) . As for creativity , existing studies generally supported a negative role of authoritarian parenting style as well as a positive role of authoritative and permissive parenting style in creativity . For example , Nichols ( 1964 ) showed that authoritarian was negatively related to creativity . Miller , Lambert , and Speirs Neumeister ( 2012 ) demonstrated that permissive parenting style was positively associated with creativity , while authoritarian parenting style was negatively associated with creativity . Mozafari ( 2014 ) indicated a negative relationship between authoritarian style and creativity as well as a positive relationship between authoritative style and creativity . Mehrinejad , Rajabimoghadam , & Tarsa ﬁ ( 2015 ) recently showed that authoritative parenting style could positively predict creativity ; while authoritarian parenting style could negatively predict creativity . However , it should also be noted that , there were still controversial and mixed ﬁ ndings regarding the relationship of parenting styles and creativity . For instance , in Fearon , Copeland , and Saxon ( 2013 ) study , although the negative relationship between authoritarian parenting style and creativity was replicated , no e ﬀ ect of authoritative and permissive parenting style was observed . In Mozafari ( 2014 ) study , it has been shown that permissive style could negatively predict creativity , rather than positively predict creativity . Moreover , Mehrinejad et al . ( 2015 ) also did not reveal a relationship between permissive parenting style and creativity . 1 . 3 . The present study As seen from the above literature review , previous research on the role of DRD2 or parenting style in creativity has both produced mixed results . Although there are many possible explanations for the con ﬂ icting ﬁ ndings ( e . g . sample size , age , and gender ) , the discrepancy might also arise from the neglect of contributions of potential gene - environment interactions . Gene – environment S . Si et al . Thinking Skills and Creativity 27 ( 2018 ) 64 – 77 65