Biophysical Journal Volume 65 July 1993 316 - 324 Cellular Motions and Thermal Fluctuations : The Brownian Ratchet Charles S . Peskin , * Garrett M . Odell , * and George F . Oster § * Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences , New York , New York 10012 ; tDepartment of Zoology , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington 98195 ; § Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology , and Entomology , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 USA ABSTRACT We present here a model for how chemical reactions generate protrusive forces by rectifying Brownian motion . This sort of energy transduction drives a number of intracellular processes , including filopodial protrusion , propulsion of the bacterium Listeria , and protein translocation . INTRODUCTION Many types of cellular protrusions , including filopodia , lamellipodia , and acrosomal extension do not appear to in - volve molecular motors . These processes transduce chemical bond energy into directed motion , but they do not operate in a mechanochemical cycle and need not depend directly upon nucleotide hydrolysis . In this paper we describe several such processes and present simple formulas for the velocity and force they generate . We shall call these machines " Brownian ratchets " ( BR ) because rectified Brownian motion is funda - mental to their operation . ' The systems we address here are different from those usually considered protein motors ( e . g . , myosin , dynein , kinesin ) , but such motors may be Brownian ratchets as well ( 1 - 4 ) . Consider a particle diffusing in one dimension with dif - fusion coefficient D . The mean time it takes a particle to diffuse from the origin , x = 0 , to the point x = 8 is : T = 02 / 2D . Now , suppose that a domain extending from x = 0 to x = L is subdivided into N = 116 subintervals , and that each boundary , x = n X 6 , n = 1 , 2 , . . . , N is a " ratchet " : the particle can pass freely through a boundary from the left , but having once passed it cannot go back ( i . e . , the boundary is absorbing from the left , but reflecting from the right ) . The physical mechanism of the ratchet depends on the situation ; for example , the particle may be prevented from reversing its motion by a polymerizing fiber to its left . The time to diffuse a length 8 is T8 = 82 / 2D . Then the time to diffuse a distance L = N X 6 is simply N X TS : T = N X Ta = N ( 62 / 2D ) = L ( 812D ) . The average velocity of the particle is v LIT , and so the average speed of a particle that is " ratcheted " at intervals 8 is 2D V = a . , Receivedforpublication 16November 1992 and infinalform 8 March 1993 . Address reprint requests to Charles S . Peskin at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences , 251 Mercer St . , New York , New York 10012 . C 1993 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 93 / 07 / 316 / 09 $ 2 . 00 1 To avoid confusion we reserve the term " thermal ratchet " to denote engines that employ a temperature gradient . Brownian ratchets operate isothennally , with chemical energy replacing thermal gradients as the energy source . This is the speed of a perfect BR . Note that as the ratchet interval , 8 , decreases , the ratchet velocity increases . This is because the frequency of smaller Brownian steps grows more rapidly than the step size shrinks ( when 8 is of the order of a mean free path , then this formula obviously breaks down ) . Several ingredients must be added to this simple expres - sion to make it useful in real situations . First , the ratchet cannot be perfect : a particle crossing a ratchet boundary may occasionally cross back . Second , in order to perform work , the ratchet must operate against a force resisting the motion . To characterize the mechanics of the BR we shall derive load - velocity relationships similar to the Hill curve that sum - marizes the mechanics of muscle contraction . HOW DOES POLYMERIZATION PUSH ? In discussions of cell motility it is frequently asserted that the polymerization of actin or of microtubules can exert a me - chanical force . This assertion is usually buttressed by ther - modynamic arguments that show that the free energy drop accompanying polymerization is adequate to account for the mechanical force required ( 5 ) . Aside from the fact that ther - modynamics applies only to equilibrium situations , such ar - guments provide no mechanistic explanation of how the free energy of polymerization is actually transduced into directed mechanical force . Here we present a mechanical picture of how polymerizing filaments can exert mechanical forces . Filopodia Janmey was able to load actin monomers into liposomes and trigger their polymerization ( 6 ) . He observed that the poly - merizing fibers extruded long spikes resembling filopodia from the otherwise spherical liposomes . A similar phenom - enon was described by Miyamoto and Hotani ( 7 ) using tu - bulin . This demonstrates that polymerization can exert an axial force capable of overcoming the bending energy of a lipid bilayer without the aid of molecular motors such as myosin . Using a bilayer bending modulus of B = 2 X 10 - 12 dyne - cm ( 8 , 9 ) , the energy required to elongate a lipid cylinder of radius 50 nm from zero length to 5 , um long is 316 Brownian Ratchet - 2 X 104 kBT . 2 Since we are dealing with thermal motions , henceforth we will express all energetic quantities in terms of kBT - 4 . 1 X 10 - 14 dyne - cm , where kB is Boltzmann ' s constant and T is the absolute temperature . The free energy change accompanying actin polymerization is AG - - 14 kBT / monomer ( 10 ) . So , polymerization can provide suffi - cient free energy to drive membrane deformation ( 5 , 11 ) . The BR model provides an explanation for how this free energy is transduced into an axial force . Consider the ratchet shown in Fig . 1 . An actin rod poly - merizes against a barrier ( e . g . , a membrane ) whose mobility we characterize by its diffusion coefficient , D . We model a polymerizing actin filament as a linear array of monomers ; here , the ratchet mechanism is the intercalation of monomers between the barrier and the polymer tip . Denote the gap width between the tip of the rod and the barrier by x , and the size of a monomer is indicated by 8 . When a sufficiently large fluctuation occurs the gap opens wide enough to allow a monomer to polymerize onto the end of the rod . The poly - merization rate is given by R = kon ( X ) X M - f , where M is the local monomer concentration and kon ( x ) X M , reflects the conditional probability of adding a monomer when the gap width is x . We set k , n ( X ) X M = a when x 2 8 , and kon ( X ) x M = 0 when x < 6 . If no barrier were present , actin could polymerize at a maximum velocity of 6 X R - 0 . 75 , um / s at 25 , uM concentration of actin monomers ( 12 ) . Cel - lular filopodia protrude at velocities about 0 . 16 , um / s ( 13 ) , well below the maximum polymerization rate . In Appendix A we show that the polymerization BR obeys the equation ac a 2c IfD \ ac x D2 + kT ) yx + a [ c ( x + 8 , t ) - H ( x - 8 ) c ( x , t ) ] + 3 [ H ( x - 8 ) c ( x - 6 , t ) - c ( x , t ) ] ( 1 ) where c ( x , t ) is the density of systems in an ensemble at po - sition x and time t . Here D is the diffusion coefficient of the particle , - f is the load force ( i . e . , to the left , opposing the motion ) , H ( x - 6 ) is the Heaviside step function ( = 0 for x < 6 , and = 1 for x > 8 ) . The boundary conditions are that x = 0 is reflecting and that c ( x , t ) is continuous at x = 8 . The 2 If we model a filopod as a cylinder with a hemispherical cap , then we can compute how much energy it takes to form such a structure from a planar bilayer . Using B - 5OkBT , the energy required to bend a membrane into a hemispherical cap is W = 47rB - 600 kBT . To create a membrane cylinder of radius 50 nm and L = 1 , im costs - 3000 kBT / jim . To elongate by 1 ratchet distance , 8 = 2 . 5 nm , against a membrane tension ofabout o = 0 . 035 dyne / cm ( equivalent to a load force of - 11 pN ) costs - 6 . 6 kBT , so that a protrusion of 5 , um requires - 1 . 3 X 104 kBT of work . Thus the total work to create a filopod 5 , Lm long and 50 - nm radius = 2 x 104 kBT The binding energy of an actin monomer is - - 13 . 6 kBT / monomer , making the process 8 / 13 . 6 - 60 % efficient . Each monomer , before attaching to the filament , binds one ATP which is hydrolyzed sometime after the monomer attaches . Each hydrolysis yields about AG - 15 - 20 kBT / mol - 62 pN - nm / ATP ; if we were to add this to the ATP ; contribution we would have a total free energy drop of AG - - 30 kBT / monomer . However , since ATP is hydrolyzed after polymerization its contribution to force generation is not important . The viscous work against the fluid medium is inconsequential compared to the bending energy , so we can neglect it in this estimate . 0 . 4 0 . 3 v [ JIm / eec ] 0 . 2 - 0 . 1 0z 0 Actin Filament a | x K , 2 3 4 5 ( O = f 8 kiiT FIGURE 1 The polymerization ratchet . An actin filament polymerizes against a barrier with diffusion constant D upon which a load , f , acts . Be - cause the filaments are arranged in a paired helix , we model the ratchet distance , 8 , as half the size of a monomer . The the graphs shows the speed of the polymerization ratchet , v ( , um / s ) , driven by a single actin filament , as a function of dimensionless load force , w = f X 8 / kB . The solid line is based on Eq . 2 , the formula for the ratchet speed when depolymerization is negligible ( 3 - * 0 ) . The curve was plotted by using , as a parameter , i . e . , , - [ w ( A ) , v ( , u ) ] . The dashed line is based on Eq . 3 , valid when poly - merization is much slower than diffusion , a 82 / D < < 1 and 3 82 / D < < 1 . The rate constants were taken from Pollard ( 12 ) for actin polymerization : a = kon X M = 11 . 3 [ 1 / s X , iM ] X 10 [ , uM ] , 3 = 1 . 6 [ I / s ] , 8 = ( monomer size ) / 2 - 2 . 7 x 10 - 7 cm , since actin is a double helix ) . We used a load diffusivity of D = 1 x 10 - 9 cm2 / s , corresponding to a disk of diameter - 2 . 5 Am . Filopodial velocites are below 0 . 16 , Am / s ( 13 ) , which is about 20 % of the maximum polymerization velocity , 8 X ( a - 13 ) = 8 X ( ko0 X M - k0ff ) - 0 . 76 , im / s ( 12 , 27 ) . From Eq . 4 , the stall force for a single actin fiber isfo - 7 . 8 pN . A filopod composed of 20 filaments presumably could exert 20 times this force . steady state solution to Eq . 1 gives the force - velocity relation if we define the ratchet velocity by afc c ( x ) dx - Bf ' c ( x ) dx v6 = 8 f c ( x ) dx ) ( i . e . , we weight the polymerization velocity by the proba - bility of a 6 - sized gap ) . When depolymerization can be ne - glected , i . e . , 3 < < a , which is the case for actin polymer - ization , we obtain the load - velocity relationship : 2D G , - ( l ) ( w2 / 2 ) v _ = ( e 1 ) co + co 1 ) j1 ( 2 ) where w is the dimensionless work done against the load in adding one monomer : co = f X 8 / kBT , and gw , ^ , a , D ) > w is given by solving a transcendental equation , , L - X = ( a 82 / D ) [ 1 - exp ( - , u ) ] ) / , u . Fig . 1 shows a plot of v ( X ) . If the polymerization and depolymerization velocities are much slower than the ideal ratchet velocity , i . e . , a X 8 , 3 x 8 < < 2D / 6 , then the ratchet equation can be solved explicitly for 3 $ 0 . The result is a startlingly simple formula : v = 8 [ ote - ' - ] ( 3 ) That is , the polymerization rate , a = klc , X M , is weighted by the probability of the load allowing a monomer - sized gap , 6 . Note that in this limit the ratchet velocity does not depend Peskin et al . 317 Volume 65 July 1993 on the diffusion coefficient of the load . Membrane tensions fall in the range 0 . 035 - 0 . 039 dyne / cm , which amount to a load force of about 25 pN . A filopod of 20 filaments could produce a thrust 20 times as strong as a single filament , or about 200 pN . The force required to stall the ratchet is found by setting v = 0 in Eq . 3 , which yields the familiar ther - modynamic relationship ( 3 / a = exp ( - f X 8 / kBT ) , or fo - B In ( I ) ( 4 ) This formula for the stall force is exact ; it remains valid for all parameter values , even those that violate the assumptions used in deriving Eq . 3 . Two observations support the BR model for filopodial growth . First , the velocity of extension is almost constant ( 13 ) , unlike the acrosomal extension of Thyone sperm , in which length grows as the square root of time ( 14 - 19 ) . The BR mechanism produces a constant velocity provided that the polymerization affinity is constant . Eventually , the filo - pod may grow long enough so that the diffusion of actin monomers to the tip is limiting , in which case the velocity will decrease . Second , experiments by Bray et al . ( 20 ) dem - onstrated that filopodial extension velocities actually in - creased somewhat with external osmolarity . This is consis - tent with the BR mechanism , since pulling water out of the cell will concentrate the actin monomers , thus increasing the affinity for a time , and hence the ratchet velocity . This con - trasts with acrosomal protrusion of Thyone wherein increas - ing the external osmolarity decreases protrusion velocities ( 17 - 19 ) . However , once a filopod grows long enough so that diffusion limits the concentration of actin monomers at the tip , the protrusion velocity will fall to zero quite quickly . The BR formula omits an important feature : proteins are flexible , elastic structures , whose internal fluctuations sig - nificantly affect their motions . In the ratchet formula ( 2 ) the rod is assumed to be stiff and the gap width depends solely on the diffusion of the barrier . However , since the actin monomers are themselves flexible , Brownian motion will induce thermal " breathing " modes which will contribute to the gap width . There is no simple way to include this into the model ; however , we can use numerical simulations to in - vestigate elastic effects in particular situations . We have per - formed a molecular dynamics simulation of this situation using the parameters for actin ; the details ofthis computation will be published elsewhere . We find that for rod lengths of more than 50 - 100 monomers the fluctuations within the rod can compress the rod enough to permit polymerization even if the barrier is too large to diffuse appreciably . In this sit - uation the elastic compression energy generated by thermal motions is the proximal origin of the force . Listeria propulsion The bacterium Listeria monocytogenes moves through the cytoplasm of its host cell with velocities typically between 0 . 02 and 0 . 2 , um / s ( 21 ) , but as fast as 1 . 5 , um / s in some cells ( 22 , 23 ) . As it moves , it trails a long tail of polymerized actin consisting of many short fibers cross - linked into a mesh - work ; the fibers are oriented predominantly with the barbed end in the direction of motion ( 22 , 23 ) . Using fluorescent photoactivation Theriot et al . ( 21 ) were able to visualize the tail as the bacterium moved . They found that the tail re - mained stationary , and that actin inserted into the tail mesh - work adjacent to the bacterial body . Taken together , these observations suggest that actin polymerization may drive bacterial movement ( 21 , 24 ) . We propose that Listeria is driven by the BR mechanism : the polymerizing tail rectifies the random thermal motions of the bacterium , preventing it from diffusing backwards , but permitting forward diffusion . In this view the tail doesn ' t actually push the bacterium : propulsion is simply Brownian diffusion rendered unidirectional by the polymerization of the actin tail . This could work in several ways . For example , assume the bacterium diffuses as a Stokes particle of size - 1 , um ( 25 ) , and the polymerization rate constants are the same as we used in the filopod calculation ( 12 , 26 ) . If the elastic resistance of the cell ' s dense actin gel is the major imped - iment to the bacterium ' s motion , it may be reasonable to ascribe the load force to this elastic resistance . Then the ratchet formula predicts velocities in the correct range work - ing against a load of a few piconewtons . The velocity de - pends on the effective concentration of actin monomers near the bacterium . The in vitro concentration is unknown , but is likely to be much higher than at the tip of a filopod . Using an effective local concentration of 50 , tM ( 27 ) , the stall force for a single actin fiber isfo - 9 pN , about six times the force generated by a myosin crossbridge . Since the tail consists of many fibers , whose orientations are not collinear , we cannot directly compute the thrust of the tail without knowledge of the fiber number and orientation distributions . All we can say is that the computed load - velocity curve shows that one fiber would be sufficient to drive a 1 - , um bacterium at 1 . 5 , um / s against a load of 1 pN . This calculation assumes that the Brownian motion of the bacterium is the same as it would be in fluid cytoplasm . However , the average mesh size of the cortical actin gel is in the neighborhood of 0 . 1 , uim , about 1 / 10th the size of the bacterium , and so the gel may constrain the bacterium ' s Brownian motion substantially . This can pro - duce an apparent cytoplasmic viscosity of more than 100 poise , which would reduce the ratchet velocity considerably . However , molecular dynamics simulations demonstrate that the elastic breathing modes of the actin tail fibers discussed above can still drive the motion of the bacterium at the ob - served velocities . We will report on these simulations else - where . According to the BR mechanism the speed of the BR de - pends on the polymerization rate of actin , although it is not driven directly by the polymerization . The faster the bacte - rium can recruit actin from the cytoplasmic pool the faster the bacterium moves and the longer the tail grows . Theriot and Mitchison ( 21 ) found that the velocity was proportional to tail length . In Appendix C we show that this linear rela - tionship between velocity and tail length holds quite gener - ally , regardless of the mechanism of force generation . Using Biophysical Journal 318 Brownian Ratchet a laser trap it should be possible to measure the stall force as a function of monomer concentration , which Eq . 4 predicts should vary as f0 - ln ( M ) . In vivo values of diffusion co - efficients and monomer concentrations may be quite differ - ent from those in vitro ; and so our computed load - velocity curve is probably not too accurate . In order to characterize the Listeria BR motor , it is necessary to design experiments to measure accurately the diffusion coefficient of a " dead " bacterium along with the in situ polymerization rates and the fiber orientations . A possible analog of the Listeria system was reported re - cently by Forscher et al . ( 28 ) : polycationic beads dropped onto the surface of certain cells commenced to move in the plane of the membrane at speeds of about 0 . 16 , um / s . Closer inspection revealed a tail of polymerized actin streaming be - hind the moving bead . This resembles the tail of Listeria , and it is tempting to assert that this too is a manifestation of the Brownian ratchet mechanism . PROTEIN TRANSLOCATION Recently , we proposed that post - translational translocation of a protein across a membrane may be driven by a BR ( 29 ) . PERMISSIVEPROCESSES ChaperomnT ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ a " _ M . FIGURE 2 ( a ) Diffusion of a protein through the translocation pore depends on permissive events on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane and ratcheting events on the lumenal side . In or - der to enter the pore the protein must be main - tained in an extended state . This is accomplished for postranslational translocation by binding of chaperonins , and for cotranslational translocation by the ribosomal tunnel ( the drawing is not in - tended to imply the two act concurrently ) . On the lumenal side the reptation of the protein through the pore can be ratcheted by several processes : disulfide bond formation , glycosylation , and con - ditions that enhance chain coiling , including dif - ferences in pH , ionic strength across the mem - brane , and cleavage of the signal sequence . ( b ) The dimensionless load - velocity curve for the translocation ratchet . X = f X S / kB is the dimen - sionless load . The maximum velocity and stall load are given by Eqs . 6 and 7 . KIlbowome t untici V Vmax 1 . 0 t Max 0 We addressed the process that begins after the proximal tip of the protein is threaded through the translocation pore ( 30 ) . Brownian motion causes the protein to fluctuate back and forth through the pore , but with no net displacement in either direction ( analogous to a reptating polymer ( 31 ) ) . If a chem - ical modification of the protein occurs on the distal side of the membrane which inhibits the chain from reptating back through the pore , the chain will be ratcheted . The model assumes that the protein is maintained in an unfolded con - formation so that it is free to fluctuate back and forth through the translocation pore . This is accomplished in the cell by the ribosomal tunnel in the case of cotranslational translocation , and by chaperonins in the case of post - translational trans - location . There are several known chemical asymmetries that can bias the Brownian walk of a chain ( cf . Fig . 2 ) ( 29 , 32 - 34 ) . As a polypeptide emerges from the translocation apparatus the chain is subjected to glycosylation , formation of disulfide bonds , cleavage of the signal sequence ( which affects folding of the chain , and binding of chaperonins ) . Any , or all , of these can induce the asymmetry in the system required for the BR . This multiplicity of ratchet mechanisms may explain why different laboratories have attributed the translocation motor RATCHET PROCESSES Trani1ocatfom OChaperonin | ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ COILING : * ApH e A ( lonic streCfgth ) S inal ee . tuenc clcavaoc * ~ ~ ~ Ielulfide ATF ' aSe O onding Glycosylat ; on ( a ) 2D 1 8 1 + 2K 1 . 2 k , OT fo ~ ~ k8T In 1 + + 8 ( b ) 319 Peskin et al . Volume 65 July 1993 to different constituents of the translocation machinery , and why almost any protein can be translocated if given the proper signal sequence . This ratchet is somewhat different from the polymeriza - tion BR considered above since there are many ratcheting sites rather than one . In Appendix B we derive a force - velocity relationship for the translocation ratchet in the case where the ratchet mechanism is the binding of chaperonins on the luminal side of the translocation pore . Since the mo - tion of each segment is equivalent we consider an ensemble of points diffusing on a circle of circumference equal to the length of a ratchet segment of the polymer , 8 . As before , each point is subject to a force - f which imparts a drift velocity - f X D / kBT . Points are in rapid equilibrium between two states : SO i± S1 , with rate constants kon and koff . Points in state SO pass freely through the origin in both directions , but points in state S1 are ratcheted : they cannot cross back across the origin . Let p be the probability of finding a point in state SI : p = kon / ( kon + kOff ) . Then we can write the net flux of points as + ( x , t ) = - ( DflkT ) c - D ( ac / dx ) , where c ( x , t ) is the den - sity of points at position x and time t . + ( x ) satisfies the steady state conservation equation ( a4 / ax ) = 0 , with boundary conditions 4 ( O ) = 4 ( 6 ) , and c ( 8 ) = ( 1 - p ) X c ( O ) . ( The latter boundary condition is not self - evident ; it is derived in Ap - pendix B . ) We solve for c ( x ) and define the average velocity as v = 54 / N , where N = f ' c ( x , t ) dx is the total number of points in the ensemble . The result is : 1 / 2 12 v = eZ ( 5 ) 1K ( ew - 1 ) Lk ( ew - 1 ) ( 5 where Cl is defined as before , and the parameter is the dis - sociation constant of the chaperonins . The maximum ( no load ) velocity and the stall load are : 2D 1 max 8 1 + 2K ' ( 6 ) kBT ( I f0 = - lnl + KJ . ( 7 ) Note that even when K = 1 , translocation still proceeds at a finite rate , whereas the polymerization ratchet stalls even in the no - load condition when a = , B . A typical force - velocity curve computed from Eq . 5 is plotted in Fig . 2 . Equation 5 has two important limitations . First , it assumes that the rates kon and k0ff are very fast , and second , that the ratchet is in - elastic . The effect of elasticity cannot be handled analyti - cally ; however , numerical studies show that an elastic chain translocates faster than a rigid chain ( 29 ) . This is because local fluctuations can carry a subunit through the pore to be ratcheted without translocating the entire chain . Note that Eq . 6 implies that the average translocation time for a free chain of length L is T = Llv a L X 8 ; for a chain of length L = n X 8 , Ta 82 . Numerical simulations show that this quadratic dependence on ratchet distance is obeyed for elastic chains as well ( 29 ) . Since there is no obvious load force resisting translocation , we can use Eq . 6 to put some quantitative bounds on the translocation time of a protein . For example , the slowest time corresponds to the situation where one end is just threaded through the translocation pore and translocation is completed when the other end passes through the translation pore . Tak - ing 8 - 100 nm as the length of an unfolded protein , and D - 10 - 8 cm2 / s as the longitudinal diffusion coefficient , the translocation time is - 5 ms ; but if the chain is ratcheted every 5 nm , the transit time is 0 . 25 ms - faster by a factor of 20 . This estimate of T is probably too short , since the one - dimensional formula ( 6 ) cannot take into account the effects of chain coiling ; for this a full three - dimensional calculation must be carried out . Also , Eq . 5 neglects the effect of chain elasticity , which significantly adds to the translocation ve - locity . Thus , both our numerical and analytical calculations demonstrate that the BR mechanism is more than sufficient to account for the observed rates of translocation . Recent experiments by Ooi and Weiss ( 35 ) have confirmed the pre - dictions of the BR model . They found that proteins targeted to liposomes could translocate bidirectionally through the translocation pore . However , if the lumen contained the chaperonin BiP , or if lumenal glycosylation was enabled , proteins translocated unidirectionally . There are several other phenomena that are possibly driven by rectified diffusion . For example , the polymerization of sickle hemoglobin into the rods that deform the erythrocyte membrane appear similar to filopod protrusion ( 36 ) , and probably derive their thrust from the same mechanism . Fi - nally , in vitro model systems show that depolymerizing microtubules can drive kinetochore movements toward the minus end at velocities of - 0 . 5 , um / s and exert forces on the order of - 10 - 5 dyne ( 37 ) . Koshland et al . ( 37 ) describe a qualitative model for how depolymerization could drive kinetochore movement , and Hill and Kirschner ( 5 ) have shown that such movements are thermodynamically feasible . The BR model fills in the mechanical mechanism , and Eq . 5 may apply to this phenomenon as well . DISCUSSION The notion that biased Brownian motion drives certain bi - ological motions is not new : Huxley implied as much in his 1957 model for myosin ( 38 ) , and later authors have proposed similar models for other molecular motors ( 1 - 4 , 39 ) . The model we present here differs from these in two respects . Physically , we are modeling mechanisms that do not operate in the same thermodynamic cycle as do molecular motors . Rather they are " one - shot " engines ; for example , after pro - trusion of a filopod the polymers must be disassembled and the process started anew . Mathematically , we do not treat the motion as a biased random walk , as in Feynman ' s " thermal ratchet " machine ( 40 ) . Biased random walk models assume asymmetric jump probabilities in either direction at each step ; in the limit of small step sizes this produces a contin - uous drift velocity proportional to the difference in jump 320 Biophysical Journal Brownian Ratchet probabilities ( 41 ) . By contrast , we assume that the jump probabilities are symmetric , and so diffusion is unbiased . Only when diffusion crosses a ratchet threshold does the motion become ratcheted . Perhaps these differences do not distinguish between ther - mal mechanisms in any fundamental way , for thermal fluc - tuations participate in all chemical reactions and , ultimately , the BR mechanism derives its free energy from chemical reactions : actin polymerization in the case of Listeria and fllopodial motion , and by a variety of processes in protein translocation , including binding of chaperonins , post - translational coiling , glycosylation , etc . As in Huxley ' s model and its relatives , the proximal force for movement arises from random thermal fluctuations , while the chemical potential release accompanying reactions serves to rectify the thermal motions of the load ( e . g . , Refs . 2 and 42 ) . For ex - ample , the binding free energy of a monomer to the end of an actin filament must be tight enough to prevent the load from back diffusion . If AGb were - kBT , the residence time of the monomer would be short and the site would likely be empty when the load experiences a reverse fluctuation , or , if the site is occupied , the force of its collision with the load would dislodge the monomer . Hence the concentration of monomers and the binding energy of polymerization supply the free energy to implement the ratchet . Thus these pro - cesses do not violate the Second Law ; rather they use chem - ical bond energy to bias the available thermal fluctuations to drive the ratchet . APPENDICES A . The polymerization ratchet In this appendix we derive the load - velocity relation for the polymerization ratchet . Consider the situation shown in Fig . 3 . A particle diffuses in one dimension ahead of a growing polymer . We put the origin of our coordinate system on the tip of the polymer so that the distance between the tip and the diffusing particle is x . The particle executes a continuous random walk ( Brownian motion ) with diffusion coefficient D in a constant force field , - f , which imparts a drift velocity - DflkBT . When - ever the distance between the particle and the tip of the polymer exceeds the size of a monomer , 6 , there is a probability / unit time a = k . , , , , X ( mono - mer concentration ) that a monomer will polymerize onto the tip , extending the length of the polymer by S . This is equivalent to the particle jumping from x - - x - 8 , since x is the distance between the particle and the tip of the polymer . Regardless of the position of the diffusing particle , there is a probability / unit time f3 = k0ff of a monomer dissociating from the tip of the polymer . This is equivalent to the particle jumping from x - 3 x + 8 . We describe the mean behavior of a large ensemble of such particle - polymer systems by defining a density c ( x , t ) , such that fb c ( x , t ) dx = number of systems in the ensemble for which x is in the interval ( a , b ) at time t . Consulting the transition diagram in Fig . 3 , one can see that c ( x , t ) obeys the following pair of diffusion equations : ac a 2c Df ac - = D - + - + ac ( x + 8 , t ) - , ( 3c ( x , t ) , x < 8 at ax kT ax ( Al ) ac a2c Dfdc dt = D - x2 + - + a [ c ( x + 6 , t ) - c ( x , t ) ] at ax kBTaX + P3 [ C ( X - 8 , t ) - c ( x , t ) ] , x > 8 ( A2 ) With the help of the Heaviside step function , these may be written as a single equation , as has been done in the text ( Eq . 1 ) . We will assume that the free energy of polymerization is sufficiently large that a monomercannot be knocked off if the load fluctuates to the left and hits the tip . Thus we can impose the reflecting boundary condition at x = 0 as follows . ac ( O , t ) Df - D - C ( O , t ) = 0 ax kB T ( A3 ) We also impose the condition that c ( x , t ) be continuous atx = 8 ( this turns out to ensure that the flux is continuous at x = 8 as well ) : c ( S . , t ) = c ( 8 + , t ) . ( A4 ) Once a steady state solution c ( x ) has been found for a given load force f , the velocity corresponding to that load is found as follows . af ; c ( x ) dx - A f c ( x ) dx vf = x8 x 0 " O c ( x ) dx ( A5 ) w - f 28 38 I . . 1 I0 - + x as - _ I . . . I I o0 . x x + 6 - j FIGURE 3 Transition diagram for Eqs . Al and A2 . This is because fl c ( x ) dx is the total number of systems in the ensemble and f | c ( x ) dx is the number of systems for which the gap between the diffusing particle and the polymer tip is large enough for monomer insertion . Thus af , c ( x ) dx - Of o c ( x ) dx is the net rate of polymerization ( number of monomers inserted minus the number of monomers removed / unit time ) for the ensemble as a whole . Dividing by the number of systems in the ensemble , we obtain the net rate of polymerization / system ( i . e . , per polymer chain ) . Finally , we multiply by the monomer size , 8 , to convert this rate to the velocity with which the polymer tip advances . As a result of this entire computation , we obtain the formula for the mean polymerization velocity as a function of the load force f , as given in the text ( Eq . 2 ) . B . The translocation ratchet The situation for the translocation ratchet is somewhat different from that of the polymerization ratchet and requires a separate analysis . Consider a rod diffusing longitudinally along the x axis with diffusion coefficient D . A force , - f , is applied to the end of the rod which imparts a drift velocity - ( f / C ) = - ( DkB T ) f , where ; is the frictional drag coefficient . The rod carries ratchet sites which are equally spaced and have separation 8 between adjacent sites . We assume that a ratchet site can freely cross the origin from left to right . In the case of a perfect ratchet , we assume that each ratchet site , C x < 8 321 Peskin et al . a a I . x . 81 x x 8 Volume 65 July 1993 ( B1 ) and hence the entire rod , is reflected every time a ratchet site attempts to cross the origin from right to left . In the case of an imperfect ratchet , such reflection is not certain , but is assigned a probability , p . In either case , analysis of the situation is facilitated by introducing a variable X ( t ) = po - sition of the first site to the right ofthe origin , so that X ( t ) is always in ( 0 , 6 ) . Then X ( t ) describes a ( continuous ) random walk on a circular domain with a rectifying ( or partially rectifying ) condition at the origin ( see Fig . 4 ) . The perfect translocation ratchet Consider an ensemble of such rods , and let c ( x , t ) be the density of the variable X ( t ) , defined above , so that fb c ( x , t ) = number of rods in the interval : a < X ( t ) < b . Then the flux of rods at a point x is as follows . Df ac 4 ) - - c - D - . kB T ax The density and flux satisfy the following conservation equation . ac a4 _ c + ao = O at ax The boundary conditions for this system are as follows . 4 ) ( 0 , t ) = 0 ( s , t ) ( B3 ) c ( 6 , t ) = 0 ( B4 ) The first condition expresses the fact that a new ratchet appears at x = O each time an old one disappears at x = 8 . The second condition expresses the fact that x = 6 is an absorbing boundary , since the ratchet is perfect . We shall consider only steady states , in which c and 4 are independent of time . Then , since ac / at = 0 , we also have a8 / ax = 0 , and so 4 is an unknown constant . The concentration , c ( x , t ) is obtained by solving Eq . B 1 with the boundary condition ( Eq . B4 ) . The solution is : C ( X ) = BT4 [ _ f ( - x ) 1 ] . c ( ) Df [ kB T ( B5 ) The number of rods in the ensemble can expressed in terms of the flux , 4 ) : N 4 ) 62 rkBTc ( x / dfxfD ] N = c ( x ) dx = f - exp kI ( B6 ) The flux 4 is the average rate at which ratchet sites cross the origin ( from left to right ) in the ensemble as a whole . Thus 4IN is the corresponding rate for an individual rod . Since the rod moves a distance 8 foreach site ratcheted , the mean velocity of the rod is 8 X 4 / N . Thus we may compute the average velocity of the perfect translocation ratchet as ( 2D & o2 / 2 V T 8 ( e l - 1 ) - w ( B7 ) ( B2 ) where w = ( f 8 / kB T ) . At zero load this reduces to the ideal ratchet velocity ( B2 ) v = ( 2D / 8 ) . Note that as a consequence of assuming that the ratchet is perfect there is no force that will bring the ratchet to a halt . To circumvent this feature we generalize the model as follows . The imperfect translocation ratchet Suppose that each site which is located on x > 0 can exist in two states that are in rapid equilibrium : k0ff So 2 : : . SI ( B8 ) k m tkoff ~ ~ ~ ~ ( n a - ) - * = f ( a ) cr ( 6 , t ) cr ( O , t ) rA l Il I P . I c I ( 6 , t ) LI - p - c1 ( O , t ) , - I I I x = 8 x = O and that only sites in the state SI are ratcheted . Thus sites in state SO pass freely through the origin in both directions , but sites in state SI are reflected . Let p be the probability of finding a ratchet in state SI : ( B9 ) k + n kon + k , ff where k0n and k0ff are the rate constants for the transitions between the two states . The results of this section are valid in the limit k0n - x oo , koff - 00 , but in such a way that p has a finite limit . As a physical example of an imperfect Brownian ratchet one may consider the case in which chap - eronin molecules are present in solution on the trans side of the mem - brane ( x > 0 ) and can bind reversibly to specific sites on a protein molecule . Such a site is assumed ratcheted ( State SI ) when a chaperonin molecule is bound . In an imperfect ratchet , Eqs . B 1 , B2 , and B3 still apply , but the boundary condition ( Eq . B4 ) is replaced by c ( 8 ) = ( 1 - p ) c ( O ) . ( B 1O ) The justification for this boundary condition is given below . Proceeding as before , we solve for c ( x ) , then N , and compute the velocity as follows . ( b ) FIGURE 4 ( a ) Geometry of the translocation ratchet . Binding sites for chaperonins are spaced 8 apart . ko , and kff are the binding and dissociation rate constants , respectively . ( b ) Transition diagram for deriving the bound - ary condition ( B27 ) . 2D [ / 2 v - 1 ) ) ( B 11 ) Here w = ( f8 / kB T ) is the work done against the load forcef when the ratchet moves one unit , 8 , and K = ( 1 - p ) lp = kOff / kO ) is the dissociation constant of the ratchet . The shape of the load - velocity curve is concave , Biophysical Journal 322 t 8 N I Brownian Ratchet decreasing from a no - load velocity of Vmax = ( 2D / 8 ) ( 1 / 1 + 2K ) to a stall velocity atfo = ( kBT / S ) ln ( l + ( 1 / K ) ) . For the ranges of parameters we shall employ , the force - velocity curve is practically linear and can be ap - proximated by VVmax Dfo I + 2K ( ln ( ( K + I ) / K ) ) ( B12 ) Deriviation of the boundary condition The boundary condition c ( 8 ) = ( 1 - p ) c ( O ) is crucial to the derivation of the ratchet equation . To see where it comes from we proceed as follows . The diffusion equation implies an infinite speed for a Brownian particle and equal probabilities of stepping to the right or left ( 41 ) . Therefore , we ex - amine the limit of a finite speed random walk by defining density functions for points moving to the right , cr ( x , t ) , and to the left , cl ( x , t ) . with speed s . These obey the conservation equations : acr ac + s d YxIrCr + YrICI ( B13 ) at ax c ac , - d = ' YrCr - YrICI ( B14 ) at ax Here Yrl and Ylr are the probabilities per unit time of a point changing direction from left to right and right to left , respectively . We shall solve these equations on the circular domain ( 0 , 8 ) using the following transition rules at the origin x = 0 = 8 ( cf . Fig . 4 ) . Points moving to the right cross the origin and continue to the right . Leftward moving points encountering the bound - ary have a probability p of reversing their direction and a probability ( 1 - p ) of maintaining their direction . This translates into the following condi - tions on the fluxes of particles at the origin as follows . SCr ( 8 , t ) + sp x cI ( O , t ) = SCr ( O , t ) sc , ( S , t ) = s ( l - p ) X cI ( O , t ) Dividing by s and rearranging yields : Cr ( S , t ) = Cr ( O , t ) - pC ( O , t ) cI ( 8 , t ) = ( 1 - p ) X cI ( O , t ) . Rather than solving for c , and cl , we shall solve for their sum and dif - ference : C ( X , t ) = c1 ( X , t ) + cl ( X , t ) u ( x , t ) = c1 ( x , t ) - cl ( x , t ) . ( B 19 ) ( B20 ) Adding and subtracting the conservation equations yields : ac au - + s = 0 ( B21 ) at ax au ac + s - = vc - Yu ( B22 ) a9t ax where v = Yrl - yr , and - y = Yr , + - yr We can reduce this to a single equation in c ( x2t ) by eliminating the unknown u and defining S2 / y D and v / s - f / kBT as follows . 1 a2c ac c Df ac a2c ' y at2 + dt kBTdx ax2 ( B23 ) As s - X00 with D and f fixed , this becomes ac a2c Df ac - = D + - ( B24 ) at kB ) T x which is equivalent to Eqs . B 1 - B2 . The boundary condition for this equation may be deduced from Eqs . B17 and B18 ; it is as follows . c ( 8 , t ) = c ( 0 , t ) - p2c ( 0 , t ) = ( 1 - p ) X c ( 0 , t ) + p X u ( O , t ) . ( B25 ) This boundary condition contains the variable u , which we now show van - ishes in the limit considered above . Dividing the equation for au / at by y : I au sac { v _ . + _ _ - - I c - u . y at y ax ey ( B26 ) Now , let y a - * ( with D and f fixed ) , and note that sly = D - / iy - > 0 , v / , y = ( - Df / kBT ) ( l1s ) = ( - Df / kBT ) X ( 1 X \ / y ) - O 0 ( with D and f fixed ) . Therefore , u - O 0 as y - m 00 ; that is , as the reversal rate , y gets very large , the random walk becomes symmetric ( 41 ) . Since u - + 0 , the limiting form of the boundary condition on c is as follows . c ( s , t ) = ( 1 - p ) X c ( O , t ) ( B27 ) C . Listeria velocity is proportional to tail length Using fluorescently tagged actin monomers Theriot and Mitchison ( 21 ) demonstrated that the velocity of a bacterium varies linearly with the length of its actin tail . We can describe these experiments as follows . In the lab frame , the tail is stationary and the bacterium moves ( say , to the right ) at velocity v > 0 . In a coordinate system attached to the bacterium , the tail has velocity - v , and the posterior edge of the bacterium is located at some fixed position , say x = 0 . Let n ( x , t ) be the density of short actin filaments in the tail at position x and time t . Then the conservation equation for the fiber density is : an a - - - ( n X v ) = - , un an ax ( C1 ) ( B 15 ) where v is the bacterial velocity so that - v is the velocity of the tail relative ( B 16 ) to the bacterium , and p± is the local rate of actin depolymerization ; Eq . Cl holds on x < 0 . Let us consider the steady state situation , ( an / at ) = 0 . The boundary condition for this equation is simply that the flux of tail material CR17 at the bacterial interface is equal to the polymerization rate : ( D1 / ) ( B 18 ) v X n ( O ) = + - polymerization rate . ( C2 ) At steady state qi is constant and the solution to the conservation equation is n ( x ) = n ( O ) expQ± ) = expQ± ) , x < 0 . ( C3 ) Note that the space constant for the exponential decay of the tail density is L = v / pt ; in this sense , the length of the tail is proportional to v . Therefore , the length of the tail will be proportional to v , and the slope of the L vs . v curve simply measures the rate of depolymerization of the tail meshwork . Thus the linearity of velocity with tail length does not tell us anything about the mechanism of locomotion . We acknowledge J . Theriot , T . Mitchison , and P . Forscher for sharing un - published data with us , and P . Janmey , J . Hartwig , C . Cunningham , D . Lemer , J . Cohen , and S . Simon for their valuable comments and discussions . C . S . Peskin was supported by National Science Foundation ( NSF ) grant CHE - 9002146 . G . F . Oster was supported by NSF grant MCS - 8110557 . Both G . F . 0 . and C . S . P . acknowledge the support provided by MacArthur Foundation Fellowships . G . F . 0 . acknowledges the hospitality of the Neurosciences Institute at which part of this work was performed . G . M . 0 . acknowledges the Miller Institute at the University of California , Berkeley . 323 Peskin et al . 324 Biophysical Journal Volume 65 July 1993 REFERENCES 1 . Mitsui , T . , and H . Ohshima . 1988 . A self - induced model of myosin head motion in contracting muscle . I . Force - velocity relation and energy liberation . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 9 : 248 - 260 . 2 . Meister , M . , S . R . Caplan , and H . C . Berg . 1989 . Dynamics of a tightly coupled mechanism for flagellar rotation : bacterial motility , chemios - motic coupling , protonmotive force . Biophys . J . 55 : 905 - 914 . 3 . Cordova , N . , B . Ermentrout , and G . Oster . 1991 . The mechanics of motor molecules . I . The thermal ratchet model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 339 - 343 . 4 . Vale , R . D . , and F . Oosawa . 1990 . Protein motors and Maxwell ' s de - mons : does mechanochemical transduction involve a thermal ratchet ? Adv . Biophys . 26 : 97 - 134 . 5 . Hill , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1982 . Bioenergetics and kinetics of micro - tubule and actin filament assembly and disassembly . Int . Rev . Cytol . 78 : 1 - 125 . 6 . Janmey , P . , C . Cunningham , G . Oster , andT . Stossel . 1992 . Cytoskeletal networks and osmotic pressure in relation to cell structure and motility . In Swelling Mechanics : From Clays to Living Cells and Tissues . T . Karalis , editor . Springer - Verlag , Heidelberg . 7 . Miyamoto , H . , and H . Hotani . 1988 . Polymerization of microtubules within liposomes produces morphological change of their shapes . In Taniguchi International Symposium on Dynamics of Microtubules . H . Hotani , editor . The Taniguchi Foundation , Taniguchi , Japan . 220 - 242 . 8 . Bo , L . , and R . E . Waugh . 1989 . Determination of bilayer membrane bending stiffness by tether formation from giant , thin - walled vesicles . Biophys . J . 55 : 509 - 517 . 9 . Duwe , H . , J . Kaes , and E . Sackmann . 1990 . Bending elastic moduli of lipid bilayers - modulation by solutes . J . Phys . 11 ( France ) . 51 : 945 - 962 . 10 . Gordon , D . , Y . - Z . Yang , and E . Korn . 1976 . Polymerization of Acan - thamoeba actin . J . Biol . Chem . 251 : 7474 - 7479 . 11 . Hill , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1983 . Regulation of microtubule and actin filament assembly - disassembly by associated small and large mole - cules . Int . Rev . Cytol . 84 : 185 - 234 . 12 . Pollard , T . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - andADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 - 2754 . 13 . Argiro , V . , M . Bunge , and M . Johnson . 1985 . A quantitative study of growth cone filopodial extension . J . Neurosci . Res . 13 : 149 - 162 . 14 . Perelson , A . S . , and E . A . Coutsias . 1986 . A moving boundary model of acrosomal elongation . J . Math . Biol . 23 : 361 - 379 . 15 . Oster , G . , and A . Perelson . 1988 . The physics of cell motility . In Cell Behavior : Shape , Adhesion and Motility . J . Heaysman , C . Middleton . F . Watt , editors . 35 - 54 . 16 . Oster , G . , A . Perelson , and L . Tilney . 1982 . A mechanical model for acrosomal extension in Thyone . J . Math . Biol . 15 : 259 - 265 . 17 . Tilney , L . , and S . Inoue . 1982 . The acrosomal reaction of Thyone sperm . II . The kinetics and possible mechanism of acrosomal process elon - gation . J . Cell Biol . 93 : 820 - 827 . 18 . Inoue , S . , and L . Tilney . 1982 . The acrosomal reaction ofThyone sperm . II . Changes in the sperm head visualized by high resolution video mi - croscopy . J . Cell Biol . 93 : 812 - 820 . 19 . Tilney , L . , and S . Inoue . 1985 . Acrosomal reaction ofthe Thyone sperm . III . The relationship between actin assembly and water influx during the extension of the acrosomal process . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 1273 - 1283 . 20 . Bray , D . , N . Money , F . Harold , and J . Bamburg . 1991 . Responses of growth cones to changes in osmolality of the surrounding medium . J . Cell Sci . 98 : 507 - 515 . 21 . Theriot , J . A . , T . J . Mitchison , L . G . Tilney , and D . A . Portnoy . 1992 . The rate ofactin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature ( Lond . ) . 357 : 257 - 260 . 22 . Tilney , L . G . , and D . A . Portnoy . 1989 . Actin filaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1597 - 1608 . 23 . Dabiri , G . A . , J . M . Sanger , D . A . Portnoy , and F . S . Southwick . 1990 . Listeria monocytogenes moves rapidly through the host - cell cytoplasm by inducing directional actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 6068 - 6072 . 24 . Sanger , J . M . , J . W . Sanger , and F . S . Southwick . 1992 . Host cell actin assembly is necessary and likely to provide the propulsive force for intracellular movement of Listeria monocytogenes . Infect . Immun . 60 : 3609 - 3619 . 25 . Berg , H . 1983 . Random Walks in Biology . Princeton University Press . Princeton , New Jersey . 26 . Pollard , T . 1990 . Actin . Curr . Opin . Cell Bio . 2 : 33 - 40 . 27 . Cooper , J . A . 1991 . The role of actin polymerization in cell motility . Ann . Rev . Physiol . 53 : 585 - 605 . 28 . Forscher , P . , C . H . Lin , and C . Thompson . 1992 . Indictopodia : a novel form of stimulus - evoked growth cone motility involving site directed actin filament assembly . Nature ( Lond . ) . 357 : 515 - 518 . 29 . Simon , S . , C . Peskin , and G . Oster . 1992 . What drives the translocation of proteins ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 3770 - 3774 . 30 . Simon , S . , and B . Blobel . 1991 . A protein - conducting channel in the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell . 65 : 371 - 380 . 31 . de Gennes , P . 1983 . Reptation d ' une chaine heterogene . J . Physique Lett . 44 : L225 - L227 . 32 . Cheng , M . Y . , F . U . Hartl , J . Martin , R . A . Pollock , F . Kalousek , W . Neupert , E . M . Hallberg , R . L . Hallberg , and A . L . Horwich . 1989 . Mitochondrial heat - shock protein hsp60 is assential for assembly of proteins imported into yeast mitochondria . Nature ( Lond . ) . 337 : 620 - 625 . 33 . Ostermann , J . , A . L . Horwich , W . Neupert , and F . U . Hartl . 1989 . Protein folding in mitochondria requires complex formation with hsp6o and ATP hydrolysis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 341 : 125 - 130 . 34 . Kagan , B . , A . Finkelstein , and M . Colombini . 1981 . Diptheria toxin fragment forms large pores in phospholipid bilayer membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 78 : 4950 - 4954 . 35 . Ooi , C . , and W . J . Weiss . 1992 . Bidirectional movement of a nascent polypeptide across microsomal membranes reveals requirements for vectorial translocation of proteins . Cell . 71 : 87 - 96 . 36 . Liu , S . - C . , L . Derick , S . Zhai , and J . Palek . 1991 . Uncoupling of the spectrin - based skeleton from the lipid bilayer in sickled red cells . Science . 252 : 574 - 575 . 37 . Koshland , D . E . , T . J . Mitchison , and M . W . Kirschner . 1988 . Polewards chromosome movement driven by microtubule depolymerization in vitro . Nature ( Lond . ) . 331 : 499 - 504 . 38 . Huxley , A . F . 1957 . Muscle structure and theories of contraction . Prog . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 7 : 255 - 318 . 39 . Leibler , S . , and D . Huse . 1991 . A physical model for motor proteins . C . R . Acad . Sci . ( III ) . 313 : 27 - 35 . 40 . Feynman , R . , R . Leighton , and M . Sands . 1963 . The Feynman Lectures on Physics . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . 41 . Zauderer , E . 1989 . First order partial differential equations . In Partial Differential Equations of Applied Mathematics . John Wiley & Sons , New York . 42 . Khan , S . , and H . C . Berg . 1983 . Isotope and thermal effects in che - miosmotic coupling to the flagellar motor of Streptococcus . Cell . 32 : 913 - 919 .