Similarity , Induction , Naming , and Categorization ( SINC ) : Generalization or Inductive Reasoning ? Reply to Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) Vladimir M . Sloutsky and Anna V . Fisher Ohio State University This article is a response to E . Heit and B . K . Hayes’s ( 2005 ) comment on the target article “Induction and Categorization in Young Children : A Similarity - Based Model” ( V . M . Sloutsky & A . V . Fisher , 2004a ) . The response discusses points of agreement and disagreement with Heit and Hayes ; phenomena predicted by similarity , induction , naming , and categorization ( SINC ) ; and relationships between SINC and models of verbal inductive reasoning , as well as contributions and limitations of SINC and directions for future research . Overall , the authors disagree with Heit and Hayes’s analysis of limitations of SINC and with their analysis of SINC in the context of verbal inductive reasoning . At the same time , the authors agree that more research is needed to provide a unified account of similarity , induction , categorization , and recognition . Keywords : categorization , induction , cognitive development , recognition memory The ability to extend knowledge from known to novel , or inductive generalization , and the development of this ability are interesting and controversial issues in human cognition . Some researchers have proposed a knowledge - based ( or naı¨ve - theory ) approach , arguing that even early in development , conceptual knowledge is a critical component of induction ( Gelman , 2003 ; Gelman & Wellman , 1991 ; Keil , Smith , Simons , & Levin , 1998 ) . Others have suggested that inductive generalization may develop in a bottom - up manner , with similarity playing a critical role in early induction ( Colunga & Smith , 2005 ; French , Mareschal , Mer - millod , & Quinn , 2004 ; McClelland & Rogers , 2003 ; Sloutsky , 2003 ; Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a ) . Whereas both positions agree that bottom - up processes , such as similarity computation , may play a role ( e . g . , Keil , 2003 ; Keil et al . , 1998 ) , they disagree as to whether it is necessary to posit conceptual knowledge to explain early induction . In a recently published article ( Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a ) , we addressed this controversy by presenting theoretical arguments and empirical evidence suggesting that positing a significant role of conceptual knowledge in early induction is unnecessary and un - warranted . We also proposed a model of early similarity , induc - tion , and categorization ( SINC ) . Originally , SINC stood for sim - ilarity , induction , and categorization , but our more recent data discussed below suggest a more extended interpretation : similarity , induction , naming , and categorization . SINC considers induction as a set of interrelated processes . For instance , ( a ) upon learning that an animal is called “fep , ” one can generalize this name to other similar animals ; ( b ) upon learning that the fep is a mammal , one can generalize the category mem - bership to other feps ; and ( c ) upon learning that feps use serotonin for neural transmission , one can generalize this knowledge to other feps and possibly to other mammals . These forms of inductive generalization are referred to as ( a ) label extension , or naming , ( b ) categorization , and ( c ) projective induction . Because SINC con - siders these to be interrelated processes , unless specified other - wise , we use the term induction as a generic reference to each of these processes . There are several theoretical assumptions underlying SINC , some of which have been confirmed empirically . First , early in development , the three processes described above are variants of the same process of automatic similarity - based generalization . Second , early in development , linguistic labels are features con - tributing to similarity of compared entities , with similarity com - puted over automatically detected perceptual and linguistic fea - tures . Further , various features may have different attentional weights and therefore different contributions to similarity and thus to induction . In particular , linguistic labels often have somewhat larger attentional weights than does appearance information . Un - like the knowledge - based approach , which argues that effects of labels stem from their conceptual importance , SINC argues that , early in development ( because labels are features contributing to similarity ) , effects of labels stem from low - level attentional mech - anisms . These theoretical assumptions enable a formal way of predicting early induction performance as well as the prediction of a number of interesting and novel phenomena . In their commentary , Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of SINC while placing it in a larger context of inductive reasoning . Although the commentary presents an impressive overview of the field of inductive reasoning , it places SINC in a wrong context , focusing on some of the apparent rather than real weaknesses while overlooking some real strengths and real limitations of SINC . Vladimir M . Sloutsky and Anna V . Fisher , Center for Cognitive Sci - ence , Ohio State University . This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant REC 0208103 awarded to Vladimir M . Sloutsky . We thank Chris Robin - son , Brett Hayes , and Evan Heit for their helpful comments . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Vladimir M . Sloutsky , Center for Cognitive Science , Ohio State University , 208C Ohio Stadium East , 1961 Tuttle Park Place , Columbus , OH 43210 . E - mail : sloutsky . 1 @ osu . edu Journal of Experimental Psychology : General Copyright 2005 by the American Psychological Association 2005 , Vol . 134 , No . 4 , 606 – 611 0096 - 3445 / 05 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 134 . 4 . 606 606 In pointing to limitations of SINC , Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) argue that ( a ) SINC fails to account for some of the well known inductive reasoning phenomena , and ( b ) SINC does not predict anything new compared with existing models of induction . We disagree with both arguments . The first argument , although factually true , puts SINC in a wrong context , as most of the inductive reasoning phenomena were demonstrated with adults . The second argument is factually wrong because it misses a wide range of phenomena generated by SINC , which ( in our view ) distinguish it from other proposed models . Further , as we argue below , the attempt to express models of inductive reasoning in the currency of SINC leads to several contradictions . In what follows , we consider some of the arguments presented by Heit and Hayes and outline points of agreement and directions for future research . Is Research on Inductive Reasoning an Adequate Context for Evaluating SINC ? Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) suggest examining the contribution of Sloutsky & Fisher ( 2004a ) by considering it in the wider context of research on inductive reasoning . Heit and Hayes then briefly discuss the 11 phenomena generated by the similarity - coverage model ( SCM ; Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , Lopez , & Shafir , 1990 ) and argue that SINC cannot account for most of these phenomena . Note that , according to SCM , induction is a function of similarity and of category information , whereas according to SINC , induc - tion is a function of similarity ( with labels contributing to simi - larity rather than providing category information ) . Therefore , whereas SINC is a model of early induction , we believe that SCM ( because of its category component ) is a model of mature induction . Note that whereas phenomena generated by the category com - ponent of SCM were found in adults , evidence for these effects in children is equivocal . In particular , there are two studies that failed to find diversity effects in 5 – 6 - year - olds or 8 – 9 - year - olds ( Gutheil & Gelman , 1997 ; Lopez , Gelman , Gutheil , & Smith , 1992 ) and one study that succeeded to find these effects in 5 - year - olds ( Heit & Hahn , 2001 ) . There is also a study reporting typicality effects in 5 – 6 - year - olds ( Lopez et al . , 1992 ) ; however , we recently proposed an alternative interpretation of these findings ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005b , p . 595 ) . Specifically , we presented evidence that these putative typicality effects could stem from the less typical animals being referred to by less familiar words . In our view , these difficulties to find reliable evidence for the category component in young children reflect the fundamental differences between early and mature induction . Whereas the former is a similarity - based process of inductive generalization , the latter may involve a deliberate category - based reasoning com - ponent . Generalization is a relatively automatic process that does not require deliberate selective attention , whereas reasoning is a deliberate process of deriving conclusions from premises and evaluating these conclusions and / or arguments . Given that reason - ing is likely to require deliberate control of attention , and given that the ability of young children to focus and shift attention deliberately is unclear ( Kirkham , Cruess , & Diamond , 2003 ; Na - politano & Sloutsky , 2004 ; Robinson & Sloutsky , 2004 ) , chil - dren’s ability to perform category - based inductive reasoning is questionable . Although Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a ) did not expli - cate these arguments , they contrasted SINC ( a bottom - up model of early inductive generalization ) with a top - down , knowledge - based approach , which considers early induction as a variant of reasoning process ( e . g . , Gelman , 1988 ; Gelman & Markman , 1986 ) . In short , Heit and Hayes suggest considering SINC in the context of inductive reasoning , whereas we believe that this is a wrong context for the analysis of early induction . Further , as it is a model of inductive generalization , SINC ( as we demonstrate below ) enables the prediction of a wide range of interesting phe - nomena that models of inductive reasoning can neither predict nor account for . What Is the Broader Context of SINC ? As mentioned above , SINC is a model implementing a theory of inductive generalization that can predict a wide range of phenom - ena across a variety of tasks . Some of these phenomena were presented in Sloutsky and Fisher’s ( 2004a ) study , whereas others appear elsewhere . These phenomena include ( a ) effects of labels on similarity early in development ; ( b ) effects of phonological similarity of labels on induction ; ( c ) low - level attentional mecha - nisms underlying effects of labels on similarity and induction ; ( d ) flexible ( yet nondeliberate ) adjustment of attentional weights of different sources of information ; ( e ) differential effects of induc - tion on recognition memory at different points of development ; ( f ) dissociation between label and category information ; ( g ) integra - tion of labeling and appearance information in the course of similarity judgment and induction ; and ( h ) interrelationships among induction , categorization , naming , and similarity . Note that each of these phenomena includes many more specific effects . Whereas SINC and its underlying theory predict these effects , none of the models reviewed by Heit and Hayes can account for the first seven phenomena . First , it has been demonstrated that , early in development , labels contribute to similarity of compared entities ( Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a ; Sloutsky & Lo , 1999 ) . In particular , when two entities share a label , young children tend to consider these entities as looking more alike than when the same entities are presented without labels , and as we explain below , these effects stem from attentional factors such as auditory information overshadowing ( or attenuating processing of ) corresponding visual information ( Na - politano & Sloutsky , 2004 ; Robinson & Sloutsky , 2004 ; Sloutsky & Napolitano , 2003 ) . Second , on the basis of the theoretical assumption that , early in development , linguistic labels are features contributing to the overall similarity , SINC predicts that phonological similarity of labels may contribute to induction . There is recent evidence sup - porting this prediction ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2004 ) : Young children were more likely to generalize a property from test item to a target item if the test and target items had a phonologically similar label ( e . g . , Guma and Gama ) than if it had a phonologically different label ( Guma and Fika ) . Further , young children tended to extend phonologically similar words to visually similar entities . Third , according to SINC , effects of words on similarity and thus on induction stem from low - level attentional mechanisms rather than from an understanding of conceptual importance of labels . On the basis of this idea , it was predicted that words , as well as other auditory stimuli , may affect processing of corresponding visual information . This prediction was confirmed empirically : For infants and young children , auditory information overshadows 607 COMMENTS corresponding visual information ( Napolitano & Sloutsky , 2004 ; Robinson & Sloutsky , 2004 ; Sloutsky & Napolitano , 2003 ) . In particular , when discriminable visual and auditory stimuli ( includ - ing human speech ) were presented together , discrimination of visual ( but not of auditory ) stimuli decreased compared with a unimodal baseline . Fourth , because effects of words and visual information on induction stem from attentional mechanisms rather than from understanding of the conceptual importance of labels or appearances , SINC predicts that contribution of labels or appear - ance to induction can be changed by changing the attentional weights of labels or appearance through associative training . This prediction was supported in a set of experiments ( e . g . , Sloutsky & Spino , 2004 ) in which attention to labels or to appearances was manipulated by varying their predictive values ( when a cue is consistently nonpredictive , attention to this cue decreases ; see Hall , 1991 , for a review ) . After training , participants were pre - sented with an induction task , which was repeated 3 . 5 months after training . It was found that , as a result of training , young children exhibited ( depending on the training condition ) either appearance - based or label - based induction , with either pattern being different from pretraining induction . Further , 3 . 5 months after training , young children retained these effects of training . Fifth , SINC enabled a novel prediction regarding effects of induction on recognition memory . Recall that , according to SINC , early induction is driven by similarity , whereas according to the knowledge - based approach , even early in development . induction is category based and is driven by more abstract category infor - mation . Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a ) developed the induction - then - recognition ( ITR ) paradigm , allowing the distinction between these two possibilities . The ability of ITR to distinguish between these possibilities is based on the following reasoning . Research on false - memory phenomena has shown that deep semantic processing of studied items ( including grouping of items into categories ) often increases memory intrusions—false recognition and recall of nonpresented “critical lures” or items semantically associated with studied items ( e . g . , Koutstaal & Schacter , 1997 ; Thapar & McDermott , 2001 ; Toglia , Neuschatz , & Goodwin , 1999 ) . Thus “deeper” processing can lead to lower recognition accuracy when critical lures are semantically similar to studied items . In contrast to deep process - ing , focusing on perceptual details of pictorially presented infor - mation results in accurate recognition ( Marks , 1991 ) . Therefore , a memory test administered after an induction task may reveal information about how items were processed during the induction task . If participants processed the items relatively abstractly as members of a category ( i . e . , they performed category - based induc - tion ) , then they would likely have difficulty discriminating studied targets from conceptually similar critical lures . If , on the other hand , they processed items more concretely , focusing on percep - tual details ( i . e . , they performed similarity - based induction ) , then they should discriminate relatively well . This is exactly what Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a , 2004b ; Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005b ) found . After performing induction with pictures of members of familiar categories ( e . g . , cats ) , young children exhibited greater recognition accuracy than did adults , with recognition gradually decreasing with increasing age . Sixth , SINC clearly differentiates between labeling information and category information . According to SINC , linguistic labels contribute to induction by contributing to similarity rather than by denoting categories . Initial evidence for this distinction comes from the fact that young children’s induction is not category based ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005b ; Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a , 2004b ) , yet labels contribute to early induction by affecting similarity ( Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a ; Sloutsky , Lo , & Fisher , 2001 ) . More direct evidence for the distinction comes from a set of recent studies that use the ITR paradigm ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005a ) . Note that in the ITR - paradigm recognition studies dis - cussed above ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005b ; Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a , 2004b ) , pictures were not accompanied by labels . If label and category information are the same for young children , then when presented entities are labeled , children should exhibit effects of semantic processing ( low recognition accuracy stemming from high hits and elevated false alarms ) . Further , effects of category labels ( i . e . , the word cat referring to each individual cat ) should differ from those of individual nonsense labels ( i . e . , a different nonsense count noun referring to each member of a category ) . In particular , only the former , but not the latter , should promote category - based induction . However , because SINC does not con - sider category labels to be category markers , the prediction is different . In particular , because labels may overshadow corre - sponding visual information , introduction of labels may disrupt encoding of visual information , thus resulting in a decreased proportion of hits . Further , category labels and individual nonsense labels should have comparable effects on recognition memory . This is exactly what was found when category labels were introduced in the ITR paradigm : In contrast to the no - label con - dition where the proportion of hits was above chance , in the label condition , the proportion of hits dropped to chance , whereas the proportion of false alarms was unaffected by labeling ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005a ) . Further , our unpublished data indicate that cat - egory labels and individual nonsense labels exert similar effects on patterns of recognition memory of young children . However , when young children were trained to perform category - based induction ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2005a ) , not only did their induction perfor - mance increase , but participants also exhibited patterns of recog - nition accuracy that were similar to those of adults ( i . e . , high hits and elevated false alarms ) . These results support the distinction between category informa - tion and labeling information for young children . It seems , how - ever , that Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) overlook this distinction . In particular , in reference to an apparent contradiction between the results of Sloutsky and Fisher’s ( 2004a ) Experiments 1 and 5 , Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) write that Experiment 1 was a similarity judgment task comparing children and adults , and the main result was that children were influenced by shared category labels ( italics added ) but adults were not . In contrast ( italics added ) , Experiment 5 had the opposite pattern of results . Children’s recognition judgments were unaffected by category mem - bership ( italics added ) , but adults showed a distinctly categorical pattern . ( p . 603 ) The appearance of the contradiction may arise only if one treats category labels and category membership as the same , whereas if one acknowledges the difference between the two , there is no contradiction between the results of Experiments 1 and 5 . In neither experiment were young children influenced by category information , and in both experiments , their induction was driven by the overall similarity ( computed over visual and labeling 608 COMMENTS features in Experiment 1 and over visual features only in Experiment 5 ) . Seventh , labels and visual similarity jointly contribute to induc - tion early in development , and unless trained to do so , young children do not selectively attend to labeling or appearance infor - mation . Further , SINC can quantify this contribution : For example , SINC accurately predicted young children’s performance on indi - vidual triads with Gelman and Markman ( 1986 ) stimuli , and as predicted , children’s induction was driven by the overall similarity rather than by reliance on labels . Finally , SINC assumes the interrelatedness of similarity , induction , and categorization , and results reported by Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a ) support this as - sumption , pointing to high intercorrelations among similarity , in - duction , and categorization . In sum , SINC predicts a large number of phenomena pertaining to early similarity judgment , induction , categorization , lexical ex - tension , and recognition memory . Further , as we discuss in the next section , most of these phenomena cannot be predicted or accounted for by other models of induction . SINC and Models of Verbal Induction When discussing SINC vis - a ` - vis models of inductive reasoning , Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) try to convert these models into the “cur - rency” of SINC , thereby demonstrating that predictions of SINC are indistinguishable from those of models of inductive reasoning . In the previous section , we presented evidence that this argument is factually wrong—SINC does predict phenomena that cannot be predicted ( or accounted for ) by models of verbal inductive reason - ing . In this section , we argue that this attempted conversion leads to contradictions . First , unlike SINC , none of the models reviewed by Heit and Hayes differentiates between labeling information and category information ; they consider both kinds of information to be equiv - alent . The principled reason for SINC to be able to differentiate between the two kinds of information is the “label - as - attribute” hypothesis ( see Sloutsky & Fisher , 2004a ; Sloutsky & Lo , 1999 ; Sloutsky et al . , 2001 ) , which as we argued above , is one of the major contributions of Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a ) and of SINC in general . The hypothesis posits that , for young children , labels are features contributing directly to similarity rather than making an indirect contribution by communication that identically labeled items belong to the same category and thus are more similar . This hypothesis led to predictions that ( a ) there is a dissociation be - tween label and category information and thus between label - based and category - based induction ; ( b ) phonological similarity of labels contributes to induction ; and ( c ) attentional weights of labels can be flexibly adjusted in the course of associative training . Because none of the discussed models predicts that labels directly contribute to similarity or that there is a dissociation between label and category information , none of the models can either predict or account for these effects . Therefore , the attempted conversion is highly questionable because it either ( a ) grants the Rips ( 1975 ) and Sloman ( 1993 ) models the assumptions that they do not make ( i . e . , that labels directly contribute to similarity ) or ( b ) treats labels as an equivalent of category information for SCM ( Osherson et al . , 1990 ) and Heit ( 1998 ) models , which , as we demonstrated above , is not true , at least for young children . Further , the mechanism by which labels contribute to induction proposed by SINC is very different from that in other models ( such as SCM and Heit’s , 1998 , model ) . The latter becomes especially true when mechanisms underlying induction are examined more closely . In particular , because SINC considers labels as attributes contributing to the overall similarity , it can predict that the pho - nological similarity of labels may also contribute to the overall similarity and thus to induction . This contribution of phonological similarity of labels to the overall similarity can be captured by the following equation : Sim (cid:1) B , T (cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) B , where (cid:2) and (cid:4) ( 0 (cid:5) (cid:2) , (cid:4) (cid:5) 1 ) denote values ( weights ) of a label and visual information , respectively , and B and (cid:3) denote the number of featural mismatches between the appearance and the label of Test B and the target , respectively . When there are no mismatches , (cid:3) (cid:3) B (cid:3) 0 , and (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:3) 1 , the similarity between Test B and the target equals to unity . Now , with the Luce choice rule and simple derivations , we can express the probability of inducing a property from Test B to the target : P (cid:1) B (cid:2) (cid:1) 1 1 (cid:6) (cid:2) (cid:7) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) A (cid:4) B , where (cid:2) (cid:7) is the similarity of label of Test A to the label of the target , whereas (cid:2) (cid:3) is the similarity of label of Test B to the label of the target . Therefore , the probability of inducing a property from Test B to the target is a function of two similarity ratios : ( a ) the ratio of appearance similarities of each of the test items to the target’s appearance and ( b ) the ratio of label similarity of each of the test items’ label to the target’s label . In other words , this slight modification of SINC predicts that ( with all other things being equal ) induction from Guga to Guba should be more likely than induction from Guga to Zedo . Whereas there is evidence support - ing this prediction of SINC for young children ( Fisher & Sloutsky , 2004 ) , none of the reviewed models of induction can predict or account for these results . Second , none of the models reviewed by Heit and Hayes ( 2005 ) have mechanisms for separating or integrating visual and linguistic information . Recall that SINC specifies these mechanisms and tests them by independently manipulating label , appearance , and ( more recently ) category information . At the same time , because none of the models reviewed by Heit and Hayes has these mech - anisms , it is unclear ( a ) how these models could separate contri - bution of linguistic , appearance , and category information and ( b ) how it is possible to manipulate the three sources independently while maintaining assumptions of each respective model . Finally , when comparing models of induction to SINC , Heit and Hayes seem to overlook some critical differences in predictions . For example , in reference to recognition data reported by Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004a ) , they wrote that “the Sloman ( 1993 ) model is explicitly not a category - based model , so any results indicating that children’s judgments are similarity based might be just as compatible with the Sloman model as with SINC” ( p . 603 ) . This statement , however , disregards the important fact that Sloman’s model ( unlike SINC ) does not differentiate either be - tween early and mature induction or between category and label 609 COMMENTS information . Therefore , unlike SINC , it cannot account for ( a ) differences between children’s and adults’ recognition accuracy , ( b ) differences between children’s recognition accuracy before and after training , or ( c ) the differential effects of labels on recognition accuracy of children before and after training ( discussed above ) . In sum , the attempted conversion of models of inductive rea - soning into the “currency” of SINC is problematic . Because , similar to SINC , each of these models has ( or can have ) a simi - larity component , the conversion may appear possible . However , because neither of the models differentiates between labels and categories , the conversion ignores one of the most important properties of SINC , thus making the similarity between SINC and converted models rather superficial . Points of Agreement , Real Limitations of SINC , and Directions for Future Research Despite the arguments presented above , there are several points of agreement . First , we agree with Heit and Hayes that none of the models of induction , including SINC , has been implemented as a model of recognition and that more work is needed to develop a unified account of categorization and recognition . We also agree that SINC does not differentiate between “projectible” and “non - projectible” properties . In particular , it has been shown that young children generalize putatively stable properties , such as “has hol - low bones , ” but not transient properties , such as “fell on the floor this morning” ( Gelman , 1988 ) . One possibility is that young chil - dren understand that these latter properties vary within a category , thus suggesting that children have aggregate representation of categories ( Gelman , 1988 ) . Alternatively , it is possible that chil - dren differentiate between properties that do and do not vary within individuals , generalizing the latter but not the former . We plan to directly examine this issue in future studies . Finally , we agree that research generated by SINC has been focused on con - clusions about individuals , and not about categories . However , there is a principled reason for this : According to SINC , early induction is not category - based and therefore , SINC distinguishes between generalizations to a single versus multiple individuals , but not between generalizations to an individual versus a category . There are several limitations of SINC that were not mentioned by Heit and Hayes but that should be addressed in future research . First and most important , at this time , SINC does not model mature induction , whereas given that inductive generalization is not lim - ited to young children , it is important to model inductive general - ization at different points of development . Second , although SINC assumes flexibility of attentional weights , it is not a model of learning . Therefore , at this time , it can neither model change in the way participants perform induction nor model the transition from early to mature induction . Expanding SINC in the direction of a learning model is an important future goal . Finally , in its current form , SINC does not specify how computed similarity information is stored and retrieved , and therefore , although capable of predict - ing recognition memory phenomena qualitatively , SINC cannot model recognition . These limitations present interesting and im - portant challenges , and they are to be addressed in future research . Although more research is needed , SINC and its underlying theory generated new knowledge ( a ) pointing to the similarity - based mechanism of early induction , ( b ) revealing how and why labels contribute to similarity and induction early in development , and ( c ) specifying interrelationships between induction and recog - nition across points of development . References Colunga , E . , & Smith , L . B . ( 2005 ) . From the lexicon to expectations about kinds : A role for associative learning . Psychological Review , 112 , 347 – 382 . Fisher , A . V . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . When mats meow : Phonological similarity of labels and induction in young children . In K . Forbus , D . Gentner , & T . Regier ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the XXVI Annual Confer - ence of the Cognitive Science Society . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fisher , A . V . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2005a ) . Effects of category labels on induction and visual processing : Support or interference ? In B . G . Bara , L . Barsalou , & M . Bucciarelli ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Fisher , A . V . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2005b ) . When induction meets memory : Evidence for gradual transition from similarity - based to category - based induction . Child Development , 76 , 583 – 597 . French , R . M . , Mareschal , D . , Mermillod , M . , & Quinn , P . C . ( 2004 ) . The role of bottom - up processing in perceptual categorization by 3 - to 4 - month - old infants : Simulations and data . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 382 – 397 . Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 – 95 . Gelman , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The essential child : Origins of essentialism in everyday thought . London : Oxford University Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . ( 1986 ) . Categories and induction in young children . Cognition , 23 , 183 – 209 . Gelman , S . A . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 1991 ) . Insides and essences : Early understanding of the obvious . Cognition , 38 , 213 – 244 . Gutheil , G . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1997 ) . Children’s use of sample size and diversity information within basic - level categories . Journal of Experi - mental Child Psychology , 64 , 159 – 174 . Hall , G . ( 1991 ) . Perceptual and associative learning . New York : Oxford University Press . Heit , E . ( 1998 ) . A Bayesian analysis of some forms of inductive reasoning . In M . Oaksford & N . Chater ( Eds . ) , Rational models of cognition ( pp . 248 – 274 ) . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Heit , E . , & Hahn , U . ( 2001 ) . Diversity - based reasoning in children . Cog - nitive Psychology , 43 , 243 – 273 . Heit , E . , & Hayes , B . K . ( 2005 ) . Relations between categorization , induc - tion , recognition , and similarity . Comment on Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2004 ) . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 134 , 596 – 605 . Keil , F . C . ( 2003 ) . Categories , cognitive development , and cognitive sci - ence . In D . H . Rakison & L . M . Oakes ( Eds . ) , Early category and concept development : Making sense of the blooming , buzzing confusion ( pp . v - xviii ) . London : Oxford University Press . Keil , F . C . , Smith , W . C . , Simons , D . J . , & Levin , D . T . ( 1998 ) . Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism : Implications for hybrid models of the structure of knowledge . Cognition , 65 , 103 – 135 . Kirkham , N . Z . , Cruess , L . , & Diamond , A . ( 2003 ) . Helping children apply their knowledge to their behavior on a dimension switching task . De - velopmental Science , 6 , 449 – 476 . Koutstaal , W . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Gist - based false recognition of pictures in older and younger adults . Journal of Memory & Language , 37 , 555 – 583 . Lopez , A . , Gelman , S . A . , Gutheil , G . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1992 ) . The development of category - based induction . Child Development , 63 , 1070 – 1090 . Marks , W . ( 1991 ) . Effects of encoding the perceptual features of pictures on memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 566 – 577 . McClelland , J . L . , & Rogers , T . T . ( 2003 ) . The parallel distributed pro - 610 COMMENTS cessing approach to semantic cognition . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 , 310 – 322 . Napolitano , A . C . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . Is a picture worth a thousand words ? The flexible nature of modality dominance in young children . Child Development , 75 , 1850 – 1870 . Osherson , D . N . , Smith , E . E . , Wilkie , O . , Lopez , A . , & Shafir , E . ( 1990 ) . Category - based induction . Psychological Review , 97 , 185 – 200 . Rips , L . J . ( 1975 ) . Inductive judgments about natural categories . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 14 , 665 – 681 . Robinson , C . W . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . Auditory dominance and its change in the course of development . Child Development , 75 , 1387 – 1401 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1993 ) . Feature - based induction . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 231 – 280 . Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2003 ) . The role of similarity in the development of categorization . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 246 – 251 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2004a ) . Induction and categorization in young children : A similarity - based model . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 133 , 166 – 188 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2004b ) . When development and learning decrease memory : Evidence against category - based induction in chil - dren . Psychological Science , 15 , 553 – 558 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Lo , Y - F . ( 1999 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar ? Linguistic labels and the development of similarity judgment . Developmental Psychology , 35 , 1478 – 1492 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Lo , Y - F . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2001 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar : Linguistic labels and the development of inductive inference . Child Development , 72 , 1695 – 1709 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Napolitano , A . ( 2003 ) . Is a picture worth a thousand words ? Preference for auditory modality in young children . Child De - velopment , 74 , 822 – 833 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Spino , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Naı¨ve theory and transfer of learning : When less is more and more is less . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 11 , 536 – 541 . Thapar , A . , & McDermott , K . B . ( 2001 ) . False recall and false recognition induced by presentation of associated words : Effects of retention interval and level of processing . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 424 – 432 . Toglia , M . P . , Neuschatz , J . S . , & Goodwin , K . A . ( 1999 ) . Recall accuracy and illusory memories : When more is less . Memory , 7 , 233 – 256 . Received February 28 , 2005 Revision received June 6 , 2005 Accepted June 6 , 2005 (cid:1) Call for Nominations The Publications and Communications ( P & C ) Board has opened nominations for the editorships of Behavioral Neuroscience , JEP : Applied , JEP : General , Neuropsychology , Psychological Methods , and Psychology and Aging for the years 2008 – 2013 . John F . Disterhoft , PhD ; Phillip L . Ackerman , PhD ; D . Stephen Lindsay , PhD ; James T . Becker , PhD ; Stephen G . West , PhD ; and Rose T . Zacks , PhD , respectively , are the incumbent editors . Candidates should be members of APA and should be available to start receiving manuscripts in early 2007 to prepare for issues published in 2008 . Please note that the P & C Board encourages participation by members of underrepresented groups in the publication process and would partic - ularly welcome such nominees . Self - nominations also are encouraged . Search chairs have been appointed as follows : (cid:127) Behavioral Neuroscience : Linda P . Spear , PhD , and J . Gilbert Benedict , PhD (cid:127) JEP : Applied : William C . Howell , PhD (cid:127) JEP : General : Peter A . Ornstein , PhD (cid:127) Neuropsychology : Susan H . McDaniel , PhD , and Robert G . Frank , PhD (cid:127) Psychological Methods : Mark Appelbaum , PhD (cid:127) Psychology and Aging : David C . Funder , PhD , and Leah L . Light , PhD Candidates should be nominated by accessing APA’s EditorQuest site on the Web . Using your Web browser , go to http : / / editorquest . apa . org . On the Home menu on the left , find Guests . Next , click on the link “Submit a Nomination , ” enter your nominee’s information , and click “Submit . ” Prepared statements of one page or less in support of a nominee can also be submitted by e - mail to Karen Sellman , P & C Board Search Liaison , at ksellman @ apa . org . Deadline for accepting nominations is January 20 , 2006 , when reviews will begin . 611 COMMENTS