Recent studies in signal transduction have highlighted the importance of specialized membrane domains , such as the apical junctional domain and the immunological synapse , in bringing ligands , receptors and downstream components in close proximity 1 . The ability to organize and maintain specialized membrane domains is essential to most if not all cells . To do this , cells must coordinate processes at the cell surface with those occurring in the underlying cortical cytoplasm and cytoskeleton . For example , the formation of complex subcellular structures at the apical end of the cell , such as microvilli and inter - cellular junctions , requires close interactions between the plasma membrane , membrane - associated cytoplasmic proteins and the underlying cytoskeleton . Studies over the past 25 years have implicated ezrin , radixin and moesin , collectively known as ERMs , as key organizers of specialized membrane domains . The ERMs are expressed in a developmental and tissue - specific manner , with many epithelial cells expressing predominantly ezrin and many endothelial cells express - ing predominantly moesin . This suggests that different ERM functions are tailored to the needs of specific cell types ( BOX 1 ) . Through their ability to interact with transmembrane proteins , phospholipids , membrane - associated cytoplasmic proteins and the cytoskeleton , ERMs organize complex membrane domains . In addition , genetic studies in the past few years have revealed that ERMs have unexpectedly diverse functions , including villar organization in the gut 2 , light - regulated mainten - ance of photoreceptors 3 , control of cortical stiffening during mitosis 4 , 5 and regulation of RhoA activity in epithelial cells 6 . Together , these data present a uniquely rich understanding of ERM regulation and functions . Early studies of ERMs concentrated on their bio - chemical interactions and functions in cultured mam - malian cells . These aspects of ERM function have been extensively reviewed elsewhere 7 – 10 and are touched on only briefly here . More recently , considerable progress has been made in two diverse areas : elucidating the structural properties of ERMs and understanding their functions in living tissues . In this Review , we discuss well - established biochemical models for ERM regu - lation and describe how they relate to recent work that explores ERM structure and cellular functions during development , immune responses and disease . Regulation of ERM function ERMs are characterized by the presence of an ~ 300 amino acid plasma membrane - associated FERM domain in the amino terminus , followed by a long region with a high α - helical propensity and terminating in a carboxy - terminal domain , known as the C - terminal ERM - association domain ( C - ERMAD ) , that has the ability to bind the FERM domain or filamentous actin ( F - actin ) ( FIG . 1a ) . Two findings led to the discovery that ERM func - tion is conformationally regulated by head to tail folding ( that is , binding of the C - terminal C - ERMAD to the N - terminal FERM domain ) . First , an F - actin - binding site was identified in the last 34 residues of ezrin 11 ; and second , the ~ 80 C - terminal residues of ezrin ( the C - ERMAD ) were found to bind tightly to the FERM domain in such a way that the F - actin - binding site was masked 12 . We now know that all ERMs exist in an appar - ently dormant , closed conformation and that release of the C - ERMAD from the FERM domain is necessary * Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology , University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois 60637 , USA . ‡ Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Cancer Research and Harvard Medical School , Department of Pathology , 149 13th Street , Charlestown , Massachusetts 02129 , USA . § Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology , Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 , USA . e - mails : rfehon @ uchicago . edu ; mcclatch @ helix . mgh . harvard . edu ; apb5 @ cornell . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2866 Immunological synapse A large junctional structure that is formed at the cell surface between a T cell and an APC with which it is interacting . It consists of molecules required for adhesion and signalling , is important in establishing T cell adhesion and polarity , is influenced by the cytoskeleton and transduces highly controlled secretory signals , thereby allowing the directed release of cytokines or lytic granules towards the APC or target cell . Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins Richard G . Fehon * , Andrea I . McClatchey ‡ and Anthony Bretscher § Abstract | Specialized membrane domains are an important feature of almost all cells . In particular , they are essential to tissues that have a highly organized cell cortex , such as the intestinal brush border epithelium . The ERM proteins ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) have a crucial role in organizing membrane domains through their ability to interact with transmembrane proteins and the cytoskeleton . In doing so , they can provide structural links to strengthen the cell cortex and regulate the activities of signal transduction pathways . Recent studies examining the structure and in vivo functions of ERMs have greatly advanced our understanding of the importance of membrane – cytoskeleton interactions . R E V I E W S 276 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 PDZ domain ( Postsynaptic density protein of 95 kDa , Discs large and Zonula occludens 1 domain ) . A region that is present in several scaffolding proteins and is named after the founding members of this protein family . PDZ domains bind to specific short amino acid sequences in interacting proteins . for their full activation and exposes binding sites in the FERM domain and the F - actin - binding site of the C - ERMAD ( FIG . 1b ) . Current ideas indicate that the dor - mant protein is spring - loaded , so that when the affinity between the FERM domain and the C - ERMAD is reduced , the molecule pops open , allowing it to connect the membrane to the underlying actin cytoskeleton . Regulation of ERMs by phosphorylation . The first insights into the molecular mechanism of the regu - lation of ERMs came with the discovery that moesin is phosphorylated on Thr558 ( which is located in the C - ERMAD ) during platelet activation 13 , and numerous other studies then showed that the equivalent residue in ezrin and radixin ( Thr576 and Thr564 , respectively ) can lead to activation . A two - step model of activa - tion has been proposed in which ERMs are recruited to membrane regions that are rich in phosphatidyl - inositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( ptdIns ( 4 , 5 ) p 2 ) , perhaps ren - dering the conserved Thr residue more accessible to phosphoryl ation 14 , 15 . Numerous kinases in vertebrate cells can phosphorylate ERMs on this regulatory Thr , including Rho kinase , protein kinase Cα ( pKCα ) , pKCθ , NF - κβ - inducing kinase ( NIK ; also known as MAp3K14 ) , MST4 and lymphocyte - oriented kinase ( loK ; also known as STK10 ) 16 – 20 . In vivo studies in Drosophila melanogaster , which has a single ERM called Moesin 21 , have provided fur - ther evidence that ERMs are activated when they adopt an open conformation following phosphorylation of the regulatory Thr . Several studies have shown that a single kinase , Sterile 20 - like kinase ( SlIK ) , seems to be responsible for phosphorylation of this residue 4 , 5 , 22 , 23 , although one study has also shown that Rho kinase mutations affect the staining of phosphorylated Moesin in D . melanogaster oocytes 24 . Mutations that mimic phosphorylation ( Thr559Asp ) or abolish phosphoryl - ation ( Thr559Ala ) at the regulatory Thr residue of the Moesin C - ERMAD have been tested for their ability to rescue loss of function Moesin mutations . As predicted by the conformational regulation model , Speck et al . 6 showed that Moesin mutants are rescued to viability by the transgenic expression of N - terminally MYC - tagged Thr559Asp Moesin . By contrast , expression of MYC - tagged Thr559Ala Moesin fails to rescue Moesin mutations and has no phenotype when expressed in wild - type tissue , suggesting that it is non - functional . Interestingly , two other studies have obtained different results . polesello et al . 25 found that neither allele provided genetic rescue , and Karagiosis and Ready 26 found that the Thr559Asp allele had dominant phenotypes when expressed in wild - type eye tissue . Both of these studies used Moesin transgenes that had been C - terminally tagged with either green fluorescent protein or six copies of the MYC epitope . However , biochemical studies have raised the possibility that C - terminal tags might disrupt hydrogen bonding between the FERM domain and the C - ERMAD hydroxyl group , thereby interfering with the intramolecular head - to - tail interaction and altering ERM function 27 . Additional mechanisms of ERM activation have also been described in vertebrates . Cyclin - dependent kinase 5 ( CDK5 ) can phosphorylate Thr235 of ezrin 28 , which lies on the FERM – C - ERMAD interface directly opposite Thr567 ( ReF . 29 ) . In addition to Thr residues , ezrin can be phosphorylated on Tyr145 and Tyr353 by various Tyr kinases , including epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) 30 , but how these modifications affect the conformation and function of ezrin is still unclear . Binding partners of ERMs . As mentioned above , phos - phorylation of ERMs at the regulatory Thr residue reduces the affinity of the C - ERMAD for the FERM domain , and this active conformation allows other pro - teins to bind . Numerous proteins can bind the FERM domain ; for example , the regulatory subunit of protein kinase A binds the α - helical region 31 , and F - actin binds the tail . An account of proteins that bind the FERM domain has been provided elsewhere 32 , so only a few key points are made here . The FERM domain of activated ERMs can bind directly to the cytoplasmic tails of many membrane pro - teins , including CD44 , CD43 ( also known as SpN ) and intercellular adhesion molecule 2 ( ICAM2 ) 33 ( FIG . 1b ) . A distinct site on the FERM domain can bind to the related scaffolding proteins ERM - binding phosphoprotein 50 ( EBp50 ; also known as NHERF1 ) and NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein ( E3KARp ; also known as NHERF2 ) , each of which has two PDZ domains followed by an ERM - binding domain . Therefore , the FERM domain can bind at least two different classes of membrane - associated proteins . EBp50 and E3KARp bind multiple different membrane proteins themselves 34 , so there are several Box 1 | Functional redundancy and diversity among mammalian ERMs In mammals , ezrin , radixin and moesin ( collectively known as ERMs ) are encoded by three genes ( in humans , these are on chromosomes 6 , 11 and X , respectively ) that seem to each give rise to a single protein . The proteins show some tissue specificity : ezrin is most abundantly expressed by epithelial cells , moesin by endothelial cells and radixin by hepatocytes . ERMs share striking amino acid identity , but a few notable features suggest that there is possible functional diversity . For example , ezrin can be phosphorylated on Tyr residues that are not present in moesin or radixin 99 , and moesin lacks Pro - rich sequences that are found in ezrin and radixin 100 . Ezrin - deficient mice die by 3 weeks of age with defects that are limited to the gastrointestinal tract 2 . Moreover , inactivation of radixin in mice yields viable animals that show subtle liver defects 101 , and moesin - deficient mice do not exhibit overt phenotypes 102 . The paucity of phenotypes in these mice suggests that other ERMs can compensate for the loss of individual ERMs in many tissues . However , crucial roles for individual ERMs in vivo have been described . For example , homozygosity for a severely hypomorphic allele of ezrin causes defective acid secretion by gastric parietal cells . Interestingly , this phenotype is associated with a failure of the formation and function of apical canaliculi , which deliver acid - secreting pumps to the apical surface of the parietal cells 103 . Furthermore , radixin - deficient mice exhibit loss of hearing and selective degeneration of stereocilia in the inner ear 104 , which could reflect divergent functions . Roles for moesin in hepatic stellate cell migration and alveolar wound healing have also been identified 105 , 106 . These studies do not necessarily distinguish between a requirement for tissue - specific expression of individual ERMs and truly functionally divergent roles for ERMs , although work on the immunological synapse ( see main text ) indicates that ezrin and moesin can display different functions . A better understanding of redundancy and diversity of ERM function will require genetic studies in which , for example , the ezrin - coding region is knocked into the locus encoding moesin . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 277 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Linker region a b FERM domain P F - actin binding site C - ERMAD α - Helical domain 1 aa 85 aa 202 aa 298 aa 470 aa 497 aa 586 aa 567 aa P P F - actin Ezrin EBP50 PDZK1 Ezrin Activation by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding and phosphorylation of ERM DormantEBP50 DormantEzrin DormantPDZK1 PDZ domain of EBP50 PDZ domain of PDZK1 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Plasmamembrane FERM domain α - Helical and linker domain C - ERMAD 1 2 3 4 F1 F2 F3 proteins that have the potential to bind the FERM domain directly or indirectly . In addition , pDZK1 , a scaffolding protein with four pDZ domains that links through its tail to the pDZ domains of EBp50 , further expands the repertoire of proteins associated with this system 35 . Interestingly , like ERMs , EBp50 and pDZK1 are conformationally regulated by intra - molecular asso - ciations ( FIG . 1b ) that perhaps modulate their affinities for their ligands 35 – 37 . The overall model that emerges is that the activity of ERMs is regulated by many signal transduction path - ways , and when ERMs are active they can potentially assemble clusters of specific membrane proteins and link them to F - actin . Structural insights into ERM function . Several struc - tures have been described that provide insights into how ERMs function . The X - ray structures of the ~ 300 amino acid FERM domains of ERMs have all been solved inde - pendently ( ezrin 38 ; radixin 39 ; moesin 40 ) and , as expected from their high sequence conservation , are similar . The FERM domain can be divided into three subdomains ( F1 , F2 and F3 ; also known as A , B and C , respectively ) that are arranged like a clover leaf ( FIG . 2 ) and have struc - tural ( but not sequence ) homology to a known protein fold . Specifically , F1 is structurally similar to ubiquitin , F2 to acyl CoA - binding protein and F3 to a pTB domain . The structure of the isolated FERM domain provides a view of the ‘active’ structure — that is , not bound by the inhibitory C - ERMAD . The crystal structure of the radixin FERM domain bound to the cytoplasmic tail of ICAM2 , CD43 or p - selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 ( pSGl1 ; also known as SElplG ) identified a consensus sequence ( Arg / lys / Gln ) - X - X - Thr - ( Tyr / leu ) - X - X - ( Ala / Gly ) ; in which X denotes any amino acid ) that binds in a groove bordered by a β - strand and an α - helix of subdomain F3 . The binding involves an antiparallel β - strand – β - strand interaction ( FIG . 2a ) in a manner that is similar to the binding of the phosphorylated peptide of insulin recep - tor substrate 1 ( IRS1 ) to the pTB domain of the ins ulin receptor 41 – 43 . This groove has also been shown to be involved in the binding of the tails of the adhesion molecules CD44 and the neutral endopeptidase NEp through a different sequence 44 , 45 . EBp50 binds through its C - terminal region to a different surface on subdomain F3 of the FERM domain 46 ( FIG . 2b ) . Extensive analysis of this interaction shows that the consensus sequence Met - Asp - Trp - X - X - X - X - X - ( leu / Ile ) - phe - X - X - ( leu / phe ) in EBp50 is necessary to bind the FERM domain , and that binding of EBp50 reduces the affinity of the FERM domain for the ligands discussed above that bind to the same site as ICAM2 ( ReF . 47 ) . The moesin FERM domain complexed with the ~ 80 residue C - ERMAD revealed the structure of the ‘in active’ FERM domain and the extended C - ERMAD , which consists of a β - strand and four major α - helices that bind and mask a large surface of the F2 and F3 FERM subdomains 29 ( FIG . 2c , d ) . A NMR study has shown that C - ERMAD helices bind the FERM domain independ - ently , implying that each makes a binding contribution to achieve the high affinity seen between the FERM domain and the C - ERMAD 48 . Numerous features concerning this association are notable . First , the C - ERMAD contributes two helices , helix A and helix D , around which the mobile regions of subdomains F2 and F3 fold , thus con - tributing to the stability of the interaction 38 . Second , the C - ERMAD binds FERM surfaces that also bind ligands ; for example , the surface bound by the ICAM2 peptide is occupied by the β - strand of the C - ERMAD , and the Figure 1 | Domain organization of erMs and an activation model . a | All ERMs ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) have a similar domain structure . The domain organization of ezrin is shown here . The amino‑terminal FERM domain ( blue ) consists of three subdomains : F1 , F2 and F3 ( ReF . 29 ) ( also known as A , B and C , respectively 39 ) . The central ~ 150 residue region ( yellow ) is predicted to have a high α ‑helical content and propensity to assemble into a coiled coil . This is followed by a linker region that is Pro‑rich in ezrin and radixin , but not in moesin , and the protein terminates in the carboxy‑terminal ERM‑associated domain ( C‑ERMAD ; orange ) , which contains the filamentous actin ( F‑actin ) ‑binding site . b | Ezrin is activated through phosphatidyl‑ inositol 4 , 5‑bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) binding and phosphorylation of Thr567 , which reduces the affinity of the N‑terminal FERM domain for the C‑ERMAD . This unmasks binding sites for F‑actin and the cytoplasmic tails of specific membrane proteins , such as CD43 ( also known as SPN ) , CD44 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) , ICAM2 , Na + – H + exchanger 1 ( NHE1 ; also known as SLC9A1 ) , syndecan 2 and β ‑dystrophin , ( part 1 ) . Furthermore , the adaptor protein ERM‑binding phosphoprotein 50 ( EBP50 ; also known as NHERF1 ) can also bind the FERM domain ( part 2 ) . As EBP50 binding to the FERM domain reduces the affinity of the FERM domain for the cytoplasmic tails of membrane proteins 47 , these two ERM binding modes might be mutually exclusive , as shown in the figure . The PDZ domains of EBP50 can bind additional proteins , such as NHE3 ( also known as SLC9A3 ) , cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) , β 2 adrenergic receptor , platelet‑derived growth factor receptor ( PDGFR ) , epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , EBP50 PDZ interactor of 64 kDa ( EPI64 ; also known as TBC1D10A ) , and the scaffolding protein PDZK1 ( part 3 ) . Moesin and radixin are thought to function in a similar manner and bind many of the same or related proteins , although in general they have not been as well studied . EBP50 and PDZK1 are thought to exist in a closed form . On unmasking of the EBP50‑binding site on the ezrin FERM domain , the open conformation of EBP50 is stabilized and binds ezrin . A similar type of mechanism might also exist for PDZK1 , which can bind proteins such as organic cation / carnitine transporter 1 ( OCTN1 ; also known as SLC22A4 ) , Na 2 + ‑dependent phosphate transporter 2A ( NaPi‑2A ) and membrane associated protein 17 ( MAP17 ; also known as PDZK1IP1 ) through its PDZ domains ( part 4 ) . R E V I E W S 278 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ICAM2 EBP50 α - Helix β - Strand β - Strand Helix A Helix A Helix D Helix D Helix C Helix B Helix B F3 F3 F3 F3 F3 F2 F2 F2 F2 F2 F1 F1 F1 F1 Helix C a b d c C - ERMAD e f FERM domain C - ERMAD ~ 25 nm Full activation α - Helix Linker binding site of the EBp50 C - terminal helix is occupied by helix D of the C - ERMAD ( FIG . 2a – d ) . This masking of binding sites explains why EBp50 cannot bind to the FERM domain of the full - length dormant ERM or the FERM – C - ERMAD complex 49 . Although crystallizing full - length human ERMs has been difficult , the structure of the insect Spodoptera frugiperda Moesin was recently reported , revealing the location of the highly α - helical central region 50 ( FIG . 2e ) . The structure of the FERM and C - ERMAD regions of this protein are highly similar to the corresponding struc - tures of the human proteins , and the central region exists as three α - helices . The first helix , emerging from F3 , folds back along F1 and F2 ; the second helix makes hydro phobic contacts with F1 and extends as an anti - parallel coiled coil with the third helix , which lands on the back of F1 and con - nects through a linker region to the C - ERMAD ( FIG . 2e ) . Interestingly , the linker lies in a pocket between F2 and F3 that can be occupied by inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( Insp 3 ) , the soluble head group of ptdIns ( 4 , 5 ) p 2 . This sug - gests that the linker region may become excluded from this site when ptdIns ( 4 , 5 ) p 2 binds 39 . This is interesting as ptdIns ( 4 , 5 ) p 2 binding has been implicated in the first step of ERM activation by inducing a conformational change to render the conserved Thr more accessible for phosphorylation 15 , 39 . Taken together , the data from the biochemical and structural studies suggest that multiple signal transduction pathways can contribute to the complete opening of ERMs to activate their membrane – cytoskeleton linking activity . They also hint at the possi - bility that functionally important intermediate states of ERM activation may exist . ERM proteins in cell signalling Given their ability to mediate multiple interactions at the cell cortex , ERMs are ideally located to regulate the formation of specialized membrane domains . Such domains are essential for signal transduction because they bring receptors and downstream signalling compo - nents in close proximity 1 . As described in the following paragraphs , genetic studies in D . melanogaster have pro - vided direct evidence for ERM regulation of RhoA and Hedgehog signalling . However , as ERMs can interact with transmembrane receptors , they are probably involved in other signalling pathways as well . RhoA signalling . RhoA , a small GTpase , is a key regula - tor of the cortical actin cytoskeleton . By interacting with downstream effectors , such as Rho kinase and formins , RhoA shapes the cytoskeleton , thereby regulating dynamic cellular processes , including morphogenesis , cytokinesis and cell migration ( see below ) . Early work on ERMs and RhoA signalling concen - trated on a potential role for ERMs as RhoA downstream effectors 8 , 51 , 52 . Recent work indicates that ERMs may also function upstream to regulate RhoA activity . Several studies have shown that ERMs interact with proteins that regulate Rho GTpases , including Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( RhoGEFs ) , Rho GTpase - activating proteins ( RhoGAps ) and Rho GDp - dissociation inhibi - tors ( RhoGDIs ) 53 – 56 . In D . melanogaster , Moesin has Figure 2 | Structures of FerM domains with bound ligands . a | The radixin FERM domain complexed with a peptide from the cytoplasmic tail of intercellular adhesion molecule 2 ( ICAM2 ; protein data bank ( PDB ) identifier 1J19 ) . The β ‑strand binds to a groove on the F3 subdomain 43 . b | The moesin FERM domain bound to the carboxy‑ terminal peptide of ERM‑binding phosphoprotein 50 ( EBP50 ; also known as NHERF1 ) ( PDB identifier 1SGH ) . The tail of EBP50 forms an α ‑helix that binds to the surface of the F3 subdomain 46 , 47 . c , d | Two views of the C‑terminal ERM‑associated domain ( C‑ERMAD ) of moesin ( red ) bound to the moesin FERM domain ( blue ; PDB identifier 1EF1 ) . The C‑ERMAD binds the F2 and F3 subdomains through a β ‑strand followed by four helices ( helix A , B , C and D ) 29 . In the orientation corresponding to panels a and b , it can be seen that the β ‑strand occupies the same groove that binds ICAM2 , and helix D binds to the same surface as EBP50 . e | The full‑length dormant structure of the insect Spodoptera frugiperda Moesin ( PDB identifier 2I1J ) , revealing the structure of the central α ‑helical region 50 . f | A conceptual model of the activation of ERMs involving the complete dissociation of the C‑ERMAD from the FERM domain , thereby allowing the central α ‑helical region to unravel and potentially span up to 25 nm . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 279 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Hypomorphic A mutant allele that has a similar but weaker function than the wild - type allele . Juxtamembrane region A sequence in a transmembrane protein on the cytoplasmic side that is adjacent to a transmembrane helix . Adherens junction A cell – cell adhesion complex that contains cadherins and catenins that are associated with cytoplasmic actin filaments . been proposed to negatively regulate Rho1 , the fly RhoA orthologue , as reducing Rho1 genetic dosage ( in Rho1 + / – animals ) strongly suppresses loss of function Moesin phenotypes , for example loss of epithelial integ - rity and lethality 6 , 22 , 57 . A similar suppression of loss of function Moesin phenotypes has been seen in cultured S2 cells using RhoA RNA interference 5 . Consistent with these findings , levels of activated RhoA are increased in mammalian cells expressing a dominant - negative ezrin construct 6 . Interestingly , other reports have concluded that rather than acting antagonistically to RhoA , mammalian ERMs positively regulate RhoA activity by interacting with RhoGEFs and RhoGDIs 7 , 58 – 60 . These inconsistencies may reflect differences in experimental design or perhaps that ERMs function in a context - dependent manner . Regardless , our current knowledge of the functional interactions between RhoA and ERMs is rudimentary , and further study is needed . Hedgehog signalling . The Hedgehog signalling pathway regulates cell fate specification and proliferation in vari - ous tissues and developmental contexts . A recent study has used hypomorphic Moesin alleles that allow the exam - ination of Moesin function during later developmental stages to study its function in adult wing patterning 57 . These mutations produce pattern defects in the adult wing veins , such as broadening of the third vein and alteration of inter - vein spacing . Examination of reporter genes for all of the main signalling pathways known to function in wing development , including Notch , wingless , decapentaplegic , EGFR and hedgehog , revealed that only Hedgehog signalling is affected by Moesin mutations . More detailed analysis showed that Hedgehog targets that require low levels of signalling output are expressed normally , whereas those that require high levels are expressed poorly . These phenotypes are strongly suppressed by reducing Rho1 gene dosage , suggesting that these Moesin functions also involve Rho1 signal - ling . The mechanism by which Moesin facilitates high levels of Hedgehog signalling is not clear ; however , a pre vious yeast two - hybrid interaction study showed that Moesin interacts with patched 61 , a Hedgehog recep - tor , indicating that Moesin might regulate its function ( see below ) . Membrane receptor signalling . patched is just one of a range of membrane receptors that interact with the FERM domain of ERMs either directly or through the pDZ domain - containing adaptor proteins EBp50 and E3KARp 32 . These interactions may serve not only to link the receptors to the cortical cytoskeleton in a regu - lated manner , but also to assemble signalling complexes that , in turn , may regulate receptor trafficking and co - receptor functions . Although functionally disparate , many ERM - associated receptors are co - expressed and may be coordinately regulated by ERMs . Well - studied examples of interactions with mem - brane proteins include the association of ERMs with the positively charged juxtamembrane regions of trans - membrane proteins such as CD43 and CD44 , and with membrane receptors such as Na + – H + exchanger 3 ( NHE3 ; also known as SlC9A3 ) or cystic fibrosis trans - membrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) that associate with EBp50 through a C - terminal pDZ - binding domain . Association with ERMs is thought to promote the activ - ation of CD44 co - receptors such as the hepatocyte growth factor receptor MET 62 , and regulated association of CD43 with ERMs is important for immuno logical synapse formation ( discussed below ) . Furthermore , interaction with ERMs is necessary for apical EBp50 localization in the mouse intestinal epithelium , which indicates that it might be necessary for the localization and / or function of EBp50 - associated receptors such as NHE3 or CTFR 2 . Indeed , many studies support a role for ezrin binding in the regulation and / or trafficking of NHE3 and CFTR , through the assembly of higher - order membrane complexes 63 . Although the primary focus of many studies of ERM function in cell signalling has been as targets or effectors of signalling mechanisms that organize the apical domain of the cell , there is a growing body of evi dence that ERMs function as upstream regula - tors of signalling mechanisms in epithelia and other tissues . Through their ability to interact with different transmembrane and membrane - associated partners , ERMs have the potential to bring cytoskeletal regu - latory proteins in close apposition to the actin cytoskeleton , or receptors together with downstream signalling components . This under - explored area of ERM research will probably result in many exciting discoveries in the future . ERM functions in development and differentiation A key prediction from biochemical studies over the past 20 years is that ERMs function to organize both the plasma membrane and the cortical cytoskeleton . However , this prediction has only recently been tested in tissues , using model systems in which ERM genetic mutations could be studied . The existence of a single ERM orthologue in D . melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans eliminates the questions of redundancy that surround mammalian studies , and gene knockout studies in mice have both supported the concept of redundancy and provided intriguing hints of func - tional diversity among mammalian ERMs ( BOX 1 ) . Recent genetic studies in D . melanogaster , C . elegans and mice have revealed a wide range of ERM functions , only some of which were predicted from earlier bio - chemical studies and the models generated from them ( discussed below ) . Oocyte polarity . The ability to asymmetrically orient and localize the cytoskeleton is known to be essential to the stable maintenance of cell polarity . Although ERMs organize the cortical cytoskeleton asymmetri - cally and thereby promote adherens junction stability and epi thelial integrity , they do not seem to be directly involved in establishing apical – basal polarity in epithe - lial cells . However , partial depletion of Moesin from the D . melanogaster oocyte can result in severe anterior – posterior polarity defects owing to the mislocalization of R E V I E W S 280 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a Oocyte polarity d Immunological synapse b Interphase c Undifferentiated cell Spindle T cell APC Epithelial cell Mitosis Moesin C - ERMAD F - actin C - ERMAD F - actin F - actin F - actin oskar mRNA Plasmamembrane Moesin Adherens junction ERM Microtubule Ezrin Moesin CD43 Bitesize ZAP70 Membranebleb T cell receptor Peptide MHCclass II Atomic force microscope A microscope that non - destructively measures the forces ( at the atomic level ) between a sharp probing tip ( which is attached to a cantilever spring ) and a sample surface . The microscope images structures at the resolution of individual atoms . gene products that specify the posterior end , including oskar mRNA and Staufen 25 , 64 ( FIG . 3a ) . localization of oskar mRNA by Staufen is known to require interaction with the cortical actin cytoskeleton 65 , which is disrupted in Moesin - depleted oocytes 25 , 64 . Interestingly , Moesin seems to stabilize actin filaments uniformly through - out the oocyte cortex , suggesting that other molecules are involved in localizing oskar mRNA and Staufen specifically in the posterior end . Mitosis . Cells in culture , and even polarized epithelial cells , undergo cortical retraction and rounding as they enter the early stages of mitosis . Concomitantly , the spindle becomes organized , elongated and properly posi - tioned in the cell . Rounding is accompanied by increased cortical stiffness , loss of stress fibres and uniform accum - ulation of actin microfilaments around the cell cortex . previous studies had shown that this process is RhoA dependent , suggesting a role for myosin II and possibly other RhoA effectors . However , the exact mechanisms by which this occurs are unclear 66 . Recent studies have shown that in D . melanogaster Moesin functions in enhancing cortical stiffness to pro - mote cell rounding during mitosis 4 , 5 . In D . melanogaster cultured cells , reduction in Moesin levels using RNA interference results in multiple defects during mitosis , including cell shape abnormalities and delay in anaphase onset . Furthermore , these cells fail to undergo normal cortical retraction and exhibit severe membrane blebbing that is Myosin II dependent . Consistent with this pheno - type , ERMs are recruited to the plasma membrane during bleb formation in interphase mammalian cells and seem to have a role in bleb retraction 67 . Measurements using an atomic force microscope indicate that cortical rigidity fails to increase during mitosis when Moesin is depleted 4 . This phenotype is suppressed by the expression of the phos - phomimetic Moesin allele but not by the non - phospho - rylatable Moesin allele . Furthermore , depletion of SlIK , which phosphorylates Moesin , results in similar pheno - types to Moesin knockdown , suggesting that the activated , phosphorylated form of Moesin is essential for the cortical contraction and rigidity that occur during mitosis . Figure 3 | In vivo functions of erMs . a | In addition to their well‑known function in supporting actin‑containing apical microvilli 8 , ERMs ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) have essential functions in several specialized tissues . In the Drosophila melanogaster oocyte , Moesin is necessary for cortical cytoskeleton integrity and the cytoskeleton‑dependent localization of posterior polarity determinants such as oskar mRNA . Moesin probably associates with transmembrane proteins during the establishment of oocyte polarity . b | An example in which ERMs function by binding to and organizing the cortical actin cytoskeleton . In interphase cells , inactive , self‑associated ERMs do not stabilize the interface between membrane proteins and the cortical cytoskeleton , yielding randomly oriented filamentous actin ( F‑actin ) and low cortical tension . As cells enter mitosis , ERM activation results in the linkage of actin filaments to the cell cortex so that they lie parallel to the plasma membrane , increased cortical tension , an associated rounding of the cell membrane and the proper positioning of the mitotic spindle . c | Another example in which ERMs function by binding to and organizing the cortical cytoskeleton . In differentiating D . melanogaster epithelial cells , Moesin recruitment to the apical membrane by Bitesize , a synaptotagmin‑ like protein , results in the recruitment and stabilization of F‑actin in the apical domain . Actin filaments , in turn , stabilize adherens junctions that assemble in the apical junctional region . Although not depicted , it is likely that Moesin interacts with unidentified transmembrane proteins in the oocyte , mitotic cells and the D . melanogaster embryonic epithelium . d | During human T cell activation , moesin , which normally binds and localizes CD43 ( also known as SPN ) to the plasma membrane , is transiently inactivated in the region where the T cell binds to the antigen‑presenting cell ( APC ) , leading to microvillar collapse and delocalization of CD43 . Simultaneously , ezrin is activated and recruits ζ ‑chain associated protein kinase of 70 kDa ( ZAP70 ) to the immunological synapse , where it phosphorylates other components of the T cell activation pathway . C‑ERMAD , carboxy‑terminal ERM‑associated domain ; MHC , major histocompatibility complex . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 281 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Imaginal disc A single - cell layer epithelial structure of the D . melanogaster larva that gives rise to wings , legs and other appendages . Brush border The highly architecturally and functionally specialized apical domain of intestinal and renal epithelial cells . It is composed of the cytoskeleton - rich terminal web and its associated apical junctions , which form a platform from which a dense array of microvilli project . These microvilli increase the absorptive and resorptive surface areas of the gut and kidney , respectively . Syncytial embryo The early stage D . melanogaster embryo , in which a rapid series of nuclear replication cycles occur in the absence of cell division , resulting in a single cell with thousands of nuclei . Synaptotagmin One of a group of Ca 2 + - binding proteins that are generally understood to be involved with the secretion of granules and vesicles , especially in the nervous system . Apical polarity complex A protein complex consisting of PAR3 ( known as Bazooka in D . melanogaster ) , PAR6 and atypical protein kinase C that establishes and maintains the apical membrane in polarized epithelial cells . Epithelial to mesenchymal transformation A morphological change that is characteristic of some developing tissues and certain forms of cancer , in which cells lose intercellular junctions and apical – basal polarity , become migratory and , in the case of cancer , become invasive . Cadherin A cell - type - specific calcium - dependent transmembrane adhesion protein . Cadherins promote homophilic binding and are preferentially located at adherens junctions . Taken together , these results support a model in which D . melanogaster Moesin , and presumably the mammalian ERMs , promote cortical rigidity by bind - ing to cortical actin filaments so that they lie parallel to the plasma membrane 4 , 68 ( FIG . 3b ) . This model is ele - gant , simple and consistent with existing paradigms for ERM function . However , as seen previously in imaginal discs 6 , many phenotypes of Moesin deficiency , including cortical deformation and spindle morphology , can be suppressed by the simultaneous depletion of Rho1 , even though cortical stiffness should be severely com - promised in these cells 5 . The same study found that both Rho1 and Myosin II are mislocalized in Moesin - depleted cells . These results suggest that there is a complex rela - tionship between ERMs and the regulation of cortical stiffness , and that the ability of ERMs to regulate RhoA has a role in this process . Epithelial morphogenesis and integrity . Early studies of ezrin indicated that it localizes to the brush border of the intestinal epithelium , strongly suggesting a role in the organization of the actin - rich apical plasma membrane of epithelial cells . Recent studies have greatly expanded our understanding of the mechanistic basis of this function for ERMs . D . melanogaster embryonic development provides a unique system in which to study epithelial morpho - genesis because the entire embryonic epidermis is formed in a simultaneous cleavage event that divides the syncytial embryo into thousands of cells at the cellular blastoderm stage . A genome - wide DNA array study to identify genes expressed specifically at this crucial stage identified a D . melanogaster synaptotagmin orthologue , Bitesize , as being expressed during the time that the blastoderm differentiates into a polarized epithelium 69 . Bitesize , a cytoplasmic protein , is recruited to the api - cal membrane domain through interactions with the apical polarity complex . In the absence of Bitesize func - tion , early aspects of apical – basal polarity , including the formation of adherens junctions , occur normally but , subsequently , epithelial organization and the adherens junctions break down . How does Bitesize stabilize adherens junctions and epithelial architecture ? protein interaction studies iden - tified Moesin as a binding partner for Bitesize 61 , and genetic studies confirmed that depletion of Moesin has a similar phenotype to loss of Bitesize 69 . As Moesin binds F - actin , these results suggest that Bitesize recruits Moesin to the apical domain early during cell polarization , and Moesin , in turn , stabilizes cortical actin . Cortical actin is required for the formation of stable adherens junctions , which are necessary for epithelial integrity and polarity ( FIG . 3c ) . Moesin also seems to have an important role in other D . melanogaster epithelia at later developmental stages . In the imaginal epithelia , Moesin loss of function mutants display a disruption in overall morph ology and epithelial integrity 6 , 57 . Mutant cells that ‘fall out’ of the epithelium lack markers for intercellular junctions or apical – basal polarity and seem to be able to migrate , suggesting that they have undergone an epithelial to mesenchymal transformation ( EMT ) . Cortical actin under - lying the apical membrane is substantially diminished in cells that remain in the epithelium but , surprisingly , adherens junctions seem to be only mildly affected . The EMT - like phenotype does not seem to be directly related to loss of apical actin because it is strongly suppressed by reducing the genetic dosage of Rho1 , even though apical actin is not restored ( A . l . Neisch and R . G . F . , unpublished observations ) . overall , studies in D . melanogaster seem to support a model in which Moesin stabilizes the apical plasma membrane and adherens junctions through its ability to interact with F - actin . However , it is not yet clear whether this is a general model for ERM function in epithelial morphogenesis . Bitesize function does not seem to be required for the development of imaginal epithelia 70 , suggesting that its interaction with Moesin is specific to the early stages of epithelial morphogenesis , or that it has redundancy with other , currently unknown proteins . Similarly , although some Moesin - mutant imaginal epithelial cells lose cell integrity and polarity , many remain integrated into the epithelial layer 6 , suggesting that ERMs are not absolutely required for adherens junction stability in established epithelia . Lumen morphogenesis . The formation of epithelial structures containing a central lumen that is lined by apical surfaces and sealed off by apical junctions under - lies the morphogenesis of vital organs across evolution . Studies in both C . elegans and mice have recently sug - gested a crucial role for ERMs in certain types of lumen morphogenesis . In C . elegans , the single ERM orthologue , ERM - 1 , localizes to the luminal membrane of epithelia that lack a supporting cuticle or flexible exoskeleton 71 , 72 . loss of ERM - 1 led to the appearance of cyst - like structures along the lumen in these epithelia , suggesting a defect in lumen formation . For example , constrictions and occlusions occur along the intestine of ERM - 1 - deficient C . elegans and are accompanied by perturbations in the cortical cytoskeleton , aberrant apical morphology and abnormal positioning of adherens junctions . Coincident loss of either hmr - 1 ( the C . elegans homologue of E - cadherin ) or hmp - 1 ( the α - catenin homologue ) , which are components of the apical portion of the C . elegans adherens junction , led to a marked fragmentation of junctional staining . This phenotype was not seen in ERM - 1 - , cadherin - or catenin - deficient worms , suggest - ing that ERM - 1 functionally interacts with components of the apical adherens junction . By contrast , genetic studies did not support a functional interaction between ERM - 1 and discs large 1 ( DlG - 1 ) , a component of the basal portion of the adherens junction . The phenotype of ERM - 1 - deficient C . elegans was also enhanced by loss of either actin or the cortical cytoskeletal protein β - H - spectrin , suggesting that ERM - 1 is important for cortical cytoskeletal integrity 71 . Intestinal lumen morphogenesis in C . elegans is thought to be accompanied by the migration of adherens junction components from an apical to an apicolateral position , yielding a free apical surface 73 . R E V I E W S 282 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Catenin A cytoplasmic protein that is directly or indirectly linked to the cytoplasmic tail of cadherins . In this complex , catenins promote the anchoring of cadherins to actin and junction stabilization . Osteosarcoma A malignant tumour of the osteoid bone . Rhabdomyosarcoma A malignant tumour of skeletal muscle . Podocyte A cell in the kidney that has a crucial function in the filtration of solutes in the blood to form urine . one group 72 suggested that this process was incomplete in the absence of ERM - 1 , yielding intestinal obstructions caused by aberrant points of adhesion between the apical surfaces of cells along the gut lumen . Another group 71 suggested that these obstructions represented severely ‘twisted’ intestinal segments that arise later during the repositioning of cells around the already formed central lumen . Either way , these observations suggest that ERM - 1 has an important function at the apical – junctional interface during lumen morphogenesis . A strikingly similar role for ezrin has been reported in the mouse intestinal epithelium , where ezrin is the only ERM expressed 2 . The mammalian intestinal lumen is normally lined with finger - like villi that expand the absorptive surface of the gut . Deletion of ezrin yields abnormal fusion of individual villi , a defect that origi - nates during embryonic development when the conver - sion of a stratified epithelium to a columnar epithelial monolayer drives villus morphogenesis . Central to this conversion is the appearance in the stratified epithelium of poorly characterized , elongated cell – cell junctions that exhibit an electron - dense appearance by trans - mission electron microscopy . De novo lumina appear at the centre of each junction and expand , always framed by these electron - dense junctions . The secondary lumina fuse together and drive the fragmentation of the stratified epithelium as it converts to a monolayer covering each villus . In the absence of ezrin , secondary lumina form but fail to expand completely , leaving incompletely segregated villi . Importantly , properly segregated regions of the villus that display a well - developed brush border do form , but ultrastructural defects in the cytoskeleton - rich apical platform ( known as the terminal web ) and its associated junctions and microvilli are evident , consistent with a role for ezrin in stabilizing this structure . The corrugated appearance of the terminal web and rounded nascent villar epithelial surfaces suggests altered tension across the apical sur - face of the epithelial sheet in the absence of ezrin , which is consistent with recent studies in D . melanogaster that implicate Moesin in controlling apical stiffness during tracheal lumen expansion 74 . These studies suggest that ERM - 1 and ezrin are important for maintaining the apical – junctional inter - face during morphogenetic processes that involve apical expansion or reorganization . Notably , in both early C . elegans and mouse embryos , ERM - 1 and ezrin are localized to the junctional region before being reposi - tioned to the apical surface as polarity is established 72 , 75 . This is also true in the developing intestine , where junc - tional concentration of ezrin precedes de novo lumen formation , and in the adult intestine , where ezrin concen trates along cell – cell boundaries in the crypt but is apically repositioned as cells differentiate and migrate up the villus axis ( I . Saotome and A . I . M . , unpublished observations ) . It is possible that ERM - 1 and ezrin actu - ally facilitate junctional remodelling along cell – cell boundaries during highly dynamic situations when cells are dividing and actively moving past each other ; sub - sequent apical relocalization might restrict remodelling to the apical – junctional interface . ERM functions in physiology and disease Given the diverse requirements for ERMs in developing tissues , it is not surprising that they also have important roles in physiology and disease . Below we discuss two prominent examples , one showing that ezrin promotes tumour metastasis and one highlighting that individual ERMs have unique roles in assembling membrane com - plexes that mediate communication between T cells and antigen - presenting cells ( ApCs ) . Metastasis . During the complex process of metastasis , tumour cells invade the surrounding normal tissue , recruit new blood vessels and successfully travel to and colonize distant organs 76 . Each step involves an intimate physical relationship between the tumour cell and sur - rounding tissue . Accumulating evidence suggests that ezrin promotes tumour metastasis , although the molec - ular and cellular basis of this is unclear . Many studies document increased ezrin expression and / or activity specifically in metastatic tumours , with human and mouse osteosarcomas and rhabdomyosarcomas being the best - studied examples 77 . Most but not all of these studies cite a unique role for ezrin in this process , but not for moesin or radixin . Recent studies suggest that ezrin is dynamically regu - lated during different stages of osteosarcoma metastasis 78 . Ezrin is upregulated early during metastatic progression and later as established metastases expand , but is down - regulated during the intervening establishment and survival of metastatic nodules . This suggests a role for ezrin in tumour invasion , initially from the primary tumour and subsequently during metastatic expansion . This is consistent with studies implicating ERMs in junc - tional remodelling and / or stability — processes known to be defective in tumour invasion 79 . Several ezrin - associated transmembrane proteins , such as CD44 , podoplanin and podocalyxin , have been implicated independently in tumour metastasis . Some studies of CD44 in tumour invasion suggest that its role is directly related to its function as a receptor for hyaluronic acid , which is often concentrated at the inva - sive front of tumours and may be important in cancer stem cell – niche interactions 80 . In addition , CD44 is thought to function as a co - receptor for certain receptor Tyr kinases such as MET , which is known to promote tumour invasion and cell motility ; this function has been shown to require the association of CD44 with ezrin 81 . podoplanin and podocalyxin are both transmembrane sialoproteins that are found in the kidney podocyte and elsewhere . podoplanin is upregulated at the outer edge of tumours , and transgenic expression of podoplanin in the RIp - Tag mouse model of pancreatic β - cell tumori - genesis promotes tumour invasion without EMT 82 . This is unusual , given that EMT is thought to promote tumour invasion by endowing tumour cells with more motile mesenchymal behaviour 83 . Moreover , podoplanin can promote EMT in Madine – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) epithelial cells in a manner that is dependent on its association with ezrin 84 . In MDCK cells , podo - calyxin can drive the formation of a pre - apical domain between cells by locally antagonizing cell – cell adhesion , R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 283 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology FERM ancestor MERM ancestor D . melanogaster Coracle Mus musculus ezrin ( 100 % ) Mus musculus radixin ( 88 % ) Mus musculus moesin ( 85 % ) Mus musculus merlin ( 59 % ) D . melanogaster Merlin ( 53 % ) D . melanogaster Moesin ( 73 % ) raising the possibility that mislocalized podocalyxin activity could antagonize cell – cell adhesion more broadly and promote motility 85 . Indeed , recent studies suggest that podocalyxin promotes the invasion of breast and prostate tumour cells in an ezrin - dependent manner 86 . Association of ezrin with all three transmembrane proteins is thought to mediate regulation ( either posi - tive or negative ) of RhoA 84 , 87 , 88 . RhoA activation , in turn , has been linked both positively and negatively to junctional stability , cell motility and tumour invasion , suggesting that context - dependency dictates the cell - ular outcome of RhoA activity 89 . It is striking that the invasive behaviour of Moesin - deficient imaginal disc epithelial cells is also driven by altered RhoA activity , although in D . melanogaster Moesin loss rather than increased expression seems to promote EMT - like behaviour 6 . It is also interesting to note that in addition to tumour cell migration , ERMs have been proposed to have both positive and negative roles in lymphocyte migration 58 , 90 . Genetic studies using mouse models should help to unravel the role of ezrin and its associated proteins in tumour metastasis in vivo . The immunological synapse — an example of ERM functional diversity . Non - vertebrate animals seem to have only one ERM , whereas vertebrates have three ( BOX 2 ) . The vertebrate ERMs show considerable tissue specifi - city , suggesting that evolution has tailored ezrin , radixin and moesin to carry out related but distinct functions in different cell types ( BOX 1 ) . An interesting example of functional diversity is seen during immunological syn - apse formation in mammalian leukocytes , which express ezrin and moesin but not radixin 91 . During immuno - logical synapse formation , a peptide presented by an ApC is recognized by the cognate T cell to form a tight inter - action that assembles in seconds and persists for hours . Recognition of the peptide presented by the ApC triggers the T cell receptor , and this induces several changes . unstimulated T cells are spherically uniform and covered in microvilli , so to form the synapse the microvilli have to be locally disassembled at the site of interaction , which is achieved through ERM dephosphorylation 92 . In addition , bulky glycoproteins ( such as CD43 ) have to be moved away , and the T cell receptor has to be recruited to the site of the synapse . Adhesion molecules have to then hold the two cells together . ERMs have been implicated in all these processes 93 – 95 . Interestingly , a similar array of ERM - mediated cytoskeletal rearrangements occurs during infection of lymphocytes by HIV - 1 ( BOX 3 ) . Two new studies , one in human cells and the other in mice , have examined in more detail the roles of ERMs in immunological synapse formation 96 , 97 . The relative con - tributions of ezrin and moesin seem to differ in the two systems . In human cells , moesin and ezrin bind different Box 2 | ERM sequence conservation between vertebrates , flies and worms ERMs ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) are encoded by three highly homologous genes that have ~ 85 % similarity at the amino acid level ( the amino acid similarity to mouse ezrin is shown in the figure ) . In all non - mammalian genomes sequenced so far there is only one ERM gene , suggesting that the genes encoding ezrin , radixin and moesin are the result of gene duplication events unique to mammals . In Drosophila melanogaster , this single ERM orthologue has been named Moesin because it lacks a polyproline stretch near the carboxyl terminus , as does mammalian moesin ( FIG . 1a ) . As indicated in the similarity tree , within the FERM domain superfamily the ERMs clearly form a subgroup with Merlin ( D . melanogaster Coracle is shown in the figure as a representative FERM domain superfamily member ) . Recent genomic sequence data from a diverse group of animals suggest that Merlin and ERMs arose early in metazoan evolution from a common ancestral protein ( the MERM ancestor ) because both genes are conserved in groups as diverse as flies , worms , mammals and even choanoflagellates 32 . If true , then their common origins would suggest that Merlin and ERMs share similarities in both cellular functions and mechanisms of regulation . Box 3 | The role of ERMs in retroviral and bacterial infections ERMs ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) have a surprisingly complex role in cells infected by retroviruses or bacteria . Infection of lymphocytes by HIV - 1 induces a complex array of cortical rearrangements that lead to the formation of what has been termed the virological synapse 107 by analogy to the immunological synapse . On contact , GP120 on the surface of the virus binds CD4 on the lymphocyte surface , recruiting this transmembrane protein and the associated protein CXC - chemokine receptor 4 ( CXCR4 ) to the contact region . Concomitantly , there is a local activation and accumulation of moesin and ezrin together with filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , the actin - binding protein filamin and the severing protein cofilin to the synapse . Small interfering RNA - mediated knockdown of ERMs strongly diminishes the ability of HIV - 1 to enter and infect cells 108 , 109 and prevents the redistribution of CD4 and CXCR4 into the synapse 108 . CD4 – CXCR4 clustering depends on the actin cytoskeleton , suggesting that ERMs facilitate virological synapse formation by anchoring actin filaments . A related series of events seems to occur in response to the attachment of Neisseria meningitides to endothelial cells . N . meningitides in the bloodstream can attach to endothelial cells and form small colonies . Infected endothelial cells form local membrane protrusions at the site of contact that facilitate bacterial internalization and transcytosis . In response , leukocytes adhere to endothelial cells at the site of infection and migrate across the endothelial layer . Stabilization of the initial leukocyte adhesion involves local activation of ERMs , accumulation of actin filaments and recruitment of adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) 110 . A recent study has revealed a fascinating mechanism that bacteria use to circumvent the host’s leukocyte response 111 . Endothelial cells respond to the adhering bacterial colony in a similar manner to leukocytes by accumulating transmembrane proteins ( ICAM1 , ICAM2 , CD44 and E - selectin ) , F - actin and active ERMs to the region of contact . As a result , infected endothelial cells are unable to respond properly to leukocytes because the N . meningitides colony titrates away a limited pool of available ERMs and blocks the formation of a leukocyte docking site , preventing leukocyte adhesion . R E V I E W S 284 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 proteins and have complementary , phosphorylation - regulated roles in the formation of the immunological synapse 97 . Specifically , in unstimulated cells , phosphoryl - ated moesin is enriched and associates with CD43 in the cell cortex , whereas ezrin is largely unphosphorylated and located in the cytoplasm . on stimulation , moesin is rapidly and locally dephosphorylated to collapse the microvilli in the contact area and release CD43 . Ezrin binds to , and is needed for , the recruitment of ζ - chain associated protein kinase of 70kDa ( ZAp70 ; a down - stream component of T cell signalling ) to the synapse , from which moesin and CD43 are excluded ( FIG . 3d ) . In mice , ezrin and moesin are also found in comple - mentary regions during immunological synapse for - mation , but this transient state ends with both being localized to the distal pole of the cell 96 . In contrast to human cells , immunological synapse formation had only modest defects in ezrin - knockout cells , as ZAp70 was correctly localized , whereas depletion of both ezrin and moesin had severe effects . Thus , it seems that in mice , ezrin and moesin play both unique and redundant parts in immunological synapse formation . Conclusion and perspectives Recent work using genetic approaches has revealed a surprising wealth of phenotypes and functions for ERMs in the context of both normal tissues and disease states . Such a wide array of phenotypes , from loss of epithelial integrity to disruption of embryonic anterior – posterior polarity , seems to suggest a wide range of molecular functions . Nonetheless , all available evidence suggests that ERMs function primarily to organize the interface between the actin cytoskeleton and the plasma membrane in various cellular contexts ( FIG . 3 ) , so the impressive plei - otropy of ERM mutant phenotypes may simply represent the diverse range of functions of membrane – cytoskeletal interactions in all cells . There are hints that ERMs may regulate cortical cytoskeletal organization in multiple ways . By far the best documented is the ability of the C - ERMAD to bind F - actin , thereby perhaps organizing and bundling filaments parallel to the cell membrane . In addition , there is increasing evidence that ERMs may interact with dif - ferent sets of transmembrane and membrane - associated partners in different cells and subcellular domains ( FIG . 3d ) , thereby bringing cytoskeletal regulatory proteins in close apposition to the actin cytoskeleton . This ability to interact with multiple partners , possibly in a combin - atorial manner , provides the potential for consider able functional diversity . Thus , further elucidation of ERM binding partners , and the contexts in which they interact , will be a key area for future research . Another important and still unexplored area of ERM research is how they are regulated . Although we know that head to tail folding , which is controlled by phospho - lipid binding and phosphorylation , is important , we know little about the mechanisms upstream of these events . Is membrane phospholipid composition regulated to affect ERM function as suggested by a recent study 98 ? How exactly is ERM phosphorylation controlled and in what cellular and developmental contexts is this regulated ? As described in BOX 2 , within the FERM domain superfamily the ERMs are most closely related to merlin , which is encoded by the neurofibromin 2 ( NF2 ) tumour suppressor gene . Merlin is required for proper growth regulation in both mammals and D . melanogaster , sug - gesting that its molecular functions are well conserved . Although there is clear evidence that ERMs and merlin are derived from a common evolutionary precursor ( BOX 2 ) , we currently have a poor understanding of their functional relationship . Given the structural similarities between merlin and ERMs , it seems likely that they share molecular properties , but genetic analyses carried out so far suggest that their phenotypes are different ( BOX 4 ) . Further studies in these areas are likely to reveal even more functions for ERMs and may provide clearer insights into the precise mechanisms by which ERMs organize and control specialized membrane domains . Integration of this information into a comprehensive model of regulated ERM - mediated membrane complex formation will , in turn , increase our understanding of many complex biological and disease processes . Box 4 | Merlin and its relationship to ERMs When positional cloning studies revealed that neurofibromin 2 ( NF2 ) encodes a protein , merlin , that is closely related to ERMs ( ezrin , radixin and moesin ) , it was initially surprising that a protein thought to mediate membrane – cytoskeletal interactions could have a role in growth control 112 , 113 . Subsequent studies have suggested that merlin acts at the plasma membrane , possibly to regulate growth factor receptor availability at the cell surface , a function that is consistent with a protein that regulates membrane – cytoskeletal interactions 32 . However , genetic studies indicate that merlin and the ERMs have different functions , despite the fact that these proteins seem to have diverged evolutionarily from a common ancestor and have retained marked sequence and structural similarity . Substantial aspects of the conformational regulation model are conserved in merlin , although the simple closed - inactive , open - active relationship for ERM may not apply to merlin 32 . Studies have identified several binding partners that are shared by all of these proteins , and merlin and the ERMs seem to be regulated by a combination of phosphorylation and phospholipid binding . One model suggests that merlin and ERMs might function antagonistically , perhaps because ERMs have a well - defined actin - binding domain at the carboxyl terminus , which is not present in merlin . Indeed , deletion of the actin - binding domain produces a dominant - negative form of ERMs 6 . However , ERMs are approximatley ten times more abundant than merlin in cells , suggesting that merlin would be a weak competitive binding partner 114 . Nonetheless , the overall similarity in structure and common evolutionary origin suggests that the functional differences between merlin and ERMs are the result of different specificities for binding partners rather than fundamentally different modes of molecular action . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 285 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 1 . Lajoie , P . , Goetz , J . G . , Dennis , J . W . & Nabi , I . R . Lattices , rafts , and scaffolds : domain regulation of receptor signaling at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 381 – 385 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Saotome , I . , Curto , M . & McClatchey , A . I . Ezrin is essential for epithelial organization and villus morphogenesis in the developing intestine . Dev . Cell 6 , 855 – 864 ( 2004 ) . This work provides a detailed phenotypic analysis of epithelial defects in the intestine of mice deficient for ezrin , showing that ezrin has a crucial role in lumen morphogenesis in the gut . 3 . Chorna - Ornan , I . et al . Light - regulated interaction of Dmoesin with TRP and TRPL channels is required for maintenance of photoreceptors . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 143 – 152 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Kunda , P . , Pelling , A . E . , Liu , T . & Baum , B . Moesin controls cortical rigidity , cell rounding , and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 91 – 101 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Carreno , S . et al . Moesin and its activating kinase Slik are required for cortical stability and microtubule organization in mitotic cells . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 739 – 746 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Speck , O . , Hughes , S . C . , Noren , N . K . , Kulikauskas , R . M . & Fehon , R . G . Moesin functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity . Nature 421 , 83 – 87 ( 2003 ) . This in vivo analysis of Moesin’s role in D . melanogaster epithelial morphogenesis shows that there are strong functional interactions between Moesin and RhoA . 7 . Ivetic , A . & Ridley , A . J . Ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins and Rho GTPase signalling in leucocytes . Immunology 112 , 165 – 176 ( 2004 ) . 8 . Bretscher , A . , Edwards , K . & Fehon , R . G . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators at the cell cortex . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 586 – 599 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Gautreau , A . , Louvard , D . & Arpin , M . ERM proteins and NF2 tumor suppressor : the Yin and Yang of cortical actin organization and cell growth signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 104 – 109 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Tsukita , S . & Yonemura , S . Cortical actin organization : lessons from ERM ( Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin ) proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 34507 – 34510 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Turunen , O . , Wahlstrom , T . & Vaheri , A . Ezrin has a COOH - terminal actin - binding site that is conserved in the ezrin protein family . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 1445 – 1453 ( 1994 ) . 12 . Gary , R . & Bretscher , A . Ezrin self - association involves binding of an N - terminal domain to a normally masked C - terminal domain that includes the F - actin binding site . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1061 – 1075 ( 1995 ) . 13 . Nakamura , F . , Amieva , M . R . & Furthmayr , H . Phosphorylation of threonine 558 in the carboxyl - terminal actin - binding domain of moesin by thrombin activation of human platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31377 – 31385 ( 1995 ) . 14 . Yonemura , S . , Matsui , T . & Tsukita , S . Rho - dependent and - independent activation mechanisms of ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins : an essential role for polyphosphoinositides in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2569 – 2580 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Fievet , B . T . et al . Phosphoinositide binding and phosphorylation act sequentially in the activation mechanism of ezrin . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 653 – 659 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Belkina , N . V . , Liu , Y . , Hao , J . J . , Karasuyama , H . & Shaw , S . LOK is a major ERM kinase in resting lymphocytes and regulates cytoskeletal rearrangement through ERM phosphorylation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 4707 – 4712 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Matsui , T . et al . Rho - kinase phosphorylates COOH - terminal threonines of ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins and regulates their head - to - tail association . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 647 – 657 ( 1998 ) . 18 . Ng , T . et al . Ezrin is a downstream effector of trafficking PKC - integrin complexes involved in the control of cell motility . EMBO J . 20 , 2723 – 2741 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Simons , P . C . , Pietromonaco , S . F . , Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . & Elias , L . C - terminal threonine phosphorylation activates ERM proteins to link the cell’s cortical lipid bilayer to the cytoskeleton . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 253 , 561 – 565 ( 1998 ) . 20 . ten Klooster , J . P . et al . Mst4 and Ezrin induce brush borders downstream of the Lkb1 / Strad / Mo25 polarization complex . Dev . Cell 16 , 551 – 562 ( 2009 ) . 21 . McCartney , B . M . & Fehon , R . G . Distinct cellular and subcellular patterns of expression imply distinct functions for the Drosophila homologues of Moesin and the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor , Merlin . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 843 – 852 ( 1996 ) . 22 . Hipfner , D . R . , Keller , N . & Cohen , S . M . Slik Sterile - 20 kinase regulates Moesin activity to promote epithelial integrity during tissue growth . Genes Dev . 18 , 2243 – 2248 ( 2004 ) . This paper shows that the Sterile 20 family kinase SLIK is required for D . melanogaster Moesin phosphorylation in vivo and that loss of this phosphorylation produces a strong Moesin - like phenotype , showing that C - terminal phosphorylation is necessary for ERM function . 23 . Hughes , S . C . & Fehon , R . G . Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are coordinately regulated by the Slik kinase . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 305 – 313 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Verdier , V . et al . Drosophila Rho - kinase ( DRok ) is required for tissue morphogenesis in diverse compartments of the egg chamber during oogenesis . Dev . Biol . 297 , 417 – 432 ( 2006 ) . 25 . Polesello , C . , Delon , I . , Valenti , P . , Ferrer , P . & Payre , F . Dmoesin controls actin - based cell shape and polarity during Drosophila melanogaster oogenesis . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 782 – 789 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Karagiosis , S . A . & Ready , D . F . Moesin contributes an essential structural role in Drosophila photoreceptor morphogenesis . Development 131 , 725 – 732 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Chambers , D . N . & Bretscher , A . Ezrin mutants affecting dimerization and activation . Biochemistry 44 , 3926 – 3932 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Yang , H . S . & Hinds , P . W . Increased Ezrin expression and activation by CDK5 coincident with acquisition of the senescent phenotype . Mol . Cell 11 , 1163 – 1176 ( 2003 ) . 29 . Pearson , M . , Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . & Karplus , P . Structure of the ERM protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding tail domain . Cell 101 , 259 – 270 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Krieg , J . & Hunter , T . Identification of the two major epidermal growth factor - induced tyrosine phosphorylation sites in the microvillar core protein ezrin . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 19258 – 19265 ( 1992 ) . 31 . Dransfield , D . T . , Bradford , A . J . & Goldenring , J . R . Distribution of A - kinase anchoring proteins in parietal cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1269 , 215 – 220 ( 1995 ) . 32 . McClatchey , A . I . & Fehon , R . G . Merlin and the ERM proteins — regulators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex . Trends Cell Biol . 19 , 198 – 206 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Yonemura , S . et al . Ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins bind to a positively charged amino acid cluster in the juxta - membrane cytoplasmic domain of CD44 , CD43 , and ICAM - 2 . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 885 – 895 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Weinman , E . J . , Hall , R . A . , Friedman , P . A . , Liu - Chen , L . Y . & Shenolikar , S . The association of NHERF adaptor proteins with G protein - coupled receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 68 , 491 – 505 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Lalonde , D . & Bretscher , A . The scaffold protein PDZK1 undergoes a head - to - tail intramolecular association that negatively regulates its interaction with EBP50 . Biochemistry 48 , 2261 – 2271 ( 2009 ) . 36 . Cheng , H . et al . Autoinhibitory interactions between the PDZ2 and C - terminal domains in the scaffolding protein NHERF1 . Structure 17 , 660 – 669 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Morales , F . C . et al . NHERF1 / EBP50 head - to - tail intramolecular interaction masks association with PDZ domain ligands . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 2527 – 2537 ( 2007 ) . 38 . Smith , W . J . , Nassar , N . , Bretscher , A . , Cerione , R . A . & Karplus , P . A . Structure of the active N - terminal domain of ezrin . Conformational and mobility changes identify keystone interactions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 4949 – 4956 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Hamada , K . , Shimizu , T . , Matsui , T . , Tsukita , S . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis of the membrane - targeting and unmasking mechanisms of the radixin FERM domain . EMBO J . 19 , 4449 – 4462 ( 2000 ) . 40 . Edwards , S . D . & Keep , N . H . The 2 . 7 Å crystal structure of the activated FERM domain of moesin : an analysis of structural changes on activation . Biochemistry 40 , 7061 – 7068 ( 2001 ) . 41 . Takai , Y . , Kitano , K . , Terawaki , S . , Maesaki , R . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis of PSGL - 1 binding to ERM proteins . Genes Cells 12 , 1329 – 1338 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Takai , Y . , Kitano , K . , Terawaki , S . , Maesaki , R . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis of the cytoplasmic tail of adhesion molecule CD43 and its binding to ERM proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 381 , 634 – 644 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Hamada , K . , Shimizu , T . , Yonemura , S . , Tsukita , S . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis of adhesion - molecule recognition by ERM proteins revealed by the crystal structure of the radixin - ICAM - 2 complex . EMBO J . 22 , 502 – 514 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Mori , T . et al . Structural basis for CD44 recognition by ERM proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 29602 – 29612 ( 2008 ) . 45 . Terawaki , S . , Kitano , K . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis for type II membrane protein binding by ERM proteins revealed by the radixin - neutral endopeptidase 24 . 11 ( NEP ) complex . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 19854 – 19862 ( 2007 ) . 46 . Finnerty , C . M . et al . The EBP50 - moesin interaction involves a binding site regulated by direct masking on the FERM domain . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 1547 – 1552 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Terawaki , S . , Maesaki , R . & Hakoshima , T . Structural basis for NHERF recognition by ERM proteins . Structure 14 , 777 – 789 ( 2006 ) . 48 . Jayaraman , B . & Nicholson , L . K . Thermodynamic dissection of the Ezrin FERM / CERMAD interface . Biochemistry 46 , 12174 – 12189 ( 2007 ) . 49 . Reczek , D . & Bretscher , A . The carboxyl - terminal region of EBP50 binds to a site in the amino - terminal domain of ezrin that is masked in the dormant molecule . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 18452 – 18458 ( 1998 ) . 50 . Li , Q . et al . Self - masking in an intact ERM - merlin protein : an active role for the central α - helical domain . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 1446 – 1459 ( 2007 ) . The first structural determination of a full - length ERM ; this paper shows how head to tail folding results in inactivation of the ERM , and provides support for a model in which ERMs are activated by sequential unfolding . 51 . Mackay , D . J . , Esch , F . , Furthmayr , H . & Hall , A . Rho - and rac - dependent assembly of focal adhesion complexes and actin filaments in permeabilized fibroblasts : an essential role for ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 927 – 938 ( 1997 ) . 52 . Hirao , M . et al . Regulation mechanism of ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) protein / plasma membrane association : possible involvement of phosphatidylinositol turnover and Rho - dependent signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 37 – 51 ( 1996 ) . 53 . Hatzoglou , A . et al . Gem associates with Ezrin and acts via the Rho - GAP protein Gmip to down - regulate the Rho pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 1242 – 1252 ( 2007 ) . 54 . Reczek , D . & Bretscher , A . Identification of EPI64 , a TBC / rabGAP domain - containing microvillar protein that binds to the first PDZ domain of EBP50 and E3KARP . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 191 – 206 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Hamada , K . et al . Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of RhoGDI in complex with the radixin FERM domain . Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 57 , 889 – 890 ( 2001 ) . 56 . D’Angelo , R . et al . Interaction of ezrin with the novel guanine nucleotide exchange factor PLEKHG6 promotes RhoG - dependent apical cytoskeleton rearrangements in epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 4780 – 4793 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Molnar , C . & de Celis , J . F . Independent roles of Drosophila Moesin in imaginal disc morphogenesis and hedgehog signalling . Mech . Dev . 123 , 337 – 351 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Lee , J . H . et al . Roles of p - ERM and Rho - ROCK signaling in lymphocyte polarity and uropod formation . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 327 – 337 ( 2004 ) . 59 . Takahashi , K . et al . Direct interaction of the Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin / radixin / moesin initiates the activation of the Rho small G protein . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 23371 – 23375 ( 1997 ) . 60 . Takahashi , K . et al . Interaction of radixin with Rho small G protein GDP / GTP exchange protein Dbl . Oncogene 16 , 3279 – 3284 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Formstecher , E . et al . Protein interaction mapping : a Drosophila case study . Genome Res . 15 , 376 – 384 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Orian - Rousseau , V . et al . Hepatocyte growth factor - induced Ras activation requires ERM proteins linked to both CD44v6 and F - actin . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 76 – 83 ( 2007 ) . 63 . Lamprecht , G . & Seidler , U . The emerging role of PDZ adapter proteins for regulation of intestinal ion transport . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 291 , G766 – G777 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S 286 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 64 . Jankovics , F . , Sinka , R . , Lukacsovich , T . & Erdelyi , M . Moesin crosslinks actin and cell membrane in Drosophila oocytes and is required for OSKAR anchoring . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2060 – 2065 ( 2002 ) . Together with reference 25 , this paper shows an essential role for Moesin in D . melanogaster oocyte polarity . 65 . Micklem , D . R . , Adams , J . , Grunert , S . & St . Johnston , D . Distinct roles of two conserved Staufen domains in oskar mRNA localization and translation . EMBO J . 19 , 1366 – 1377 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Maddox , A . S . & Burridge , K . RhoA is required for cortical retraction and rigidity during mitotic cell rounding . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 255 – 265 ( 2003 ) . 67 . Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . & Mitchison , T . J . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 477 – 490 ( 2006 ) . 68 . Neisch , A . & Fehon , R . G . FERMing up the plasma membrane . Dev . Cell 14 , 154 – 156 ( 2008 ) . 69 . Pilot , F . , Philippe , J . M . , Lemmers , C . & Lecuit , T . Spatial control of actin organization at adherens junctions by a synaptotagmin - like protein Btsz . Nature 442 , 580 – 584 ( 2006 ) . 70 . Serano , J . & Rubin , G . M . The Drosophila synaptotagmin - like protein bitesize is required for growth and has mRNA localization sequences within its open reading frame . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13368 – 13373 ( 2003 ) . 71 . Gobel , V . , Barrett , P . L . , Hall , D . H . & Fleming , J . T . Lumen morphogenesis in C . elegans requires the membrane - cytoskeleton linker erm - 1 . Dev . Cell 6 , 865 – 873 ( 2004 ) . 72 . Van Furden , D . , Johnson , K . , Segbert , C . & Bossinger , O . The C . elegans ezrin - radixin - moesin protein ERM - 1 is necessary for apical junction remodelling and tubulogenesis in the intestine . Dev . Biol . 272 , 262 – 276 ( 2004 ) . References 71 and 72 explore ERM function in C . elegans epithelia and show that in C . elegans ERMs function in luminal morphogenesis in the gut . 73 . Bossinger , O . , Klebes , A . , Segbert , C . , Theres , C . & Knust , E . Zonula adherens formation in Caenorhabditis elegans requires dlg - 1 , the homologue of the Drosophila gene discs large . Dev . Biol . 230 , 29 – 42 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Kerman , B . E . , Cheshire , A . M . , Myat , M . M . & Andrew , D . J . Ribbon modulates apical membrane during tube elongation through Crumbs and Moesin . Dev . Biol . 320 , 278 – 288 ( 2008 ) . 75 . Louvet , S . , Aghion , J . , Santa - Maria , A . , Mangeat , P . & Maro , B . Ezrin becomes restricted to outer cells following asymmetrical division in the preimplantation mouse embryo . Dev . Biol . 177 , 568 – 579 ( 1996 ) . 76 . Christofori , G . New signals from the invasive front . Nature 441 , 444 – 450 ( 2006 ) . 77 . Hunter , K . W . Ezrin , a key component in tumor metastasis . Trends Mol . Med . 10 , 201 – 204 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Ren , L . et al . The actin - cytoskeleton linker protein ezrin is regulated during osteosarcoma metastasis by PKC . Oncogene 28 , 792 – 802 ( 2009 ) . 79 . Jeanes , A . , Gottardi , C . J . & Yap , A . S . Cadherins and cancer : how does cadherin dysfunction promote tumor progression ? Oncogene 27 , 6920 – 6929 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Ponta , H . , Sherman , L . & Herrlich , P . A . CD44 : from adhesion molecules to signalling regulators . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 33 – 45 ( 2003 ) . 81 . Orian - Rousseau , V . & Ponta , H . Adhesion proteins meet receptors : a common theme ? Adv . Cancer Res . 101 , 63 – 92 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Wicki , A . et al . Tumor invasion in the absence of epithelial - mesenchymal transition : podoplanin - mediated remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . Cancer Cell 9 , 261 – 272 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Polyak , K . & Weinberg , R . A . Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states : acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits . Nature Rev . Cancer 9 , 265 – 273 ( 2009 ) . 84 . Martin - Villar , E . et al . Podoplanin binds ERM proteins to activate RhoA and promote epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4541 – 4553 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Meder , D . , Shevchenko , A . , Simons , K . & Fullekrug , J . Gp135 / podocalyxin and NHERF - 2 participate in the formation of a preapical domain during polarization of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 303 – 313 ( 2005 ) . 86 . Sizemore , S . , Cicek , M . , Sizemore , N . , Ng , K . P . & Casey , G . Podocalyxin increases the aggressive phenotype of breast and prostate cancer cells in vitro through its interaction with ezrin . Cancer Res . 67 , 6183 – 6191 ( 2007 ) . 87 . Bourguignon , L . Y . Hyaluronan - mediated CD44 activation of RhoGTPase signaling and cytoskeleton function promotes tumor progression . Semin . Cancer Biol . 18 , 251 – 259 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Schmieder , S . , Nagai , M . , Orlando , R . A . , Takeda , T . & Farquhar , M . G . Podocalyxin activates RhoA and induces actin reorganization through NHERF1 and Ezrin in MDCK cells . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol 15 , 2289 – 2298 ( 2004 ) . 89 . Samarin , S . & Nusrat , A . Regulation of epithelial apical junctional complex by Rho family GTPases . Front . Biosci . 14 , 1129 – 1142 ( 2009 ) . 90 . Yoshinaga - Ohara , N . , Takahashi , A . , Uchiyama , T . & Sasada , M . Spatiotemporal regulation of moesin phosphorylation and rear release by Rho and serine / threonine phosphatase during neutrophil migration . Exp . Cell Res . 278 , 112 – 122 ( 2002 ) . 91 . Shcherbina , A . , Bretscher , A . , Kenney , D . M . & Remold - O’Donnell , E . Moesin , the major ERM protein of lymphocytes and platelets , differs from ezrin in its insensitivity to calpain . FEBS Lett . 443 , 31 – 36 ( 1999 ) . 92 . Faure , S . et al . ERM proteins regulate cytoskeleton relaxation promoting T cell - APC conjugation . Nature Immunol . 5 , 272 – 279 ( 2004 ) . 93 . Delon , J . , Kaibuchi , K . & Germain , R . N . Exclusion of CD43 from the immunological synapse is mediated by phosphorylation - regulated relocation of the cytoskeletal adaptor moesin . Immunity 15 , 691 – 701 ( 2001 ) . 94 . Allenspach , E . J . et al . ERM - dependent movement of CD43 defines a novel protein complex distal to the immunological synapse . Immunity 15 , 739 – 750 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Roumier , A . et al . The membrane - microfilament linker ezrin is involved in the formation of the immunological synapse and in T cell activation . Immunity 15 , 715 – 728 ( 2001 ) . References 93 – 95 describe the role of ERMs in the formation of the immunological synapse during T cell activation . 96 . Shaffer , M . H . et al . Ezrin and moesin function together to promote T cell activation . J . Immunol . 182 , 1021 – 1032 ( 2009 ) . 97 . Ilani , T . , Khanna , C . , Zhou , M . , Veenstra , T . D . & Bretscher , A . Immune synapse formation requires ZAP - 70 recruitment by ezrin and CD43 removal by moesin . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 733 – 746 ( 2007 ) . 98 . Hao , J . J . et al . Phospholipase C - mediated hydrolysis of PIP2 releases ERM proteins from lymphocyte membrane . J . Cell Biol . 184 , 451 – 462 ( 2009 ) . 99 . Krieg , J . & Hunter , T . Identification of the two major epidermal growth factor - induced tyrosine phosphorylation sites in the microvillar core protein ezrin . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 19258 – 19265 ( 1992 ) . 100 . Lankes , W . T . & Furthmayr , H . Moesin : a member of the protein 4 . 1 - talin - ezrin family of proteins . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 8297 – 8301 ( 1991 ) . 101 . Kikuchi , S . et al . Radixin deficiency causes conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with loss of Mrp2 from bile canalicular membranes . Nature Genet . 31 , 320 – 325 ( 2002 ) . 102 . Doi , Y . et al . Normal development of mice and unimpaired cell adhesion / cell motility / actin - based cytoskeleton without compensatory up - regulation of ezrin or radixin in moesin gene knockout . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 2315 – 2321 ( 1999 ) . 103 . Tamura , A . et al . Achlorhydria by ezrin knockdown : defects in the formation / expansion of apical canaliculi in gastric parietal cells . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 21 – 28 ( 2005 ) . 104 . Kitajiri , S . et al . Radixin deficiency causes deafness associated with progressive degeneration of cochlear stereocilia . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 559 – 570 ( 2004 ) . 105 . Okayama , T . et al . Attenuated response to liver injury in moesin - deficient mice : impaired stellate cell migration and decreased fibrosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1782 , 542 – 548 ( 2008 ) . 106 . Hashimoto , S . et al . Dysregulation of lung injury and repair in moesin - deficient mice treated with intratracheal bleomycin . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 295 , L566 – 574 ( 2008 ) . 107 . Liu , Y . , Belkina , N . V . & Shaw , S . HIV infection of T cells : actin - in and actin - out . Sci . Signal . 2 , pe23 ( 2009 ) . 108 . Barrero - Villar , M . et al . Moesin is required for HIV - 1 - induced CD4 - CXCR4 interaction , F - actin redistribution , membrane fusion and viral infection in lymphocytes . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 103 – 113 ( 2009 ) . 109 . Kubo , Y . et al . Ezrin , Radixin , and Moesin ( ERM ) proteins function as pleiotropic regulators of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection . Virology 375 , 130 – 140 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Millan , J . & Ridley , A . J . Rho GTPases and leucocyte - induced endothelial remodelling . Biochem . J . 385 , 329 – 337 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Doulet , N . et al . Neisseria meningitidis infection of human endothelial cells interferes with leukocyte transmigration by preventing the formation of endothelial docking structures . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 627 – 637 ( 2006 ) . 112 . Trofatter , J . A . et al . A novel moesin - , ezrin - , radixin - like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor . Cell 72 , 791 – 800 ( 1993 ) . 113 . Rouleau , G . A . et al . Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative membrane - organizing protein causes neurofibromatosis type 2 . Nature 363 , 515 – 521 ( 1993 ) . 114 . Maeda , M . , Matsui , T . , Imamura , M . & Tsukita , S . Expression level , subcellular distribution and rho - GDI binding affinity of merlin in comparison with Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin proteins . Oncogene 18 , 4788 – 4797 ( 1999 ) . Acknowledgements We thank the members of our laboratories for their contribu - tions and helpful discussions . We apologize for work that was omitted owing to space limitations . Work in our labora - tories was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( A . B . , R . G . F . and A . I . M . ) and the US Army Neurofibromatosis Research Program ( A . B . and A . I . M . ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gene hmp‑1 | hmr‑1 | NF2 Protein Data Bank : http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb 1EF1 | 1J19 | 1SGH | 2I1J UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org CD43 | CD44 | CDK5 | CFTR | DLG‑1 | E3KARP | EBP50 | EGFR | ezrin | ICAM2 | IRS1 | LOK | MET | moesin | MST4 | NHE3 | NIK | PDZK1 | PSGL1 | radixin | RhoA | Rho1 | ZAP70 FURTHER INFORMATION Richard G . Fehon’s homepage : http : / / fehonlab . bsd . uchicago . edu Andrea I . McClatchey’s homepage : http : / / www . hms . harvard . edu / dms / bbs / fac / mcclatchey . html Anthony Bretscher’s homepage : http : / / www . icmb . cornell . edu / faculty‑staff / bretscher / bretscher‑lab all linkS are active in the online pDF R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 287 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 erratum Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins Richard G . Fehon , Andrea I . McClatchey & Anthony Bretscher Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 11 , 276 – 287 ( 2010 ) . On page 277 of the above article , there is a mistake with the definition and alternative name of NIK . This should be NCK - interacting kinase ( also known as MAP4K4 ) and not NF - κβ - inducing kinase ( also known as MAP3K14 ) as stated . We apologize for any confusion caused to the readers . © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10