Current Biology , Vol . 13 , 252 – 257 , February 4 , 2003 ,  2003 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00040 - X ADF / Cofilin Controls Cell Polarity during Fibroblast Migration assembly , but how polarized protrusion is established and maintained during migration is poorly understood . Direct evidence showed that recently disassembled ac - Helen R . Dawe , 1 Laurie S . Minamide , 2 James R . Bamburg , 2 and Louise P . Cramer 1 , * 1 MRC - Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Department of Biology tin filaments are required for protrusion of the lamelli - podium during chick embryo fibroblast migration [ 1 ] ; University College London London WC1E 6BT however , recent disassembly was not necessary for nonpolarized protrusion in nonmigrating cells . One im - United Kingdom 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular plication of these data is that the mechanisms of polar - ized and nonpolarized protrusion are distinct . As the Biology Colorado State University ADF / cofilin ( AC ) family of proteins is essential for fila - ment disassembly / severing in cells [ 2 , 3 ] , we hypothe - Fort Collins , Colorado 80523 size that controlling AC activity regulates polarized la - mellipodium protrusion during migration . AC proteins are inactivated by phosphorylation by the LIM [ 4 , 5 ] and Summary TES [ 6 ] family kinases for which , to date , AC proteins are the only known substrates . To migrate , normally a cell must establish morphologi - A role for AC in cell polarity during migration has not cal polarity and continuously protrude a single lamelli - previously been investigated . One study [ 7 ] showed that podium , polarized in the direction of migration . We ACis necessaryfor protrusionin EGF - stimulatedadeno - have previously shown that actin filament disassembly carcinoma cells , but it is difficult to assess a role for AC isnecessary forprotrusion ofthe lamellipodiumduring in cell polarity in this study , as cells were assessed at fibroblast migration . As ADF / cofilin ( AC ) proteins are a very early step , possibly prior to initiation of whole essential for the catalysis of filament disassembly in cell migration . Cell polarity is also difficult to assess , as , cells , we assessed their role in polarized lamellipod - at this early stage , lamellipodia appeared delocalized . ium protrusion in migrating fibroblasts . We compared Other studies [ 4 , 5 ] have modulated AC activity in cells the spatial distribution of AC and the inactive , phos - by overexpressing constitutively active or dominant - phorylated AC ( pAC ) in migrating cells . AC , but not negative LIM kinase ( LIMK ) but have focused on cell pAC , localized to the lamellipodium . To investigate a types that do not typically migrate . Here , we examine role for AC in cell polarity , we increased the proportion theeffectofmutantACproteinsandconstitutivelyactive of pAC in migrating fibroblasts by overexpressing con - LIMK 1 in maintaining cell polarity during established stitutively active ( CA ) LIM kinase 1 . In 87 % of cells migrationinchickembryoheartfibroblaststhataremov - expressing CA LIM kinase , cell polarity was abolished . ingconstitutivelyinprimarycellculture . Thesecellshave In such cells , the single polarized lamellipodium was a characteristic morphology and are typically wedge or replaced by multiple nonpolarized lamellipodia , which , kite shaped with a single , clearly polarized lamelli - in contrast to nonexpressing migrating cells , stained podium . for pAC . Cell polarity was rescued by coexpressing an As a first clue to identify candidate mechanisms for active , nonphosphorylatable Xenopus AC ( CA XAC ) regulating cell polarity during migration , we investigated with the CA LIMK . Furthermore , overexpressing a the distribution of AC and pAC in separate populations pseudophosphorylated ( less active ) XAC by itself also of fixed , migrating ( 12 – 36 hr culture ) and nonmigrating abolished cell polarity . We conclude that locally main - ( 8 - day culture ) chick embryo fibroblasts , grown out from taining ADF / cofilin in the active , nonphosphorylated heart explants as previously described [ 1 ] . A specific statewithinthelamellipodiumisnecessarytomaintain antibody that recognizes both ADF and pADF in chick polarized protrusion during cell migration . cells [ 8 ] was used to show that ADF was localized fairly homogeneously throughout thecell , including the lamel - Results and Discussion lipodium , in both migrating ( Figures 1A and 1C ) and nonmigrating ( Figures 1B and 1D ) fibroblasts . The lamel - Many types of motile cells protrude lamellipodia , actin - lipodium is clearly identified as an F - actin - rich band , as rich membrane extensions of the cell . In order for a probed with phalloidin in stained cells ( Figures 1A and normal cell to migrate , it must become polarized and 1B ) . A similar distribution was observed for cofilin when continuously protrude a single lamellipodium ( e . g . , Fig - cells were stained with a specific antibody ( ACFL02 - A , ure 1A , between arrows ) , oriented in the direction of Cytoskeleton ) that recognizes both cofilin and pcofilin migration . Nonmigrating cells can also protrude lamelli - ( data not shown ) . In contrast , pAC was differentially podia , but a key difference is that morphological polarity distributed in cells stained with a specific antibody that has been lost and many lamellipodia protrude from mul - recognizes only the phosphorylated form of both ADF tiple points around the cell ( e . g . , Figure 1B , between and cofilin [ 9 ] . In migrating cells , it was clear from super - arrows ) , resulting in no net motility . It is clear that the imposing pAC and phalloidin staining in costained cells initial step of lamellipodium protrusion depends on actin that pAC was localized to the cell body but depleted from the lamellipodium itself ( Figure 2F , absence of fluo - rescence between the arrows ) . A longer fixation time * Correspondence : l . cramer @ ucl . ac . uk Brief Communication 253 J774 macrophages , as in migrating fibroblasts , pAC was absent from the lamellipodium , while , in PtK2 cells , a nonmigrating epithelial cell line like nonmigrating fibro - blasts , pAC was present throughout the lamellipodium ( data not shown ) . To investigate whether the observed distribution of AC and pAC in cells is important for controlling cell polarity during cell migration , we expressed either con - stitutively active LIM kinase 1 ( CA LIMK ) to increase the proportion of pAC in cells or mutant AC proteins in migrating fibroblasts . As with other primary cell types , gene transfer into migrating heart fibroblasts is ineffi - cient when conventional transfection protocols are used . However , when using the AdEasy adenoviral sys - tem ( Stratagene ) , we found that the cells infect and ex - press exogenous CA LIMK and mutant AC proteins effi - ciently . Viral infection with an empty virus control containing only GFP had no effect on cell polarity or cell migration speed , and the appearance of infected cells was indistinguishable from noninfected controls ( Figure 3 , compare [ B ] to [ K ] ; Figure 4 , compare [ A ] to [ E ] ) . However , optimal protein expression of infected cells occurred after 48 hr of infection , the time that fibroblasts grown on coverslips in primary culture begin to lose migration capacity . Therefore , in addition to simultane - ously infecting and growing out cells for 24 hr from explants plated on matrigel - coated coverslips ( the stan - dard method of preparing a population of migrating cells , [ 1 ] ) , we also infected explants in suspension cul - ture for an additional 24 hr prior to plating the explants . While suspension culture of individual cells resulted in extensive cell death within 8 hr , explants could be suc - cessfully held in suspension without loss of viability for up to 5 days ( data not shown ) . The period in suspension culture had no effect on the ability of fibroblasts to ad - here to coverslips and migrate out from the explants at Figure 1 . ADF Is Localized to the Lamellipodium in Migrating and expected speeds and morphology ( data not shown ) . Nonmigrating Fibroblasts First , we increased the proportion of pAC in migrating ( A – H ) ( A , C , E , and F ) Migrating and ( B , D , G , and H ) nonmigrating cells by expressing EE508 ( thr508 replaced by glu and fibroblasts were fixed and costained with ( A , B , E , and G ) phalloidin insertion of an additional glu ) , a constitutively active and ( C , D , F , andH ) anti - ADF , whichrecognizesADFandpADFonly . ( E – H ) Enlargementsofthelamellipodiumin ( A ) – ( D ) , respectively . The form of LIM kinase 1 [ 10 ] . In LLPCK A4 . 8 cells , infection lamellipodium is denoted between the arrows . The scale bar in ( D ) with an adenovirus expressing LIMK EE508 caused a represents 10 (cid:1) m ; the scale bar in ( H ) represents 5 (cid:1) m . dose - dependent increase in the amount of phosphory - lated AC ( Figure 3A , compare lanes 2 [ low dose ] and 3 [ high dose ] with the uninfected control in lane 1 ) . This ( 45 min ) did not alter the cellular distribution of pAC ; construct is therefore active in cells . thus , we conclude that the depletion is not due to any Infected cells expressing EE508 were identified by poor fixation within the lamellipodium . We observed the GFP expression driven off a second promotor from the same differential distribution of AC and pAC in individual same adenovirus , as previously described [ 11 ] . In fibro - cellsthatweknewweremigrating ( bytime - lapsemicros - blasts expressing EE508 , cell polarity and protrusion of copy ) prior to cell fixation and staining in situ on the a single polarized lamellipodium was lost . Instead , these time - lapse microscope . Thus , we think the observed cells adopted a nonmigrating appearance , character - depletion of pAC from the lamellipodium accurately re - ized by the presence of multiple nonpolarized lamelli - flects the situation in locomoting cells . In contrast , in podia ( Figure 3E , multiple lamellipodia in nonpolar cells nonmigrating fibroblasts , pAC ( Figure 2H ) was clearly denoted by arrowheads ) . In contrast to noninfected , mi - detectable in both the cell body and the lamellipodium grating cells ( Figures 2A and 2C ) , pAC was localized to in a generally even distribution ( Figure 2 , compare [ G ] these nonpolarized lamellipodia ( see Figures 3E and 3G , and [ H ] , between arrows ) . This differential distribution the boxed region is enlarged 2 - fold in the panel inserts ) . of pAC in migrating and nonmigrating cells is unlikely In control cells , infected with adenovirus for expressing due to any difference in the instantaneous rate of protru - only GFP , cell polarity was unaffected ; cells protruded sion , as this rate is similar for migrating and nonmigrat - a single polarized lamellipodium ( compare Figures ing chick fibroblasts [ 1 ] . Furthermore , we observed a 3B – 3D to the uninfected cell in Figures 3K – 3M ) , and , as expected , pAC , as with uninfected cells , remained similar staining pattern in other cell types . In migrating Current Biology 254 Figure 2 . pAC Is Depleted from the Lamelli - podium in Migrating Fibroblasts ( A – H ) ( A , C , E , and F ) Migrating and ( B , D , G , and H ) nonmigrating fibroblasts were fixed in formaldehyde and costained with ( A , B , E , and G ) phalloidin and ( C , D , F , and H ) anti - pAC , whichisspecificforthephosphorylated form of both ADF and cofilin . ( E – H ) Enlarge - ments of the lamellipodium ( denoted be - tweenthearrows ) in ( A ) – ( D ) , respectively . The arrows in ( F ) denote the position of the lamel - lipodium in the migrating fibroblast , as de - fined by the position of the F - actin - rich band stained with phalloidin . Note the lack of pAC staining in the lamellipodium in the migrating cell ( [ F ] , between arrows ) . The scale bar in ( D ) represents 10 (cid:1) m ; the scale bar in ( H ) represents 5 (cid:1) m . virtually undetectable within the lamellipodium ( Figure over 3 experiments ) , and protrusion of a single polarized lamellipodium was restored ( Figure 3H , single lamelli - 3D , between arrows ) . Therefore , we are confident that neither the observed loss of cell polarity nor the induced podium in polar cells denoted by thin arrow ) . In asecond , independentapproach toincrease pACin change in pAC distribution is due to either viral infection or GFP expression . We found that 87 % of cells express - cells , we overexpressed a pseudophosphorylated ( less active ) XAC mutant ( E3 ) ( ser3 replaced by glu , [ 12 ] ) by ing CA LIMK did not exhibit polarized morphology , as characterized by protrusion of a single polarized lamelli - itself in migrating cells . Cells expressing E3 lost their capacity to protrude a single polarized lamellipodium podium , compared to 27 % – 30 % of noninfected cells and cells infected with a control GFP - adenovirus ( Figure ( Figure 4 , compare [ C ] and [ D ] with the control cell in [ A ] and [ B ] ; Figure 4G , n (cid:2) 260 cells over 3 experiments ) 3N , n (cid:2) 400 cells over 3 experiments ) . Taken together , these data indicate that a signaling pathway involving and , as with cells expressing only CA LIMK , cells pro - truded multiple lamellipodia ( Figure 4C , arrowheads ) . As LIMK is important for maintaining polarized lamellipod - ium protrusion during migration . far as we are aware , this is the first indication of a pAC analog ( E3 ) acting as a dominant negative . This should We tested whether the effect of CA LIMK on polarized lamellipodium protrusion was AC specific by overex - prove a useful tool in future studies on the role of these essential proteins in cell motility . pressing the active , nonphosphorylatable Xenopus AC mutant , XAC A3 ( ser3 replaced by ala , [ 12 ] ) , together Our data show that AC proteins are necessary for main - taining a single polarized lamellipodium in migrating with CA LIMK in coinfected cells . Coexpressing cells were identified by GFP expression to identify CA LIMK cells . Cells in which AC function and polarized protru - sionisinhibitedgainthecapacityforprotrudingmultiple , ( see above ) and by indirect immunofluorescence with an XAC1 - specific antibody [ 13 ] that exhibited minimal albeit depolarized , lamellipodia . How is this apparent contradiction explained ? We suggest that there exists cross - reactivitywithchickACandwasbarelydetectable by fluorescence in noninfected cells when compared in cells more than one mechanism for lamellipodium protrusion , distinguished by the supply of actin mono - with cells expressing exogenous XAC . Coinfection com - pletely rescued cell polarity ( Figure 3N , n (cid:2) 270 cells mer than fuels protrusion . In migrating cells , it appears Brief Communication 255 Figure 3 . ConstitutivelyActiveLIMKinaseIn - duces Loss of Morphological Cell Polarity that Is Rescued by an Active , Nonphospho - rylatable Xenopus XAC Viral constructs were made , expanded , and titered , and cells were infected essentially as described [ 18 ] . ( A ) Western Blot of extracts of cells infected with the LIMK EE508 construct . Extracts ( 10 (cid:1) g total protein ) from ( lane 1 ) uninfected LLPCK A4 . 8 cells and extracts from cells in - fected for 24 hr with ( lane 2 ) 25 (cid:1) l aliquot or ( lane 3 ) 150 ml aliquot of adenovirus for expressionofCALIMK . Blotsweredeveloped first with an antibody against the phospho - peptide of ADF / cofilin [ 9 ] . The LLCPK A4 . 8 cellsexpressonlycofilin [ 19 ] . Blotswerethen reprobed with a mouse monoclonal antibody to exon 1b of the tropomyosin ( TM ) 5 gene as a loading control . ( B – N ) The effect of LIMK EE508 and XAC A3 on cell polarity in migrating fibroblasts . In each experiment , approximately 1 . 5 – 2 (cid:3) 10 6 viralfocus - formingunitswasaddedperheart explant . In the continued presence of the vi - rus , explants were held in suspension for 24 hr , plated for an additional 24 hr ( see results ) , fixed , permeabilized , and costained with ( B , E , H , and K ) phalloidin and either ( D and G ) anti - pAC or ( J and M ) anti - XAC . Migrating fi - broblastswereinfectedeitherwith ( B – D ) GFP only or ( E – G ) LIMK EE508 only , or they were coinfected with ( H – J ) LIMK EE508 and XAC A3 . Noninfected controls are shown in ( K ) – ( M ) . Cells were fixed after 48 hr of infection and were stained with phalloidin . Quantifica - tion of cell polarity (cid:4) SEM is shown in ( N ) . Note that , for uninfected cells , the graph is expressed as polar cells ( % total cells ) (cid:4) SEM . The single lamellipodium in polar cells is denoted by a thin arrow ; multiple lamelli - podiainnonpolarcellsaredenotedbyarrow - heads . Note the loss of cell polarity and the protrusion of multiple lamellipodia in the cell expressing LIMK EE508 . The scale bar in ( M ) represents 10 (cid:1) m . that recently disassembled actin filaments rapidly pro - for nonpolarized protrusion in the same cell . This behav - iormayreflectaphysiologicalroleforswitchingbetween vide actin monomer to fuel reassembly and protrusion , whereas , in nonmigrating cells , stored monomer is likely polarized and nonpolarized protrusion , for example , as is required during cell - turning events during migration the preferred supply [ 1 ] . Thus , it is not surprising that blocking AC function and thus filament disassembly / and when a migrating cell reaches its destination and stops migrating . It is tempting to speculate that locally severing abolishes polarized protrusion in migrating cells , without inhibiting the capacity for releasing stored regulating the phosphorylation state of AC controls switching between the two mechanisms . monomer to fuel nonpolarized protrusion in the same cell . We do not currently know why polarized protrusion How is locally maintaining AC in the nonphosphory - lated state within the lamellipodium coupled to actin in migrating cells apparently suppresses the capacity Current Biology 256 initiate elsewhere in the cell where actin monomer was available for assembly , resulting in a loss of net cell polarity and net motility . Taken together , our data indicate that locally main - taining AC proteins in the nonphosphorylated , active state within the lamellipodium is necessary to maintain polarized lamellipodium protrusion during cell migra - tion , thus enabling continuous movement . We do not yet know how this is regulated in cells . One open possi - bility is that LIM kinase localization may be restricted to outside the lamellipodium in migrating cells , although antibodies recognizing chick LIM kinase are not yet available to test this idea . Another scenario is that the rate of AC dephosphorylation , acting via the recently identified specific AC phosphatase slingshot [ 15 ] , is higher in the lamellipodium in migrating cells compared to the rest of the cell . Conversely , phosphorylated AC may be stabilized specifically outside the lamellipodium by 14 - 3 - 3 (cid:5) binding , as this protein has newly been shown to be a pAC binding protein that protects pAC from dephosphorylation [ 16 ] . Finally , we do notyet know whether it is ADF , cofilin , or both that regulate cell polar - ity ; however , bothADFandcofilinareapparentlypresent in these cells , as we obtained positive staining with specific antibodies . Further work needs to be done to test exactly how AC and pAC localization is determined in cells and the specific roles played by ADF and cofilin in regulating cell polarity . Experimental Procedures Cells were fixed in 4 % methanol - free formaldehyde ( Taab ) in cy - toskeleton buffer ( 10 mM MES [ pH 6 . 1 ] , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 138 mM KCl , 2 mM EGTA ) with 0 . 32 M sucrose for 20 min to optimally preserve the cytoskeleton [ 17 ] , permeablized in 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 10 min , and costained with 0 . 1 (cid:1) g / ml Alexa594 - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) and primary antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence . Figure 4 . Expression of Pseudophosphorylated XAC Induces Loss Note that all antibodies used in this study recognized bands of the of Cell Polarity expected molecular weight on Western blots of chick embryo heart ( A – F ) Migrating fibroblasts were infected either with ( A and B ) GFP fibroblast cell extracts ( data not shown ) . High - resolution images or ( C and D ) XAC E3 , or ( E and F ) were not infected , then fixed and were digitally acquired with a 12 - bit cooled charge - coupled device stained with ( A , C , and E ) phalloidin or ( D and F ) costained with camera ( KAF 1400 , Roper Scientific ) on a Nikon microscope using phalloidin and anti - XAC . The scale bar in ( F ) represents 10 (cid:1) m . a 100 (cid:3) , 1 . 4 NA oil objective controlled by Metamorph software ( G ) Quantification of staining . A graph of polar cells is shown ( % ( Universal Imaging ) . total expressing cells (cid:4) SEM ) . Note the loss of cell polarity and the protrusion of multiple lamellipodia in the cell expressing XAC E3 Acknowledgments ( arrowheads ) . The TM antibody ( cg3 ) was a generous gift from Ron Weinberger , New Childrens Hospital , Westmead , Australia . Many thanks to J . dynamics to maintain polarized lamellipodium protru - Rosenblatt , J . Hyams , and Y . Goda for insightful comments on the sion during migration ? We surmise that the local ratio manuscript and to Alisa Shaw and Judith Sneider for preparation of some of the adenoviral vectors used here . This work was sup - ofG - andF - actinisalso important . WeknowthatG - actin ported by a Royal Society University Research Fellowship and Well - concentrationislimitedinthelamellipodiumofmigrating come Trust and Human Frontiers Science Programme grants ( to cells [ 14 ] , and we also know that recycling of the actin L . P . C . ) , by a Medical Research Council studentship ( to H . R . D . ) , and istherate - limitingstepformembraneprotrusioninthese by grants GM35126 and NS40371 from the National Institutes of cells [ 1 ] . In this scenario , locally maintaining AC in the Health ( to J . R . B . ) . active , nonphosphorylated state within the lamellipod - ium ensures a continual supply of actin monomer de - Received : November 1 , 2002 Revised : November 29 , 2002 rived from disassembly for reassembly and protrusion , Accepted : November 29 , 2002 directed in one spatial location . This would thus stabilize Published : February 4 , 2003 and maintain polarized protrusion and net migration . Conversely , whenpACisincreasedinthelamellipodium , References the local monomer supply would be depleted without being replenished by AC - catalyzed filament disassem - 1 . Cramer , L . P . ( 1999 ) . Roleofactin - filamentdisassemblyinlamel - bly . As monomer is abundant in the rest of the cell body lipodium protrusion in motile cells revealed using the drug jas - plakinolide . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1095 – 1105 . [ 14 ] , we expect that a new protrusion would randomly Brief Communication 257 2 . Bamburg , J . R . , McGough , A . , and Ono , S . ( 1999 ) . Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / cofilins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 364 – 370 . 3 . Moon , A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1995 ) . The ADF / cofilin proteins : stimulus - responsive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1423 – 1431 . 4 . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynamicsthrough phosphorylationofcofilinby LIM - kinase . Na - ture 393 , 805 – 809 . 5 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kan - gawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphory - lationbyLIM - kinase1anditsroleinRac - mediatedactinreorga - nization . Nature 393 , 809 – 812 . 6 . Toshima , J . , Ohashi , K . , Okano , I . , Nunoue , K . , Kishioka , M . , Kuma , K . , Miyata , T . , Hirai , M . , Baba , T . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1995 ) . Identification and characterization of a novel protein kinase , TESK1 , specifically expressed in testicular germ cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31331 – 31337 . 7 . Zebda , N . , Bernard , O . , Bailly , M . , Welti , S . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . PhosphorylationofADF / Cofilinabolishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subse - quent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1128 . 8 . Morgan , T . E . , Lockerbie , R . O . , Minamide , L . S . , Browning , M . D . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1993 ) . Isolation and characterization of a regulated form of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 623 – 633 . 9 . Meberg , P . J . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . S . , Takahashi , M . , and Bam - burg , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and cofilin phos - phorylation dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . 10 . Edwards , D . C . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . Structural features of LIM kinase that control effects on the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 11352 – 11361 . 11 . He , T . C . , Zhou , S . , da Costa , L . T . , Yu , J . , Kinzler , K . W . , and Vogelstein , B . ( 1998 ) . A simplified system for generating recom - binant adenoviruses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 2509 – 2514 . 12 . Meberg , P . J . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Increase in neurite outgrowth mediated by overexpression of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2459 – 2469 . 13 . Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchi - son , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ( XAC ) isresponsiblefortheturnoverofactinfilamentsin Listeria monocytogenes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1323 – 1332 . 14 . Cramer , L . P . , Briggs , L . J . , andDawe , H . R . ( 2002 ) . Useoffluores - cent DNase to spatially measure G - actin levels in migrating and non - migrating cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 51 , 27 – 38 . 15 . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . , and Ue - mura , T . ( 2002 ) . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 . 16 . Gohla , A . , and Bokoch , G . ( 2002 ) . 14 - 3 - 3 regulatesactindynam - ics by stabilizing phosphorylated cofilin . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1704 – 1710 . 17 . Cramer , L . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1993 ) . Moving and stationary actin filaments are involved in spreading of postmitotic PtK2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 833 – 843 . 18 . Minamide , L . S . , Shaw , A . E . , Sarmiere , P . D . , Wiggan , O . , Malo - ney , M . T . , Bernstein , B . W . , Sneider , J . M . , Gonzalez , J . A . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Production and use of replication defi - cient adenovirus for transgene expression in neurons . Methods Cell Biol . , in press . 19 . Ashworth , S . L . , Southgate , E . , Sandoval , R . M . , Meberg , P . J . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Molitoris , B . A . ( 2003 ) . ADF / cofilin mediates actin cytoskeletal alterations in LLC - PK cells during ATP deple - tion . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . , in press .