Paper to be presented at DRUID19 Copenhagen Business School , Copenhagen , Denmark June 19 - 21 , 2019 Knowledge Catalysts : The Role of Generalist Incumbents in Post - Hiring Knowledge Integration Di Tong Drexel University LeBow College of Business dt474 @ drexel . edu Jay Lee Drexel University Management jayleej @ gmail . com Abstract How can organizations effectively integrate the knowledge of hired employees ? While prior research presumes automatic diffusion and integration following recruitment , recent evidence suggests that the extent of post - hiring knowledge integration is limited . In this study , we focus on the composition of human capital , specifically the proportion of generalist incumbents , as a potential facilitator of post - hiring knowledge integration . Drawing on the generalist - specialist framework , we posit that generalist incumbents provide unique services that enhance several processes central to an organization’s absorptive capacity . Consequently , a hire’s knowledge is more likely to be integrated and exploited when the hiring organization’s human capital consists of more generalists . ? Such services of generalists are more important when the hire’s knowledge is applied to domains unfamiliar to the hiring organization . Our analysis of 4 , 875 ? U . S . patents in 701 R & D locations ? provides strong support for our theory . In particular , we exploit changes in R & D tax credit policies as an exogenous shock and augment it with a matching design for robust identification and causal inference . Our results show that a greater proportion of generalists among incumbents leads to more frequent integration and exploitation ? of hires’ knowledge . This is likely due to increased collaborations among incumbents and greater ability to retain the knowledge after the hires’ turnover . These effects are mostly driven by the exploitation and retention in knowledge domains new to the organization ; for familiar domains , generalist incumbents have little effect on post - hiring integration . Our study contributes to the literatures of learning by hiring and scientific human capital in innovation . 1 Knowledge Catalysts : The Role of Generalist Incumbents in Post - Hiring Knowledge Integration Di Tong Jeongsik “Jay” Lee LeBow College of Business Drexel University Current Version : March 8 , 2019 Abstract How can organizations effectively integrate the knowledge of recruited employees ? While prior research presumes automatic diffusion and integration following recruitment , recent evidence suggests that the extent of post - hiring knowledge integration is limited . In this study , we focus on the composition of human capital , specifically the proportion of generalist incumbents , as a potential facilitator of post - hiring knowledge integration . Drawing on the generalist - specialist framework , we posit that generalist incumbents provide unique services that enhance several processes central to an organization’s absorptive capacity . Consequently , a recruit’s knowledge is more likely to be integrated and exploited when the hiring organization’s human capital consists of more generalists . Such services of generalists are more important when the recruit’s knowledge is applied to domains unfamiliar to the hiring organization . Our analysis of 4 , 875 U . S . patents in 701 R & D locations provides strong support for our theory . In particular , we exploit changes in R & D tax credit policies as an exogenous shock and augment it with a matching design for robust identification and causal inference . Our results show that a greater proportion of generalists among incumbents leads to more frequent integration and exploitation of recruits’ knowledge . This is likely due to increased collaborations among incumbents and greater ability to retain the knowledge after the recruit’s turnover . These effects are mostly driven by the exploitation and retention in knowledge domains new to the organization ; for familiar domains , generalist incumbents have little effect on post - hiring integration . Our study contributes to the literatures of learning by hiring and scientific human capital in innovation . Keywords : generalists , learning - by - hiring , knowledge integration , inventor mobility , scientific human capital , innovation , natural experiment 2 INTRODUCTION Do organizations acquire knowledge through recruitment ? This question is especially relevant for R & D - intensive organizations for which tacit and complex knowledge embedded in individuals is crucial for innovation outcomes . Extant literature holds a positive view regarding the effect of mobility on the hiring organization’s learning ( Rosenkopf and Almeida , 2003 ; Song et al . 2003 ) , largely by seeing mobility as a source for knowledge spillovers or externalities ( Moen 2000 ) . However , embedded knowledge , especially its non - codified , tacit component , is inherently sticky ( Szulanski 1996 ) and need not automatically spill over to the hiring organization . Indeed , recent evidence suggest the real effect of mobility on subsequent organizational learning is much lower than earlier estimates ( Singh and Agrawal 2011 , Tzabbar et al . 2015 ) . This , along with theoretical concerns , suggests that mobility alone is not a sufficient condition for learning by hiring . An immediate question , then , is how can organizations better acquire knowledge embedded in the recruited personnel ? Closely related is the question of whether , or when , the acquired knowledge enables the hiring organization to do something new and different . After all , a key goal of recruitment is to avoid path dependence common in internal knowledge generation ( Song et al . 2003 ) . We suggest that a deeper look into hiring organizations helps address these questions . In part , the context of the destination firm is generally understudied in mobility research ( Mawdsley and Somaya 2016 ) . But more important , whether and how recruits’ knowledge is utilized is a matter of the hiring organization’s absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) . To probe into these questions , we adopt a micro - foundation perspective in our study , and integrate it with the absorptive capacity literature to develop explanations for post - hiring knowledge integration . The micro - foundation perspective posits that organizational - level knowledge phenomenon are fundamentally rooted in , and caused by , individual attributes ( Felin et al . 2015 ) . In line with this view , the original absorptive capacity theory has placed much emphasis on depicting how individual attributes and actions are aggregated up to shape organizational absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ; Yao and Chang 2017 ) . While many individual attributes likely matter , we focus on the degree of knowledge specialization as a key attribute . Extensive specialization has become a prominent feature in modern 3 science ( Jones 2009 ) and has broad implications . Rapidly growing stock of scientific knowledge results in the emergence of numerous , narrow knowledge domains ( Evans 2008 ) . To reach the knowledge frontier , scientists and inventors have to be increasingly specialized ( Jones 2009 ; Leahey 2016 ) . While specialization increases individual proficiency and knowledge depth ( Leahey 2007 ) , it also makes interpersonal communication and coordination more difficult ( Becker and Murphy 1992 ; Kogut and Zander 1996 ) . Within organizations , barriers arising from extensive individual specialization could undermine the effectiveness of organizational absorptive capacity . These communicative and coordinative barriers highlight the increasing need for individuals who could span intellectual boundaries . To that end , a small but growing literature has begun to examine unique services that broadly knowledgeable individuals , or generalists 1 , may provide in various innovation contexts ( Melero and Palomeras 2015 , Nagle and Teodoridis 2017 , Teodoridis et al . 2018 ) . To be sure , the innovation literature is aware of the importance of gatekeepers ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) or boundary spanners ( Tushman 1977 , Tushman and Scanlan 1981 ) , which appear similar to generalists . However , these concepts are largely defined from a task - based view . As Postrel ( 2002 ) clarifies , knowledge specialization should be defined independent of tasks because otherwise the relationship between knowledge and tasks , which is what we often seek to understand , becomes obscure . We thus consider generalists as the individuals whose expertise span multiple knowledge domains . This conceptualization is rooted in cognitive psychology and is task independent , unlike gatekeepers or boundary spanners . More important , the concept of generalists is more nuanced and involves abilities beyond being able to communicate across specialties . Specifically , we highlight three broad roles of generalists : information conduits , visionaries , and social integrators . These roles stem from their unique knowledge structure , which produces behavioral , cognitive , and social distinctions from more specialized individuals . We argue that , when more of the hiring organization’s incumbents are generalists , several key processes of organizational absorptive 1 We use the terms generalists and specialists for the ease of exposition throughout the paper . However , in practice , the degree of specialization is a continuum rather than a dichotomy . 4 capacity are enhanced . Consequently , the hiring organization becomes more effective at recognizing , assimilating , and exploiting knowledge embedded in the recruited personnel . Focusing on knowledge exploitation as an observable and concrete outcome , we posit that the ratio of generalist incumbents in an organization is positively related to the rate at which a recruit’s knowledge is exploited by the incumbent members . This ratio is also positively related to the team - based exploitation of that knowledge and the expansion into domains new to the hiring organization . We further suggest that a greater presence of generalist incumbents enhances the retention of a recruit’s knowledge , particularly in new domains . We test these ideas in the context of industrial R & D using patent data from the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) . We exploit a series of R & D tax policy changes as an exogenous shock to the level of generalists in an organization and apply them to a carefully matched sample to improve causal interpretations of the results . We find strong evidence that having more generalist incumbents is indeed conducive to post - hiring exploitation of recruits’ knowledge . The magnitude of effect is also substantial : a one standard deviation increase in the proportion of generalists among incumbents leads to a 118 percent increase in the annual number of incumbent citations to the recruit’s prior patent . These generalist - facilitated citations are more frequently made by teams rather than by a single incumbent , and are more frequently used in generating knowledge in domains new to the hiring organizations than in familiar ones . This latter effect on the type of knowledge domain is stronger the more distant the recruit’s knowledge to the hiring organization’s knowledge base . We find some evidence that with greater presence of generalists , the recruit’s knowledge is more likely to be still used after he leaves the organization , particularly for generating knowledge in new domains . In contrast , generalists do not seem to matter as much for knowledge generation in familiar domains . Our study offers several contributions . Extant learning - by - hiring literature has paid much attention to mobile individuals who are knowledge diffusers themselves . Our study complements this approach by shifting attention to the attributes of the hiring organization’s incumbents . In doing so , we develop micro - level explanations for the role of generalists in building up organizational absorptive capacity . Second , while learning - by - hiring literature has long viewed inbound mobility as an opportunity 5 for new knowledge generation and organizational change , existing evidence is largely indirect ( e . g . , how recruitment is related to new product introduction or technological changes ) . Our study provides direct evidence of how generalists facilitate exploitation of recruits’ knowledge to create new knowledge . This effort contributes to the absorptive capacity literature as well . Despite its rich focus on individual - level mechanisms ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) , later development on absorptive capacity has largely conceived it as an organizational - level construct ( Yao and Chang 2017 ) . Our effort to connect individual attributes to organizational absorptive capacity addresses the recent call for a greater focus on individuals and individual actions ( Volberda et al . 2010 ) . By shedding light on the utilities of generalists in post - hiring knowledge exploitation , we also contribute to the growing literature on the comparative roles of generalist versus specialist knowledge workers in knowledge production and diffusion ( Jones 2009 , Leahey 2007 , Teodoridis et al . 2018 ) . Our rigorous empirical design also improves causal inference of the findings . THEOREY AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT Theoretical Background Knowledge intensive organizations , such as firms engaging in industrial R & Ds , frequently recruit inventors from other organizations to access external knowledge , which is often tacit and embedded in scientists and inventors ( Polanyi 1966 ) . Inbound mobility is said to result in learning - by - hiring when the hiring organization integrates and builds upon recruits’ knowledge to develop new knowledge and capabilities ( Song et al . 2003 , Palomeras and Melero 2010 ) . This is often captured with patent citation statistics . When the hiring organization cites a recruit’s prior patents ( those developed before moving ) , it is seen as an indication that that particular piece of knowledge encapsulated in the patent is absorbed and exploited by the hiring organization . Implicit in this interpretation is the idea that the knowledge has become diffused to and widely held and used by incumbents at the hiring organization . However , disaggregated citation statistics suggest the opposite : prior patents are more often exploited by recruits themselves , while incumbents’ uses are limited ( Singh and Agrawal 2011 ; Tzabbar et al . 2015 ) . Thus , the true effect of mobility on subsequent learning is overstated . This can be problematic in at least two ways . Without incumbent learning , any advantages accrued from retaining recruits may quickly dissipate once 6 these recruits leave ( Simon 1991 ) . Further , insufficient use of recruits’ knowledge by other organization members reduces potential recombinant opportunities critical for innovation ( Fleming , 2001 ) . Therefore , learning - by - hiring is likely to be more effective if recruits’ knowledge can be more broadly used by incumbent members , rather than predominantly by recruits themselves . Limited use of recruits’ knowledge may occur for several reasons . From a policy standpoint , non - compete policies lead much of the observed mobility to involve workers moving across companies with distinct knowledge bases ( Marx 2011 ) , limiting incumbents learning . Industrial scientists are either unwilling to share knowledge with competing others ( Haeussler 2011 ) , who may come from the same field , or often lack sufficient prior knowledge to adequately absorb the disclosed knowledge of non - competitors ( Bower and Hilgard 1981 ) . These phenomena may reflect the broader problem that distinct knowledge backgrounds impede knowledge use . This problem may have been exacerbated in recent decades by the rising trend of individual knowledge specialization ( Jones 2009 ) . Specialization takes place when people acquire related schemas ( Dane 2010 ) or “knowledge items” ( Demsetz 1998 , Postrel 2002 ) . Often , these interrelated knowledge items form well - circumscribed knowledge domains ( Carnabuci and Bruggeman 2009 ) . Given that learning is cumulative and associative ( Bower and Hilgard 1981 ) , acquiring related knowledge items allows one to efficiently progress toward the knowledge frontier ( Jones 2009 ) . This has become ever more necessary because bounded rational individuals face increasingly massive stocks of modern scientific knowledge ( Evans 2008 , Jones 2009 ) . However , the downsides to specialization are costly : increased individual specialization not only reduces one’s ability to absorb distinct knowledge ( Kogut and Zander 1996 , Postrel 2002 ) , but could also create mental “lock - ins” that behaviorally reduce one’s propensity to probe into unfamiliar knowledge domains or solutions ( Luchins 1942 ) . These problems are especially alarming in the context of external recruitment , because recruits may often bring in unfamiliar knowledge and have to be socially integrated to the hiring organizations . To tackle the problems , scholars have taken two approaches . The first focuses on organization - level , or top - down , solutions . For instance , imposing a shared identity ( Kogut and Zander 1996 ) or 7 developing pro - collaboration norms and practices ( Tzabbar 2009 , Zucker et al . 1998 ) can be helpful . This view is contrasted by the second approach , which seeks individual - level , or bottom - up , solutions . Facing these problems , prior research has highlighted organizational norms and routines for solutions ( Kogut and Zander , Tzabbar 2009 ) . The second approach is in part promoted by the micro - foundation camp in strategy research ( Felin et al . 2015 ) , which emphasizes individual attributes as the fundamental basis of organizational phenomena . We adopt the second approach because the post - hiring use of recruits’ knowledge is ultimately a matter of the organization’s absorptive capacity , which inherently involves and aggregates from individual and interpersonal actions ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) . Though later research largely construed absorptive capacity at an aggregate level , such as skill breadth ( Mowery and Oxley 1995 ) or dynamic capability ( Zahra and Georgie 2002 ) , scholars recently re - focus on individuals and their actions in understanding absorptive capacity ( Volberda et al . 2010 , Yao and Chang 2017 ) . Consistent with this trend , scholars have started to reassess the value of generalists in the context of industrial innovation ( e . g . , Melero and Palomeras 2015 ) . While specialists have focused knowledge in narrow areas , generalists are the ones whose expertise span multiple knowledge domains . One immediate utility generalists can thus provide to enhance firm absorptive capacity is by acting as boundary spanners who communicate across diverse knowledge domains ( Tushman 1977 , Tushman and Scanlan 1981 ) . However , as we discuss below , the full range of implications of developing broad knowledge across domains extends well beyond this communication function . We link the stream of work on generalists with the absorptive capacity literature , and elaborate on how generalists differ from others , the roles they play , and the way they contribute to the enhancement of absorptive capacity at hiring organizations . The roles of generalists in knowledge activities That generalists possess less interrelated knowledge items may cause a typical concern that they are “Jack - of - all - trades , master - of - none . ” In general , this is a legitimate concern because accruing knowledge across diverse domains can be inefficient . However , it is less of a concern in contexts where institutional gatekeeping is common . Institutional gatekeeping involves a screening process that weeds out non - qualified candidates , thereby providing some minimal quality assurance for the generalists who pass the 8 screening . For instance , generalist students are less likely to be discounted when they have passed college admissions ( Merluzzi and Phillips 2016 ) . In our context of industrial R & D , gatekeeping processes are prevalent : obtaining relevant training and education , publishing journal articles , or getting patent approvals all involve serious institutional screening . As such , generalist inventors are unlikely to be a master of none . Building upon this idea , we identify at least three distinct roles generalist play in an organization : information conduits , visionaries , and social integrators . Information conduits Specialization repeatedly exposes one to the same knowledge domain , thus reinforces learned routines and behaviors ( Gick and Lockart 1995 ) and results in automaticity and problem - solving fixation ( Bilalić et al . 2008 ) . In contrast , generalists are exposed to various knowledge domains with diverse norms and assumptions . They are less likely to think in a confined , routinized manner , and often search broadly and flexibly for solutions ( Dane 2010 ) . Moreover , their greater number of knowledge domains increases the likelihood that generalists have overlapping knowledge with others . Such shared knowledge permits more effective knowledge exchange ( Reagans and McEvily 2003 ) , such as through better information retrieval ( Rulke and Galaskiewicz 2000 ) . Because they can better communicate across domains and search more broadly and flexibly , generalists can serve as channels of information and knowledge , such as those embedded in new recruits , enabling more efficient and wider diffusion in their organization . Visionaries A less obvious yet crucial advantage of having knowledge across diverse domains is the higher chances of developing deep visions . Exposed to distinct norms , values , and assumptions embedded in different domains , generalists can identify broadly applicable , fundamental principles ( Gruber et al . 2013 ) across domains . By recognizing cross - domain commonalities , such as by analogical transfer ( Gentner 1983 , Holyoak 1984 ) , generalists may also develop a distinct cognitive structure ( Schilling et al . 2003 ) . Such a unique structure allows generalists to interpret problems from novel perspectives and derive diverse meanings ( Huber 1991 , Kaplan and Simon 1990 ) . Generalists can thus provide novel , big - picture insights to guide the problem - solving process , and can often apply known principles to new contexts ( Melero and 9 Palomeras 2015 ) . This visionary role is still more likely when generalists are qualified by screening processes , which ensure that generalists have reasonably deep knowledge in each domain . Social integrators The diffusion and production of knowledge in organizations are as much a social process as a cognitive one ( Brown and Duguid 2001 ) . In addition to providing domain - specific knowledge and skills , training and expertise in a knowledge domain stamp on individuals the domain identities that affect perceptions and social interactions . Particularly in science - based settings , inventors belonging to different knowledge communities with different norms and principles may identify more strongly with those in the same community ( Knorr Cetina 1999 ) . This social categorization may inhibit collaboration and knowledge flow across domains . Unlike specialists , generalists acquire multiple identities , which reduce the chance of social categorization and provide greater opportunities for knowledge - based social interactions . At an aggregate - level , having more generalists likely reduces the overall strength of in / out group bias when each member is less strongly identified with a particular domain ( Bunderson and Sutcliffe 2002 ) . Generalists also facilitate knowledge - based social interactions across groups ( Kleinbaum et al . 2013 ) , through which they foster development of trust , commitment , emotional bonds , and mutual understandings among people ( Feldman 1976 ) . Generalist incumbents , firm absorptive capacity , and post - hiring knowledge exploitation These distinct roles of generalists promote an organization’s ability to recognize , assimilate , and exploit external knowledge , i . e . , its absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) . Given the broad trend to specialize and the difficulty of acquiring diverse expertise ( Jones 2009 ) , we begin with the premise that organizations are often composed of few generalists and many specialists . The specialists at the hiring organization could be homogenously or diversely specialized . Depending on the composition , generalists are not always useful for a given absorptive capacity process . Nonetheless , we posit that the utilities of generalists carry through all processes in a joint fashion , and are on average sufficiently meaningful . The chain of activities through which recruits’ knowledge eventually gets exploited begins with value recognition ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) . But for this , incumbents should first know the existence of 10 new knowledge ( Todorova and Durisin 2007 , Zahra and George 2002 ) . As information conduits , generalist incumbents think flexibly and search broadly beyond their domains of expertise ( Bilalić et al . 2008 , Dane 2010 ) . This makes them prone to noticing useful information in new recruits , which is facilitated by the greater number of domains generalists know of . When the hiring organization largely comprises homogenous specialists , generalists enhance this stage by expanding the range of external knowledge detectable to incumbents . Even with diverse specialists , generalists can still bridge the gap if none of the incumbent knowledge overlaps with the recruit . Once a recruit’s knowledge is identified , its value needs to be assessed . This value recognition stage is typically assumed static , i . e . , there is a fixed value attached to the knowledge . However , we argue that value recognition is likely to be dynamic because the value of knowledge is often contingent on available opportunities . For instance , evolving technological landscapes may make existing knowledge more valuable ( Garud and Nayyar 1994 ) . Value of recruits’ knowledge could also change depending on availability of complementary assets . Recognizing these opportunities , and thus accurately assessing the value , is not straightforward . Generalist incumbents may effectively perform these functions because they possess and can apply abstract principles to develop insights . Such insights allow them to identify nonobvious recombinant opportunities and envision future uses of recruits’ knowledge , both of which allow a more precise assessment of knowledge value . While in - domain specialists could also provide a more accurate assessment , they are limited to opportunities within their expertise domains and may fail to identify cross - domain opportunities . Value recognition is followed by the assimilation of a recruit’s knowledge . As information conduits , generalist can more easily transmit and interpret the recruit’s knowledge to other members , thus accelerating the diffusion of that knowledge among incumbents . This will likely increase the speed and scale of knowledge assimilation , especially when the organization consists of diversely specialized incumbents . With more homogenous specialists , generalists are equally valuable as information conduits unless the recruit’s knowledge precisely overlaps with the specific domain of incumbent specialization . Beyond better diffusion , generalists may directly enhance assimilation . Their interpretation helps 11 incumbents to better understand , and thus assimilate the recruit’s knowledge . Further , some specialists may be overly committed to their own routines and unwilling to assimilate distinct knowledge . As visionaries , generalists may suggest nonobvious utilities of the recruit’s knowledge that are in line with existing routines or mental models . Generalist incumbents also play a useful role in the exploitation of new knowledge , which is arguably the ultimate goal of learning - by - hiring . By providing insights and vision , generalists point to more promising directions for building on the recruit’s knowledge . Given the highly uncertain nature of knowledge search , this directly increases the likelihood of successful search ( Melero and Palomeras 2015 ) . By and large , new knowledge comes from the recombination of existing elements . Hence , the ability of generalists to identify nonobvious recombinative opportunities for the recruit’s knowledge increases the rate at which the knowledge is exploited to new knowledge production . Recent studies in the absorptive capacity literature suggest that the above absorptive capacity processes are closely intertwined with social integration processes in organizations ( e . g . , Todorova and Durisin 2007 ) . This is especially true in external recruitment . Without proper social integration , new recruits’ knowledge can be under - valued ( Gruenfeld et al . 2000 ) and deemed unreliable ( Szulanski 1996 ) by incumbents . Absent trust , recruits may be unwilling to disclose what they know . Through their role as social integrators , generalists mitigate these adverse effects . With improved social integration , recruits’ knowledge becomes better identified and more accurately valued , and hence treated more fairly by incumbents . This enhances the assimilation and exploitation of recruits’ knowledge . Social integration is particularly valuable when the hiring organization features diversely specialized members . For homogenous specialists , the out - group bias may not be strong and enough opportunities may exist for knowledge - based interactions , and hence the social integrator’s role may be limited . Even so , if there is no overlap between the recruit’s knowledge and that of homogenous specialist incumbents , strong faultline ( Lau and Murnighan 1998 ) emerges and the role of generalists as social integrators is much needed . Overall , generalist incumbents provide valuable services as social integrators in facilitating the absorption of a recruit’s knowledge . 12 The chain of these activities , to which generalist incumbents contribute by playing several roles , culminates in the exploitation of a new recruit’s knowledge , which is perhaps the most concrete and observable step in organizational absorptive capacity . Summarizing the discussion above , we hypothesize on the overall effect of generalists on the incumbent exploitation of a new recruit’s knowledge : H1a : A new recruit’s knowledge is more likely to be exploited by incumbent members when there are more generalist incumbents present at the hiring organization . Generalist incumbents and the domains of post - hiring knowledge exploitation A critical consideration in learning - by - hiring is whether external knowledge , such as one embedded in new recruits , is exploited to address path dependency . Indeed , this is a key reason for external recruitment ( Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003 ) . When incumbents generate new knowledge building on a recruit’s knowledge , that new knowledge may belong to a domain the organization has prior experience in and so is “familiar , ” or to a domain it has no experience in and hence is “novel . ” By applying the recruits’ knowledge to research in new areas , hiring organizations can break into less familiar knowledge domains and reduce path dependency . We thus consider how generalist incumbents might help with this process . Entry into new domains is more likely when distant knowledge elements are combined as it tends to result in more radical innovation ( Fleming 2001 ) . The chances are higher when recruits’ knowledge is more distinct from that of the hiring organization . Yet , more distant knowledge is harder to absorb because of potential lack of incumbent knowledge . Generalists can help bridge this gap . As information conduits and visionaries , generalist incumbents have greater awareness of recruit’s knowledge , can better assess its value , and disseminate the knowledge more widely . By facilitating the social integration of recruits , generalists foster mutual trust between recruits and incumbents , thereby increasing information exchange between them . Hence , the recruits’ distant knowledge may be better recognized , assimilated , and exploited . This increases the overall chance of knowledge generation in novel domains . When recruits bring knowledge close to that of the hiring organization , opportunities for novel recombination may seem limited because most recombinations may have already been tried and any untried recombination is likely to be path - dependent . Even so , generalist incumbents can promote the 13 creation of novel knowledge . We distinguish between two processes through which incumbents acquire recruits’ knowledge : “simple assimilation” in which knowledge is absorbed intact , and “transformation” in which incumbents modify or re - interpret recruits’ knowledge ( Todorova and Durisin 2007 , Zahra and George 2002 ) . With simple assimilation , path dependency likely persists and the recruits’ knowledge is less likely to help the organization to enter new knowledge domains . However , with generalists , transformation is more likely to occur because they as visionaries excel at developing heterogeneous interpretations of knowledge . Interpretive heterogeneity provides insights for applying existing solutions to novel contexts through analogical transfer ( Gentner 1983 , Holyoak 1984 ) and allows novel solutions to emerge even when the recruits’ knowledge is familiar . Taken together , generalist incumbents facilitate the exploitation of the new recruit’s knowledge to generating knowledge in novel domains . Formally , H1b : A new recruit’s knowledge is more likely to be exploited to generate knowledge in domains new to the hiring organization than in domains familiar to it when there are more generalist incumbents present at the hiring organization . Generalist incumbents and the mode of post - hiring knowledge exploitation Research suggests that recruits’ knowledge is better used when incumbents frequently collaborate ( Tzabbar et al . 2015 , Zucker et al . 1998 ) . Generalist incumbents promote a collaborative environment , which increases the rate of incumbent exploitation of recruits’ knowledge . We consider two related yet distinct mechanisms . On the one hand , generalists foster the formation of collaborative relationships . As visionaries , they help identify opportunities that draw on complementary skills and knowledge of incumbents . This is particularly useful when these opportunities require recombining knowledge elements across diverse knowledge domains and hence is difficult for specialists to identify . By fostering social integration , generalists also increase other members’ willingness to collaborate . On the other hand , the ability of generalists to speak multiple “languages” allow smoother operations of teams ( Melero and Palomeras 2015 , Paulus 2000 ) , mitigating the risk of collaboration falling apart . Hence , with greater presence of generalists , team - based exploitations of new recruit’s knowledge are more likely . Thus , 14 H2a : A new recruit’s knowledge is more likely to be exploited by teams of inventors as opposed to solo inventors when there are more generalist incumbents present at the hiring organization . We further expect that this role of generalist incumbents in promoting team - based exploitation will be more salient for novel domains . Generating knowledge in domains new to the hiring organization often requires identifying and recombining non - obvious or unfamiliar elements . This type of search tends to be ambiguous and ill - defined ( Bennett and Gadlin 2012 ) , and exhibits greater variances in quality ( Singh and Fleming 2010 ) . The generation of novel knowledge is thus “high risk , high return . ” Research also notes that by collaborating , people are better able to identify promising breakthrough ideas while weeding out bad ones ( Singh and Fleming 2010 ) . Insofar as generalists facilitate the formation and operation of teams , they also promote team production of knowledge in novel domains . Specifically , uncommon and distant recombinations , which allow organizations to break into new domains , are hard to identify and often require inventors from various backgrounds to collaborate . However , the ambiguity and ill - defined nature of these opportunities make it difficult for incumbents to know a priori the needed skills and backgrounds to successfully exploit them . Generalist incumbents can help identify these opportunities and better recognize who - knows - what and whom - to - include in a team to tackle problems . Moreover , the highly uncertain knowledge search , coupled with diverse backgrounds , can pose serious coordinative challenges to teams . Generalist incumbents can help smoothen operations in these situations ( Melero and Palomeras 2015 ) . Lastly , by facilitating social integration , generalists glue together incumbents and new recruits . This role is especially valuable when team exploitation requires recruits’ personal involvement . Overall , the presence of generalist incumbents will be more closely related to team - based exploitations of a new recruit’s knowledge to novel domains than those to familiar domains . Thus , we hypothesize : H2b : The team - based exploitation of a new recruit’s knowledge is likely to be greater for knowledge generation in domains new to the hiring organization than in domains familiar to it when there are more generalist incumbents present at the hiring organization . Generalist incumbents and organizational knowledge retention 15 Perhaps equally , if not more , important for learning - by - hiring is to ensure the hard - earned knowledge to stay in the organization , even when the recruit leaves the organization . Without retaining that knowledge , any gains from external recruitment are likely to be transient ( Simon 1991 ) . Having more generalists in the organization reduces this threat because generalists enable broader diffusion and assimilation of knowledge and facilitate collaborative exploitation of the knowledge . Because individuals are the fundamental unit of organizational memory ( Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) , broader retention reduces the risk of knowledge loss from turnover . It also has a secondary effect . Information retrieval is easier when people have shared knowledge ( Rulke and Galaskiewicz 2000 ) . Because generalist incumbents promote knowledge sharing , the recruit’s knowledge is also shared and retained by more members . Hence , that knowledge has a greater chance to be retrieved and exploited by incumbents long after the initial possessor of the knowledge leaves the organization . Consequently , H3a : The duration of exploitation of a new recruit’s knowledge after the person’s departure is likely to be longer when there are more generalist incumbents present at the hiring organization . While better integration generally helps mitigate the threats from turnovers , turnovers still have important implications for the outcome of exploitation . Knowledge is often tacit and embedded in individuals . Until converted into explicit knowledge ( von Krogh et al . 2000 ) , tacitness generates natural excludability such that more complex and in - depth exploitation requires the knowledge possessor’s personal involvement ( Zucker and Darby 1996 ) . Thus , while diffusion and assimilation grant incumbents with access to recruits’ knowledge , their ability to exploit the knowledge may be limited by its tacitness . When the recruit leaves the organization , the ambiguous portion of tacitness remains unresolved , barring full exploitation of all potential opportunities from the knowledge . Most likely , any exploitation of the recruit’s knowledge absent its original possessor will be confined to the routines and domains that are familiar to the incumbents . Path dependency and organizational inertia in knowledge search increase this propensity . Hence , the departure of recruits is likely to result in their knowledge being exploited in ways readily recognizable to the hiring organization to generate knowledge in domains it is familiar with . 16 Generalist incumbents alleviate this tendency . Tacit knowledge is partly generated through social interactions as a form of “learning - through - interacting” ( Lundvall and Johnson 1994 ) . By promoting opportunities for social interactions , generalists facilitate the acquisition of tacit knowledge as well as explicit knowledge of new recruits . Increased opportunities for collaboration provide a context in which other organization members can access and acquire the recruit’s tacit knowledge ( Zucker and Darby 1996 ) . This reduces the loss of tacit knowledge upon the recruit’s departure . Moreover , tacit knowledge enables the discovery of novel applications of existing knowledge by allowing more flexible framing of problems ( Leonard and Sensiper 1998 ) . This is where generalist incumbents add value because of their flexible thought - process and search pattern ( Bilalić et al . 2008 , Dane 2010 ) . The ability of generalists to derive heterogeneous interpretations may also substitute for the loss of tacit knowledge , providing insight for applications to novel domains , even after the recruit leaves the organization . This role of generalists in facilitating the post - departure exploitation of a recruit’s knowledge is likely to be more muted in domains that the hiring organization has prior experience in , because these domains may offer less room for novel interpretations and applications of the tacit knowledge . Therefore , we hypothesize : H3b : The post - turnover duration advantage in a new recruit’s knowledge exploitation due to the presence of generalist incumbents is likely to be greater for domains new to the hiring organization than for domains familiar to it . DATA AND ANALYSIS Empirical strategy and sample construction To test our theory , we rely on patent data , which are commonly used to study knowledge production and diffusion ( Griliches 1990 , Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002 ) . We use the disambiguated data by Li et al . ( 2014 ) , who identify unique inventors in the USPTO data from 1975 to 2010 . Following prior work ( Gambardella and Giarratana 2010 , Toh 2014 ) , we identify learning effects at the R & D location or site level , based on the first inventor’s city , rather than at the firm level . There are a few reasons for this choice . For one , individuals’ knowledge is most accessible by co - located colleagues ( Hansen and Lovas 2004 ) and its 17 spillovers tend to be geographically localized ( Shaver and Flyer 2000 ) . More important for identification , this allows us to construct a matched sample that controls for firm - level heterogeneity . Despite their advantages , patent data do not allow accurate identification of mobility events ( Ge et al . 2016 ) . A mobility event is generally inferred from two consecutive patents of the same inventor filed with different assignees . To minimize potential misidentification , we employ a stricter process ( Singh and Agrawal 2011 ) and limit to cases in which two patents are less than four years apart . We also assume the timing of mobility as the midpoint of the two filing years . Patents granted or filed before the move year are considered “prior patents” of the mobile inventor . For the hiring organization , such prior patents are the externally generated knowledge that is subject to subsequent integration by its incumbents . A naïve test of our hypotheses would check if a new recruit’s patents are cited more frequently in locations with more generalists . However , it may suffer from endogeneity bias . Unobservable factors such as collaborative norms may create more generalist incumbents by encouraging cross - project involvements while promoting the use of new recruit’s knowledge ( Tzabbar 2009 ) . Failing to account for the possibility leads to overestimating the effect of generalist incumbents on knowledge exploitation . On the contrary , in addition to hiring from outside , firms may reallocate existing inventors to build new technology capabilities ( Banerjee and Campbell 2009 ) . Coupling of both practices means an increased presence of generalist incumbents ( due to inventor reallocation ) but a reduced rate of knowledge exploitation ( due to the refocus of internal development on those areas ) . This leads to an underestimation of the effect . We address this issue by employing two measures : policy shocks and matching . Primarily , we exploit a series of state R & D tax credit policies as an exogenous source of variations in our main explanatory variable . Following the introduction of federal R & D tax credits in 1981 , more than thirty U . S states passed state tax credit laws by 2006 . These policies offer credits against corporate income tax based on the amount of qualified research . Significant for our setting , they motivate firms to reallocate projects and workers to R & D locations eligible for the credits . This increases the heterogeneity of projects and ideas in these locations and hence , inventors there are more likely to become generalists than those in locations with no policy changes ( Toh 2014 ) . These policy changes exhibit several desirable properties . 18 They did not alter the level of corporation R & D investments ( Goolsbee 1998 ) or the types of research projects ( Wilson 2009 ) . Tax credits rarely influenced the nature of R & D activities ( OTA 1995 ) and often translate to increases in scientist salaries ( Goolsbee 1998 ) . Hence , these policies affected only the degree of inventor specialization in the impacted locations without altering other aspects of firm R & D ( e . g . , intensity or direction ) . Using the shocks as instruments , we perform two - stage estimations ( Heckman 1979 ) . For this approach to be valid , the instruments should be significantly correlated with the endogenous variable and satisfy exclusion restrictions . Both conditions are met . We complement the instrumental variable approach with matching design in sample construction . The recruit’s knowledge , as reflected in her prior patents , can be heterogeneous across mobility events . For greater comparability , we construct a matched sample using coarsened - exact matching ( CEM ) . Specifically , we identify a “treated” patent as one filed before the move by an inventor recruited to a location that later experiences the enactment of an R & D tax credit law . Using a CEM algorithm , we then select a “control” patent filed before the move by an inventor recruited in the same year of the treated patent’s inventor mobility and by the same assignee but to a location that experiences no policy changes . Both patents should also have the same grant year and the same number of five - year post - grant citations . Due to the tradeoff between the stringency in matching and the availability of eligible controls , this procedure does not guarantee perfect comparability between the treated and the controls . Hence , we use the CEM as a pruning technique to reduce model dependence and statistical bias while increasing efficiency ( Iacus et al . 2012 ) , rather than to establish counterfactuals . Our causal identification mainly relies on the two - stage estimation that exploits policy shocks . We also include in the regression a battery of controls to compensate for any imbalance . On this matched sample , we trace prior patents for up to seven years before and after the policy enactment ( Singh and Agrawal 2011 ) . The “enactment year” for a control patent is that of the matched treated patent . Balancing between the pre - and post - enactment periods ensures more precise estimation of the pre - post difference in citations . The final sample has over 20 , 000 patent - location - year observations , with 1 , 949 unique recruits , 4 , 875 prior patents of these recruits , and 701 hiring sites ( of 171 firms ) . 19 Variable construction Dependent variables . We use patent citations to capture incumbent exploitation of a recruit’s knowledge . We construct five measures , each of which represents a different mode of exploitation pursuant to our hypotheses . Number Cite counts the annual number of citations made by the hiring firm’s incumbents to a recruit’s prior patent . Solo Cite is a dummy for citations by a solo inventor and Team Cite a dummy for citations by a team of inventors . New Cite counts citations by incumbents in a technology class , based on the U . S . Patent Classification ( USPC ) system , that is new to the R & D location ( i . e . , no prior patent in that class ) , and Old Cite counts citations in all other technology classes ( i . e . , familiar to the location ) . Explanatory variables . Our main explanatory variable is the extent of generalist incumbent presence in an R & D location . We first calculate inventor - level specialization indices based on USPC technology classes : 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 / = 𝐼𝐼 / 2 𝑁𝑁 / 4 5 267 where i denotes an inventor , k the sequence of technology class , T the total number of main technology classes inventor i has patented , n k is the number of inventor i ’s patents in class k , and N the total number of inventor i ’s patents . A higher value of this measure indicates greater specialization . Following prior work ( Melero and Palomeras 2015 ) , we classify as a generalist an inventor whose specialization measure belongs to the bottom 10 percent of the distribution . 2 We then compute for each R & D location Generalist Level as the ratio between the number of generalists and that of all inventors in the location . 3 We also construct Hire Depart as the number of years since the recruit’s departure ( a departure is identified similarly as a mobility event ) . We assign zero for the years the recruit remains with the hiring location . 2 Using a higher threshold ( e . g . , 20 percent ) makrs results less significant , probably due to the looseness of criterion . 3 This measure could be confounded by productivity differences because inventors with more patents are more likely to be generalists . Note , however , that these two dimensions are not mechanically correlated in Herfindahl - type concentration indices ( Nagle and Teodoridis 2017 ) . Nonetheless , we try an alternative measure based on the residuals from regressing the number of technology classes of each inventor on the inventor’s number of prior patents and then reverse - ranked . This alternative measure thus purges the “productivity effect” in the likelihood of being classified as a generalist . The results remain robust on this measure . Because of its intuitive appeal and better match to our theoretical construct , the concentration - based measure is used in all our analyses . 20 Instrumental variables . For the two - stage estimation , we construct three instrument variables that capture variations in state tax credit policies across R & D locations . For each R & D location , Policy State equals 1 if the location experienced a policy change at some point and 0 otherwise . Post Enact is 0 but switches to 1 in the year of a tax credit policy enactment . Policy Post is the interaction term between the two . These instruments generate the predicted values of Generalist Level , which is assumed uncorrelated with errors . Control variables . We construct several variables to control for variations across locations and patents . At the location level , Knowledge Distance , a technology class - based Euclidean distance between patent portfolios of the recruit and the hiring location , controls for the familiarity of the recruit’s knowledge to the incumbents at the hiring location . Patent Intensity , the annual number of patents filed in a location , controls for variances in patenting rates across locations . R & D Expense , calculated at the firm level due to the lack of location - specific R & D expenditure data , reflects R & D investments . Density , the number of realized collaborative ties divided by the number of all possible ties ( Knoke and Kuklinski 1982 ) , controls for variations in the extent of collaboration across locations . At the patent level , we include Patent Age , the number of years since patent grant , and Patent Quality , the number of citations received prior to the mobility . We also include Patent Breadth , the number of technology classes . Mover HHI controls for the new recruit’s specialization . We also control for the lifetime citations of a prior patent through Total Citation , which includes self - citations by the recruit . Lastly , we account for time trend using Year . - Insert Table 1 about Here - Table 1 presents summary statistics and pairwise correlations . We observe no significant correlation between any pair of variables , except the variables that are naturally correlated ( e . g . , different types of citations ) . The variance inflation factors from OLS regressions show the highest value of 2 . 23 , lower than the common threshold of 10 . Combined , multicollinearity does not appear to be an issue . Estimation models We mainly use the two - stage instrumental variable analysis . In the first stage , we use policy shocks to predict changes in the main explanatory variable ( Generalist Level ) by the following equation : 𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ; < = = 𝛼𝛼 7 𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ; = + 𝛼𝛼 4 𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ; = + 𝛼𝛼 C 𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼 ; = + γ𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺 ; < = + 𝜀𝜀 ; < = 21 where l denotes location , p patent , and t year . We use OLS to estimate this equation . Here , a 3 captures the relative change in generalist incumbents due to the policy change , net of influences from other covariates . We then use the predicted values of generalist level in the following second stage model : 𝐾𝐾𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐾𝐾𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐾𝐾𝐾𝐾𝐼𝐼𝑃𝑃𝐾𝐾𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ; < = = 𝛽𝛽 7 𝑃𝑃𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐾𝐾𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐾𝐾𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ; < = M7 + 𝛿𝛿𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐺𝐺 ; < = M7 + 𝜖𝜖 ; < = M7 where the dependent variable is as described above . Our main interest is in β 1 , the effect of Generalist Level on post - hiring exploitation of recruit’s knowledge . We use a negative binomial regression for estimation . We bootstrap both stages to obtain consistent standard errors , clustered by mobility event . RESULTS Previews Figure 1 shows a simple comparison of Generalist Level before and after the policy enactment between locations . Policy - impacted locations exhibit relatively lower levels of generalists , but the post - enactment increase there is more pronounced . Thus , the policy shocks seem to have worked as expected . Figure 2 presents the propensity of incumbent citations of a recruit’s patent , aggregated across locations and years , before and after the policy enactment . To ease comparison , we use incidence rate ratios from a negative binomial regression of non - self - citation counts on time dummies . The plot shows a noticeable increase of citation propensity in policy - impacted locations after the policy enactment , while it is little changed in non - impacted locations . These graphs indicate that citation boosts are driven by increases in the ratio of generalists . Though only suggestive , these are informative and indeed consistent with our expectation . - Insert Figure 1 and 2 about Here - Main Results We begin with the overall effect of generalist incumbents on the hiring site’s exploitation of the new recruit’s knowledge . In Model 1 of Table 2 , we regress Number Cite on Generalist Level along with other controls without instrumenting for the level of generalists . In this “naïve” model , the coefficient on Generalist Level is negative , indicating that R & D locations with a higher proportion of generalists are less likely to exploit the new recruit’s knowledge . However , this estimate may well be biased , confounded by 22 unobservable factors . In fact , a negative relationship is entirely possible . For instance , a centralized R & D process produces broader - scope technologies ( Argyres and Silverman 2004 ) , creating more generalists ( Toh 2014 ) . Meanwhile , it reduces local information processing ( Zmud 1982 ) and the organization’s ability to incorporate external knowledge ( Moch and Morse 1977 ) . Insofar as the control locations are systematically less autonomous , they will have more generalist incumbents but be inferior in post - hiring knowledge exploitation . This is partly evidenced in Figure 1 where the control locations indeed have proportionally more generalists than the treated locations . The Durbin - Wu - Hausman test rejects the null of exogeneity , providing further evidence that endogeneity may be a real concern here . - Insert Table 2 and Figure 3 about Here - In Model 2 , we address the endogeneity issue by a two - stage instrumental variable approach . In the first stage , the coefficient on Policy ´ Post is significantly positive , suggesting the policy enactment increases the level of generalists in policy - impacted locations relative to non - impacted ones . The Wald F - statistic ( 207 . 1 ) for the weak identification test ( Kleibergen and Paap 2006 ) is above the Stock and Yogo’s ( 2005 ) critical value ( 22 . 3 ) . The underidentification test is also significant ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Both test results strongly reject the null of a weak correlation between instruments and the endogenous variable . Our first - stage result corroborates prior studies documenting the de - specializing effect of R & D tax credit policies ( Toh 2014 ) . 4 In the second stage in which we regress Number Cite on the predicted Generalist Level , we find a strongly positive coefficient on the level of generalist . This supports our hypothesis that having more generalist incumbents at the hiring organization leads to more frequent exploitation of the new recruit’s knowledge . An overidentification test fails to reject the null ( Hansen’s J statistic = 3 . 368 , p > 0 . 1 ) , indicating that instruments are uncorrelated with the second stage error term . The economic significance of effect also appears substantial . The estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in Generalist Level from its mean equals an increase of 0 . 13 citations per year . This is a very substantial boost in incumbent citations because on average , a prior patent in our sample is cited only 0 . 11 times a 4 Toh ( 2014 ) examines a single state , Pennsylvania , but our study uses all policy changes across all available states . 23 year , including citations made by outside inventors . The marginal effect of Generalist Level on incumbent citations also appears increasing nonlinearly ( Figure 3 ) . Thus , we find strong support for Hypothesis 1a . To examine the role of generalist incumbents in the knowledge domains the new recruit’s knowledge is exploited to ( H1b ) , we split the number of citations by the domain of citation , Old Cite and New Cite , and regress each on Generalist Level along with controls . Because the two outcomes are closely related and are parts of a larger system , their errors are expected to be correlated . Thus , we use the seemingly unrelated regression ( SUR ) that accounts for the covariance structure between error terms ( Zellner 1962 ) . As in Model 2 , Generalist Level is instrumented and both stages in the estimation are bootstrapped to obtain consistent standard errors . Because the first stage is identical to Model 2 , we only report the second stage results in Model 3 . 5 The coefficient on Generalist Level is significantly positive for New Cite , with the magnitude of effect almost double that of Number Cite . For Old Cite , however , the coefficient on Generalist Level is insignificant , albeit positive . Hence , the overall effect of Generalist Level found in Model 2 seems predominantly driven by the knowledge exploitation to “novel” domains , rather than all knowledge domains . This is consistent with our expectation that generalist incumbents are more effective for exploiting a recruit’s knowledge to breach into unfamiliar areas . The c 2 test indicates significant difference between the two coefficients . Therefore , Hypothesis 1b is also supported . - Insert Table 3 about here - Our next set of analyses concerns the mode of knowledge exploitation , specifically whether it is done by teams of inventors or by solo inventors . We thus split the citations into those by a solo inventor ( Solo Cite ) and those by a team of inventors ( Team Cite ) . Because these two outcomes are likely to be correlated , we perform the SUR estimation . Model 1 of Table 3 uses all citations , without differentiating between the domains of citing patents . The level of generalist incumbents is again instrumented by policy shocks . For Solo Cite , the coefficient on Generalist Level is positive but insignificant . But , it is highly significant and positive for Team Cite . These suggest that having more generalists increases team - based 5 The models reported in the table exclude the least significant variable from regressors . Randomly dropping a control or keeping all controls ( which produce estimates identical to non - SUR results ) makes little difference . 24 exploitation of the recruit’s knowledge , but has no effect on the knowledge exploitation by solo inventors . Though the coefficients are not meaningfully different , the results are consistent with Hypothesis 2a . To further examine this , in Models 2 and 3 we split the citations by the domain of citing patents . Model 2 uses the citations made by patents in domains new to the hiring location . As in the previous model , Generalist Level is highly significant and positive for Team Cite but insignificant for Solo Cite . No such pattern is found in the domains familiar to the hiring location ( Model 3 ) : the coefficient on Generalist Level is indistinguishable from zero for both modes of exploitation . These results suggest that the facilitating role of generalist incumbents in team - based exploitation of a recruit’s knowledge is more effective for novel knowledge domains than familiar domains . Hence , Hypothesis 2b is supported . - Insert Table 4 and Figure 4 about Here - Lastly , we test the role of generalist incumbents in post - departure exploitation of a recruit’s knowledge by interacting Generalist Level with Hire Depart , with Generalist Level again instrumented by policy shocks . When all citations are used ( Model 1 of Table 4 ) , the coefficient on Generalist Level is positive and Hire Depart exhibits a negative coefficient , both of which are consistent with expectation . However , the coefficient on the interaction term is neither positive nor significant . Figure 4 indicates that this average effect may conceal the variations across different levels of generalist incumbents . When examined for two levels ( one standard deviation above and below the mean ) of generalists , the post - departure citation rate is persistently greater for the locations with high - level generalists , but it declines more quickly . Though Hypothesis 3a is not supported , the result suggests a more nuanced picture . When we distinguish between the domains of generated knowledge by Old Cite and New Cite and re - estimate the model using the SUR , we find a positive and marginally significant interaction term for New Cite but not for Old Cite ( Model 2 ) . The baseline effect of a recruit’s departure is negative for New Cite . However , the positive interaction term suggests that the presence of generalist incumbents mitigates the adverse impact of turnover on knowledge production in unfamiliar domains . For these domains , the coefficient on Generalist Level remains significantly positive . In contrast , none of the coefficients on the core explanatory variables shows statistical significance . Hence , we find support for Hypothesis 3b . 25 Robustness Checks and Supplementary Analyses We have used two alternative specification approaches . First , we use the hurdle model ( McDowell 2003 ) , in which we simultaneously estimate the probability of non - zero citations and the zero - inflated Poisson model conditioning on non - zero citations . It accounts for the prevalent zeros in the dependent variable . Second , we use the standard two - stage least square approach ( Heckman 1979 ) with a log - transformed dependent variable in the second stage , in which both equations are estimated by OLS and hence no bootstrapping is necessary . On both variations , the results remain robust and qualitatively similar . 6 We have also conducted several supplementary analyses . First , we look at whether the effect of generalist incumbents on knowledge exploitation is moderated by the distance between the knowledge bases of the recruit and the hiring location . It is possible that generalist incumbents may prove more effective in bridging between distant knowledge bases , which can be especially valuable for learning by hiring ( Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003 , Song et al . 2003 ) . Such role of generalists may be also more salient in expanding into new knowledge domains . When we include an interaction term between Generalist Level and Knowledge Distance in the model , this coefficient is negative , suggesting that the positive effect of generalist incumbents on knowledge exploitation diminishes with the distance between the knowledge bases . However , contrasting effects emerge when the domain of generated knowledge is split by Old Cite and New Cite . For the familiar domains , generalist incumbents and knowledge distance are substitutionary : the positive effect of generalists diminishes with distance . But for the novel domains , the positive effect increases with knowledge distance . This is consistent with the distinct roles of generalists in knowledge integration , particularly as information conduits and visionaries within an organization . Second , we categorize the domains of citing patents into four types depending on the familiarity to the recruit and the hiring location : domains that are familiar to both , those familiar to the recruit but new to the location , those new to the recruit but familiar to the hiring location , and those new to both . By this , we can more precisely identify the conditions in which the facilitating role of generalist incumbents 6 Results of these alternative specifications , along with those from the supplementary analyses described subsequently , are unreported here due to space limitations but are available from the authors . 26 becomes more critical . The results show that the positive effect of generalist incumbents on knowledge exploitation is the largest for the domains new to the location but familiar to the recruit . For other types , the effect is still larger than the baseline ( familiar to both ) but less pronounced . This strengthens the evidence for our theory , particularly for Hypothesis 1b on the domains of knowledge exploitation . Lastly , we account for the distribution of incumbents who perform the knowledge exploitation . Though we argue that the enhanced knowledge exploitation owes to generalist incumbents’ role in widely diffusing the recruit’s knowledge , it is possible that such knowledge is diffused to only a few members or generalists themselves while other incumbents remain unaware of it . Thus , we perform two additional tests . In the first , we regress the proportion of citations made by unique inventors on the level of generalist incumbents . The result shows that generalist incumbents increase the proportion of unique citing inventors , ruling out the possibility that the recruit’s knowledge exploitation is concentrated among a few members . The second test looks at the proportion of citations made by unique non - generalist incumbents . The result again rules out the alternative : with more generalist incumbents , the recruit’s prior patent is cited by more non - generalist incumbents . Together , these results support our argument that the positive relationship between generalist incumbents and citation rates is due to the wider diffusion and exploitation of the recruit’s knowledge , rather than to some statistical artifacts or confounders . DISCUSSION We have sought to understand the role of generalist incumbents in the post - hiring integration of a recruit’s knowledge . Several findings stand out from this inquiry . With more generalist incumbents in the hiring organization , incumbent exploitations of a recruit’s knowledge , particularly by teams , are more likely . The greater presence of generalist incumbents also enhances the retention and continued exploitation of the recruit’s knowledge . This facilitation effect is starker for the knowledge exploitation in domains new to the hiring organization . Overall , these findings are consistent with our argument on the generalists’ role as information conduits , visionaries and social integrators , thereby serving as a critical micro - foundation for organizational absorptive capacity in learning by hiring . Link to literatures 27 Our study contributes to several strands of literature . First , we speak to the literature of organizational learning , particularly the learning - by - hiring angle . Studies have documented a non - trivial post - mobility productivity loss of the mover ( Groysberg et al . 2008 , Huckman and Pisano 2006 ) . However , whether individual productivity loss implies organizational performance loss depends on potential spillovers to incumbents . The extent of knowledge spillovers depends on the recruit’s quality as well as contextual factors of the hiring organization ( Tzabbar 2009 ) . Many studies have focused on the former such as spillover effects of hiring stars . We complement them by focusing on the composition of human capital in the hiring organization as a key contextual factor . By this we also respond to a recent call to shift attention to the context of hiring organizations in understanding value creation through mobility ( Chadwick 2017 ) . We also claim a methodological contribution . Because contextual factors such as the level of generalist incumbents are likely intertwined and correlated with other factors , isolating a single element to examine its impact can be challenging . By adopting a rigorous empirical design , we disentangle between these factors and improve causal inference . Moreover , while prior studies emphasize the importance of local collaborations for knowledge spillovers ( Tzabbar 2009 , Zucker and Darby 1996 ) , we show that collaboration is partly driven by the composition of the human capital and thus emerges endogenously . This points to the need of accounting for the endogenous nature of contextual variables in organizational learning . We also touch on the direction of post - hiring knowledge production . By distinguishing between the domains of knowledge generated from the recruits’ knowledge , we suggest a mechanism through which hiring organizations can reduce path dependency in learning ( Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003 ) . Our findings have useful implications for the absorptive capacity literature . Joining recent effort ( Yao and Chang 2017 ) , we highlight individual - level processes by which externally sourced knowledge can be absorbed and retained . Gatekeepers have been noted to be critical in promoting organizational absorptive capacity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ) , but who takes the role of a gatekeeper has not been clear . We demonstrate generalist - type human capital as a crucial mechanism of gatekeeping . It also calls for further studies on the qualities of human capital in shaping organizational absorptive capacity . 28 We also speak to the innovation literature as it relates to the role of human capital in innovation process . A notable aspect in this inquiry is increasing specialization among knowledge workers ( Leahey 2007 ; Teodoridis et al . 2018 ) . Our study reveals a useful function of generalists in the organizational context , namely their abilities to facilitate knowledge absorption after recruitment . This positive finding also calls for probing other innovation - related consequences of generalists in learning organizations . Limitation and future research We note a few important caveats . First , we rely on patent data for information on inventor mobility and knowledge integration . Though commonly used in the literature , patent data are imperfect for identifying job changes ( Ge et al . 2016 ) . Despite our best attempt to alleviate the problem ( use of a shorter mobility window and mid - points ) , these methods are error - prone . Second , we pool data from multiple industries to maximize the sample size against our stringent research design . While helping improve generalizability , this choice may introduce greater unobserved heterogeneity . Industries exhibit different propensities to patent ( Griliches 1990 ) , and varying patent propensities may obscure integrative and collaborative efforts in some industries more than others because these efforts are only observed through patents . We address this concern by matching patents by assignee and technology class . Nonetheless , our findings are not free from such concern . After all , R & D locations of the same firm may operate in different industries , and patents of the same technology class may be applied to different industries . Future research could improve upon these limitations , for instance by utilizing data with better identified career history ( e . g . , census data ) or a more refined sample of industries . Supplementing patent data with other metrics of knowledge output such as publications will also help better distinguish between the input and output side of the knowledge process . Our findings also leave some questions for follow - up studies . While we focus on post - hiring knowledge integration , perhaps a more interesting question would be performance outcomes following the integration . Does the team - based exploitation of the recruit’s knowledge lead to more impactful output or better overcome path dependency than solo exploitation ? Are teams composed of both the recruit and the incumbents more effective than other types of composition ? Given that specialization often results in greater productivity , what is the overall productivity implications 29 of having proportionally more generalists in a hiring organization ? Clearly , intriguing questions abound . We hope that our study serves another stepping stone for continued research in this exciting avenue . REFERENCES Argyres NS , Silverman BS ( 2004 ) R & D , organization structure , and the development of corporate technological knowledge . Strategic Management J . 25 ( 8 - 9 ) : 929 - 958 . Banerjee PM , Campbell BA ( 2009 ) Inventor bricolage and firm technology research and development . R & D Management . 39 ( 5 ) : 473 - 487 . Becker GS , Murphy KM ( 1992 ) The division of labor , coordination costs , and knowledge . Quart . J . Econom . 107 ( 4 ) : 1137 - 1160 . Bennett LM , Gadlin H ( 2012 ) Collaboration and team science : From theory to practice . J . Investigative Med . 60 ( 5 ) : 768 - 775 . Bilalić M , McLeod P , Gobet F ( 2008 ) Why good thoughts block better ones : The mechanism of the pernicious Einstellung ( set ) effect . Cognition 108 ( 3 ) : 652 - 661 . Bower GH , Hilgard ER ( 1981 ) Theories of Learning ( Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ ) . Brown JS , Duguid P ( 2001 ) Knowledge and organization : A social - practice perspective . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 2 ) : 198 - 213 . Bunderson JS , Sutcliffe KM ( 2002 ) Comparing alternative conceptualizations of functional diversity in management teams : Process and performance effects . Acad . Management J . 45 ( 5 ) : 875 - 893 . Carnabuci G , Bruggeman J ( 2009 ) Knowledge specialization , knowledge brokerage and the uneven growth of technology domains . Social forces 88 ( 2 ) : 607 - 641 . Chadwick C ( 2017 ) Toward a more comprehensive model of firms’ human capital rents . Acad . Management Rev . 42 ( 3 ) : 499 - 519 . Coff RW ( 1997 ) Human assets and management dilemmas : Coping with hazards on the road to resource - based theory . Acad . Management Rev . 22 ( 2 ) : 374 - 402 . Cohen WM , Levinthal DA ( 1990 ) Absorptive Capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 ( 1 ) : 128 - 152 . Dane E ( 2010 ) Reconsidering the trade - off between expertise and flexibility : A cognitive entrenchment perspective . Acad . Management Rev . 35 ( 4 ) : 579 - 603 . Evans JA ( 2008 ) Electronic publication and the narrowing of science and scholarship . Science 321 ( 5887 ) : 395 - 399 . Feldman DC ( 1976 ) A contingency theory of socialization . Admin . Sci . Quart . 21 ( 3 ) : 433 - 452 . Felin T Foss NJ Ployhart RE ( 2015 ) The microfoundations movement in strategy and organization theory . Acad . Management Annals 9 ( 1 ) : 575 - 632 . Fleming L ( 2001 ) Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Sci . 47 ( 1 ) : 117 - 132 . Gambardella A , Giarratana MS ( 2010 ) Localized knowledge spillovers and skill - biased performance . Strategic Entrep . J . 4 ( 4 ) : 323 - 339 . Garud R , Nayyar PR ( 1994 ) Transformative capacity : Continual structuring by intertemporal technology transfer . Strategic Management J . 15 ( 5 ) : 365 - 385 . Ge C , Huang KW , Png IP ( 2016 ) Engineer / scientist careers : Patents , online profiles , and misclassification bias . Strategic Management J . 37 ( 1 ) : 232 - 253 . Gentner D ( 1983 ) Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cog . Sci . 7 ( 2 ) : 155 - 170 . Gick ML , Lockhart RS ( 1995 ) Cognitive and affective components of insight . Davidson JE , Sternberg RJ , eds . The Nature of Insight ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) , 197 - 228 . Griliches Z ( 1990 ) Patent statistics as economic indicators : A Survey . J . Econom . Lit . 28 ( 4 ) : 1661 - 1707 . Goolsbee A . 1998 . Does government R & D policy mainly benefit scientists and engineers ? Amer . Econom . Rev . 88 ( 2 ) : 298 - 302 . Grant RM ( 1996 ) Toward a knowledge - based theory of the firm . Strategic Management J . 17 ( S2 ) : 109 - 122 . 30 Groysberg B , Lee LE , Nanda A ( 2008 ) Can they take it with them ? The portability of star knowledge workers ' performance . Management Sci . 54 ( 7 ) : 1213 - 1230 . Gruber M , Harhoff D , Hoisl K ( 2013 ) Knowledge recombination across technological boundaries : Scientists vs . engineers . Management Sci . 59 ( 4 ) : 837 - 851 . Gruenfeld DH , Martorana PV , Fan ET ( 2000 ) What do groups learn from their worldliest members ? Direct and indirect influence in dynamic teams . Organ . Behav . Human Dec . Proc . 82 ( 1 ) : 45 - 59 . Haeussler C ( 2011 ) Information - sharing in academia and the industry : A comparative study . Res Policy 40 ( 1 ) : 105 - 122 . Hansen MT , Løvås B ( 2004 ) How do multinational companies leverage technological competencies ? Moving from single to interdependent explanations . Strategic Management J . 25 ( 8 - 9 ) : 801 - 822 . Heckman JJ ( 1979 ) Sample selection bias as a specification error . Econometrica 47 ( 1 ) : 153 – 161 . Holyoak KJ ( 1984 ) Analogical thinking and human intelligence . Sternberg RJ , eds . Advances in the Psych . Human Intelligence Vol 2 ( Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc , Hillsdale , NJ ) , 199 - 230 . Huckman RS , Pisano GP ( 2006 ) The firm specificity of individual performance : Evidence from cardiac surgery . Management Sci . 52 ( 4 ) : 473 - 488 . Iacus SM , King G , Porro G ( 2011 ) Multivariate matching methods that are monotonic imbalance bounding . J . Amer . Stat . Assoc . 106 ( 493 ) : 345 - 361 . Jaffe AB , Trajtenberg M ( 2002 ) Patents , Citations , and Innovations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy ( MIT press , Cambridge , MA ) . Jones BF ( 2009 ) The burden of knowledge and the “death of the renaissance man” : Is innovation getting harder ? . Rev . Econom . Stud . 76 ( 1 ) : 283 - 317 . Kaplan CA , Simon HA ( 1990 ) In search of insight . Cog . Psy . 22 ( 3 ) : 374 - 419 . Kleibergen F , Paap R ( 2006 ) Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value decomposition . J . Econometrics 133 ( 1 ) : 97 – 126 . Knoke D , Kuklinski JH ( 1982 ) Network Analysis ( Sage , Beverly Hills , CA ) . Kogut B , Zander U ( 1996 ) What firms do ? Coordination , identity , and learning . Org . Sci . 7 ( 5 ) : 502 - 518 . Lau DC , Murnighan JK ( 1998 ) Demographic diversity and faultlines : The compositional dynamics of organizational groups . Acad . Management Rev . 23 ( 2 ) : 325 - 340 . Leahey E ( 2007 ) Not by productivity alone : How visibility and specialization contribute to academic earnings . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 72 ( 4 ) : 533 - 561 . Leonard D , Sensiper S ( 1998 ) The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation . Cali . Management Rev . 40 ( 3 ) : 112 - 132 . Li GC , Lai R , D’Amour A , Doolin DM , Sun Y , Torvik V , Amy ZY , Fleming L ( 2014 ) Disambiguation and co - authorship networks of the US patent inventor database ( 1975 – 2010 ) . Res . Policy 43 ( 6 ) : 941 - 955 . Luchins AS ( 1942 ) Mechanization in problem solving : the effect of Einstellung . Psych . Monographs 54 ( 6 ) ( Whole No . 248 ) . Lundvall BÄ , Johnson B ( 1994 ) The learning economy . J . Industry . Stud . 1 ( 2 ) : 23 - 42 . Marx M ( 2011 ) The firm strikes back : non - compete agreements and the mobility of technical professionals . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 76 ( 5 ) : 695 - 712 . Mawdsley JK , Somaya D ( 2016 ) Employee mobility and organizational outcomes : An integrative conceptual framework and research agenda . J . Management 42 ( 1 ) : 85 - 113 . McDowell A ( 2003 ) From the help desk : hurdle models . The Stata Journal 3 ( 2 ) : 178 - 184 . Melero E , Palomeras N ( 2015 ) The Renaissance Man is not dead ! The role of generalists in teams of inventors . Res Policy 44 ( 1 ) : 154 - 167 . Merluzzi J , Phillips DJ ( 2016 ) The specialist discount : Negative returns for MBAs with focused profiles in investment banking . Admin . Sci . Quart . 61 ( 1 ) : 87 - 124 . Moch MK , Morse EV ( 1977 ) Size , centralization and organizational adoption of innovations . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 42 ( 5 ) : 716 - 725 . Mowery DC , Oxley JE ( 1995 ) Inward technology transfer and competitiveness : The role of national innovation systems . Cambridge J . Econom . 19 ( 1 ) : 67 - 93 . 31 Nagle F , Teodoridis F ( 2017 ) Jack of all trades and master of knowledge : The role of generalists in novel knowledge integration . Working Paper , Harvard Business School , Boston , . Office of Technology Assessment ( OTA ) ( 1995 ) The Effectiveness of Research and Experimentation Tax Credits ( Congress of the United States , Washington , D . C . ) Palomeras N , Melero E ( 2010 ) Markets for inventors : Learning - by - hiring as a driver of mobility . Management Sci . 56 ( 5 ) : 881 - 895 . Paulus P ( 2000 ) Groups , teams , and creativity : The creative potential of idea - generating groups . Appl . Psych . 49 ( 2 ) : 237 - 262 . Polanyi M ( 1966 ) The Tacit Dimension ( Anchor Day Books , New York , NY ) . Postrel S ( 2002 ) Islands of shared knowledge : Specialization and mutual understanding in problem - solving teams . Organ . Sci . 13 ( 3 ) : 303 - 320 . Reagans R , McEvily B ( 2003 ) Network structure and knowledge transfer : The effects of cohesion and range . Admin . Sci . Quart . 48 ( 2 ) : 240 - 267 . Rosenkopf L , Almeida P ( 2003 ) Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility . Management Sci . 49 ( 6 ) : 751 - 766 . Rulke DL , Galaskiewicz J ( 2000 ) Distribution of knowledge , group network structure , and group performance . Management Sci . 46 ( 5 ) : 612 - 625 . Schein EH ( 1978 ) Career Dynamics : Matching Individual and Organizational Needs ( Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA ) . Schilling MA , Vidal P , Ployhart RE , Marangoni A ( 2003 ) Learning by doing something else : Variation , relatedness , and the learning curve . Management Sci . 49 ( 1 ) : 39 - 56 . Shaver J , Flyer F ( 2000 ) Agglomeration economies , firm heterogeneity , and foreign direct investment in the United States . Strategic Management J . 21 ( 12 ) : 1175 - 1193 . Slavova K , Fosfuri A , De Castro JO ( 2015 ) Learning by hiring : The effects of scientists’ inbound mobility on research performance in academia . Organ . Sci . 27 ( 1 ) : 72 - 89 . Simon HA ( 1991 ) Bounded rationality and organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) : 125 - 134 . Singh J , Agrawal A ( 2011 ) Recruiting for ideas : How firms exploit the prior inventions of new hires . Management Sci . 57 ( 1 ) : 129 - 150 . Singh J , Fleming L ( 2010 ) Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs : Myth or reality ? . Management Sci . 56 ( 1 ) : 41 - 56 . Song J , Almeida P , Wu G ( 2003 ) Learning – by – Hiring : When is mobility more likely to facilitate interfirm knowledge transfer ? . Management Sci . 49 ( 4 ) : 351 - 365 . Stock JH , Yogo M ( 2005 ) Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression . Andrews DWK , ed . Identification and Inference for Econometric Models ( Cambridge University Press , New York ) , 80 – 108 . Szulanski G ( 1996 ) Exploring internal stickiness : Impediments to the transfer of best practice within the firm . Strategic Management J . 17 ( S2 ) : 27 - 43 . Teodoridis F , Bikard M , Vakili K ( 2018 ) Creativity at the knowledge frontier : The impact of specialization in fast - and slow - paced domains . Admin . Sci . Quart . , ePub ahead of print July 30 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0001839218793384 Todorova G , Durisin B ( 2007 ) Absorptive capacity : Valuing a reconceptualization . Acad . Management Rev . 32 ( 3 ) : 774 - 786 . Toh PK ( 2014 ) Chicken , or the egg , or both ? The interrelationship between a firm ' s inventor specialization and scope of technologies . Strategic Management J . 35 ( 5 ) : 723 - 738 . Tushman ML , Scanlan TJ ( 1981 ) Boundary spanning individuals : Their role in information transfer and their antecedents . Acad . Management J . 24 ( 2 ) : 289 - 305 . Tushman ML ( 1977 ) Special boundary roles in the innovation process . Admin . Sci . Quart . 22 ( 4 ) : 587 - 605 . Tzabbar , D ( 2009 ) When does scientist recruitment affect technological repositioning ? . Acad . Management J . 52 ( 5 ) : 873 - 896 . 32 Tzabbar D , Silverman BS , Aharonson BS ( 2015 ) Learning by hiring or hiring to avoid learning ? . J . Managerial Psych . 30 ( 5 ) : 550 - 564 . Volberda HW , Foss NJ , Lyles MA ( 2010 ) Perspective—Absorbing the concept of absorptive capacity : How to realize its potential in the organization field . Organ . Sci . 21 ( 4 ) : 931 - 951 . Von Krogh G , Ichijo K , Nonaka I ( 2000 ) . Enabling Knowledge Creation : How to Unlock the Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the Power of Innovation ( Oxford University Press on Demand , Oxford , UK ) . Walsh JP , Ungson , GR ( 1991 ) Organizational memory . Acad . Management Rev . 16 ( 1 ) : 57 - 91 . Wilson DJ ( 2009 ) Beggar thy neighbor ? The in - state , out - of - state , and aggregate effects of R & D tax credits . Rev . Econom . Stat . 91 ( 2 ) : 431 - 436 . Yao FK , Chang S ( 2017 ) Do individual employees ' learning goal orientation and civic virtue matter ? A micro - foundations perspective on firm absorptive capacity . Strategic Management J . 38 ( 10 ) : 2041 - 2060 . Zahra SA , George G ( 2002 ) Absorptive capacity : A review , reconceptualization , and extension . Acad . Management Rev . 27 ( 2 ) : 185 - 203 . Zellner , A ( 1962 ) An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and tests for aggregation bias . J . Amer . Stat . Assoc . 57 ( 298 ) : 348 - 368 . Zmud RW ( 1982 ) Diffusion of modern software practices : Influence of centralization and formalization . Management Sci . 28 ( 12 ) : 1421 - 1431 . Zucker LG , Darby MR ( 1996 ) Star scientists and institutional transformation : Patterns of invention and innovation in the formation of the biotechnology industry . Proceedings of the Natl . Acad . Sci . 93 ( 23 ) : 12709 - 12716 . Zucker , LG , Darby MR , Armstrong J ( 1998 ) Geographically localized knowledge : Spillovers or markets ? . Econom . Inquiry 36 ( 1 ) : 65 - 86 . 33 Figure 1 : Proportion of Generalists Before Figure 2 : Propensity of Citing Recruit’s and After Policy Enactment Patent Before and After Policy Enactment Figure 3 : Marginal Effects of Generalist Level Figure 4 : Marginal Effects of Generalist on Number of Citations Level on Knowledge Retention 34 Table 1 : Descriptive Statistics and Correlations Variables Mean S . D . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 Num . Cite 0 . 03 0 . 30 1 . 00 2 Old Cite 0 . 01 0 . 20 0 . 60 1 . 00 3 New Cite 0 . 01 0 . 24 0 . 72 - 0 . 10 1 . 00 4 Solo Cite 0 . 00 0 . 09 0 . 41 0 . 14 0 . 39 1 . 00 5 Team Cite 0 . 01 0 . 22 0 . 87 0 . 39 0 . 75 0 . 25 1 . 00 6 Generalist Level 0 . 13 0 . 13 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 02 1 . 00 7 Knowledge Distance 3 . 94 3 . 42 - 0 . 01 0 . 03 - 0 . 05 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 0 . 05 1 . 00 8 Hire Depart 0 . 38 1 . 29 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 08 1 . 00 9 Total Citation 0 . 75 1 . 81 0 . 27 0 . 17 0 . 20 0 . 14 0 . 25 - 0 . 03 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 10 Patent Intensity 37 . 10 66 . 66 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 05 - 0 . 01 0 . 54 - 0 . 00 11 Density 0 . 20 0 . 26 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 03 0 . 01 - 0 . 38 0 . 00 12 R & D Expense 2 . 38 1 . 83 - 0 . 04 0 . 01 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 07 0 . 42 0 . 07 13 Patent Age 8 . 87 5 . 41 0 . 00 - 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 04 - 0 . 16 0 . 23 14 Patent Quality 1 . 83 4 . 26 0 . 03 - 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 01 0 . 04 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 09 - 0 . 01 15 Patent Breadth 1 . 85 1 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 0 . 07 0 . 01 0 . 02 16 Mover HHI 0 . 42 0 . 26 0 . 02 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 02 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 05 17 Year 2000 . 4 4 . 81 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 03 0 . 04 - 0 . 09 - 0 . 05 0 . 11 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 9 Total Citation 1 . 00 10 Patent Intensity 0 . 02 1 . 00 11 Density - 0 . 02 - 0 . 36 1 . 00 12 R & D Expense 0 . 12 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 1 . 00 13 Patent Age - 0 . 02 - 0 . 07 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 22 1 . 00 14 Patent Quality 0 . 13 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 09 0 . 42 1 . 00 15 Patent Breadth 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 04 0 . 09 0 . 09 1 . 00 16 Mover HHI 0 . 03 - 0 . 02 0 . 02 - 0 . 09 - 0 . 01 0 . 00 - 0 . 37 1 . 00 17 Year 0 . 22 0 . 03 - 0 . 07 0 . 25 0 . 18 0 . 04 - 0 . 04 0 . 04 1 . 00 Note : N = 33 , 733 . Correlation coefficients with absolute value above 0 . 014 are significant at 0 . 01 level 35 Table 2 : Effects of Generalist Level on Knowledge Integration Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Stage 1 Stage 2 Estimation Model : Neg . Binomial OLS Neg . Bin . Neg . Bin . Neg . Bin . Dependent Variable : Number Cite Generalist Level Number Cite Old Cite New Cite Generalist Level - 3 . 6284 * * * 7 . 5267 * * * 3 . 3134 12 . 3774 * * * ( 0 . 6973 ) ( 2 . 3150 ) ( 2 . 4184 ) ( 2 . 5874 ) Policy State - 0 . 0531 * * * ( 0 . 0022 ) Post Enact 0 . 0006 ( 0 . 0022 ) Policy × Post 0 . 0256 * * * ( 0 . 0028 ) Knowledge Distance - 0 . 0374† 0 . 0045 * * * - 0 . 1159 * * * - 0 . 0075 - 0 . 5367 * * * ( 0 . 0201 ) ( 0 . 0003 ) ( 0 . 0232 ) ( 0 . 0264 ) ( 0 . 0738 ) Hire Depart - 0 . 2183 * - 0 . 0016† - 0 . 2197 * * - 0 . 1980† - 0 . 2751 * ( 0 . 0858 ) ( 0 . 0008 ) ( 0 . 0736 ) ( 0 . 1093 ) ( 0 . 1081 ) Total Citation 0 . 4679 * * * - 0 . 0015 * * 0 . 4769 * * * 0 . 4448 * * * 0 . 3601 * * * ( 0 . 0253 ) ( 0 . 0004 ) ( 0 . 0194 ) ( 0 . 0197 ) ( 0 . 0205 ) Patent Intensity 0 . 0041 * * * - 0 . 0000 * * * 0 . 0056 * * * 0 . 0043 * * * 0 . 0065 * * * ( 0 . 0007 ) ( 0 . 0000 ) ( 0 . 0008 ) ( 0 . 0007 ) ( 0 . 0013 ) Density - 1 . 6781 * * * 0 . 0123 * - 1 . 9372 * * * - 1 . 2513 * * - 2 . 0299 * * * ( 0 . 3198 ) ( 0 . 0062 ) ( 0 . 3943 ) ( 0 . 3600 ) ( 0 . 5145 ) R & D Expense - 0 . 0004 * * * - 0 . 0000 * * * - 0 . 0003 * * * - 0 . 2697 * * * - 0 . 4627 * * * ( 0 . 000 ) ( 0 . 0000 ) ( 0 . 0000 ) ( 0 . 0375 ) ( 0 . 0907 ) Patent Age - 0 . 1082 * * * 0 . 0010 * * * - 0 . 1276 * * * - 0 . 2002 * * * - 0 . 1070 * * * ( 0 . 0195 ) ( 0 . 0002 ) ( 0 . 0155 ) ( 0 . 0229 ) ( 0 . 0151 ) Patent Quality 0 . 0397 * * - 0 . 0005† 0 . 0438 * * * 0 . 0473 * * 0 . 0623 * * * ( 0 . 0142 ) ( 0 . 0002 ) ( 0 . 0123 ) ( 0 . 0175 ) ( 0 . 0097 ) Patent Breadth - 0 . 0855 0 . 0019† - 0 . 1143 * - 0 . 1379 * ( 0 . 0679 ) ( 0 . 0010 ) ( 0 . 0581 ) ( 0 . 0653 ) Mover HHI 0 . 0099 - 0 . 0453 * * * 0 . 4342† 0 . 7466 * * ( 0 . 2316 ) ( 0 . 0042 ) ( 0 . 2501 ) ( 0 . 2754 ) Year 0 . 1792 * * * - 0 . 0016 * * * 0 . 1809 * * * 0 . 2045 * * * - 0 . 0043 ( 0 . 0174 ) ( 0 . 0003 ) ( 0 . 0191 ) ( 0 . 0184 ) ( 0 . 0228 ) Constant - 360 . 68 * * * 3 . 5005 * * * - 365 . 20 * * * - 412 . 25 * * * 5 . 4585 ( 34 . 8569 ) ( 0 . 7139 ) ( 38 . 3003 ) ( 36 . 9023 ) ( 45 . 8348 ) Observations 23 , 618 27 , 003 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 Wald chi - sq . 726 . 5 * * * — 1051 . 8 * * * 763 . 3 * * * 995 . 5 * * * F statistic — 139 . 18 * * * — — — Log pseudo - 2779 . 5 — - 2700 . 0 - 1795 . 5 - 1623 . 5 ( Pseudo ) R - sq . 0 . 212 0 . 103 0 . 205 0 . 175 0 . 235 Weak id . ( KP Wald F ) — 207 . 1 — — — Under - id . ( KP LM ) — P < 0 . 0001 — — — Over - id . ( Hansen J ) — — 3 . 368 1 . 773 16 . 777 * * * Notes : Except in Model 1 , Generalist Level is instrumented for by the policy implementation variables included in the first stage of Model 2 . The corresponding Stock and Yogo’s ( 2005 ) critical value is 22 . 3 . Robust standard errors clustered by mobility event are in parentheses . † p < 0 . 10 ; * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . 36 Table 3 : Effects of Generalist Level on the Mode and Domain of Knowledge Exploitation Model 1 ( All Domains ) Model 2 ( Novel Domains ) Model 3 ( Familiar Domains ) Dependent Var . : Solo Cite Team Cite Solo Cite Team Cite Solo Cite Team Cite Generalist Level 3 . 1964 6 . 8451 * * * 5 . 6003 9 . 6844 * * * 1 . 5189 2 . 9046 ( instrumented ) ( 4 . 0366 ) ( 1 . 9507 ) ( 4 . 8351 ) ( 2 . 6549 ) ( 4 . 9610 ) ( 2 . 3375 ) Knowl . Distance - 0 . 1244 * * - 0 . 1169 * * * - 0 . 4333 * * - 0 . 5147 * * * - 0 . 0752 - 0 . 0488 * ( 0 . 0403 ) ( 0 . 0221 ) ( 0 . 1259 ) ( 0 . 1179 ) ( 0 . 0506 ) ( 0 . 0245 ) Hire Depart - 0 . 1379 - 0 . 2699 * * - 0 . 0393 - 1 . 1488 - 0 . 1803 - 0 . 1768 * ( 0 . 1868 ) ( 0 . 0807 ) ( 0 . 1919 ) ( 1 . 9521 ) ( 6 . 4215 ) ( 0 . 0803 ) Total Citation 0 . 3512 * * * 0 . 4852 * * * 0 . 2404 * * * 0 . 4142 * * * 0 . 3755 * * * 0 . 4640 * * * ( 0 . 0314 ) ( 0 . 0186 ) ( 0 . 0331 ) ( 0 . 0265 ) ( 0 . 0444 ) ( 0 . 0221 ) Patent Intensity 0 . 0033 0 . 0056 * * * 0 . 0034† 0 . 0073 * * * 0 . 0030 0 . 0044 * * * ( 0 . 0020 ) ( 0 . 0007 ) ( 0 . 0018 ) ( 0 . 0020 ) ( 0 . 0019 ) ( 0 . 0006 ) Density - 4 . 6309 * * * - 1 . 6760 * * * - 2 . 8550 * - 1 . 1941 * * - 5 . 1438 * * * - 1 . 9844 * * * ( 0 . 8132 ) ( 0 . 3306 ) ( 1 . 1145 ) ( 0 . 4191 ) ( 1 . 0890 ) ( 0 . 4302 ) R & D Expense - 0 . 4108 * * * - 0 . 3297 * * * - 0 . 3704† - 0 . 5791 * * * - 0 . 3445 * * * - 0 . 2866 * * * ( 0 . 0770 ) ( 0 . 0374 ) ( 0 . 1960 ) ( 0 . 0946 ) ( 0 . 0900 ) ( 0 . 0426 ) Patent Age - 0 . 1030 * * * - 0 . 1329 * * * - 0 . 0531 - 0 . 1668 * * * - 0 . 2088 * * * - 0 . 1309 * * * ( 0 . 0224 ) ( 0 . 0150 ) ( 0 . 0365 ) ( 0 . 0226 ) ( 0 . 0548 ) ( 0 . 0173 ) Patent Quality — 0 . 0482 * * * 0 . 0192 0 . 0996 * * * 0 . 0230 0 . 0403 * * ( 0 . 0099 ) ( 0 . 0452 ) ( 0 . 0131 ) ( 0 . 0683 ) ( 0 . 0138 ) Patent Breadth - 0 . 1936 - 0 . 1437 * * — 0 . 1317 — - 0 . 2154 * * ( 0 . 1381 ) ( 0 . 0553 ) ( 0 . 0808 ) ( 0 . 0670 ) Mover HHI 0 . 9636 * — 0 . 6144 — 1 . 5429 * * * — ( 0 . 3797 ) ( 0 . 4866 ) ( 0 . 3861 ) Year 0 . 1530 * * * 0 . 1758 * * * 0 . 0263 0 . 0044 0 . 1628 * * * 0 . 1741 * * * ( 0 . 0315 ) ( 0 . 0153 ) ( 0 . 0461 ) ( 0 . 0294 ) ( 0 . 0459 ) ( 0 . 0191 ) Constant - 309 . 90 * * * - 354 . 81 * * * - 57 . 195 - 11 . 698 - 330 . 10 * * * - 351 . 48 * * * ( 63 . 1806 ) ( 30 . 6967 ) ( 92 . 2616 ) ( 58 . 9020 ) ( 92 . 0619 ) ( 38 . 3684 ) Observations 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 Wald chi - sq . 323 . 3 * * * 1278 . 1 * * * 171 . 5 * * * 579 . 6 * * * 188 . 4 * * * 898 . 4 * * * Log pseudo - 746 . 5 - 2438 . 2 - 412 . 7 - 1258 . 0 - 492 . 3 - 1920 . 7 ( Pseudo ) R - sq . 0 . 1780 0 . 2077 0 . 1721 0 . 1872 0 . 1606 0 . 895 Overid ( Hansen J ) 10 . 559 * * 2 . 636 10 . 122 * * 3 . 812 4 . 390 2 . 839 Notes : † p < 0 . 10 ; * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . Robust standard errors clustered by mobility event are in parentheses . 37 Table 4 : Effects of Generalist Level on Knowledge Retention Model 1 Model 2 Dependent Variable : Number Cite Old Cite New Cite Generalist Level 7 . 6032 * * 2 . 6882 8 . 0523 * * * ( instrumented ) ( 2 . 5885 ) ( 2 . 5204 ) ( 1 . 9437 ) Hire Depart - 0 . 1230 0 . 0108 - 1 . 4610 * ( 0 . 2791 ) ( 0 . 5967 ) ( 0 . 7180 ) Generalist Level X Hire Depart - 0 . 7968 - 1 . 6921 7 . 9645† ( 2 . 2577 ) ( 5 . 0470 ) ( 4 . 6005 ) Knowledge Distance - 0 . 1153 * * * 0 . 0116 - 0 . 4757 * * * ( 0 . 0253 ) ( 0 . 0186 ) ( 0 . 0681 ) Total Citation 0 . 4766 * * * 0 . 4430 * * * 0 . 3656 * * * ( 0 . 0227 ) ( 0 . 0184 ) ( 0 . 0201 ) Patent Intensity 0 . 0056 * * * 0 . 0040 * * * 0 . 0053 * * * ( 0 . 0009 ) ( 0 . 0006 ) ( 0 . 0014 ) Density - 1 . 9365 * * * - 1 . 2323 * * - 1 . 9182 * * * ( 0 . 3926 ) ( 0 . 3697 ) ( 0 . 4857 ) R & D Expense - 0 . 3439 * * * - 0 . 2845 * * * - 0 . 5159 * * * ( 0 . 0451 ) ( 0 . 0367 ) ( 0 . 0768 ) Patent Age - 0 . 1274 * * * - 0 . 2001 * * * - 0 . 1018 * * * ( 0 . 0148 ) ( 0 . 0213 ) ( 0 . 0153 ) Patent Quality 0 . 0437 * * 0 . 0465 * 0 . 0636 * * * ( 0 . 0128 ) ( 0 . 0192 ) ( 0 . 0097 ) Patent Breadth - 0 . 1147† — - 0 . 1045 ( 0 . 0624 ) ( 0 . 0695 ) Mover HHI 0 . 4336† 0 . 2787 — ( 0 . 2250 ) ( 0 . 2468 ) Year 0 . 1806 * * * 0 . 2035 * * * 0 . 0001 ( 0 . 0176 ) ( 0 . 0184 ) ( 0 . 0182 ) Constant - 364 . 58 * * * - 410 . 55 * * * - 2 . 6992 ( 35 . 2606 ) ( 36 . 9033 ) ( 36 . 5157 ) Observations 22 , 090 22 , 090 22 , 090 Wald chi - sq . 836 . 0 * * * 760 . 4 * * * 993 . 7 * * * Log pseudo - 2687 . 3 - 1796 . 9 - 1624 . 4 ( Pseudo ) R - sq . 0 . 2091 0 . 1746 0 . 2342 Overid ( Hansen J ) 0 . 238 0 . 633 0 . 852 Notes : † p < 0 . 10 ; * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . Robust standard errors clustered by mobility event are in parentheses .