what customers can ' t tell you might be just what you need to develop successful new products . SPARK I N N O V A T I O N THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN BY DOROTHY LEONARD A N D JEFFREY F . RAYPORT 102 ARTWORK BY BILL MAYER A LMOST EVERY COMPANY COMPETES to some degree on the basis of continual Jx innovation . And to be commercially successful , new product and service ideas must , of course , meet a real - or perceived - customer need . Hence the current managerial mantras : " Get close to the customer " and " Listen to the voice of the customer . " The problem is , customers ' ability to guide the development of new products and services is limited by their experience and their ability to imag - ine and describe possible innovations . How can companies identify needs that customers themselves may not recognize ? How can designers develop ways to meet those needs , if even in the course of extensive market research , customers never mention their desires because they assume those desires can ' t he fulfilled ? A set of techniques we call empathic design can help resolve those dilemmas . At its foundation is observation - watching consumers use products or services . But unlike in focus groups , usability laboratories , and other contexts of tradition - al market research , such observation is conducted in the customer ' s own environ - ment - in the course of normal , everyday routines . In such a context , researchers can gain access to a host of information that is not accessible through other observation - oriented research methods . HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW November - December 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN The techniques of empathic design - gathering , analyzing , and applying information gleaned from observation in the field - are familiar to top engi - neering / design companies and to a few forward - thinking manufacturers , but they are not common practice . Nor are they taught in marketing courses , being more akin to anthropology than marketing Sometimes , customers are so accusLomed to current conditions that thev don ' t think to ask for a new solution . science . In fact , few companies are set up to employ empathie design , - the techniques require unusual coUahorative skills that many organizations have not developed . Market researchers generally use text or numbers to spark ideas for new products , but empathic designers use visual information as well . Traditional researchers are generally trained to gather data in relative isolation from other disci - plines ; empathic design demands creative interac - tions among members of an interdisciplinary team . Developing the expertise , however , is a worthy investment . Empathic design is a relatively low - cost , low - risk way to identify potentially critical customer needs . It ' s an important source of new product ideas , and it has the potential to redirect a company ' s technological capahilities toward entirely new businesses . When Questions Don ' t Yield Answers when a product or service is well understood , tradi - tional marketing science provides amazingly so - phisticated ways to gain useful information from potential customers and influence their purchasing decisions . Consider how subtle are preferences of smell and sound , yet car manufacturers can design automobile interiors to evoke the specific scent of expensive leather that U . S . buyers expect in a lux - ury vehicle . Nissan Design International tested more than 90 samples of leather before selecting 3 that U . S . noses preferred for the Infinity ) - 30 . Simi - larly , manufacturers are adept at fine - tuning en - gines so that they make the preferred sounds associ - ated with surging power and swift acceleration . Harley - Davidson , in fact , has sued competitors that have imitated the voices of its motors , which have been carefully adjusted to please its customers ' ears . Customers can guide an auto or motorcycle manufacturer in making even minute adjustments in its offering because they arc familiar with the products and have developed over time a finely honed set of desires and perceived needs . In fact , the driving experience is so deeply ingrained that they can re - create most of the needs they encounter while on the road even when they are not actually in the driver ' s seat . The practices of traditional mar - keting science are also effective in situations where consumers are al - ready familiar with a proposed solu - tion to a problem hecause of their experiences with it in a different context . Peel - away postage stamps were an innovation that customers could comprehend because they had already encountered the light adhesives used in Post - it Notes and peel - away labels . But sometimes , customers are so accustomed to current conditions that they don ' t think to ask for a new solution - even if they have real needs that could he addressed . Hahit tends to inure us to in - convenience ; as consumers , we create " work - arounds " that become so familiar we may forget that we are being forced to behave in a less - than - optimal fashion - and thus we may be incapable of telling market researchers what we really want . For example , when asked about an editing func - tion in a software package , one customer had no complaints - until she sat down to use the program in front of the observer . Then she realized that her work was disrupted when the program did not automatically wrap text around graphics while she edited . Accustomed to working around the prob - lem , she had not mentioned it in earlier interviews . Market research is generally unhelpful when a company has developed a new technological capa - bility that is not tied to a familiar consumer para - digm . If no current product exists in the market that embodies at least the most primitive form of Dorothy Leonard i . s the WiUiam J . Ahernathy Professor of Business Administration at tbe Harvard Business School in Boston . Massachusetts . Her teaching , research , and consulting focus on creativity , innovative knowl - edge management as a core capability , and new - product development . Her book Wellsprings of Knowledge : Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innovation was puhlished in 199S by the Harvard Business School Press . Jeffrey F . Rayport is an associate professor of business administration at the Harvard Business School . His re - search focuses on the impact on new information tech - nologies on service - marketing strategies for informa - tion - intensive companies . 104 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW Niivember - Deccmber 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN a new product , consumers have no foundation on which to formulate their opinions . When radio technology was first introduced in the early twenti - eth century , it was used solely for transmitting Morse code and voice communication from point to point . Only after David Sarnoff suggested in 1915 that such technology could be better em - ployed in broadcasting news , music , and haseball games was the " radio music box " born . Sarnoff had put his knowledge of the technology together with what he found when he observed families gathered in their homes to envision a totally different use for the technology . No one had asked for broadcasting because they didn ' t know it was feasihle . So there are many reasons why standard tech - niques of inquiry rarely lead to truly novel product concepts . It is extremely difficult to design an in - strument for market research that is amenable to quantitative analysis and also open - ended enough to capture a customer ' s environment completely . Market researchers have to contend with respon - dents ' tendency to try to please the inquirer by pro - viding expected answers , as well as their inclina - tion to avoid embarrassment by not revealing practices they suspect might he deemed inappropri - ate . The people who design surveys , run focus groups , and interview customers further cloud the results by inadvertently - and inevitably - introduc - ing their own hiases into the questioning . When a customer ' s needs are solicited in writing or through constrained dialogue , pummeled with statistical logic , and delivered to product developers in com - pressed form , critical information may be missing . But why would observation be a better approach ? What We Learn from Observation Watching consumers has always yielded ohvious , but still tremendously valuable , basic information . Consider usability : Is the package difficult to open ? Does the user have to resort to the manual , or are operating principles clearly telegraphed by the de - sign ? Are handles , knobs , and distances from the floor designed ergonomically ? Does the user hesi - tate or seem confused at any point ? What unspoken and possibly false assumptions are guiding the user ' s interaction with the product ? You can easily get that sort of feedback by watch - ing people work with your products in usability labs and by testing for various ergonomic require - ments . It is the additional information gained from seeing your customers actually use your product or service in their own physical environment that makes empathic design an imperative . Empathic - design techniques can yield at least five types of information that cannot be gathered through tradi - tional marketing or product research . Triggers of Use . What circumstances prompt peo - ple to use your product or service ? Do your cus - tomers turn to your offering when , and in the way , you expected ? If they don ' t , there may be an oppor - tunity for your company . Consider what Hewlett - Packard learned in the early 1990s by observing users of the HP 95 / 100 LX series of personal digital assistants ( PDAs ) . The company allied itself with Lotus Development Cor - poration to produce the PDA mainly because its product developers knew that their " road warrior " consumers valued the computing power of Lotus 1 - 2 - 3 spreadsheet software . But when HP ' s re - searchers watched customers actually using the product , they found that the personal - organizer software the company had also licensed from Lotus was at least as important a trigger for using the PDA as the spreadsheet was . When the makers of Cheerios went out in the field , they found that breakfast wasn ' t necessarily the primary purpose for which certain households were using the cereal . Parents of small children , they found , were more interested in the fact that the pieces could be bagged , carried , and doled out one by one as a tidy snack anytime , anywhere to occupy restless tots . And when the brand manager for a spray - on cook - ing oil saw his neighbor using the product on the bottom of his lawn mower , he discovered an entirely unexpected trigger . Pressed to explain , the neighbor pointed out that the oil prevented cut grass from adhering to the bottom of the mower and did no harm to the lawn . Such unanticipated usage pat - terns can identify opportunities not only for inno - vation and product redesign but also for entering entirely new markets . Interactions with the User ' s Environment . How does your product or service fit into your users ' own idiosyncratic systems - whether they be a house - hold routine , an office operation , or a manufactur - ing process ? Consider what Intuit , maker of the personal - finance software package Quicken , leafns through its " Follow Me Home " program , in which produet developers gain permission from first - time buyers to observe their initial experience with the software in their own homes . Intuit , of course , learns a good deal about its product ' s packaging , documentation , and installation from this exer - cise , as well as about the user friendliness of its software . But it can gather that kind of information in a usability laboratory . What Intuit can ' t reliably learn in any way other than by watching someone boot up Quicken on a home computer is what other HAUVAUD BUSINESS REVIEW NovcmbtT - Deccmbt - r 1997 105 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN software applications are running on that cus - tomer ' s system and how that software can interfere with or complement Quicken ' s own operation . Moreover , product developers can see what other data Hies the customer refers to and might wish to access directly , what state of organization or disar - ray such files are in , and whether they are on paper or in electronic form . It was from such in - home oh - servations that Intuit designers discovered that many small - business owners were using Quicken to keep their books . Some small changes that can result from watch - ing people use your product in their own environ - ment can also be competitively important . When engineers from a manufacturer of laboratory equip - ment visited a customer , they noticed that the equipment emitted a high level of air pollution when it was being used for certain applications . That observation motivated the company to add a venting hood to its product line . Current users were so accustomed to the unpleasant smell that they had never thought to mention it and didn ' t regard a venting hood as an important enhancement - until it was available . Then the company ' s sates force found the hood to be a compelling sales point when customers compared the product with those of competitors . User Customization . Do users reinvent or re - design your product to serve their own purposes ? Producers of industrial equipment observed users taping pieces of paper to their product to serve as identifying labels . The manufacturer gained an in - expensive , but appreciable , advantage over the competition when it incorporated a flat protected space for such machine - specific information into its next model . And every Japanese automaker has set up a design studio in southern California be - cause fanatical car owners there are prone to modi - Observers saw people combining beepers and cell phones not to answer calls but to screen them . fying their cars , often substantially , to meet their particular desires , be they functional ( more cargo space , larger engines ) or ego - intensive ( spoilers , special wheels , new colors ) . Observing these users helps designers at Nissan and Toyota envision the potential evolution of specific models - and gives them a window on the possible future of cars and trucks in general . Sometimes , users combine several existing prod - ucts to solve a problem , not only revealing new uses for traditional products but also highlighting their shortcomings . A prominent producer of household cleaners handed video cameras to family members to record how its products were really be - ing used in people ' s basements . The company then could see homemakers concocting their own recipes for particular household chores , such as washing white curtains ( " one cup baking soda , one cup dishwashing detergent , " and so on ] . Similarly , in the course of studying consumers ' mobile - communication needs , consultants at the Chicago - based Doblin Group , observed individuals creatively combining beepers and cell phones so they could be just as available as they wished - and no more . These consumers gave special beeper codes to friends and relatives to screen out unde - sired interruptions . That suggested to the firm the need for filtering capabilities on cell phones . Intangible Attributes of the Product . What kinds of peripheral or intangible attributes does your product or service have ? Customers rarely name such attributes in focus groups or surveys , but those unseen factors may constitute a kind of emo - tional franchise - and thus an opportunity . When watching videos of homemakers using cleansers and detergents , representatives of the household - products company could see how often the smell of the products evoked satisfaction with their use , en - gendered feelings of nostalgia ( " My mother used this " ) or elicited other emotional responses ( " WTien it smells clean , it makes all my work worthwhile " ) . Such intangible , invisible product assets can be augmented , exploited , or redirected . After visiting the homes of Kimberly - Clark customers , consul - tants at the Palo Alto , California - based design firm GVO recognized the emotional appeal of pull - on diapers to parents and toddlers , who saw them as a step toward " grown - up " dress . Diapers were clothing , the observers realized , and had highly symbolic as well as function - al meaning . Huggies Pull - Ups were rolled out nationally in 1991 , and by the time competitors caught on , the company was selling $ 400 million worth of the product annually . Failing to note such intangible attributes can sink a new product , Environmentally friendly disks that clean washer loads of clothes without deter - gents have yet to attract a mass market - in large part , according to the Doblin Group ' s observational research , hecause they don ' t produce the expected clean - clothes smell . 106 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW Nfivember - December 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN Unarticulated User Needs . The application of empathic design that holds the greatest potential benefit is the observation of current or possible customers encountering problems with your prod - ucts or services that they don ' t know can be ad - dressed and may not even recognize as problems . What do you see people being unable to do that would clearly be beneficial ? A product developer from Hewlett - Packard sat in an operating room observing a surgeon at work . The surgeon was guiding his scalpel by watching the pa - couple at the side of the road wrestling the back seat of a competitor ' s minivan out of the way so they could pick up a new couch . " We bought this so we would have room , " they told him , " but we can ' t use it for what we want without taking out the seats . " They would never have thought of ask - ing for any solution to their problem , but one im - mediately occurred to Hirshberg - six - foot runners that would enable van owners to fold up the back - seats and slide them out of the way , thus easily cre - ating cargo room . tient ' s body and his own hands displayed on a tele - vision screen . As nurses walked around the room , they would periodically obscure the surgeon ' s view of the screen and the operation for a few seconds . No one complained . But this unacknowledged problem caused the developer to ponder the possi - bility of creating a lightweight helmet that could suspend the images a few inches in front of the sur - geon ' s eyes . Her company had the technology to create such a product . The surgeon would never have thought to ask for it , even though its potential to improve productivity , increase accuracy , and make the surgeon ' s work easier was substantial . Unarticulated needs abound in daily routines , even when a technological solution exists . For ex - ample , Nissan Design ' s president , Jerry Hirshberg , was driving along a freeway one day when he saw a Weyerhaeuser won an important advantage in the market for particle board after observing an unarticulated need during a visit to a customer ' s plant . The customer , a major furniture maker , cre - ated table legs by laminating together narrow hoards produced by some of Weyerbaeuser ' s com - petitors . Unable either to match the competitors ' prices or to convince the customer to pay higher prices for superior quality , Weyerhaeuser instead came up witb a new way to make table legs - a new , much thicker particle board that did not have to be laminated . The consequent savings to customers in tooling and labor costs put Weyerhaeuser back in the competitive running . Some stunning product ideas come from an engi - neer or designer who actually uses the products he or she develops because this individual combines HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW November - December 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN knowledge of unexpressed needs with knowledge of how to fill those needs . U . S . women were annoyed for years by the inappropriateness of using a man ' s safety razor , designed for faces , on their underarms and legs . When a female designer reshaped the razor for a woman ' s hand and needs - the Gillette Lady Sensor - it was enormously successful . The oft - repeated advice to " delight the cus - tomer " assumes real meaning when product or ser - vice providers push beyond what their customers Empathic - design techniques can ' t replace market research ; rather , they contribute to the flow of ideas that need further testing . U anticipate to deliver the unexpected - and technol - ogy is a primary agent of such delight . But all com - panies have capabilities they are failing to tap in their quest to create innovative products and ser - vices because those who know wbat can be done are not generally in direct contact with those who need something done . Empathic - design techniques thus exploit a company ' s existing technological capabilities in the widest sense of the term . When a company ' s representatives explore their customers ' worlds with the eyes of a fresh observer while simultaneously carrying the knowledge of what is possible for the company to do , they can redirect existing organizational capabilities toward new markets . Consider it a process of mining knowl - edge assets for new veins of innovation . Usually , much of the basic underlying technology or service methodologies already exist ; they just need to be applied differently . One important note : empathic - design techniques cannot replace market research ; rather , they con - tribute to the flow of ideas that need further scien - tific testing before a company commits itself to any full - fledged development project . Empathic Design : the Process Companies can engage in empathic design , or simi - lar techniques such as contextual inquiry , in a vari - ety of ways . However , most employ the following five - step process : Step One : Observation . It ' s important to clarify who should be observed , who should do the observ - ing , and what the observer should be watching . Who should be observed ^ These individuals may be customers , noncustomers , the customers of cus - tomers , or a group of individuals who by playing different roles collectively perform a task . Hewlett - Packard makes protocol analyzer soft - ware that enables managers of computer operations to diagnose network malfunctions . As networks hecame more complex , smaller companies began to offer customized software for the idiosyncratic needs of some of HP ' s customers . In response , HP designers conducted extensive mar - ket research , which resulted in a ca - cophony of requests to expand the types of data the analyzers could track and report on . Not only did that make product development much more difficult , it also failed to make the products any more effec - tive . Users became inundated with data that they couldn ' t turn into use - ful information . HP developers de - cided to stop focusing on their traditional cus - tomers , the operations managers . Instead , they watched , among others , network maintenance technicians at work . From those observations , the developers discov - ered that what their customers really needed was not , as they had been told , more data to analyze . Rather , users needed to recover swiftly from com - puter crashes . That change in perspective led to a shift in technological emphasis . The result was HP ' s highly successful Network Advisor , which de - emphasizes data collection , analysis , and reports . Instead , it identifies the network problem , recom - mends a solution , and suggests ways to implement the solution quickly . Who should do the observingi Differences in training , education , and natural inclinations pre - dispose different people to extract very different in - formation when watching the exact same situa - tion . A human - factors specialist may note body positions ; an engineer may notice angles and me - chanical interactions ; a designer may see spaces and forms . Of course , many people are multiskilled observers , but the best way to capture the most im - portant aspects of an environment is to send out a small team , each member of which has expertise in a different discipline . That ' s what the design firm IDEO did for Details , a subsidiary of the office - equipment supplier , Steelcase . To help Details de - velop a more easily repositioned computer key - board , IDEO sent a human - factors expert , an engineer , and a designer on anthropological expedi - tions into office buildings . Each team member brought back a notebook full of very different data . 108 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW November - December 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN Observing in Cyberspace The techniques of empathic design are a natural for the physical marketplace : watching customers use a product or service in their own homes or offices pro - vides a wealth of information about possible innova - tions in real time and with little or no distortion , But empathic design also has great potential in the virtual world , or the " marketspace . " Increasingly , people con - duct business transactions - from hanking and invest - ing to purchasing and installing software packages - through cyherspace . Observing behavior in that vir - tual realm can yield many of the same benefits as ob - servation in the physical world . In fact , in many situa - tions , the virtual form of empathic design can result in speedier , more targeted innovation because compa - nies can " watch " many more people at any given time in cyherspace and spot needs and trends at the very instant they emerge . For example , software developers are increasingly taking advantage of " plug - ins " - small modules of computer code that they can download directly from the Web through their Internet browsers and combine together to make larger applications . Microsoft and Netscape are highly interested in which plug - ins their customers arc downloading via their respective browsers , Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator . Both companies can directly observe users running the plug - ins , gaining clues about emerging customer needs . For example , many browser users have recently begun to experiment with Internet telephony - that is , they have begun to use software from companies such as VocalTec Communications to make long - distance phone calls for free over the Web . Responding to this trend , Microsoft and Netscape now offer browsers with Internet telephony built in . Similarly , software designers , who often conduct beta tests of new products on the Web with large groups of " techies , " have access to enormously varied virtual discussions ahout their products . Every time a company releases a beta version of software on the Web and invites hackers to find bugs , identify flaws , and suggest improvements , that company can harvest insights into future needs by observing how users cus - tomize and critique their products . And the success of America Online can be attrih - uted in part to the fact that its managers understood and acted on what they found when they observed cus - tomers ' usage patterns - Originally , managers had be - lieved that information services would drive their business , but they found that those offerings were not what users valued most . Kather , users valued the abil - ity to communicate through virtual channels with one another . So AOL invested aggressively in creating venues for social interaction , ranging from chat rooms and E - mail to buddy lists and event forums . When AOL has ignored the wisdom of observing and listening to its markets , it has stumbled badly . Wit - ness the recent consumer backlash that occurred when the commercial on - line service announced that it would sell the phone numbers of its 8 . 5 million users to telemarketers for a hefty sum . It pays to stay close to users through physical or digital observation as they use or experience the product or service . Of course , the techniques of empathic design do not translate directly from the physical world to the vir - tual one . In fact , some would argue that " ohservation " in the marketspace is simply capturing data . And to an extent it is , since all observation ultimately becomes a source of data ahout users . But data represent behav - ior . And therein lies much untapped potential - un - tapped because the techniques of empathic design de - mand a much more intensive approach to those data than most companies currently take . Empathic design requires researchers to think ahout a body of data as a window into consumers ' behavior and then to use that information as the basis for innovation . That requires a substantial investment in reflection and analysis - something many companies have not yet made . Companies observing in cyberspace also face the issue of where to draw the line when it comes to pri - vacy . Observation in the marketspace is by nature un - obtrusive and can be perceived as invasive . Customers do not want to be spied on . It is imponant to consider what customers may consider an invasion of privacy and when the customer should be allowed to set the boundaries on a company ' s observations . Tbe Micro - soft Network software originally scanned and re - ported back to Microsoft the other programs its users had on their hard drives . The purpose of the ohserva - tion ostensibly was to help Microsoft make its prod - ucts compatible with other vendors ' software . But customers raised concerns about privacy , and the prac - tice was discontinued . It is worthwhile for companies to address that issue and to explore the potential of empathic - design tech - niques in the marketspace . Not only is it straightfor - ward and inexpensive to observe customers ' behavior in the virtual world , but many companies are already collecting the raw material they need , whether they know it or not , simply by virtue of their on - going ac - tivities in marketspace channels . Every move that consumers make in tbe virtual worid leaves a digital fingerprint ; collectively , those prints form a trail that outlines needs and desires , pointing the way toward successful innovation . HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW Nuvcnihi - T - December 109 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN Because a critical objective of such an expedition is to match the unarticulated needs of users with technological possibilities , at least one member of any team should have experience in behavioral ob - servation and another should have a deep under - standing of the organizational capabilities the de - velopment team can draw upon . When the team comes from an outside consulting firm , some of the client ' s employees should be included to provide that deep understanding . The Doblin Group , for ex - ample , was challenged to redefine the travel experi - ence for SAS . It convened a very large team that in - cluded not only social scientists and information designers but also pilots and flight attendants from the airline . The airline employees understood SAS ' s capabilities in depth and also knew how proposed service innovations might require changes not just in operations but also in corporate culture . Few organizations have large numbers of employ - ees capable of conducting such anthropological expeditions . When asked what characteristics members of empathic - design teams should have . Nissan designers were startled to see how many people were eating in trucks - not just drinks , but whole spaghetti dinners . managers that employ those techniques list ones rarely found on most resumes : open - mindedness , observational skills , and curiosity . Human resource departments are not set up to screen for such abili - ties . Some companies , such as Intel and Xerox , have hired cultural anthropologists and social psycholo - gists for their research , marketing , or product de - velopment departments because they are trained observers who have demonstrated an interest in hu - man behavior . Other organizations outsource this kind of work to design firms , knowing that there are employees in such specialty companies with a variety of skills : experts in human factors , in graph - ics and visual design , and in engineering . What behavior should be observed ^ The people being observed should be carrying out normal rou - tines - playing , eating , relaxing , or working at home or at the office . For its research on mobile communications , the Doblin Group followed a lawyer from the moment she left her children at their day care center in the morning until after the children were in bed that night , revealing a wealth of communication needs that are often overlooked . Few people , of course , are totally oblivious to a team of people hanging over their shoulders , ob - serving them at work or play . But a real - life atmo - sphere - even a slightly stilted one - is still better tban the highly artificial setting of a focus - group conference room or a laboratory . For some products and services , team members may conduct their observations in a highly unobtrusive way simply by planting themselves in a public setting where peo - ple are going about their normal routines and watching behaviors more systematically than the usual sidewalk observer generally does . Step Two : Capturing Data . Because empathic - design techniques stress observation over inquiry , relatively few data are gathered through responses to questions . ( See the exhibit " Inquiry Versus Ob - servation : What ' s Different ? " ) When they wish to know how to interpret people ' s actions , observers may ask a few very open - ended questions , such as " Why are you doing that ? " They often carry a list of questions to prompt their own ohservations - for example , " What problems is the user encountering ? " But most data are gathered from visual , auditory , and sensory cues . Thus empathic - design teams very frequently use photogra - phy and videography as tools . Video can capture subtle , fleeting body language that may convey large amounts of information and store it for future review and analysis . For more than a decade , researchers at Xerox PARG , the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center , have videotaped users when they were confronted with a product such as a new copier machine . The researchers can see puzzled looks on the subjects ' faces , they watch as people search for controls , and they can observe the kinds of automatic responses that happen when someone expects a control to be here or there and it is not . Such cues come and go within the span of mere seconds and are hard to capture in notes . Even still photographs convey information that can be lost in verbal descriptions . Nissan Design International commissioned a photographer to travel to several cities and take pictures of people in trucks to better understand how they were being used as commuter and family cars . NDI designers were startled to discover how little their trucks ( and those of competitors ) were actually being used for the purposes being advertised and reported in market surveys . NDI president Hirshberg was sur - prised to see how many people were eating in trucks , recalling " not just drinks , but whole spa - 110 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW NovembeT - December 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN ghetti dinners ! " The designers also noticed how much people resembled their vehicles and how scuffed up some of the vehicles were . They began to wonder if some vehicles should be more like denim and look better the more worn they got . Photographs or drawings ( which artists and de - signers can produce on the spot ) show spatial arrangements and contain details that may have gone unnoticed while the team was on location . When members of one observation team displayed on a bulletin board all the candid photos they took of the people they ohserved in an office building , they were struck by the snake pit of wires in which everyone ' s feet were stuck . That led their company to build in conduits for those wires in its next gen - eration of dividers for modular offices . And pictures of backyard barbecues taken for the developers from the Thermos company who were working on a new charcoal grill showed women struggling with equipment designed for the generally greater height Inquiry Versus Observation : What ' s Different ? Inquiry I . People can ' t ask for what they don ' t know is technically possible . 2 . People are generally highly unreliable re - porters of their own behavior . Observation 1 . Well - chosen observers bave deep knowledge of corporate capabilities , including the extent of the company ' s technical expertise . 2 . Observers rely on real actions rather than re - ported behavior . 3 . People tend to give answers they think are expected or desired . 4 . People are less likely to recall their feelings about intangible characteristics of products and services when they aren ' t in the process of using them . 5 . People ' s imaginations - and hence their de - sires - are bounded by their experience ; they accept inadequacies and deficiencies in their environment as normal . 6 . Questions are often biased and reflect inquir - ers ' unrecognized assumptions . 7 . Questioning interrupts the usual flow of peo - ple ' s natural activity . 8 . Questioning stifles opportunities for users to suggest innovations . 3 . People are not asked to respond to verbal stim - uli ; they give nonverbal cues of their feelings and responses through body language , in addi - tion to spontaneous , unsolicited comments . 4 . Using the actual product or a prototype , or en - gaging in the actual activity for which an in - novation is being designed , stimulates com - ments about such intangibles as smells or emotions associated with the product ' s use . 5 . Trained , technically sophisticated ohservers can see solutions to unarticulated needs . 6 . Observation is open ended and varied ; trained observers tend to cancel out one another ' s ob - servational biases . 7 . Observation , while almost never totally unob - trusive , interrupts normal activities less than questioning does . 8 . Observers in the field often identify user inno - vations that can be duplicated and improved for the rest of the market . HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW Niivtmbor - Decembcr 111 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN and upper body strength of men , who were ( incor - rectly ) assumed to be the most likely outdoor fami - ly chefs . Step Three : Reflection and Analysis . After gath - ering data in many forms , the team members return to reflect on what they have observed and to review their visual data with other colleagues . Those indi - viduals - unhampered by possibly extraneous infor - mation , such as the reputations of the individuals or companies visited or the weather at the observa - tion site - will focus on the data before them , and they , too , will see different things . They will ask questions that tbe team members may or may not be able to answer and tbat may well send tbem out for furtber observation . It is at this point that tbe team tries to identify all of its customers ' possible problems and needs . Tbe IDEO team redesigning Lifeline Systems ' personal - response unit for elderly people uncovered a potentially dangerous problem only after tbey sbared their field data with colleagues . On leaving for an extended period , many users turned off their units so tbat Lifeline ' s monitoring staff would not mistake silence for an emergency . However , be - cause tbe unit lacked an obvious status indicator , users often forgot to reactivate tbe units wben they returned . The opportunity to improve the design was recognized by engineers who were not part of the original group of IDEO observers . Consequent - ly , IDEO redesigned tbe product so tbat it indicated even to the vision impaired when it was turned off and automatically restarted when users tried to send their habitual " all is well " signals to tbe mon - itoring service . Step Four : Brainstorming for Solutions . Brain - storming is a valuable part of any innovation process ; within tbe empatbic - design process , it is used specifically to transform the observations into Photographs show spatial arrangements and details that may go unnoticed in the field . graphic , visual representations of possible solu - tions . Design firms maintain tbat tbis step is often undervalued : " Our clients sometimes don ' t under - stand why brainstorming is expensive - and im - mensely productive - until they bave sat in on a ses - sion . Tben they usually go away shaking their heads , saying , ' Wow - that was really amazing ! ' " Although brainstorming is generally associated with a creative process , it is not undisciplined . Managers at IDEO tell their employees to heed five rules : defer judgment , build on tbe ideas of otbers , hold one conversation at a time , stay focused on the topic , and encourage wild ideas . Such sessions are valuable not only for tbe ideas that pop up during tbe actual brainstorming session but also for tbe concepts and solutions that occur to people later , at home , because tbe seeds to tbem bad been planted in tbeir minds . Companies that routinely hold brainstorming sessions as part of the empathic - design process need supporting infrastructure . That can be as low tech as a table covered in tbick paper used for doo - dling and taking notes ; wben a session is over , team members can tear off the best ideas and take them bome . It can be as bigb tecb as the Idea Faetory , a physical and virtual space being set up in San Fran - cisco to help companies create next - generation products and business strategies . To facilitate col - laborative work , the Idea Factory will boast work - stations ; customized groupware ; and the latest white - board recording equipment , which can pro - duce hard copies of whatever is written down or drawn on the board ' s surface . Step Five : Developing Prototypes of Possible Solutions . Clearly , prototypes are not unique to empatbic design . But the more radical an innova - tion , of course , the harder it is to understand how it should look , function , and be used . Just as re - searcbers gather useful visual data , so too can they stimulate communication by creating some physi - cal representation of a new concept for a product or service . Prototypes are a critical part of the era - patbic - design process for at least three reasons : > Prototypes clarify the concept of the new product or service for the development team . • They enable the team to place its concept in front of other individuals who work in functions not formally represented on the team . • They can stimtilatc reaction and foster discussion witb potential cus - tomers of the innovation because of tbeir concreteness . Sometimes , two prototypes are used , one tbat emulates the function but not tbe form , and anotber tbat illustrates tbe ideal physical appearance of the intended product but doesn ' t work . In designing the outdoor grill . Thermos ' s Lifestyle team produced two models , which they called tbe Monitor and tbe Merrimack ( after tbe Civil War ships ) . The Monitor was a func - tioning prototype , but tbe team considered it ugly ; the Merrimack was sleek and stylisb but was actu - 112 HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW November - DccembeT 1997 SPARK INNOVATION THROUGH EMPATHIC DESIGN ally an inert object made of plastic foam . Tbe com - pany used both models to elicit feedhack from con - sumers and retailers . Simulations are also useful prototypes . And they need not be as computer - intensive and elaborate as the University of Illinois ' s CAVE , wbicb simulates the three - dimensional space of a room and can be programmed to represent different environments , such as a factory . In fact , many useful simulations are not computerized at all . When Chaparral Steel Company wanted to design metal splash guards to apply their intensive knowledge of media possibili - ties within constraints tbat they could not other - wise personally experience ( at least for some years ) . Empathic Design as a Culture Shift A common criticism of the kinds of innovative ideas arising through empathic design is , " But users haven ' t asked for that . " Precisely . By tbe time they do , your competitors will have the same new - product ideas you have - and you will be in the put along tbe patb of the white - hot metal bars that were moving toward the rolling mill , they posi - tioned waterlogged plywood at various angles and heights to simulate different designs . The plywood was rapidly consumed by the hot metal , but not before the experimenters could learn what design worked best . Role - playing is also a form of simulation . At In - terval Research Corporation of Palo Alto , Califor - nia , young twenty - something media - interface de - signers were outfitted witb fogged glasses , gloves , and weights on their arms and legs so they could feel what it would be like for the very elderly to work prototype physical controls or use hand ges - tures in the air as a way to control the next genera - tion of TVs , VCRs , and other electronic equipment . That simulation allowed the young researchers to " me - too " game of copying and improving tbeir ideas . Empathic - design techniques involve a twist on the idea that new - product development should be guided by users . In this approach , tbey still do - they just don ' t know it . Empathic design pushes innovation beyond pro - ducing the same thing only better . So for example , computer company managers wbo have been ex - posed to a deep cultural understanding of mobility no longer think only of making lighter , faster , and more durable laptops . Instead , they are challenged to consider other communication needs a portable computer might meet . Developing a deep , empath - ic understanding of users ' unarticulated needs can challenge industry assumptions and lead to a shift in corporate strategy . 9 Reprint 9 7606 To order reprints , see the last page of this issue . HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW November - December 1997 113