Counteracting Anchoring Eﬀects in Group Decision Making Martin Stettinger 1 , Alexander Felfernig 1 , Gerhard Leitner 2 , and Stefan Reiterer 1 1 Institute for Software Technology , Inﬀeldgasse 16b , A - 8010 Graz , Austria stettinger @ ist . tugraz . at , felfernig @ ist . tugraz . at , reiterer @ ist . tugraz . at 2 Institute for Informatics Systems Universit¨atsstraße 65 – 67 , A - 9020 Klagenfurt , Austria gerhard . leitner @ aau . at Abstract . Similar to single user decisions , group decisions can be af - fected by decision biases . In this paper we analyze anchoring eﬀects as a speciﬁc type of decision bias in the context of group decision scenarios . On the basis of the results of a user study in the domain of software requirements prioritization we discuss results regarding the optimal time when preference information of other users should be disclosed to the current user . Furthermore , we show that explanations can increase the satisfaction of group members with various aspects of a group decision process ( e . g . , satisfaction with the decision and decision support quality ) . Keywords : Group Decision Making , Recommender Systems , Decision Biases , Anchoring Eﬀects . 1 Introduction Many decisions in everyday life occur in the context of groups , for example , a decision regarding the restaurant to choose for a dinner with friends or a decision regarding the next years’ conference or workshop location . A major objective of the Choicla 1 group decision support environment is to support diﬀerent types of group decision scenarios in an eﬃcient fashion . Choicla includes function - alities that determine recommendations on the basis of individual preferences of group members . When dealing with group decisions , one has to cope with diﬀerent types of decision biases which can deteriorate decision quality . We will ﬁrst provide a short overview of such biases and then focus on the aspect of how to counteract anchoring eﬀects in group decision making . For a more detailed overview of such biases we refer to [ 4 ] . Serial position eﬀects occur in situations where items at the beginning and the end of a list are evaluated more often ( behavioural aspect ) and also recalled ( cognitive aspect ) more often [ 5 , 15 ] than items in the middle of a list . Such items can be argumentations in product descriptions [ 18 ] , products and their attributes 1 www . choicla . com . 2 Stettinger et al . [ 5 ] , and lists of links [ 15 ] . Such eﬀects can occur independent of the popularity of an attribute or item , for example , item properties presented at the beginning and the end of a recommendation dialog are recalled more often independent of their popularity [ 5 ] . A possibility to counteract serial position eﬀects in group - based recommendation is to change the preference acquisition interface , for example , from a star - based rating to a utility - based rating ( items are evaluated with regard to a predeﬁned set of interest dimensions ) which encourages users to analyse item descriptions in more detail [ 18 ] . Decoy eﬀects cause shifts in preference construction since decisions are taken depending on the context in which alternatives are presented to the user [ 22 ] . For example , including a completely inferior alternative ( e . g . , with the lowest overall utility compared to all other alternatives in a list of recommended items ) can change a user’s evaluation of the remaining items in the list . In the context of recommenders , such eﬀects have been analyzed by Teppan et al . [ 20 ] who showed the existence of decoy eﬀects on the basis of real - world ﬁnancial services datasets . Counteracting decoy eﬀects can be based on predictive models that predict decoy items which could be eliminated from a result set [ 20 ] . Explanations can have a signiﬁcant impact on the way that items are per - ceived / evaluated and – as a consequence – on the corresponding decision . Thus , explanations play an important role in recommender systems [ 8 , 21 ] , for example , a digital camera will be purchased or not , a movie will be watched or not , a car feature will we included or not , a project proposal will be accepted or not , and a software requirement will be regarded as important or not . Stettinger et al . [ 18 ] analyze the impact of argument orderings of item explanations on the decision outcome , Felfernig et al . [ 6 ] and Pu et al . [ 16 ] show the ( positive ) inﬂuence of explanations on a user’s trust in recommender systems , and Herlocker et al . [ 10 ] discuss diﬀerent explanation - relevant dimensions in recommender systems where beside justiﬁcation , user involvement , and education , acceptance is mentioned as a major relevant factor . Anchoring eﬀects cause decisions which are inﬂuenced by the group member who ﬁrst articulated his / her preferences [ 1 , 11 ] – these results in the context of decision support environments are conﬁrmed by social - psychological studies that point out the relationship between decision quality and the visibility of individ - ual preferences for other group members [ 9 , 14 ] . Interestingly , hidden preferences in early phases of group decision scenarios can increase the overall amount of information exchange between group members and the higher the amount of information exchange the higher the quality of the decision outcome . In collab - orative ﬁltering scenarios , anchoring eﬀects can be triggered by disclosing , for example , the average rating of other ( similar ) users . An adaptation of the prefer - ence acquisition interface ( e . g . , a rating scale adapted from a 5 - star to a binary one ) can help to counteract such biases in collaborative ﬁltering [ 1 , 2 ] . The existence of anchoring eﬀects in group decision scenarios has also been shown in Felfernig et al . [ 7 ] who analyzed bias - induced preference shifts in the context of requirements engineering . In this scenario , the task of the project team was to make decisions regarding diﬀerent technical and organizational aspects of The 23rd Conference on User Modelling , Adaptation and Personalization 3 their software project . Examples of such decisions are the way in which their soft - ware project should be evaluated and the type of technology that should be used for implementing the requirements . Masthoﬀ and Gatt [ 13 ] discuss algorithmic approaches to satisfaction prediction in group decision scenarios where confor - mity ( judgments are inﬂuenced by the judgements already articulated by other group members ) and emotional contagion ( inﬂuence of an individual’s aﬀective state on that of other group members ) are mentioned as inﬂuence factors . Com - pared to Masthoﬀ and Gatt [ 13 ] , we did not analyze emotional states of group members and focused on the impacts of diﬀerent degrees of judgement visibility . An analysis of intra - group dynamics in Choicla decision scenarios is within the scope of future work . Our major focus in this paper is to show in which way anchoring eﬀects can be counteracted in the context of group decision making . In this context , we focus on a requirements prioritization scenario where groups of students ( teams ) had to agree on the set of additional requirements ( and their priority ) they are willing to implement in their software project . In addition , we investigated the impact of explanations in group decision scenarios ( explanations textually entered after a ﬁnal decision has been taken ) . In this context we were interested on the impact that explanations can have on the overall acceptance of a group decision by individual group members . As a basis for completing the requirements prioritization task the teams of our study used the Choicla group decision support environment . Example Choicla scenarios for industrial settings are the selection of new employees , the selection of conference locations , and the evaluation of project proposals . In the private context , Choicla can , for example , support the selection of a restau - rant for a dinner with friends , the selection of a hotel for a holiday trip , and the selection of a cinema movie to watch with friends . In addition to Choicla , there exist many other group decision support environments . Doodle 2 focuses primarily on the aspect of coordinating meetings and does not include additional mechanisms to determine recommendations for groups of users . Similarly , Vern [ 23 ] is a tool that supports the identiﬁcation of meeting times based on the idea of unconstrained democracy where individuals are enabled to freely propose al - ternative dates themselves . Smartocracy provides support for voting scenarios in social network contexts where information from the social network is applied to rank recommendations [ 17 ] . Dotmocracy 3 deals with larger groups of users and provides a method for collecting and visualizing group preferences . The sys - tem is based on the idea of participatory decision making – it’s major outcome is a graph type visualization of the group - immanent preferences . Compared to Choicla , these tools focus on speciﬁc domains and do not oﬀer the possibility for a ﬂexible deﬁnition of domain - independent decision scenarios . The contributions of this paper are the following : ( 1 ) we provide a short overview of the Choicla group decision support environment on the basis of a working example from the area of software requirements prioritization , ( 2 ) we show ( a ) the existence of anchoring eﬀects and ( b ) possibilities of counteract - 2 doodle . com . 3 dotmocracy . org . 4 Stettinger et al . ing these eﬀects in the context of group decision making , and ( 3 ) we show that explanations in group decision scenarios can have a positive impact on the over - all acceptance of group decisions . The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . In Section 2 we provide an overview of the Choicla decision support environment . In Section 3 we report the results of an empirical study which fo - cused on ( a ) anchoring eﬀects within group decision scenarios and ( b ) the impact of explanations . The paper is concluded with Section 4 . 2 The Choicla Environment Decision tasks often diﬀer in their basic properties , for example , decision heuris - tics [ 12 ] such as majority voting or least misery should be preselected or not , alternatives can only be deﬁned by the administrator ( also denoted as creator ) of a decision task ( app ) , preferences of other group members should be visible ( or not ) , and decisions should be explained or not ( by the creator of a decision task ) . Due to the many existing options , decision tasks must be conﬁgured before being provided to a group of users – for details see Stettinger et al . [ 19 ] . An example of a deﬁnition ( conﬁguration ) of a Choicla decision app is depicted in Figure 1 . In this example , a group of users ( stakeholders ) should decide about the priority of requirements that should be additionally implemented in a software project . In this context , all group members are allowed to add their own alternatives ( soft - ware requirements ) , to add additional material ( links and ﬁles ) , and to see the preferences of other users ( regarding the prioritization of requirements ) . Making the process design of decision tasks conﬁgurable introduces the ﬂexibility that is needed due to the heterogeneity of decision problems . The achieved ﬂexibility provides the basis for organizing the Choicla components in a kind of a soft - ware product line that is open in terms of the generation ( implementation ) of problem - speciﬁc decision applications . Fig . 1 . Interface for conﬁguring Choicla decision apps . After a Choicla decision app conﬁguration has been completed , the cor - responding decision app is automatically generated and installed on the home screen of the decision app creator . The creator can now invite relevant users ( in our case stakeholders ) to participate in the decision process – this is currently The 23rd Conference on User Modelling , Adaptation and Personalization 5 possible via email . Figure 2 depicts examples of already conﬁgured and gener - ated Choicla decision apps : requirements prioritization ( our working example ) , appointment scheduling , hardware procurement , and personnel decision 4 . Figure 2 includes two more tabs which are denoted as DecisionApp Store and Create DecisionApp . The former can be used for searching and installing new decision apps ( this is only possible if a decision app has been deﬁned as public and therefore been made reusable by the app creator ) , the latter can be used for creating ( conﬁguring ) your own decision app ( for details see Stettinger et al . [ 19 ] ) . Choicla decision apps can entail an arbitrary number of decision instances , for example , if a requirements prioritization decision has to be taken for a new project or a new set of requirements , the same decision app can be used by simply creating a new instance inside the given decision app . Also after completion of the decision process , each individual instance of the decision app is accessible in a decision history ( documentation ) . Fig . 2 . Examples of deﬁned ( conﬁgured ) and generated Choicla decision apps . 3 User Study As already mentioned in Section 1 , our major goal is to analyze anchoring ef - fects in group decision scenarios . In a requirements prioritization scenario ( team members had to select additional requirements they had to implement within the scope of their project ) we wanted to investigate the existence of anchoring eﬀects and also to ﬁgure out when to best disclose individual preferences ( evaluations ) to other users ( in our case stakeholders ) . In this context we were also interested in the impact of preference invisibility on the degree of information exchange between individual stakeholders . Finally , we wanted to investigate factors such as the impact of the existence of explanations for group decisions on the degree of satisfaction with the decision support and the perceived understandability of the group decision . In the remainder of this paper we will ﬁrst present the Choicla decision app generated for the purposes of requirements prioritization ( software requirements for an online game ) and then discuss the design of our user study and the corresponding study results in detail . 4 The Choicla personnel decision app is already applied by an Austrian university . 6 Stettinger et al . The generated requirements prioritization decision app supports the priori - tization of requirements on the basis of a multi - utility based evaluation scheme [ 3 ] . Team members ( subjects of the study ) were enabled to evaluate each re - quirement with regard to the dimensions Risk , Eﬀort , and Proﬁt . Note that such dimensions are freely deﬁnable in Choicla if a MAUT - based aggregation func - tion ( group recommendation heuristic ) has been selected . An example of the evaluation of the requirement Change Background is depicted in Figure 3 . Fig . 3 . Evaluation interface of the requirements in Choicla . Participants can enter their ratings by selecting a value for the dimensions Risk , Eﬀort , and Proﬁt . This requirement is linked to a detailed textual description – in our case , the background style should be changeable in an online game . Note that in utility - based scenarios Choicla supports a group - based MAUT approach , where individual ratings deﬁned for interest dimensions are aggregated using arithmetic mean and then added up ( for details see Stettinger et al . [ 18 ] ) . The utility of each individual alternative ( requirement ) is then transposed to a ﬁve - star rating scale as depicted in Figure 3 . Since the goal of our study was to investigate anchoring eﬀects in the context of group decision scenarios , the visibility of the preferences of other group members was one of the major variation points in the user study . Figure 3 includes a Choicla user interface version where the preferences of other users are not disclosed to the current user . In contrast , Figure 4 depicts an interface version were the preferences ( priorities ) of the individual stakeholders are visible ( the height of each bar corresponds to the corresponding MAUT value [ 3 , 18 ] of a requirement , individual preferences are visible when moving the mouse pointer over the corresponding bar ) . If all stakeholders have articulated their requirements , the creator of a decision app can close the decision process , i . e . , no further changes / adaptations of the individual user preferences are possible from that time on . Closing the decision process means that one or more options are selected by the administrator and these alternatives altogether then represent the ﬁnal decision . The selected alternatives may not correspond with the alternatives proposed by the aggregation heuristic ( in our case MAUT ) . In our working example , the creator of the decision app selected only one requirement ( Global Highscore ) as an additional requirement to be implemented in the project ( see Figure 5 ) . In this case , the creator follows the group rec - The 23rd Conference on User Modelling , Adaptation and Personalization 7 Fig . 4 . Group recommendation ( on the basis of MAUT values ) for the prioritization of requirements within Choicla . Preferences of individual stakeholders are disclosed when moving the mouse pointer over the bar . Fig . 5 . Representation of a ﬁnal decision in Choicla in terms of a bar chart . ommendation and also explains the reason for the ﬁnal decision . Note that the possibility of explaining ﬁnal decisions is another major variation point in the user study , i . e . , some versions included this option , some versions not . We conducted a user study with computer science students at the Graz Uni - versity of Technology ( N = 229 participants , 16 % female , and 84 % male ) who took a course on object oriented analysis and design . Students formed software teams with 5 – 6 participants ( in total 45 teams ) who had then to implement an online game environment . Each team had to develop the same set of basic requirements but could choose 5 out of a set of 10 additional requirements using Choicla as the sole decision and communication platform . 5 The 45 software teams ( groups ) were assigned to diﬀerent categories as follows ( see also Table 1 ) . First , 23 groups were confronted with a Choicla user interface which enforced the explanation 5 Due to space limitations we limited our example set to 3 requirements . 8 Stettinger et al . of ﬁnal decisions , the remaining 22 groups had the option to explain their de - cisions but this was not mandatory . Second , the individual Choicla versions diﬀered in terms as of when individual preferences are made public to all group members ( after one , two , three , or all group member ( s ) has ( have ) articulated his / her ( their ) preferences ) . explanation mandatory explanation not mandatory after 1 . after 2 . after 3 . after all after 1 . after 2 . after 3 . after all 6 groups 6 groups 5 groups 6 groups 6 groups 6 groups 5 groups 5 groups Table 1 . Assignment of versions to groups in the user study , for example , ”explanation mandatory + after 1 . ” denotes a Choicla version with mandatory explanations and in - dividual preferences were disclosed after one group member deﬁned his / her preferences . The hypotheses as input for our user study were the following . First , we assumed that anchoring eﬀects occur especially in cases were preference infor - mation of individual users is disclosed although this information has not been provided by all group members , i . e . , the lower the number of completed prefer - ence deﬁnitions the higher the probability of anchoring eﬀects ( H1 ) . Second , we assumed that the best time to disclose individual preferences is a situation where each group member has already articulated his / her requirements ( H2 ) . This strategy should lead to the best results regarding ( a ) the satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision as well as ( b ) the perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . In our study , data to answer ( a ) – ( d ) were collected in a post - decision questionnaire . The rating scale for questions ( a ) – ( b ) was [ very satisﬁed ( 5 ) . . very unsatisﬁed ( 1 ) ] , for question ( c ) it was [ understood immedi - ately ( 5 ) . . no chance to understand without asking a couple of times ( 1 ) ] , and for ( d ) it was [ excellent ( 5 ) . . very bad ( 1 ) ] . In the line of decision psychological experiments [ 9 , 14 ] we assume that the later individual preferences are disclosed the higher will be the number of com - ments in the Choicla forum ( H3 ) . A higher degree of information exchange also has a direct positive impact on decision quality – see also [ 9 , 14 ] . Hypothesis H3 is related to the fact that groups tend to focus on the preferences of other group members if this information is available but otherwise focus on information exchange to gain a better understanding of the problem setting [ 9 , 14 ] . With hypothesis H4 we want to express the assumption that the explanation of a ﬁnal decision can increase ( a ) the satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision as well as ( b ) the perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . The results of our user study were the following . We can conﬁrm hypothe - sis H1 , i . e . , anchoring eﬀects are triggered by an earlier disclosure of preference information to other group members . In this context , we analyzed the standard deviations of the individual user ratings ( i . e . , we used the standard deviation of ratings as an indicator of anchoring eﬀects ) depending on the time of the disclosure of the ratings ( preferences ) of individual group members . Figure 6 depicts the standard deviations of user ratings depending on the time of pref - erence disclosure ; standard deviations increase monotonously in the number of The 23rd Conference on User Modelling , Adaptation and Personalization 9 anonymously articulated preferences . The series of standard deviations related to versions after 1 . and after 2 . ( and above ) signiﬁcantly diﬀer in terms of their mean values ( p < 0 . 05 , t - test ) . Fig . 6 . Standard deviations of user ratings of alternatives ( requirements ) depending on preference disclosure time ( after 1 . . 3 , or all users articulated preferences ) . We can also conﬁrm hypothesis H2 . The later the time of preference disclosure ( the more group members have articulated their preferences without viewing the preferences of other users ) , the higher the evaluation with regard to the dimensions ( a ) satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision , ( b ) perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . Figure 7 depicts , for example , the user evaluations with regard to ( a ) satisfaction with ﬁnal group decision and ( b ) perceived degree of decision support . The average evaluations of all dimensions , i . e . , ( a ) . . ( d ) , are depicted in Table 2 . T - tests also conﬁrm signiﬁcant user evaluation improvements with an increas - ing number of deﬁned but undisclosed preferences . The average user evaluations regarding ( a ) and ( b ) related to versions after 1 . and after 3 . ( and above ) diﬀer in terms of their mean value ( p < 0 . 05 , t - test , see also Figure 7 ) . Signiﬁcant results ( p < 0 . 05 , t - test ) could also be observed for average user evaluations regarding ( c ) and ( d ) related to versions after 1 . and after all . We can conﬁrm hypothesis H3 : the later individual preferences are disclosed to other users , the higher the amount of comments / discussions in the Choicla forum . The number of comments depending on the degree of already available preference deﬁnitions not disclosed to other users is shown in Figure 8 . Finally , we can also conﬁrm hypothesis H4 : groups with ( enforced ) explana - tion support for group decisions have signiﬁcantly higher evaluations in terms of the dimensions ( a ) satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision , ( b ) perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . This is conﬁrmed by corre - sponding t - tests ( p < 0 . 05 ) when comparing groups with and without ( enforced ) explanation support ( average evaluations are depicted in Table 3 ) . 10 Stettinger et al . Fig . 7 . Satisfaction with ﬁnal group decision and perceived degree of decision support depending on preference disclosure time ( after 1 . . 3 , or all users articulated preferences ) . All after 1 . after 2 . after 3 . after all a 2 . 87 ( 1 . 67 ) 3 . 01 ( 1 . 5 ) 3 . 31 ( 1 . 19 ) 3 . 73 ( 0 . 73 ) b 1 . 75 ( 1 . 77 ) 2 . 2 ( 1 . 62 ) 2 . 83 ( 1 . 59 ) 3 . 72 ( 1 . 02 ) c 3 . 44 ( 1 . 65 ) 3 . 54 ( 1 . 54 ) 3 . 79 ( 1 . 22 ) 4 . 04 ( 0 . 81 ) d 3 . 02 ( 1 . 77 ) 3 . 55 ( 1 . 75 ) 3 . 91 ( 1 . 46 ) 4 . 16 ( 1 . 04 ) Table 2 . Avg . evaluations and std . dev . regarding ( a ) satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision , ( b ) perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . Fig . 8 . Number of comments in the Choicla discussion forum depending on preference disclosure time ( after 1 . . 3 , or all users articulated preferences ) . The 23rd Conference on User Modelling , Adaptation and Personalization 11 Explanations Enforced Explanations Not Enforced after 1 . after 2 . after 3 . after all after 1 . after 2 . after 3 . after all a 3 . 67 ( 1 . 27 ) 4 . 01 ( 1 . 15 ) 4 . 31 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 93 ( 0 . 23 ) 2 . 4 ( 1 . 76 ) 2 . 87 ( 1 . 66 ) 3 . 17 ( 1 . 47 ) 3 . 22 ( 1 . 33 ) b 1 . 95 ( 1 . 66 ) 2 . 5 ( 1 . 51 ) 3 . 45 ( 1 . 19 ) 4 . 69 ( 0 . 82 ) 1 . 63 ( 1 . 94 ) 2 . 02 ( 1 . 82 ) 2 . 67 ( 1 . 63 ) 3 . 18 ( 1 . 47 ) c 3 . 84 ( 1 . 35 ) 3 . 94 ( 1 . 24 ) 4 . 29 ( 0 . 92 ) 4 . 87 ( 0 . 41 ) 3 . 12 ( 1 . 72 ) 3 . 25 ( 1 . 78 ) 3 . 57 ( 1 . 58 ) 3 . 73 ( 1 . 22 ) d 3 . 62 ( 1 . 37 ) 3 . 95 ( 1 . 15 ) 4 . 41 ( 0 . 66 ) 4 . 86 ( 0 . 31 ) 2 . 88 ( 1 . 96 ) 3 . 17 ( 1 . 81 ) 3 . 29 ( 1 . 73 ) 3 . 87 ( 1 . 4 ) Table 3 . Avg . evaluations and std . dev . regarding ( a ) satisfaction with the ﬁnal group decision , ( b ) perceived degree of decision support , ( c ) perceived understandability of the ﬁnal group decision , and ( d ) consideration of one’s personal preferences . 4 Conclusions and Future Work With the work presented in this paper we have shown the existence of anchoring eﬀects in group decision scenarios : the earlier individual user preferences are dis - closed to other group members , the higher the probability of the occurrence of anchoring eﬀects . The time of preference disclosure also has a direct impact on the perceived quality of the decision outcome and the perceived decision support . Furthermore , late preference disclosure can lead to a higher discussion intensity inside a group which can have a direct positive impact on the quality of the de - cision outcome . It is important to take into account these aspects in application development ; especially one has to analyze the need of preference disclosure since non - disclosed preferences can help to signiﬁcantly improve decision quality . The analysis of further decision biases and their impact on group decision making is within the major focus of our future work since this will help to further advance the quality of group decision support in the Choicla environment . With regard to anchoring eﬀects we want to analyze in further detail the impact of diﬀer - ent representation types of user preferences ( e . g . aggregated representations vs . user - speciﬁc representations ) on evaluation dimensions such as perceived deci - sion quality and quality of decision support . Finally , we are also interested in a deeper understanding of intra - group dynamics that can potentially help to further improve the quality of group decisions . References 1 . G . Adomavicius , J . Bockstedt , S . Curley , and J . Zhang . Recommender Systems , Consumer Preferences , and Anchoring Eﬀects . In Decisions @ RecSys 2011 , pages 35 – 42 , Chicago , IL , USA , 2011 . 2 . G . Adomavicius , J . Bockstedt , S . Curley , and J . Zhang . De - Biasing User Prefer - ence Ratings in Recommender Systems . In RecSys 2014 Workshop on Interfaces and Human Decision Making for Recommender Systems ( IntRS 2014 ) , pages 2 – 9 , Foster City , CA , USA , 2014 . 3 . J . Dyer . MAUT - Multi Attribute Utility Theory . In Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis : State of the Art Surveys , volume 78 of Intl . Series in Operations Research & Management Science , pages 265 – 292 . Springer New York , 2005 . 4 . A . Felfernig . Biases in Decision Making . In Intl . Worksh . on Decision Making and Recommender Systems , volume 1278 , pages 32 – 37 . CEUR Proceedings , 2014 . 12 Stettinger et al . 5 . A . Felfernig , G . Friedrich , B . Gula , M . Hitz , T . Kruggel , G . Leitner , R . Melcher , D . Riepan , S . Strauss , E . Teppan , and O . Vitouch . Persuasive Recommendation : Serial Position Eﬀects in Knowledge - Based Recommender Systems . In Y . Kort , W . IJsselsteijn , C . Midden , B . Eggen , and B . Fogg , editors , Persuasive Technology , number 4744 in LNCS , pages 283 – 294 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2007 . 6 . A . Felfernig , B . Gula , and E . Teppan . Knowledge - based Recommender Technolo - gies for Marketing and Sales . Intl . Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJPRAI ) , 21 ( 2 ) : 1 – 22 , 2006 . 7 . A . Felfernig , C . Zehentner , G . Ninaus , H . Grabner , W . Maaleij , D . Pagano , L . Weninger , and F . Reinfrank . Group decision support for requirements nego - tiation . In UMAP’11 Workshops , volume 7138 , pages 105 – 116 . Springer , 2012 . 8 . S . Gkika and G . Lekakos . The Persuasive Role of Explanations in Recommender Systems . In 2nd Intl . Workshop on Behavior Change Support Systems ( BCSS 2014 ) , volume 1153 , pages 59 – 68 , Padua , Italy , 2014 . CEUR Proceedings . 9 . T . Greitemeyer and S . Schulz - Hardt . Preference - consistent evaluation of infor - mation in the hidden proﬁle paradigm : Beyond group - level explanations for the dominance of shared information in group decisions . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 84 ( 2 ) , pages 332 – 339 , 2003 . 10 . J . Herlocker , J . Konstan , and J . Riedl . Explaining Collaborative Filtering Recom - mendations . In CSCW 2000 , pages 241 – 250 , Philadelphia , PA , USA , 2000 . ACM . 11 . K . Jacowitz and D . Kahneman . Measures of Anchoring in Estimation Tasks . Per - sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 21 ( 1 ) : 1161 – 1166 , 1995 . 12 . J . Masthoﬀ . Group Recommender Systems : Combining Individual Models . Rec - ommender Systems Handbook , pages 677 – 702 , 2011 . 13 . J . Masthoﬀ and A . Gatt . In Pursuit of Satisfaction and the Prevention of Em - barrassment : Aﬀective State in Group Recommender Systems . User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction , 16 ( 3 – 4 ) : 281 – 319 , 2006 . 14 . A . Mojzisch and S . Schulz - Hardt . Knowing other’s preferences degrades the quality of group decisions . Jrnl . of Personality & Social Psy . 98 ( 5 ) , pages 794 – 808 , 2010 . 15 . J . Murphy , C . Hofacker , and R . Mizerski . Primacy and Recency Eﬀects on Clicking Behavior . Computer - Mediated Communication , 11 : 522 – 535 , 2012 . 16 . P . Pu and L . Chen . Trust - inspiring Explanation Interfaces for Recommender Sys - tems . Knowledge - Based Systems , pages 542 – 556 , 2007 . 17 . M . Rodriguez , D . Steinbock , J . Watkins , C . Gershenson , J . Bollen , V . Grey , and B . deGraf . Smartocracy : Social Networks for Collective Cecision Making . In HICSS 2007 , page 90 , Waikoloa , Big Island , HI , USA , 2007 . IEEE . 18 . M . Stettinger , A . Felfernig , G . Leitner , S . Reiterer , and M . Jeran . Counteracting Serial Position Eﬀects in the CHOICLA Group Decision Support Environment . In 20th ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ( IUI2015 ) , pages 148 – 157 , Atlanta , Georgia , USA , 2015 . ACM . 19 . M . Stettinger , A . Felfernig , G . Ninaus , M . Jeran , S . Reiterer , and G . Leitner . Conﬁguring Decision Tasks . Conﬁguration Workshop , Novi Sad , pages 17 – 21 , 2014 . 20 . E . Teppan and A . Felfernig . Minimization of Decoy Eﬀects in Recommender Result Sets . Web Intelligence and Agent Systems , 10 ( 4 ) : 385 – 395 , 2012 . 21 . N . Tintarev and J . Masthoﬀ . Explanations of Recommendations . In ACM Conf . on Recommender Systems 2007 , pages 203 – 206 , Minneapolis , MN , USA , 2007 . ACM . 22 . A . Tversky and I . Simonson . Context - dependent Preferences . Management Sci - ence , 39 ( 10 ) : 1179 – 1189 , 1993 . 23 . S . Yardi , B . Hill , and S . Chan . VERN : Facilitating Democratic Group Decision Making Online . In Intl . ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP 2005 ) , pages 116 – 119 , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA , 2005 . ACM .