THE JOURNAL OF B I U ~ I C A L CHEMISTRY 0 1994 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . Vol . 269 , No . 51 , Issue of December 23 , pp . 3241132417 , 1994 Printed in U . S . A . Dynamin 1 Antisense Oligonucleotide Treatment Prevents Neurite Formation in Cultured Hippocampal Neurons * ( Received for publication , July 13 , 1994 ) Enrique Torre * , Mark A . McNivenO , and Rad UrrutiaOn From the Wepartment of Neuroscience , University of Virginia Health Science Center , Charlottesville , Virgina 22908 and the § Department of Molecular Neuroscience and the Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 Dynamin 1 ( D100 ) is a microtubule - activated GTPase that is believed to play a role in the early steps of recep - tor - mediated endocytosis . Previous studies on the char - acterization of the Drosophila dynamin gene homolog , known as shibire , suggest that this protein may also par - ticipate in the formation of neuronal processes . To un - derstand the role of rat brain dynamin 1 in neuronal morphogenesis , we correlated the intracellular levels of dynamin with the formation of neurites in rat hip - pocampal neurons and neuroblastoma N1E - 115 cells in uitro . Quantitative Western and Northern blot analyses show that dynamin levels increase during neurite for - mation in both the hippocampal neurons and N1E - 115 cells and decrease in N1E - 115 cells during serum - induced neurite retraction . Furthermore , using anti - sense technology , we investigated the effect of de - creased intracellular levels of dynamin on neurite for - mation in cultured embryonic hippocampal neurons . Antisense oligonucleotides against sequences surround - ing the initiation codon of the rat brain dynamin gene ( D100 ) reduce the intracellular levels of dynamin by ap - proximately 90 % and impair the formation of the minor and axon - like processes in a dose - dependent manner . Taken together , these results suggest that dynamin - me - diated processes are necessary for normal neuronal morphogenesis . Dynamin 1 ( D100 ) is a 100 - kDa GTPase originally isolated from bovine brain using a microtubule - based motor purifica - tion scheme ( 1 , 2 ) . Although the role of dynamin as an organelle translocator in vivo remains unclear , two major lines of evi - dence indicate that this protein may play a significant role in the endocytic recycling of membranes . First , biochemical stud - ies have shown that this protein can bind and become activated by a variety of cellular components involved in vesicular trans - port such as microtubules ( 3 ) , organelle membranes ( 4 ) , and SH3 - containing proteins ( 5 , 6 ) . Second , the isolation and char - acterization of a dynamin cDNA clone from rat brain indicates that this protein is highly related in structure to a growing family of GTP - binding proteins known to support vesicular transport , including VPSl ( vacuolar protein sorting protein ) ( 7 ) and the Drosophila shibire gene product ( 8 , 9 ) . In particular , the similarity between dynamin and shibire indicates that DK 44650 andAA09227 ( to M . A . M . ) and 1R29 NS 32882 - 01 ( to R . U . ) . * This study was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “aduertisernent” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Mayo Clinic , 200 1st St . SW , Rochester , MN 55905 . ”el . : 507 - 284 - 1166 ; 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed : Guggenheim 17 , Fax : 507 - 284 - 0762 . these proteins are true homologs and suggests that analysis of the defects caused by temperature - sensitive mutations in the shibire gene can be beneficial for understanding the in vivo role of dynamin . The shibire mutant fly displays an impairment in the endocytic transport of neurotransmitter vesicles at the syn - aptic terminal , resulting in paralysis at the restrictive temper - ature ( 10 ) . Ultrastructural analysis of this mutant reveals an accumulation of invaginated coated pits , which appear unable to bud from the plasma membrane ( 11 ) . Overexpression of mu - tant forms of rat and human brain dynamin in COS and HeLa cells , respectively , also inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis , further supporting the participation of dynamin in clathrin - mediated vesicular transport pathways ( 12 , 13 ) . Thus , a poten - tial role for dynamin in neurons is to support the endocytic transport of clathrin - coated membranes . Developmental studies using mutant shibire neurons in pri - mary culture have suggested that dynamin may also be in - volved in neuronal morphogenesis . When incubated at the re - strictive temperature , the shibire neurons display an altered formation of the growth cone and an impairment in the out - growth of neuronal processes ( 14 , 15 ) . Interestingly , dynamin expression in rat brain has been shown to increase during early postnatal development , suggesting that high levels of this pro - tein are necessary for the maturation of the central nervous system ( 16 , 17 ) . Nakata and co - workers ( 16 ) have shown that dynamin is preferentially expressed in the cerebellar cortex , hippocampus , and cerebral cortex . In the cerebral cortex , the dynamin 3 . 6 - kilobase transcript was detected by Northern blot analysis after postnatal day 7 , with a maximal peak of expres - sion between postnatal day 15 and 23 . In cerebellum , the level of the dynamin transcript begins to rise after postnatal day 14 and becomes maximal at postnatal day 35 . Similar results were obtained by Western blot analysis using a polyclonal antibody against a sea urchin protein that recognizes rat brain dynamin ( 17 ) . This increased expression of dynamin during development suggests that this protein is necessary to support either neurite formation or synaptogenesis . Because it is difficult to separate these two phenomena using a whole brain system , a reliable cell model in which both neuritogenesis and synaptogenesis can be studied separately is useful for defining the role of dynamin during neuronal development . In this study , we investigated the role of rat brain dynamin 1 ( D100 ) in neuronal morphogenesis using two well established , neuronally - derived cell culture models : rat hippocampal neu - rons and murine N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells . Rat embryonic hippocampal neurons in primary culture are a useful model to study the process of neurite formation . The axon and dendrites formed by these cells in vitro possess most of the distinct fea - tures displayed by both neuronal processes in vivo ( 18 - 21 ) . The N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells are capable of both forming and retracting neurites when grown in the presence or in the ab - sence of serum , respectively ( 22 , 23 ) . Here we report that dy - 32411 32412 Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth - 46 + 29 GAA’ITCCCGG ~ GCCGGGATCGCAACCCGCCGGGCCCCGCCGCAACC ~ GGCAACCGCGGCATGGAAGACCTCACC DAS 1 DAS 2 FIG . 1 . Dynamin 1 antisense oligonucleotide sequences . The regions within the dynamin 1 cDNA sequence used to design dynamin sense and antisense oligonucleotides 1 and 2 are underlined . Antisense oligonucleotides were synthesized as the reverse complements of the regions indicated . Dynamin antisense oligonucleotide 2 spans from nucleotide 32 to nucleotide 56 of the published sequence . Note that this region overlaps the ATG initiation codon . Dynamin antisense 2 corresponded to nucleotide 7 - 32 , and therefore was located upstream from the initiation codon . namin levels increase steadily with the formation of neurites in both neuronal cell populations and decrease during the serum - induced neurite retraction in the N1E - 115 cells . Furthermore , a reduction in the intracellular level of dynamin in the hip - pocampal neurons through antisense oligonucleotide treatment results in a significant impairment in neurite formation . There - fore , these results provide convincing evidence demonstrating that dynamin 1 is required for normal neuritogenesis . The pos - sible involvement of dynamin in the molecular mechanisms underlying neurite formation is discussed . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Antibody Production , SDS - Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis , and Western Blot Analysis - A peptide corresponding to residues 216 - 241 within the dynamin 1 coding sequence ( 24 ) was synthesized at the Mayo Peptide Core Facility ( MC62 : ARDVLENKLLPLRRGYIGVVNRSQKD ) . This peptide was conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin and injected into New Zealand White rabbits , and the antiserum was collected . The polyclonal anti - dynamin antibodies were affinity purified from serum using the MC62 peptide immobilized on an Amino - Link column ( Pierce ) . Purified antibodies were eluted from the columns using the Immuno - pure buffer system ( Pierce ) , concentrated , and equilibrated into Dul - becco’s PBS’ ( DPBS : 8 mM Na , HPO , , 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KC1 , 1 . 5 mM KH , PO , , 0 . 5 mM MgCI , , 0 . 04 % NaN , , pH 7 . 25 ) using Centricon - 10 filters ( Amicon Co . , Beverly MA ) . The specificity of this antibody was deter - mined by Western blot analysis of partially purified rat brain dynamin obtained by the method of Scaife and Margolis ( 2 ) . For detection of dynamin in the hippocampal neurons throughout development , cells were harvested and lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris - HC1 , pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM MgCl , , 2 mM EGTA , 0 . 1 % ( PN ) Triton X - 100 , 1 mM phenylmeth - ylsulfonyl fluoride , 10 mg / ml leupeptin , and 10 mg / ml pepstatin . Pro - tein concentration was determined by the BCA method ( 25 ) . Aliquots of the cell extracts were analyzed by SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophore - sis according to the procedure of Laemmli ( 26 ) and subsequently trans - ferred to nitrocellulose or polyvinylidine difluoride membranes as de - scribed by Towbin et al . ( 27 ) . Dynamin was detected using the peptide affinity - purified polyclonal antibody MC62 and goat anti - rabbit alka - line phosphatase - labeled secondary antibodies ( Promega Corp . , Madi - son WI ) . Quantitation of dynamin levels was obtained by densitometry using the NIH digital densitometry system Image I ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda MD ) . For the measurement of dynamin levels in antisense - treated hippocampal neurons , proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose , incubated subsequently with MC62 and ’251 - labeled goat anti - rabbit antibodies ( ICN , Irvine CA ) . Densitometric analysis of the blot was performed using the Molecular Dynamics PhosphorImager 425 ( Sunnyvale , CAI . Primary Culture OfRat Embryonic Hippocampal Neurons - Primary cultures of hippocampal neurons were prepared from 18 day rat embryos as described previously ( 19 ) . Briefly , the hippocampi of embryos were isolated under a dissection microscope , trypsinized , and further disso - ciated using a Pasteur pipette . For immunocytochemistry , cells were plated onto polylysine - coated coverslips at a density of 2 , 000 cells / cm2 and maintained in minimal essential medium plus 10 % horse serum for 1 h . The coverslips with attached cells were then transferred to 60 - mm Petri dishes containing glia - conditioned N2 . 1 media of Bottenstein and Sat0 ( 18 ) for treatment with sense or antisense oligonucleotides . Synthesis , Purification , and Administration of Dynamin Antisense 0ligonucleotides”Two dynamin antisense oligonucleotides , designated DASl ( 5’ - GGTTGCCCATGGTTGCGGCGGGCCC - 3’ ) and DAS2 ( 5’ - GGCGGG’ITGCGATCCCGGCAGCCGG - 3’ ) were designed based upon the rat brain dynamin cDNA sequence ( 24 ) . Control sense oligonucleo - tides were synthesized as the reverse complement of the antisense The abbreviations used are : PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; Mes , 4 - morpholineethanesulfonic acid . oligonucleotides . The selected sequences do not match any other gene in the data base ( Genbank and EMBL ) as determined using DNA * anal - ysis software ( DNAStar , Madison WI ) . Fig . 1 shows the location of these oligonucleotides in the sequence of the rat brain dynamin cDNA . For all experiments , the oligonucleotides were added to the medium 1 - 2 h after plating when the serum - containing medium was changed to defined medium . Medium containing fresh oligonucleotides at the same concen - tration was renewed every 12 h . Oligonucleotide dosage effects were determined by applying the oligonucleotides at 50 , 25 , and 12 . 5 PM . After completion of the experiments , the cells were either fixed for immunocytochemistry or harvested for Western blot analysis . Light Microscopy and Immunofluorescence - The formation of neu - rites by the hippocampal neurons was monitored by phase contrast microscopy using an Axiovert microscope from Zeiss . Pictures were taken after 6 , 12 , 24 , and 48 h of adding the sense or antisense oligo - nucleotides using TMax 400 film ( Eastman Kodak Co . , Rochester NY ) . The number , area , and length of both major and minor processes were determined using Image I software ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda MD ) . For immunofluorescence , hippocampal neurons treated at different times with the oligonucleotides were rinsed briefly in PBS ( 137 mM NaC1 , 2 . 7 mM KC1 , 4 . 3 mM N + HPO , , 1 . 4 mM KH , PO , , pH 7 . 4 ) and fixed for 30 min at room temperature in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS containing 4 % sucrose . Cells were permeabilized for 5 min at room temperature using a buffer containing 0 . 1 M Mes , pH 6 . 8 , 1 mM MgCI , , 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . After blocking the cells for 5 min at room temperature with PBS containing 10 % bovine serum albumin and 1 % goat serum , cells were incubated overnight with a monoclonal an - tibody against acetylated a - tubulin ( Sigma ) . The immunoreaction was detected using successive incubations with biotin - conjugated goat anti - rabbit antibody ( Vector , Burlingame CA ) for 45 min at 37 “C and with fluorescein isothiocyanate - labeled extravidin ( Vector , Burlingame CA ) for 1 h at 37 “C . RNA Preparation and Northern Blot Analysis - Total RNA was iso - lated according to Chomczynski and Sacchi ( 28 ) from the N1E - 115 neu - roblastoma cells grown either in the presence or in the absence of serum at different time points . The RNA was separated on a 1 % agarose formaldehyde gel , blotted onto Hybond - N + membranes ( Amersham Corp . ) and cross - linked for 12 s in a UV cross - linker ( Stratagene , La Jolla CA ) . Membranes were prehybridized for 4 h at 68 “C using RapidHyb buffer ( Amersham Corp . ) containing 100 pg / ml of denatured salmon sperm DNA . Hybridization was performed overnight under the same conditions with 5 ng / ml of a random primed 32P - labeled probe ( D100 ) spanning from nucleotides 90 to 590 of the Dl00 coding sequence ( 24 ) . The membrane was washed with a final stringency of 0 . 1 x SSPE ( 1 x SSPE = 0 . 18 M NaC1 , 10 mM NaH , PO , , 1 mM EDTA , pH 7 . 7 ) containing 0 . 1 % SDS at 65 “C . Autoradiography was carried out at - 80 “C using Kodak X - Omat film with intensifylng screens . The specific hybridization signal for dynamin was normalized to the amount of GAPDH present in each lane as described previously ( 29 ) . RESULTS Dynamin Is Up - regulated in Cultured Neurons During Neu - rite Formation and Down - regulated During Neurite Retrac - tion - To address whether dynamin plays a role in neurite out - growth , we first correlated the intracellular levels of dynamin with the number and length of neurites extended by hip - pocampal neurons developing in uitro . To this end , we raised a polyclonal antibody against a peptide representing a sequence conserved between shibire and rat brain dynamin ( see “Exper - imental Procedures” ) and used this antibody to perform quan - titative Western blotting of hippocampal neuron proteins . Western blot analysis of hippocampal cell homogenates trans - ferred to nylon membranes showed that this antibody ( MC62 ) recognizes a 100 kDa band that co - migrates with purified rat brain dynamin ( Fig . 2 ) and an 80 - kDa polypeptide , previously Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth 32413 a b FIG . 2 . Specificity of the MC62 dynamin antibody as deter - mined by Western blot analysis . a , rat brain dynamin purified ac - cording to the method of Scaife and Margolis ( 2 ) . b , hippocampal neuron homogenate ( 48 h after plating ) . Proteins were separated on a 7 % poly - acrylamide gel containing SDS , transferred to a polyvinylidine difluo - ride nylon membrane , and probed with MC62 antibody . The antibody recognizes the 100 - kDa dynamin polypeptide in cell homogenates as well as an 80 - kDa putative proteolytic fragment . described as a dynamin 1 proteolytic fragment ( 4 ) . In addition , a 115 - kDa dynamin cross - reacting band could be detected in Western blot analysis of total hippocampal cell homogenates if nitrocellulose is used as the solid support ( see Fig . 6 ) instead of nylon membranes . We therefore used this antibody to per - form quantitative Western blot analyses to test if the level of dynamin protein increases concomitantly with an increase in the number and length of neurites growing from hippocampal neurons developing in culture . These cells have proven to be an invaluable model to study neuronal development and cell polarity ( 18 - 21 ) since the axon and dendrites formed by these cells in vitro possess almost all of the distinct features dis - played by neuronal processes in vivo . When initially isolated , these neurons appeared rounded ( Stage I ) , and after only 2 h in culture , they extended small fillopodial extensions ( Stage IF ( fillopodial ) ) . By 6 h , these cells formed several identical short processes that contain microtubules and microtubule - associated protein 2 ( Stage 11 ) . Approximately 12 h after plat - ing , a single neurite underwent rapid elongation and differen - tiated into an axon expressing axonal marker proteins such as T ( Stage III ) , while the remaining neurites became dendrites ( Stage IV ) . Finally , a significant increase in the branching and formation of synapsis among the neuronal processes was the landmark of Stage V . Fig . 3 shows that the level of dynamin increased steadily in direct correlation with an increase in the number and length of neurites . Two h after plating , when neu - rites had not yet formed , the level of dynamin was barely de - tectable . However , with the initial growth of neurites that oc - curred within 48 h after plating , there was a significant up - regulation in dynamin expression . After 14 days in culture , an increase of approximately 4 - fold in the intracellular level of dynamin correlated with the presence of both large dendritic and axonal networks with elaborate branching patterns in the hippocampal neurons . To extend our initial observations on dynamin regulation in hippocampal neurons , we also measured the expression of the DlOO gene in the murine neuroblastoma cell line N1E - 115 11 1 ” 1 i 8 hr 16hr 24hr 48 hr 72 hr 7 d Time of Development in Culture I4 d FIG . 3 . Dynamin levels are increased during neurite formation in culture . Western blot analysis ( a ) and corresponding quantitative histogram ( 6 ) of dynamin 1 expression during the in uitro development of hippocampal neurons . Homogenates ( 100 pg ) from cells cultured for 8 , 16 , 24 , 48 , and 72 h , 7 and 14 days were separated by SDS - polyac - rylamide gel electrophoresis , transferred to nylon membranes , and probed with the MC62 anti - dynamin antibody . The intracellular level of dynamin was determined by densitometric analysis of the Western blot , and the data plotted against the time of development in culture . Note that the level of dynamin increases linearly in relationship to the age of the culture . using Northern blot analysis . These cells provide an advantage over the primary hippocampal cell culture since they grow or retract neurites in the absence or presence of serum , respec - tively ( 22 , 23 ) . In addition , neurites formed upon serum star - vation can retract when serum is added back to the media . Using these cells , we studied the expression of DlOO at differ - ent time points during neurite formation and retraction . The Northern blot analysis depicted in Fig . 4 demonstrates that DlOO mRNA levels increase linearly during neurite formation and decrease during neurite retraction . Densitometric analysis of this blot showed that cells induced to extend neurites after 36 h of serum deprivation displayed a 4 - fold increase in the level of DlOO in comparison with cells grown in the presence of serum that have not extended neurites . Furthermore , the level of DlOO expression fell steadily during neurite retraction to reach the basal level 24 h after the addition of serum - contain - ing media . In addition , by immunofluorescence microscopy us - ing affinity - purified MC62 antibodies , dynamin immunoreac - tivity can be detected in the growth cone of the hippocampal neurons throughout development in culture ( data not shown ) . The level of dynamin , as estimated from the fluorescence mi - crographs , increased significantly as a function of time after plating , and it was in agreement with the results obtained from the quantitative Western blot analyses described above . Antisense Oligonucleotide Deatment Reduces Dynamin Levels and Prevents Neurite Formation - Because the level of dynamin correlated with the formation of neurites in both the hippocampal and neuroblastoma neurons ( Figs . 3 and 41 , we tested the hypothesis that normal levels of dynamin are nec - essary for the formation of neurites in cultured hippocampal neurons . Therefore , we reduced the intracellular level of dy - namin 1 in these cells by antisense oligonucleotide treatment and measured the effect on neurite outgrowth ( Figs . 5 and 6 ) . Two different antisense oligonucleotides and their correspond - ing control sense oligonucleotides surrounding the translation initiation codon were administered to hippocampal neurons starting 2 h after cell plating ( see “Experimental Procedures” ) . We considered this time to be optimal for the initiation of the antisense treatment since the DlOO mRNA could be targeted with the oligonucleotides before any detectable up - regulation 32414 Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth A B 0 I2 24 . 16 I2 24 - SERUM + SERUM Frc . 4 . Dynamin 1 is differentially expressed during neurite formation and retraction . Northern blot analysis ( a ) and correspond - blastoma cell line N1E - 115 during neuritogenesis . Total RNA ( 30 pg ) ing histogram ( b ) of dynamin 1 ( D100 ) expression in the mouse neuro - was extracted from N1E - 115 cells at 12 , 24 , and 36 h of serum starva - tion - induced neurite formation and at 12 and 24 h during serum - in - duced neurite retraction , transferred to a nylon membrane , and probed with a random prime - labeled cDNA spanning from nucleotides 90 to 590 of the Dl00 coding sequence . The level of dynamin at the different time points was normalized to the amount of GAPDH . Note that the level of the 3 . 6 - kilobase DlOO mRNA increases during neurite formation ( - serum ) and decreases during neurite retraction ( + serum ) . in dynamin gene expression occurred ( Fig . 3 ) . The efficiency of dynamin antisense treatment was assessed by quantitative Western blot analysis using the antibody MC62 . Protein samples were collected after 24 h and transferred to nitrocel - lulose membranes , which allowed the detection of the 115 - kDa dynamin cross - reacting protein to be used as an internal con - trol for equal loading of protein in each lane . As shown in Fig . 5 , dynamin antisense oligonucleotide treatment significantly reduced the intracellular level of dynamin by approximately 95 % , whereas treatment with the control sense oligonucleo - tides did not affect the levels of this protein . The 80 - kDa pro - tein detected by MC62 also disappeared in the antisense - treated cells , supporting the previously proposed idea that this polypeptide represents a proteolytic fragment of rat brain dy - namin ( 4 ) . The 115 - kDa dynamin cross - reacting band remained intact after antisense treatment , suggesting that this protein is not a product of the DlOO gene and that oligonucleotide treat - ment specifically reduces the intracellular levels of dynamin without affecting the expression of an immunologically related protein . To determine the effects of a reduced dynamin level in hip - pocampal neurons , cells were fixed after 6 , 12 , 24 , and 48 h of oligonucleotide treatment , and the number and length of neu - rites were counted . As shown in Fig . 6 , the morphology of hip - pocampal neurons developing in vitro is altered dramatically in the presence of increasing concentrations of antisense oligonu - cleotides . In the antisense - treated neurons , a significant reduc - tion in the number and length of neurites was observed . This inhibitory effect on neurite outgrowth was dose - dependent and most apparent at concentrations between 12 . 5 and 50 w for the two antisense oligonucleotides tested , with no effect ob - served by the addition of sense oligonucleotides . At 50 W , the effect of the antisense oligonucleotides was evident after only 6 h of incubation , a stage that correlates with the initial up - regulation of dynamin levels in hippocampal neurons ( Fig . 3 ) . The impairment in neurite formation caused by reduced dy - namin levels in hippocampal neurons using different concen - trations of antisense oligonucleotides is quantitated in Fig . 7 . These data show a clear dose - dependent reduction in the for - mation of both minor and axon - like processes in the antisense - treated neurons . Fig . 7b indicates that , due to an impairment in neurite outgrowth , more than 80 % of the antisense - treated hippocampal neurons remained in Stage I and did not acquire the normal mature phenotype . DISCUSSION The Expression and Distribution of Dynamin Correlates With Neurite Formation - In the present study , we have investigated the role of dynamin 1 ( D100 ) in neurite formation . For this purpose , we have correlated the expression of this protein in both the hippocampal neurons and the N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells with neurite formation and retraction . Dynamin is ex - pressed at low levels in both cell types prior to the formation of cell processes , suggesting that this protein may be necessary for vital cell processes that occur in neurons even in the ab - sence of neurites . Since dynamin has been shown to play a role in the early steps of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( 12 , 13 ) , " basal levels " of this protein may be necessary for the endocytic uptake of basic nutrients and growth factors that are known to be internalized by this mechanism ( 30 , 31 ) . However , we fur - ther observed that the level of dynamin increases in direct correlation to the formation of neurites . The up - regulation of dynamin expression in the hippocampal neurons occurs as early as 6 h after plating , a stage that coincides with the initial outgrowth of neuronal processes as has been described by Dotti et al . ( 20 ) . The level of dynamin rises continuously in direct correlation with an increase in the length and branching of both minor and axon - like processes . We also detected an up - regulation in DlOO gene expression in the neuroblastoma cells N1E - 115 when induced to grow neurites by serum - starvation . In addition , the level of dynamin expression in these cells fell when the neurites are retracted upon the addition of serum to the medium . These results indicate that the correlation of dy - namin levels and neurite formation is not unique to the hip - pocampal neurons . Interestingly , the up - regulation of dynamin seen in the hip - pocampal neurons between 8 and 72 h after plating occurs prior to the formation of synaptic boutouns . This is of singular im - portance since developmental changes in dynamin levels , as determined by Western and Northern blot analysis , have been previously correlated with synaptogenesis ( 16 , 17 ) . The appar - ent discrepancy between these results may be explained by the fact that early studies were not performed on isolated single neurons that can be analyzed both before and after the forma - tion of neurites . We have used the isolated embryonic hip - pocampal neurons for our studies since it is one of the best characterized models to study neurite formation . Because all the stages of the neuritogenic process have been carefully de - scribed in these cells , we have been able to detect changes in dynamin levels that occur before synapse formation . In support of this observation , the outgrowth of short neuronal processes in N1E - 115 cells is not accompanied by formation of synapses , indicating that the up - regulation of dynamin observed under serum - starvation conditons in these cells ( Fig . 4 ) can also be better correlated with neuritogenesis than with synaptogen - esis . In addition , dynamin has been recently determined to be present in the neuritic tips and growth cones in several neuro - nal cell populations ( 2 , 32 ) . We have also confirmed that this localization pattern for dynamin is the same in the cultured hippocampal neurons developing in vitro ( data not shown ) . Therefore the presence of dynamin in the growth cone further supports the involvement of this protein in neuritogenesis . A Requirement For Dynamin During Neurite Outgrowth - Based on the observations that 1 ) the expression of dynamin increases during neurite formation in both hippocampal neu - rons and neuroblastoma cells , 2 ) dynamin levels decrease dur - ing the serum - induced neurite retraction in neuroblastoma cells , and 3 ) dynamin is known to be present in the distal segments of the growing neurites and in the growth cone , we in Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth a b C DSZ DASZ DAS3 32415 Experimental Group FIG . 5 . Antisense oligonucleotide treatment reduces the levels of dynamin in hippocampal neurons . Western blot analysis of hip - pocampal neuron homogenates ( 100 pg of protein ) from either untreated cells ( a ) , cells incubated for 48 h with 50 prd of sense oligonucleotide 2 ( b ) , antisense oligonucleotide 2 . ( c ) , or antisense oligonucleotide 3 ( d ) . Proteins were separated on a 10 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane , and probed subsequently with the MC62 and ' 251 - labeled goat anti - rabbit antibodies ( ICN , Irvine CA ) . Densitometric analysis of the blot was performed using the Molecular Dynamics PhosphorImager 425 ( Sunnyvale , CAI . In addition to the 100 kDa dynamin band , two other bands of approximately 80 and 115 kDa are detected by this antibody . The 100 - kDa dynamin polypeptide and the putative 80 - kDa proteolytic fragment disappears in the antisense - treated neurons , while the level of the 115 kDa cross - reacting band remains unchanged allowing the use of this protein as an internal standard for densitometry . Densitometric analysis reveals that the level of dynamin is reduced by approximately 95 % in the antisense - treated neurons when normalized to the amount of the 115 kDa band . ' r a b c : d I neurons were incubated for 24 h with either 50 prd dynamin 1 sense 2 ( a ) , antisense oligonucleotide 2 at 12 . 5 p ~ ( b ) , 25 p ~ ( c ) , and 50 p ~ ( d ) . Cells FIG . 6 . Dynamin antisense oligonucleotide treatment prevents neurite formation in cultured hippocampal neurons . Hippocampal were fixed and stained with an antibody against acetylated cy - tubulin . Note that the number and length of both minor and axon - like processes decrease as the antisense concentration increases . turn hypothesized that normal levels of dynamin are necessary for neurite formation . To test this hypothesis , we treated cul - tured hippocampal neurons with antisense oligonucleotides against D100 . In the presence of two different antisense oligo - nucleotides , the dynamin levels in hippocampal neurons is de - creased by approximately 95 % , resulting in a significant reduc - tion in the number and length of neurites . Taken together , these data are consistent with the prediction that dynamin plays a role in neurite formation . Interestingly , Masur et al . ( 14 ) have shown that neurons carrying a temperature - sensitive mutation in the Drosophila gene homolog of dynamin 1 , shibire , also failed to outgrow neurites when cultured at the restrictive temperature . Therefore , these results indicate that evolution - arily conserved dynamin - based mechanisms are involved in neurite formation . Participation of Dynamin in the Mechanisms of Neurite Formation - An important question that arises from our obser - vations is how dynamin contributes to neurite outgrowth . Pre - vious studies have established that dynamin 1 is a GTPase that can be activated by microtubules and phospholipids in vitro ( 3 , 32416 Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth 1 . 6 I 1 1 a Anti - Sense p M b FIG . 7 . Quantitative analysis of neurite formation in hippocampal neurons treated with dynamin antisense oligonucleotides . a , dynamin antisense oligonucleotides prevent neurite outgrowth in hippocampal neurons . Hippocampal neurons treated for 24 h with varying concentrations of antisense oligonucleotide 2 were visualized by phase contrast microscopy , and the number of minor as well as major processes were counted . The number of both processes decrease as the antisense concentration increases . b , antisense oligonucleotides inhibit the acquisition of the normal phenotrpe by hippocampal neurons . bl , diagram of the various stages of hippocampal neurons developing in uitro . Stages I and IF , hippocampal neurons before outgrowing neurites but with small flllopodial extensions ( 0 - 6 h ) ; stage ZZ , neurons with only minor processes ( 6 - 12 h ) ; stage ZII , neurons that acquire polarity as one of the minor processes differentiates into an axon - like neurite ( 12 - 24 h ) . b2 , histogram showing the percentage of neurons present in each stage in untreated neurons and neurons treated with either dynamin sense or antisense oligonucleotides 2 ( both at 50 mM ) after 12 and 24 h in culture . Note that while the untreated and sense - treated neurons follow the normal developmental cycle described in bl , the largest percentage of antisense - treated neurons never mature past Stage I . 4 ) , although the physiological relevance of this activity is poorly understood . Several lines of evidence , however , have linked dynamin with endocytosis . Based upon analysis of the primary structure of dynamin , this protein is thought to be the mam - malian homolog of the Drosophila shibire gene product ( 8 , 9 ) . A temperature - sensitive mutation in this gene causes paralysis in Drosophila flies that are incubated at the restrictive tem - perature ( 10 ) . Ultrastructural analysis of the affected tissues has revealed an increase in clathrin - coated pits at the cell surface and a depletion of synaptic vesicles compatible with a defect in endocytosis ( 11 ) . In addition , cells from the shibire mutant displayed a specific defect in the endocytic uptake of tracer molecules ( 11 ) . Recently , Herskovits et al . ( 12 ) and van der Bliek et al . ( 13 ) have also shown that the transient expres - sion of mutant human dynamin molecules in COS and HeLa cells results in an endocytic blockage at an intermediate stage during coated vesicle formation . Although these data support the idea that dynamin is indeed involved in endocytic processes , the question that remains is : how does endocytosis contribute to neurite formation and could other dynamin - dependent functions support this process ? Studies to date have not proven particularly helpful in provid - ing a clear and direct explanation for this phenomenon . One possibility is that dynamin may be involved in the endocytic recycling of proteins that are necessary for neurite formation . Among these proteins are those required to form plasma mem - brane ( 21 , 33 ) and the growth factor receptors ( 34 ) . Another possibility is that dynamin may play a role in assembling the microtubule backbone of the neurite . However , although dy - namin binds and becomes enzymatically activated by microtu - bules , the physiological significant of this phenomenon remains unclear ( 35 ) . In addition , several immunolocalization studies have failed to identify dynamin in association with microtu - bules in vivo ( 2 , 32 ) , and overexpression of mutant dynamin in cultured cells does not alter the microtubule organization ( 12 , 13 ) . Therefore , in light of these observations , the role of dy - namin in microtubule function is currently undefined . Currently , it is not known whether dynamin is necessary for the recycling of any membrane proteins required by the grow - ing neurite , including growth factor receptors . Recently , it has been proposed that dynamin may take part in signal transduc - tion pathways associated to tyrosine - kinase receptors ( 5 , 6 ) . This hypothesis has been derived as a result of in vitro studies in which dynamin was found to bind to and become enzymati - cally activated by a subset of recombinant SH3 domains , in - cluding those of the Grb2 , p85 , and PLCy proteins ( 5 , 6 ) . Co - incidentally , some of the receptors for the nerve growth factor family of neurotrophins have been found to interact through an SH2 domain with SH3 - containing proteins , including Grb2 ( 36 ) . Therefore , if dynamin were involved in the neuronal growth factor - mediated signal transduction pathway , the lack of neurite formation in the antisense - induced dynamin - minus neurons could be explained by an interruption in the growth factor signaling cascade . Interestingly , the outgrowth of neu - rites in hippocampal neurons is thought to be supported by growth factors present in the glia - conditioned media in which they are cultured ( 37 ) . However , whether a link exists in vivo among receptors for neuronal growth factors , SH3 - containing proteins , and dynamin remains to be established and will be the focus of future work . Acknowledgments - We thank Dr . David Marks and John Henley for affmity punfying the MC62 antibody and Tiffany A . Cook for critically reading the manuscript . REFERENCES 2 . Scaife , R . , and Margolis , R . ( 1990 ) J . Cell Bid . 111 , 3023 - 3033 1 . Shpetner , H . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1989 ) Cell 69 , 421 - 432 3 . Shpetner , H . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1992 ) Nature 366 , 733 - 735 4 . Tuma , P . L . , Stachniak , M . C . , and Collins , C . A . ( 1993 ) J . Bid . Chem . 268 , 17240 - 17246 5 . Gout , I . , Dhand , R . , Hiles , I . D . , Fry , M . J . , Panayotou , G . , Das , P . , Truong , O . , lbtty , N . F . , Hsuan , J . , Booker , G . W . , Campbell , I . D . , and Watefield , M . D . 6 . Herskovits , J . S . , Shpetner , H . S . , Burgess , C . C . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1993 ) Proc . ( 1993 ) Cell 76 , 2536 7 . Vater , C . , Raymond , C . K . , Ekena , K , Howald - Stevenson , I . , and Stevens , T . H . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 , 11468 - 11472 ( 1992 ) J . Cell Biol . 119 , 773 - 786 8 . van der Bliek , A , , and Meyerowitz , E . ( 1991 ) Nature 361 , 411414 9 . Chen , M . S . , Obar , R . A , , Schroeder , C . C . , Austin , T . W . , Poodry , C . A . , Wadsworth , S . C . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1991 ) Nature 361 , 583 - 586 10 . Poadry , C . A . , and Edgar , L . ( 1979 ) J . Cell Biol . 81 , 520 - 527 11 . Kosaka , T . , and Ikeda . , K ( 1983 ) J . Cell Biol . 97 , 499 - 507 12 . Herskovits , J . S . , Burgess , C . C , Obar , R . A , , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Dynamin 1 Expression and Neurite Outgrowth 32417 13 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Redelmeier , T . E . , Damke , H . , Tisdale , E . J . , Meyerowitz , 14 . Masur , S . , Kim , Y . - T . , and Wu , C . - F . ( 1989 ) J . Neurogenetics 6 , 191 - 206 15 . Kim , Y . - T . , and Wu , C . - F . ( 1987 ) J . Neurosci . 7 , 3245 - 3255 16 . Nakata , T . , Iwamoto , A , , Noda , Y . , Takemura , R . , Yoshikura , H . , and Hirokawa , 17 . Faire , K . , Trent , F . , Tepper , J . M , and Bender , E . M . ( 1992 ) Proc . Nutl . Acud . 18 . Gosh , K , and Banker , G . ( 1991 ) Culturing Nerve Cells , Massachusetts 20 . Dotti , C . , Sullivan , C . , and Banker , G . ( 1988 ) J . Neurosci . 8 , 1454 - 1468 19 . Gosh , K . , and Banker , G . ( 1989 ) J . Cell Bwl . lOS , 1507 - 1516 21 . Dotti , C . , Parton , R . G . , and Simons , K . ( 1991 ) Nature 349 , 158 - 161 22 . Prasad , K . N . ( 1975 ) Biol . Reu . Cambridge Phil . Soc . 60 , 12 % 165 23 . Jalink , K . , Eichholtz , T . , Postma , F . R . , van Corven , E . J . , and Moolenaar , W . 24 . Obar , R . , Collins , C . A , , Hammarback , J . A , , Shpetner , H . S . , and Vallee , R . B . H . ( 1993 ) Cell Growth d ' z Diffec 4 , 247 - 255 25 . Smith , l ? IC , Krohn , R . I . , Hermanson , G . T . , Mallia , A . K . , Gartner , F . H . , ( 1990 ) Nature 347 , 256 - 261 Rovenzano , M . D . , Fojimoto , E . K . , Goeke , N . M . , Olson , B . J . , and Klenk , Biol . 122 , 565 - 578 E . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1993 ) J . Cell Bwl . 122 , 553 - 563 N . ( 1991 ) Neuron 7 , 461469 Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 837643380 Institute of Technology Press , Cambridge , MA 26 . Laemmli , U . K ( 1970 ) Nature 227 , 680485 27 . Towbin , H . , Staehelin , T . , and Gordon , J . ( 1979 ) Proc . Nutl . Acud . Sci . U . S . A 28 . Chomczynski , P . , and Sacchi , N . ( 1987 ) Anal . Biochem . 162 , 156 - 159 29 . Cook , T . , Urrutia , R . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1994 ) Proc . Nutl . Acud . Sci . U . S . A 30 . Cameron , P . L . , Sudhof , T . C . , Jahn , R . , and de Camilli , P . ( 1991 ) J . Cell Biol . 32 . Noda , Y . , Nakata , T . , and Hirokawa , N . ( 1993 ) Neuroscience 66 , 113 - 127 31 . Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , IC , and Deurs , B . ( 1991 ) Erp . Cell Res . 199 , 19 - 28 33 . Huber , L . A , , de Hoop , M . J . , Dupree , P . , Zerial , M . , Simons , K , and Dotti , C . 34 . Barde , Y . - A . ( 1990 ) Prog . Growth Factor Res . 2 , 237 - 248 35 . Vallee , R . B . ( 1992 ) Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 13 , 493496 36 . Rozakis - adcok , M . , McGlade , J . , Mbamalu , G . , Pellici , G . , Daly , R . , Batzer , A . , Thomas , S . , Brugge , J . , Pellici , P . G . , Schlessinger , J . , and Pawson , T . ( 1992 ) Nature 360 , 689 - 692 37 . Marsh , H . N . , Scholz , W . K , Lamballe , F . , Klein , R . , Naduri , V . , Barbacid , M . , and Plafrey , H . C . ( 1993 ) J . Neurosci . 13 , 4282 - 4292 D . C . ( 1985 ) Anal . Bimhem . 160 , 76435 76 , 4350 - 4354 91 , 644 - 648 116 , 151 - 164 ( 1993 ) J . Cell Biol . 123 , 47 - 55