Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces Uddipana Baishya Simon Fraser University ubaishya @ sfu . ca Alissa N . Antle Simon Fraser University alissa _ antle @ sfu . ca Carman Neustaedter Simon Fraser University carman @ sfu . ca ABSTRACT Novice tangible interaction design students often fnd it challenging to generate input action ideas for tangible interfaces . To identify opportunities to aid input action idea generation , we built and eval - uated a tool consisting of interactive physical artifacts coupled with digital examples of tangible systems and technical implementation guidance . Through video recorded design sessions and interviews with twelve students , we investigated how they used the tool to generate input action ideas , how it supported them , and what chal - lenges they faced . We found that the tool helped in generating input action ideas by enabling to experience input actions , supporting hands - on explorations , and introducing possibilities . However , in - troducing examples at times caused design fxation . The tool fell short in supporting the planning of technical implementation of the generated ideas . This research is useful for tangible interaction design students , instructors , and researchers to apply in education , design similar tools , or conduct further research . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Interaction design ; Systems and tools for interaction design ; Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Interaction techniques ; Interaction design ; Empirical studies in interaction design . KEYWORDS Tangible interaction design , Input actions for tangible user inter - faces , Tangible user interface design tool , Idea generation ACM Reference Format : Uddipana Baishya , Alissa N . Antle , and Carman Neustaedter . 2021 . Explor - ing Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 22 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445713 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8096 - 6 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445713 1 INTRODUCTION Tangible interaction design ( TIxD ) involves designing tangible user interfaces ( TUIs ) . TUIs involve physical artifacts that represent digital information and serve as interactive controls of the com - putational media [ 73 ] . Such interfaces enhance interaction with computational applications by building upon users’ knowledge and skills of interacting with their physical environments [ 34 , 39 , 66 ] . They enable users to perform various physical actions ( e . g . , squeeze , stretch ) as input actions to interact with digital information [ 31 , 34 ] . Research that emphasizes the benefts of TUIs exists in a wide range of domains such as education [ 5 , 6 ] , music [ 4 , 10 ] , health [ 3 ] , and sports [ 37 ] . Researchers have identifed various strengths of TUIs , such as the ability to facilitate tangible thinking , epistemic action , and external representation [ 66 ] . TIxD courses introduce students to TUIs ( e . g . , defnitions , his - tory , examples ) , conceptual frameworks , theoretical underpinnings , application areas , strengths and weaknesses , and design principles and methods [ 65 , 84 , 85 ] . [ 34 , 73 ] lists three key design requirements of TUIs – 1 ) Computational coupling of tangible representations to underlying digital information and computation , 2 ) Embodiment of mechanisms for interactive control with tangible representations , and 3 ) Perceptual coupling of tangible representations to dynamic intangible representations . Our work focuses on the second de - sign requirement with the objective to support the generation of input action ideas . Direct manipulability of digital information us - ing one’s body is a crucial aspect of TUIs [ 34 ] . It is through input actions that TUIs leverage users’ sophisticated haptic skills and utilize bodily engagement as a crucial component of interaction with technology . A challenge in TIxD is to seamlessly extend afordance of physi - cal objects into the digital world [ 36 ] . Moreover , since the physical objects play the dual role of control and representation , the physi - cal embodiment somewhat limits the input action possibilities that designers can incorporate in the objects [ 34 ] . In our previous study [ 9 ] , we found that novice TIxD students often fnd it challenging to generate input action ideas . They usually restrict their explo - rations to familiar possibilities such as input actions usually found in everyday devices ( e . g . , press buttons , touch , rotate ) . Doing so may lead them to potentially ignore other input actions that may address the design problem better . These common input actions are a limited set of human’s rich motor abilities and dexterity [ 41 ] . [ 17 ] points out that although these common input actions , being simple to carry out physically , are designed to ease the products’ use , they shift the load from motor skills to the cognitive domain . There exist TUIs and physical tools to aid idea generation in non - TIxD domains [ 27 , 38 , 67 ] as well as certain TIxD aspects such as application of framework [ 29 ] , conceptualization of transformation [ 51 , 52 ] , and prototyping [ 2 , 11 , 63 ] . However , little has been done to support input action idea generation . There are only a few design guidelines for designing input actions for TUIs ( e . g . , [ 12 , 34 ] ) . To our knowl - edge , IdeaBits [ 9 ] is the only design tool to aid generation of input CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . action ideas for TUIs . We designed IdeaBits for novice TIxD stu - dents , and it consists of interactive physical artifacts coupled with digital examples of TUIs and technical implementation guidance . In this paper , we present IdeaBits 2 . 0 , which is an iteration of the original IdeaBits system [ 9 ] . We designed and developed it as an exploratory research instrument to identify potential ways of supporting novice TIxD students to generate input action ideas and things that should be avoided . We defne novice TIxD stu - dents as those learning TIxD for the frst time and with no prior experience of the domain and similar domains that involve embod - ied interactions ( e . g . , gestural interfaces ) . We evaluated IdeaBits 2 . 0 by conducting an exploratory case study that involved video recorded design sessions , remote observations , and semi - structured interviews with twelve novice TIxD students individually . We in - vestigated how the participants use IdeaBits 2 . 0 to generate TUI ideas , how it supports them , and what challenges they face . We found that IdeaBits 2 . 0 helped in generating input action ideas by enabling them to experience the input actions , encouraging and facilitating hands - on explorations , and introducing possibilities . However , it fell short in supporting the planning of the technical implementation of the generated ideas . Also , introducing examples at times caused design fxation . Based on our fndings and existing literature , we derived a set of design guidelines for tools to support idea generation of TUIs , including how to enable experiencing input actions , encourage and facilitate hands - on exploration , facilitate prototyping , and provide examples and technical implementation guidance . The contributions of our work are 1 ) IdeaBits 2 . 0 as an open - sourced tool [ 72 ] , 2 ) design and results of an exploratory case study for evaluating IdeaBits 2 . 0 , and 3 ) design recommendations for tools to aid novice TIxD students in generating input action ideas . This research will be useful to TIxD students , instructors , practitioners , and researchers to apply the learnings in TIxD educa - tion and practice , design similar tools , or conduct further research on this topic . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 TUIs and Physical Tools to Aid Idea Generation in Non - TIxD Domains TUIs and physical tools such as cards exist to aid idea generation in specifc contexts and various non - TIxD domains , which are found to be benefcial from their evaluations . Here we discuss a few of these tools , while a detailed review of such tools can be found in [ 22 , 57 , 80 ] . There also exist a few tools to aid idea generation in the TIxD domain , which we discuss in the next section . Jaasma et al . [ 38 ] designed Blue Studio , an interactive space for multi - stakeholder idea generation sessions . They found that the set of physical objects acted as binding anchors for refective thinking . A similar explo - ration was done by Smit et al . [ 67 ] , who designed a diverse set of physically interactive objects , Ideating in Skills toolset , to support multi - stakeholder idea generation sessions . They found that the objects’ ambiguity and unfamiliarity triggered users’ imagination , curiosity , and physical exploration . Trotto et al . [ 70 ] designed six interactive tangible tools for idea generation . They found that tools with open - ended and undefned interaction possibilities along with unpredictable outputs encouraged exploration of the interaction possibilities . In contrast , tools with a precise aim reduced attention to the interaction possibilities and resulting output . Although none of the tools discussed above were developed with a focus on TIxD , most of them seem to be extendable to TIxD , which can be explored in future work . 2 . 2 Design Tools for TIxD There exist TUIs and physical tools to aid with certain TIxD as - pects such as application of framework [ 29 ] , conceptualization of transformation [ 51 , 52 ] , and prototyping [ 2 , 11 , 63 ] . However , to our knowledge , IdeaBits [ 9 ] is the only tool ( not yet evaluated ) to support idea generation of input actions ( more details in the next section ) . Another tool that comes close to supporting generation of input action ideas is the P . bot activity developed by Analytis et al . [ 2 ] . It is a creative design activity involving generation of input action and prototyping ; however , it is limited to designing interac - tive cardboard robots . The authors found that it helped to increase engineering students’ knowledge and confdence in electronic pro - totyping . To our knowledge , IdeaBits [ 9 ] is the only design tool to aid generation of input action ideas for TUIs . We designed IdeaBits for novice TIxD students , and it consists of interactive physical artifacts coupled with digital examples of TUIs and technical im - plementation guidance . Research on TIxD suggests the importance of iterative and rapid prototyping to obtain correct input - output mapping [ 30 ] . In turn , other researchers have designed tools to facilitate prototyping TUIs ( e . g . [ 11 , 51 , 52 ] ) and found them to be benefcial from their evalua - tion . Bdeir [ 11 ] designed littleBits , an opensource library of elec - tronic components assembled in small circuit boards , which can be snapped together to build prototypes . The author found that participants , who were otherwise skeptical of their electronic pro - totyping skills , were comfortable in prototyping using littleBits . Parkes et al . developed two motion prototyping toolkits for actu - ated products - Kinetic Sketchup [ 51 ] and Bosu [ 52 ] . They found that the ability to limit mechanical complexity by isolating elements in Kinetic Sketchup facilitated envisioning transitions . Experiment - ing with a variety of material and motion qualities by using Bosu helped novices understand the physical world while challenging assumptions related to kinetic behavior and inspired diverse ideas . 2 . 3 Role of Examples in Idea Generation In the context of design , inspiration is the process of evoking cre - ative solutions with an entity’s help [ 18 ] . One way of providing inspiration is through examples . Designers highly value inspiration [ 19 , 28 ] and frequently search for it [ 28 ] . They also collect examples for inspirational purposes [ 44 ] and generate ideas by building upon existing solutions [ 18 ] . Other researchers have , however , found both positive [ 14 , 25 , 71 ] and negative [ 40 , 59 , 71 ] impact of ex - amples on idea generation ; which is dependent on various factors such as format of the examples [ 7 , 13 ] , number and variety of ex - amples [ 48 ] , similarity of the example with solution space [ 16 , 71 ] ( exception [ 25 ] ) , time of presenting the examples [ 71 ] , participants’ domain [ 59 ] and level of expertise [ 13 , 14 ] , and type of problem statement [ 14 ] among others . Next , we illustrate the efect of some of these factors by discussing a few studies . Researchers have studied inspirational stimuli in the form of images . Casakin [ 14 ] studied the positive impact of inspirational Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 1 : GUI ( left ) and SEAs ( right ) of IdeaBits . The TUI example shown on the GUI is TwistBlocks [ 76 ] . stimuli by providing an assortment of images from architectural and remote domains . He found that both experts and novice archi - tectural designers beneftted when solving ill - defned problems . In contrast , only experts beneftted when solving well - defned prob - lems due to the absence of instructions to use analogies . Researchers also studied inspirational stimuli in the form of text . Tseng et al . [ 71 ] studied the impact of textual descriptions of products on un - dergraduate mechanical engineering students . They found that closely related stimuli , compared to distantly related , helped gen - erate more novel ideas when presented before participants began solving the problem . Distantly related stimuli helped generate more functionally distinct and novel ideas when introduced after , com - pared to before , participants began solving the problem . The ideas generated involved functional principles of the presented stimuli in all the cases . Researchers have suggested ways of minimizing as well as taking advantage of design fxation . For example , Jansson et al . [ 40 ] found that providing sample designs led the designers to incorporate both positive and negative aspects of the samples . In turn , Purcell et al . [ 59 ] suggest avoiding example designs that involve faws and taking advantage of design fxation by providing examples of innovative design solutions . Among the various formats of inspirational stimuli and examples , images ( e . g . , diagrams and photographs ) have been widely studied [ 14 , 40 , 54 , 59 ] , followed by text [ 25 , 71 ] ; while other formats ( e . g . , video and sound ) , as well as the combination of formats ( except for image with text ) , have been relatively less studied . Although other researchers have studied the role of physical products as inspirational stimuli [ 38 , 67 , 70 ] , they rarely investigated design fxation ( exception [ 70 ] ) . In our study , we provided examples in the form of interactive physical objects and in video , image , and text formats . Also , despite extensive prior research on this topic , the efect of examples on idea generation for TUIs has not yet been thoroughly investigated . 3 IDEABITS 2 . 0 We designed IdeaBits [ 9 ] as a tool to aid novice TIxD students in generating input action ideas for TUIs . It consists of two sets of artifacts – physical - only and sensor - enabled . Each set involves fve artifacts to enable users to experience a set of input actions ( squeeze , stretch , bend , fold , and pull ) . For each of these input actions , Ide - aBits provides two TUI examples that incorporate the action . These TUI examples are shown on the graphical user interface ( GUI ) of IdeaBits using video , images , and a link to the published paper ( Fig - ure 1 ) . The GUI involves two types of pages : 1 ) a home page that displays images of the sensor - enabled artifacts ( SEAs ) as clickable buttons , and 2 ) example pages that show the TUI examples , which can be opened from the home page . These examples are provided to help users conceptualize the introduced input actions as a part of TUIs . The diference between the SEAs and the physical - only artifacts ( POAs ) is that interacting with the SEAs opens the linked TUI example page and can be further interacted with to play or pause the video . IdeaBits provides technical implementation guid - ance through a “Tech” button on the GUI for each input action . The button is hyperlinked to Sparkfun [ 86 ] pages that provide informa - tion on the sensors involved in the SEAs . The intention is to help users generate technical implementation ideas for input actions . 3 . 1 Design Process of IdeaBits To design IdeaBits [ 9 ] , we followed a non - linear process with four inter - related components - 1 ) ideation and conceptualization ; 2 ) interviews to understand TIxD practices ; 3 ) participation in a TIxD course ; and 4 ) prototyping of Idea Bits . In this paper , we add to the details of this process beyond what is published in [ 9 ] by elaborating how the input actions , output , and TUI examples were selected . 3 . 1 . 1 Selecting Input Actions . To decide which input actions to introduce through IdeaBits , we cataloged sixty - two existing TUIs’ input actions by reviewing publications from the proceedings of the top conferences for TIxD - CHI and TEI . From the catalog of twenty - eight input actions [ 8 ] , we chose the fnal fve based on several factors . To open the design space for users , we chose input actions less frequently found in TUIs and not found in everyday devices . Also , other researchers have found that common exam - ples cause more design fxation than unusual or novel ones [ 56 ] . We chose input actions for which we could provide video , images , and paper of two TUI examples . Since the videos were not usually CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . Figure 2 : POAs ( top ) and SEAs ( bottom ) of IdeaBits 2 . 0 for bend , fold , pull , squeeze , and stretch ( left to right ) input actions . available in the conferences’ library , we contacted the authors or searched on video streaming platforms such as Youtube [ 87 ] . We chose input actions involving easy technical implementation for ease of building IdeaBits and to not intimidate the users ( being novices ) through the provided technical guidance . We chose input actions with possibilities for variations to enable users to modify when incorporating them in their ideas . For example , variations of stretch involve stretching say a rubber band using two fngers of a hand or two hands . We chose input actions which were simple and involved relatively low physical efort so that users could do them easily without discomfort or having to perform complicated physi - cal activities . We also avoided input actions that could potentially damage the artifacts ( e . g . , tear , punch ) . 3 . 1 . 2 Design Rationales for TUI Examples , Output of SEAs , Techni - cal Implementation Guidance , and Design Guidelines . To minimize design fxation ( based on fndings from [ 14 , 75 ] ) , we chose TUI examples that would introduce identifable variations of the in - put actions in the SEAs . To avoid design fxation , as suggested by [ 40 , 59 ] , we ensured that none of the examples belonged to the solution set of the design task used in the user study to evaluate the tool . The TUI examples illustrated real - world application scenarios of the SEAs’ input actions . To hint users towards this connection between the SEAs and the TUI examples , we designed the output of the SEAs as opening of the associated TUI example page on the GUI . To facilitate interactive explorations , we extended the SEAs’ interactivity by enabling users to play or pause the videos . We provided technical guidance by introducing the electronic components used in the SEAs . We used available sensors ( e . g . , fex sensor and pressure sensor ) , instead of multiple raw electronic components ( e . g . , resistors and capacitors ) , in the SEAs to avoid reducing users’ ( especially being novices ) creative confdence ( as found by [ 62 ] ) and to introduce them to modular components which are found by [ 11 , 62 ] to be benefcial in electronic prototyping . The objective of IdeaBits 2 . 0 , aligned with Osborn’s [ 49 ] guide - lines for generating ideas , was to help generate as many ideas as possible ( preferably diverse ) without worrying about their value . Hence , we chose not to provide design principles as they may limit users’ creativity by triggering them to judge their ideas . Even though not all the generated ideas will be good , designers can next select and refne the promising ones to align with TUI design principles . 3 . 2 Design Process of IdeaBits 2 . 0 After prototyping IdeaBits , we informally evaluated it through a heuristic evaluation [ 46 ] conducted by the frst author ( who is not a TIxD expert ) , feedback from the second author ( an expert researcher and an experienced instructor in the TIxD domain ) on the complete tool , and feedback from a peer TIxD researcher ( Master’s degree in visual communication design ) on the GUI . We next describe the revisions we made along with our design decisions and rationale . 3 . 2 . 1 Artifact Revisions . Physically testing the artifacts of IdeaBits revealed that the bend SEA was rigid , making it difcult to bend . We replaced the glue stick used to make the artifact with a thinner one and covered it with a more stretchable tape . Three of the SEAs in IdeaBits were black ( Figure 1 ) . In IdeaBits 2 . 0 , we made the artifacts within each set diferent in color to help users distinguish between them . We also made the pair of artifacts associated with the same input action of similar material and visual look ( Figure 2 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 GUI Revisions . We changed the video player’s design to match the design of popular video players , such as in YouTube [ 87 ] , which users would already be familiar with ( Figure 1 , 3 ) . To ease studying the videos , we provided color - coded bars across the video’s timeline to denote diferent sections . We used red , green , and blue color - codes to denote system overview , input action , and implementation , respectively . Users can click on any of the bars to jump to that section of the video . The paper format of the TUI examples in IdeaBits was provided through a hyperlink of the web address . In IdeaBits 2 . 0 , we enabled viewing the papers within the GUI , without having to jump to the web browser . It also enabled us to use color - coded underlining ( code consistent with the video format ) to help users quickly fnd information in the papers . We added thumbnails and captions for the examples’ image format to ease browsing and understanding of the images . More images and the sitemap are provided in Appendix A . 1 . 4 USER STUDY METHODOLOGY FOR EVALUATING IDEABITS 2 . 0 We conducted an exploratory case study [ 83 ] to identify ways in which potential support can be provided to novice TIxD students to generate input action ideas and things that should be avoided . We investigated target users’ interactions with IdeaBits 2 . 0 and their experiences while considering the tool as only an exploratory attempt rather than a promising solution . The research questions Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 3 : Video format of TUI examples in IdeaBits 2 . 0 ( bottom ) . The TUI example shown is TwistBlocks [ 76 ] . ( RQs ) that we addressed are 1 ) In what ways do users use IdeaBits 2 . 0 to generate TUI ideas ? , 2 ) In what ways do users think IdeaBits 2 . 0 supports them to generate TUI ideas ? , 2 . 1 ) In what ways do users think IdeaBits 2 . 0 supports them to generate input action ideas ? , 2 . 2 ) In what ways do users think IdeaBits 2 . 0 supports them in planning the technical implementation of the generated ideas ? , and 3 ) What challenges and limitations do users face while using IdeaBits 2 . 0 to generate TUI ideas ? The motivations behind our RQs were to identify users’ needs during the idea generation process ( RQ1 ) , contribution of the components of IdeaBits 2 . 0 ( RQ2 ) , and opportunities to build tools better than IdeaBits 2 . 0 ( RQ3 ) . The evaluation consisted of video - recorded individual design sessions where the participants used IdeaBits 2 . 0 to generate ideas for TUIs addressing a given problem statement . The frst author remotely observed these sessions , at the end of which she conducted semi - structured interviews . 4 . 1 Participants , Setting , and Research Materials We conducted the study with twelve novice TIxD students ( eight undergraduate ) from the School of Interactive Arts and Technology ( SIAT ) , Simon Fraser University , screened using a questionnaire ( Appendix A . 2 ) . The participants were of the age group of 18 to 44 years old , including six males and six females . The frst author conducted the study in a lab at SIAT . We provided IdeaBits 2 . 0 , including both sets of artifacts so that the participants could use whichever they preferred . We also provided some stationery and modeling materials ( Appendix A . 3 ) . The frst author designed a 60 minutes timer app [ 88 ] ( developed by a peer researcher ) , which had a visual timer with voice reminders at 40 , 20 , and 5 minutes remaining . We ran this app on a tablet during the design sessions to help the participants keep track of time . 4 . 2 Procedure and Tasks We conducted the evaluation individually with each participant . For each evaluation session , frst , we conducted an introductory session of 15 - 25 minutes , where the frst author provided the participants an overview of the session , explanation of the design task , and introduction of IdeaBits 2 . 0 while they tried it out . She showed TUI examples of only one input action while encouraging them to interact with only one artifact from each set . She mentioned that they were expected to use the prototype but were not limited to the introduced input actions and examples . She then conducted the 60 minutes design session during which the participant was left alone in the room to do the given design task . During the design session , the frst author did remote observation from a diferent room by live - streaming the video . She noted , including start and end timestamps , what they were doing ( building prototype , sketching , etc . ) , what they were using ( which artifact , modeling material , etc . ) , and how they were using it . She also noted any technical malfunctioning instances and anything unexpected that stood out in relevance to our RQs . Based on her observation , she expanded the interview questionnaire with open questions to probe for reasons behind certain observed behaviors . Following the design session , the frst author conducted semi - structured interviews for 14 to 25 minutes to investigate how they used IdeaBits 2 . 0 to do the design task and their experience . We provide the interview questionnaire in Appendix A . 4 . We compensated the participants with $ 25 cash . The design task was to “Generate ideas for a tangible sys - tem , involving one or more physical objects , which you can use CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . to communicate how you are feeling to a partner / friend / family member over distance . The system should enable him / her to receive the feeling you communicate as well as communicate back theirs . It should also enable you to receive the feeling s / he communicates to you . ” Participants were asked to choose at least three emotions from the six basic emotions given as part of the task : happy , sad , scared , angry , disgusted , and surprised [ 20 ] . To maintain uniformity among the participants and avoid any implicit assumptions , we mentioned during the introduction that they could use any input actions and were not limited to the fve introduced possibilities . We made this decision based on our fndings from the pilot study , where almost all the participants assumed that they were limited to the introduced possibilities since they were asked to use the tool during the design session . Only some of them questioned the frst author during the introduction to verify this assumption . However , we did not ask participants to avoid design fxation since such instruc - tion would impact and bias the results . Participants were required not to involve emoticons in their ideas due to their common use for communicating emotions [ 61 ] . They were asked to generate many ideas and select one fnal idea to fll four deliverables - 1 ) Sketches or rough physical models ( without electronic components ) with optional description , 2 ) Written description of how their idea supported communication of emotions over distance , 3 ) A table listing the emotions they could communicate using their idea along with the corresponding input actions they required to perform on their idea and the resulting output , and 4 ) A list of the electronic components they would need to build a prototype of their idea . The design task sheets are provided in Appendix A . 5 . We designed the task focusing on enabling exploration of the in - put action . We chose emotion since they are abstract and natural to be linked with physical actions , while they do not have any default associations . The input actions would be richer than input actions for control or concrete representations . Moreover , since commu - nicating involves conscious action , it is possible to incorporate a wide range of input actions as opposed to automatic detection or absent - minded interactions . We also considered other factors while designing the task , such as asking to design for themself due to lim - ited time for understanding user needs , communication of emotion over distance to make the problem statement relatable and easy to understand , there are only a few TUIs for communicating emotion over distance [ 81 ] which ensures lack of familiarity with possible solutions , asking to design for both way communication to balance their focus on input and output , providing a list of emotions to have uniformity while reducing ambiguity , and asking to pick at least three emotions to ease ideating for a variety of input actions . 4 . 3 Data Collection and Analysis We used three constructs : tool usage ( RQ1 ) , support for concep - tualizing TUIs ( RQ2 ) , and challenges of using the tool ( RQ3 ) . The collected data involved video recordings of the design sessions along with the remote observation notes , deliverables from the participants in the form of written sheets and sketches or models of their ideas , and video recordings of the semi - structured inter - views . The frst author collaborated with two peer TIxD researchers to analyze the data while co - supervised by the second and third authors . The interview data was analyzed inductively using open coding , axial coding , and selective coding [ 15 , 24 , 68 ] . The frst author ana - lyzed all twelve interviews ( to include all participants ) for a frst pass , during which her peer researcher individually analyzed three interviews . They then discussed their analysis to arrive at a set of mutually agreed - upon themes . Next , they used these themes to individually analyze one more interview while making any changes to the themes as required . When changes were made to the themes , they revisited the already analyzed interviews for follow - up exami - nations . This process was repeated until the set of themes required no more changes , which happened after the peer researcher an - alyzed six interviews . Hence the frst author alone analyzed the remaining six interviews using the set of themes they arrived at . She discussed with her peer researcher before making any changes to these themes . In this process , she analyzed the twelve interviews twice , making the analysis more robust . The coders triangulated diferent data sources , used detailed descriptions , and presented disconfrming evidence , which further contributes to validity . In deliverable 3 , the participants listed the emotions , input ac - tions , and outputs in their fnal idea . The frst author analyzed the deliverable 3 data looking for the types of input actions and outputs in the participants’ fnal ideas while comparing it against 1 ) input ac - tions and outputs in IdeaBits 2 . 0 and 2 ) input actions not in IdeaBits 2 . 0 that are ( not ) found commonly in everyday devices and TUIs . In deliverable 4 , the participants listed the electronic components required to prototype their fnal idea . The frst author analyzed the deliverable 4 data with a peer researcher for completion , feasibil - ity , errors , and the presence of the listed electronic components in the SEAs . They individually analyzed four participants’ data , followed by a discussion of their analysis looking for similarities and diferences . Since their analysis was consistent with each other , the frst author alone analyzed the remaining eight participants’ data . 5 RESULTS We next describe the themes that emerged from data analysis while using fctional names for the participants . Almost all the fndings have been derived from the interview data . For the fndings derived from other data sources , we explicitly mention the source . Hence fndings with no data source mentioned have been derived from the interview data . 5 . 1 Hands - on Interaction In this theme , we describe how participants interacted with the artifacts and modeling materials and how it helped them get ideas . All the participants interacted with the POAs , SEAs , and modeling materials . Almost all of them stated the reasons behind their ex - ploratory hands - on interactions to be curiosity and to get ideas . For example , some participants said that they interacted with the model - ing materials to uncover the input actions the material could aford , which helped them to get ideas . Similarly , investigating aspects of the SEAs ( e . g . , function , input - output mapping , and technical implementation ) were stated by around half of the participants to be the reasons for interacting with the SEAs . Other reasons stated by participants for interacting with the SEAs include – physically feel the SEAs , enact the actions , get ideas , be playful , and test which Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 4 : Input action exploration with squeeze SEA – poke ( upper left ) , tap ( upper middle ) , squeeze ( upper right ) , hit ( lower left ) . Ted’s TUI idea ( lower right ) involving hitting the foam block with the stick to communicate ‘angry’ emo - tion . non - prescribed input actions would be detected . Participants said that , when interacting with the SEAs , getting feedback through their output helped them carry out the explorations and understand the investigated aspects of SEAs . For example , Ted’s quote shows that getting output helped participants know when the performed input action was detected . “I like those [ SEAs ] just coz I can see at which point does it work . . . I squeezed it [ squeeze SEA ] in diferent ways . ” - Ted . This , in turn , helped a few participants explore a va - riety of input actions and identify which non - prescribed actions would be detected by the SEAs . Such explorations inspired them with input action ideas beyond the ones introduced . Ted said that he tried out various input actions ( poke , tap , squeeze ) on the squeeze SEA to check which of those would be detected . He also used the bend POA to hit on the squeeze SEA ( Figure 4 ) . This inspired him to incorporate ‘hit’ as an input action in his TUI idea to communicate the ‘angry’ emotion ( Figure 4 ) . A few participants said that they experimented with the SEAs to fgure out their technical implementation , which helped them plan their ideas’ technical implementation . Lee’s quote shows that having output associated with the SEAs enabled participants to fg - ure out the SEAs’ technical implementation through experimental explorations . Lee investigated the fold SEA’s technical implemen - tation by connecting its copper tapes ( when the artifact was in an unfolded position ) using the metallic ruler ( provided as a stationery item ) . When he saw that it triggered an output , he understood the SEA’s technical implementation and got an input action idea of wiping a tear ( which is a conductor ) to communicate the emotion ‘sad’ . On the other hand , participants said that the absence of output when interacting with POAs made it difcult to imagine possible consequences of the interactions . “Using this [ metallic ] ruler [ from provided stationery ] , I was thinking about ways to do that [ connect the copper tapes in the fold SEA ] . And then I was thinking , “Hmm , if you are sad [ emotion in his idea ] , there is a tear with salt , which is also a conductor . ”” – Lee . Around half of the participants said that interacting with the ar - tifacts helped them experience the associated input actions ( Paul’s quote ) , which in turn helped them get ideas involving those input actions and facilitated refective thinking . For example , as illus - trated through Neil’s quote , interacting with the artifacts helped a few participants to critically refect on the introduced input actions , which in turn helped them gain deeper insights such as understand - ing the diferences between some of the input actions they initially considered to be the same . “You provided all the sensors here so I can touch and feel and just play with it and see how it works . ” – Paul . “I never really thought about input action this much . It felt like pulling and bending is kind of similar , initially to me , but then it’s pretty diferent . ” - Neil . 5 . 1 . 1 Prototyping and Testing Ideas . In this subtheme , we describe how participants used the artifacts and modeling materials to build prototypes and test their ideas and how it helped them . Most par - ticipants said that they got new ideas for input action , outputs , and technical implementation while building ( using modeling mate - rials ) and interacting with their prototypes . Amy’s quote shows that combining modeling materials led to discovering new paired afordances of the materials , which in turn inspired new input ac - tion possibilities in her idea . “I did not thought about sliding [ input action ] until I put it [ bead from modeling material ] in [ pipe cleaner from modeling material ] , and then I’m like , “Okay . Now it can slide down . ”” - Amy . A few participants also said that they realized issues in their ideas while interacting with their prototypes , which helped them iterate their ideas . Although the SEAs were not designed to enable prototyping , they facilitated participants to test their ideas . For example , a few participants said that they interacted with SEAs to know their input action ideas’ technical feasibility . Lee’s quote shows that the presence of output and multiple afordances in the stretch SEA enabled him to use it for testing the feasibility of “clench fst” input action idea . “I was wrapping it [ stretch SEA ] around my fnger and see if I stretched , whether this [ detection of clench fst input action idea ] happens . ” - Lee . However , a few participants said that they desired to prototype using the artifacts since they found it challenging to build from scratch using the modeling materials . As illustrated through Ross’s quote , some of them even changed input actions in their ideas due to challenges faced in prototyping . “First , I tried to make something squeezy . So , I tried to make with the playdough [ modeling material ] . But unfortunately , I couldn’t because playdough is too sticky . ” - Ross . 5 . 2 Introducing Possibilities In this theme , we describe how IdeaBits 2 . 0 introduced possibilities and how it helped the participants . Participants said that IdeaBits 2 . 0 helped them generate ideas by introducing possibilities in the form of artifacts , modeling materials , TUI examples , and techni - cal implementation guidance . For example , some participants said that it helped to generate ideas quickly by providing inspiration . Some participants said that introducing multiple possibilities helped them understand the introduced concepts and open their minds to CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . multiple alternatives . “The [ TUI example ] videos really helped me open my mind because I can see diferent examples , like what can be implemented . ” – Uma . Participants said that IdeaBits 2 . 0 introduced possibilities re - lated to mainly input actions and technical implementation . Input action possibilities : IdeaBits 2 . 0 introduced fve input action pos - sibilities ( bend , fold , pull , squeeze , and stretch ) . A few participants said that since these were not among the ones commonly found in everyday devices , it helped them to get ideas beyond those common input actions ( e . g . , touch , button press , etc . ) . “It [ IdeaBits 2 . 0 ] suggest me interactions more than like these simple phone interactions like push the button and touch . So that’s pretty good . ” – Ross . Although the artifacts introduced the input actions , some participants said that since the artifacts were abstract and did not have any real - life application , they were insufcient in demonstrating application possibilities of the introduced input actions , as illustrated through Ted’s quote . “I saw this [ pull SEA ] , I interacted with it , but I’m not really sure what it is . But then when I saw those [ TUI ] video examples , I was like , “Oh , that makes lot more sense . ” So , a way to quickly show how these very simple things [ artifacts ] can transfer into full - fedged applica - tions , that did help me a lot . ” – Ted . Hence the SEAs fell short in helping participants to conceptualize their ideas . On the other hand , around half of the participants said that the TUI examples demonstrated real - world usage scenarios of how the introduced input actions can be a part of TUIs , which in turn helped conceptualize their ideas . Some participants also said that TUI examples helped them go beyond how the introduced input actions were incorporated in the artifacts . Technical implementation possibilities : IdeaBits 2 . 0 intro - duced technical implementation possibilities mainly through the “Tech” button by linking to Sparkfun [ 86 ] pages . Participants said that they referred to these possibilities to understand the technical implementation of the SEAs , plan technical implementation , and check their ideas’ technical feasibility . For example , some partici - pants used the “Tech” button to identify the type of data ( analog or digital ) involved in the sensors of the SEAs , which they were able to fnd on the linked Sparkfun [ 86 ] pages . Although the “Tech” button helped some participants , almost all the participants faced challenges or were unsuccessful in planning their ideas’ technical implementation ( more details in the last theme ) . “I really like this “Tech” button . It’s very useful . It shows the main components you can use and how to use them , and more importantly , what kind of data you are using . ” - Paul . Around half of the participants said that they wanted more examples of input actions and associated artifacts , TUI examples , and technical implementation since those helped them get ideas and do the design task . Some of them also speculated that more possibilities might help them to generate a wider variety of input action ideas and reduce design fxation ( more details in the next theme ) . 5 . 2 . 1 Preferences for TUI Example Formats . TUI examples were provided using images , videos , and published papers . Most partici - pants said that they preferred the video format since it efciently Figure 5 : Eva’s illustration of squeeze input action in her fnal idea ( left ) , prescribed way of interacting with the squeeze SEA ( right ) . demonstrated the input action , its application , and technical im - plementation . Also , the colored bars with the video player , which indicated diferent sections of the video , helped some participants to skim the videos . Some participants , however , said that they pre - ferred the image format as it was faster to view them . None of the participants preferred the paper format while stating reasons such as words being inefcient in describing input actions and reading papers being time - consuming . “With the video , you can see how they are going to do the interaction . ” - Eva . “ [ I prefer ] images , coz even for the video , I was skipping so I can go through it faster . ” - Kate . “You cannot describe how this thing [ input action ] is gonna be used in words only . ” - Ross . 5 . 3 Examples Causing Design Fixation In this theme , we describe how IdeaBits 2 . 0 caused design fxation by inspiring ideas similar to the introduced possibilities , why the participants tried to incorporate the introduced possibilities , and disconfrming pieces of evidence . 5 . 3 . 1 Inspiring Ideas Similar to the Introduced Possibilities . In this subtheme , we describe how , at times , the artifacts , TUI examples , and technical implementation information inspired ideas similar to the inspirational source . These similarities occurred concerning in - put actions , outputs , technical implementation , and overall concept . For example , some participants said that the SEAs inspired their input action ideas . These ideas were , however , the same as those in the artifacts . On top of that , some of the participants who incor - porated the introduced input actions did so in a way very similar to the prescribed way of interacting with the artifacts ( Figure 5 ) , as found from analysis of the deliverables . Design fxation also oc - curred when SEAs’ technical implementation inspired participants , where the technical implementation plan for the participants’ ideas were same as that of the inspiring SEAs ; even though some of these ideas involved input actions that were diferent from those in the artifacts . For example , Lee said that the technical implementation plan of his idea was inspired from and the same as that of the stretch SEA . He , however , used it to detect clench fst input action instead of stretch . Design fxation also occurred when a few participants were inspired by TUI examples they were already aware of and not introduced by IdeaBits 2 . 0 . 5 . 3 . 2 Trying to Incorporate from the Introduced Possibilities . In this subtheme , we describe how and why participants tried to incorpo - rate from the introduced possibilities . Almost all the participants Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan said that they tried to incorporate the introduced input action and technical implementation possibilities due to six main reasons . 1 ) Some participants said that being introduced to a set of possibilities made them focused on those while making it challenging to think of alternatives . Some of them also speculated that such fxation occurred due to being introduced to only a limited number of pos - sibilities . “Coz , there’s only fve [ introduced ] input actions , I think it hinders my imagination to some degree because it makes you focus on what’s present . I don’t really think of any additional material . ” - Lee . 2 ) A few participants said that the presence of the SEAs in functioning condition , along with associated technical implementa - tion information , gave them confdence in the feasibility of their ideas that involved the introduced input actions . “I have three ideas , and then I moved on to this one [ idea involving fold ] just because it [ fold SEA ] is already there , kind of functioning . ” – Jane . 3 ) When they were not able to get ideas . For example , a few participants said that they tried to incorporate the technical implementation of the SEAs when they were unable to plan technical implementa - tion for their ideas . They even changed the input actions in their ideas to be able to use the technical implementation of the arti - facts . 4 ) To minimize efort . For example , a few participants said that they tried to incorporate the technical implementation of the SEAs to minimize efort , sometimes even when the input actions in their idea were diferent from those in the artifacts . 5 ) Due to time shortage . For example , a few participants tried to incorpo - rate the introduced input actions since the 60 minutes duration of the design session was not sufcient to get familiar with the introduced and think beyond them , especially when the introduced possibilities were new to them . “Since they [ introduced input ac - tions ] are fairly new to me , it takes me some time to adapt to that before I can think of something else outside the box . ” – Ross . 6 ) Some participants said that they felt expected to incorporate the intro - duced input actions since they were asked to use the tool during the design session . However , all of them said to have understood the given instruction that they were not constrained to those input actions . 5 . 3 . 3 Disconfirming Evidence . In this subtheme , we put forward the other side of the coin by describing some instances where Ide - aBits 2 . 0 inspired ideas without causing design fxation . Some of the participants’ ideas were completely diferent from their inspira - tional sources , while some others were variations of the introduced possibilities . First , we discuss the analysis of the input actions and output in the participants’ fnal ideas , which provides a mixed pic - ture concerning design fxation . Input actions in the participants’ fnal ideas involved ones commonly found in everyday devices and as well as others , including the ones introduced by IdeaBits 2 . 0 . Eight out of the twelve fnal ideas involved one or more introduced input actions . However , a total of eight fnal ideas involved at least one input action that was not introduced by IdeaBits 2 . 0 . Out of these eight ideas , fve ideas involved at least one input action which is not commonly found in everyday devices and TUIs ( eight input actions in total , such as tear , wipe , twist ) , while fve ideas involved at least one commonly found input action ( fve input actions in total , such as pressing a button , touch , slide ) . The participants involved visual , auditory , and tactile output in their fnal ideas . Eight fnal ideas involved at least one auditory or visual output , which is the type of output of the SEAs . However , six fnal ideas involved at least one tactile output . Based on the interviews , there seem to be three main factors that minimized design fxation . 1 ) Hands - on interaction helped partici - pants to think beyond the introduced possibilities . For example , a few participants said that interacting with the SEAs helped them to think beyond the TUI examples . Similarly , interacting with the mod - eling materials helped a few participants get ideas for applying the introduced input actions beyond how they had been implemented in the artifacts , as illustrated through Amy’s quote . “That [ input action idea of pulling a bead through a pipe cleaner ] just popped out while playing with the [ modeling ] material . And then I thought , “Okay , I was probably thinking in a very limited scenario . It [ pull input action ] is beyond what it [ pull SEA ] looks like . ”” – Amy . 2 ) Ideas were diferent from the inspirational stimuli when it reminded the participant of another object , activity , or concept . For example , Ted said that the stretch POA reminded him of a telephone cord and how his mother used to wrap it around her fnger , which eventually led him to the twist input action idea . 3 ) Instructions provided to the participants helped minimize design fxation . A few participants said that they did not feel limited to the introduced possibilities and instead saw IdeaBits 2 . 0 as a source of inspiration , mainly because of the instruction given that they were not constrained to the fve introduced input actions . 5 . 4 Challenges in Using IdeaBits 2 . 0 Participants faced certain challenges when using IdeaBits 2 . 0 to do the design task , which were mainly related to the artifacts’ output , artifacts’ robustness , design guidance , and technical implementa - tion guidance . Artifacts’ output : Having an output associated with the SEAs had many positive impacts ( discussed earlier ) , along with a few challenges . For example , some participants said that they were distracted by popping up of the TUI examples when interacting with the SEAs , not letting them focus on experiencing the input actions . “I can focus more on the interaction [ when interacting with the POAs ] , instead of having all the videos and images . ” – Eva . However , a few participants said that they wanted the SEAs to be the sole controller of the GUI instead of having to keep switching between the mouse and the artifacts . They found it confusing to have two types of controllers , leading to mistakenly reaching out for the SEAs to control parts of the GUI that they knew could be controlled only using the mouse . Also , as found from the analysis of the design session videos , most of the time , the participants were looking at the GUI while interacting with the SEAs presumably as controllers for the GUI . Artifacts’ robustness : Although most of the participants said that they preferred to interact with the SEAs over the POAs , mainly because their output made them interactive and provided feedback , a few participants said that they limited their interaction with the SEAs due to fear of breaking them . They instead chose to interact with the POAs , which they perceived to be robust due to being physical - only . “Because I know I couldn’t break them [ POAs ] , so I played around with them a little bit more . ” - Ted . The fex sensor in CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . the bend SEA was damaged twice during the study . The fex sensor is supposed to be bent in only one direction , which we indicated by labeling the artifact . Some participants , however , while exploring the artifact , bent it in the prohibited direction , which eventually damaged the sensor . Design guidance : A few participants said that they expected IdeaBits 2 . 0 to provide design guidelines related to the input actions , such as how to choose an input action based on context and which input actions go well together . Technical implementation guidance was mainly provided by linking to Sparkfun [ 86 ] pages through the “Tech” button . Al - though the button helped participants in certain ways ( discussed earlier ) , only one participant listed the technical implementation for input actions correctly ( feasible plan with no errors ) and com - pletely ( all necessary components listed ) ; while around half of the participants said that they faced challenges with the guidance pro - vided . For example , some participants disliked being taken to a web browser when clicking on the “Tech” button and hence suggested incorporating the technical implementation information within the GUI of IdeaBits 2 . 0 . While a few participants said that they did not use the “Tech” button , even though they were unable to plan the technical implementation of their ideas , since they anticipated it to be time - consuming . Participants also perceived the SEAs as techni - cal implementation possibilities . Some participants , however , said that they were not able to understand the SEAs’ technical imple - mentation when the involved sensors were not visible , such as the pull and the squeeze artifacts . A few participants also said that they wanted to see the sensors’ output values when interacting with the artifacts to be able to understand the involved data type ( digital or analog ) and inspect their sensitivity . “I need to see how sensitive the inputs [ of the SEAs ] are . . . Like a panel that show you the result of the interaction , right ? ” – Ross . Another challenge with providing technical implementation information was that a few participants said that it limited their creativity by making them focus on the feasibility of ideas . They speculated that such information might be helpful for later in the idea generation phase when they have narrowed down to a few ideas . “With this [ technical implementation information ] , sometimes you get kind of a reality check of like , “Oh , so this is how you practically build it . ” , which is really good for a second [ idea generation ] stage . But in the frst one , you kind of need to come up with like gravity machines or whatever . ” - Jane . 6 DISCUSSION We now discuss the fndings from our study by comparing them with existing literature and provide design recommendations ( in italics ) for tools to support idea generation of TUIs . 6 . 1 Experiencing Input Actions In this section , we discuss the benefts of experiencing input actions and how this can be facilitated by providing interactive artifacts . We found that interacting with the artifacts enabled participants to experience the input actions , which in turn helped them notice the similarities and diferences between the introduced input actions , think beyond the introduced possibilities , get ideas , and realize shortcomings in their ideas ( also found by [ 32 , 38 , 52 ] for other design domains ) . Our fndings are also consistent with Schon’s [ 64 ] argument on the importance of " backtalk " from design materi - als , Gedenryd’s [ 23 ] emphasis on bodily engagement with design materials during interactive cognition as a critical part of design , and Ingold’s [ 33 ] insistence on the inseparability of ( hands - on ) ac - tions from perception in the practice of craft . Hence , design tools to support idea generation for TUIs need to provide interactive artifacts ( that aford physical interactions ) to enable experiencing input actions . Also , it may help to provide a variety of materials to work with due to the dependency of TUI design on material properties , as found by [ 52 ] for kinetic designers . Both sets of artifacts facilitated experiencing the input actions by providing passive haptic feedback through the product’s physical reaction to the participants’ actions . For example , the elongation and reduced fexibility of the stretch artifacts on being stretched provided participants tactile confrmation of their action . Our fnd - ings are in line with TUI’s aspect of immediate haptic feedback [ 35 ] and Djajadiningrat’s [ 17 ] emphasis on linking action , form , and feedback . Consistent with the concept of double interaction loops in TUIs [ 35 ] , the SEAs provided an additional ( digital ) feedback through their output that provided participants confrmation of computational interpretation of their action . This , in turn , helped the participants in many ways , such as encouraging and facilitat - ing hands - on exploration ( more details in the following themes ) . On the other hand , the absence of output when interacting with POAs made it difcult to imagine possible consequences of the interactions . Hence , the artifacts need to have an output . However , some participants found the output of the SEAs ( open - ing the associated TUI example page on the GUI ) to be shifting their focus away from the artifact and experiencing the input ac - tions . Designing the SEAs as GUI controllers also resulted in the participants interacting with them absentmindedly while having their primary focus on the GUI . Hence to facilitate experiencing the input actions , we recommend having subtle and non - intrusive outputs of the artifacts instead of designing them as controllers for the GUI . Feedback can be provided in a non - intrusive way by say keeping it in the background of the primary task [ 74 ] , using low intensity [ 58 ] , or temporally extending it [ 42 ] . To avoid steering users’ atten - tion away from the artifacts , we recommend providing the output through the artifact instead of another device . This is consistent with Wensveen’s [ 79 ] suggestion to co - locate input and output for being perceived as natural coupling . For example , one can incorporate Djajadiningrat’s [ 17 ] concept of a 4D form of product reaction , where the output ( change in 3D appearance over time ) additionally guides how to interact with the object . We did not foresee these issues of the input - output mapping of the SEAs , nor were these discovered during the semi - formal evaluation of IdeaBits . 6 . 2 Encouraging and Facilitating Hands - on Exploration In this section , we discuss the advantages of hands - on exploration and how design tools can facilitate it . Encouraging and facilitating exploration of multiple alternatives is benefcial for idea generation , as found by [ 21 , 60 ] as well as from our study . We found that mod - eling materials and SEAs encouraged and facilitated exploration Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan of input actions . The ambiguity of the modeling materials and in - teractivity ( having output ) of the SEAs encouraged exploration by triggering participants’ curiosity . Participants interacted with the modeling materials inquiring about their afordances ( also found by [ 69 ] ) , leading to exploration of various input actions , which helped them to get input action ideas even beyond the ones introduced in IdeaBits 2 . 0 . We did not provide instruction on how to interact with the modeling materials , which may have encouraged exploration ( as found by [ 38 ] ) . Hence , to encourage exploration , we recommend providing unfamiliar and ambiguous artifacts with open - ended inter - action possibilities while not being prescriptive about the associated input actions . The SEAs encouraged exploration , despite being as - sociated with prescribed input actions , by triggering participants’ curiosity to fnd out how they work and test their sensitivity ( also found by [ 67 ] ) . Such explorations helped participants to generate ideas for input actions involving variations of the introduced input actions and input actions not introduced by IdeaBits 2 . 0 ( also found by [ 52 ] ) . Hence , to encourage exploration , we recommend providing interactive ( having output ) artifacts . For an added objective of dis - covery , one may link the artifacts with unexpected outputs , similar to the Blue Studio [ 38 ] , which may also help users to change their perspectives and get new ideas as found by [ 38 ] . To facilitate exploration , we recommend providing artifacts with output and fexible afordances . Explorative interaction with the SEAs was facilitated by feedback ( from its output ) and versatility in their afordance . For example , the squeeze artifacts ( Figure 2 ) , made from a foam cube , aforded to tap and poke , along with squeeze . Despite such versatility , the artifacts’ designed afordances to a large degree determined the ways that participants interacted with those . Our fndings are in line with the notion of designed afordances in which the physical aspects of an object impact the opportunities for interaction by enabling some actions but not others and by driving users’ perception of how to interact with it [ 43 ] . For example , the bend artifacts ( Figure 2 ) , made using glue gun stick , aforded to bend but not twist . To facilitate open - ended explorations of a wide range of possibilities , we recommend introducing versatility in the artifacts’ designed afordances by carefully considering various physical aspects ( e . g . , material , form , size ) . Further , these aspects may be changed over time ( as discussed in [ 17 ] ) . We also recommend minimizing the possibilities of technical malfunctioning along with making the artifacts visibly robust to encourage playful , explorative , and worry - free interactions . We found that some participants , while exploring the bend SEA , bent it in the prohibited direction , which eventually damaged the fex sensor . At the same time , some participants limited their interaction with the SEAs due to fear of breaking them . 6 . 3 Facilitating Prototyping In this section , we discuss the advantages of prototyping for TUI designers and how design tools can facilitate it . We found that building ( using modeling materials ) and interacting with prototypes ( electronically non - functional ) helped participants get ideas , make design decisions , and realize issues in their ideas . Our fndings are in line with [ 11 , 52 , 63 ] . For example , [ 52 ] found that when designing actuated products , iterative prototyping helped designers make successful design decisions due to the high dependency of kinetic design on materiality . Although the SEAs were not designed to enable prototyping , some participants wanted to use them for prototyping to avoid reinventing the wheel by building from scratch . The SEAs can be provided as pluggable modules that can be used to quickly build , interact with , and modify functional prototypes with low implementation burden . Other researchers have found that reducing implementation burden enables designers , especially novices , to focus on the design of the interaction [ 63 ] and encourage exploration of ideas [ 52 , 63 ] . They also found that modular plug - and - play tools facilitate exploration during electronic prototyping [ 2 , 62 , 63 ] , however , at the cost of reduced fexibility and modifability [ 53 , 63 ] . 6 . 4 Inspirational Examples Versus Design Fixation In this section , we discuss the benefts of providing inspirational stimuli , the possibility of inspirational stimuli causing design fxa - tion , and some strategies to minimize design fxation . Our study and many other researchers ( e . g . [ 14 , 38 , 67 ] ) have found inspirational stimuli to be benefcial during idea generation . We found that TUI examples , artifacts , and modeling materials acted as inspirational stimuli and helped participants to get ideas . Some participants were not even able to get any ideas before they started using IdeaBits 2 . 0 . Hence , we recommend providing examples for various aspects of TUIs , such as input action and output , in the form of interactive artifacts and digital examples of TUIs . Inspirational stimuli may , however , also lead to design fxation , as found in our study and by many other researchers ( e . g . [ 40 , 59 , 71 ] ) . We found that participants , at times , blindly adhered to certain concepts , aspects , or elements of the inspirational stimuli , leading to the generation of ideas that are similar to the stimuli . Design fxation occurred mainly due to four reasons . 1 ) Virtue of present - ing – The mere virtue of presenting the tool to the participants made them inclined to incorporate the introduced possibilities in their ideas . It directed their focus towards the presented set of pos - sibilities while making it challenging to think beyond those ( also found by [ 54 , 55 ] ) . 2 ) Limited number – Introducing a limited number of possibilities for input actions and output of SEAs led to design fxation ( also found by [ 48 ] , difered by [ 16 , 56 ] ) . 3 ) Format – Examples’ format played a role in design fxation ( also found by [ 7 , 13 ] ) . For example , providing the input action examples in a tech - nically functional format ( SEAs ) skewed participants’ perception of feasibility to be higher for the introduced actions compared to other possibilities . 4 ) Minimizing efort – Choosing options from the provided repository of possibilities was perceived by participants to be quicker and easier than coming up with new ideas . Hence they opted for the ‘path - of - least - resistance’ ( also found by [ 77 , 78 ] ) . We also identifed four key factors that helped reduce design fx - ation . A ) Hands - on exploration - Enabling hands - on exploration helped go beyond the introduced examples by facilitating refec - tive thinking and discovery of new possibilities . B ) Introducing variety – Using multiple formats ( POAs , SEAs , TUI examples ) intro - duced variations of the input actions and reduced design fxation . Other researchers have found that diversity in stimuli increases ideas’ originality [ 26 ] . C ) Novel examples – Providing novel ex - amples of input actions , which are not found in everyday devices , helped participants to overcome their fxation on such common CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . input actions ( also found by [ 56 ] ) . D ) Mixing possibilities – Pro - viding TUI examples from outside the given design task’s solution set helped reduce design fxation by avoiding generation of ideas that were replicas of a single example ( also found by [ 16 ] , difered by [ 25 , 71 ] ) . It led participants to mix and match diferent compo - nents ( e . g . , input , output , technical implementation ) from diferent examples and add their creations while synthesizing these into TUI ideas . Based on the above , to minimize design fxation , we recommend - 1 ) providing a large number of novel examples while including variety and avoiding the solution set , 2 ) facilitating hands - on exploration of the introduced possibilities , and 3 ) encouraging users to combine possibilities to discover new ones ; e . g . , combining materials to discover new afordances . 6 . 5 Technical Implementation Guidance In this section , we give guidelines on how to provide technical implementation guidance . IdeaBits 2 . 0 provided technical imple - mentation guidance through the “Tech” button and the SEAs . We found that although the provided guidance helped in certain ways , almost all the participants were unsuccessful in planning the tech - nical implementation of their input action ideas . The issue with the “Tech” button was with its delivery of the information rather than with the content . For understanding a sensor , participants wanted to know the involved data type , sensitivity , and how to use them ( also found by [ 63 ] ) ; which they mentioned was provided through the “Tech” button . However , some participants did not use the “Tech” button as they anticipated it to be time - consuming . Being taken to a web browser might be one of its reasons , which in fact , some participants said that they disliked . Hence , we rec - ommend providing technical implementation information ( including the sensors’ data type , sensitivity , and how to use them ) within the GUI , as also suggested by some participants . Doing so will provide easy and quick access to the information while enabling to design the information organization , presentation , and delivery formats in a way that facilitates quick comprehension . Technical implementation possibilities introduced through the SEAs had issues in terms of not being able to see the involved elec - tronics ( also found by [ 89 ] ) and the output values of the sensors . Hence , w e recommend designing the artifacts in a way that users can easily open them up to access the involved electronic components at their will , along with displaying the sensors’ output values . However , we do not recommend designing the artifacts in a way that the in - volved electronic components are revealed upfront since introducing technical implementation details may reduce creative confdence as found in our study and by [ 62 ] . Similarly , other technical imple - mentation information can also be provided such that it is displayed only when the user makes an active choice to access it . Technical implementation possibilities introduced through the SEAs also pre - sented certain benefts . For example , physically interacting and experimenting with the SEAs , while getting feedback from the out - put , helped participants to uncover the fundamental concepts of the involved electronic components ; which in turn helped them to use these concepts for detecting diferent variations of the intro - duced input actions , as well as for detecting input actions beyond the ones introduced ( also found by [ 52 ] ) . Hence , we recommend introducing technical implementation possibilities in the form of in - teractive artifacts . Additionally , showing the SEAs’ output and input data values , as also suggested by some participants , and enabling to tweak their sensitivity , may further facilitate exploration and under - standing of the artifacts’ technical implementation . Such information can be shown when a user plugs in the artifact to say a technical inquiry platform . 6 . 6 Value of IdeaBits 2 . 0 In this section , we discuss how the diferent components and as - pects of IdeaBits 2 . 0 contributed to its value . Participants used the artifacts to generate ideas by carrying out hands - on exploration , investigating their properties , examining possibilities beyond the introduced , enacting physical actions , and testing ideas . These ac - tivities helped them get ideas by experiencing the input actions , critically refecting on the introduced actions , understanding the artifacts’ investigated aspects , discovering unexpected possibilities , and realizing issues in their ideas . The artifacts helped participants to experience input actions by providing them with a physical medium to carry out the actions . In the absence of such a facilitative medium , one would have to perform the actions as gestures in the air while imagining what it would be like to interact with a physical interface afording that action . Even though each artifact was associated with a specifc prescribed input action , their fexible physical afordance facilitated open - ended hands - on explorations of various physical interactions , including those beyond the prescribed ones . For example , partici - pants utilized the stretch POA’s and squeeze SEA’s afordance for twist and poke , respectively . When an artifact was perceived to be robust , it encouraged participants to carry out carefree hands - on explorations . The diference between the two types of artifacts ( SEAs and POAs ) is that the SEAs have output . Hence interacting with the SEAs enabled participants to experience their input - output map - ping , where they saw an example of what the output of the per - formed input action could possibly be . On the other hand , when interacting with the POAs , participants had to imagine output pos - sibilities . They found this challenging . Having output associated with the SEAs attracted participants to interact with them and en - couraged exploration by triggering curiosity . Having output also facilitated such hands - on explorations by providing feedback . For example , getting output helped participants know when the per - formed input action was detected , which helped them explore input actions beyond the ones prescribed . The artifacts are extractions of building blocks of TUIs – input and output . Both POAs and SEAs are extractions of input , involving simplifed and generic implementation of a set of input actions . Although the SEAs involve both input and output , these are ab - stract artifacts with no recognizable real - world usage . On the other hand , the TUI examples demonstrated how the introduced input actions can be incorporated as a part of TUIs through real - world usage scenarios . Providing such examples helped participants to de - velop an understanding of the bigger picture , which in turn helped them conceptualize their ideas . Hence , simplifying the learning task through extractions of the building blocks helped reduce intrinsic cognitive load , and subsequent additions of the omitted elements Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan through the diferent components of IdeaBits 2 . 0 helped commence understanding ( also suggested by [ 50 ] ) . However , such extraction of input action is not to be mistaken with assumptions such as input can be combined with output independently , or they always are provided through diferent devices . In TUIs , input actions are aforded by the physical artifacts , which are also ( tangible ) repre - sentation of digital information [ 73 ] . For designing successful TUIs , [ 35 ] emphasizes the importance of a balanced and tight perceptual coupling between the tangible representation and the output . [ 79 ] emphasizes the importance of coupling input and output in TUIs and provides six practical characteristics for the same . This interde - pendency of input , tangible representation of digital information , and output must be carefully considered when designing TUIs . 7 CONCLUSION Our work makes three main contributions . 1 ) We contribute an improved version of IdeaBits [ 9 ] as a tool to aid idea generation for TUI input actions . We open - sourced the code [ 72 ] to enable other designers and researchers to use it for creating similar pro - totypes . It would provide some standards and starting points for other designers designing similar tools . 2 ) The results from the eval - uation of IdeaBits 2 . 0 provide a foundation for other researchers to build upon while conducting further research on this topic . We also provided various study materials ( e . g . , questionnaires , partici - pants’ deliverables ) in appendices and as supplementary material to facilitate further research . 3 ) We provided a set of design recom - mendations for tools to support novice TIxD students in generating input action ideas , which designers can use as guidelines while designing such tools . The recommendations can also be explored for their generalizability to other user groups ( e . g . , TUI designers , senior TIxD students ) , other similar domains that involve embod - ied interaction or designing physical products ( such as gestural interfaces or product design ) , and creative activities in general . While our work presents promising opportunities , it has certain limitations . We conducted a semi - formal evaluation of IdeaBits [ 9 ] to design IdeaBits 2 . 0 . For example , the frst author , who is not an expert in TIxD , did the heuristic evaluation . Conducting it with three to fve experts may help to identify around 80 % of the usability problems [ 1 , 45 ] . We are aware of four limitations of the user study we conducted . First , it was conducted in an experimental setup while being videotaped and remotely observed , which may have infuenced participants’ task performance and interaction with Ide - aBits 2 . 0 . The study involved the users completing the design task individually . Users may use IdeaBits 2 . 0 in a diferent way when they work in groups . The design session being only one hour - long , the participants had limited time to interact with IdeaBits 2 . 0 , that too as frst - time users , while also being asked to perform a spe - cifc unfamiliar design task . They may use IdeaBits 2 . 0 diferently over an extended period of time and when working on a diferent task , e . g . , a graded TIxD course project . Second , absence of a con - trol group makes it challenging to know the efectiveness of the tool . Third , participants were selected from limited demographics , involving students from only SIAT . Therefore , the department’s specifc education and culture might have infuenced the fndings . Considering additional factors ( e . g . , competency in TIxD , expertise in electronics etc . ) in screening and segregating the participants may enhance the fndings . Fourth , a part of the data was analyzed by only the frst author , who also designed the tool , conducted the interviews , and did the remote observation . Hence there may be bias in the conclusions drawn from the study . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We want to thank Dr . Halil Erhan for his feedback on the project as the external examiner , peer researchers ( Ofr Sadka , Dr . Victor Cheung ) for analyzing a part of the data , Pankaj Kumar for writing the code for the GUI of IdeaBits 2 . 0 , Boxiao Gong for evaluating the GUI of IdeaBits , Matin Lotfaliee for writing the code for the timer app , Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for funding the project , and the participants of the study . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Chadia Abras , Diane Maloney - krichmar , and Jenny Preece . 2004 . User - Centered Design . In In Bainbridge , W . Encyclopedia of Human - Computer Interaction . Thousand Oaks : Sage Publications . [ 2 ] S . Analytis , J . Sadler , and M . R . Cutkosky . 2015 . Paper Robot : A Design Activity to Increase Beginner’s Prototyping Confdence with Microcon - trollers . The Design Society - a worldwide community . Retrieved February 2 , 2020 from https : / / www . designsociety . org / publication / 36123 / Paper + Robot % 3A + A + Design + Activity + to + Increase + Beginner % E2 % 80 % 99s + Prototyping + Confdence + with + Microcontrollers [ 3 ] Alissa N . Antle , Leslie Chesick , Aaron Levisohn , Srilekha Kirshnamachari Srid - haran , and Perry Tan . 2015 . Using Neurofeedback to Teach Self - regulation to Children Living in Poverty . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’15 ) , 119 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771852 [ 4 ] Alissa N . Antle , Milena Droumeva , and Greg Corness . 2008 . Playing with the Sound Maker : Do Embodied Metaphors Help Children Learn ? In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) , 178 – 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463754 [ 5 ] Alissa N . Antle , Min Fan , and Emily S . Cramer . 2015 . PhonoBlocks : A Tangi - ble System for Supporting Dyslexic Children Learning to Read . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’15 ) , 533 – 538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677199 . 2687897 [ 6 ] Alissa N . Antle , Alyssa F . Wise , Amanda Hall , Saba Nowroozi , Perry Tan , Jillian Warren , Rachael Eckersley , and Michelle Fan . 2013 . Youtopia : A collaborative , tangible , multi - touch , sustainability learning activity . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) , 565 – 568 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485866 [ 7 ] Olufunmilola Atilola , Megan Tomko , and Julie S Linsey . 2016 . The efects of rep - resentation on idea generation and design fxation : A study comparing sketches and function trees . Design Studies 42 : 110 – 136 . [ 8 ] Uddipana Baishya . Library of input actions in TUIs . Google Docs . Retrieved March 22 , 2020 from https : / / docs . google . com / spreadsheets / d / 1mDj8fw7ygOgyKnxygT - 7Ej26Z8Vs8yFWVaYuSBi3s68 / edit ? usp = sharing [ 9 ] Uddipana Baishya , Alissa N . Antle , and Elgin - Skye McLaren . 2019 . Idea Bits : A Tangible Design Tool to Aid Idea Generation for Tangible Manipulation . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) , LBW0135 : 1 - LBW0135 : 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3312820 [ 10 ] Saskia Bakker , Alissa N . Antle , and Elise van den Hoven . 2012 . Embodied metaphors in tangible interaction design . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 16 , 4 : 433 – 449 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0410 - 4 [ 11 ] Ayah Bdeir . 2009 . Electronics As Material : LittleBits . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ’09 ) , 397 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1517664 . 1517743 [ 12 ] Steve Benford , Holger Schnädelbach , Boriana Koleva , Rob Anastasi , Chris Green - halgh , Tom Rodden , Jonathan Green , Ahmed Ghali , Tony Pridmore , and Bill Gaver . 2005 . Expected , sensed , and desired : A framework for designing sensing - based interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 12 , 1 : 3 – 30 . [ 13 ] Hui Cai , Ellen Yi - Luen Do , and Craig M . Zimring . 2010 . Extended linkography and distance graph in design evaluation : an empirical study of the dual efects of inspiration sources in creative design . Design Studies 31 , 2 : 146 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2009 . 12 . 003 [ 14 ] Hernan Casakin . 2005 . DESIGN AIDED BY VISUAL DISPLAYS : A COGNITIVE APPROACH . Journal of Architectural and Planning Research 22 , 3 : 250 – 265 . [ 15 ] John W . Creswell and Cheryl N . Poth . 2018 . Qualitative inquiry & research design : choosing among fve approaches . SAGE , Los Angeles . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . [ 16 ] Darren W Dahl and Page Moreau . 2002 . The infuence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of marketing research 39 , 1 : 47 – 60 . [ 17 ] Tom Djajadiningrat , Ben Matthews , and Marcelle Stienstra . 2007 . Easy doesn’t do it : skill and expression in tangible aesthetics . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 8 : 657 – 676 . [ 18 ] Claudia M Eckert , Martin Stacey , and Christopher Earl . 2005 . References to past designs . Studying designers 5 , 2005 : 3 – 21 . [ 19 ] Claudia Eckert and Martin Stacey . 2000 . Sources of inspiration : a language of design . Design Studies 21 , 5 : 523 – 538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 00 ) 00022 - 3 [ 20 ] Paul Ekman , E . Richard Sorenson , and Wallace V . Friesen . 1969 . Pan - Cultural Elements in Facial Displays of Emotion . Science 164 , 3875 : 86 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 164 . 3875 . 86 [ 21 ] Gerhard Fischer and Kumiyo Nakakoll . 1994 . Amplifying Designers’ Creativity with DomainOriented Design Environments . In In T . Dartnall ( eds . ) , Artifcial Intelligence and Creativity , 343 – 364 . [ 22 ] Jonas Frich , Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen , Christian Remy , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2019 . Mapping the Landscape of Creativity Support Tools in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300619 [ 23 ] Henrik Gedenryd . 1998 . How designers work : Making sense of authentic cognitive activities . Cognitive Science . [ 24 ] William Gibson and Andrew Brown . 2009 . Working with Qualitative Data . SAGE , Los Angeles . [ 25 ] Gabriela Goldschmidt and Anat Litan Sever . 2011 . Inspiring design ideas with texts . Design Studies 32 , 2 : 139 – 155 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2010 . 09 . 006 [ 26 ] Gabriela Goldschmidt and Maria Smolkov . 2006 . Variances in the impact of visual stimuli on design problem solving performance . Design Studies 27 , 5 : 549 – 569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2006 . 01 . 002 [ 27 ] Michael Golembewski and Mark Selby . 2010 . Ideation Decks : A Card - based Design Ideation Tool . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’10 ) , 89 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858189 [ 28 ] Milene Gonçalves , Carlos Cardoso , and Petra Badke - Schaub . 2014 . What inspires designers ? Preferences on inspirational approaches during idea generation . De - sign Studies 35 , 1 : 29 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2013 . 09 . 001 [ 29 ] Eva Hornecker . 2010 . Creative Idea Exploration Within the Structure of a Guid - ing Framework : The Card Brainstorming Game . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’10 ) , 101 – 108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1709886 . 1709905 [ 30 ] Eva Hornecker . 2012 . Beyond Afordance : Tangibles’ Hybrid Nature . In Proceed - ings of the Sixth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’12 ) , 175 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2148131 . 2148168 [ 31 ] Eva Hornecker and Jacob Buur . 2006 . Getting a Grip on Tangible Interaction : A Framework on Physical Space and Social Interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’06 ) , 437 – 446 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124838 [ 32 ] Caroline Hummels , Kees C . J . Overbeeke , and Sietske Klooster . 2007 . Move to get moved : a search for methods , tools and knowledge to design for expressive and rich movement - based interaction . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 8 : 677 – 690 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 006 - 0135 - y [ 33 ] Tim Ingold . 2001 . Beyond art and technology : the anthropology of skill . Anthro - pological perspectives on technology : 17 – 31 . [ 34 ] Hiroshi Ishii . 2007 . Tangible user interfaces . Human - Computer Interaction : De - sign Issues , Solutions , and Applications : 141 – 157 . [ 35 ] Hiroshi Ishii . 2008 . Tangible bits : beyond pixels . In Proceedings of the 2nd inter - national conference on Tangible and embedded interaction , 15 – 25 . [ 36 ] Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer . 1997 . Tangible bits : towards seamless interfaces between people , bits and atoms . 234 – 241 . [ 37 ] Hiroshi Ishii , Craig Wisneski , Julian Orbanes , Ben Chun , and Joe Paradiso . 1999 . PingPongPlus : Design of an Athletic - tangible Interface for Computer - supported Cooperative Play . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) , 394 – 401 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303115 [ 38 ] Philemonne Jaasma , Dorothé Smit , Jelle van Dijk , Thomas Latcham , Ambra Trotto , and Caroline Hummels . 2017 . The Blue Studio : Designing an Interactive Environment for Embodied Multi - Stakeholder Ideation Processes . In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’17 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3024969 . 3025002 [ 39 ] Robert JK Jacob , Audrey Girouard , Leanne M Hirshfeld , Michael S Horn , Orit Shaer , Erin Treacy Solovey , and Jamie Zigelbaum . 2008 . Reality - based interaction : a framework for post - WIMP interfaces . 201 – 210 . [ 40 ] David G . Jansson and Steven M . Smith . 1991 . Design fxation . Design Studies 12 , 1 : 3 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0142 - 694X ( 91 ) 90003 - F [ 41 ] Mads Vedel Jensen , Jacob Buur , and Tom Djajadiningrat . 2005 . Designing the user actions in tangible interaction . 9 – 18 . [ 42 ] Martin Jonsson , Anna Ståhl , Johanna Mercurio , Anna Karlsson , Naveen Ra - mani , and Kristina Höök . 2016 . The Aesthetics of Heat : Guiding Awareness with Thermal Stimuli . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Con - ference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) , 109 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839487 [ 43 ] Victor Kaptelinin and Bonnie Nardi . 2012 . Afordances in HCI : toward a mediated action perspective . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 967 – 976 . [ 44 ] Ianus Keller , Froukje Sleeswijk Visser , Remko van der Lugt , and Pieter Jan Stap - pers . 2009 . Collecting with Cabinet : or how designers organise visual mate - rial , researched through an experiential prototype . Design Studies 30 , 1 : 69 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2008 . 06 . 001 [ 45 ] Jakob Nielsen . 1994 . Usability Engineering . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 46 ] Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich . 1990 . Heuristic Evaluation of User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’90 ) , 249 – 256 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97281 [ 47 ] Karin Niemantsverdriet and Maarten Versteeg . 2016 . Interactive Jewellery as Memory Cue : Designing a Sound Locket for Individual Reminiscence . In Proceed - ings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) , 532 – 538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2856524 [ 48 ] Bernard A Nijstad , Wolfgang Stroebe , and Hein F . M Lodewijkx . 2002 . Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups : Exposure efects in an idea generation task . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 38 , 6 : 535 – 544 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 1031 ( 02 ) 00500 - 0 [ 49 ] Alex Osborn . 2012 . Applied imagination - principles and procedures of creative writing . Read Books Ltd . [ 50 ] Fred Paas , Alexander Renkl , and John Sweller . 2003 . Cognitive load theory and instructional design : Recent developments . Educational psychologist 38 , 1 : 1 – 4 . [ 51 ] Amanda Parkes and Hiroshi Ishii . 2009 . Kinetic Sketchup : Motion Prototyping in the Tangible Design Process . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ’09 ) , 367 – 372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1517664 . 1517738 [ 52 ] Amanda Parkes and Hiroshi Ishii . 2010 . Bosu : a physical programmable design tool for transformability with soft mechanics . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , 189 – 198 . [ 53 ] Amanda J . Parkes , Hayes Solos Rafe , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2008 . Topobo in the wild : longitudinal evaluations of educators appropriating a tangible interface . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) , 1129 – 1138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357232 [ 54 ] Matti K . Perttula and Lassi Liikkanen . 2006 . Exposure efects in design idea generation : unconscious conformity or a product of sampling prob - ability ? In Proceedings of NordDesign 2006 Conference [ August 16 - 18 , 2006 , Reykjavik , Iceland ] , 42 – 55 . Retrieved February 17 , 2020 from https : / / researchportal . helsinki . f / en / publications / exposure - efects - in - design - idea - generation - unconscious - conformity [ 55 ] Matti K . Perttula and Lassi A . Liikkanen . 2008 . Structural Tendencies and Ex - posure Efects in Design Idea Generation . 199 – 210 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / DETC2006 - 99123 [ 56 ] Matti Perttula and Pekka Sipilä . 2007 . The idea exposure paradigm in design idea generation . Journal of Engineering Design 18 , 1 : 93 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09544820600679679 [ 57 ] Dorian Peters , Lian Loke , and Naseem Ahmadpour . 2020 . Toolkits , cards and games – a review of analogue tools for collaborative ideation . CoDesign 0 , 0 : 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1715444 [ 58 ] Henning Pohl , Andreea Muresan , and Kasper Hornbæk . 2019 . Charting Subtle Interaction in the HCI Literature . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300648 [ 59 ] A . Terry Purcell and John S . Gero . 1996 . Design and other types of fxation . Design Studies 17 , 4 : 363 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 96 ) 00023 - 3 [ 60 ] Mitchel Resnick , Brad Myers , Kumiyo Nakakoji , Ben Shneiderman , Randy Pausch , Ted Selker , and Mike Eisenberg . 2005 . Design principles for tools to support creative thinking . In NSF Workshop Report on Creativity Support Tools , 25 – 36 . [ 61 ] Giuseppe Riva . 2002 . The Sociocognitive Psychology of Computer - Mediated Com - munication : The Present and Future of Technology - Based Interactions . CyberPsy - chology & Behavior 5 , 6 : 581 – 598 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / 109493102321018222 [ 62 ] J . Sadler , L . Shluzas , P . Blikstein , and R . Katila . 2015 . Creative Chunking : Modu - larity Increases Prototyping Quantity , Creative Self - Efcacy and Cognitive Flow . The Design Society - a worldwide community . Retrieved February 2 , 2020 from https : / / www . designsociety . org / publication / 36113 / Creative + Chunking % 3A + Modularity + Increases + Prototyping + Quantity % 2C + Creative + Self - Efcacy + and + Cognitive + Flow [ 63 ] Joel Sadler , Kevin Durfee , Lauren Shluzas , and Paulo Blikstein . 2015 . Bloctopus : A novice modular sensor system for playful prototyping . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction , 347 – 354 . [ 64 ] Donald A . Schön . 1983 . The refective practitioner : how professionals think in action . Basic Books , New York . [ 65 ] Orit Shaer , Michael S Horn , and Robert JK Jacob . 2009 . Tangible user interface laboratory : Teaching tangible interaction design in practice . Artifcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : AI EDAM 23 , 3 : 251 . Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan [ 66 ] Orit Shaer and Eva Hornecker . 2010 . Tangible User Interfaces : Past , Present , and Future Directions . Found . Trends Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , 1 – 2 : 1 – 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 1100000026 [ 67 ] Dorothé Smit , Doenja Oogjes , Bruna Goveia de Rocha , Ambra Trotto , Yeup Hur , and Caroline Hummels . 2016 . Ideating in Skills : Developing Tools for Embodied Co - Design . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) , 78 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839497 [ 68 ] Anselm L . Strauss and Juliet M . Corbin . 1998 . Basics of qualitative research : techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks . [ 69 ] Petra Sundström , Alex Taylor , Katja Grufberg , Niklas Wirström , Jordi Sol - sona Belenguer , and Marcus Lundén . 2011 . Inspirational bits : towards a shared understanding of the digital material . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 1561 – 1570 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979170 [ 70 ] Ambra Trotto and Caroline Hummels . 2013 . Engage me , do ! engagement catal - ysers to ignite a ( design ) conversation . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces ( DPPI ’13 ) , 136 – 145 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2513506 . 2513521 [ 71 ] Ian Tseng , Jarrod Moss , Jonathan Cagan , and Kenneth Kotovsky . 2008 . The role of timing and analogical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies 29 , 3 : 203 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2008 . 01 . 003 [ 72 ] uddipana . 2020 . uddipana / IdeaBits . Retrieved June 14 , 2020 from https : / / github . com / uddipana / IdeaBits [ 73 ] B . Ullmer and H . Ishii . 2000 . Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces . IBM Systems Journal 39 , 3 . 4 : 915 – 931 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1147 / sj . 393 . 0915 [ 74 ] Kaisa Väänänen - Vainio - Mattila , Jani Heikkinen , Ahmed Farooq , Grigori Evreinov , Erno Mäkinen , and Roope Raisamo . 2014 . User experience and expectations of haptic feedback in in - car interaction . In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia ( MUM ’14 ) , 248 – 251 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677972 . 2677996 [ 75 ] Anna Vallgårda and Ylva Fernaeus . 2015 . Interaction Design as a Bricolage Prac - tice . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction - TEI ’14 , 173 – 180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2677199 . 2680594 APPENDICES GUI of IdeaBits 2 . 0 [ 76 ] Meng Wang , Kehua Lei , Zhichun Li , Haipeng Mi , and Yingqing Xu . 2018 . Twist - Blocks : Pluggable and Twistable Modular TUI for Armature Interaction in 3D Design . 19 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173225 . 3173231 [ 77 ] Steven M Smith Thomas B Ward and Ronald A Finke . 1995 . The creative cognition approach . MIT press . [ 78 ] Thomas B Ward . 1994 . Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive psychology 27 , 1 : 1 – 40 . [ 79 ] Stephan AG Wensveen , Johan Partomo Djajadiningrat , and CJ Overbeeke . 2004 . Interaction frogger : a design framework to couple action and function through feedback and feedforward . In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , 177 – 184 . [ 80 ] Christiane Wölfel and Timothy Merritt . 2013 . Method Card Design Dimen - sions : A Survey of Card - Based Design Tools . In Human - Computer Interac - tion – INTERACT 2013 ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , 479 – 486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 40483 - 2 _ 34 [ 81 ] Kieran Woodward , Eiman Kanjo , Samuel Burton , and Andreas Oikonomou . 2018 . EmoEcho : A Tangible Interface to Convey and Communicate Emotions . In Pro - ceedings of the 2018 ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Wearable Computers - UbiComp ’18 , 746 – 749 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3267305 . 3267705 [ 82 ] Lining Yao , Sayamindu Dasgupta , Nadia Cheng , Jason Spingarn - Kof , Ostap Rudakevych , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2011 . RopePlus : Bridging Distances with Social and Kinesthetic Rope Games . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’11 ) , 223 – 232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979611 [ 83 ] Robert K Yin . 2009 . Case study research : design and methods / Robert K . Yin . Los Angeles : Sage Publications . [ 84 ] 2012 . Learning and Experience : Teaching Tangible Interaction & Edutainment . Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 64 : 265 – 274 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sbspro . 2012 . 11 . 031 [ 85 ] TECI - Alissa N Antle . TECI - Alissa N Antle . Retrieved December 26 , 2020 from http : / / antle . iat . sfu . ca / teaching / iat884timeline / [ 86 ] SparkFun Electronics . Retrieved July 16 , 2018 from https : / / www . sparkfun . com / [ 87 ] YouTube . Retrieved July 16 , 2020 from https : / / www . youtube . com / [ 88 ] matinlotfali / AndroidTimer . GitHub . Retrieved September 14 , 2019 from https : / / github . com / matinlotfali / AndroidTime . [ 89 ] Arduino Education . Retrieved February 2 , 2020 from https : / / www . arduino . cc / education CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . Sitemap diagram . Home page . Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Video format of TUI examples . The TUI example shown is Memento [ 47 ] . Image format of TUI examples . The TUI example shown is RopePlus [ 82 ] . CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . Paper format of TUI examples . The TUI example shown is RopePlus [ 82 ] . 7 . 1 Screening Questionnaire Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Uddipana Baishya et al . List of Stationery and Modelling Materials Stationery 1 . A4 Papers 6 . Pencils 11 . Sketching papers 2 . Clip board 7 . Pens 12 . Stapler and pins 3 . Color pencils 8 . Rulers 13 . Sticky notes 4 . Erasers 9 . Sharpeners 14 . Whiteners 5 . Geometry box 10 . Sketch pens Modelling Materials 1 . Beads 17 . Glue gun , sticks , pad 33 . Reusable adhesive 2 . Bendable sticks 18 . Ice - cream sticks 34 . Ribbons 3 . Both sided tape 19 . Jute rope 35 . Rings ( wooden ) 4 . Cello tape 20 . Ladder cable ties 36 . Rubber bands 5 . Chart papers 21 . Legos 37 . Safety pins 6 . Clothe pieces 22 . Magnets 38 . Scissors 7 . Construction paper 23 . Masking tape 39 . Sponge cubes 8 . Craft board 24 . Measuring tape 40 . Spring 9 . Cubes 25 . Modeling clay 41 . Sticks 10 . Cutters 26 . Needle and thread 42 . Straws 11 . Cutting board 27 . Packing tape 43 . Suction cups 12 . Elastic 28 . Parachute cord 44 . Super glue 13 . Elastic sheet 29 . Permanent markers 45 . Thread and needles 14 . Felt sheets 30 . Pipe cleaners 46 . Toothpicks 15 . Foam shapes 31 . Playdough 47 . Twist ties 16 . Glue 32 . Pom poms 48 . Velcro straps Interview Questionnaire 1 . Congratulations on completing the session . How did it go ? 2 . I am curious about the ideas you came up with . Can you help me understand your fnal idea ( referring to the deliverables in sequence ) ? 3 . Can you walk me through your process of how you came up with this fnal idea ? a . ( If they did not explore multiple ideas ) How many ideas did you explore ? Why so ? 4 . What are the ways you used IdeaBits 2 . 0 to do this design task ? 5 . Do you prefer either the POAs or the SEAs ? Why so ? 6 . Do you prefer the image , video or paper format for the examples ? Why so ? 7 . Let us discuss further the input actions you explored . Can you walk me through how you came up with these input actions in your fnal idea ? a . ( If not already mentioned ) Did you use IdeaBits 2 . 0 to come up with input action ideas ? a . ( If they used IdeaBits 2 . 0 ) How did you use it ? b . ( If they did not use IdeaBits 2 . 0 ) Why did you choose not to use it ? b . Did you face any challenges while generating IA ideas ? ( If they faced challenges ) What challenges did you face ? 8 . Did you come across any input actions you were not familiar with ? a . ( If they came across any unfamiliar input actions ) Which input actions you were not familiar with ? Could you explore any of these in your ideas ? a . ( If they explored ) Can you tell me which ones did you explore ? Can you tell me how you explored them ? b . ( If they did not explore ) Why not ? 9 . Can you tell me what you did for planning technical implementation ? a . ( If not already mentioned ) Did you use IdeaBits 2 . 0 for planning technical implementation ? b . ( If they used IdeaBits 2 . 0 ) How did you use it ? c . ( If they did not use IdeaBits 2 . 0 ) Why did you choose not to use it ? 10 . In what ways , if any , do you think IdeaBits 2 . 0 helped you in doing the design task ? 11 . In what ways , if any , do you think IdeaBits 2 . 0 hindered or limited you in doing the design task ? 12 . Can you tell me about the challenges you faced , if any , while doing the design task ? 13 . Can you tell me about the challenges you faced , if any , while using IdeaBits 2 . 0 ? ( If they hesitate to mention negative things ) IdeaBits 2 . 0 is in a very rough prototype phase . We would be more than happy to know ways in which we can improve it . So please feel free to mention anything you did not like . 14 . The goal of IdeaBits 2 . 0 is to help you generate ideas for input actions . If we were to revise IdeaBits 2 . 0 , what changes would you like to see ? Why so ? 15 . To wrap it up , the goal of this study is to understand how you use IdeaBits 2 . 0 to generate ideas for input actions . What else you would like to mention to help us understand your experience better ? a . Is there anything else you would like to discuss ? Exploring Opportunities to Aid Generation of Input Action Ideas for Tangible User Interfaces CHI ’21 , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan 8 DESIGN TASK Deliverables Please attach extra sheets as needed .