Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect Sarah - Jane Leslie a , ⇑ , Sangeet Khemlani b , Sam Glucksberg b a Department of Philosophy , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA b Department of Psychology , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 November 2009 revision received 20 December 2010 Available online xxxx Keywords : Generics Semantics Linguistics Concepts Philosophy Quantiﬁers a b s t r a c t Generics are statements such as ‘‘tigers are striped’’ and ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ . They express general , though not universal or exceptionless , claims about kinds ( Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ) . For example , the generic ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ seems true even though many ducks ( e . g . the males ) do not lay eggs . The universally quantiﬁed version of the statement should be rejected , however : it is incorrect to say ‘‘ all ducks lay eggs’’ , since many ducks do not lay eggs . We found that adults nonetheless often judged such universal statements true , despite knowing that only one gender had the relevant property ( Experiment 1 ) . The effect was not due to participants interpreting the universals as quantifying over subkinds , or as applying to only a subset of the kind ( e . g . only the females ) ( Experiment 2 ) , and it persisted even when people judged that male ducks did not lay eggs only moments before ( Experi - ment 3 ) . It also persisted when people were presented with correct alternatives such as ‘‘some ducks do not lay eggs’’ ( Experiment 4 ) . Our ﬁndings reveal a robust generic overgen - eralization effect , predicted by the hypothesis that generics express primitive , default generalizations . (cid:2) 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction Statements such as ‘‘tigers are striped’’ , ‘‘ravens are black’’ , ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘ticks carry Lyme disease’’ are known as generics . Insofar as they are not used to con - vey information about a particular individual but rather information about a kind , these statements express generalizations ( Carlson , 1977 ; Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ) . Generics have been widely studied by linguists and philos - ophers , and have recently attracted the attention of psy - chologists ( Chambers , Graham , & Turner , 2008 ; Cimpian , Brandone , & Gelman , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , & Brandone , 2010 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Gelman & Bloom , 2007 ; Gelman , Goetz , Sarnecka , & Flukes , 2008 ; Gelman & Raman , 2003 ; Gelman , Star , & Flukes , 2002 ; Gelman & Tardif , 1998 ; Goldin - Meadow , Gelman , & Mylander , 2005 ; Hollander , Gelman , & Star , 2002 ; Khemlani , Leslie , & Glucksberg , 2009 ; Khemlani , Leslie , Glucksberg , & Rubio - Fernandez , 2007 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2006 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2009 ) . This paper presents four studies designed to inves - tigate the relationship between people’s interpretations of generics and their interpretations of the quantiﬁers ‘‘all’’ and ‘‘some’’ . From a logical point of view , statements like ‘‘all tigers are striped’’ , which we will refer to as universally quantiﬁed statements , are only true if every single tiger is striped . The existence of a single stripeless tiger is enough for the uni - versal statement ‘‘all tigers are striped’’ to be false . Unlike universally quantiﬁed statements , generics such as ‘‘tigers are striped’’ can be true even if there are some stripeless ti - gers ( Carlson , 1977 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Krifka et al . , 1995 ; Lawler , 1973 ) . Further , some generic statements are judged true even though a large percentage of the kind lack the property in question . For example ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus’’ are true , but male and immature ducks never lay eggs , and over ninety - nine percent of mosquitoes do not carry the West Nile virus ( Carlson , 1977 ; Cohen , 1996 ; Leslie , 2007 ; Leslie , 2008 ; see also Cimpian , Brandone , et al . , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , 0749 - 596X / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 ⇑ Corresponding author . Address : Department of Philosophy , 1879 Hall , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 , USA . E - mail address : sjleslie @ princeton . edu ( S . - J . Leslie ) . Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Memory and Language journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jml Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 et al . , 2010 ) . Recent empirical work conﬁrms that people often judge that these generics are true even when they know that a large percentage of the kind lacks the predi - cated property ( Cimpian , Brandone , et al . , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , et al . , 2010 ; Khemlani et al . , 2007 ; Khemlani et al . , 2009 ) . Sentences involving the quantiﬁer ‘‘some’’ ( henceforth , existentially quantiﬁed statements ) , e . g . ‘‘some tigers are albinos’’ or ‘‘some dogs have only three legs , ’’ are true so long as there is at least one albino tiger or one three - legged dog . The corresponding generic statements ‘‘tigers are albi - nos’’ and ‘‘dogs have only three legs’’ , however , are rejected ( Carlson , 1977 ; Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ; Khemlani et al . , 2009 ) . Some generics are also rejected even though most members of the kind have the property – for example , peo - ple reject ‘‘books are paperbacks’’ and ‘‘Canadians are right - handed’’ , despite knowing that more than ﬁfty per - cent of the kind has the property ( Carlson , 1977 ; Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ; Khemlani et al . , 2009 ) . For these reasons , semanticists distinguish the meanings of generic state - ments from the meanings of both universally and existen - tially quantiﬁed statements ( e . g . , Carlson , 1977 ; Krifka et al . , 1995 ; Lawler , 1973 ) . Unlike quantiﬁers such as ‘‘all’’ , ‘‘most’’ , or ‘‘some’’ , generics are difﬁcult to analyze from the semantic perspec - tive since they cannot be described in set - theoretic terms ( Leslie , 2007 ) . Semantic analyses thus suggest that gener - ics should be much more difﬁcult to acquire and process than quantiﬁers , due to their greater logical complexity ( Leslie , 2008 ; see also Carlson , 1977 ; Cohen , 1996 ; Krifka et al . , 1995 ; Pelletier & Asher , 1997 ) . However , recent developmental ﬁndings suggest that generics may be as easy as quantiﬁers for young children to acquire and process , and in some cases even easier ( Gelman , Coley , Rosengren , Hartman , & Pappas , 1998 ; Gelman & Tardif , 1998 ; Gelman , Hollander , Star , & Heyman , 2000 ; Hollander et al . , 2002 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Gelman & Raman , 2003 ; Goldin - Meadow et al . , 2005 ; Gelman et al . , 2008 ; Hollander , Gelman , & Raman , 2009 ; Graham , Nayer , & Gelman , in press ; Pappas & Gelman , 1998 ; Papafragou & Schwarz , 2005 / 2006 ; Tardif , Gelman , Fu , & Zhu , in press ) . The generics - as - defaults hypothesis In light of these considerations and others , several the - orists have proposed that generics may express default generalizations ( Csibra & Gergely , 2009 ; Gelman , 2010 ; Gelman & Brandone , 2010 ; Hollander et al . , 2009 ; Leslie , 2007 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . That is , the cognitive system may have an automatic , early - developing way of generalizing infor - mation from individuals to kinds ( Baldwin , Markman , & Melartin , 1993 ; Graham , Kilbreath , & Welder , 2001 ; Keates & Graham , 2008 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . These primitive kind - based generalizations are , according to this hypothesis , later articulated in language as generics . If correct , this hypoth - esis would explain why generics are understood and pro - duced by young children , despite the semantic complexity that linguists have claimed generics exhibit ( Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ; Cohen , 1996 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Leslie , 2007 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . The generalizations expressed by quantiﬁed statements , in contrast , represent more sophisticated generalizations – not the primitive default ones expressed by generics ( Leslie , 2008 ) . Leslie ( 2008 ) notes that such a hypothesis would ex - plain otherwise puzzling cross - linguistic data : generic interpretations are always associated with less marked syntactic forms than quantiﬁed statements ( Dahl , 1985 ; Krifka et al . , 1995 ) . For example , in English , one uses the words ‘‘all’’ or ‘‘every’’ to mark a universal generalization , and the word ‘‘some’’ to mark an existential generaliza - tions . However , there is no word ‘‘gen’’ that is used to mark a generic generalization – English speakers do not say ‘‘gen tigers are striped’’ like they say ‘‘all tigers are striped’’ . In - stead , the generic interpretation is associated with the ab - sence of a quantiﬁer word : ‘‘tigers are striped’’ . Similar patterns are found cross - linguistically – no known lan - guage contains a word ‘‘gen’’ that exclusively marks a gen - eric generalization . Rather , like English , generics are signaled in part by the absence of quantiﬁer terms ( Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ; Dahl , 1985 ) . Default interpretations are often associated with less - marked surface forms ( Chomsky , 2000 ) . Thus this cross - linguistic pattern can be explained if generics express default generalizations . Quantiﬁer words such as ‘‘all’’ and ‘‘some’’ signal that the cognitive system must generalize in a non - default manner , whereas the unmarked generic form allows the cognitive system to rely on its default way of generalizing . The hypothesis that generics , unlike quantiﬁers , express default generalizations generates a number of empirical predictions ( Gelman , 2010 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . For example , if understanding quantiﬁed statements requires deviating from the default mode of generalization , then both chil - dren and adults should sometimes fail to execute this devi - ation , and so should incorrectly treat quantiﬁed statements as generics . This tendency might be more pronounced in young children , but if the generics - as - default hypothesis is correct , adults should also be prone to making these er - rors , at least under some circumstances . Prior research conducted by Hollander et al . ( 2002 ) and Tardif et al . ( in press ) found evidence that young children may indeed treat quantiﬁed assertions as generics . However they did not ﬁnd this with their adult participants . In their study , Hollander et al . ( 2002 ) investigated the extent to which children and adults differentiated generics from universal and existential claims by asking them a variety of yes / no questions , each of which appeared either in universal form ( e . g . ‘‘do all shoes have laces ? ’’ ) , generic form ( e . g . ‘‘do shoes have laces ? ’’ ) , or existential form ( e . g . ‘‘do some shoes have laces ? ’’ ) . They found that four - year - olds and adults successfully differentiated between all three types of questions in their answers , but three - year - olds did not . Instead , the three - year - olds gave the same responses regardless of whether the question was in universal , generic , or existential form . The difference be - tween the age groups was due entirely to differences in their responses to the two quantiﬁers – Hollander et al . found no developmental differences in the responses to the generic questions across these three age groups . The three - year - olds responded as the adults did to the generic questions – but then also responded in that same way to the universally and existentially quantiﬁed questions . The three - year - olds apparently handled the generic questions 2 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 like the older children and the adults did , but unlike the older age groups , the three - year - olds seemed to treat the quantiﬁed questions as though they were in fact generic questions ( Hollander et al . , 2002 ) . Tardif et al . ( in press ) conducted a similar study of Mandarin Chinese speakers , and found the same results with three - year - olds . Mandarin speaking four - year - olds also showed the effect ; it was not until age ﬁve that Mandarin speaking children differenti - ated their responses to quantiﬁed questions from their re - sponses to generic questions . Such ﬁndings are predicted by the generics - as - default hypothesis : when confronted with a quantiﬁed statement that applies to an entire kind , the young preschoolers failed to inhibit their default tendency toward generic general - izations , and so they treated the quantiﬁed assertions as though they were generic . Thus instead of considering whether , e . g . , all shoes have laces , the three - year - olds instead evaluated the generic ‘‘shoes have laces’’ , and responded accordingly . The English speaking three - year - olds were , however , able to respond accurately to quantiﬁed questions in a post - test session where all the questions concerned a small discrete set of items ( e . g . ‘‘are all the crayons in the box ? ’’ ) rather than category - wide generalizations , as was the case in the main experi - ment ( Hollander et al . , 2002 ) , and the Mandarin speaking three - and four - year - olds were able to distinguish ‘‘all’’ from ‘‘some’’ in this context as well ( Tardif et al . , in press ) . The results of the main experiment were thus not due to a basic lack of competence with the quantiﬁers ; they seemed instead to do with the difﬁculty of processing category - wide quantiﬁed statements . When confronted with a quantiﬁed claim about an entire category ( as opposed to a speciﬁc subset ) , young preschoolers appear to rely on their interpretation of the corresponding generic . In Hollander et al . ’s ( 2002 ) and Tardif et al . ’s ( in press ) experiments , adults did not make the error of treating quantiﬁed statements as though they were generics . The generics - as - defaults hypothesis would predict that this would not always be the case , however . We wondered if Hollander et al . ’s and Tardif et al . ’s adult ﬁndings would hold up across a broader range of test items . Would adult participants have any inclination to treat category - wide quantiﬁed statements as though they were in fact gener - ics ? Work by Jönsson and Hampton ( 2006 ) , Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , Lopez , and Shaﬁr ( 1990 ) and Sloman ( 1993 ) , Sloman ( 1998 ) suggests that this may occur in the case of the quantiﬁer ‘‘all’’ . For example , Jönsson and Hampton found that , in a wide range of circumstances , adults judged that it was more likely , e . g . , that all ravens are black , than that all young jungle ravens are black . Clearly , such judgments are erroneous from the point of view of logic , because all ravens are black entails that all young jungle ravens are black . However , if the participants interpreted the universals as generics , then their responses would be much more reasonable , since the generic ravens are black could be true even if jungle ravens were , say , light brown when they are young ( Jönsson & Hampton , 2006 ; Jönsson , personal communication ) . Indeed , Connolly , Fodor , Gleitman , and Gleitman ( 2007 ) conﬁrmed that people routinely reason this way with generics ( see also Cimpian , Brandone , et al . , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , et al . , 2010 ) . Their focus was not on the interpretation of generic statements per se , but rather on prototypical properties ( Rosch , 1978 ) – propertiesthatgenericsarewellsuitedtoex - press ( Declerk , 1986 ; Geurts , 1985 ) . While the generics - as - defaults hypothesis would explain Jönsson and Hampton’s ﬁndings , their data constitute only indirect support for the hypothesis . Is it possible to ﬁnd more direct evidence of adults interpreting quantiﬁed statements as generics ? Data from a memory study by Leslie and Gelman ( submitted for publication ) supports the hypothesis that adults , as well as children , may sometimes treat quantiﬁed statements as generics . Leslie and Gelman’s data suggest that adults and young children both frequently misremem - ber category - wide statements quantiﬁed with ‘‘all’’ and ‘‘most’’ as generics . This is consistent with the idea that adults may at times treat universally quantiﬁed statements as generics . In light of these ﬁndings , we wondered whether adults would be inclined to agree to some false universal statements when the corresponding generic is true , despite knowing about the falsifying counterinstances . Preliminary data reported by Khemlani et al . ( 2007 ) suggested that this was indeed the case – participants agreed to statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘all horses give live birth’’ approximately half the time . We term this the generic over - generalization ( GOG ) effect , since it involves overgeneraliz - ing from the truth of a generic to the truth of the corresponding universal statement , as the generics - as - de - fault hypothesis would predict . In Experiment 1 , we repli - cated Khemlani et al . ( 2007 ) with a larger range of items . We predicted that the ﬁndings from Khemlani et al . ( 2007 ) would hold up , and that people would often judge state - ments like ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ to be true . While Hollander et al . ( 2002 ) and Tardif et al . ( in press ) found evidence that preschoolers treat statements quanti - ﬁed with ‘‘some’’ as generics , we reasoned that it was un - likely that adults would make such errors in this experimental context . This is because generics are rarely accepted if no members of the kind have the property , i . e . , if the corresponding existential statement is false ( Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ) . Thus , it would not be feasible to ﬁnd cases where an existential statement was false , but the corresponding generic was true . The only possible GOG errors involving ‘‘some , ’’ then , would involve people incorrectly judging a true existential statement to be false because the corresponding generic was false , e . g . judging ‘‘some Canadians are right - handed’’ to be false because the generic ‘‘Canadians are right - handed’’ is false . However , it is extremely easy to determine that such an existential is true : one only needs to think of a single right - handed Canadian in order to accept it . In this way , true existential statements are easy to evaluate , and so it is unlikely that adults would incorrectly rely on the default generic in such cases . It may be harder , though , for people to conﬁrm that a universal statement is true , since they are only true if every single member of the kind has the prop - erty in question . Adults may thus save cognitive effort by relying on the generic to evaluate the universal . If true existential statements are easier to evaluate than univer - sals , however , it is likely that no GOG effect will be found S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 3 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 for statements quantiﬁed with ‘‘some . ’’ If the statement is easy to evaluate , participants will be unlikely to rely on the generic default . The scope of the overgeneralization effect The generics - as - default hypothesis predicts that adults will tend to incorrectly endorse false universal statements if the corresponding generic is true . A further question is whether this effect would be found for all types of generics , or whether it is more limited in scope . Generics are often used to express essential properties of a kind ( Gelman , 2003 ; Gelman , 2010 ; Gelman & Brandone , 2010 ) , or prop - erties that bear a principled connection to the kind ( Prasada & Dillingham , 2006 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2009 ) ; for example ‘‘tigers are striped’’ , ‘‘horses have hooves’’ , ‘‘doc - tors heal people’’ . Prasada and Dillingham ( 2006 ) , Prasada and Dillingham ( 2009 ) deﬁne the notion of a principled connection so as to include only properties that are ex - pected to be highly prevalent among members of the kind . However , generics such as ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘lions have manes’’ seem to express essential properties in the sense of Medin and Ortony ( 1989 ) and Gelman ( 2003 ) , and other - wise resemble principled properties , despite predicating properties that are only true of mature members of one gender of the kind ( Cimpian , Brandone , et al . , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , et al . , 2010 ; Leslie , 2007 , 2008 ; Leslie , Khemlani , Prasada , & Glucksberg , 2009 ) . A discussion of the relationship between principled and essential proper - ties is beyond the scope of this paper ( but see Prasada & Dillingham , 2009 ) , so here we adopt the term characteristic property to indicate a property that bears a deep causal and explanatory relation to the kind in question – a property that results from the nature of that kind . Characteristic properties can , in some cases , occur in only a minority of the members of the kind ; for example , laying eggs would seem to stem from the nature of ducks , even though only the mature fertile female ducks possess the property . Leslie ( 2007 ) , Leslie ( 2008 ) terms generics such as ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ minority characteristic generics , since they express properties that are characteristic of the kind , but are only possessed by a minority of its members . Regardless of prevalence , not all generics express char - acteristic properties : for example ‘‘cars have radios’’ , ‘‘pi - geons sit on statues’’ , and ‘‘sharks attack swimmers’’ ( Leslie , 2007 ; Leslie , 2008 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2006 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2009 ) . Would all these generics sup - port a GOG effect ? One hypothesis is that all generics pro - duce GOG effects , regardless of whether the property in question is characteristic of the kind or not . On this hypothesis , people should accept universals like ‘‘all cars have radios’’ and ‘‘all sharks attack swimmers’’ as fre - quently as they accept minority characteristic universals such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘all lions have manes’’ . There are , however , some theoretical and empirical rea - sons to suspect that the GOG effect might be most pro - nounced in the case of characteristic properties ( Khemlani et al . , 2007 ) . Characteristic properties are usu - ally possessed by all or almost all members of a kind ; in most cases , the only members of a kind that lack a charac - teristic ( or essential ) property are in some respect abnor - mal , e . g . , a stripeless albino tiger or a three - legged dog ( Gelman , 2003 ) . Thus , while the corresponding universal statements may be strictly speaking incorrect – since there are some stripeless tigers and three - legged dogs – asser - tions such as ‘‘all tigers are striped’’ and ‘‘all dogs have four legs’’ may be close enough to being correct for practical purposes . This is not so for non - characteristic properties : there is nothing abnormal about the many sharks that never attack swimmers , and so ‘‘all sharks attack swim - mers’’ is patently incorrect . In this way , the tendency to substitute a judgment of the generic for the universal will be generally more successful when the property in ques - tion is a characteristic one , and so adult participants may be less likely to show a GOG effect if the property is not characteristic of the kind . However , there are some characteristic properties that do not occur in all or almost all members of the kind , namely minority characteristic ones , as in ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘lions have manes’’ ( Leslie , 2008 ) . If this hypothesis is correct , then the GOG effect should be observed for minor - ity characteristic predications , such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘all lions have manes’’ . Data from Khemlani et al . ( 2007 ) favored the hypothesis that the GOG effect was pri - marily to be found for minority characteristic generics . The limited range of test items prevented any ﬁrm conclusions being drawn , and so Experiment 1 used an expanded set of items to test the GOG effect . A full taxonomy of the types of predications used in these studies may be found in Table 1 below . If adults do indeed erroneously accept statements like ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ , does this necessarily support the generics - as - default hypothesis ? One alternative explana - tion is that people may interpret the universal quantiﬁer ‘‘all’’ as applying to subkinds of ducks , rather than to indi - vidual ducks . That is , people may understand ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ to mean all kinds of ducks lay eggs – e . g . , Mallard ducks lay eggs , Muscovy ducks lay eggs , and so on . On this interpretation , it would be correct to accept ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ , and so this would not constitute evidence that par - ticipants were defaulting to their judgment of a generic in place of a universal . An alternative explanation is that peo - ple may interpret ‘‘all ducks’’ to apply to only a subset of ducks , namely the fertile female ducks . That is , the context may restrict the scope of the quantiﬁer , so that people do not interpret ‘‘all ducks’’ to apply to every single duck in the world , but rather to a subset of those ducks ( Stanley , 2007 ; Stanley & Szabo , 2000 ) . If this explanation is correct , then people’s acceptance of ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ would again not constitute evidence for the generics - as - defaults hypothesis . Experiment 2 sought to address these issues . In Experiment 2a , participants were given population information ( e . g . ‘‘there are 431 million ducks in the world’’ ) so as to prime them to interpret the subsequent statement ( ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) as quantifying over ( a ) individual ducks , and ( b ) every single duck in the world . If the GOG effect is driven by quantiﬁcation over subtypes , or by contextual quantiﬁer domain restriction , then it should disappear in the context of population information . Further , in Experiment 2b , participants performed a para - phrase task in which they were asked to paraphrase the sentence they evaluated . The paraphrases were then coded 4 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 for any indications that participants had generalized over subkinds or interpreted the scope of the quantiﬁer to be re - stricted to a subset of the kind . If the GOG effect was sim - ply due to generalization over subkinds or restricted quantiﬁer scope , then there should be evidence of this in participants’ paraphrases . In particular , they should be more likely to provide a paraphrase that either refers to subkinds or reﬂects quantiﬁer domain restriction if they accepted the universal than if they rejected it . Another alternative explanation for the effect would be that participants were simply ignorant of the biological facts . Experiment 3 addressed whether the participants who accepted statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ did indeed know that male ducks do not lay eggs . It is possible – though perhaps unlikely – that people accepted these false universal statements simply out of ignorance . The experiment used a blocked design ; one block replicated Experiment 1 and the other asked participants to evaluate statements involving counterexamples such as ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ . In addition to controlling for background knowledge , we were interested in whether the GOG effect would persist after participants had been asked to think about these counterexamples . Adults take counterexam - ples into consideration when evaluating universals , so if participants had processed these statements as universals but were somehow unable to bring counterexamples to mind , then the GOG effect should disappear , since counte - rexamples should have been readily called to mind . Con - versely , if participants processed the universal statements as though they were generics , as we predicted , then they should have accepted ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ to some extent , even after rejecting the statement ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ . After all , the truth of the generic ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ is per - fectly compatible with male ducks’ failure to do so . Finally , Experiment 4 tested whether the GOG effect persisted when people were asked to choose between two statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘some ducks do not lay eggs’’ . The experiment offered people a correct alternative , and thus made salient the potential er - ror that would be involved in accepting the universal . If the GOG effect is due to participants’ relying on their judgment of the generic instead of evaluating the universal , then they may continue to erroneously prefer the universal statement . Experiment 1 : the generic overgeneralization effect Preliminary work suggests that the GOG effect may oc - cur most clearly for predications that express gender - spe - ciﬁc properties that are characteristic of the kind in question , e . g . , how the members of the kind reproduce ( Khemlani et al . , 2007 ) . Can any GOG effect be found for non - characteristic properties , or is it limited to characteris - tic properties in the case of adults ? Prasada and Dillingham ( 2006 ) , Prasada and Dillingham ( 2009 ) and Leslie ( 2007 ) , Leslie ( 2008 ) have identiﬁed various other types of gener - ics , so we included each identiﬁed type in our experiments , plus a category of statements that are false in generic form . Examples are given in Table 1 . Our ﬁrst and last types of predications , quasi - deﬁni - tional and false generalizations , were included for compar - ison purposes . False generalizations tend to be rejected in generic form despite predicating prevalent properties of the kind ( Khemlani et al . , 2009 ) . The inclusion of this cate - gory allowed us to determine which , if any , of the other types were more likely to be accepted in universal form . If other types of statements were accepted in universal form more frequently than false generalizations , then that would suggest a GOG effect for them . At the other end of the spectrum are the quasi - deﬁnitional predications , which are genuinely true in universal form . Acceptance in universal form of any predication types other than qua - si - deﬁnitional ones constitutes an error , since there are al - ways some members of the kind that lack the property . Majority characteristic predications involve characteristic properties that are true of all the normal members of the Table 1 Various types of generic generalizations used in Experiments 1 , 2 , and 3 . Predication type Example Truth value of the generic Description Quasi - deﬁnitional Triangles have three sides True Property must be universally true of all the members of the kind ; no exceptions Majority characteristic Tigers have stripes True Property must be central , principled or essential ( Gelman , 2003 ; Medin & Ortony , 1989 ) – namely , it must be directly related to the nature of the kind in question . It must also be prevalent though not universally had among members of the kind ; while some exceptional members ( e . g . albino tigers ) fail to possess it , all the normal members of the kind must possess it Minority characteristic Lions have manes True Property must be central , principled or essential ( Gelman , 2003 ; Medin & Ortony , 1989 ) – namely , it must be directly related to the nature of the kind in question . However , it must only be held by a minority of the kind . For our purposes we restricted these items to methods of gestation , methods of nourishing the very young , and characteristic physical traits had only by one gender Majority Cars have radios True Property must be prevalent among members of the kind , and must not be a principled connection ( Prasada & Dillingham , 2006 , 2009 ) . Striking Pit bulls maul children True Property must only be had by a small minority of the kind , and must signify something dangerous and to be avoided False generalization Canadians are right - handed False Property must be prevalent among members of the kind and there must be a sufﬁciently salient alternative property ( e . g . being left - handed ) , so that the generic form of the predication sounds false or mistaken S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 5 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 kind ( they map onto Prasada & Dillingham’s , 2006 ; Prasada & Dillingham’s , 2009 notion of principled connections ) , and so it would not be surprising if people accepted those statements in universal form . We were particularly inter - ested in minority characteristic , majority , and striking predications throughout our studies . Recent work suggests that these different types of generic predications can be distinguished along various dimensions ( Cimpian , Brandone , et al . , 2010 ; Cimpian , Gelman , et al . , 2010 ; Khemlani et al . , 2009 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2006 ; Prasada & Dillingham , 2009 ; Leslie et al . , 2009 ) , and so they may be treated in different ways on our tasks . Thus our inclusion of minority characteristic , majority and striking items allowed us to better test the extent and limits of the GOG effect . Method Participants and procedure 56 volunteers participated in the experiment over the Internet . Participants were chosen from Amazon’s Mechan - ical Turk system for human interface tasks , an online forum through which individuals can participate in tasks for mon - etary compensation . All spoke English as their ﬁrst lan - guage and none had participated in experiments concerning generics before . They were asked to judge their agreement to each item , one at a time , and registered their responses by selecting buttons marked ‘yes’ and ‘no’ over the Internet through an interface written in Ajax . Materials and design Participants were presented with 72 experimental items randomly embedded in a list of 60 ﬁllers . The 72 experimental items consisted of six types of predications , and examples are given in Table 1 . A full listing of the materials is provided in the Appendix . Each predicate type appeared in one of three statement types : existential ( e . g . , ‘‘some ducks lay eggs’’ ) , generic ( e . g . , ‘‘ducks lay eggs’’ ) , or universal ( e . g . , ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) . This generated a 6 ( predicate type ) (cid:2) 3 ( statement type ) repeated measures factorial design . Statements were counterbalanced such that each participant saw any given predicate in only one statement type . We also included 30 false and 30 true ﬁller items . Filler items were non - quanti - ﬁed factual assertions , such as ‘‘Paris is the capital of France’’ ( true ) and ‘‘New York City is in England’’ ( false ) . Results and discussion Fig . 1 shows the proportions of ‘yes’ responses to each of the eighteen types of assertions . Existentially quantiﬁed Existential Generic Universal Experiment 1 Quasi - definitional Majority characteristic Minority characteristic Majority StrikingFalse generalization Existential Generic Universal Experiment 2a Existential Generic Universal Experiment 2b 0 40 80 0 40 80 0 40 80 Fig . 1 . Proportions of agreement for Experiment 1 , 2a , and 2b as a function of statement type and predicate type ; 95 % conﬁdence intervals shown . 6 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 and generic statements were deemed true most of the time , while agreement to universal statements depended on the type of predication expressed . In generic form , qua - si - deﬁnitional and majority characteristic statements were judged true 90 % and 96 % of the time , respectively . Minority characteristic predications in generic form were judged true 85 % of the time , and majority and striking were judged true in generic form 82 % and 77 % of the time , respectively . The various assertions in existential form were each judged true over 90 % of the time , with the exception of quasi - deﬁnitional existentials , which had a 78 % acceptance rate . This relatively low acceptance rate can be attributed to the scalar implicature effect , a well - known phenomenon in the language comprehension liter - ature . Given , say , that all triangles have three sides , it is pragmatically odd to assert that some triangles have three sides ; people sometimes interpret some as implying not all , and so are reluctant to agree to universally true assertions quantiﬁed by ‘‘some’’ ( Bott & Noveck , 2004 ) . False generalizations were rejected most of the time when they appeared in generic form – the agreement rate for them was only 38 % . Of more interest are the universally quantiﬁed predications . Participants were prone to the GOG effect for minority characteristic and majority charac - teristic predications : universally quantiﬁed minority char - acteristic predications were judged true 51 % of the time and principled predications were judged true 78 % of the time when , in fact , all of those statements were false . Fur - ther , 40 out of 56 participants judged universal minority characteristic predications true over 30 % of the time ( bino - mial test , p < . 005 ) , and 10 out of 12 items were judged true over 30 % of the time ( binomial test , p < . 05 ) , where 30 % re - ﬂects a proportion high enough to indicate a GOG effect . In contrast , universally quantiﬁed majority and striking pred - ications were incorrectly judged true only 13 % and 14 % of the time , respectively . The proportions of agreement data were subjected to a 6 (cid:2) 3 within - subjects ANOVA . As is conventional , we use F 1 and F 2 to report participant and item analyses respec - tively , aswellasmin F 0 ( Clark , 1973 ) . Therewasamaineffect of predicate type , F 1 ( 5 , 275 ) = 95 . 21 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 5 , 65 ) = 30 . 50 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 5 , 111 ) = 23 . 10 , p < . 0001 , reﬂecting the higher agreement rate to quasi - deﬁnitional , principled , and minority characteristic statements than majority , strik - ing , or false generalization statements . There was also a main effect of statement type , F 1 ( 2 , 110 ) = 260 . 33 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 2 , 130 ) = 338 . 03 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 2 , 229 ) = 147 . 07 , p < . 0001 , reﬂecting the higher agreement for ‘some’ statements ( 91 % ) than for generic statements ( 78 % ) , withthelowestagreementfor‘all’statements ( 42 % ) . Finally , there was a reliable interaction between predicate type and statement type , F 1 ( 10 , 550 ) = 72 . 19 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 10 , 130 ) = 42 . 48 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 10 , 301 ) = 26 . 55 , p < . 0001 . The interaction can be interpreted in terms of the differences in agreement rate for statement type as a function of predi - catetype . Agreementratesforexistentiallyquantiﬁedasser - tions were comparable across predicate types . In contrast , quasi - deﬁnitional and majority characteristic predicates yielded robust agreement rates in the universal condition , minority characteristic predicates tended towards agree - ment , and majority , striking , and false generalizations were usually rejected . Finally , generic statements differed as a function of predicate type , with false generalizations elicit - ing lower agreement than any of the other predications . Planned comparisons revealed that quasi - deﬁnitional , majority characteristic , and minority characteristic asser - tions were each accepted in universal form signiﬁcantly more often than false generalizations , t s ( 110 ) > 8 . 01 , p s < . 0001 , d s > 1 . 53 . Neither majority , t ( 110 ) = . 57 , p = . 57 , d = . 11 , nor striking assertions were accepted more often than false generalizations , t ( 110 ) = . 10 , p = . 92 , d = . 02 . These results support the hypothesis that the GOG effect only occurs for predications that express char - acteristic properties of the kind . Experiment 1 found that the GOG effect occurs on approximatelyhalfthetrialswhenthepropertyischaracter - istic of the kind but only occurs in one gender . No evidence was found of the GOG effect occurring when the property inquestionisnotcharacteristicofthekind . ThusExperiment 1 provides evidence that the GOG effect is limited to charac - teristic properties , at least for adults . It also provides evi - dence for the generics - as - default hypothesis more generally , since , as predicted , adults exhibited a tendency to accept false universals with true corresponding generics . However , one alternative explanation of these data is that people interpret the quantiﬁer ‘‘all’’ as applying to subkinds instead of individual members of the kind , in which case Experiment 1 would not in fact constitute evidence for generics being defaults . Another explanation is that people interpret the quantiﬁer ‘‘all’’ as applying only to a subset of the kind – in particular , to only one gender . That is , perhaps theycontextuallyrestrictedthescopeoftheuniversalquan - tiﬁer so that it does not apply to the entire kind , but only to one gender of the kind – just as if someone asserts ‘‘every student passed the exam’’ , she would naturally be inter - preted as talking about the students in her class , not about every single student in the world ( Stanley , 2007 ; Stanley & Szabo , 2000 ) . Experiment 2 was designed to address these alternative deﬂationary explanations . Experiment 2 : is the GOG effect due to quantiﬁcation over subkinds or domain restriction ? To determine whether the GOG effect can be explained by supposing that participants generalize over subkinds or restrict the scope of the universal quantiﬁer , Experiment 2a tested whether the GOG effect persisted in a context in which participants were directed to consider every sin - gle individual member of the kind . Experiment 2b solicited paraphrases , to test whether they indicate reliance on a subkind interpretation or quantiﬁer domain restriction . Experiment 2a : priming individual - based interpretations with population information Method Participants and procedure Twenty - seven volunteers from the same population as Experiment 1 participated over the Internet for pay . All were native English speakers and none had participated S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 7 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 in experiments on generics in the past . The study used the same procedure as in Experiment 1 , except that on each trial , to prime them to consider each and every individual member of a kind in the world , instead of subkinds or a subset of those individuals , participants were provided with additional information about population estimates for the kind in question . For example , participants were visually presented with the following : ‘‘Suppose the fol - lowing is true : there are 431 million ducks in the world . Do you agree with the following : all ducks lay eggs . ’’ The numerical information was artiﬁcial , but was designed to convey plausible population estimates for each kind . Materials and design Experiment 2a used the same set of items used in Experiment 1 , except that it dropped three items : ‘‘rectan - gles are geometric ﬁgures’’ , ‘‘US Presidents are over 35’’ , and ‘‘strokes cause paralysis’’ . These items were dropped because it was not possible to construct meaningful popu - lation estimates for each item , e . g . , it is nonsensical to say that there are 45 million rectangles in the world , because the set of rectangles is impossible to count . Filler state - ments were dropped from the study . In total , participants evaluated 69 items . Each item appeared in existential , gen - eric , or universal form . The study thus generated a 6 ( pred - icate type ) (cid:2) 3 ( statement type ) repeated measures factorial design . Results and discussion Fig . 1 provides the proportions of ‘yes’ responses to the different assertions used in Experiment 2a . Participants ac - cepted minority characteristic universal assertions 30 % of the time , whereas they accepted majority and striking assertions only 6 % and 5 % of the time respectively . Despite a reduction of the GOG effect , the overall pattern results of the present study replicated those of Experiment 1 . The proportions of agreement data were subjected to a 6 (cid:2) 3 within - subjects ANOVA , which revealed a main effect of predicate type , F 1 ( 5 , 130 ) = 100 . 18 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 5 , 62 ) = 43 . 02 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 5 , 116 ) = 30 . 09 , p < . 0001 , a main effect of statement type , F 1 ( 2 , 52 ) = 192 . 50 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 2 , 124 ) = 315 . 39 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 2 , 117 ) = 119 . 54 , p < . 0001 , and a reliable interaction between predicate type and statement type , F 1 ( 10 , 260 ) = 54 . 85 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 10 , 124 ) = 31 . 77 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 10 , 267 ) = 20 . 12 , p < . 0001 . Planned comparisons showed that , as in Experiment 1 , minority characteristic assertions were accepted in univer - sal form signiﬁcantly more often than false generalizations , t ( 52 ) = 5 . 64 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 54 . As before , majority t ( 52 ) = . 50 , p = . 48 , d = . 19 , and striking assertions were not accepted reliably more often than false generalizations , t ( 52 ) = . 57 , p = . 57 , d = . 15 . Our ﬁndings demonstrate that the GOG effect occurred even in a context in which people were asked to consider a population estimate designed to focus attention on every individual member of the kind in the world , rather than on subkinds or on a subset of individuals . This additional information may have reduced the overgeneralization ef - fect ; people accepted minority characteristic assertions 30 % of the time in this study as compared to 51 % of the time in Experiment 1 . Thus some of the GOG effect found in Experiment 1 may have been due to some participants employing a subkinds interpretation or a restricted inter - pretation . However , the results of Experiment 2a indicate that the effect cannot be entirely explained in this way , since the effect remained in a context that encouraged gen - eralization across each and every individual in the world . It is also possible that the GOG effect was reduced here be - cause the context primed participants to employ a more analytic mode of thinking , due to considering numerical information about populations ( see Alter , Oppenheimer , Epley , & Eyre , 2007 ) . As a result , the participants may have answered more carefully , and therefore they may have been less likely substitute a default generic judgment for a universal one . The reduction in the GOG effect may thus be due in part to the elimination of subkind and restricted interpretations . Experiment 2b tested the deﬂationary interpretations further by eliciting participants’ para - phrases of quantiﬁed and generic assertions . Experiment 2b : paraphrases of existential , generic , and universal assertions Method Participants and procedure Sixteen volunteers from the same population as Exper - iment 1 participated over the Internet for pay . All were na - tive English speakers and none had participated in experiments on generics in the past . The experiment con - sisted of two phases . Participants ﬁrst performed an evalu - ation phase in which they carried out the same agreement task as in Experiment 1 . They then carried out a second phase , in which they were given the same assertions as in the ﬁrst phase and were asked to type out a paraphrase of each assertion . Participants were speciﬁcally asked to produce paraphrases that retained as much of the original meaning of the statement as possible . The paraphrase task examined whether individuals used language that sug - gested a subkind interpretation or a restricted interpreta - tion , e . g . , whether a participant paraphrased the universal ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ as ‘‘all types ( / kinds / sorts / species ) of ducks lay eggs , ’’ or as ‘‘all female ducks lay eggs . ’’ Materials and design Experiment 2b used the same set of items used in Experiment 1 , except that all the ﬁller statements were omitted since we were not interested in how the ﬁllers were paraphrased . In total , participants evaluated 72 items . Each item appeared in existential , generic , or uni - versal form . The study thus generated a 6 ( predicate type ) (cid:2) 3 ( statement type ) repeated measures factorial design . Results and discussion The results of the ﬁrst phase of Experiment 2b repli - cated those of Experiment 1 , and are shown in Fig . 1 . Par - ticipants accepted minority characteristic universal 8 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 assertions 48 % of the time . The proportions of agreement data were subjected to a 6 (cid:2) 3 within - subjects ANOVA . There was a main effect of predicate type , F 1 ( 5 , 75 ) = 21 . 46 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 5 , 65 ) = 19 . 83 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 5 , 138 ) = 10 . 31 , p < . 0001 , a main effect of statement type , F 1 ( 2 , 30 ) = 87 . 23 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 2 , 130 ) = 125 . 75 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 2 , 76 ) = 50 . 8 , p < . 0001 , and a reliable interaction between predicate type and statement type , F 1 ( 10 , 150 ) = 24 . 89 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 10 , 130 ) = 25 . 24 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 10 , 279 ) = 12 . 53 , p < . 0001 . This pattern of results is comparable to those of the previous studies . In the second phase of the experiment , participants pro - duced paraphrases of the statements that they had evalu - ated in the ﬁrst phase . The authors coded the paraphrases on three separate dimensions . First , the para - phrases were coded based on what kind of statement was produced ( existential , generic , universal , or other ) . Coding was based on the semantic signiﬁcance of the paraphrase , so paraphrases that used the quantiﬁers ‘‘none’’ or ‘‘no’’ , e . g . , ‘‘no moose are without antlers , ’’ were coded as univer - sal quantiﬁers . Likewise , assertions that made use of the quantiﬁers ‘‘always’’ and ‘‘never’’ were coded as universals . Deﬁnite and indeﬁnite singular assertions , e . g . , ‘‘a paper - back is a book’’ , were coded as generics , as were qualiﬁed generics , e . g . , ‘‘female ducks lay eggs’’ . Paraphrases that made use of the quantiﬁers ‘‘there are’’ and ‘‘a few’’ were coded as existentials , as were negated universals , e . g . , ‘‘not all cheetahs are fast runners . ’’ Finally , everything that did not fall into these categories was coded as ‘other’ . Para - phrases were also coded on ( a ) whether they mentioned subtypes or not , e . g . , ‘‘some types of pencils are made of wood’’ , and ( b ) whether they made reference to a restricted subset of the kind , e . g . , ‘‘female ducks lay eggs’’ . The authors agreed on 79 . 8 % of responses ( Cohen’s kappa = . 73 , z = 43 . 7 , p < . 0001 ) . Differences between the coding were reconciled on a case - by - case basis . Table 2 shows the form of participants’ paraphrases as a function of the statement that they were asked to para - phrase . As the table shows , they paraphrased existential assertions as existentials 62 % of the time , generics as generics 59 % of the time , and universal as universals 51 % of the time . Across all responses , only 16 % of the para - phrases were classiﬁed as ‘other’ . For those paraphrases that were different from the original assertions , partici - pants paraphrased universals as generics on 36 % of trials , which happened signiﬁcantly more often than when they paraphrased existentials , generics , or universals as any other type of statement ( Mann – Whitney tests , all z s > 3 . 59 , all p s < . 0001 ) . ( That is , universal - as - generic paraphrases were provided reliably more often than uni - versal - as - existential paraphrases , than generic - as - existen - tial paraphrases , than existential - as - generic paraphrases , and so on for all the other possible combinations . ) This ﬁnding also is consistent with the generics - as - default hypothesis , as it reveals a tendency to paraphrase univer - sals as generics . Only 1 % of paraphrases included subtyping language , and 1 . 6 % of them included a subset restriction across the experiment as a whole . Both proportions were signiﬁcantly greater than 0 ( permutation tests , p s < . 001 ) . However , the proportion of paraphrases with subtyping language did not correlate with the proportion of GOG errors ( Kendall’s tau = (cid:3) . 02 , z = . 58 , p = . 56 ) , and neither did the proportion of paraphrases that were restricted to a relevant subset of the kind ( Kendall’s tau = . 02 , z = . 76 , p = . 45 ) . If the GOG effect was driven by these interpretations , then one would expect to see a higher proportion of such para - phrases when the universal was accepted vs . when it was rejected . That is , if the GOG effect was due to participants taking the minority characteristic universals to quantify over subkinds or a restricted subset , then participants who agreed to the universals should be more likely to pro - duce paraphrases that make reference to subtypes or sub - sets . No such effect was observed , however . In light of this ﬁnding , plus the overall low rate of subtyping and restrict - ing paraphrases , Experiment 2b suggests that the GOG ef - fect was not due to subkind or restricted interpretations . An alternative way of assessing whether participants’ answers were due to subkind or restricted interpretations could have been to point out participants’ mistakes to them and then see if and how they attempted to defend their original responses . However , people’s tendency to produce post hoc rationalizations for phenomena that are driven by wholly unrelated causes is well documented ( e . g . , Nisbett & Wilson , 1977 ) . Thus , participants may claim that in fact they were employing a subkind interpretation in order to justify an otherwise incorrect response that was driven by a default to the generic interpretation – just as Nisbett and Wilson’s participants claimed to prefer the detergent Tide because , e . g . their mother used Tide , when in fact their preference was driven by priming effects . For these reasons , we elicited our paraphrases in a neutral con - text ( i . e . without confronting participants about their er - rors ) , in order to minimize the chances of post hoc rationalizations . Experiments 1 , 2a , and 2b reveal a GOG effect that cannot be explained by a subkind interpretation of the assertions , or by a domain - restricted interpretation . However , the results may be trivially attributed to a lack of knowledge of the gender discrepancies in the properties expressed by the minority characteristic predications . Perhaps participants were unaware of the gender discrepancies in the minority characteristic state - ments . To investigate this issue , Experiment 3 tested participants’ knowledge of gender discrepancies for the minority characteristic items – e . g . , whether people know that male horses do not give live birth . Experi - ment 3 also tested whether the GOG effect would be eliminated if people were forced to consider relevant knowledge . Table 2 Percentages of statements that were paraphrased as an existential , as a generic , as a universal , or in some other form as a function of the statement type of the original assertion in Experiment 2b . Paraphrased as Original statement type Existential Generic Universal Existential 62 8 4 Generic 12 59 36 Universal 3 18 51 Other 24 16 9 100 100 100 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 9 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 Experiment 3 : minimizing the generic overgeneralization effect Participants completed the same evaluation task as in Experiment 1 , but were also given a knowledge test in which they judged the truth values of false gendered minority characteristic statements such as ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ or ‘‘female lions have manes . ’’ The study manip - ulated whether the evaluation test was presented before or after the knowledge task . When the evaluation task was presented ﬁrst , we expected to replicate the results of Experiment 1 , with the additional manipulation check that participants were expected to reject statements such as ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ in the subsequent knowledge test . Otherwise , we could attribute performance in Experiment 1 to participants’ lack of knowledge of the gender discrep - ancies in question . When the knowledge test was pre - sented before the evaluation task , then participants may no longer agree with statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ because they would have recently rejected state - ments such as ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ , and so would have counterexamples to the universal statements in mind ( Johnson - Laird & Hasson , 2003 ) . If participants demon - strated knowledge of the gender discrepancies but never - theless showed the GOG effect , then this would suggest that the effect is robust and difﬁcult to eliminate . For the evaluation task , we asked participants from the same population as in Experiment 1 to evaluate the truth values of the eighteen different kinds of assertions . We em - ployed a 6 ( predicate type ) (cid:2) 3 ( statement type ) (cid:2) 2 ( task order ) design , and we presented a total of 72 counterbal - anced target stimuli . These same participants were given a knowledge test , in which they were given counterexam - ples to test their knowledge of the relevant gender discrep - ancies , either before or after the evaluation task . Method Participants and procedure 40 volunteers from the same population as Experiment 1 participated over the Internet for pay . All were native English speakers and none had participated in experiments on generics in the past . Participants judged the truth of each item , one at a time , following the same procedure as in Experiment 1 . Materials and design Experiment 3 used the same set of 72 items used in Experiment 1 , examples of which are given in Table 1 . We used a blocked design . In one block , participants were presented with a knowledge test of 55 statements , 12 of which were gendered versions of the minority characteris - tic generic statements used in Experiment 1 . The state - ments were false , and participants were expected to reject them . Table 3 lists the gendered minority character - istic statements used in the study . The rest of the 55 state - ments were designed to ensure that there were approximately equal numbers of true and false items , and more importantly that participants did not just em - ploy the strategy of rejecting all the gendered statements out of hand . For example , these items included true gen - dered statements such as ‘‘female zebras have stripes’’ . In the other block , participants evaluated the items as they had in Experiment 1 . Half of the participants received the knowledge test before the evaluation task and the other half received it after . The ﬁller statements that were used in Experiment 1 were omitted so as to maximize the likelihood that participants would remember their judg - ments about the gender speciﬁcity of the properties when presented with the knowledge test ﬁrst . Dropping the ﬁller items thus maximized the likelihood that participants would remember that male ducks do not lay eggs , and would reject ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ . Results and discussion Participants were aware of the relevant gender discrep - ancies in minority characteristic predications , except for one item : 73 % of participants believed that female cardi - nals are red . Accordingly , this item was dropped from the analyses of all four experiments . The remaining false gen - dered minority characteristic items were rejected 84 % of the time , and levels of rejection did not vary by whether the knowledge task was presented before or after the eval - uation task , t ( 38 ) = 1 . 00 , p = . 32 , d = . 32 . Proportions of agreement to each of the false gendered minority charac - teristic statements are given in Table 3 . We also included Table 3 Percentage agreement to false gendered minority characteristic statements used in Experiment 3 . Predication type Example Proportion of agreement Agreement rate Minority characteristic Male sheep produce milk 3 Low Minority characteristic Male snakes lay eggs 3 Low Minority characteristic Male horses give live birth 8 Low Minority characteristic Male ducks lay eggs 8 Low Minority characteristic Male pigs suckle their young 8 Low Minority characteristic Male insects lay eggs 18 High Minority characteristic Female lions have manes 20 High Minority characteristic Female deer have antlers 23 High Minority characteristic Female moose have antlers 25 High Minority characteristic Female goats have horns 33 High Minority characteristic Male kangaroos have pouches 33 High Minority characteristic Female cardinals are red a 73 – a Note : participants erroneously agreed with this item 73 % of the time , and so the corresponding ungendered minority characteristic statement , ‘‘car - dinals are red’’ , was dropped from the analyses of Experiments 1 , 2a , 2b , 3 , and 4 . 10 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 items that participants could have deemed gender speciﬁc ( e . g . , ‘‘female zebras have stripes’’ ) , but we found that they were aware of the lack of gender speciﬁcity in those items . These data suggest that the results in Experiment 1 cannot be attributed to mere ignorance on the part of our participants . The overall agreement rates for the evaluation task were comparable to those found in Experiment 1 . Existen - tially quantiﬁed statements were judged as true most of the time ( 91 % ) . Just as in Experiment 1 , quasi - deﬁnitional existentials exhibited a scalar implicature effect ( 76 % ) , i . e . , a relatively low agreement level because of the implication that ‘‘some’’ is taken to mean ‘‘not all’’ ( Bott & Noveck , 2004 ) . Statements in generic form were judged true 77 % of the time , and false generalizations were accepted only 33 % of time . Universal statements were accepted 40 % of the time . We replicated the GOG effect : minority characteristic universals were judged true 41 % of the time . Participants agreed with minority characteris - tic universals 50 % of the time when they were presented before the knowledge test , and this agreement rate dropped to 32 % when presented after the knowledge test . Even when participants had recently rejected statements such as ‘‘males ducks lay eggs’’ , they still showed the over - generalization effect – by agreeing with statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ – almost a third of the time . The effect was reduced but not eliminated . The proportion of agreement data were subjected to a 6 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 2 mixed measures ANOVA . As in Experiment 1 , we found a main effect of predicate type , F 1 ( 5 , 190 ) = 104 . 02 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 5 , 65 ) = 60 . 75 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 5 , 146 ) = 38 . 35 , p < . 0001 , reﬂecting the higher agreement rate to quasi - deﬁnitional ( 86 % ) , majority char - acteristic ( 88 % ) , and minority characteristic statements ( 76 % ) than to majority ( 61 % ) , striking ( 58 % ) , and false generalization statements ( 46 % ) . There was also a main effect of statement type , F 1 ( 2 , 76 ) = 218 . 19 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 2 , 130 ) = 367 . 03 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 2 , 160 ) = 136 . 84 , p < . 0001 , reﬂecting the higher agreement for ‘some’ state - ments ( 91 % ) than for generic statements ( 77 % ) , with the lowest agreement for ‘all’ statements ( 40 % ) , and a signiﬁ - cant interaction between predicate type and statement type , F 1 ( 10 , 380 ) = 59 . 89 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 10 , 130 ) = 50 . 75 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 10 , 356 ) = 27 . 47 , p < . 0001 , again replicat - ing the results in Experiment 1 . Despite the reduction of the overgeneralization effect when universal statements were presented after the knowledge test , the ANOVA did not yield a signiﬁcant effect of task order . Finally , there was no signiﬁcant three - way interaction , F 1 ( 10 , 380 ) = 1 . 71 , p = . 08 , F 2 ( 10 , 130 ) = 2 . 29 , p < . 05 , min - F 0 ( 10 , 441 ) = . 98 , p = . 46 . Fig . 2 displays performance for universal statements as a function of predicate type and task order . Planned com - parisons showed that indeed , minority characteristic uni - versals were accepted less often when evaluated after the knowledge test as compared to before ( 32 % vs . 50 % ) , t ( 38 ) = (cid:3) 2 . 05 , p < . 05 , d = (cid:3) . 65 . Conversely , majority characteristic universals were ac - cepted more often when evaluated after ( 90 % ) vs . before ( 70 % ) the knowledge test , t ( 38 ) = 2 . 95 , p < . 01 , d = . 93 . We interpret this result as a sensitizing effect where the knowledge test , in combination with the subsequent eval - uation task , alerted participants to the difference between minority characteristic and majority characteristic items . Majority characteristic universals may have been accepted more often to potentially compensate for the reduction in agreement to minority characteristic universals . No other simple effects comparisons between task orders were reliable . Planned comparisons between predicate types ( collapsed over the two test orders ) replicated previous ﬁndings , and revealed that minority characteristic assertions were accepted in universal form more than false generalizations , t ( 78 ) = 6 . 31 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 41 , whereas neither majority t ( 78 ) = . 95 , p = . 34 , d = . 21 , nor striking assertions were accepted reliably more than false general - izations , t ( 78 ) = . 48 , p = . 63 , d = . 11 . Importantly , even when the knowledge phase was presented ﬁrst , minority characteristic predictions were accepted more frequently in universal form than false generalizations , t ( 38 ) = 3 . 26 , p < . 005 , d = 1 . 03 . As Table 3 shows , false gendered minority characteristic items were rejected most of the time . However , some items were accepted as much as 33 % of the time , and so Evaluation First E valuation Second Experiment 3 0 20 40 60 80 100 Quasi - definitional Majority characteristic Minority characteristic MajorityStrikingFalse generalization Fig . 2 . Proportions of agreement to universals for Experiment 3 as a function of predicate type , separated by whether the evaluation task came ﬁrst ( before the knowledge test ) or second ( after the knowledge test ) ; 95 % conﬁdence intervals shown . S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 11 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 we examined whether the GOG effect was reduced as a re - sult of participants’ lack of knowledge about speciﬁc items . Five of the 11 remaining minority characteristic items had ignorance rates of less than 10 % ( with an average of 6 % ) – i . e . the false gendered items ( e . g . ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ ) were accepted by fewer than 10 % of participants . The other six items had ignorance rates greater than 10 % , with an average of 25 % of participants failing to reject the false gendered item . If the GOG effect had been driven by igno - rance , then the effect would have been much greater for the second set of items , since participants were less likely to know about the gender differentiations . However , the items for which the ignorance rate was less than 10 % yielded a substantial GOG effect ( 44 % of trials ) , as did those with an ignorance rate greater than 10 % ( 38 % of trials ) . The GOG effects for the two subsets of items did not differ , t ( 78 ) = . 70 , p = . 49 , d = . 16 . Between the knowledge test and the evaluation of minority characteristic universals , there are four possible patterns of response that a given participant could provide for a given minority characteristic item : ( 1 ) A GOG effect response , in which the participant cor - rectly rejected the false gendered minority charac - teristic assertion , but nonetheless accepted the corresponding minority characteristic universal ( e . g . s / he rejected ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ but accepts ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) . ( 2 ) A correct response , in which the participant rejected both the false gendered minority characteristic assertion as well as the minority characteristic uni - versal ( e . g . s / he rejected both ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) . ( 3 ) An ‘ignorant’ response , in which the participant accepted the false gendered minority characteristic assertion and also accepted the minority character - istic universal ( e . g . s / he accepted both ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ and ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) . ( 4 ) A ‘noise’ response , in which the participant accepted the false gendered minority characteristic but rejected the universal ( e . g . s / he accepted ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ but rejected ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ ) . Table 4 shows the distribution of the four types of re - sponses in Experiment 3 as a function of the task order . When the evaluation task came before the knowledge test , participants were equally likely to provide GOG responses ( 40 % of trials ) as they were to produce correct responses ( 44 % of trials ) , t ( 38 ) = . 49 , p = . 63 , d = . 15 . Participants were signiﬁcantly more likely to produce GOG responses than ignorant responses ( 10 % of trials ) , t ( 38 ) = 3 . 36 , p < . 005 , d = 1 . 09 , or noisy responses ( 6 % of trials ) , t ( 38 ) = 4 . 53 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 43 . Further , 17 out of the 20 participants produced more GOG responses than ignorant or noisy re - sponses ( binomial test , p < . 0001 , assuming a prior proba - bility of 1 / 3 ) . When the evaluation task came after the knowledge task , participants made more correct responses ( 65 % ) than GOG responses ( 19 % ) , t ( 38 ) = 5 . 61 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 77 . These two types of responses ( GOG vs . correct ) were en - tered into a Chi - square test by task order , and the test re - vealed a signiﬁcant interaction , v 2 = 11 . 52 , p < . 001 , reﬂecting a higher rate of correct responses when the eval - uation phase was proceeded by the knowledge test . How - ever , despite the reduced proportion of GOG responses when the evaluation task came second , participants still made more GOG responses than noisy responses ( 3 % of tri - als ) , v 2 = 11 . 63 , p < . 0001 , suggesting that the GOG effect was not due to random responding , even when partici - pants completed the knowledge test ﬁrst . Experiment 3 showed that the GOG effect is not entirely due to ignorance . Participants were generally aware of the relevant gender distinctions , which eliminates the possi - bility that overgeneralization effects arise simply out of ignorance . When the evaluation block came ﬁrst , partici - pants produced GOG responses on 40 % of trials – that is , they accepted ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ despite knowing that male ducks do not lay eggs . Thus , the effect found in Exper - iment 1 was not due to ignorance . Participants also sometimes committed the error even when primed with information about the members of a kind who do not possess the predicate in question ( ‘male ducks’ and ‘female lions’ for the examples above ) . Partici - pants who rejected false gendered statements such as ‘‘male ducks lay eggs’’ nevertheless subsequently agreed with the minority characteristic universal statement ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ on 19 % of trials . The reduced GOG effect re - ﬂects that participants recalled the information from the ﬁrst half of the task . It is likely that participants were made more sensitive to whether information was gender spe - ciﬁc , since the knowledge portion highlighted this . They may have proceeded more cautiously in the second half of the task , especially when it came to the minority charac - teristic statements . It is thus not surprising that the GOG effect was reduced ; heightened sensitivity to gender - spe - ciﬁc properties likely lessened the extent to which partici - pants relied on their judgments of generics to evaluate universals , since they would have been more alert to the possibility of error . What is more remarkable is that the GOG effect persisted nonetheless on almost one ﬁfth of tri - als . This experiment thus suggests that the GOG effect is difﬁcult to eliminate entirely . The overgeneralization effect persisted in Experiment 3 despite the availability of information that , in principle , should prevent the error . Would the effect still persist even when a correct alternative is presented to participants ? People might have agreed with statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ because such statements were presented in isolation . Experiment 4 investigated whether partici - pants would still agree with the above statement when they were explicitly provided with correct alternatives such as ‘‘only some ducks lay eggs’’ or ‘‘some ducks don’t lay eggs . ’’ Table 4 Percentages of the four possible types of responses in Experiment 3 as a function of the task order . Task order Type of response GOG effect Correct Ignorance Noise Evaluation ﬁrst 40 44 10 6 Evaluation second 19 65 13 3 12 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 Experiment 4 : the availability of correct alternatives Would people continue to show the overgeneralization error in spite of being presented with correct alternatives ? Experiment 4 addressed this question by allowing partici - pants to judge two competing statements on whether they agreed with one over the other . The pairs of statements dif - fered only in the quantiﬁers used to express them . Half the participants were asked to compare universals ( e . g . , ‘‘all Xs are Ys’’ ) with afﬁrmative existentials ( e . g . , ‘‘only some Xs are Ys’’ ) , and other half compared universals with negative existentials ( e . g . , ‘‘some Xs are not Ys’’ ) . Both formulations of the existential provided correct alternatives to the false universals , and so at least in the case of majority character - istic , minority characteristic , majority , striking , and false generalizationpredications , participantscouldchooseacor - rect answer by selecting the existential . Participants who express a preference for universals over afﬁrmativeexisten - tials ( e . g . , ‘‘only some ducks lay eggs’’ ) or negative existen - tials ( e . g . , ‘‘some ducks don’t lay eggs’’ ) would show the overgeneralization effect . Given the results of our previous experiments , we expected participants to do so for majority characteristic and minority characteristic predications . Method Participants Forty volunteers from the same population as Experi - ments 1 and 2 participated over the Internet for pay . All were native English speakers and none had participated in experiments on generics in the past . Materials and design Experiment 4 used the same set of 72 items used in Experiments1and2 , examplesofwhicharegiveninTable1 . On each trial , participants saw two versions of each item : a universal version and an existential version . Half the partic - ipants received an afﬁrmative existential form ( ‘‘only some Xs are Ys’’ ) and the other half received a negative existential form ( ‘‘some Xs are not Ys’’ ) . This generated a 6 ( predicate type ) (cid:2) 2 ( existential polarity ) design , where the polarity of the existentialwas a between - participants manipulation . Procedure Participants were asked to evaluate each pair of items over the Internet through an interface written in Ajax . The interface consisted of two locations on a horizontal plane , which werelabeled ‘A’ and ‘B’ . The pairs of targetstimuliap - peared in these locations , and the order of their appearance was randomized such that half the time the universals ap - peared in slot ‘A’ and half the time they appeared in slot ‘B’ . Thus , the interface layout appeared as follows : All Xs are Ys Only some Xs are Ys A B Participants indicated whether they agreed with one of the items over the other by responding on a 6 - point Likert scale ranging from 6 ( ‘‘I agree with A more’’ ) to 1 ( ‘‘I agree with B more’’ ) . Results and discussion Responses on the Likert scale were coded so that a mean score of 6 indicates that participants agreed with universals over existentials , a score of 3 . 5 indicates no preference , and a score of 1 indicates that participants agreed with existentials over universals for that particular type of predication . Quasi - deﬁnitional statements were gi - ven a mean rating of 5 . 01 , majority characteristic 4 . 61 , minority characteristic 3 . 56 , majority 1 . 94 , striking 1 . 98 , and false generalizations 1 . 74 . The means of participants’ responses , separated by the polarity of the existential , are given in Table 5 . These differences were assessed via a 6 (cid:2) 2 mixed ANO - VA , which yielded a signiﬁcant main effect of predication type , F 1 ( 5 , 190 ) = 141 . 64 , p < . 0001 , F 2 ( 5 , 65 ) = 62 . 50 , p < . 0001 , min F 0 ( 5 , 127 ) = 43 . 36 , p < . 0001 , but no main ef - fect of polarity and no interaction . Plannedcomparisonsshowedthat minoritycharacteristic universals ( M = 3 . 56 ) were preferred more often than major - ity ( M = 1 . 94 , t ( 78 ) = 8 . 6 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 92 ) , striking ( M = 1 . 98 , t ( 78 ) = 8 . 57 , p < . 0001 , d = 1 . 92 ) , and false general - ization universal assertions ( M = 1 . 74 , t ( 78 ) = 10 . 18 , p < . 0001 , d = 2 . 28 ) . These data indicate a deﬁnite tendency to prefer minority characteristic universals to minority char - acteristic existentials , as compared to striking , majority , or falsegeneralizationuniversal – existentialpairs . Thetendency is a dramatic illustration of the GOG effect , as participants need only recognizethat , for instance , the populationofmale duckssatisﬁestheexistentialstatement‘‘onlysomeduckslay eggs’’ and ‘‘some ducks don’t lay eggs’’ and thus falsiﬁes the universal statement ‘‘all ducks lay eggs . ’’ Use of a Likert scale in this experiment also allowed us to test how conﬁdent participants were in their judgments whentheydisplayedaGOGeffect . Thepreviousstudiesused a forced - choice paradigm , so it is possible that a GOG rate of approximately 50 % ‘yes’ responses indicated that partici - pants were uncertain and responding at chance . However , had they relied on their judgment of the generic to evaluate the universal , as per the generics - as - default hypothesis , they should have been conﬁdent in their answers . Although the mean preference for minority characteristic universals was 3 . 56 in this study , participants’ conﬁdence ratings were signiﬁcantlybimodal ( Hartigan’sdiptest , p < . 001 ) , i . e . , their responses fell nearer to the end - points of the scale rather than the mid - point . In other words , participants who pre - ferred the minority characteristic universal did so with con - ﬁdence . Experiment4demonstratedthatevenwhencorrect Table 5 Mean ratings of agreement ( and standard deviations ) to the universal ( 6 ) or the existential ( 1 ) formulations of assertions as a function of predication type and polarity of the existential in Experiment 4 . Predication type Polarity of the existential statements Afﬁrmative Negative Quasi - deﬁnitional 4 . 95 ( 1 . 92 ) 5 . 16 ( 1 . 61 ) Majority characteristic 4 . 70 ( 1 . 93 ) 4 . 51 ( 1 . 87 ) Minority characteristic 3 . 77 ( 2 . 23 ) 3 . 35 ( 2 . 07 ) Majority 2 . 03 ( 1 . 62 ) 1 . 85 ( 1 . 54 ) Striking 1 . 93 ( 1 . 54 ) 2 . 03 ( 1 . 59 ) False generalizations 1 . 83 ( 1 . 63 ) 1 . 65 ( 2 . 12 ) S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 13 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 alternatives were available at the time of choice , partici - pants showed the GOG effect . General discussion The generic overgeneralization ( GOG ) effect is a robust phenomenon . Participants agreed to statements such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ a substantial portion of the time ( Exper - iment 1 ) , despite knowing that male ducks do not lay eggs ( Experiment 3 ) . Participants endorsed these universals de - spite judging only minutes earlier that only half the kind has the property ( Experiment 3 ) . Participants also fre - quently failed to reject these false universal statements when they were explicitly provided with true alternatives suchas‘‘someducksdonotlayeggs’’ ( Experiment4 ) . Theef - fectisnotlikelytobeattributabletoparticipants’employing a subtyping interpretation on which ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ would be understood to mean all kinds of ducks lay eggs , nor is it likely attributable to participants’ contextually restricting the scope of the universal quantiﬁer so that it only applies to , e . g . , female ducks . Experiment 2a showed a GOG effect after participants were primed with population information ( ‘‘thereare431millionducksintheworld’’ ) de - signed to encourage an individual - based interpretation of thestatements , andtoencourageparticipantstounderstand the quantiﬁer to range over every single duck in the world ( Stanley & Szabo , 2000 ) . While the GOG effect occurred at a lower rate in this context , it still occurred on a substantial portion of trials . The lower rate may have been due to elim - inating any subkind and restricted interpretations , or alter - natively the numerical population information may have putparticipantsinamorecarefulandanalyticframeofmind ( Alter et al . , 2007 ) . Further , Experiment 2b found very little evidence of subtyping interpretations or of domain - re - stricted interpretations when participants provided para - phrases of the statements they had evaluated . Importantly , there was no reliable correlation between subtyping or re - stricted paraphrases and acceptance of universal state - ments , which would be expected if the GOG effect were due to participants employing subtyping interpretations . The ﬁndings reported here are instead better explained by the hypothesis that the GOG effect – or at least a substantial portionoftheobservedeffect – wasduetoparticipantsrely - ing on their judgments of the corresponding ( true ) generic , and so failing to properly evaluate the universal in question . Ifthisisso , thentheeffectthatHollanderetal . ( 2002 ) and Tardif et al . ( in press ) identiﬁed in preschoolers persists into adulthood , asthegenerics - as - defaulthypothesiswouldpre - dict . The hypothesis that generics express primitive , default generalizationsexplainsarangeofﬁndingsincludingacqui - sition data , cross - linguistic syntactic patterns , and errors in reasoning tasks . For example , if generics express children’s default generalizations , then this would explain why gener - ics are acquired early despite their semantic complexity ( Carlson & Pelletier , 1995 ; Gelman , 2003 ; Gelman , 2010 ; Gelman & Brandone , 2010 ; Gelman & Raman , 2003 ; Graham et al . , in press ; Leslie , 2007 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . It would also ex - plain why generic forms are always less syntactically marked than quantiﬁcational ones ( Chomsky , 2000 ; Dahl , 1985 ; Krifka et al . , 1995 ; Leslie , 2008 ) . Importantly , thegenerics - as - defaulthypothesisalsopre - dicts that quantiﬁed statements will sometimes be incor - rectly interpreted as generics . This prediction , if correct , would explain Jönsson and Hampton’s ( 2006 ) inverse con - junctionfallacy , LeslieandGelman’s ( submittedforpublica - tion ) ﬁnding that quantiﬁed statements are frequently recalled as generics , and Hollander et al . ’s ( 2002 ) and Tardif et al . ’s ( in press ) ﬁnding concerning preschoolers’ interpre - tationsof ‘‘all’’ and‘‘some . ’’ The studiespresented inthis pa - perrepresentafurthertestofthepredictionsofthegenerics - as - default hypothesis . Consistent with the hypothesis , we found that adults show a robust tendency to evaluate some universal statements as though they were generics . Partici - pants did so across a range of contexts , including one in which they were presented with population information concerning the kind ( Experiment 2 ) , one in which they were ﬁrst primed to consider the counterexamples ( Experiment 3 ) and one in which they were presented with correct alter - natives to the universal ( Experiment 4 ) . Interestingly , our ﬁndings appear to be limited to pred - ications that involve properties that are characteristic of the kind . Our focus in these experiments was on minority characteristic universals such as ‘‘all ducks lay eggs , ’’ since these universals offered the clearest illustration of the GOG effect . However , participants also accepted majority char - acteristic universals such as ‘‘all tigers have stripes’’ , de - spite the fact that these predications are not strictly true in universal form . After all , there are stripeless tigers ( as Siegfried and Roy’s performances attest ) . Our experiments did not control for whether or not people are aware that some tigers lack stripes , so we cannot be sure that these statements were not accepted out of simple ignorance . However , Jönsson and Hampton’s ( 2006 ) studies suggests that something more interesting than ignorance may be driving these results . Forty - six percent of the time their participants judged that a more inclusive universal such as ‘‘all ravens are black’’ was more likely to be true than a narrower one such as ‘‘all young jungle ravens are black’’ – even when the two statements were presented side by side for comparison ( Jönsson & Hampton , 2006 , Study 5 ) . Either this constitutes a clear failure to appreciate the log - ical features of universal statements , or else their partici - pants were interpreting these universals as generics ( Jönsson , personal communication ) . It should be further noted here than nearly all of Jönsson and Hampton’s items would count as majority characteristic predications according to our criteria , and so our participants’ willing - ness to accept majority characteristic universals could potentially be due to their interpreting them as generics also . Similarly , Leslie and Gelman’s ( submitted for publica - tion ) memory task – in which adults often recalled univer - sal statements as generics – exclusively used items that would count as majority characteristic by our criteria . Jönsson and Hampton’s results , together with Leslie and Gelman’s , suggest that majority characteristic universals may be interpreted as generics , and our results suggest that this is true of minority characteristic universals as well . We did not ﬁnd that majority or striking universals were accepted , however – in our studies , the GOG effect was limited to minority characteristic and possibly majority characteristic items . These ﬁndings support the 14 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 hypothesis that the GOG effect is limited to cases where a characteristic property is predicated of the kind . Part of the explanation here may be that characteristic properties are usually held by all the normal members of a kind , andsoGOGeffectsconcerningsuchpropertiesmayof - ten constitute relatively minor errors . Thus , adults could save cognitive effort by relying on the default generic inter - pretation to evaluate the universal , without risking signiﬁ - cant error . The error only becomes signiﬁcant in the case of these gender - speciﬁc properties . For non - characteristic properties , however , the risk of error is more prominent , and so adults may have learned not to rely on their judg - ments of generics for such items . One outstanding question iswhethertherearedevelopmentaldifferencesintheextent of the GOG effect – e . g . might young children show GOG ef - fects even if the property is not characteristic ? Hollander etal . ’s ( 2002 ) resultssuggestthattheGOGeffectmaypoten - tially be broader in scope for young children . However , they did not use a wide enough range of items to support deﬁnite conclusions . Future research is needed to address this ques - tion , andtherebyshedmorelightonwhyadultsonlyexhibit this effect when the property is characteristic . In sum , the generic overgeneralization effect – the ten - dency to judge universally quantiﬁed statements to be true whenthecorrespondinggenericistrue – occursforminority characteristic statements like ‘‘all ducks lay eggs’’ . These universally quantiﬁed statements were accepted by partici - pantsabouthalfthetime , despitetheirknowingthatonlyfe - male ducks lay eggs . These ﬁndings are plausibly due to participantshavingatendencytotreatuniversalstatements as though they were generics , as one would predict on Leslie’s ( 2008 ) and Gelman’s ( 2010 ) hypothesis that gener - ics express primitive , default generalizations ( see also Csibra & Gergely , 2009 ; Gelman & Brandone , 2010 ; Hollander et al . , 2009 ) . This explanation , if correct , has the potential to apply to a range of disparate phenomena , such as Hollander et al . ’s ( 2002 ) developmental ﬁndings , Jönsson and Hampton’s ( 2006 ) Inverse Conjunction Fallacy , and Leslie and Gelman’s ( submitted for publication ) memory task . Thesediverseﬁndingsmayhaveacommonunderlying explanation : people have a tendency to treat universally quantiﬁed statements as though they were generics . This tendency is what one would expect if generics involve more basic generalizations , while universally quantiﬁed state - ments involve more sophisticated , non - default ones . Acknowledgments We are grateful to Paula Rubio Fernandez , Axit Fumero , Susan Gelman , Geoffrey Goodwin , Phil Johnson - Laird , Mark Johnston , Alan M . Leslie , Louis Lee , Ray Nickerson , Sandeep Prasada , and Carlos Santamaria for their helpful comments . These studies were supported in part by a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship awarded to the second author . Appendix Materials for Experiments 1 , 2 , and 3 in generic form . Predication type Item ( in generic form ) Predication type Item ( in generic form ) Quasi - deﬁnitional Ants are insects Majority Barns are red Quasi - deﬁnitional Bachelors are unmarried Majority Bars are noisy Quasi - deﬁnitional Cats are animals Majority Bikers have tattoos Quasi - deﬁnitional Dogs are mammals Majority Cars have radios Quasi - deﬁnitional Elms are trees Majority Clocks are round Quasi - deﬁnitional Mushrooms are fungi Majority Italians eat spaghetti Quasi - deﬁnitional Poodles are dogs Majority Jackets have zippers Quasi - deﬁnitional Preschoolers cannot vote Majority Pigeons sit on statues Quasi - deﬁnitional Rectangles are geometric ﬁgures Majority Pigs are kept in pens Quasi - deﬁnitional Sows are pigs Majority Shoes have laces Quasi - deﬁnitional US Presidents are over 35 Majority Squirrels live in parks Quasi - deﬁnitional Vixens are foxes Majority Subways are crowded Majority characteristic Bees have wings Striking Birds carry avian ﬂu Majority characteristic Cats have whiskers Striking Coyotes kill pets Majority characteristic Cheetahs run fast Striking Insects carry viruses Majority characteristic Cows eat grass Striking Lions eat people Majority characteristic Dogs have tails Striking Mosquitoes carry malaria Majority characteristic Horses have four legs Striking Pit bulls maul people Majority characteristic Kangaroos hop Striking Rats carry disease Majority characteristic Leopards have spots Striking Rottweillers maul children Majority characteristic Pencils are wooden Striking Sharks attack swimmers Majority characteristic Ravens are black Striking Strokes cause paralysis Majority characteristic Sparrows have wings Striking Ticks carry Lyme disease Majority characteristic Tigers have stripes Striking Tigers attack people Minority characteristic Cardinals are red a False generalization Animals are mammals Minority characteristic Deer have antlers False generalization Athletes are students ( continued on next page ) S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 15 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 References Alter , A . L . , Oppenheimer , D . M . , Epley , N . , & Eyre , R . N . ( 2007 ) . Overcoming intuition : Metacognitive difﬁculty activates analytic reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 136 , 569 – 576 . Baldwin , D . A . , Markman , E . , & Melartin , R . ( 1993 ) . Infants’ ability to draw inferences about nonobvious object properties : Evidence from exploratory play . Child Development , 64 , 711 – 728 . Bott , L . , & Noveck , I . A . ( 2004 ) . Some utterances are underinformative : The onset and time course of scalar inferences . Journal of Memory and Language , 51 , 437 – 457 . Carlson , G . ( 1977 ) . Reference to kinds in English . PhD dissertation , University of Massachusetts , Amherst . Carlson , G . , & Pelletier , F . J . ( 1995 ) . The generic book . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Chambers , C . G . , Graham , S . A . , & Turner , J . N . ( 2008 ) . When hearsay trumps evidence : How generic language guides preschoolers’ inferences about unfamiliar things . Language and Cognitive Processes , 23 , 749 – 766 . Chomsky , N . ( 2000 ) . New horizons in the study of language and mind . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cimpian , A . , Brandone , A . C . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Generic statements require little evidence for acceptance but have powerful implications . Cognitive Science , 34 ( 8 ) , 1452 – 1482 . Cimpian , A . , Gelman , S . A . , & Brandone , A . C . ( 2010 ) . Theory - based considerations inﬂuence the interpretation of generic sentences . Language and Cognitive Processes , 25 ( 2 ) , 261 – 276 . Clark , H . H . ( 1973 ) . The language - as - ﬁxed - effect fallacy : A critique of language statistics in psychological research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 335 – 359 . Cohen , A . ( 1996 ) . Think generic : The meaning and use of generic sentences . PhD dissertation , Carnegie Mellon University . Connolly , A . , Fodor , J . , Gleitman , L . R . , & Gleitman , H . ( 2007 ) . Why stereotypes don’t even make good defaults . Cognition , 103 , 1 – 22 . Csibra , G . , & Gergely , G . ( 2009 ) . Natural pedagogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13 , 148 – 153 . Dahl , O . ( 1985 ) . Tense and aspect systems . Oxford : Blackwell . Declerk , R . ( 1986 ) . The manifold interpretations of generic sentences . Lingua , 68 , 149 – 188 . Gelman , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The essential child . New York : Oxford University Press . Gelman , S . A . ( 2010 ) . Generics as a window onto young children’s concepts . In F . J . Pelletier ( Ed . ) , Kinds , things , and stuff : The cognitive side of generics and mass terms . New directions in cognitive science ( Vol . 12 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Bloom , P . ( 2007 ) . Developmental changes in the understanding of generics . Cognition , 105 ( 1 ) , 166 – 183 . Gelman , S . A . , & Brandone , A . C . ( 2010 ) . Fast - mapping placeholders : Using words to talk about kinds . Language Learning and Development , 6 , 223 – 240 . Gelman , S . A . , Coley , J . , Rosengren , K . , Hartman , E . , & Pappas , A . ( 1998 ) . Beyond labeling : The role of parental input in the acquisition of richly structured categories ( Vol . 63 , No . 1 ) . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development ( SRCD ) , Series no 235 . Ann Arbor , MI : SRCD . Gelman , S . A . , Goetz , P . J . , Sarnecka , B . S . , & Flukes , J . ( 2008 ) . Generic language in parent – child conversations . Language Learning and Development , 4 , 1 – 31 . Gelman , S . A . , Hollander , M . , Star , J . , & Heyman , G . D . ( 2000 ) . The role of language in the construction of kinds . In D . Medin ( Ed . ) . Psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 39 , pp . 201 – 263 ) . New York : Academic Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Raman , L . ( 2003 ) . Preschool children use linguistic form class and pragmatic cues to interpret generics . Child Development , 74 , 308 – 325 . Gelman , S . A . , Star , J . R . , & Flukes , J . E . ( 2002 ) . Children’s use of generics in inductive inferences . Journal of Cognition and Development , 3 , 179 – 199 . Gelman , S . A . , & Tardif , T . ( 1998 ) . A cross - linguistic comparison of generic noun phrases in English and Mandarin . Cognition , 66 , 215 – 248 . Geurts , B . ( 1985 ) . Generics . Journal of Semantics , 4 . Goldin - Meadow , S . , Gelman , S . A . , & Mylander , C . ( 2005 ) . Expressing generic concepts without a language model . Cognition , 96 , 109 – 126 . Graham , S . A . , Nayer , S . L . , & Gelman , S . A . ( in press ) . Two - year - olds use the generic / non - generic distinction to guide their inferences about novel kinds . Child Development . Graham , S . A . , Kilbreath , C . S . , & Welder , A . N . ( 2001 ) . Words and shape similarity guide 13 - month - olds’ inferences about nonobvious object properties . In J . D . Moore & K . Stenning ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty third annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 352 – 357 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hollander , M . A . , Gelman , S . A . , & Raman , L . ( 2009 ) . Generic language and judgments about category membership : Can generics highlight properties as central ? Language and Cognitive Processes , 24 , 481 – 505 . Hollander , M . A . , Gelman , S . A . , & Star , J . ( 2002 ) . Children’s interpretation of generic noun phrases . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 6 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . , & Hasson , U . ( 2003 ) . Counterexamples in sentential reasoning . Memory & Cognition , 31 , 1105 – 1113 . Jönsson , M . L . , & Hampton , J . A . ( 2006 ) . The inverse conjunction fallacy . Journal of Memory and Language , 55 , 317 – 334 . Keates , J . , & Graham , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Category labels or attributes : Why do labels guide infants’ inductive inferences ? Psychological Science , 19 , 1287 – 1293 . Khemlani , S . , Leslie , S . J . , & Glucksberg , S . ( 2009 ) . Generics , prevalence , and default inferences . In N . Taatgen , H . van Rijn , J . Nerbonne , & L . Schomaker ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 31st annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Khemlani , S . , Leslie , S . J . , Glucksberg , S . , & Rubio - Fernandez , P . ( 2007 ) . Do ducks lay eggs ? How humans interpret generic assertions . In D . S . McNamara & J . G . Trafton ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 29th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Nashville , TN : Cognitive Science Society . Krifka , M . , Pelletier , F . J . , Carlson , G . , ter Meulen , A . , Chierchia , G . , & Link , G . ( 1995 ) . Genericity : An introduction . In G . Carlson & F . J . Pelletier ( Eds . ) , The generic book ( pp . 1 – 125 ) . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Lawler , J . ( 1973 ) . Studies in English generics . University of Michigan Papers in Linguistics , 1 . Leslie , S . J . ( 2007 ) . Generics and the structure of the mind . Philosophical Perspectives , 21 , 375 – 405 . Leslie , S . J . ( 2008 ) . Generics : Cognition and acquisition . The Philosophical Review , 117 ( 1 ) , 1 – 49 . Leslie , S . J . & Gelman , S . A . ( submitted for publication ) . Quantiﬁed statements are recalled as generics : Evidence from preschool children and adults . Appendix ( continued ) Predication type Item ( in generic form ) Predication type Item ( in generic form ) Minority characteristic Ducks lay eggs False generalization Bees are worker bees Minority characteristic Goats have horns False generalization Books are paperbacks Minority characteristic Horses give live birth False generalization Canadians are right - handed Minority characteristic Insects lay eggs False generalization Computers are pcs Minority characteristic Kangaroos have pouches False generalization Ducks are female Minority characteristic Lions have manes False generalization Engineers are male Minority characteristic Moose have antlers False generalization Humans are over three years old Minority characteristic Pigs suckle their young False generalization Lions are male Minority characteristic Sheep produce milk False generalization Teachers are female Minority characteristic Snakes lay eggs False generalization Trees are deciduous trees a This item was dropped from the analyses reported in the paper ( see Table 3 ) . 16 S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005 Leslie , S . J . , Khemlani , S . , Prasada , S . , & Glucksberg , S . ( 2009 ) . Conceptual and linguistic distinctions between singular and plural generics . Proceedings of the 31st annual cognitive science society . Amsterdam : Cognitive Science Society . Medin , D . L . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Psychological essentialism . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 179 – 195 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Nisbett , R . , & Wilson , T . ( 1977 ) . Telling more than we can know : Verbal reports on mental processes . Psychological Review , 84 , 231 – 259 . Osherson , D . N . , Smith , E . E . , Wilkie , O . , Lopez , A . , & Shaﬁr , E . ( 1990 ) . Category - based induction . Psychological Review , 97 , 185 – 200 . Papafragou , A . , & Schwarz , N . ( 2005 / 2006 ) . Most wanted . Language Acquisition , 13 , 207 – 251 . Pappas , A . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1998 ) . Generic noun phrases in mother – child conversations . Journal of Child Language , 25 , 19 – 33 . Pelletier , F . J . , & Asher , N . ( 1997 ) . Generics and defaults . In J . van Benthem & A . ter Meulen ( Eds . ) , Handbook of logic and language ( pp . 1125 – 1179 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Prasada , S . , & Dillingham , E . ( 2006 ) . Principled and statistical connections in common sense conception . Cognitive Science , 99 ( 1 ) , 73 – 112 . Prasada , S . , & Dillingham , E . ( 2009 ) . Representation of principled connections : A window onto the formal aspect of common sense perception . Cognition , 33 ( 3 ) , 401 – 448 . Rosch , E . ( 1978 ) . Principles of categorization . In E . Rosch & B . B . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categorization ( pp . 27 – 48 ) . Hillsdale : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Sloman , S . A . ( 1993 ) . Feature - based induction . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 231 – 280 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1998 ) . Categorical inference is not a tree : The myth of inheritance hierarchies . Cognitive Psychology , 35 , 1 – 33 . Stanley , J . ( 2007 ) . Language in context : Selected essays . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Stanley , J . , & Szabo , Z . ( 2000 ) . On quantiﬁer domain restriction . Mind and Language , 15 ( 2 and 3 ) , 219 – 261 . Tardif , T . , Gelman , S . A . , Fu , X . , & Zhu , L . ( in press ) . Acquisition of generic noun phrases in Chinese : Learning about lions withoutan‘‘ - s’’ . Journal of Child Language . S . - J . Leslie et al . / Journal of Memory and Language xxx ( 2011 ) xxx – xxx 17 Please cite this article in press as : Leslie , S . - J . , et al . Do all ducks lay eggs ? The generic overgeneralization effect . Journal of Memory and Language ( 2011 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2010 . 12 . 005