Biophysical Factors Leading to VILI N . Vlahakis , J . C . Berrios , and R . D . Hubmayr Introduction In the past decade , the ventilatory management of patients with injured lungs has undergone a major paradigm shift . Whereas the old paradigm considered the sole goal of mechanical ventilation to be the correction of gas exchange failure , the new paradigm seekstoprovide ‘physical therapy’toaninjuredlung . Thisnew paradigm embraces the hypothesis that both rate and amplitude of lung deformation affect numerous lung cell metabolic functions and consequently modulate transcellular as well as intercellular fluid transport , mechanisms of inflammation , host defense , and wound repair . These insights have profoundly altered the ventilator manage - ment of patients with injured lungs [ 1 ] . Although it is often difficult to assess the contribution of mechanical lung injury at the bedside relative to other disease mechanisms , a wealth of experimental and clinical data indicates that ventilator associated lung injury indeed exists [ 2 , 3 ] and that it contributes to the mortality of patients [ 1 ] . Deformation of the Lung during Breathing Micro - mechanics of the Normal Lung Itisremarkablethatin2003 there isstillconsiderableuncertaintyaboutthestresses and strains ( a measure of deformation ) of lung cellsand connective tissue elements during breathing . It has been appreciated for more than 50 years that the topog - raphical distributions of transpulmonary pressure and volume are non - uniform and the cause of this non - uniformity is generally understood ( reviewed recently in [ 4 ] ) . Accordingly , the lungs and the boundary structures to which they must conform ( ribcage , diaphragm abdomen , heart and mediastinum ) are considered gravitationally deformed elastic solids . The shape matching of lung and boundary structures imposes a non - uniform strain field . Contrary to initial hypotheses the effects of gravity on the lungs themselves is only a minor determinant of non - uni - formstrain . Thegravitationaldeformationsofheartanddiaphragm / abdomenturn out to be much more important determinants of regional volume and ventilation . However , with increasing precision of methods for measuring regional lung func - tion it has become clear that there is considerable small scale heterogeneity in lung parenchymal strain that cannot be explained by a gravitational mechanism [ 5 ] . Measurements of regional lung expansion in dogs suggested that the linear dimensions of the lung increase by as much as 40 % during an inspiratory capacity maneuver [ 6 ] . However , considering lung architecture this is a gross overestimate of lung cell and tissue strain . The lung parenchyma is a cell and connective tissue network that is distorted by surface tension . Embedded in this network are airways and blood vessels , which resist deformation to a greater extent than the surround - ing parenchyma . This difference in mechanical properties is an important source of interdependence [ 7 ] . Models of lung micro - mechanics that are based on mor - phometric analyses of perfusion fixed tissue specimens consider the helical net - work of elastic and collagen fibers that form the alveolar ducts as the primary tissue stress bearing elements [ 8 , 9 ] . The alveolar walls are largely supported by surface tension and simply unfold as lung volume increases [ 10 ] . This explains why macroscopic strains computed from lung regions > 1 cm 3 may grossly overestimate the stretch experienced by lung cells during breathing . Aware of this limitation , Tschumperlin and Margulies traced the lengths of alveolar basement membranes in electron microscopic images of alveolar walls and estimated that their area changed by no more than 35 % during an inspiratory capacity maneuver [ 11 ] . This corresponds toalinearstrainof ~ 15 % . Theseinvestigatorsalsosuggestedthatmost of the stretch experienced by alveolar lining cells occurs at high lung volumes , i . e . , after the alveolar wall has fully unfolded . It should be noted that the need for tissue fixationandtheassociatedchangesinhydrationandsurfacetensionleavelingeringquestionsaboutthevalidityofallcurrentalveolarmicro - strain estimates . Alterna - tive imaging approaches that enable morphometric measurements on live speci - mens ought to eliminate remaining uncertainties in this field . Micro - mechanics of the Injured Lung Data on the micro - mechanics of injured lungs are few and their interpretation is controversial [ 12 , 13 ] . The long held view that the heavy injured lung collapses under its own weight has been challenged [ 4 , 14 ] . The challenge rests on the assertion that fluid accumulates in small airways and distal airspaces which pre - vents rather promotes the collapse of dependent lung tissue . The effects on gas exchange , i . e . , shunt and low ventilation / perfusion ratio ( V / Q ) , are similar , regard - less of whether one views the dependent lung as atelectatic ( the alveoli are airless and collapsed ) or expanded by edema . However , the stresses to which airway and alveolar lining cells are exposed during breathing could be quite different . Two attributes of the injured lungs dominate injury mechanisms : 1 ) the number of alveoli capable of expanding during inspiration is decreased ; 2 ) the distribution of liquid and surface tension in distal airspaces and hence the local impedances to lung expansion are heterogeneous . The first attribute was identified by Gattinoni’s group and was characterized as “baby lung” [ 15 ] . It explains the increased risk of lung injury from regional overexpansion . The second attribute , namely heteroge - neity in regional impedances to lung expansion , has several consequences . One is theshearstressbetweenneighboring , interdependentunitsthatoperateatdifferent 214 N . Vlahakis , J . C . Berrios , and R . D . Hubmayr