The Golem at Large : What You Should Know About Technology by Harry Collins and Trevor Pinch . Cambridge , U . K . : Cambridge University Press , 1998 . 162 pp . $ 20 HC . his thin book is the second volume of a con - templated “Colem series . ” The first volume T was titled The Golem : What You Should Know About Science and like that , this one describes seven case studies , or “stories” , as the authors call them . Bach story involves specific technological events : 1 ) The role of the Patriot missile in the Gulf War of 1991 . 2 ) Assigning blame for the Challenger explosion of 1986 . 3 ) Two specific demonstrations LO “prove” techno - logical desiderata . 4 ) Disputes about the origins of oil . 5 ) The failures of macroeconomic modeling . 6 ) The effects on sheep in Cumbria ( Britain ) of 7 ) Cures for AIDS and lay expertise . A golcm , they say , is a powerful mythological creature who will follow orders and do your work but it is clumsy and dangerous . It is not im evil creature but it is a little daft . The cases they describe flesh out the substance of their conception of “Golem Tcchnol - ogy . ” It is necessary to outline at least a few of their case studies in order to make comprehensible their conception of the golem . “Truth , ” it is said , “is the first casualty of war . ” But , say the authors , this misses the “rather more important point that a principal weapon of war is lies . ” This was no less true of President Bush’s war against Saddam Hussein in 1991 . The perfonnance of the US . Patriot missile against the Iraqi Scuds is the focus of their sto - Norman Balahanian can be reached at 6232 NW 32nd Drive , Gainesville , FL 32653 . Email : balaban - ian @ ece . njZ . edu . Chcrnobyl nuclear fallout . ry . ’ h o weeks after the start oE the war , Allied com - mander General Norman Schwaifzkopf said : “It’s one hundred percent so far . Of 33 [ Scuds ] engaged [ by Patriot ] , there have been 33 destroyed . ” Two weeks later , “President Bush said forty - one of the forty - two missiles had been ‘intcrccpted’ . ” Even two wccks after the end of the war , tcstilying before Congrcss , US . Army officials stated that “forty - five out of forty - sev - en Scuds had been intercepted by Patriot . ” Nolice the difference in terminology : destroyed vs intcrcepted . Late in 1991 , Theodore Postol , a profes - sor in the M . I . T . Defense - and Arms Control - Studies Program , published a detailed study of all the filmed evidence of the “interceptions” and came to the con - clusion “that Patriot’s perfonnance ‘resulted in what may have been an almost total failure’ . ”’ Others arrived at similar conclusions . In Congressional testimony in 1992 , Representative John Conyers was able to elicit from General Robert Drolet that , yes , President Bush was correct when he said that forty - one out of forty - two Scuds had been ‘intercepted ; “he did not say killed or destroyed @ ut , Gen . Scbwwtzkopf did ! ] ; he said intercepted : ’ And what does “interceplcd” mean ? That the Patriot and Scud “passed each other in the sky” ! During thcsc heruings , representatives of the US . General Accounting Once there is no way to conclusively determine how many targets the Patriot killed or failed to kill . . , , ” A great deal of debatc has ensued over the relative success of Patriot . With the low - speed videos taken , the missiles travel too far between frames to really confirm what happened . Because of high missile speed , extremely high - speed , high - resolution photog - raphy would have been necessary to verify hits . But such equipment to collect data could not be used , according to the GAO testimony to Congress , unless “the trajectory of both the Patriot and its target are known in advance , ” an obvious impossibility . There is a hint of the golem here . However , the deceptive state - ments of political and military leaders are not related to the technological golem but to normal politics . The second “story” concerns the explosion of the space shuttle Challengcr in 1986 , about which SSIT has ‘While n Visifixfi Scholar of M . l . % , I anendeed rcrnitiarr if , I991 pm - serircd by Post01 011 hir findings ( prim Io pabikolion ) deconslucr - ing the DoD videos of the “inre , cqtiuiir” and showing rhe alleged hits io be misscr . IEEE Technology and Society Magazine , Winter 1999 / 2000 long concerned itself . Investigation quickly revealed that the causc of the accidcnt was the failure of onc ol the O - rings that sealed the gap between segments of the rocket’s booster . The escaping gases caused the lire that resulted in the disaster . Thc major qucstion boilcd down to why the failure of one of the O - rings ? An immediate answer was that O - rings lose resilience at low tempera - tures and the temperature at the launch site the previous night had dropped to unprcccdcntcd low values . Engi - neers , including Roger Boisjoly from Morton Thiokol , builders of thc Solid Rocket Boostcr , had warned against the launch for that reason . Their managers , who wcrc under huge political pressure to maintain schcdulc , had ovcssoled them . So had the NASA engineers . The authors’ take on the matter is : “Ncw research 011 the Challenger launch deci - sion by Diane Vaughan shows that the dangcrs of thc O - rings wcrc not ignorcd bccausc of cco - nopic or political pressures . They were ignored because the consensus of the engineers and managcrs who took part in thc IatcIul celccon - fercnce [ the previous night ] was that , based on engineering data and their past safety practices , there was no clear reason not to launch that night . With twenty - twenty hindsight we can see they were wrong , but on the night in question , the decision they reached was reasonable in the light of rcasonablc technical cxpcrtisc . ” The authors then go on to detail the many tests conducted on thc O - ring problcin over thc prcccding ycars , in whosc outcoincs Thiokol and NASA cngi - neers often disagreed , taking positions at variance witli those they took on the night before the launch . Aside From a relatcd 1991 arliclc by Pinch , listed in the References but from which nothing is directly quotcd , the authors’ cntirc casc is bascd on Dianc Vaughan’s 1996 Chicago University Press book The Challenger . Lauizch Decision . Thcy givc I8 quotations from Vaughan set off from the main text , some quite extensive ( one almost a lull page ) , and many other briel oncs within the tcxt . One of the general concepts regarding technology to emerge froin the authors’ studies is that of experimenter’s regress , a term that “refers to the catch - 22 in research frontier experiments where the outcome is contested , ” “The logic of the situation is like this : what is thc cossect outcoinc ol thc tcst ? Is therc a largc or small gap‘ ? The correct outcome depends on whether there is a large or small gap to detect . To find this out we must devise a good test and have a look . But we don’t know what a good test is until we have tried it and found that it givcs the correct result . But we don’t know what ~ IEEE Technology and Society Magazine , Winter 1999l2000 the correct result is until we havc built a good tcst . . . and so on , potentially ad infinitum . ’’ Experimenier’s regress is a concept the authors use in each of the cases under study . It is also manifest in the PatriotEcud controvcrsy concerning hits or misses . It is a component of the golemness of tcchnology . Collins and Pinch givc a dctailcd description of the dcbatcs on tests to be performed on the Solid Rocket Booster , and other componcnts of the shuttle , and the rcsults ofihe tests themselves . At one point in the nar - rative , they say : “It was at this point , in July 1981 , that Rogcr Roisjoly joined the Thiokol team . ” They go on to dcscribc how Boisjoly had detailed discussions regarding testing of O - rings witli his NASA cotintcr - part over “seven or eight months” . “Both cnginccring communitics ackuowledged that the joint did not work as per design but they felt that it worked suffi - ciently wcll that it win an acceptable risk . ” The authors do give a very detailcd dcscription or launch evcnts in 1985 , the resulting problems ( includ - ing with the O - rings ) and ti great dcal of testing fol - lowing thcsc events , building their case that the engi - neering conselisus on both sides was that : “ . . . . all the engineers directly involved , including Roger Boisjoly , still considered the joint to be an acceptable risk . ” The authors acknowlcdgc that , during the thvce - hour teleconference between NASA and Thiokol ( 34 Thiokol and NASA engineers and managers the night preceding the morning launch of Challenger ) Thiokol rccom - mended delaying the launch 011 the basis OC tcmpcraturc until thc tcmperaturc rcached at least 53” F , this being the calculatcd O - ring temperature on the previous cold - est launch . But NASA viewed temperature as a ncw cri - terion sprung at than at the very last minute . NASA inanagemcnt agucd strenuously against postponing . The authors say : “All participants at the teleconference agreed that Thiokol had a weak engineering mgument . ” Thiokol was permitted an off - line caucus that lasted 30 minutes . Engineers “Boisjoly and Ainie Thompson vigorously defended their position . , , . The othcr cngi - neers wcrc mainly silcni , ” Thiokol Senior Vice President Jerry Mason “put thc counter arguments” and stated that ”if engineering could not produce any new information it was time to make il management dccision . ’’ Boisjoly and Thompson made their case onc morc timc . The four senior managers then votcd to launch , onc of ihan only acter Senior VP Mason said to him : “It’s time to take off your enginccring hat and put on your management hat . ” The final quote from Vaughan is said to come from a previously unincntioncd “Thiokol’s Joc Kilminstcr : ” “There was a peiceived difference of opinion among thc cnginccring people in the room , and when you have a difference of opinion and you are asked for a single engineering opinion , then someone has to collect that information from both sides and makc a jodgement . ” Kilminster’s status at Thiokol is not mentioned : The authors’ conclusion : “What has emerged . . . is engineer , manager . . . public - relations person ? that the prevailing story of amoral managers ruling honest eiiginecrs is too simple . Th long - running disagreements and uncertainties about the joint hut engineering consensus by the timc of the teleconference was that it was an acceptable risk . ” My confidence in the authors was shaken several times during their narrative . TWO pages after they mention Boisjoly joining Thiokol “at this point” , and after giving several Vaughan quotes rcgarding Boisjoly discussions with NASA engineers and state - ments about his disagrccment with NASA engineers over the O - ring gap size , they say “Now the ultimate test , , , could take placc - the first flight . , . . On 12 April 198 I , the first Space Shuttle was launched . ” But Boisjoly did not join Thiokol until 3 months after the first shuttle was launched . There is some obvious con - fusion in the narrative sequcnce that could have some bearing on their statement that there was “engineering There is , as well , an inconsisleiicy in their descrip - tion of the 30 - minute Thiokol off - line caucus during the teleconkrence . On the one hand , they say two Thiokol cngineers “vigorously” opposed the launch on the basis ol temperature during the caucus , while the othcr cngineers remained silent . On the other hand , they then present a “Kilminster” quote concerning a “perceived difference ol opinion among the enginecr - ing peoplc in the soom . ” IC the difference was merely perceived by the scnior managers , but unvoiced , can thc rest of the authors’ rationale that there was “cngi - neering conscnsus” and “acceptable risk” hold water ? Confidcncc in the authors is shaken also by their identifying the Marshall Spacc Flight Center as being located in “Huntsville , Texas” . ( As cxoneration , it can be noted that the authors are Britishllrish , after all , and Texas is pretty big and might include Alabama ! ) that it was an acceptable risk . ” The third casc consists of an cxamination or two large - scale 1984 events that were stagcd as “demon - strations” to convince the public of the truth of what those who carried them oul wanted thc public to belicvc . The Central Eleclricity Generating Board ( CEGB ) in Britain normally transported the spent nuclear wastes from its generating stations by rail to reprocessing plants . The CEGB carried out the first demo . Although the wastcs wcre said to bc in strong 47 - lon steel flasks with a wall thickncss of 14 inchcs and the lid secured by 14 bolts , the public was still not convinced that a rail accident would not rclcasc radioactivity . So the CEGB staged a spectacular crash in which a locomotive pulling three coaches was crashed at high speed into a flask on the waggon on which it was normally carried dumped onto the track . Millions vicwed this “demonstration” on TV . “The train hit the flask with a tremendous cxplo - sion of dust , smoke , and flame , pushing the flask before it . “Parts of the engine flew in all directions . ” But , “apart from cosmetic damage , the flask was oth - erwise inviolatc . ” A promotional vidco was made , narrated “with used - car - salcsman brashness” , alleg - ing the siifcty of rail transport of nuclcar wastes . However , thc organization Greenpeacc had its own engineers and came to quite dilferent conclusions . * Thc vast majority of flasks in use at the time of the demo were not of 14 - inch steel , as the test flask was , but were much thinner , with a lead lining . Indeed , according to Greenpeacc , CEGB had pri - vately carried out tests on such flasks and had casi - ly ruptured thcm . The Type 46 locomotive used in the tcst had a soft - er nose than many other types in regular use ; thus , thc impact of the collision was , to some cxtcnt , absorbed in the engine’s nose . @ The angle of impact was chosen so as not to maxi - mize damage . @ Thc train’s coaches had been so weightcd as to minimize the possibility that they would be jetti - soned ovcr the engine and cause a secondary impact on the flask . * The whecls oE the waggon on which the flask was placed had bccn removed , making it impossible for them to dig into the ground , thus holding the flask stationary and increasing the force nf impact . ( The filmed cvcnt showed that the waggon and flask were lifted and flung through the ais , thus providing little resistance to thc forward motion . ) @ The flask on its waggon had been placed at thc very end ( if the rail track , cverything beyond thc impact area being nothing but smooth carth so that nothing was present that c ( iuld hold the flask or pcnctrate it . The authors makc an interesting distinction between an experiment or test and a demonstration . Thc outcome of an experiment is nuknown and inay cvcn be surpris - ing . On the other hand , in a demonstration ( think of a scicncc classroum ) no surprises are expcctcd and none normally rcsult ; everything gocs according to what has bccn previously worked out . ( Of course , demonstrations can be hunglcd , with unexpcctcd outcomes . ) The second event dcscribed in this chapter took pliicc in thc same year in the United States . Again a crash was staged , this time of a Boeing 720 to illustrate to the pub - lic that a jellified keroscnc fuel for aircraCt ( anti - misting kerosene or AMK developed by the British firm IC1 - Lmperial Chemical Industries ) can prcvcnt the fuel from 41 IEEE Technology and Societv Magazine . Winter 199912000 turning into an aerosol on impact . This featurc o€ the fuel was to prevent the immediate burning of the aircraft following a crash , thus pcimitling those passengers who survived the impact to escape . This time it was lhe Fed - eral Aviation Agency ( FAA ) that arranged a dcmonslra - tion crash at Edwards Air Force Base . The radio - con - trolled plane loaded with dummics and using AMK was to land with its wheels up just short of a simulated run - way where various sources of ignition were placed , as well as jagged ‘cutters’ mounted so as to rupture the fuel tank and the wing tips . Television and print ncws rcporls described a ‘lire - ball’ that resulted when the plane crashed ; “parts flew off ; slow motion showed a door ripped nfC and thc immediatc billowing of a rcd - yellow flame which enveloped the aircraft . A distant shot showed a billow Subsequent close - ups showed the burnt - out fuselage and the burnt remains of dummy passengers , ” From thcsc initial rcporls , no other con - clusion seems to be possiblc but [ hat AMK failcd . The crash test was a “demonstration” because the details had all bccn worked out in previons crashes of old airplanes “propelled a1 high speed along test tracks” which showed that AMK should havc worked . In demonstsations , no surprises should occur . Howev - er , in this case , the “pilot” in radio control of thc plane Crom the ground lost control of the plane and one wing hit the ground before the other . “The plane slcwed to onc side , crashed into the obstacles and came to a complctc stop . A mctal cutter designed to rip into the wings and fuel tanks entered one of the still - spinning engines , stopping it instantly and causing a far greater release of energy than norinally would be expected . This , in turn , caused the initial fireball which would not havc happcncd if thc dcmon - stration had gone according to plan . ” What had been intended as a demonstration with certain expected outcomes became , instead , an experi - ment with unforeseen outcomes . Nevertheless , it was reasonablc for testing the flammability oC AMK that the crash be a typical , relatively mild one , not an cxtremc one in which passengers would not have sur - vived the impact anyway . This is qnite unlike u crash involving nuclear wastes ; just one accident involving the releasc of radioactivity is not acccptablc . Notwithstanding the impressions lcft by lhc initial fireball , that “fire swept over the fuselage , but did not pcnctratc thc cabin or cockpit . ” It dicd on1 after a sec - ond or so . Indeed , the AMK spilled as a result of the first impact swept over the fuselage and cooled it ; it did not burn . Passengers who had survived thc initial impact could have escaped after the firebell died out . The plane and the dummy passengers were eventu - ally destroyed by a second fire “caused by fuel enter - ing the plane through an open cargo door and through rents in the fuselage made by the cutters as the planc slewed to onc side . ” The second fire did not start until at lcast some of tlic passcngcrs would have had time to escape . But for the pnrposes of television , the relative - ly long time between the end of thc first fircball and the time that a black clond of smoke could be shown to the TV audience is dead time where nothing is hap - pening and , hence , appropriate to cut . The Golem seeins to be at work . But can the misimpressions cre - ated by telecasters be all there is lo the goleni . The second case described in this “story” suffers from a nuinbcr of errors that rcsult in a loss of confi - dence in the authors . 8 On p . 58 : “The Federal Aviation Agency ( FAA ) arranged the demonstration . ” The FAA is identified correctly . 0 On p . 59 , wc find : “NASA arranged that the Boe - ing 720 fuelled with AMK would land , with wheels 8 the FAA is called the Federal Aviation Authority bot latcr on the page it again becomes Agency . 8 Still on p . 68 , when dcscribing what occurred dur - ing the crash , we find : “Instead of sliding along the runway with wheels down , 8 NASA is mentioned three times in this story : on p . 59 , as just noted above , on p . 68 where it is statcd that “the [ FAA ] , NASA and IC1 were all convinced of the effectiveness of AMK” and on p . I1 where the test is said to be “the NASA test . ” Were the wheels supposed to be up or down ? If down , the plane wouldn’t be sliding along the runway , bnt rolling . Who arranged thc demonstration ? Surely it was the FAA . How could NASA be involved here ? A glance at the index gives pp . 68 - 11 1 passim for NASA . Thc Challengcr story , so closely identified with NASA , appears on pp . 30 - 56 hut the index gives no clue of this . On the other hand , NASA does not appear again after p . 71 . Sloppincss in the index ( there arc many other errors there ) is not necessarily an indica - tion of sloppiness in content , but it does not inspirc confidence that the content is accnrate . The remaining “stories” constitute more illuslrations of the nature of golem technology . They are all intercst - ing and they all illustrate experimenters regress . But presumably the golem in technology is more than this concept . Perhaps another reader might do bctter , but I can still unable to come up with a more solid meaning for the golem in technology than the few words noted in this review . It seems to me that Murphy’s Law ( anything that can go wrong will go wrong ) ought to be an impor - tant component in the elucidation of golem technology . 42 IEEE Technology and Society Magazine , Winter 1999l2000