warwick . ac . uk / lib - publications A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick Permanent WRAP URL : http : / / wrap . warwick . ac . uk / 102002 / Copyright and reuse : This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright . Please scroll down to view the document itself . Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to cite it . Our policy information is available from the repository home page . For more information , please contact the WRAP Team at : wrap @ warwick . ac . uk Development of a new genetically - encoded tag for correlative light electron microscopy by Nicholas I . Clarke Supervisors : Stephen J . Royle and Robert A . Cross Thesis Submitted to the University of Warwick for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy July 2017 March 2018 Contents 1 Introduction 15 1 . 1 Correlative Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 1 . 1 . 1 Probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 1 . 1 . 2 Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 1 . 1 . 3 Retracing and Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 1 . 2 Cell Biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 1 . 2 . 1 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 1 . 2 . 2 Chemically - induced dimerization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 1 . 3 Motivation for this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 1 . 4 Published work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 2 Materials and Methods 46 2 . 1 Molecular biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 2 . 2 Cell biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 2 . 3 Light microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 2 . 4 Correlative light electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 2 . 5 Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 3 Development of FerriTag and implementation for light microscopy 57 3 . 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 3 . 2 Direct fusion of ferritin results in aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 3 . 3 Engineering an inducible electron dense particle . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 3 . 4 Optimization of recombinant ferritin for inducible tagging . . . . . . . . 66 3 . 5 Temporal resolution of FerriTagging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 3 . 6 FerriTagging does not perturb the function of clathrin . . . . . . . . . . 74 2 CONTENTS 3 3 . 7 Rapamycin analogs are compatible with FerriTagging . . . . . . . . . . 76 3 . 8 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78 4 Characterization and application of FerriTag using correlative light electron microscopy 82 4 . 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 4 . 2 Loading FerriTag with iron is non - toxic to HeLa cells . . . . . . . . . . 83 4 . 3 Optimization of sample processing using FerriTag for CLEM . . . . . . 85 4 . 4 FerriTag can be used to localize intracellular proteins using CLEM . . . 87 4 . 5 FerriTagging is speciﬁc to the target protein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 4 . 6 The labelling resolution of FerriTag is on the order of 10 nm . . . . . . 92 4 . 7 FerriTag has a high signal - to - noise ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 4 . 8 FerriTagging is highly e ﬃ cient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 4 . 9 Contextual nanoscale mapping of HIP1R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 4 . 10 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 5 Discussion 113 Appendices 138 5 . 1 Published Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138 List of Figures and Tables Table 1 . 1 CLEM probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Figure 1 . 1 General processing workﬂows for CLEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 Figure 1 . 2 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Figure 1 . 3 Models of HIP1R localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 Figure 1 . 4 Protein dimerization systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 Figure 2 . 1 CLEM Workﬂow using FerriTag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 Table 2 . 1 Contructs used in this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 Table 2 . 2 Oligos used in this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 Figure 3 . 1 Molecular structure of electron dense proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 Figure 3 . 2 Direct fusion of ferritin results in aggregation of mitochondria . . . . 61 Figure 3 . 3 Inducible labeling of proteins of interest by ribosomes is not feasible 63 Figure 3 . 4 Rapamycin - induced labeling of proteins of interest by FRB - mCherry - FTH1 only , is not feasible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 Figure 3 . 5 FerriTagging results in successful labeling of mitochondria . . . . . . 67 Figure 3 . 6 Schematic diagram of FerriTagging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 Figure 3 . 7 FerriTagging has fast temporal resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 Figure 3 . 8 FerriTagging does not perturb normal clathrin function . . . . . . . 75 Figure 3 . 9 Rapamycin analogs can be used for FerriTagging . . . . . . . . . . . 77 Figure 4 . 1 Quantiﬁcation of cell viability in iron - supplemented media . . . . . . 84 Figure 4 . 2 Sample processing using FerriTag for CLEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 Figure 4 . 3 Visualizing Ferritagged proteins by light and electron microscopy . . 88 Figure 4 . 4 Identity of FerriTag particles and speciﬁcity of FerriTagging . . . . . 91 Figure 4 . 5 The labelling resolution of FerriTagging is approximately 10 nm . . . 94 Figure 4 . 6 Automated ﬁtting in FerriTag images and determination of SNR . . 97 4 LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES 5 Figure 4 . 7 Workﬂow for automatic detection of FerriTag particles in electron micrographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100 Figure 4 . 8 Automated detection of FerriTag particles in electron micrographs . 102 Figure 4 . 9 Nanoscale mapping of HIP1R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104 Figure 4 . 10Proposed model for HIP1R localization during clathrin - mediated en - docytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 Acknowledgments First , I would like to acknowledge my supervisor , Steve Royle . For the entirety of this PhD . he has been an excellent advisor and mentor . Thank you for giving me the opportunity to work with you and learn from you . I hope , at least in some part , I can follow in your footsteps . I would next like to thank everyone who I have had the pleasure of working with over the years . You have all helped me along the way and made this experience one I shall never forget . A special mention to my parents . I will be forever grateful to you for always being there and giving me the opportunities to be able to pursue my passions in life , including this one . Finally , and most of all , I thank Erikka Samuel . For everything . This work was generously funded by Cancer Research UK . 6 Declarations This thesis is submitted to the University of Warwick in support of my application for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy . It has been composed by myself and has not been submitted in any previous application for any degree . The work presented was carried out by the author with exception to the computer code needed for image analysis , which was written by Stephen Royle and described in sections 2 . 5 , 4 . 6 , 4 , 7 and 4 . 8 . 8 Abbreviations 3D Three - dimensional APX Ascorbate peroxidase APEX Enhanced ascorbate peroxidase CID Chemically - Induced dimerization CLEM Correlative or correlated light and electron microscopy DAB Diaminobenzidine DAPI 4’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole DMEM Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium DMT1 Divalent metal ion transferase 1 DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid EELS Electron energy loss spectroscopy EM Electron microscopy Fab Fragment antigen - binding FBS Foetal bovine serum FKBP FK506 - binding protein FlAsH Fluorescein bi - arsenical hairpin - binding FLM Florescent light microscopy 9 FRB FKBP and rapamycin binding FTH1 Ferritin heavy polypeptide 1 FTL Ferritin light chain GFP Green ﬂuorescent protein HIP1R Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related protein HPF High - pressure freezing LCa Clathrin light chain a LM Light microscopy HRP Horseradish peroxidase MAO Monoamine oxidase MiniSOG Mini Singlet Oxygen Generator mTOR Mammalian target of rapamycin NA Numerical aperture PBS Phosphate bu ﬀ ered saline PCR Polymerase chain reaction PI ( 4 , 5P ) 2 Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ReAsH bi - arsenical hairpin - binding ROI Region of interest RPL5 Ribosomal protein L5 RPL22 Ribosomal protein L22 SD Standard deviation SDM Site - directed mutagenesis SNR signal - to - noise ratio TEM Transmission electron microscopy TULIP Tunable , light - controlled interacting protein Abstract To understand cell biology in detail , we must explore subcellular organization in 3D and locate proteins at high resolution . To achieve this , the most popular approach is to use two complimentary imaging techniques ; light and electron microscopy . Combining these techniques by correlative or correlated light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) allows cellular events to be observed ﬁrst by ﬂuorescence microscopy and then the same event can be tracked and visualised at high - resolution using electron microscopy . However , a current challenge is to develop probes to precisely visualize proteins in cells using this method . This thesis introduces FerriTag , a new genetically - encoded chemically - inducible tag for correlative light - electron microscopy . FerriTag is a ﬂuorescent recombinant electron - dense ferritin particle that can speciﬁcally label target proteins rapidly and e ﬃ ciently using rapamycin - induced heterodimerization . The processing protocol described for CLEM is simple yet robust and can potentially be used for tagging any protein - of - interest . FerriTag is easily distinguished from background in electron micrographs due to its high signal to noise ratio and also provides a labelling resolution of 10 ± 5 nm . These qualities make FerriTag an ideal probe for CLEM . FerriTag can be used to perform contextual nanoscale mapping of protein loca - tion relative to a subcellular structure . This was utilised to study the distribution and conformation of huntingtin - interacting protein 1 related ( HIP1R ) in and around clathrin - coated pits , providing insight to the roles played by HIP1R , clathrin and actin during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . FerriTag o ﬀ ers great potential for future CLEM applications and will be a useful discovery tool for cell biology . 13 Chapter 1 Introduction 1 . 1 Correlative Microscopy Correlative microscopy refers to the combination of more than one imaging modal - ity , enabling the user to acquire complementary data on the same biological sample . Among the many correlative workﬂows available , the combination of light with electron microscopy is by far the most widely used ( Müller - Reichert and Verkade , 2012 ) . This combination of imaging techniques is referred to as CLEM , for Correlated Light Electron Microscopy or Correlative Light Electron Microscopy . Ellisman et al . ( 2012 ) has tried to deﬁne each of these terms based on the precision of correlation . That is , in Correlated Light Electron Microscopy the same area within a sample is tracked , whereas in Correlative Light Electron Microscopy , the same sample , not exact area , is tracked . Typically the latter , is more user friendly , as it does not require absolute precision in the tracking of an individual subcellular event throughout the entire workﬂow and instead represents a more global approach to correlation . Whilst this thesis does make a distinction between the two deﬁnitions , it is important to realise these terms to deﬁne each correlation method is not generally accepted throughout the ﬁeld and are instead used interchangeably in the literature . Light microscopy enables the rapid screening and localization of proteins to reveal their dynamics . Though much information regarding intracellular features are hidden if they are unlabeled or fall below the di ﬀ raction limit of light . If combined with electron microscopy however , the region of interest can be imaged again , this time at increased resolution where further cellular context is also made available . CLEM 15 therefore facilitates the ability to determine the underlying structure of rare , transient or previously undescribed subcellular events . In order to precisely track and correlate these events between each technique , it is essential to use a probe that can be observed for both light and electron microscopy . The sample must then be processed in a way that allows for optimal preservation , structure determination and probe visualization . Finally , correlation between light and electron microscopy is achieved through registration of the same areas or whole samples in complementary images . Typically , these three steps , probes , processing and registration , are necessary for all CLEM experiments . 1 . 1 . 1 Probes The intracellular environment is crowded . Thousands of proteins are constantly in - volved in a plethora of cellular processes ( Fulton , 1982 ; Hurtley , 2009 ) . This intricate , dynamic yet structured behavior has been termed the ‘molecular sociology of the cell’ ( Robinson et al . , 2007 ; Mahamid et al . , 2016 ) . To enable the precise localization of pro - teins within such a complex and busy environment , highly sensitive probes for CLEM are therefore essential . Over the past few decades , many advances have been made in the development of probes for CLEM . These can be categorized based on whether they are a ﬃ nity - based or genetically encoded . A ﬃ nity - based label techniques are typically invasive , as they compromise cellular ultrastructure . In contrast genetically encoded tags are non - invasive and are therefore more desirable as samples can be processed in their native state under optimal ultrastructural preservation conditions . A brief overview of probes for CLEM can be found in Table 1 . 1 . 16 17 18 1 . 1 . 1 . 1 A ﬃ nity - based labels Antibody based recognition probes are still widely used for CLEM ( Gri ﬃ ths and Lu - cocq , 2014 ) . They take advantage of the high speciﬁcity of primary antibodies that are able to bind unique epitopes on a target protein . A secondary antibody , conjugated to a ﬂuorescent moiety with an electron dense tag , can subsequently bind , allowing the visualization of the probe by both light and electron microscopy . The major dis - advantage is that weak ﬁxation is usually necessary to ensure suitable preservation and accessibility to epitopes , often resulting in compromised ultrastructure . Addition - ally pre - embedding protocols require permeabilisation of the cell membrane further compromising cellular ultrastructure and often , intracellular material and membrane constituents can be lost during sample processing . It is therefore imperative to create a careful balance between sample preservation , accessibility and retention of antigenicity . There are however , certain situations in which antibody based probes do not require permeabilisation . These protocols are classed as post - embedding . Fluoronanogold Fluoronanogold is a bifunctional immunoprobe consisting of an antibody ( Fab ′ frag - ment ) conjugated to a ﬂuorophore and small gold cluster , aiding in the accessibility to antigenic sites ( Takizawa and Robinson , 2000 ) . However , its size hinders its ability to be visualized by electron microscopy and it therefore requires autometallographic enhancement methods to further develop its size and contrast ( Baschong and Stierhof , 1998 ) . In these processes , metal ions in solution are reduced to a zero oxidation state which are then deposited onto Fluoronanogold , which acts as a nucleation site . How - ever this process often results in artefacts due to di ﬃ culties in controlling the particle enhancement reaction and forming irregular sized and shaped particles . In addition , enhancement procedures can be liable to autonucleation creating non - specﬁc back - ground metal deposition . Typically , deposition of gold ions is preferred to silver ions , as it provides better contrast under the electron microscope and it does not get dis - solved by strong reducing agents such as osmium tetroxide , which is routinely used for 19 electron microscopy sample preparation as a ﬁxative and heavy - metal staining agent . Nevertheless , a number of studies have highlighted the advantages of Fluoronanogold in CLEM applications , where these di ﬃ culties have been overcome ( Takizawa et al . , 2015 ; Olmos et al . , 2015 ; Magidson et al . , 2016 ) . Quantum dots Quantum dots are small inorganic nanocrystals . They can be ﬁnely tuned enabling the ability to emit light over a broad spectrum of wavelengths facilitating imaging of multiple labels simultaneously by light microscopy . Precise correlation can then be achieved with electron microscopy due to their electron dense core ( Nisman et al . , 2004 ; Deerinck et al . , 2007 ) . However , they are not as electron dense as gold particles and thus can be di ﬃ cult to see in heavily stained samples . Although mainly used in pre - embedding protocols , quantum dots interestingly have been used to tag intracellular proteins in a non - invasive manner ( Giepmans et al . , 2005 ) . 1 . 1 . 1 . 2 Genetically encoded tags Over recent years , there has been much interest in the development of new geneti - cally encoded tags for CLEM . As they can be expressed within the sample itself , they can be processed in a non - invasive manner , enabling optimal preservation of cellular ultrastructure . Additionally , genetically encoded tags are highly speciﬁc and support analysis of live cellular dynamics and molecular processes by light microscopy prior to imaging at high resolution using electron microscopy . 1 . 1 . 1 . 2 . 1 Fluorescent proteins Fluorescent proteins have revolutionized cell biology . Since the cloning of green ﬂu - orescent protein ( GFP ) there has been an expanding list of new ﬂuorescent proteins that exhibit a broad range of emission wavelengths ( Ormö et al . , 1996 ; Shaner et al . , 2005 ) . This extensive palette of colors enables imaging of several proteins at once by ﬂuorescent light microscopy . 20 Fluorescent proteins themselves are not electron dense . They therefore usually re - quire the addition of a speciﬁc immunogold particle against the ﬂuorescent protein to be readily observed by electron microscopy ( Hodgson et al . , 2014 ) . Recent develop - ments in CLEM protocol design however , have enabled the use of a ﬂuorescent protein only , to correlate data . Usually these involve the preservation of ﬂuorescence dur - ing processing and then ﬂuorescent imaging can be completed on - section resulting in ultra - precise correlated imaging ( Kukulski et al . , 2011 ; Johnson et al . , 2015 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) . A recent advance in this area is the osmium - resistant ﬂuorescent protein , Eos4 . It has been speciﬁcally engineered to withstand heavy ﬁxation and thus aids in ultrastructural preservation and electron microscopy contrast ( Paez - Segala et al . , 2015 ) . Advances in super - resolution microscopy have further supported the improvement of correlating light with electron microscopy data ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ) . However , these techniques still do not provide resolution high enough to distinguish single proteins . Recently , super resolution microscopy has been combined with metal replica sample preparation to correlate proteins at the cell membrane with extremely high resolution ( Sochacki et al . , 2014 , 2017 ) . Though , this approach is particularly invasive , due to sample processing involving the need to produce membrane sheets . Consequently , intracellular constituents are removed , resulting in potential loss of ultrastructural information . Fluorescent proteins are also extremely useful for correlative experiments to di ﬀ er - entiate a speciﬁc cell - of - interest within a heterogeneous population . This is particularly useful for the quantitative study of whole cells to examine ultrastructural phenotypes at high resolution ( Cheeseman et al . , 2013 ; Hirst et al . , 2015 ) 1 . 1 . 1 . 2 . 2 DAB - based tags DAB - based methods are based on the principle of diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) oxidation by free oxygen radicals . The formation of free radical species can be generated photoox - idation or during the enzymatic conversion of peroxidase . This reaction polymerizes 21 DAB , forming an osmiophilic precipitate that when treated with osmium tetroxide , becomes electron dense and thus easily visible by electron microscopy ( Hanker , 1979 ; Maranto , 1982 ) . However , the electron density created by all DAB based tags , generates a di ﬀ use signal that also has the possibility to drift into neighboring regions surrounding the tagged protein - of - interest ( van Weering et al . , 2010 ; Morphew et al . , 2015 ) . This lim - its to what can be resolved using these techniques and typically single or low - density proteins cannot be readily visualized . Furthermore , these techniques require the user to deﬁne the optimum staining conditions to generate su ﬃ cient contrast for each ex - periment to visualize the particular tagged protein - of - interest . Tetracysteine tags One of the ﬁrst genetically encoded tag methodologies for CLEM was based on the ability that a small tetracysteine motif , - Cys - Cys - Xaa - Xaa - Cys - Cys - , could bind bi - arsenical derivatives . Fluorescein bi - arsenical hairpin - binding ( FlAsH ) and the re - soruﬁn derivative ( ReAsH ) are membrane permeable non - ﬂuorescent molecules that upon binding tetracysteine motifs fused to a protein - of - interest , emit green and red ﬂuorescence respectively ( Gri ﬃ n et al . , 1998 ; Gaietta et al . , 2002 ; Martin et al . , 2005 ) . The binding of trivalent arsenic atoms to endogenous thiols however is toxic in live cell applications . To overcome this , dithiols are added to minimize these e ﬀ ects . Although both of these methods are ideally suited for light microscopy , it is only ReAsh that can be readily observed by electron microscopy . ReAsH beneﬁts from also being a singlet oxygen generator and is therefore able to photoconvert DAB to form an electron dense precipitate . During this reaction , careful controls must be put in place to minimize non - speciﬁc background staining . This approach was ﬁrst implemented by Gaietta et al . ( 2002 ) and was used to study the dynamics and ultrastructural properties of di ﬀ erent ReAsH - labeled connexin43 pools within gap junctions . A major advantage of this tagging approach is owed to its small size . Typically , most genetically encoded tags are fused to the protein - of - interest at its N or C terminus . 22 Tetracysteine tags have also shown to possess the ability to be incorporated within the sequence of the protein itself without disrupting normal function . This has been particularly useful for the study of viral function and infectivity ( Das et al . , 2009 ) . With recent developments into CLEM probe design , there are however more e ﬃ cient probes available and today , tetracysteine tags are usually not the probe of choice in DAB precipitation based CLEM experiments . MiniSOG MiniSOG ( for mini Singlet Oxygen Generator ) is a ﬂavoprotein engineered from pho - totropin 2 , a photoreceptor from Arabidopsis thaliana ( Shu et al . , 2011 ) . It is a small non - invasive genetically encoded tag that exhibits internal ﬂuorescence as well as en - hanced singlet oxygen generation compared to ReAsH . The combined ability to ﬂu - oresce and photooxidise DAB upon blue light irradiation in the presence of oxygen , makes the tag highly desirable . A number of studies have highlighted miniSOGs suc - cess for CLEM applications ( Cleyrat et al . , 2014 ; Ludwig et al . , 2013 ) . Though , due to practical di ﬃ culties and di ﬀ use nature of the tag , its popularity as a probe for CLEM is not widespread throughout the ﬁeld . Peroxidase based labels Enzymatic conversion of DAB by horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) conjugated to anti - bodies has been widely used for protein localization in electron microscopy ( Porstmann and Kiessig , 1992 ; Sosinsky et al . , 2007 ) . In the presence of hydrogen peroxide , HRP can polymerize DAB into an electron dense precipitate . However , the active site of HRP does not form in reducing environments such as the mammalian cytosol , there - fore restricting the ability to label many proteins within the cell . To overcome the limitations of HRP , Martell et al . ( 2012 ) engineered a geneti - cally encoded peroxidase from ascorbate peroxidase ( APX ) a class I cytosolic plant peroxidase , that remains active in all cellular compartments . Enhanced APX ( APEX ) catalyzes the hydrogen peroxide dependent polymerization of DAB to form an elec - 23 tron dense precipitate ( Martell et al . , 2012 ) . It is noteworthy , enzymatic based DAB precipitation using APEX is much easier than that of photooxidation by miniSOG . More recently , the same group designed APEX2 , which works in exactly the same way as APEX , but has signiﬁcantly improved sensitivity , thereby limiting cellular toxicity ( Lam et al . , 2014 ) . APEX has proved its use in an array of protein localization studies for electron microscopy ( Wong and Munro , 2014 ; Shvets et al . , 2015 ; Ariotti et al . , 2015 ) . Fur - thermore , it can also be used as a proximity - based label for proteomic mapping and characterization of close protein - protein interactions in cells ( Rhee et al . , 2013 ) . Alone however , APEX is not ﬂuorescent and therefore needs to be fused to a ﬂuorescent protein to be visualized by light microscopy for correlative experiments . 1 . 1 . 1 . 2 . 3 Metal - ligand based tags The generation of metal clusters within cells to localize proteins using CLEM is highly desirable . Exogenous metal ions bind to the genetically encoded metal ligand based tag enabling the scattering of electrons , thereby generating contrast that is tightly focused for electron microscopy detection . Deposition of metal ions in this way provides a high signal to noise ratio , permitting the tag to be distinguished easily from background noise . In addition , direct detection of metal ions can be determined using electron energy loss spectroscopy ( EELS ) . Metallothionein Metallothionein is a small cysteine rich metal - ion chelator that regulates metal home - ostasis within the cell . It can bind a variety of metal ions including cadmium , zinc , copper and gold with high a ﬃ nity and is therefore the ideal candidate protein to be used as a genetically encoded tag for electron microscopy . Diestra et al . 2009 showed by directly fusing metallothionein to a protein - of - interest , the cysteine rich metalloth - ionein in the presence of gold salts can build metal nanoclusters of up to 1 nm in diameter , in bacteria . The cluster provided su ﬃ cient density to localize the protein - 24 of - interest in unstained resin sections ( Diestra et al . , 2009 ; Fernndez de Castro et al . , 2014 ) . Further work optimized this labeling approach to speciﬁcally localize proteins in mammalian cells with high sensitivity and resolution ( Risco et al . , 2012 ) . Note , for use as a genetically encoded tag for CLEM , metallothionein must also be fused to a ﬂuorescent protein . However , toxicity of gold salt incubation in cells was a major concern , both for cell viability and ultrastructure preservation . To overcome this , Morphew et al . ( 2015 ) further optimized the process in which binding of gold to metallothionein could be achieved . Interestingly , metallothionein retains its ability to bind gold after cryo - immobilization . Therefore gold addition was achieved post processing on - section or during freeze substitution , resulting in electron dense clusters that could be distin - guished by electron microscopy ( Morphew et al . , 2015 ) . It should be noted however , this study highlighted the inability to distinguish low abundant proteins from back - ground noise in electron micrographs . Low staining conditions during processing are also necessary in order to not mask the electron density of the small tag . This limits the user from distinguishing other cellular ultrastructure information . Bacterial ferritin Wang et al . developed a genetically encoded tag for cryo - electron tomography based on a iron storage protein called ferritin . Bacterial ferritin ( FtnA ) was directly fused to a protein - of - interest where it could form a covalently attached electron dense ferritin particles under iron rich conditions in bacterial cells ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) . The use of iron is preferable to gold as for metallothionein , due to lower toxicity to cells . The authors do highlight however , that certain proteins will mislocalize due to the multi - valent nature of the recombinant ferritin particle . To assess potential mis - localization issues , a ﬂuorescent protein should be tagged to the protein - of - interest also , so it can be visualized ﬁrst by light microscopy . While used in bacteria , this direct ferritin tagging methodology is technically demanding and has not yet been reported to work in mammalian cells . 25 1 . 1 . 2 Processing There is no universal protocol to process samples for CLEM . Due to the diverse array of goals made available for CLEM , many di ﬀ erent protocols have been developed and the path taken depends on the scientiﬁc question being addressed . Furthermore , not all probes are compatible with all processing workﬂows and therefore the probe used also inﬂuences the pathway taken . Collectively , processing of samples for CLEM can be divided into two main categories : • Pre - embedding CLEM • Post - embedding CLEM General workﬂows for pre - embedding and post - embedding CLEM are shown in Figure 1 . 1 . Correlating data from both modalities in either approach permits the pre - identiﬁcation of cellular events ﬁrst by light microscopy , providing an exact focus point for high - resolution electron microscopy acquisition . This ability to pre - identify regions of interest is highly valuable as it minimizes the challenge of locating speciﬁc events within such a complex and crowded intracellular environment . 26 27 Pre - embedding CLEM Samples being processed for pre - embedding CLEM are imaged by light microscopy prior to ﬁxation and embedding for correlation with electron microscopy . This approach is particularly useful if live cell imaging is required to study dynamic events . Fluorescent proteins guide their identiﬁcation and enable precise tracking of the event through time . In addition , pre - embedding CLEM is especially useful to discern transiently expressing cells within a heterogeneous population for correlative experiments . Once the position and recording of the event or object has been acquired by light microscopy , samples are immediately ﬁxed and processed for electron microscopy . Optimal ﬁxation of the sample is key for accurate correlation of the event between imaging modalities . Cryo - immobilization provides superior ultrastructure preservation compared to chemical ﬁxation ( Moor and Mühlethaler , 1963 ) . For biological materials , this is routinely achieved by either plunge freezing or high pressure freezing ( Medalia et al . , 2002 ; Moor , 1987 ) . Though , the time delay between imaging and ﬁxation may potentially lead to loss of event correlation . However , recent technical advances have been developed to aid in this transition , minimising these concerns . The rapid transfer system ( RTS ) permits the easy transport and loading of carriers between imaging and loading of samples for high pressure freezing ( McDonald et al . , 2007 ) . The cryocapsule is a small cell culture tool which was manufactured to ﬁt directly into the high pressure freezer , simplifying sample preparation ( Heiligenstein et al . , 2014 ) . MAVIS ( Microscopy and Vitriﬁcation Integrated System ) is an integrated system that combines a light microscope with a plunger freezer . Imaging can be performed immediately before freezing , vastly improving time resolution of event correlation down to a time frame of seconds ( Koning et al . , 2014 ) . The major drawback to pre - embedding procedures is that resolution along the z - axis is much worse for light microscopy compared to the required thickness of resin sections for electron microscopy . This consequently only produces an approximation - based correlation for correlated techniques . A distinct advantage of using duel ﬂuorescent and electron dense tags for pre - 28 embedding CLEM is that precise correlated data is not critical for localizing proteins at the nanoscale . More simple correlative light electron microscopy procedures can be used instead , as tagged proteins can be readily distinguished in both modalities . Though , if a single speciﬁc event needs to be tracked , correlated methods are essential . Post - embedding CLEM Samples being processed for post - embedding CLEM are imaged by light microscopy following ﬁxation and embedding for correlation with electron microscopy . The ﬂu - orescent signal is preserved during sample processing , which enables ﬂuorescent light microscopy to be performed on - section . Electron microscopy is then performed on the same section delivering the most exact correlation possible , due to high z - axis reso - lution . This approach has been implemented in a number of studies facilitating the localization of proteins with high precision ( Kukulski et al . , 2011 ; Johnson et al . , 2015 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) . In order to be compatible for the preservation of ﬂuorescence , certain processing steps must be optimized , including choice of resin , ﬁxation , dehydration and heavy metal staining . Acrylic resins must be used for sample embedding due to their hy - drophilic nature and their ability to interact with ﬂuorophores favorably to preserve ﬂuorescence . Chemical ﬁxation for post - embedding CLEM is only possible if weak crosslinking reagents are used , otherwise ﬂuorescent proteins become denatured . Cryo - immobilization by plunge freezing or high - pressure freezing is often used instead . Flu - orescent proteins may quench over prolonged exposure to solvent during dehydration in some samples ( Peddie et al . , 2014 ) . Faster procedures for substitution have been de - veloped to negate these e ﬀ ects ( McDonald and Webb , 2011 ) . Additionally , ﬂuorescent proteins can also be quenched due to over - exposure to certain heavy metals . The loss of heavy metals during sample processing results in low contrast and ability to visualize ultrastructure in electron microscopy . Low amounts of uranyl acetate or tannic acid are often used during substitution , resulting in ﬂuorescence preservation and electron contrast ( Kukulski et al . , 2011 ; Johnson et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , osmium - resistant 29 ﬂuorescent proteins have recently been engineered to aid in this problem ( Paez - Segala et al . , 2015 ) . An alternative approach for post - embedding CLEM using chemical ﬁxation uses cryo - sectioning of frozen embedded gelatin samples ( Tokuyasu , 1973 ) . Here , thawed cryo - sections are imaged ﬁrst by ﬂuorescent light microscopy before being imaged at high resolution by electron microscopy . Due to mild ﬁxation , antigenicity is preserved remarkably well and therefore immunogold procedures are often performed inline with ﬂuorescent light microscopy correlation for ultra - precise protein localization ( Hodgson et al . , 2014 ) . 1 . 1 . 3 Retracing and Registration The ﬁnal step in the CLEM workﬂow involves reliable and precise retracing and reg - istration between light and electron microscopy data . Both correlative and correlated procedures absolutely require accurate retracing of the sample being imaged . It is only correlated workﬂows however that involve registration , to be able to track exact re - gions within a sample . Whist the process of registering light with electron micrographs for correlated experiments is challenging , software tools such as TrakEM2 ( Cardona et al . , 2012 ) and ec - CLEM ( Paul - Gilloteaux et al . , 2017 ) can assist greatly . The way in which retracing and registration is achieved depends on whether pre or post - embedding CLEM is performed . Pre - embedding procedures use speciﬁc sample holders , ﬁnder cell - culture grids , laser marks or pattern recognition to accurately track each sample throughout the entire CLEM workﬂow ( de Boer et al . , 2015 ) . To perform correlated registration , serial stacks are ﬁrst acquired using ﬂuorescence light microscopy . The slice that best matches the electron micrograph is used to correlate and overlay both images . This typically results in inaccurate correlation due to limitations in z - axis resolution . Moreover , shrinkage during sample processing , sample distortion from resin sectioning and small time delays during ﬁxation further restrict the ability to accurately correlate data . Re - tracing for post - embedding CLEM involves picking up sections onto ﬁnder grids . 30 The ﬁnder grid is visible by both light and electron microscopy and therefore , ﬂuores - cent regions of interest can be retraced during the transfer of grids between both imag - ing modalities . Post - embedding registration is far more precise than pre - embedding techniques as light microscopy and electron microscopy is performed on the same sec - tion , thereby overcoming z - axis resolution limitations . Fiducial markers aid in precise registration and correlation , as they are visible by both light and electron microscopy ( Kukulski et al . , 2011 ) . They therefore act as position co - ordinates to guide the user towards the exact region of interest when at high resolution . Recent advances in technology have further improved the ability to precisely corre - late data for post - embedding CLEM . Integrated light and electron microscopes perform imaging sequentially without the need to move the sample ( Peddie et al . , 2014 ) . This enables precise correlation through the automated overlay of both images without the need for ﬁnder grids or ﬁducial markers . Additionally , cryo - ﬂuorescence stages allow ﬂuorescent light microscopy to be performed on whole frozen samples ( Schorb et al . , 2017 ) . As the sample is then immediately imaged by cryo - electron microscopy it makes retracing and registration particularly user - friendly . 31 1 . 2 Cell Biology 1 . 2 . 1 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Endocytosis describes the process by which vesicles are produced from the plasma membrane , facilitating the internalisation of extracellular molecules , plasma membrane proteins and lipids into the cell . Multiple endocytic tra ﬃ cking pathways exist and can be broadly categorized by whether they are mediated by clathrin or not ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ) . Clathrin is a triskelion - shaped sca ﬀ old protein , composed of three heavy and three light chains . As well as playing a fundamental role in membrane tra ﬃ cking it also moonlights in mitosis , aiding in the stabilization of microtubules in kinetochore ﬁbres ( Royle , 2013 ) . Clathrin - coated structures where ﬁrst observed in mosquito embryos by electron microscopy and have been of great interest for decades ( Roth and Porter , 1964 ) . Yet , the mechanisms by which clathrin - mediated endocytosis operates and how the process is regulated are still being unraveled . In brief , a complex network of proteins coordinates the timely progression through four deﬁned stages , illustrated in Figure 1 . 2 . This begins with event initiation and is followed by vesicle maturation , scission and ﬁnally uncoating . A high - resolution study has imaged these key steps using high - precision correlated light electron microscopy and shown how the plasma membrane is remodelled during the entire process ( Kukulski et al . , 2012 ) . Brieﬂy , Sac - charomyces cerevisiae strains expressing various ﬂuorescently tagged clathrin - mediated endocytic proteins were high - pressure frozen and prepared for post - embedding CLEM by preserving ﬂuorescence in - resin . Each strain was then imaged by light microscopy and the ﬂuorescent signal was tracked to the electron microscope where the ultrastruc - ture was observed at high resolution . This work highlights the power of CLEM for the study of cell biology and speciﬁcally clathrin - mediated endocytosis . A well studied example of a cargo molecule that is constitutively internalised in this way , is an iron - binding protein called transferrin . Iron - bound transferrin binds to its receptor on the cell surface , where it is rapidly internalized by invagination 32 of clathrin - coated pits . Inside the cell , it is tra ﬃ cked to early endosomes , releases bound iron and is then recycled back to the cell surface . Uptake of transferrin takes around 10 minutes and is recycled out by 15 minutes ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . The uptake of ﬂuorescently labelled transferrin is widely used to study normal clathrin - mediated endocytic function . 33 34 Initiation Due to the complexity of the molecular machinery involved , a uniﬁed model for ini - tiation has not emerged ( Godlee and Kaksonen , 2013 ) . Though , essential adaptor and accessory proteins clearly have fundamental roles in the timely order of protein assembly during initiation . While clathrin is the main component of the endocytic machinery , it is unable to directly bind to the plasma membrane or to cargo . To initiate clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis therefore , adaptor proteins that bind plasma membrane and cargo are needed to provide the necessary link to which clathrin can subsequently bind . Among the ﬁrst to arrive is AP - 2 ( Loerke et al . , 2011 ) . AP - 2 can bind speciﬁcally to various partners including clathrin , endocytic motifs present on cargo receptors and the membrane - speciﬁc lipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5P ) 2 ) . Localization of AP - 2 to the membrane is thought to be PIP2 dependent . It is this recruitment of AP - 2 guided by PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 localization at the plasma membrane that is generally viewed as the essential initiator sequence for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Kelly et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , there is an emerging role of the location site playing a role in clathrin - coated pit initiation . While the degree and signiﬁcance of spatially regulating endo - cytosis at speciﬁc sites remains unclear , several studies have observed that multiple nucleations can occur at the same location ( Nunez et al . , 2011 ; Li et al . , 2015 ) . These highly productive areas of initiation have been termed hotspots ( Keen et al . , 1999 ) . Recent work using super - resolution microscopy has shown that at a single hotspot , in 3 . 6 % of cases , more than 5 nucleation events can occur ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . Whilst initiation is not solely restricted to hotspot locations , they do provide a mechanism to spatially organize clathrin - mediated endocytosis at certain locations within the cell . Maturation Following initiation , the plasma membrane must invaginate and continue to assem - ble the clathrin coat , to eventually form a vesicle . Whether this transition occurs by clathrin polymerization during membrane invagination or by membrane reshaping 35 where clathrin has already recruited remains controversial ( Dannhauser et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ) . Though clathrin has been shown to possess an increased a ﬃ nity for curved membranes ( Pucadyil and Holkar , 2016 ) , substantial evidence has been gener - ated that supports the latter model . Avinoam et al . used correlated light electron mi - croscopy to image endocytic sites and determine clathrin coats and membrane proﬁles during invagination . Interestingly , the clathrin coat surface remained almost constant throughout , which would not occur if clathrin polymerization were to occur . The cur - vature of the clathrin coat also increased as invagination proceeded , further supporting the latter model . Several endocytic accessory proteins have demonstrated membrane - bending prop - erties . The PIP2 binding proteins epsin , CALM and amphiphysin all contain am - phiphatic helices that insert into the plasma membrane inducing positive curvature towards the insertion . This facilitates maturation of early clathrin - coated initiation sites into a deeply invaginated pit ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ) . Actin recruitment at endocytic sites occurs early during invagination , generating a propulsive force that promotes vesicle maturation ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ) . Actin and actin - associated factors are recruited and enriched in more than 50 % of clathrin - mediated endocytosis events and disruption to the actin cytoskeleton leads to impaired maturation e ﬃ ciency as well as distinct morphological changes to the neck of deeply invaginated pits in mammalian cells ( Taylor et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) . Furthermore , a positive correlation between clathrin coated pit lifetime and amount of actin recruited exists ( Grassart et al . , 2014 ) . Although , actin is not essential for clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in cultured mammalian cells , there is evidence that actin recruitment is necessary when membrane tension is high ( Boulant et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with this , actin is essential for endocytosis in yeast ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . As their membrane tension is high , a greater force needs to be generated by actin polymerization to internalize membranes during endocytosis . Actin coupling to clathrin - coated pits is regulated by HIP1R . HIP1R has the abil - ity to bind membranes , clathrin light chain and actin and is found in more than 90 % 36 of clathrin - mediated endocytic events ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . It can also exist in two conﬁrmations : extended and kinked ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Wilbur et al . , 2008 ) . Though , how HIP1R links the clathrin machinery to actin during maturation of the vesicle is not particularly well understood . Three models have been proposed , outlined in Figure 1 . 3 . First , immunogold electron microscopy on unroofed cells sug - gested HIP1R is restricted to the rim of clathrin - coated pits ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ) . Second , HIP1R was proposed to bind the clathrin coat exclusively towards the vesicle neck providing an anchor site to which actin can bind ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ) . Third HIP1R was predicted to be distributed throughout the pit and distal regions of the membrane where it could adopt di ﬀ erent conﬁrmations ( Wilbur et al . , 2008 ) . The conformational change enabled di ﬀ erent actin binding properties . In its extended state , HIP1R can bind actin with much higher a ﬃ nity than when found in its closed conﬁr - mation . Extended HIP1R was predicted to bind the plasma membrane and speciﬁcally localize at the neck of a budding vesicle while its closed weaker state bound clathrin and decorates the pit itself . Although all three models highlight key ﬁndings regarding HIP1R structure and localization , only the second model remains feasible for e ﬃ cient vesicle production as it is the only model to show actin being linked to clathrin . With - out this , su ﬃ cient force to internalize clathrin - coated vesicles by actin polymerization is not achieved . However , their work did not include ultrastructural localization of HIP1R . So we do not know how HIP1R structure relates to its function and in turn , how this is related to ultrastructure . 37 38 Scission Scission of the mature clathrin - coated vesicle is dependent on the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . Dynamin is a large GTPase that assembles into helical polymers around the neck of deeply invaginated pits . Dynamin is recruited to the neck by BAR domain - containing proteins , such as amohiphysin and endophilin . These proteins have a strong binding preference for curved membranes and also contain amphipathic helices that may also help to bend the membrane , facilitating scission ( Daumke et al . , 2014 ) . Constriction of the dynamin ring is induced by GTP - hydrolysis promoting a conformational change that results in vesicle ﬁssion ( Srinivasan et al . , 2016 ) . Without dynamin , vesicle formation is arrested ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ) . Vesicle uncoating The ﬁnal step involves the uncoating of clathrin from vesicles . This disassembly from lattice to triskelia is achieved by the recruitment of auxillin ( or GAK in non - neuronal cells ) . Following scission , auxillin binds the clathrin coat , speciﬁcally localizing beneath the hub of neighbouring triskelia . This enables the heat shock protein 70 ( Hsc70 ) to subsequently bind whereby uncoating is then initiated ( Greener et al . , 2000 ) . Furthemore , auxillin can bind speciﬁc membrane lipids that have been synthesized from PIP2 by the phosphatase synaptojanin . Changing the phosphoinositide compo - sition of clathrin - coated vesicles in this way controls the timing of auxillin binding restricting its arrival to peak dynamin activity and thus assists uncoating ( Guan et al . , 2010 ) . Following uncoating , the clathrin machinery is released into the cytoplasm where it can be reused in other rounds of clathrin - coated vesicle formation . 39 1 . 2 . 2 Chemically - induced dimerization Chemically - Induced dimerization ( CID ) is a powerful tool for controlling protein func - tion in cell biology . It has been widely used in the study of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis , to force protein - protein interaction ( Zoncu et al . , 2007 ; Nakatsu et al . , 2010 ; Brach et al . , 2014 ; Manna et al . , 2015 ) or relocate target proteins to speciﬁc cellular compartments ( Robinson et al . , 2010 ; Willox and Royle , 2012 ; Hirst et al . , 2015 ) . Conditional regulation of two proteins is induced by small molecules that promote their association into a high - a ﬃ nity interaction . The ﬁrst naturally occurring CID system was described by Liu et al . 1991 , in which the immunospressant drug FK506 was shown to simultaneously bind FKBP12 and calcineurin , resulting in the inhibition of T - cell receptor - mediated signalling . Building on this work , a semi - synthetic ligand named FK1012 , formed by linking two FK506 molecules , was prepared that could dimerize FKBP12 , without binding calcineurin ( Spencer et al . , 1993 ) . Whilst FK1012 was the ﬁrst CID system to induce the close association of two proteins , the system is limited to proteins dependent on homodimerization . Several years later , the synthesis of heterodimerizing molecules capable of speciﬁcally dimerizing two di ﬀ erent proteins were reported ( Belshaw et al . , 1996 ; Licitra and Liu , 1996 ; Rivera et al . , 1996 ) . Among these , was the small molecule , rapamycin . Rapamycin is the most widely used chemical heterodimerizer in cell biology ( Fig - ure 1 . 4A ) ( Putyrski and Schultz , 2012 ) . Rapamycin ﬁrst binds the FKBP domain of FKBP12 . This complex then binds and inhibits the FRB ( FKBP and rapamycin - binding ) domain of the kinase Target of Rapamycin ( mTOR ) with extremely high a ﬃ nity ( 2 n m ) ( Figure 1 . 4A ) . In cells , two proteins genetically fused to FKBP and FRB can be inducibly dimerized upon the addition of rapamycin , resulting in them being brought within close proximity with one another . Due to the small molecular size of rapamycin , it readily enters cells inducing the heterodimerization within a timescale of seconds . A potential limitation of using rapamycin to induce heterodimerization , is its nat - ural inhibitory e ﬀ ect on mTOR . Over substantial time periods , rapamycin has been 40 shown to inhibit downstream mTOR signaling pathways that regulate cell metabolism , growth , proliferation and survival ( Laplante and Sabatini , 2009 ) . Because of theses ef - fects , non - immunosuppressive rapamycin analogs ( Rapalogs ) have been developed . The most widely used , AP21967 is able to speciﬁcally bind a mutant FRB domain ( FRB T2098L ) but is too bulky to bind the FRB domain of endogenous mTOR ( Figure 1 . 4 B ) ( Putyrski and Schultz , 2012 ) . Recent work has introduced a new promising CID system using the plant hormone Gibberellin ( Miyamoto et al . , 2012 ) . Here , Miyamoto et al . synthesised a modiﬁed form of Gibberellin , GA3 - AM , which ﬁrst binds it receptor gibberellin insensitive dwarf1 ( GID1 ) . The GA3 - AM - GID1 complex can then dimerize with gibberellin insensitive ( GAI ) ( Figure 1 . 4 B ) . Whilst the kinetics of this system to reach maximum dimerization does not quite act as fast as rapamycin - induced dimerization ( approximately 60 seconds for GA3 - AM , compared to less than 10 seconds for rapamycin ) , it is still useful for the e ﬀ ective perturbation of many cellular processes . 41 42 1 . 3 Motivation for this project Combined together , light and electron microscopy can provide unprecedented infor - mation about the complex network of proteins involved in the many processes within the cell . However , there are drawbacks in current probes available to perform highly accurate correlation down to single protein localization . The ideal probe for CLEM must therefore meet these essential criteria : • It should be genetically encoded and thus non - invasive . • It should be non - toxic and non - disruptive to any cellular processes . • The tag must be ﬂuorescent so it is visible by light microscopy and also electron - dense so it can be distinguished again by electron microscopy . • The electron density must be tightly focused and have good signal : noise ratio so it can be readily distinguished from background in electron micrographs . • The methodology should be robust , reliable and not dependent on user optimizing the staining conditions for each protein - of - interest . • It should be compatible with high pressure freezing and thus allow samples to be optimally preserved for imaging . In order to study intracellular proteins involved in crowded and complex processes such as clathrin - mediated endocytosis , it is fundamental that a new probe should be developed that satisﬁes all these criteria . 43 1 . 4 Published work The work presented in this thesis regarding the development of a new genetically en - coded tag has been preprinted ( Clarke and Royle , 2016 ) and is currently under review at a journal . In addition to this , I have also collaborated on several other papers which have now been published ( Auckland et al . , 2017 ; Nixon et al . , 2017 ; Wood et al . , 2017 ) . My contribution to these are summarized in the appendices . 44 Chapter 2 Materials and Methods 2 . 1 Molecular biology RPL5 - mCherry - FRB was made by amplifying human ribosomal protein L5 ( RPL5 , IM - AGE clone 5736022 ) by PCR and inserting into pMito - mCherry - FRB ( made available from previous work ; see Cheeseman et al . 2013 ) via Eco RI - Age I . RPL22 - mCherry - FRB was made by amplifying human ribosomal protein L22 ( RPL22 , IMAGE clone 5109124 ) by PCR and inserting into pMito - mCherry - FRB via Eco RI - Bam HI . FRB - mCherry - FTH1 was made by amplifying human ferritin heavy polypeptide 1 ( FTH1 , IMAGE clone : 3459353 ) by PCR and inserting into pFRB - mCherry via Xho I - Eco RI . The mi - tochondrial target sequence TOM70p from pMito - mCherry - FRB was subcloned into FRB - mCherry - FTH1 via Bsr GI - Xba I , to make pMito - mCherry - FTH1 . To make FTL only , human ferritin light chain ( FTL , IMAGE clone 2905327 ) was ampliﬁed by PCR and inserted into pEGFP - C1 , removing EGFP , via Age I - Xho I . GFP - FKBP - LCa was available from previous work ( Cheeseman et al . , 2013 ) . FKBP - GFP - Myc - MAO was a kind gift from Sean Munro ( MRC - LMB , Cambridge ; see Wong and Munro 2014 ) . FRB - mCherry - FTH1 ( T2098L ) was made using a site - directed mutagenesis ( SDM ) method based on the QuikChange protocol ( Wang and Malcolm , 1999 ) to introduce a T2098L mutation . CD8 - GFP - FKBP was made by amplifying CD8 α from CD8 - mCherry - FRB ( made available from previous work ; see Wood et al . 2016 ) by PCR and inserting into pEGFP - FKBP - N1 via Nhe I - Age I . HIP1R - GFP - FKBP was made by amplifying HIP1R from Addgene plasmid 27700 by PCR and inserting into pEGFP - FKBP - N1 via Xho I - Age I . 46 2 . 2 Cell biology HeLa cells ( HPA / ECACC # 93021013 ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium ( DMEM , Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 100 U / ml penicillin / streptomycin at 37 ◦ C and 5 % CO 2 . Cells would reach 80 - 100 % con - ﬂuency before they where passaged . Cells where kept no longer than a total of 25 passages following initial thawing . Cells grown in iron - rich conditions were supple - mented with FeSO 4 · 7 H 2 O to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 m m in full DMEM , 16 hours prior to imaging . Transfection was performed using Genejuice ( Novagen ) . Cells seeded in 3 . 5 cm wells where grown to around 70 % conﬂuency , 24 hours prior to transfection . To per - form transfection , 3 µ l of Genejuice was added to 100 µ l of DMEM without additives and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes . A total of 1 . 5 µ g of DNA was added to the Genejuice / DMEM mixture and incubated for a further 15 minutes at room tem - perature . The DNA / Genejuice / DMEM mixture is then added to each well containing full DMEM and left for 12 - 16 hours overnight . Transfection media was washed o ﬀ the following morning and replaced with full DMEM and cells were imaged or ﬁxed 2 days following transfection . The total amount of DNA for each plasmid transfected in Fer - riTag experiments , was 750 ng of the GFP - FKBP tagged protein - of - interest and 750 ng FerriTag ( mixture of FTL only vector and FRB - mCherry - FTH1 ) . The ratio of tran - sected FerriTag plasmids is stated for each experiment . Optimal FerriTag expression is performed by transfecting 600 ng FTL only vector and 150 ng of FRB - mCherry - FTH1 ( i . e . 4 : 1 ) . Cell viability was performed using the trypan blue exclusion assay . HeLa cells were grown in 12 - well plates and incubated in full DMEM containing di ﬀ erent concentrations of FeSO 4 · 7 H 2 O . At certain time points , cells where detached from each well using trypsin and resuspended in full DMEM . A 1 : 1 dilution of cell suspension with 0 . 4 % Trypan Blue solution ( ThermoFisher ) was prepared for each suspension . Following brief incubation at room temperature , a total of 500 cells for each condition where 47 counted under a microscope . Non - viable cells appear blue and viable cells are unstained ( clear ) . 2 . 3 Light microscopy Fixed cell experiments were performed in transiently transfect HeLa cells attached to glass coverslips . Cells were ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde , 4 % sucrose in PBS at 37 ◦ C , washed in PBS and mounted in Mowiol containing DAPI . Imaging was performed on a Nikon Ti epiﬂuorescence microscope with standard ﬁltersets , equipped with a heated environmental chamber ( OKOlab ) and CoolSnap MYO camera ( Photometrics ) using NIS elements AR software . Live - cell microscopy of FerriTag kinetics was performed in HeLa cells plated on ﬂuo - rodishes ( WPI ) expressing GFP - FKBP - LCa and either FerriTag ( FTL : FRB - mCherry - FTH1 , 4 : 1 ) or rapalog compatible FerriTag ( FTL : FRB - mCherry - FTH1 T2098L , 4 : 1 ) . Cells were kept in Leibovitz L - 15 CO 2 - independent medium ( Sigma ) supplemented with 10 % FBS and kept at 37 ◦ C during acquisition . Imaging was captured on a spinning disc confocal microscope ( Ultraview Vox , Perkin Elmer ) with a 100x 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective taking frames every 2 seconds using a dual camera system ( Hamamatsu ORCA - R2 ) after excitation with 488 nm and 561 nm lasers . Transferrin uptake analysis was performed in HeLa cells cultured on glass coverslips , expressing GFP - FKBP - LCa and FerriTag ( FTL only : FRB - mcherry - FTH1 , 1 : 4 ) . 48 hours post - transfection , cells were serum - starved for 30 minutes in serum - free DMEM and then rapamycin was added in test conditions to induce FerriTagging . Control conditions had no rapamycin added . Hypertonic sucrose solution ( 0 . 45M in serum - free DMEM ) was added 15 minutes into serum starvation . Following 2 minutes rapamycin addition , Alexa647 - conjugated transferrin ( Invitrogen ) was added directly to all cells for 10 minutes . Cells were washed in warm PBS and ﬁxed in 3 % paraformaldehyde + 4 % sucrose for 15 minutes . Coverslips were washed in PBS and dH 2 O before mounting onto glass slides with Mowiol containing DAPI . In all experiments rapamycin ( Alfa Aesar ) was added by pipetting in a concentrated 48 solution in appropriate media at 37 ◦ C to a ﬁnal concentration of 200 n m . The same approach was used to add AP21967 at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 µ m . 2 . 4 Correlative light electron microscopy HeLa cells transfected with a GFP - FKBP tagged protein - of - interest and FerriTag ( FTL : FRB - mCherry - FTH1 . 4 : 1 ) , were plated onto gridded glass culture dishes ( P35G - 1 . 5 - 14 - CGRD , MatTek Corporation , Ashland , MA , USA ) . Iron - rich media was added 16 hours prior to imaging ( with the exception of the experiment shown in ﬁgure 4 . 4 C ) . Light microscopy was performed on a Nikon Ti epiﬂuorescence microscope ( described above ; see 2 . 3 . Cells were kept at 37 ◦ C in Leibovitz L - 15 CO 2 - independent medium supplemented with 10 % FBS during imaging . Using the photo - etched coordinates on each grid , the location of each cell - of - interest was recorded using brightﬁeld illumi - nation at 20x for future reference . The same cell was then relocated and ﬂuorescent live cell imaging was then acquired at 100x . During imaging , unless otherwise stated , rapamycin was added and once su ﬃ cient FerriTagging had been achieved , cells were immediately ﬁxed in 3 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 5 % paraformaldehyde in 0 . 05 m phosphate bu ﬀ er pH 7 . 4 for 1 h . Following ﬁxation , free aldehydes were quenched in 50 m m glycine solution and cells washed several times in 0 . 05 m phosphate bu ﬀ er . Cells were post - ﬁxed in 1 % osmium tetroxide ( Agar ) for 1 h , washed in distilled water and then dehydrated through an ascending series of ethanol ( 30 , 50 , 70 , 80 , 90 , 100 , 100 % . 5 minutes each ) . Cells were then inﬁltrated in epoxy resin ( TAAB ) using a 2 : 1 ratio of ethanol : resin for 30 minutes , 1 : 2 ratio of ethanol : resin for 30 minutes and then resin only for a further 60 minutes . Fresh full resin was then added and a gelatin capsule containing resin was placed over the grid containing the cell - of - interest . Resin was then left to poly - merize at 60 ◦ C for 48 hours . Coverslips attached to the polymerized resin block were removed by brieﬂy plunging into liquid nitrogen . The cell - of - interest was then located by correlating grid coordinates imprinted on the resin block with previously acquired 20x brightﬁeld images . The resin around the cell - of - interest was trimmed away using a glass knife and serial , ultrathin sections of 70 nm were then taken using a diamond 49 knife on an EM UC7 ( Leica Microsystems ) and collected on uncoated hexagonal 100 mesh grids ( EM resolutions ) . Electron micrographs were recorded using a JEOL 1400 TEM operating at 100 kV using iTEM software . See ﬁgure 2 . 1 . All CLEM experiments were processed in this way , with the exception of section 4 . 3 in which en bloc uranyl acetate staining was performed before ethanol dehydration at a concentration of 0 . 5 % in 30 % ethanol for 1 hour . 50 51 2 . 5 Image analysis Kinetics were measured using particle detection on binarized image stacks . Particles were used as a mask to collect mean pixel densities from green ( LCa ) and red ( FerriTag ) channels . The ratio of background - subtracted intensities was taken for each particle and the median value ( set to 0 ) used for averaging across multiple cells . As a control , the red channel was spatially randomized and analyzed in the same way , giving no response . Pearson’s correlation coe ﬀ cient was calculated from red and green ﬂuorescent channels in IgorPro 7 . 01 . For analysis of transferrin uptake , images were thresholded in the far red channel to isolate vesicular structures . Using the ImageJ plugin , analyse particles , a mask showing particles of 0 . 03 - 0 . 8 µ m and circularity of 0 . 3 - 1 . 0 for each image was created . Pixels over threshold within each cell were measured and values used as the basis for quantiﬁcation . Measurement of ﬂuorescence intensity was calculated from background subtracted integrated densities for the whole cell in ImageJ . Sections 4 . 6 , 4 . 7 and 4 . 8 contain full details of the determination of the labeling resolution of FerriTag , the signal - to - noise ratio calculation and the automated particle detection , respectively . The synthetic images generated for section 4 . 7 were made using two images . The ﬁrst , an 8 - bit random noise which is then blurred , and the second is black background . A 3x3 pixel white square is then put at random positions ( same location in the two images ) . The ﬁrst image is then blurred with Gaussian blur . For contextual mapping of HIP1R using FerriTag , electron micrographs in TIFF format were imported into IMOD and the plasma membrane and location of electron dense FerriTag particles were manually segmented . The coordinates corresponding to contours and objects were fed into IgorPro 7 . 01 using the output from model2point . Custom - written procedures ( available at https : / / github . com / quantixed / FerriTag ) processed these data . First , the coordinates were scaled from pixels to real - world values , and the closest distance ( proximity ) to the plasma membrane was recorded . Then , the 52 predicted beginning and end of the clathrin - coated pit were deﬁned manually in a graphical user interface . The contour length of the pit was determined and the contour length between the start of the pit and the point of closest approach for each particle was calculated . Using the ratio of these two lengths , a spatially normalized view of particle location in relation to an idealized clathrin - coated pit was plotted . Particles located at distal , uncoated regions and particles inside the pit were plotted separately . All ﬁgures were made in ImageJ or IgorPro 7 . 01 and assembled in Adobe Illus - trator . All code for image analysis in this thesis was written by Stephen Royle and is available at https : / / github . com / quantixed / FerriTag . 53 54 55 Chapter 3 Development of FerriTag and implementation for light microscopy 3 . 1 Introduction Genetically encoded probes are essential tools for CLEM that enable speciﬁc proteins - of - interest to be visualized at high resolution . As deﬁned in section 1 . 4 , available probes do not meet all of the criteria for an ideal CLEM probe . Therefore , the development of a new genetically - encoded probe for CLEM , is highly desirable . The probe must generate su ﬃ cient contrast that is tightly focused in order to be readily visualized by electron microscopy . Therefore , the genetically encoded tag must itself be electron dense or it should have the capability to bind exogenous metal ions to scatter electrons . Furthermore it should be small enough so it can access the target protein and should also be free to di ﬀ use throughout the cytoplasm , otherwise it may interfere with normal cellular processes . Two candidates that are known to be electron dense and are easily distinguishable from background by electron microscopy are ribosomes and ferritin . We wondered if either could be engineered to function as a probe for CLEM . Ribosome The ribosome catalyzes protein synthesis within the cell . A network of ribosomal pro - teins form two subunits that link together , which both have distinct functions ( Figure 3 . 1 A ) . Together they translate the sequence of codons on messenger ribonucleic acid directing the synthesis of a polypeptide chain where it can then form a functional pro - 57 tein . Ribosomes are found in the cytoplasm or bound to the endoplasmic reticulum . The Eukaryotic ribosome is relatively large in size ( approximately 20nm ) and gener - ates su ﬃ cient contrast to be clearly visualized within the cell by electron microscopy ( Leeson and Leeson , 1965 ) . Ferritin Ferritin is a small naturally occurring biological complex that acts to regulate iron levels in cells and is found in almost all living organisms . It is made up of 24 polypeptide subunits that form a spherical protein cage approximately 12 nm in diameter ( Figure 3 . 1 B ) . Subunits consist of heavy - chains ( FTH1 ) that contain the ferroxidase center and light - chains ( FTL ) that facilitate the mineralization of Fe 3 + . The Light and Heavy - chain stoichiometry making each cage varies between di ﬀ erent tissues ( Wilkinson et al . , 2006 ) . Within the central ferritin core interior , it has the ability to store up to 4500 iron atoms ( Jutz et al . , 2015 ) . This high iron content conﬁned within its 7 . 5 nm core makes ferritin very electron dense and thus can be readily visualized by electron microscopy ( Masuda et al . , 2010 ) . In fact , ferritin - conjugated antibodies where the ﬁrst probes to localize proteins by electron microscopy ( Singer , 1959 ) . Previous work has highlighted the use of ( bacterial ) ferritin as a genetic tag for cryo - electron tomography ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) . However , no work has been undertaken in mammalian cells using a ferritin - based genetic tag for CLEM . 58 59 Results 3 . 2 Direct fusion of ferritin results in aggregation The ﬁrst attempt to use ferritin as a genetic tag for CLEM in mammalian cells aimed to build upon previous work , by directly fusing ferritin to a protein - of - interest ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) . A mitochondrial target sequence ( Tom70p ) fused to mCherry and human ferritin heavy chain ( FTH1 ) was expressed in HeLa cells and imaged by ﬂuorescent light microscopy . However , it was clear this direct fusion resulted in severe aggregation and mislocalization of the mitochondria ( Figure 3 . 2A ) . This was most likely due to the multivalent nature of the ferritin cage as illustrated in ﬁgure 3 . 2B . It was clear this approach would not work . On this basis we did not try the direct fusion of a ribosomal subunit to a protein - of - interest as we did not want to interfere with normal protein synthesis . 60 61 3 . 3 Engineering an inducible electron dense parti - cle As the direct fusion to either ferritin or to the ribosome was not feasible , the idea of inducibly adding them to a protein - of - interest was explored . This would mean each protein can perform its normal cellular function prior to induction . To do this , a rapamycin - induced protein dimerization system was used ( Figure 1 . 4 ) . Ribosome Ribosomal proteins that were exposed to the outer surface of the Eukaryotic 60S ribo - somal subunit complex were selected ( Myasnikov et al . , 2016 ) . Ribosomal protein L5 ( RPL5 ) and L22 ( RPL22 ) were suitably positioned , each extending their C - terminus away from the complex exterior ( Figure 3 . 1A ) . It was thought by expressing a sin - gle ribosomal protein with mCherry - FRB fused at their C - terminus , a recombinant 60S subunit complex would form that could be inducibly targeted to an FKBP - tagged protein - of - interest . To test this idea , HeLa cells expressing a recombinant ribosomal complex as well as GFP - FKBP tagged monoamine oxidase ( MAO ) that localizes to mitochondria , where ﬁxed and processed for ﬂuorescence light microscopy . Before the addition of rapamycin , ribosomal complexes appeared homogeneously distributed in the cytoplasm . However , following rapamycin addition neither RPL5 ( Figure 3 . 3 A ) or RPL22 ( Figure 3 . 3 B ) relocalized to the mitochondria . It was concluded that with - out further optimization , ribosomes cannot work as inducible electron dense tags for CLEM . 62 63 Ferritin The same rationale used for ribosomal labelling was applied to engineering an inducible recombinant ferritin cage . FRB - mCherry was fused to the N - terminus of FTH1 , allow - ing the tag to be exposed to the exterior of the recombinant ferritin cage ( Figure 3 . 1B ) . It is essential FRB - mCherry is exposed to the exterior of the cage , as to not bury the tag inside the core of of the ferritin particle , which may interfere with its dimeriza - tion properties or its ability to bind iron . HeLa cells expressing FRB - mCherry - FTH1 as well as GFP - FKBP tagged MAO , where ﬁxed and processed for ﬂuorescence light microscopy . Whilst ferritin appeared to label the target protein following rapamycin addition , it did result in the mislocalization and aggregation of mitochondria . Further - more , ferritin aggregated with itself prior to rapamycin addition ( Figure 3 . 4 ) . This was likely due to the multivalent nature of ferritin . Therefore , for it to be e ﬀ ectively used as an inducible electron dense tag for CLEM , further optimization was needed . 64 65 3 . 4 Optimization of recombinant ferritin for inducible tagging It was thought that reducing the number of FRB - mCherry subunits per ferritin cage would minimize aggregation issues during recombinant ferritin cage assembly . To test this idea , the number of FRB - mCherry tagged FTH1 subunits were co - expressed with a higher ratio of untagged FTL subunits . HeLa cells expressing FRB - mCherry - FTH1 and FTL at di ﬀ erent ratios of ( 1 : 2 . 1 : 4 or 1 : 8 ) were expressed together with GFP - FKBP - MAO and imaged by ﬂuorescence light microscopy ( Figure 3 . 5 ) . In general a 1 : 2 ratio still resulted in aggregation of the recombinant ferritin particle whilst 1 : 8 did not provide su ﬃ cient expression of tagged FTH1 . Diluting the amount of tagged FTH1 subunits to 1 : 4 however resulted in the homogeneous distribution of recombinant ferritin prior to rapamycin addition and e ﬀ ectively labelled the protein - of - interest after application without any mislocalization or aggregation issues . We therefore determined this as the optimal condition for expression in HeLa cells and we named this optimized genetically encoded recombinant ferritin particle FerriTag . Using this subunit dilution approach with the direct ferritin tag was not seen feasible as we still have limited control over how many tagged and untagged subunits are expressed . It is therefore likely that if the 24 subunit ferritin cage had two or more tagged subunits within its structure , the protein - of - interest would still aggregate and / or mislocalise . 66 67 3 . 5 Temporal resolution of FerriTagging Our current model for FerriTag is shown in Figure 3 . 6 . FerriTag assembles in cells by expressing FRB - mCherry - FTH1 and FTL at a ratio of 1 : 4 . At the same time a GFP - FKBP - tagged protein - of - interest is expressed . Prior to the addition of rapamycin , Fer - riTag is free to di ﬀ use throughout the cytoplasm and the GFP - FKBP - tagged protein - of - interest performs its normal cellular function . Upon the addition of rapamycin , the heterodimerization of FKBP and FRB domains is induced resulting in FerriTag la - belling the protein - of - interest . This labelling event is referred to as FerriTagging . As both FerriTag and the protein - of - interest are ﬂuorescently labelled , FerriTagging can be observed by light microscopy . This means we can study the dynamics of an event and then correlate this with electron microscopy . It is therefore essential that an in - ducible system provides rapid labelling of the protein to be able to capture such an event . To assess the temporal resolution of FerriTagging , HeLa cells expressing FerriTag and GFP - FKBP - LCa where imaged using fast dual camera imaging by spinning disk confocal light microscopy , capturing frames every 2 seconds ( Figure 3 . 7 A ) . The kinetics of FerriTag appeared to show a very fast labelling phase followed by a much slower accumulation of ﬂuorescence . To look at the on - time of FerriTagging , the time to reach half maximum ( T 1 / 2 ) was used as a metric . In the case of labelling clathrin , FerriTagging reaches half maximum within a few seconds following the addition of rapamycin ( Figure 3 . 7 B , C and D ) . However , due to artefactual " spikes " in ﬂuorescence ( discussed below ) , these values may not be completely accurate and the half maximum on - time of FerriTagging is probably slower . To look into this , FerriTag ﬂuorescence in the cytoplasm was assessed and shown that the time taken to reach half maximum reduction is longer ( T 1 / 2 = 17 . 93 seconds ) which represents a more realistic value . The time taken to reach complete labelling is much slower . This is quantiﬁed by the time taken to reach maximum labelling , taking almost 5 minutes ( Figure 3 . 7 B , C and D ) . These data suggest FerriTagging occurs over two pools , an initial fast pool 68 and a much slower secondary pool . For all of these experiments , manual addition of rapamycin resulted in artefactual " spikes " in ﬂuorescence during image acquisition . This prevented the ﬁt of curves to data to assess the speed of the fast and slow phases of FerriTagging . Future experiments will use a ﬂow chamber and rapid solution switching to apply rapamycin without disrupting ﬂuorescence measurements . 69 70 71 72 73 3 . 6 FerriTagging does not perturb the function of clathrin For many experiments FerriTagging will occur , dynamics will be observed and the sample will be immediately ﬁxed and processed for electron microscopy . However there are cellular processes that occur on a longer timescale and it is therefore important to assess whether FerriTagging perturbs normal protein function in such cases . An example is clathrin - mediated encocytosis ( section 1 . 2 . 1 ) . Therefore , to assess whether FerriTagging inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis , transferrin uptake was compared in cells expressing FerriTag and GFP - FKBP - LCa in the presence or absence of rapamycin ( Figure 3 . 8 B ) . Rapamycin was added for 2 min - utes prior to the addition of transferrin , ensuring all LCa was Ferritagged ( Figure 3 . 8 A ) . Transferrin uptake was left to proceed in both conditions for 10 minutes , permitting su ﬃ cient time for its internalization ( Figure 3 . 8 A ) . Quantiﬁcation of transferrin uptake showed no di ﬀ erence between LCa Ferritagged cells and cells where no rapamycin was added , suggesting FerriTagging does not inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Fig - ure 3 . 8 C ) . Inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis could readily be detected by pre - treatment of the cells with hypertonic sucrose ( 0 . 45 m ) ( Figure 3 . 8 ) . 74 75 3 . 7 Rapamycin analogs are compatible with Fer - riTagging A potential limitation of using rapamycin to induce heterodimerization for FerriTag - ging , is its natural inhibitory e ﬀ ect on mTOR . FerriTagging occurs with in seconds ( section 3 . 5 ) , so over short imaging periods ( < 10 minutes ) , rapamycin will have no ef - fect on mTOR function . However , as suggested in section 3 . 6 , there may be applications where imaging will need to be acquired over longer periods following FerriTagging . To alleviate this issue we assessed whether FerriTag could be engineered to be compatible with rapamycin analogs to induce labelling following the addition of AP21967 ( section 1 . 2 . 2 ) . Threonine 2098 was mutated to a leucine in the FRB domain of FRB - mCherry - FTH1 to create a rapalog compatible FerriTag . HeLa cells expressing FerriTag ( FRB - mCherry - FTH1 T2098L : FTL , 1 : 4 ) and GFP - FKBP - LCa where imaged by spinning disk confocal light microscopy , and assessed for FerriTagging following the addition of AP21967 ( 1 µ m ) ( Figure 3 . 9 A ) . FerriTagging occurred immediately following AP21967 treatment ( Figure 3 . 9 B ) and speciﬁcally labelled clathrin - coated structures , similar to inducing heterodimerization by rapamycin ( Figure 3 . 7 ) . 76 77 3 . 8 Discussion This chapter introduces FerriTag , a new genetically encoded tag for CLEM . The de - velopment and implementation of the method had been achieved for light microscopy . Initial optimization focused on circumventing issues associated with the use of genetically - encoded ferritin . By expressing a mixture of untagged human ferritin light chain ( FTL ) with a lower concentration of FRB - mCherry tagged human ferritin heavy chain ( FTH1 ) , we can build an inducible recombinant ferritin cage ( FerriTag ) that does not aggregate with itself , or the target protein , before the addition of rapamycin . Fol - lowing the addition of rapamycin , FerriTag rapidly labels the protein - of - interest with high speciﬁcity . No aggregation of Ferritagged proteins - of - interest was seen for those we tested . Furthermore , we show that FerriTagging does not interfere with normal clathrin function . This is important for experiments where Ferritagged proteins will be imaged for longer periods . However , the impact of FerriTagging on normal protein function for other experiments would need to be assessed , case - by - case . The temporal resolution data suggests FerriTagging occurs within two pools ( Sec - tion 3 . 5 ) . An initial fast pool labels the target structure quickly following rapamycin addition . The resulting slow pool then continues to FerriTag the target protein but over a much slower time - scale . These two pools likely reﬂect how FerriTag can label structures within close proximity quickly following rapamycin addition but once FKBP binding sites on the protein - of - interest get taken up , the amount of FerriTag binding events become less frequent . Taken together , these data suggests the kinetics will per - mit the use of FerriTag to localize proteins involved in dynamic cellular processes but restricted to events that occur on a time - scale that last at least 20 seconds or more . This is further discussed in section 5 . Currently there is limited control over how many FRB - mCherry tagged FTH1 sub - units are expressed with untagged FTL subunits when FerriTag is made in cells . Whilst expressing tagged and untagged subunits at a ratio of 1 : 4 gives good expression of Fer - riTag with no adverse aggregation issues , using transient transfection of two separate 78 plasmids to do this may sometimes result in some cells not expressing , or expressing to much or too little of one plasmid . To circumvent this , it is possible to make a bicistronic vector containing an internal ribosome entry site ( IRES ) to ensure both transgenes are expressed . As the expression e ﬃ ciency of the IRES is not as strong as a cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) promoter , the correct expression ratio of tagged and untagged ferritin subunits can be achieved ( Kuzmich et al . , 2013 ) . In addition , a chimeric fusion incorporating multiple ferritin subunits can be engineered . It has previously been re - ported that the fusion of FTL and FTH1 using a ﬂexible linker is possible to express ferritin in mammalian cells that advantageously also has enhances the iron - loading properties of ferritin ( Iordanova et al . , 2010 ) . It is therefore plausible a similar con - struct can be engineered for FerriTag i . e . FRB - mCherry - FTH1 - FTL , that may help control subunit stoichiometry when expressed . A potential limitation of FerriTagging is the use or rapamycin . We show FerriTag - ging is compatible with rapalogs that can dimerize with exogenous FRB domains but do not interfere with mTOR signalling pathways . As endogenous FKBP is a highly abundant cytosolic protein , it can potentially out - compete exogenous FKBP for FRB binding , thereby decreasing heterodimerza - tion e ﬃ ciency . This may be problematic when studying low abundant proteins using FerriTag , as lower levels of exogenous FKBP are expressed . In such cases , we would deplete endogenous FKBP , which has been shown to improve e ﬃ ciency of rapamycin - induced dimerization ( Ballister et al . , 2014 ) . Similarly , exogenous FKBP - rapamycin complexes can bind endogenous mTOR . Consequently , endogenous mTOR would bind the target protein instead of FerriTag . If this proves problematic , we would combine endogenous FKBP knockdown with rapalog compatible FerriTag . Future improvement to the FerriTag methodology may look to other CID systems to improve labelling e ﬃ ciency and dynamics . Although rapamycin - induced dimerization using FerriTag has fast temporal resolution it may be that other techniques are quicker . The plant hormone , gibberellin , has recently been shown to trigger the interaction between a gibberellin insensitive dwarf1 ( GID1 ) and a gibberellin insensitive ( GAI ) 79 domain for CID experiments ( Figure 1 . 4 C ) . As this system is completely orthogonal it may result in faster labelling dynamics compared to rapamycin . Furthermore it will not interfere with endogenous cellular processes ( Miyamoto et al . , 2012 ) . In conclusion , we begin to meet the essential criteria for the ideal CLEM probe that are discussed in section 1 . 3 and with this method now working well by light microscopy , we now wanted to visualize FerriTagging by electron microscopy to localize proteins at the nanoscale . 80 Chapter 4 Characterization and application of FerriTag using correlative light electron microscopy 4 . 1 Introduction In the previous chapter we showed that FerriTagging works e ﬀ ectively as assessed by light microscopy . We saw how FerriTag could be attached to a protein - of - interest upon addition of rapamycin . We next wanted to characterise FerriTagging by electron microscopy . Key questions are whether the genetically - encoded proteins assemble to form a particle which can bind iron and whether these particles are speciﬁcally attached to proteins - of - interest . We also wanted to determine the resolution of FerriTagging . If FerriTag works well as a CLEM probe , we should be able to use it to address a real problem in cell biology . 82 Results 4 . 2 Loading FerriTag with iron is non - toxic to HeLa cells In order to visualize FerriTag by electron microscopy , it must bind enough iron to provide su ﬃ cient contrast to be distinguished from background noise . An iron - loading step during cell culture is therefore required . We reasoned the greater amount of iron the cell can take up , the greater the amount of iron FerriTag can bind and thus appear more electron dense . The concentration of iron used must be non - toxic to cells . Previous work , has shown that incubating HeLa cells for 72 hours in iron - rich culture medium containing 500 ug / ml of iron ( 3 . 3 mM FeSO 4 ) has adverse e ﬀ ects on cell viability and ultrastructure ( Jauregui et al . , 1975 ) . Determining the optimal culture time and concentration needed for loading cells with iron was therefore essential for FerriTagging . HeLa cells where incubated in varying concentrations of iron - rich media over periods of up to 48 hours . Cell viability was determined using the trypan blue exclusion assay at various time points up to 48 hours for each concentration ( Figure 4 . 1 ) . Whilst cell viability decreases over time at increasing iron concentrations , minimal toxicity was ob - served in cells cultured for 16 hours in media supplemented with 1 m m FeSO 4 ( 98 . 5 % ) . This was seen acceptable compared to control ( 99 . 87 % ) , whereas increased concentra - tions at the same time point signiﬁcantly reduced cell viability i . e . 3 m m FeSO 4 , 93 % . Thus , 1 m m FeSO 4 for 16 hours was used during CLEM sample preparation to load FerriTag with iron . 83 84 4 . 3 Optimization of sample processing using Fer - riTag for CLEM For FerriTag to be e ﬀ ectively used for CLEM , the electron density generated from its iron - loaded core must not be masked by over - staining samples during processing for electron microscopy . However , samples must be stained by heavy metals so cellular ultrastructure can be visualized . Finding the correct balance is therefore essential . Initial optimization of sample processing was performed in a correlative manner ( section 1 . 1 ) . HeLa cells were transfected with FerriTag ( FRB - mCherry - FTH1 : FTL , 1 : 4 ) and a GFP - FKBP - tagged protein - of - interest and plated on to gridded - glass culture dishes in order to track cells throughout the entire workﬂow . Prior to imaging , cells are incubated in media supplemented with 1 mM FeSO 4 for 16 hours ( section 4 . 2 ) . Fluorescent light microscopy is then performed and cells expressing both FerriTag and the GFP - FKBP - tagged protein - of - interest are selected . Rapamycin ( 200 n m ) is added and FerriTagging is observed . Once su ﬃ cient tagging has been achieved , cells are ﬁxed chemicaly . Samples are then post - ﬁxed and stained in 1 % osmium tetroxide for 1 hour and prepared for embedding in plastic resin prior to imaging by transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) ( ﬁgure 4 . 2 A ) . Routine heavy metal staining for electron microscopy generally uses en - bloc uranyl acetate and on - section uranyl acetate and lead citrate staining ( Graham and Orenstein , 2007 ) . However , we found these masked the electron density of FerriTag and were therefore omitted from the protocol ( ﬁgure 4 . 2 B ) . The ﬁnal optimized workﬂow for processing Ferritagged samples for correlative light electron microscopy using chemical ﬁxation is shown in ﬁgure 4 . 2 and is used for all following CLEM experiments herein . It should be noted that there may be other processing protocols or techniques that are more suited for the better visualization of FerriTag , including those that better preserve cellular ultrastructure such as high pressure freezing and freeze substitution . These workﬂows are discussed in chapter 5 . 85 86 4 . 4 FerriTag can be used to localize intracellular proteins using CLEM We next wanted to assess whether FerriTag could be used to localize intracellular pro - teins at the nanoscale following the optimized correlative workﬂow outlined in section 4 . 3 . To do this , two di ﬀ erent proteins in disparate locations were selected that could be easily distinguished in the cell by electron microscopy . • Monoamine oxidase ( MAO ) an outer mitochondrial membrane protein • Clathrin light chain a ( LCa ) , part of the clathrin triskelion ( Section 1 . 2 . 1 ) Each protein was tagged with GFP - FKBP , expressed in HeLa cells with FerriTag ( FRB - mCherry - FTH1 : FTL , 1 : 4 ) and imaged by live - cell ﬂuorescent light microscopy ( ﬁgure 4 . 3 ) . The grid coordinate containing each cell - of - interest were noted for track - ing of the same cell throughout the CLEM workﬂow . Prior to rapamycin addition , FerriTag is homogeneously distributed throughout the cell and both the mitochondria and clathrin do not aggregate or mislocalise . Rapamycin addition induced the het - erodimerization of both FKBP and FRB resulting in FerriTag speciﬁcally labelling each protein - of - interest rapidly . Following ﬁxation and processing , ultrathin sections of the same cell imaged by light microscopy were imaged by electron microscopy . Elec - tron dense FerriTag particles , the correct size of the interior core of human ferritin ( 7 nm ) , could be easily distinguished from background noise in electron micrographs . Furthermore , the ultrastructure of the cell is also visible . Speciﬁcally , electron dense FerriTag particles can be seen decorating the mitochondrial membrane in GFP - FKBP - Myc - MAO cells and clathrin - coated pits and vesicles in GFP - FKBP - LCa cells , where each protein - of - interest is normally located . 87 88 4 . 5 FerriTagging is speciﬁc to the target protein Whilst we could observe electron dense particles in the vicinity of the target protein that consistent with size and shape as ferritin ( Figure 4 . 4 A ) , we needed direct evidence that they were FerriTag . Three control experiments using di ﬀ erent sample preparation conditions were set up that would determine their identity and test the speciﬁcity of FerriTagging . First , samples prepared in section 4 . 4 could be used as internal controls ( Figure 4 . 4 B ) . That is we checked to see the density of labelling at non - target sites . No particles were seen decorating clathrin - coated structures in cells where MAO was Ferritagged . Similarly , no particles were seen on the mitochondrial membrane in cells where LCa was Ferritagged . Second , HeLa cells where prepared for CLEM as before ( Section 4 . 3 ) but without the addition of rapamycin ( Figure 4 . 4 C ) . FerriTag particles still form in absence of rapamycin , but without heterodimerization between FKBP and FRB , no FerriTagging of the protein - of - interest occurs . This results in no obvious particles in the vicinity of the target organelle in samples expressing FerriTag with either GFP - FKBP tagged MAO or LCa . Note , FerriTag can be seen within the cytoplasm . Finally , HeLa cells where prepared for CLEM as before ( Section 4 . 3 ) but were cultured in normal media and not under iron - rich conditions ( Figure 4 . 4 D ) . Whilst FerriTag could label the protein - of - interest by light microscopy , no obvious particles ( compared to iron - loaded cells 4 . 4 A ) were observed in rapamycin treated cells that had no iron preincubation . In some cases , particles that may be FerriTag could be partially visualised . However , they were much less dense ( shown by comparing representative line scans from Figure 4 . 4 A and D ) suggesting cells needed to be iron - loaded to enhance particle contrast . The number of FerriTag particles found in the cytoplasm and labelling the target membrane are counted in 4 . 4 . Particles within a 15 nm membrane - proximal region for MAO were counted i . e . the maximum length state of FerriTag calculated in section 89 4 . 6 and a 50 nm region for LCa i . e . maximum length state plus clathrin coat ( approx - imately 35 nm ( Wood et al . , 2016 ) ) . It is clear the number of FerriTag particles at target membrane increases following the addition of rapamycin to induce FerriTagging . However a much more quantitative approach is needed to fully assess the e ﬃ ciency of labelling . Together , these experimental conditions provide strong evidence the electron dense particles observed decorating the protein - of - interest are FerriTag and that FerriTagging is speciﬁc to the target protein . Furthermore , it also shows an excess of iron is needed to provide su ﬃ cient electron density for it to be readily visualised by electron microscopy . 90 91 4 . 6 The labelling resolution of FerriTag is on the order of 10 nm We deﬁne labelling resolution as the measurement of accuracy that deﬁnes how precise the detected position of a particle corresponds to the location of a labelled protein . This is calculated by how far the particle is relative to its target . Theoretically , this distance could be up to 22 nm for FerriTag ( Figure 4 . 5 A ) . This prediction is based on the sum of lengths estimated from co - linearly aligning the structures of all the components in a Ferritagged complex i . e . - GFP - FKBP - Rapamycin - FRB - mCherry - Ferritin . However , ﬂexibility in the linkers between each domain in the complex means it may adopt a di ﬀ erent conformation that would reduce the distance between the target protein and FerriTag . Moreover , the tag itself is mobile and could be in a number of poses relative to its target . To experimentally determine the labelling resolution , CD8a , a transmembrane pro - tein was Ferritagged . This gave a clear surface from which to measure particle dis - tances . HeLa cells expressing FerriTag ( FRB - mCherry - FTH1 : FTL , 1 : 4 ) and GFP - FKBP - CD8 α were imaged by live - cell ﬂuorescent light microscopy and following Fer - riTagging of CD8 α , cells where processed for electron microscopy as described in section 4 . 3 ( ﬁgure 4 . 5 B ) . Electron micrographs show FerriTag decorating CD8 α at the plasma membrane . The perpendicular distance from the centre of the FerriTag particle to the inner side of the plasma membrane was measured for 458 particles which gave a median distance of 9 . 5 nm ( ﬁgure 4 . 5 C ) . To interpret the shape of the experimental distribution , computer simulations were carried out that modelled the detection of FerriTag particles in electron micrographs . To do this , the origin of each particle was set on an xy plane at z = 0 , and FerriTag was modelled as a ball - and - chain . The length state , pose , sampling and error was then built into each simulation . The ﬁrst simulation modelled FerriTag at a ﬁxed length of 22 nm , due to this being its maximum theoretical length state ( Figure 4 . 5 A ) . However it was clear this distribution did not ﬁt the experimental data ( Figure 4 . 5 C i ) . Due to 92 ﬂexibility in the linkers of the domains between the ferritin particle and target protein , it is likely that FerriTag exists at distances shorter than 22 nm . The second simulation therefore modelled FerriTag where it could exist over a number of length states between 6 . 5 and 22 nm i . e . the minimum and maximum theoretical length state , respectively . The simulation that best ﬁt experimental data was where FerriTag could exist in a number of length states from 7 to 18 nm ( Figure 4 . 5 C ii ) . The median value was calculated to be 10 . 5 nm , which was in line with experimental data . Furthermore , the simulation indicates the observed distance in electron micrographs underestimates the length state by around 11 % to 13 % ( Figure 4 . 5 D ) . 93 94 4 . 7 FerriTag has a high signal - to - noise ratio The signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) is a measure of sensitivity that compares the level of a desired signal to the level of background noise . For electron microscopy , good SNR is di ﬃ cult to achieve since heavy - metal staining during sample processing masks the electron density provided by the probe . Samples can be processed without staining , however this compromises the ability to visualize cellular ultrastructure . A CLEM probe that provides high SNR is therefore highly desirable . To determine the SNR of FerriTag , images taken to measure the labelling resolution from section 4 . 6 were used , since it was the largest dataset available . The XY coor - dinates for each FerriTag particle in all electron micrographs were determined . Using these , a 21x21 pixel box centred on each particle was excised ( ﬁgure 4 . 6 A ) and the image was ﬁtted with a 2D Gaussian function , f ( x , y ) = z 0 + Aexp ⎡ ⎣ − 1 2 ( 1 − cor 2 ) ⎛ ⎝ % x − x 0 σ x & 2 + ’ y − y 0 σ y ( 2 − 2 cor ( x − x 0 ) ( y − y 0 ) σ x . σ y ⎞ ⎠ ⎤ ⎦ where the cross - correlation term , cor ∈ [ − 1 , 1 ] ( ﬁgure 4 . 6 B ) . A total of 441 par - ticles were analysed and values for the width in X and Y of each are shown in ﬁgure 4 . 6 C . On average a FerriTag particle was approximately 10 nm in size ( ﬁgure 4 . 6 C , red ) and had a peak density of around 85 arbitrary units ( ﬁgure 4 . 6 C , grey ) . This information was used to calculate the SNR . SNR is deﬁned as , SNR = µ signal σ background 95 To calculate µ signal , a 5 x 5 pixel ROI centred on the x 0 and y 0 values from each ﬁt was used . From the same electron micrograph , σ background was calculated from a region that was around 400 x 400 pixels on average . The background region - of - interest ( ROI ) was selected mostly inside the cell but also included membrane and some extracellular areas . Grid bars were avoided completely ( Figure 4 . 6 C ) . The calculation revealed that FerriTag , using the current processing protocol for CLEM ( section 4 . 3 ) and manual selection of particles , gives a SNR of approximately 8 . 7 : 1 ( ﬁgure 4 . 6 F ) . 96 97 4 . 8 FerriTagging is highly e ﬃ cient We now wanted to determine the e ﬃ ciency of FerriTagging . Prior to the addition of rapamycin , FerriTag is homogeneously distributed throughout the cytoplasm . Induc - tion of heterodimerization by the addition of rapamycin results in FerriTag labelling the protein - of - interest . Whilst we visualize this by light microscopy , we cannot assume that all FerriTag is labelling all of the protein - of - interest . An unbiased quantitative study is therefore required that can assess what concentrations of FerriTag are localised to the target region compared to the non - target region , before and after the addition of rapamycin , in electron micrographs . Since FerriTag provides high SNR ( section 4 . 7 , it can be automatically detected by a computer . Method for automatic detection of FerriTag First , each electron micrograph is inverted and a 20 pixel mean ﬁltered version is sub - tracted ( Figure4 . 7 A and B ) . This removes any background inhomogeneity and equal - izes particle detection across the whole image . Particles with a SNR of 3 and a size of 5 are then automatically detected using the ImageJ plugin , ComDet v0 . 3 . 5 . However , these basic parameters detected parts of the image that did not look to be true parti - cles . More stringent detection parameters resulted in particles being missed . Further classiﬁcation was therefore needed to discriminate real particles from spurious detec - tion . The Z - score of mean intensity of each detection was calculated and its mean inten - sity was used as the basis for discrimination ( Figure 4 . 7 C ) . Z score is deﬁned as , z = x − µ σ where x is the mean intensity of an individual detection , µ and σ are the average 98 and standard deviation of the intensity of all detections in the image , respectively . In parallel , each micrograph is segmented into three regions ( Figure 4 . 7 D ) , 1 . A membrane zone ( white ) , deﬁned below the plasma membrane , where we would expect bound FerriTag to localise to the target protein , 2 . A cytoplasmic zone ( grey ) , where unbound FerriTag would localise , 3 . Outside of the cell ( black ) , where no FerriTag should be present . Therefore , based on the expected localisation of particles , the maximum Z - score of detections outside the cell was used as a lower limit for acceptance and the maximum Z - score of detections in the membrane was taken as the upper limit for acceptance ( Figure 4 . 7 E ) . This means that all detections outside the cell was excluded and everything intracellular through to the darkest particle at the membrane was kept . The relative densities of accepted particles were then used to calculate the e ﬃ ciency of FerriTagging by comparing cytoplasmic and membrane regions . To test the performance of this workﬂow , a synthetic dataset of randomly dis - tributed particles in an image was generated ( Figure 4 . 7 F ) . Automatic detection was carried out and the data was plotted ( Figure 4 . 7 G - I ) . It shows that the workﬂow can reliably detect particles in images far beyond the number of particles we encounter in real electron micrographs . We can therefore assume each particle is being correctly detected . 99 100 Determining the e ﬃ ciency of FerriTag To measure the e ﬃ ciency of FerriTagging , we compared two datasets to assess the relative density of particles at the membrane and the cytoplasm . For this , we used electron micrographs from cells expressing GFP - FKBP - LCa and FerriTag , with and without ( control ) the addition of rapamycin , respectively ( Figure 4 . 8 A ) . Automatic detection was performed as described above for each dataset . A 50 nm membrane region was used for segmentation to account for the clathrin - coat ( approx - imately 30 nm ) and the maximum possible length of a Ferritagged complex ( approxi - mately 22 nm ) . In control samples , a total of 318 particles per µ m 3 were detected in the cytoplasm and 592 per µ m 3 in the membrane , giving a 1 . 9 fold enrichment ( Figure 4 . 8 C ) . In Ferritagged samples , a total of 348 particles per µ m 3 were detected in the cytoplasm and 1493 per µ m 3 in the membrane , giving a 4 . 3 fold enrichment . This data gives some indication that FerriTagging of a protein - of - interest represents real labelling , and that unbound FerriTag does not interfere with detection of genuine FerriTag par - ticles . However , It should be realised this software in its current state does pick out many false detections meaning it is still needs work to be used routinely . Furthermore , it is puzzling why more FerriTag particles are being detected in the cytoplasm in plus rapamycin samples compared to control where no rapamycin has been added , despite FerriTag ﬂorescence being very similar on average before the addition of rapamycin in both conditions ( Figure 4 . 8 B ) . This is discussed in section 4 . 10 . 101 102 4 . 9 Contextual nanoscale mapping of HIP1R We had now developed and characterized FerriTag for CLEM and wanted to apply Fer - riTagging to a cell biological question . The localization of HIP1R during maturation of a vesicle in clathrin - mediated endocytosis is not well understood , with three com - peting models presenting di ﬀ erent ideas ( ﬁgure 1 . 3 ) . To determine its true localization we used FerriTag to perform contextual nanoscale mapping of HIP1R using CLEM . HeLa cells expressing FerriTag ( FRB - mCherry - FTH1 : FTL , 1 : 4 ) and HIP1R - GFP - FKBP were imaged by live - cell ﬂuorescent light microscopy . Rapamycin induced the heterodimerization of FKBP and FRB domains resulting in FerriTagging of HIP1R . Cells were then processed for electron microscopy as described in section 4 . 4 and elec - tron micrographs of Ferritagged HIP1R on clathrin - coated pits were acquired ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 A ) . Each micrograph was segmented to highlight the location of each FerriTag par - ticle as well as the plasma membrane proﬁle of the pit . The edges of the pit were also deﬁned , enabling mapping of FerriTgged HIP1R distal to the pit , i . e . in adjacent areas of uncoated plasma membrane ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 B ) . Spatial averaging was then used to plot the distribution of all particles symmetrically about an idealized clathrin - coated pit for visualization ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 C ) . This revealed three key ﬁndings regarding the distribution of HIP1R . 1 ) HIP1R is homogeneously distributed over the entire crown of the clathrin - coated pit ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 C ) , 2 ) HIP1R also localizes to distal uncoated regions of the plasma membrane , albeit at a lower density ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 C and D ) , 3 ) Finally , the distance from Ferritagged HIP1R particles to the plasma membrane was greater at the pit compared to distal uncoated regions , a di ﬀ erence of 10 nm on average ( ﬁgure 4 . 9 E ) . As the C - terminus of HIP1R is Ferritagged and the N - terminus binds the plasma membrane , di ﬀ erences in distance to the membrane most likely correspond to conformational changes of the molecule . This therefore suggests HIP1R , when bound at the pit is in its extended form and in its kinked form at distal uncoated regions of the membrane . 103 104 105 4 . 10 Discussion In this chapter , FerriTag was optimised for correlative light electron microscopy . We developed a CLEM protocol using FerriTag that is simple and robust . This protocol was applied to a novel cell biological question . Our approach to load FerriTag with iron under iron - rich conditions had minimal e ﬀ ects on cell viability in HeLa cells . In addition , we believe expression of FerriTag itself will likely bu ﬀ er the iron supplementation and o ﬀ set any adverse e ﬀ ects . In other cell types or tissue that are more sensitive to iron levels cell viability will need to be assessed . If iron - loading cells decreases their viability FerriTagging may not be possible . Using the optimised protocol for CLEM outlined in section 4 . 3 , FerriTag can be used to acutely label proteins with high e ﬃ ciency and speciﬁcity . FerriTag provides electron density that is tightly focussed enabling it to generate a high SNR ( 8 . 7 : 1 ( Section 4 . 7 ) so it can be easily detected from background in electron micrographs . The SNR was calculated using a large background ROI that contained around 160 , 000 pixels on average and included cellular structures such as membrane as well as some extracellular area . When a smaller background ROI was used that contained 10 , 000 pixels and restricted to cytoplasmic areas only , the SNR was 10 . 8 : 1 , which seemed artiﬁcially high . Using a larger ROI therefore gives a more realistic value . A reason why the SNR of FerriTag is high , is due to the minimal staining conditions used in the CLEM protocol ( Section 4 . 3 ) . The heavy metal staining during sample processing was optimised to enable clear visualization of both FerriTag and cellular ultrastructure . This is important to bring context to the localisation of a tagged protein - of - interest and is something other metal - ligand based tags have failed to achieve ( Wang et al . , 2011 ; Risco et al . , 2012 ; Morphew et al . , 2015 ) . However , more routine processing pro - tocols implement other heavy - metal staining such as uranyl acetate to further increase the contrast of ultrastructure . However this was shown to mask the visualization of FerriTag ( Section 4 . 3 ) . Other processing protocols that have not yet been explored may enhance the better visualisation of FerriTag and are discussed in chapter 5 . 106 The labelling resolution of FerriTag is on the order of 10 nm . This exceeds the capa - bilities of standard immunogold techniques ( approximately 16 nm ) ( Amiry - Moghaddam and Ottersen , 2013 ) and methods that use DAB precipitation which have inherent low labelling resolutions due to the di ﬀ use nature of the precipitate they form ( Shu et al . , 2011 ; Martell et al . , 2012 ; Lam et al . , 2014 ; Ariotti et al . , 2015 ) . Whilst , super - resolution microscopy typically has a spatial resolution of around 10 - 20 nm it has further error in labelling resolution ( depending on the labelling methodology ) ( Huang et al . , 2009 ; Ma et al . , 2017 ) . Though in some specialized cases super - resolution mi - croscopy has reached sub 5 nm and will likely get even better in the future ( Schnitzbauer et al . , 2017 ) . Although di ﬃ cult to compare methods directly , FerriTag does have the added beneﬁt of being able to see all structures in the cell whereas super - resolution microscopy is limited to visualizing ﬂuorophores only . This said , super - resolution mi - croscopy does allow thousands of events in many sample to be captured per experiment , where in comparison electron microscopy has very low throughput . FerriTag can be automatically detecting by a computer using the workﬂow outlined in section 4 . 8 . However , whilst we can conﬁdently show enrichment of FerriTag parti - cles in plus rapamycin samples compared to control , the computer detection workﬂow is still very much a work in progress and needs major improvement . The software is prone to error , ﬁnding many false detections in electron micrographs that do not repre - sent true FerriTag particles . This limitation is highlighted by the fact we demonstrate detection of more particles in the cytoplasm in plus rapamycin samples compared to control , where instead we would expect to see a decease ( Figure 4 . 7 C ) . The only other explanation is 1 ) cytoplasmic clathrin is being Ferritagged which would repre - sent true labelling or 2 ) more FerriTag has been expressed in plus rapamycin samples and more background is observed . It is hard to prove point 1 ) , as clathrin by itself cannot be visualised directly in - resin by itself , so discerning whether Ferritagged cyto - plasmic clathrin represents true labelling is not possible . Fluorescence was calculated in Images used for particle detection to measure FerriTag expression ( Figure 4 . 7 B ) . Interestingly , the mean values for minus and plus rapamycin samples where very sim - 107 ilar , suggesting the amount of FerriTag being expressed in cells was also similar . It may therefore be the automated analysis pipeline just detecting more false results in plus rapamycin cells compared to controls . It is clear more development is needed to provide truly accurate , reliable and unbiased detection in this way . Future work will also determine actual false background detections by performing automated analysis on untransfected cells , where no FerriTag is expressed and no detections are expected . This was something that had not been implemented in this work as correlative samples were processed in a way where only the cell - of - interest is tracked throughout the entire workﬂow and no untransfected cells are seen in - resin to image . False detection may also be corrected using in vitro approaches . FerriTag could be puriﬁed from cells and then blotted on electron microscopy sections that have been processed for CLEM with FerriTagging . An initial image would be taken prior to blotting puriﬁed FerriTag and a second image following blotting . Automated analysis would then proceed and the detections from each image compared . FerriTag particles in - resin that do not match the parameters met by blotted FerriTag would be determined false and omitted . In hindsight , a more classical stereological approach should have been implemented to as - sess the e ﬃ ciency of FerriTagging , prior to the development of an automated detection pipeline . Brieﬂy , stereology refers to the spatial interpretation of sections to deter - mine the relative labelling intensities conﬁned within set compartments . By counting the amount of FerriTag particles within cytoplasmic and target labelling site areas in electron micrographs , high accuracy comparisons can be made with good statistical accuracy . From this , the amount of FerriTag particles per µ m 3 can be estimated and would show how many more particles are found in each compartment between plus and minus rapamycin samples . Following this , segmentation of whole cell volumes could be performed to determine detailed analysis of individual 3D compartments . Whilst this would provide a full representation of the relative labelling intestines throughout the whole sample , this would require much more work than stereological analysis as serial sectioning of whole cells would have to be performed . It is important to highlight why the SNR parameter ( 3 ) for automatic detection is 108 lower than the calculated SNR value ( 11 ) from section 4 . 7 . When a SNR of 11 was used in the automatic detection work ﬂow , the program failed to detect any particles . This was likely due to particles in the the mean ﬁltered version of the image not having a SNR this high . Instead , we found using a size of 5 and SNR of 3 gave reliable detection of true particles and some false positives . Future directions in FerriTag optimisation to create more dense particles , as well as improvements to image analysis will hopefully result in the ability to detect all true particles only . Work is ongoing in the lab to improve computer detection towards this goal . The high e ﬃ ciency , speciﬁcity , SNR and resolution of FerriTag make it ideal for mapping protein distribution at the nanoscale . We used FerriTag to perform contex - tual nanoscale mapping of HIP1R in HeLa cells . Three models for its localization and conformation during clathrin - mediated endocytosis have been described ( ﬁgure 1 . 3 ) . We propose a model that combines aspects from these previous ﬁndings ( Figure 4 . 10 B ) . We show that HIP1R localizes across the entire clathrin - coated pit and also distal , uncoated regions of the plasma membrane . This ﬁnding is contrary to the ﬁrst model ( ﬁgure 1 . 3 A ) . However this study used an ’unrooﬁng’ strategy that likely removes much of the cellular interior including HIP1R , potentially restricting immunogold la - belling artiﬁcially to the rim of the clathrin - coated pit ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ) . Though , this paper does support our observation that HIP1R is found in distal regions , bound to actin cytoskeleton . Whilst our localization data more closely matches model 3 ( ﬁgure 1 . 3 C ) , we also observe conformational di ﬀ erences in HIP1R that are reported in model 2 ( ﬁgure 1 . 3 B ) . We show HIP1R localises more closely to plasma membrane at distal , uncoated regions of the membrane compared to when bound at the pit . From this data we propose the N - terminal ANTH domain of HIP1R associates with the plasma membrane and the C - terminal region THATCH domain binds actin . At distal , uncoated regions of the plasma membrane HIP1R exists in its closed conﬁrma - tion . Whilst interaction with clathrin encourages it to adopt its extended conﬁrmation providing a link between the clathrin coat and the actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 4 . 10 A and B ) . This arrangement allows the coat to be anchored against the cytoskeleton while 109 polymerizing actin provides the force needed to push the clathrin - coated vesicle away from the membrane during maturation . To further conﬁrm this hypothesis , it would be beneﬁcial to also be able to visualise actin to discern its localisation in relation to HIP1R also . This could be achieved using cryo - tomography and a duel labelling exper - iment where HIP1R is labelled by FerriTag and actin is labelled with metallothionein ( Methodology discussed in section 5 ) . Furthermore , to prove this model absolutely and provide a deﬁnitive answer to the conformational state of HIP1R , FerriTagging should be performed at another place on the molecule . Ideally the N - terminal ANTH domain of HIP1R would be FerriTagged which would demonstrate that this domain is closer to the membrane around the clathrin - coated pit . However , labelling HIP1R at its N - terminal has the potential to disrupt it normal localisation as it may interfere with its membrane binding properties . If this is the case , it may be possible to incorporate an FKBP domain internally in HIP1R , after the ANTH domain but before the C - terminal and still be able to detect conformational changes using FerriTag . 110 111 Chapter 5 Discussion This thesis has outlined the initial development of FerriTag as a genetically - encoded tag for correlative light electron microscopy , as well as its utility to answer a long - standing question in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . FerriTag is ready for use in various areas of cell biology . An example would be dis - covering new proteins that function as inter - microtubule bridge proteins in the mitotic spindle . Currently only the TACC3 / ch - TOG / clathrin complex has been conﬁrmed , leaving at least 3 more populations with mean lengths ranging from 21 . 8 , to 53 . 3 nm to be identiﬁed ( Booth et al . , 2011 ) . Previously this task has been challenging , as the only way to directly visualise these structures is by electron microscopy . Immuno - gold labelling can then be performed to localise proteins - of - interest at high - resolution . However , weak ﬁxation is usually necessary to preserve antigenicity , often resulting in compromised ultrastructure and poor microtubule preservation ( Section 1 . 1 . 1 . 1 ) . As FerriTag is genetically encoded , no permabilisation of the cell membrane is necessary . Furthermore , it is compatible with high - pressure freezing which would ensure opti - mal ultrastructual preservation . This would require an optimised methodology which is discussed later . FerriTag therefore provides the ideal method to label candidate proteins and localise them at high resolution to determine whether they are apart of inter - microtubule bridge structures . Another project FerriTag will be useful for is the nanoscale mapping of other clathrin - mediated endocytic proteins , as HIP1R has been shown in this thesis ( Section 4 . 9 ) . This would provide high - resolution contex - tual insight to where each protein resides , potentially giving novel insight to how they function . Eventually this would create a complete model of all proteins involved in 113 clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Whilst the use of FerriTag has the potential to be useful for questions such as these in its current form , there are a number of improvements that could be made . Furthermore , like other genetically - encoded tags for CLEM , FerriTag is not without its limitations . Improvements To date , we have only explored the use of FerriTag in cells that transiently express the GFP - FKBP tagged protein - of - interest . Whilst this has not been a problem in our ex - periments , transient overexpression , in some cases , can create complications with gene dosage , protein folding , complex assembly and downstream regulation ( Gibson et al . , 2013 ) . To circumvent these issues and enable FerriTagging of proteins at endogenous levels , we plan to use gene - editing technologies to generate cell lines that encode GFP - FKBP tagged proteins ( Cox et al . , 2015 ) . As proteins are expressed at lower levels in gene - edited cells compared to overexpressed , a foreseeable obstacle will be to optimize heterodimerization using rapamycin , as discussed in section 3 . 8 . It may be possible to further improve various aspects of FerriTag itself . It is clear we are not labelling all target protein within the cell i . e . there is much more clathrin present on respective structures than what is actually being labelled with FerriTag . This may be due to several factors including , amount of FerriTag made and how much GFP - FKBP target protein is being expressed . Whilst it may be di ﬃ cult to control the amount of FerriTag made within the cell , more e ﬃ cient labelling may be achieved by concentrating FerriTagging to a speciﬁc area of the cell . In its current form , we are unable to spatially control FerriTagging due to the di ﬀ usive nature of the dimerizer ( rapamcyin or AP21967 ) . To provide more localised activation we could design an optogentic compatible FerriTag . A candidate system to do this with is UVR8 - COP1 as dimerization is irreversible ( Huang et al . , 2014 ) . However , activation is initiated by UV - B ( 280 nm ) which induces photodamage . Tunable light - inducible dimerisation tags ( TULIPs ) has been extensively used as an optogenetic dimerizing tool ( Strickland 114 et al . , 2012 ) . Brieﬂy , LOVpep , a modiﬁed phototrophin 1 light oxygen voltage ( LOV ) domain can dimerize with an engineered PDZ domain following exposure to blue light ( < 500 nm ) . However , LOVpep rapidly dissociates from the PDZ domain which isn’t ideal for FerriTag experiments , as a more stable interaction is needed to hold it at the target protein . The CRY2 - CIB system would be better suited , due to its slower dissociation rate ( around 5 minutes ) . Here , cryptochrome 2 ( CRY2 ) , a light - sensitive photosensory protein can bind cytochromes - interacting basic helix - loop - helix protein 1 ( CIB1 ) following exposure to blue light ( 470 nm ) ( Taslimi et al . , 2016 ) . As FerriTagging occurs within seconds ( Section 3 . 5 ) , ﬁxation would occur well before the CRY2 / CIB domains dissociate from one another , ensuring FerriTag remains bound to the target protein . In addition to improving labelling e ﬃ ciency it may be possible to further improve the labelling resolution of FerriTag . This could be achieved by redesigning FerriTag and making it smaller . By removing the ﬂuorescent protein i . e . GFP , from the candidate protein , it potentially reduces the labelling resolution by 4 . 9 nm ( Figure 4 . 5 ) . As we can directly visualise FerriTagging itself , the protein - of - interest does not have to be directly visualised also . In its current form , FerriTag has only been shown to bind iron to generate its electron density . This electron density could be improved by enhancing the iron - loading properties of FerriTag by expressing a mutant form that has been recently shown to bind up to threefold more iron than wildtype mammalian heavy chain ferritin ( Matsumoto et al . , 2015 ) . In addition , the expression of divalent metal ion transferase 1 ( DMT1 ) could also increase the e ﬃ ciency of iron import into cells for FerriTag to bind and potentially increase its contrast . ( Tabuchi et al . , 2002 ) . FerriTag could also be engineered to bind other , more electron dense metal ions in - cluding cadmium ( Iwahori et al . , 2006 ) , silver ( Kasyutich et al . , 2010 ) and gold ( Fan et al . , 2010 ) which would provide better contrast by electron microscopy . Further improvement to sample processing and protocol design will enable better visualization of both FerriTag and cellular ultrastructure . Our current processing pro - tocol for CLEM with FerriTag uses an osmium only heavy - metal staining approach following chemical ﬁxation . We are yet to try alternative en bloc reagents , concentra - 115 tions and times of staining or other methods of ﬁxation that could maximize the SNR of FerriTag and improve contrast of ultrastructure in electron micrographs . In addition , we could perform post - staining with heavy metals following initial imaging by electron microscopy to increase the contrast of samples . The same sample would be re - imaged and the tag position correlated across both images . The use of electron tomography may also increase the SNR of FerriTag as well as further improve resolution . This may be performed on section using the current protocol outlined here or under cryo conditions whereby thin whole - cells are directly imaged following cryo - immobilisation ( Medalia et al . , 2002 ) . To improve preservation of ultrastructure , high - pressure freez - ing can be performed immediately after FerriTagging . This is something that cannot be achieved by DAB - based probes such as APEX and miniSOG as reaction conditions to generate their precipitate cannot occur under cryo temperatures . This is predicted to not be a problem with FerriTag as iron - loading to generate its electron density is performed before ﬁxation . Following cryo - immobilisation frozen cells can then freeze - substituted and embedded in acrylic resin at low temperature . Samples prepared in this way produce high contrast images of completely unstained resin sections , potentially increasing the SNR of FerriTag . In order to image an individual event by light mi - croscopy and localise the same exact spot by electron microscopy , correlated protocols must be performed ( section 1 . 1 . 2 ) . We could apply the protocol outlined by Kukulski et al . 2011 to do this with FerriTag . The labelling resolution of this protocol using ﬂuorescent proteins alone is on the order of 100 nm . Using this protocol combined with FerriTag would dramatically improve this , resulting in ultra - precise correlated electron microscopy . The further addition of super - resolution microscopy to this ap - proach would further increase the precision of correlation ( Johnson et al . , 2015 ; Peddie et al . , 2017 ) . In addition , other imaging modalities such as Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy ( STEM ) or High Angle Annular Dark Field ( HAADF ) imaging , have not yet been tested which may improve the detection of FerriTag particles in electron micrographs . As discussed in section 4 . 10 , much more improvement has to made to the automatic 116 detection workﬂow ( Section 4 . 8 and this cannot currently be reliably used to determine real from false FerriTag particles . Whilst it may be clear to experienced users that real FerriTag particles can be easily ascertained from electron micrographs , it would be advantageous this was made clear to all . In the ﬁst instance , control experiments could be set up as in section 4 . 5 , which would hopefully make it obvious . If this does not help , the ideal approach would be to create an elemental map using electron energy loss spectroscopy ( EELS ) or Energy - dispersive X - ray spectroscopy ( EDX ) which would result in iron - loaded particles being detected . The elemental map can then be overlaid onto the electron micrograph so real iron - loaded FerriTag particles can be easily observed . Combining this data to detect true particles with the automatic detection software would also allow false positive to be excluded from the software pipeline ( Figure 4 . 8 ) , giving a much more accurate dataset to calculate FerriTagging e ﬃ ciency from ( Section 4 . 8 . Limitations Despite the many beneﬁts over other genetically - encoded tags for CLEM , FerriTag is not without its limitations . The main one being that it is not possible to tag proteins located inside organelles , as the FRB domain of FerriTag must be able to bind the FKBP domain of the target protein following rapamycin addition . Nevertheless , the user can determine whether successful FerriTagging can be achieved ﬁrst by light microscopy , before deciding whether to process samples for electron microscopy . This limitation is not a problem for other genetically - encoded tags such as APEX as it is directly fused to the protein - of - interest ( Martell et al . , 2012 ) . Another limitation is that FerriTagging may not be compatible for systems that are sensitive to enhanced levels of iron . As FerriTag needs an excess of iron to be visualized readily by electron microscopy , iron - loading needs to be performed . Currently , this is achieved by incubating samples in media supplemented with 1mM FeSO4 for 16 hours . In the future , it may be possible to overcome this live - cell incubation step and instead bind iron to FerriTag following ﬁxation . It has recently been shown Metallothionein can 117 bind gold following cryo - imobilisation by adding gold salts to the freeze substitution medium ( Morphew et al . , 2015 ) . Likewise , iron - loading of FerriTag during freeze sub - stitution will be tested . Furthermore , iron - loading may also be achieved on - section by incubating them in solution containing iron , similarly to how post - staining is routinely performed . Iron - loading and rapamycin treatment may have the potential to induce ultrastruc - tural changes in cells . To date , all work with FerriTag has been performed on ultra - thin sections and whilst no obvious ultrastructural defects are apparent , large volume imag - ing of whole of cells processed for FerriTagging has not been completed . It would be important to address this potential issue in the future by using large volume tech - niques such as serial block - face scanning electron microscopy ( SBF - SEM ) or focussed ion - beam scanning electron microscopy and comparing the e ﬀ ects of iron - loading and rapamycin treated cells with controls . FerriTag may not be suitable for labelling all proteins , especially those involved in highly dynamic events . Whilst initial FerriTagging occurs quickly following rapamycin addition ( T 1 / 2 < 20 seconds ) , full labelling is not achieved until around 5 minutes following rapamycin application ( Section 3 . 5 ) . It is therefore likely that FerriTag may not be able to performed on proteins involved in events that occur within a few seconds . To circumvent this issue , it may be possible to perform FerriTagging and ﬁx the sample once the event is captured by live - cell imaging , as colocalisation between FerriTag and the protein - of - interest will be seen . This does rely on the protein - of - interest retaining its normal function , which would have to be assessed case - by - case . Other applications FerriTag can also be combined with other genetically - encoded probes including DAB - based and metal - ligand based tags . This will enable multiple protein localization within the same cell , allowing " multicolour " electron microscopy . DAB - based tags create a cloud of electron dense precipitate and will therefore be easily distinguished from Fer - riTag particles . Discerning FerriTag when in combination with metal - ligand based tags 118 such as metallothionein , will be more di ﬃ cult , as both create tightly - focussed parti - cles . However , as FerriTag binds iron and metallothionein binds gold , electron energy loss spectroscopy ( EELS ) or Energy - dispersive X - ray spectroscopy ( EDX ) can be per - formed on - section to create a map of elements within the sample and thus distinguish each tag from one another . Careful controls will need to be put in place to ensure each FerriTag and metallothionein selectively bind a speciﬁc electron dense ion , only . As metallothionein can bind an array of di ﬀ erent metals , it should be loaded with gold ﬁrst and then iron - loading of FerriTag , can then proceed . An important consideration to make is how feasible the loading of two heavy metals would be in these experiments as gold salts such as AuCl are particularly unstable in aqueous solutions . Instead more soluble compounds such as AuCl3 , KAuCl4 or AuTM ( Aurothiomalate ) can be tested . In addition to its role as a genetic tag for CLEM , FerriTag has the potential to be used as a puriﬁcation tag . Ferritin is superparamagnetic ( Jutz et al . , 2015 ) . As proteins do not exhibit superparamagnetic behaviour , protein – metal complexes such as ferritin could be used to separate Ferritagged proteins or complexes from other cellular constituents . By harnessing these magnetic properties , it may also be possible to perform direct magnetic manipulation of proteins in living cells . However , the physical limits of the magnetic properties of ferritin have recently been discussed , prompting concern that magnetic manipulation using FerriTag may not be possible ( Meister , 2016 ) . Final conclusions The motivation behind this thesis aimed to engineer a new CLEM probe that could meet all the criteria set out in section 1 . 3 . Whilst improvements still can be made , FerriTag has already come close to meeting these . Genetically encoded and non - invasive FerriTag is genetically - encoded and thus non - invasive ( Section 3 . 4 ) . This allows high - strength ﬁxative to be used and no permabilisation of the cell membrane is re - quired resulting in well preserved samples . 119 Non - toxic and non - disruptive to cellular processes FeriTag has the potential to be toxic to cells in two areas of its protocol 1 ) iron - loading and 2 ) rapamycin treatment . Iron - loading during sample processing for Fer - riTag has been shown to be non - toxic to cell viability ( Section 4 . 2 ) . Although the use of rapamycin can induce autophagy related defects over prolonged incubation , rapalog - compatible FerriTag can be used instead if longer experiments are required ( Section 3 . 7 ) . FerriTagging also does not interfere with clathrin and is therefore non - disruptive to its normal function ( Section 3 . 6 ) . Though , this may not be true for all proteins and thus will have to be assessed case - by - case . Fluorescent and electron - dense FerriTag is visible by light microscopy as it fused to a ﬂuorescent protein ( Section 3 . 4 ) . It is also electron - dense due to its iron - loaded core , so it can be distinguished again by electron microscopy ( Section 4 . 4 ) . Tightly focused electron density and good signal : noise ratio The electron density of FerriTag is tightly focussed which generates a circular par - ticle that can be easily distinguished from background due to its high SNR ( Section 4 . 7 ) . Robust and reliable methodology DAB - based CLEM probes such as APEX and miniSOG rely on the user to optimise precipitation and staining conditions to generate their electron density . FerriTag is made in cells and does not rely on the user to optimise processing conditions to generate its electron density . The current CLEM protocol provides consistent results with good visualisation of both FerriTag and cellular ultrastructure ( Section4 . 3 ) . Although , there may be other untested processing workﬂows that provide much better results , which will be addressed in the future . 120 Compatible with high - pressure freezing Currently , DAB - based CLEM probes are not compatible with high - pressure freez - ing . Although FerriTag has not yet utilized high - pressure freezing to cryo - immobilise the sample , it is predicted to be compatible , given the protocol outlined earlier in this discussion . It is an exciting time in cell biology with many exciting technologies converging to understand protein function down to the nanoscale . My work has added FerriTag as a useful tool for characterising protein localisation and we hope that its use becomes widespread . 121 Bibliography Amiry - Moghaddam , M . and Ottersen , O . P . Immunogold cytochemistry in neuroscience . Nature Neuroscience , 16 ( 7 ) : 798 – 804 , jun 2013 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nn . 3418 . Ariotti , N . , Hall , T . , Rae , J . , Ferguson , C . , McMahon , K . - A . , Martel , N . , Webb , R . , Webb , R . , Teasdale , R . , and Parton , R . Modular Detection of GFP - Labeled Proteins for Rapid Screening by Electron Microscopy in Cells and Organisms . Developmental Cell , 35 ( 4 ) : 513 – 525 , nov 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 10 . 016 . Auckland , P . , Clarke , N . I . , Royle , S . J . , and McAinsh , A . D . Congressing kinetochores progressively load Ska complexes to prevent force - dependent detachment . The Journal of Cell Biology , 216 ( 6 ) , 2017 . Avinoam , O . , Schorb , M . , Beese , C . J . , Briggs , J . A . G . , and Kaksonen , M . Endocytic sites mature by continuous bending and remodeling of the clathrin coat . Science , 348 ( 6241 ) : 1369 – 1372 , jun 2015 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaa9555 . Ballister , E . R . , Riegman , M . , and Lampson , M . A . Recruitment of Mad1 to metaphase kinetochores is su ﬃ cient to reactivate the mitotic checkpoint . The Journal of Cell Biology , 204 ( 6 ) , 2014 . Baschong , W . and Stierhof , Y . - D . Preparation , use , and enlargement of ultrasmall gold particles in immunoelectron microscopy . Microscopy Research and Technique , 42 ( 1 ) : 66 – 79 , jul 1998 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0029 ( 19980701 ) 42 : 1 < 66 : : AID - JEMT8 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - P . Belshaw , P . J . , Ho , S . N . , Crabtree , G . R . , and Schreiber , S . L . Controlling protein association and subcellular localization with a synthetic ligand that induces heterodimerization of proteins . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 93 ( 10 ) : 4604 – 7 , may 1996 . Betzig , E . , Patterson , G . H . , Sougrat , R . , Lindwasser , O . W . , Olenych , S . , Bonifacino , J . S . , Davidson , M . W . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , and Hess , H . F . Imaging Intracellular Fluorescent Proteins at Nanometer Resolution . Science , 313 ( 5793 ) : 1642 – 1645 , sep 2006 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127344 . 123 Booth , D . G . , Hood , F . E . , Prior , I . A . , and Royle , S . J . A TACC3 / ch - TOG / clathrin complex stabilises kinetochore ﬁbres by inter - microtubule bridging . The EMBO Journal , 30 ( 5 ) : 906 – 919 , mar 2011 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 15 . Boulant , S . , Kural , C . , Zeeh , J . - C . , Ubelmann , F . , and Kirchhausen , T . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biology , 13 ( 9 ) : 1124 – 1131 , aug 2011 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2307 . Brach , T . , Godlee , C . , Moeller - Hansen , I . , Boeke , D . , and Kaksonen , M . The Initiation of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Is Mechanistically Highly Flexible . 2014 . URL http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0960982214000815 . Cardona , A . , Saalfeld , S . , Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Preibisch , S . , Longair , M . , Tomancak , P . , Hartenstein , V . , and Douglas , R . J . TrakEM2 Software for Neural Circuit Reconstruction . PLoS ONE , 7 ( 6 ) : e38011 , jun 2012 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0038011 . Cheeseman , L . P . , Harry , E . F . , McAinsh , A . D . , Prior , I . A . , and Royle , S . J . Speciﬁc removal of TACC3 - ch - TOG - clathrin at metaphase deregulates kinetochore ﬁber tension . Journal of Cell Science , 126 ( 9 ) : 2102 – 2113 , may 2013 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 124834 . Clarke , N . I . and Royle , S . J . FerriTag : A Genetically - Encoded Inducible Tag for Correlative Light - Electron Microscopy . bioRxiv , 2016 . Cleyrat , C . , Darehshouri , A . , Steinkamp , M . P . , Vilaine , M . , Boassa , D . , Ellisman , M . H . , Hermouet , S . , and Wilson , B . S . Mpl tra ﬃ cs to the cell surface through conventional and unconventional routes . Tra ﬃ c ( Copenhagen , Denmark ) , 15 ( 9 ) : 961 – 82 , sep 2014 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12185 . Cox , D . B . T . , Platt , R . J . , and Zhang , F . Therapeutic genome editing : prospects and challenges . Nature medicine , 21 ( 2 ) : 121 – 31 , feb 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 3793 . Dannhauser , P . N . , Platen , M . , B ? ning , H . , Ungewickell , H . , Schaap , I . A . , and Ungewickell , E . J . E ﬀ ect of Clathrin Light Chains on the Sti ﬀ ness of Clathrin Lattices and Membrane Budding . Tra ﬃ c , 16 ( 5 ) : 519 – 533 , may 2015 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12263 . Das , S . C . , Panda , D . , Nayak , D . , and Pattnaik , A . K . Biarsenical Labeling of Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Encoding Tetracysteine - Tagged M Protein Allows Dynamic Imaging of M Protein and Virus Uncoating in Infected Cells . Journal of Virology , 83 ( 6 ) : 2611 – 2622 , mar 2009 . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 01668 - 08 . Daumke , O . , Roux , A . , and Haucke , V . BAR Domain Sca ﬀ olds in Dynamin - Mediated Membrane Fission . Cell , 156 ( 5 ) : 882 – 892 , feb 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 02 . 017 . 124 de Boer , P . , Hoogenboom , J . P . , and Giepmans , B . N . G . Correlated light and electron microscopy : ultrastructure lights up ! Nature Methods , 12 ( 6 ) : 503 – 513 , may 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3400 . Deerinck , T . J . , Giepmans , B . N . G . , Smarr , B . L . , Martone , M . E . , and Ellisman , M . H . Light and Electron Microscopic Localization of Multiple Proteins Using Quantum Dots . In Quantum Dots , volume 374 , pages 43 – 54 . Humana Press , New Jersey , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1385 / 1 - 59745 - 369 - 2 : 43 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 17237528http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1385 / 1 - 59745 - 369 - 2 : 43 . Diestra , E . , Fontana , J . , Guichard , P . , Marco , S . , and Risco , C . Visualization of proteins in intact cells with a clonable tag for electron microscopy . Journal of Structural Biology , 165 ( 3 ) : 157 – 168 , mar 2009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2008 . 11 . 009 . Doherty , G . J . and McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of Endocytosis . Annual Review of Biochemistry , 78 ( 1 ) : 857 – 902 , jun 2009 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 78 . 081307 . 110540 . Ellisman , M . H . , Deerinck , T . J . , Shu , X . , and Sosinsky , G . E . Picking faces out of a crowd : genetic labels for identiﬁcation of proteins in correlated light and electron microscopy imaging . Methods in cell biology , 111 : 139 – 55 , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 416026 - 2 . 00008 - X . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . Y . and Drubin , D . G . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annual review of cell and developmental biology , 19 ( 1 ) : 287 – 332 , nov 2003 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 19 . 111401 . 093127 . Engqvist - Goldstein , s . E . , Warren , R . A . , Kessels , M . M . , Keen , J . H . , Heuser , J . , and Drubin , D . G . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . The Journal of Cell Biology , 154 ( 6 ) : 1209 – 1224 , sep 2001 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200106089 . Fan , R . , Chew , S . W . , Cheong , V . V . , and Orner , B . P . Fabrication of Gold Nanoparticles Inside Un - modiﬁed Horse Spleen Apoferritin . Small , 6 ( 14 ) : 1483 – 1487 , jul 2010 . doi : 10 . 1002 / smll . 201000457 . Ferguson , S . M . and De Camilli , P . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 13 ( 2 ) : 75 , jan 2012 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3266 . Fernndez de Castro , I . , Sanz - S ? nchez , L . , and Risco , C . Metallothioneins for Correlative Light and Electron Microscopy . In Methods in cell biology , volume 124 , pages 55 – 70 . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 801075 - 4 . 00003 - 3 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 25287836http : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / B9780128010754000033 . Fulton , A . B . How crowded is the cytoplasm ? Cell , 30 ( 2 ) : 345 – 7 , sep 1982 . 125 Gaietta , G . , Deerinck , T . J . , Adams , S . R . , Bouwer , J . , Tour , O . , Laird , D . W . , Sosinsky , G . E . , Tsien , R . Y . , and Ellisman , M . H . Multicolor and Electron Microscopic Imaging of Connexin Tra ﬃ cking . Science , 296 ( 5567 ) : 503 – 507 , apr 2002 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1068793 . Gibson , T . J . , Seiler , M . , and Veitia , R . A . The transience of transient overexpression . Nature Methods , 10 ( 8 ) : 715 – 721 , jul 2013 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2534 . Giepmans , B . N . G . , Deerinck , T . J . , Smarr , B . L . , Jones , Y . Z . , and Ellisman , M . H . Correlated light and electron microscopic imaging of multiple endogenous proteins using Quantum dots . Nature Methods , 2 ( 10 ) : 743 – 749 , sep 2005 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth791 . Godlee , C . and Kaksonen , M . From uncertain beginnings : Initiation mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The Journal of Cell Biology , 203 ( 5 ) , 2013 . Graham , L . and Orenstein , J . M . Processing tissue and cells for transmission electron microscopy in diagnostic pathology and research . Nature Protocols , 2 ( 10 ) : 2439 – 2450 , oct 2007 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2007 . 304 . Grassart , A . , Cheng , A . T . , Hong , S . H . , Zhang , F . , Zenzer , N . , Feng , Y . , Briner , D . M . , Davis , G . D . , Malkov , D . , and Drubin , D . G . Actin and dynamin2 dynamics and interplay during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The Journal of Cell Biology , 205 ( 5 ) , 2014 . Greener , T . , Zhao , X . , Nojima , H . , Eisenberg , E . , and Greene , L . E . Role of cyclin G - associated kinase in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles from non - neuronal cells . The Journal of biological chemistry , 275 ( 2 ) : 1365 – 70 , jan 2000 . Gri ﬃ n , B . A . , Adams , S . R . , and Tsien , R . Y . Speciﬁc covalent labeling of recombinant protein molecules inside live cells . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 281 ( 5374 ) : 269 – 72 , jul 1998 . Gri ﬃ ths , G . and Lucocq , J . M . Antibodies for immunolabeling by light and electron microscopy : not for the faint hearted . Histochemistry and cell biology , 142 ( 4 ) : 347 – 60 , oct 2014 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 014 - 1263 - 5 . Guan , R . , Han , D . , Harrison , S . C . , Kirchhausen , T . , and Kirchhausen , T . Structure of the PTEN - like Region of Auxilin , a Detector of Clathrin - Coated Vesicle Budding . Structure , 18 ( 9 ) : 1191 – 1198 , sep 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2010 . 06 . 016 . Hanker , J . S . Osmiophilic reagents in electronmicroscopic histocytochemistry . Progress in histochem - istry and cytochemistry , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 85 , 1979 . 126 Heiligenstein , X . , Heiligenstein , J . , Delevoye , C . , Hurbain , I . , Bardin , S . , Paul - Gilloteaux , P . , Seng - manivong , L . , R ? gnier , G . , Salamero , J . , Antony , C . , and Raposo , G . The CryoCapsule : Simplifying Correlative Light to Electron Microscopy . Tra ﬃ c , 15 ( 6 ) : 700 – 716 , jun 2014 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12164 . Heuser , J . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in ﬁbroblasts . The Journal of cell biology , 84 ( 3 ) : 560 – 83 , mar 1980 . Hirst , J . , Edgar , J . R . , Borner , G . H . H . , Li , S . , Sahlender , D . A . , Antrobus , R . , and Robinson , M . S . Contributions of epsinR and gadkin to clathrin - mediated intracellular tra ﬃ cking . Molecular biology of the cell , 26 ( 17 ) : 3085 – 103 , sep 2015 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 04 - 0245 . Hodgson , L . , Tavaré , J . , and Verkade , P . Development of a quantitative Correlative Light Electron Microscopy technique to study GLUT4 tra ﬃ cking . Protoplasma , 251 ( 2 ) : 403 – 416 , mar 2014 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00709 - 013 - 0597 - 5 . Huang , B . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . Super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . Annual review of biochemistry , 78 : 993 – 1016 , 2009 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 77 . 061906 . 092014 . Huang , X . , Yang , P . , Ouyang , X . , Chen , L . , and Deng , X . W . Photoactivated UVR8 - COP1 Module Determines Photomorphogenic UV - B Signaling Output in Arabidopsis . PLoS Genetics , 10 ( 3 ) : e1004218 , mar 2014 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1004218 . Hurtley , S . Location , Location , Location . Science , 326 ( 5957 ) : 1205 – 1205 , nov 2009 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 326 . 5957 . 1205 . Iordanova , B . , Robison , C . S . , and Ahrens , E . T . Design and characterization of a chimeric ferritin with enhanced iron loading and transverse NMR relaxation rate . Journal of biological inorganic chemistry : JBIC : a publication of the Society of Biological Inorganic Chemistry , 15 ( 6 ) : 957 – 65 , aug 2010 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00775 - 010 - 0657 - 7 . Iwahori , K . , Morioka , T . , and Yamashita , I . The optimization of CdSe nanoparticles synthesis in the apoferritin cavity . physica status solidi ( a ) , 203 ( 11 ) : 2658 – 2661 , sep 2006 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pssa . 200669531 . Jauregui , H . O . , Bradford , W . D . , Arstila , A . U . , Kinney , T . D . , and Trump , B . F . Iron metabolism and cell membranes . III . Iron - induced alterations in HeLa cells . The American journal of pathology , 80 ( 1 ) : 33 – 52 , jul 1975 . Johnson , E . , Seiradake , E . , Jones , E . Y . , Davis , I . , Gr ? newald , K . , and Kaufmann , R . Correlative in - resin super - resolution and electron microscopy using standard ﬂuorescent proteins . Scientiﬁc Reports , 5 ( 1 ) : 9583 , aug 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep09583 . 127 Jutz , G . , van Rijn , P . , Santos Miranda , B . , and Böker , A . Ferritin : a versatile building block for bionanotechnology . Chemical reviews , 115 ( 4 ) : 1653 – 701 , feb 2015 . doi : 10 . 1021 / cr400011b . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , and Drubin , D . G . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 7 ( 6 ) : 404 – 414 , jun 2006 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 . Kasyutich , O . , Ilari , A . , Fiorillo , A . , Tatchev , D . , Hoell , A . , and Ceci , P . Silver Ion Incorporation and Nanoparticle Formation inside the Cavity of < i > Pyrococcus furiosus < / i > Ferritin : Structural and Size - Distribution Analyses . Journal of the American Chemical Society , 132 ( 10 ) : 3621 – 3627 , mar 2010 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja910918b . Keen , J . H . , Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , and Warren , R . A . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biology , 1 ( 1 ) : 1 – 7 , may 1999 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 8971 . Kelly , B . T . , Owen , D . J . , Jodi Nunnari , b . M . , and Nichols , B . Endocytic sorting of transmembrane protein cargo This review comes from a themed issue on Membranes and organelles Edited . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 23 : 404 – 412 , 2011 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2011 . 03 . 004 . Koning , R . I . , Faas , F . G . , Boonekamp , M . , de Visser , B . , Janse , J . , Wiegant , J . C . , de Breij , A . , Willemse , J . , Nibbering , P . H . , Tanke , H . J . , and Koster , A . J . MAVIS : An integrated system for live microscopy and vitriﬁcation . Ultramicroscopy , 143 : 67 – 76 , aug 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ultramic . 2013 . 10 . 007 . Kukulski , W . , Schorb , M . , Welsch , S . , Picco , A . , Kaksonen , M . , and Briggs , J . A . Correlated ﬂuores - cence and 3D electron microscopy with high sensitivity and spatial precision . The Journal of Cell Biology , 192 ( 1 ) : 111 – 119 , jan 2011 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201009037 . Kukulski , W . , Schorb , M . , Welsch , S . , Picco , A . , Kaksonen , M . , and Briggs , J . A . Precise , Corre - lated Fluorescence Microscopy and Electron Tomography of Lowicryl Sections Using Fluorescent Fiducial Markers . In Methods in cell biology , volume 111 , pages 235 – 257 . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 416026 - 2 . 00013 - 3 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 22857932http : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / B9780124160262000133 . Kuzmich , A . I . , Vvedenskii , A . V . , Kopantzev , E . P . , and Vinogradova , T . V . Quantitative compar - ison of gene co - expression in a bicistronic vector harboring IRES or coding sequence of porcine teschovirus 2A peptide . Russian Journal of Bioorganic Chemistry , 39 ( 4 ) : 406 – 416 , jul 2013 . doi : 10 . 1134 / S1068162013040122 . Lam , S . S . , Martell , J . D . , Kamer , K . J . , Deerinck , T . J . , Ellisman , M . H . , Mootha , V . K . , and Ting , A . Y . Directed evolution of APEX2 for electron microscopy and proximity labeling . Nature Methods , 12 ( 1 ) : 51 – 54 , nov 2014 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3179 . 128 Laplante , M . and Sabatini , D . M . mTOR signaling at a glance . Journal of Cell Science , 122 ( 20 ) , 2009 . Le Clainche , C . , Pauly , B . S . , Zhang , C . X . , Engqvist - Goldstein , s . E . Y . , Cunningham , K . , and Drubin , D . G . A Hip1R / cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . The EMBO Journal , 26 ( 5 ) : 1199 – 1210 , mar 2007 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601576 . Leeson , C . R . and Leeson , T . S . An Unusual Arrangement of Ribosomes in Mesenchymal Cells . Journal of Chemical Biology , 24 ( 2 ) : 324 – 328 , 1965 . Li , D . , Shao , L . , Chen , B . - C . , Zhang , X . , Zhang , M . , Moses , B . , Milkie , D . E . , Beach , J . R . , Ham - mer , J . A . , Pasham , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Baird , M . A . , Davidson , M . W . , Xu , P . , and Betzig , E . Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics . Science , 349 ( 6251 ) : aab3500 – aab3500 , aug 2015 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aab3500 . Licitra , E . J . and Liu , J . O . A three - hybrid system for detecting small ligand - protein receptor inter - actions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 93 ( 23 ) : 12817 – 21 , nov 1996 . Liu , J . , Farmer , J . D . , Lane , W . S . , Friedman , J . , Weissman , I . , and Schreiber , S . L . Calcineurin is a common target of cyclophilin - cyclosporin A and FKBP - FK506 complexes . Cell , 66 ( 4 ) : 807 – 815 , aug 1991 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90124 - H . Loerke , D . , Mettlen , M . , Schmid , S . L . , and Danuser , G . Measuring the Hierarchy of Molecular Events During Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . Tra ﬃ c , 12 ( 7 ) : 815 – 825 , jul 2011 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2011 . 01197 . x . Ludwig , A . , Howard , G . , Mendoza - Topaz , C . , Deerinck , T . , Mackey , M . , Sandin , S . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Nichols , B . J . Molecular Composition and Ultrastructure of the Caveolar Coat Complex . PLoS Biology , 11 ( 8 ) : e1001640 , aug 2013 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001640 . Ma , H . , Fu , R . , Xu , J . , and Liu , Y . A simple and cost - e ﬀ ective setup for super - resolution localization microscopy . Scientiﬁc Reports , 7 ( 1 ) : 1542 , dec 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 01606 - 6 . Magidson , V . , He , J . , Ault , J . G . , O ? Connell , C . B . , Yang , N . , Tikhonenko , I . , McEwen , B . F . , Sui , H . , and Khodjakov , A . Unattached kinetochores rather than intrakinetochore tension arrest mitosis in taxol - treated cells . The Journal of Cell Biology , 212 ( 3 ) : 307 – 319 , feb 2016 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201412139 . 129 Mahamid , J . , Pfe ﬀ er , S . , Scha ﬀ er , M . , Villa , E . , Danev , R . , Kuhn Cuellar , L . , Forster , F . , Hyman , A . A . , Plitzko , J . M . , and Baumeister , W . Visualizing the molecular sociology at the HeLa cell nuclear periphery . Science , 351 ( 6276 ) : 969 – 972 , feb 2016 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad8857 . Manna , P . T . , Gadelha , C . , Puttick , A . E . , and Field , M . C . ENTH and ANTH domain proteins participate in AP2 - independent clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Journal of Cell Science , 128 ( 11 ) , 2015 . Maranto , A . R . Neuronal mapping : a photooxidation reaction makes Lucifer yellow useful for electron microscopy . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 217 ( 4563 ) : 953 – 5 , sep 1982 . Martell , J . D . , Deerinck , T . J . , Sancak , Y . , Poulos , T . L . , Mootha , V . K . , Sosinsky , G . E . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Ting , A . Y . Engineered ascorbate peroxidase as a genetically encoded reporter for electron microscopy . Nature biotechnology , 30 ( 11 ) : 1143 – 8 , nov 2012 . Martin , B . R . , Giepmans , B . N . G . , Adams , S . R . , and Tsien , R . Y . Mammalian cell - based optimiza - tion of the biarsenical - binding tetracysteine motif for improved ﬂuorescence and a ﬃ nity . Nature biotechnology , 23 ( 10 ) : 1308 – 14 , oct 2005 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt1136 . Masuda , T . , Goto , F . , Yoshihara , T . , and Mikami , B . The universal mechanism for iron translocation to the ferroxidase site in ferritin , which is mediated by the well conserved transit site . Biochemical and biophysical research communications , 400 ( 1 ) : 94 – 9 , sep 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2010 . 08 . 017 . Matsumoto , Y . , Chen , R . , Anikeeva , P . , and Jasano ﬀ , A . Engineering intracellular biomineralization and biosensing by a magnetic protein . Nature Communications , 6 ( 1 ) : 8721 , dec 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9721 . McDonald , K . and Webb , R . Freeze substitution in 3 hours or less . Journal of Microscopy , 243 ( 3 ) : 227 – 233 , sep 2011 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2011 . 03526 . x . McDonald , K . L . , Morphew , M . , Verkade , P . , and M ? ller - Reichert , T . Recent Advances in High - Pressure Freezing . In Methods in molecular biology ( Clifton , N . J . ) , volume 369 , pages 143 – 173 . 2007 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 59745 - 294 - 6 _ 8 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 17656750http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 59745 - 294 - 6 { _ } 8 . McMahon , H . T . and Boucrot , E . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 12 ( 8 ) : 517 – 533 , jul 2011 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3151 . 130 Medalia , O . , Weber , I . , Frangakis , A . S . , Nicastro , D . , Gerisch , G . , and Baumeister , W . Macromolec - ular architecture in eukaryotic cells visualized by cryoelectron tomography . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 298 ( 5596 ) : 1209 – 13 , nov 2002 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1076184 . Meister , M . Physical limits to magnetogenetics . eLife , 5 , aug 2016 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 17210 . Miyamoto , T . , DeRose , R . , Suarez , A . , Ueno , T . , Chen , M . , Sun , T . - p . , Wolfgang , M . J . , Mukherjee , C . , Meyers , D . J . , and Inoue , T . Rapid and orthogonal logic gating with a gibberellin - induced dimerization system . Nature chemical biology , 8 ( 5 ) : 465 – 70 , mar 2012 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchembio . 922 . Moor , H . Theory and Practice of High Pressure Freezing . In Cryotechniques in Biologi - cal Electron Microscopy , pages 175 – 191 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 1987 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 72815 - 0 _ 8 . URL http : / / www . springerlink . com / index / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 72815 - 0 { _ } 8 . Moor , H . and Mühlethaler , K . Fine Structure In Frozen - Etched Yeast Cells . The Journal of cell biology , 17 ( 3 ) : 609 – 28 , jun 1963 . Morphew , M . , O’toole , E . , Page , C . , Pagratis , M . , Meehl , J . , Giddings , T . , Gardner , J . , Ackerson , C . , Jaspersen , S . , Winey , M . , Hoenger , A . , and Mcintosh , J . Metallothionein as a clonable tag for protein localization by electron microscopy of cells . Journal of Microscopy , 260 ( 1 ) : 20 – 29 , oct 2015 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jmi . 12262 . Motley , A . , Bright , N . A . , Seaman , M . N . , and Robinson , M . S . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 – depleted cells . The Journal of Cell Biology , 162 ( 5 ) : 909 – 918 , sep 2003 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200305145 . Müller - Reichert , T . and Verkade , P . Introduction to correlative light and electron microscopy . In Meth - ods in cell biology , volume 111 , pages xvii – xix . 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 416026 - 2 . 03001 - 6 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 22857938 . Myasnikov , A . G . , Kundhavai Natchiar , S . , Nebout , M . , Hazemann , I . , Imbert , V . , Khatter , H . , Peyron , J . - F . , and Klaholz , B . P . Structure - function insights reveal the human ribosome as a cancer target for antibiotics . Nature Communications , 7 : 12856 , sep 2016 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms12856 . Nakatsu , F . , Perera , R . M . , Lucast , L . , Zoncu , R . , Domin , J . , Gertler , F . B . , Toomre , D . , and De Camilli , P . The inositol 5 - phosphatase SHIP2 regulates endocytic clathrin - coated pit dynamics . The Journal of Cell Biology , 190 ( 3 ) , 2010 . 131 Nisman , R . , Dellaire , G . , Ren , Y . , Li , R . , and Bazett - Jones , D . P . Application of quantum dots as probes for correlative ﬂuorescence , conventional , and energy - ﬁltered transmission electron mi - croscopy . The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry : o ﬃ cial journal of the Histochemistry Society , 52 ( 1 ) : 13 – 8 , jan 2004 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 002215540405200102 . Nixon , F . M . , Honnor , T . R . , Clarke , N . I . , Starling , G . P . , Beckett , A . J . , Johansen , A . M . , Brettschneider , J . A . , Prior , I . A . , and Royle , S . J . Microtubule organization within mitotic spin - dles revealed by serial block face scanning electron microscopy and image analysis . Journal of Cell Science , 130 ( 10 ) , 2017 . Nunez , D . , Antonescu , C . , Mettlen , M . , Liu , A . , Schmid , S . L . , Loerke , D . , and Danuser , G . Hotspots Organize Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis by E ﬃ cient Recruitment and Retention of Nucleating Resources . Tra ﬃ c , 12 ( 12 ) : 1868 – 1878 , dec 2011 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2011 . 01273 . x . Olmos , Y . , Hodgson , L . , Mantell , J . , Verkade , P . , and Carlton , J . G . ESCRT - III controls nuclear envelope reformation . Nature , 522 ( 7555 ) : 236 – 239 , jun 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature14503 . Ormö , M . , Cubitt , A . B . , Kallio , K . , Gross , L . A . , Tsien , R . Y . , and Remington , S . J . Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green ﬂuorescent protein . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 273 ( 5280 ) : 1392 – 5 , sep 1996 . Paez - Segala , M . G . , Sun , M . G . , Shtengel , G . , Viswanathan , S . , Baird , M . A . , Macklin , J . J . , Patel , R . , Allen , J . R . , Howe , E . S . , Piszczek , G . , Hess , H . F . , Davidson , M . W . , Wang , Y . , and Looger , L . L . Fixation - resistant photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins for CLEM . Nature Methods , 12 ( 3 ) : 215 – 218 , jan 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3225 . Paul - Gilloteaux , P . , Heiligenstein , X . , Belle , M . , Domart , M . - C . , Larijani , B . , Collinson , L . , Raposo , G . , and Salamero , J . eC - CLEM : ﬂexible multidimensional registration software for correlative microscopies . Nature Methods , 14 ( 2 ) : 102 – 103 , jan 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4170 . Peddie , C . J . , Blight , K . , Wilson , E . , Melia , C . , Marrison , J . , Carzaniga , R . , Domart , M . C . , O’Toole , P . , Larijani , B . , and Collinson , L . M . Correlative and integrated light and electron microscopy of in - resin GFP ﬂuorescence , used to localise diacylglycerol in mammalian cells . Ultramicroscopy , 143 : 3 – 14 , 2014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ultramic . 2014 . 02 . 001 . Peddie , C . J . , Domart , M . - C . , Snetkov , X . , O’Toole , P . , Larijani , B . , Way , M . , Cox , S . , and Collinson , L . M . Correlative super - resolution ﬂuorescence and electron microscopy using conven - tional ﬂuorescent proteins in vacuo . Journal of Structural Biology , 199 ( 2 ) : 120 – 131 , aug 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / J . JSB . 2017 . 05 . 013 . 132 Porstmann , T . and Kiessig , S . T . Enzyme immunoassay techniques . An overview . Journal of im - munological methods , 150 ( 1 - 2 ) : 5 – 21 , jun 1992 . Pucadyil , T . J . and Holkar , S . S . Comparative analysis of adaptor - mediated clathrin assembly reveals general principles for adaptor clustering . Molecular biology of the cell , 27 ( 20 ) : 3156 – 3163 , oct 2016 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 06 - 0399 . Putyrski , M . and Schultz , C . Protein translocation as a tool : The current rapamycin story . FEBS Letters , 586 ( 15 ) : 2097 – 2105 , jul 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2012 . 04 . 061 . Rhee , H . - W . , Zou , P . , Udeshi , N . D . , Martell , J . D . , Mootha , V . K . , Carr , S . A . , and Ting , A . Y . Proteomic Mapping of Mitochondria in Living Cells via Spatially Restricted Enzymatic Tagging . Science , 339 ( 6125 ) : 1328 – 1331 , mar 2013 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1230593 . Risco , C . , Sanmart ? n - Conesa , E . , Tzeng , W . - P . , Frey , T . , Seybold , V . , and De ? Groot , R . Speciﬁc , Sensitive , High - Resolution Detection of Protein Molecules in Eukaryotic Cells Using Metal - Tagging Transmission Electron Microscopy . Structure , 20 ( 5 ) : 759 – 766 , may 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2012 . 04 . 001 . Rivera , V . M . , Clackson , T . , Natesan , S . , Pollock , R . , Amara , J . F . , Keenan , T . , Magari , S . R . , Phillips , T . , Courage , N . L . , Cerasoli , F . , Holt , D . A . , and Gilman , M . A humanized system for pharmacologic control of gene expression . Nature Medicine , 2 ( 9 ) : 1028 – 1032 , sep 1996 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm0996 - 1028 . Robinson , C . V . , Sali , A . , and Baumeister , W . The molecular sociology of the cell . Nature , 450 ( 7172 ) : 973 – 982 , dec 2007 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06523 . Robinson , M . S . , Sahlender , D . A . , and Foster , S . D . Rapid inactivation of proteins by rapamycin - induced rerouting to mitochondria . Developmental cell , 18 ( 2 ) : 324 – 31 , feb 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 12 . 015 . Roth , T . F . and Porter , K . R . Yolk Protein Uptake in the Oocyte of the Mosquito Aedes Agypti . L . The Journal of cell biology , 20 : 313 – 32 , feb 1964 . Royle , S . J . Protein adaptation : mitotic functions for membrane tra ﬃ cking proteins . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 14 ( 9 ) : 592 – 599 , aug 2013 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3641 . Schnitzbauer , J . , Strauss , M . T . , Schlichthaerle , T . , Schueder , F . , and Jungmann , R . Super - resolution microscopy with DNA - PAINT . Nature Protocols , 12 ( 6 ) : 1198 – 1228 , may 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2017 . 024 . 133 Schorb , M . , Gaechter , L . , Avinoam , O . , Sieckmann , F . , Clarke , M . , Bebeacua , C . , Bykov , Y . S . , Sonnen , A . F . - P . , Lihl , R . , and Briggs , J . A . New hardware and workﬂows for semi - automated cor - relative cryo - ﬂuorescence and cryo - electron microscopy / tomography . Journal of Structural Biology , 197 ( 2 ) : 83 – 93 , feb 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 06 . 020 . Shaner , N . C . , Steinbach , P . A . , and Tsien , R . Y . A guide to choosing ﬂuorescent proteins . Nature Methods , 2 ( 12 ) : 905 – 909 , dec 2005 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth819 . Shu , X . , Lev - Ram , V . , Deerinck , T . J . , Qi , Y . , Ramko , E . B . , Davidson , M . W . , Jin , Y . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Tsien , R . Y . A Genetically Encoded Tag for Correlated Light and Electron Microscopy of Intact Cells , Tissues , and Organisms . PLoS Biology , 9 ( 4 ) : e1001041 , apr 2011 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001041 . Shvets , E . , Bitsikas , V . , Howard , G . , Hansen , C . G . , and Nichols , B . J . Dynamic caveolae exclude bulk membrane proteins and are required for sorting of excess glycosphingolipids . Nature commu - nications , 6 : 6867 , apr 2015 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7867 . Singer , S . J . Preparation of an electron - dense antibody conjugate . Nature , 183 ( 4674 ) : 1523 – 4 , may 1959 . Sochacki , K . A . , Shtengel , G . , van Engelenburg , S . B . , Hess , H . F . , and Taraska , J . W . Correlative super - resolution ﬂuorescence and metal - replica transmission electron microscopy . Nature Methods , 11 ( 3 ) : 305 – 308 , jan 2014 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2816 . Sochacki , K . A . , Dickey , A . M . , Strub , M . - P . , and Taraska , J . W . Endocytic proteins are partitioned at the edge of the clathrin lattice in mammalian cells . Nature cell biology , 19 ( 4 ) : 352 – 361 , apr 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3498 . Sosinsky , G . E . , Giepmans , B . N . , Deerinck , T . J . , Gaietta , G . M . , and Ellisman , M . H . Markers for Correlated Light and Electron Microscopy . In Methods in cell biology , volume 79 , pages 575 – 591 . 2007 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 06 ) 79023 - 9 . URL http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed / 17327175http : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S0091679X06790239 . Spencer , D . M . , Wandless , T . J . , Schreiber , S . L . , and Crabtree , G . R . Controlling signal transduction with synthetic ligands . Science ( New York , N . Y . ) , 262 ( 5136 ) : 1019 – 24 , nov 1993 . Srinivasan , S . , Dharmarajan , V . , Reed , D . K . , Gri ﬃ n , P . R . , and Schmid , S . L . Identiﬁcation and function of conformational dynamics in the multidomain GTPase dynamin . The EMBO Journal , 35 ( 4 ) : 443 – 457 , feb 2016 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201593477 . 134 Strickland , D . , Lin , Y . , Wagner , E . , Hope , C . M . , Zayner , J . , Antoniou , C . , Sosnick , T . R . , Weiss , E . L . , and Glotzer , M . TULIPs : tunable , light - controlled interacting protein tags for cell biology . Nature Methods , 9 ( 4 ) : 379 – 384 , mar 2012 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1904 . Tabuchi , M . , Tanaka , N . , Nishida - Kitayama , J . , Ohno , H . , and Kishi , F . Alternative Splicing Regu - lates the Subcellular Localization of Divalent Metal Transporter 1 Isoforms . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 13 ( 12 ) : 4371 – 4387 , dec 2002 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 03 - 0165 . Takizawa , T . and Robinson , J . M . FluoroNanogold Is a Bifunctional Immunoprobe for Correlative Fluorescence and Electron Microscopy . Journal of Histochemistry & Cytochemistry , 48 ( 4 ) : 481 – 485 , apr 2000 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 002215540004800405 . Takizawa , T . , Powell , R . D . , Hainfeld , J . F . , and Robinson , J . M . FluoroNanogold : an important probe for correlative microscopy . Journal of Chemical Biology , 8 ( 4 ) : 129 – 142 , oct 2015 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12154 - 015 - 0145 - 1 . Taslimi , A . , Zoltowski , B . , Miranda , J . G . , Pathak , G . P . , Hughes , R . M . , and Tucker , C . L . Optimized second - generation CRY2 - CIB dimerizers and photoactivatable Cre recombinase . Nature chemical biology , 12 ( 6 ) : 425 – 30 , 2016 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nchembio . 2063 . Taylor , M . J . , Perrais , D . , and Merriﬁeld , C . J . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS biology , 9 ( 3 ) : e1000604 , mar 2011 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000604 . Taylor , M . J . , Lampe , M . , and Merriﬁeld , C . J . A Feedback Loop between Dynamin and Actin Recruitment during Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . PLoS Biology , 10 ( 4 ) : e1001302 , apr 2012 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001302 . Tokuyasu , K . T . A technique for ultracryotomy of cell suspensions and tissues . The Journal of cell biology , 57 ( 2 ) : 551 – 65 , may 1973 . van Weering , J . R . T . , Brown , E . , Sharp , T . H . , Mantell , J . , Cullen , P . J . , and Verkade , P . Intracellular membrane tra ﬃ c at high resolution . Methods in cell biology , 96 : 619 – 48 , 2010 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 10 ) 96026 - 3 . Wang , Q . , Mercogliano , C . P . , and Löwe , J . A ferritin - based label for cellular electron cryotomography . Structure ( London , England : 1993 ) , 19 ( 2 ) : 147 – 54 , feb 2011 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2010 . 12 . 002 . Wang , W . and Malcolm , B . A . Two - stage PCR protocol allowing introduction of multiple mutations , deletions and insertions using QuikChange Site - Directed Mutagenesis . BioTechniques , 26 ( 4 ) : 680 – 2 , apr 1999 . 135 Wilbur , J . D . , Chen , C . - Y . , Manalo , V . , Hwang , P . K . , Fletterick , R . J . , and Brodsky , F . M . Actin Binding by Hip1 ( Huntingtin - interacting Protein 1 ) and Hip1R ( Hip1 - related Protein ) Is Regulated by Clathrin Light Chain . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 283 ( 47 ) : 32870 – 32879 , nov 2008 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M802863200 . Wilkinson , J . , Di , X . , Schönig , K . , Buss , J . L . , Kock , N . D . , Cline , J . M . , Saunders , T . L . , Bujard , H . , Torti , S . V . , Torti , F . M . , and Torti , F . M . Tissue - speciﬁc expression of ferritin H regulates cellular iron homoeostasis in vivo . The Biochemical journal , 395 ( 3 ) : 501 – 7 , may 2006 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20060063 . Willox , A . K . and Royle , S . J . Stonin 2 is a major adaptor protein for clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle retrieval . Current biology : CB , 22 ( 15 ) : 1435 – 9 , aug 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 05 . 048 . Wong , M . and Munro , S . The speciﬁcity of vesicle tra ﬃ c to the Golgi is encoded in the golgin coiled - coil proteins . Science , 346 ( 6209 ) : 1256898 – 1256898 , oct 2014 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1256898 . Wood , L . A . , Clarke , N . I . , Sarkar , S . , and Royle , S . J . Hot - wiring clathrin - mediated endocytosis in human cells . bioRxiv , 2016 . Wood , L . A . , Larocque , G . , Clarke , N . I . , Sarkar , S . , and Royle , S . J . New tools for ’hot - wiring’ clathrin - mediated endocytosis with temporal and spatial precision . The Journal of cell biology , 216 ( 12 ) : 4351 – 4365 , dec 2017 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201702188 . Zoncu , R . , Perera , R . M . , Sebastian , R . , Nakatsu , F . , Chen , H . , Balla , T . , Ayala , G . , Toomre , D . , and De Camilli , P . V . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 ( 10 ) : 3793 – 8 , mar 2007 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0611733104 . 136 Appendix 5 . 1 Published Work 1 ) Auckland , P . , Clarke , N . I . , Royle , S . J . , McAinsh , A . D . Congressing kinetochores progres - sively load Ska complexes to prevent force - dependant detachment . Journal Cell Biology ( 2017 ) : doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201607096 Overview In this work I used correlated light microscopy movies with serial block face scanning electron microscopy ( SBF - SEM ) to track congressing sister kinetochore pairs that were orientated and breath - ing . As sample processing for electron microscopy had been optimized to enable clear visualization of microtubules , we could demonstrate congressing pairs were bi - oriented at high resolution ( Figure 1 ) . We also discovered that aligned kinetochores have a 50 % increase in bound microtubules compared to those that have not yet congressed ( Figure 6 ) . This data provided strong evidence that supported the model for how increasing pulling forces could be generated at kinetochores during congression . 2 ) Nixon , F . M . , Honnor , T . R . , Clarke , N . I . , Starling , G . P . , Beckett , A . J . , Johansen , A . M . , Brettschnei - der , J . A . , Prior , I . A . , Royle , S . J . Microtubule organization within mitotic spindles revealed by serial block face scanning EM and image analysis . J Cell Sci ( 2017 ) : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 203877 Overview For this paper , I used correlative light SBF - SEM to visualize microtubules within the mitotic spindle . Acquired datasets were segmented and rendered in 3D to provide information on microtubule organization . Speciﬁcally , my data contributed to the further quantiﬁcation of the number of micro - tubules that terminate at kinetochores using this method ( Figure 2 ) . Furthermore , I provided 3D rendered images that show single microtubules could be resolved ( Figure 2 ) and gave the idea for volumetric analysis of kinetochores ( Figure 6 ) . 138 3 ) Wood , L . A . , Larocque , G . , Clarke , N . I . , Sarkar , S . , Royle , S . J . New tools for “hot - wiring” clathrin - mediated endocytosis with temporal and spatial precision . Journal Cell Biology ( 2017 ) : doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201702188 Overview In this work I used correlative light - electron microscopy to locate synthetic endocytic vesicles made by this system . Live - cell uptake of ﬂuoronanogold bound to CD8 α was tracked following the chemical induction of endocytosis , cells where processed for electron microscopy and gold particles where located in resin sections ( ﬁgure 2 ) . This experiment provided key ultrastructural information about the created vesicles , 1 ) It supported and conﬁrmed they were clathrin - coated and , 2 ) The synthetic vesicles where structurally di ﬀ erent to normal clathrin - coated vesicles . 139