Washington University School of Medicine Washington University School of Medicine Digital Commons @ Becker Digital Commons @ Becker 2020 - Current year OA Pubs Open Access Publications 7 - 1 - 2022 A phase 2 trial of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck A phase 2 trial of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck cancer surgery : Effects on surgical site infection and the oral cancer surgery : Effects on surgical site infection and the oral microbiome microbiome Joseph Zenga Medical College of Wisconsin Sidharth V Puram Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis et al . Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / oa _ 4 Part of the Medicine and Health Sciences Commons Please let us know how this document benefits you . Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Zenga , Joseph ; Puram , Sidharth V ; and et al . , " A phase 2 trial of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck cancer surgery : Effects on surgical site infection and the oral microbiome . " eBioMedicine . 81 , 104099 ( 2022 ) . https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / oa _ 4 / 1234 This Open Access Publication is brought to you for free and open access by the Open Access Publications at Digital Commons @ Becker . It has been accepted for inclusion in 2020 - Current year OA Pubs by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Becker . For more information , please contact vanam @ wustl . edu . A phase 2 trial of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck cancer surgery : Effects on surgical site infection and the oral microbiome Joseph Zenga , a * Samantha Atkinson , b , c Tina Yen , d Becky Massey , a Michael Stadler , a Jennifer Bruening , a William Peppard , d , e Michael Reuben , f Michael Hayward , b , g , h Brian Mesich , i Blake Buchan , i Nathan Ledeboer , i Joyce L . Sanchez , j Raphael Fraser , k Chien - Wei Lin , k Mary L . Holtz , b , g , h Musaddiq Awan , l Stuart J . Wong , m Sidharth V . Puram , n and Nita Salzman b , g , h a Department of Otolaryngology , Division of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology and Reconstruction , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States b Center for Microbiome Research , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States c Department of Microbiology & Immunology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States d Department of Surgery , Division of Surgical Oncology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States e Department of Pharmacy , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States f Department of Pharmacy , Children ’ s Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States g Department of Pediatrics , Division of Gastroenterology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States h Children ’ s Research Institute , Children ’ s Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States i Department of Pathology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States j Department of Medicine , Division of Infectious Diseases , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States k Department of Biostatistics , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States l Department of Radiation Oncology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States m Department of Medicine , Division of Hematology and Oncology , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee , WI , United States n Department of Otolaryngology , Division of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology and Reconstruction , Washington University School of Medicine , Saint Louis , MO , United States Summary Background Head and neck cancer ( HNC ) surgery remains an important component of management but is associ - ated with a high rate of surgical site infection ( SSI ) . We aimed to assess the safety and efﬁcacy of a topical mucosal antiseptic bundle in preventing SSI and evaluate microbial predictors of infection through a genomic sequencing approach . Methods This study was an open - label , single - arm , single - center , phase 2 trial of a topical mucosal antiseptic bundle in patients with HNC undergoing aerodigestive tract resection and reconstruction . Patients underwent topical prepa - ration of the oral mucosa with povidone - iodine ( PI ) and chlorhexidine gluconate ( CHG ) pre - and intra - operatively followed by oral tetracycline ointment every 6 hours for 2 days post - operatively . The primary outcome was change in bacterial bioburden at the oral surgical site . Secondary outcomes included safety , SSI , and microbial predictors of infection . Findings Of 27 patients screened between January 8 , 2021 , and May 14 , 2021 , 26 were enrolled and 25 completed the study . There were no antiseptic - related adverse events . The topical mucosal antiseptic bundle signiﬁcantly decreased oral bacterial colony - forming units from pre - operative levels ( log 10 mean difference 4 ¢ 03 , 95 % CI 3 ¢ 13 (cid:1) 4 ¢ ; 92 ) . There were three SSI ( 12 % ) within 30 days . In correlative genomic studies , a distinct set of amplicon sequence variants in the post - operative microbiome was associated with SSI . Further , despite no instance of post - operative orocervical ﬁstula , metagenomic sequence mapping revealed the oral cavity as the origin of the infectious organism in two of the three SSI . Interpretation The bacterial strains which subsequently caused SSI were frequently identiﬁed in the pre - operative oral cavity . Accordingly , a topical antiseptic bundle decreased oral bacterial bioburden throughout the peri - operative period and was associated with a low rate of SSI , supporting further study of topical antisepsis in HNC surgery . * Corresponding author at : Division Chief , Don and Sharyn Blatnik Professor of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology and Reconstruc - tion , Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Sciences , Medical College of Wisconsin , 9200 W . Wisconsin Ave . Mil - waukee , WI 53226 , United States . E - mail address : jyzenga @ mcw . edu ( J . Zenga ) . eBioMedicine 2022 ; 81 : 104099 Published online 4 June 2022 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ebiom . 2022 . 104099 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 1 Articles Funding Alliance Oncology . Copyright (cid:1) 2022 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier B . V . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) Keywords : Surgical site infection ; Topical antisepsis ; Head and neck cancer surgery Introduction Head and neck cancers ( HNC ) , including tumors of the oral cavity , pharynx , and larynx , remain an important source of cancer - related mortality worldwide , with an estimated 66 , 000 cases and over 14 , 000 associated deaths in the United States in 2021 alone . 1 HNC sur - gery requiring vascularized reconstruction continues to be a central component of management for select pri - mary and recurrent tumors . However , a main source of peri - operative morbidity after HNC surgery is surgical site infection ( SSI ) , which has been consistently reported in over 20 % of cases . 2 - 4 Post - operative SSI leads to substantial physical , psychosocial , and ﬁnancial burdens on patients , providers , and hospital systems . 5 Importantly , SSI may also lead to delays in necessary post - operative radiation , which can result in an increased risk of cancer recurrence and decreased over - all survival . 6 - 8 While several clinical risk factors for SSI have been identiﬁed , many are largely immutable including extent of cancer resection , prior radiotherapy , age , and comor - bidity . 9 For these reasons , interventional efforts to decrease SSI for HNC have primarily investigated the choice or duration of intravenous antibiotic therapy . 3 Intravenous prophylactic antibiotics are well known to decrease the incidence of SSI in HNC , with infection rates over 70 % in early placebo - controlled trials . 10 - 14 Despite the substantial beneﬁt of short - term therapy , however , delivering intravenous antibiotics for more than 24 hours post - operatively has not been shown to improve SSI rates , which have seen little change over the past four decades of study . 3 In HNC surgery , there are multiple opportunities for bacterial contamination of the surgical ﬁeld leading to SSI . For cancer resection , incisions are required in both the pharyngeal mucosa and cervical skin with intraoper - ative connections between the aerodigestive tract and the neck soft tissues . These wounds must then be Research in context Evidence before this study We searched PubMed and abstracts from oncology and surgical meetings for studies relevant to topical antisep - sis and surgical site infection in head and neck cancer surgery . Search terms including “ surgical site infection ” , “ head and neck cancer surgery ” , “ head and neck onco - logic surgery ” , “ oral cancer ” , “ oropharynx cancer ” , “ larynx cancer ” , “ hypopharynx cancer ” , “ ﬂ ap reconstruc - tion ” , “ orocervical ﬁ stula ” , “ pharyngocutaneous ﬁ stula ” , and associated permutations , and relevant articles up until October 20 , 2020 , were identi ﬁ ed . At the time of study design , despite persistent infection rates of 20 % or more in multi - institutional reports , administration of intravenous antibiotics for 24 hours post - operatively was the only standard prophylactic regimen to prevent surgical site infection after head and neck oncologic surgery . Several studies had suggested a possible bene - ﬁ t of oral mucosal topical antibiotic or antiseptic agents but the effects on the oral microbiota at the surgical site remained unknown . Further , surgical site infections after head and neck oncologic surgery were commonly caused by pathogenic organisms . Whether these bacte - ria were present pre - operatively , introduced intra - oper - atively , or were a post - operative contaminant was also uncertain . To address these gaps in knowledge , this study was designed to evaluate the safety of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck oncologic surgery , determine its effects on the surgical site microbiome , and use genomic and metagenomic sequencing to source - track the infectious organism in patients who developed surgical site infection . Added value of this study This study con ﬁ rmed the safety of a topical antiseptic bundle in head and neck oncologic surgery , showed a signi ﬁ cant associated decrease in oral bacterial biobur - den at the surgical site in response to pre - and intra - operative therapy , and demonstrated no increase in re - colonization by pathogenic organisms or adverse effects on the oral microbiome . Further , use of oral topi - cal antisepsis was associated with a low rate of infection in comparison to the available literature . This study also demonstrated that bacteria causing surgical site infec - tions are commonly pre - existing in the oral cavity , even in the absence of a post - operative orocervical ﬁ stula . Finally , this trial established the validity of source - track - ing infectious organisms to their peri - operative origin after oncologic surgery through a genomic and metage - nomic sequencing approach . Implications of all the available evidence Overall , safety and ef ﬁ cacy data from this study support a favorable risk - bene ﬁ t pro ﬁ le for the use of topical anti - sepsis in head and neck oncologic surgery . Whether topical antisepsis can replace intravenous antibiotic use remains uncertain and merits evaluation in a random - ized controlled trial . Articles 2 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 repaired with vascularized skin ﬂap reconstructions taken from elsewhere on the body . While common upper aerodigestive tract microbiota can cause SSI , infections are often due to pathogens not typically found among commensal oronasal or skin bacteria , including Methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus , Pseudomo - nas , Enterobacter , and Enterococcus spp . 4 , 15 - 17 It remains unclear whether these bacteria are present pre - opera - tively in upper aerodigestive tract environment or are introduced peri - operatively from another source . However , the clear beneﬁt of intravenous antibiotics in the immediate peri - operative period but not beyond 24 hours suggests that the target organisms leading to infection are present at the surgical site in the early peri - operative period . Therefore , considering the high baseline microbial bioburden of the oral cavity and its proximity to the operative ﬁeld in HNC surgery , we hypothesized that oral contamination is the primary mechanism leading to SSI and that the oral microbiome may play a role in susceptibility to infection . To test this hypothesis , this trial evaluates the impact of peri - opera - tive topical mucosal decontamination on the oral micro - bial bioburden and oral microbiome composition at the surgical site throughout the peri - operative period and to evaluate its effects on SSI . Further , to more precisely deter - mine the source of infection , whole genome sequencing was performed of the organisms isolated from SSI puru - lence with subsequent mapping of these sequences back on to the metagenomic microbial communities of the pre - operative and post - operative oral cavity . Methods Study design and participants This study was an open - label , single - arm , single - center interventional Phase 2 trial assessing the safety and antibacterial efﬁcacy of a topical mucosal antiseptic bun - dle in HNC patients undergoing open aerodigestive tract resection . Patients were eligible for enrollment if they were 18 years or older undergoing an open surgical procedure requiring a communication between the upper aerodigestive tract and cervical skin repaired with a vascularized ﬂap reconstruction , which could be either a regional pedicled and / or free ﬂap . Patients were excluded if they had an allergy to study medications or had an active infection at the time of surgery . Ethics The study was done in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the International Conference on Har - monisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines and was approved by the relevant Medical College of Wisconsin Scientiﬁc Review and Institutional Review Board com - mittees ( NCT04721626 ) . All patients provided written informed consent before study entry . Topical mucosal antiseptic bundle and clinical procedures Enrolled patients received a topical mucosal antiseptic bundle consisting of pre - operative , intra - operative , and post - operative agents ( Table 1 ) . The topical antiseptic bundle included three agents (cid:1) povidone - iodine ( PI ) , chlorhexidine gluconate ( CHG ) , and tetracycline (cid:1) based on survey results of current surgical practice across the United States , evidence from related surgical subspecialities , and existing data in HNC surgery . 18 - 23 For all cases , the pre - operative topical antiseptics were applied to the entire upper aerodigestive tract including the oral cavity and pharynx . Further , intra - operative irri - gations covered all exposed oral and pharyngeal mucosa . Intravenous antibiotic therapy was given to all patients prior to surgery with standard intra - operative redosing and for 24 hours post - operatively , in accor - dance with national and institutional guidelines . 24 Ampicillin / sulbactam was the preferred intravenous agent as per institutional standard of care . Pre - operative skin preparation was performed in accordance with CDC guidelines . 24 Microbial specimen collection Microbial sample collection procedure Fresh samples were taken for quantitative and qualita - tive microbiology as well as bacterial genomic assess - ments . The following sites and time - points were selected to represent a comprehensive investigation of the peri - operative microbial environment : 1 . Pre - operatively ( under anesthesia prior to topical therapies ) 2 . Oral cavity 3 . Nasal cavity 4 . Intra - operatively ( after tumor resection ) 5 . Oral cavity before antiseptic wound irrigation 6 . Oral cavity after antiseptic irrigation 7 . Surgical drapes adjacent to the operative ﬁeld 8 . Post - operatively ( day 3 - 5 after surgery ) 9 . Oral cavity 10 . From patient’s hospital room environment in the follow areas : door handle , overbed table , suction tubing . Swabs were de - identiﬁed prior to transfer to labo - ratory staff who were blinded to patient identiﬁca - tion . To maintain consistency between patients and collection time - points , all specimens were collected by the same study author ( JZ ) , based on established methodology . 25 For sampling methodology and swab processing for genomic and microbiologic analyses , see Supplement . Articles www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 3 Outcomes The primary endpoint was the quantitative change in abundance of bacterial bioburden in the oral cavity in response to the topical antiseptic therapies . Secondary endpoints included SSI , adverse events ( AEs , NCI CTCAE v5 . 0 ) due to the topical antiseptic intervention , features in the oral microbiome associated with SSI ( for deﬁnition , see Supplement ) , and genomic mapping to identify the site of origin of the infectious organism . Statistical analysis Quantitative microbiologic culture . With anticipated enrollment of 25 patients , the detectable effect size ( group mean difference ) with 80 % power using a paired t - test with a signiﬁcance level of 5 % is 0 ¢ 6 times the standard deviation of the group difference of bacterial abundance . A paired - samples t - test was conducted to compare bacterial loads at pre - operative , intra - operative , and post - operative time - points . In this analysis , the intra - operative and post - operative time - points were compared separately to the pre - operative values . All paired - samples analyses were done on the log 10 scale and used a 5 % level of statistical signiﬁcance . Prior to conducting the analysis , the assumption of normally distributed difference of log bacterial load was con - ﬁrmed using the skew and kurtosis levels as well as quantile - quantile plots . Genomic and metagenomic analyses . 16S rDNA analy - sis was used to evaluate the composition of the oral microbiome at multiple peri - operative time - points and to determine if features of the oral microbiome were associated with SSI . Whole genome sequencing ( WGS ) was performed on bacteria isolated from culture of purulence expressed from the SSI . In the patients who developed SSI , metagenomic sequencing was then per - formed on the bacterial communities isolated from peri - operative swabs . Additionally , any pathogenic bac - teria that were cultured from the peri - operative microbiologic samples with a species - level match to the SSI organism also underwent WGS . To identify the peri - operative origin of the organism which led to SSI , its genomic sequence was mapped back on to the WGS or metagenomic data from the peri - operative environ - ment . In the case where multiple WGS samples were obtained from the same bacterial species in the same patient , a pangenome analysis was performed to deter - mine if differences existed between these strains . For bioinformatics analyses , see Supplement . Role of the funding source . The study sponsor had no role in study design , in collection , analysis , and interpre - tation of data , in the writing of the report , or in the deci - sion to submit the paper for publication . Results Clinical outcomes Twenty - seven patients were screened between January 8 , 2021 , and May 14 , 2021 . Twenty - six were enrolled and 25 completed the study ( Figure 1 ) . Patients were fol - lowed for 30 days post - operatively for the development of SSI . There were no antiseptic - related AEs . All patients received prophylactic intravenous ampillicin / sulbactam for 24 hours . All patients underwent post - operative tube feeding and remained NPO for at least 7 days . Baseline characteristics are shown in Supple - mentary Table 1 . There were three cases of SSI ( 12 % ) , all of which occurred as a purulent infection which spontaneously drained through the cervical incision . SSI was identiﬁed at a median of 18 days post - opera - tively ( range 15 - 25 days ) . There were no orocervical or pharyngocervical ﬁstulae and all patients who developed SSI had passed a videoﬂuoroscopic swallow study . Base - line and treatment characteristics of the study popula - tion are shown in Supplementary Table 1 . Microbiologic and genomic correlates Swabs from all seven peri - operative sites and time - points for all 25 included study patients ( see above , Topical antiseptic Administration Timing Administration Location Administration Details 5 % PI + 0 . 12 % CHG Pre - operatively under anesthesia prior to incision Oral cavity Any present teeth were brushed and topical agents were applied and left undisturbed for at least 3 minutes prior to incision * 10 % PI + 0 . 12 % CHG Intra - operative irrigation after tumor resection but before reconstruction Oralcavityandassociated wound bed The wound ( including oral cavity , exposed aerodigestive tract , and neck wound ) was irrigated for 60 seconds 3 % Tetracycline ointment Immediately post - operative and then every 6 hours for 2 days Oral cavity 10g ointment placed on oral cavity suture lines . If no suture lines visible , oral cavity coated with ointment . Table 1 : Interventional topical antiseptic regimen . * For edentulous patients , the gumline was brushed in an otherwise identical manner to patients with dentition . Articles 4 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 Microbial sample collection procedure ) along with swabs of purulent ﬂuid sampled from each of the three SSI underwent qualitative and quantitative microbiologic culture and DNA extraction . Microbiologic culture analysis Incidence of pathogenic bacteria found in the pre - operative oral cavity . The pre - operative oral cavity was found to harbor pathogenic organisms in ﬁve patients ( 20 % ) including Serratia marcenses , Proteus mirabilis , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Klebsiella variicola , and Klebsi - ella oxytoca . Of these patients , the pathogen persisted in the post - operative oral culture in two cases ( S . marcenses and P . aeruginosa ) . Of these patients , only one ( P . aerugi - nosa ) went on to experience an SSI which grew that same pathogen . Overall effects of the topical antiseptic bundle on decontamination of the oral cavity surgical site . The topical antiseptic bundle signiﬁcantly decreased oral bacterial colony - forming units ( CFU ) overall from pre - operative baseline to post - operative sampling ( log 10 mean difference 4 ¢ 03 , 95 % CI 3 ¢ 13 (cid:1) 4 ¢ 92 , Table 2 ) . This difference in oral bacterial bioburden in response to top - ical antiseptic therapy ( 74 . 1 times the standard deviation of the group difference ) exceeded the targeted change in the primary endpoint ( 0 . 6 times the standard deviation of the group difference ) . Pre - operative and intra - opera - tive topical mucosal antisepsis both exhibited a signiﬁ - cant decrease in CFU counts , while the post - operative topical antiseptic regimen alone did not demonstrate a signiﬁcant independent effect . SSI and the microbiology of infection . The three cases of SSI among study patients grew Staphylococcus epider - mis , Eikenella sp , and P . aeruginosa , respectively . When culture results from all sites and time - points were evalu - ated , the same bacterial species which caused SSI was identiﬁed in a peri - operative culture for only one patient ( P . aeruginosa , found in the pre - operative and post - oper - ative oral cavity , Table 3 ) . In the other two cases of SSI , the bacterial species causing infection was not found in any peri - operative microbiologic culture . Genomic and metagenomic correlates . While DNA extraction was performed for all 178 unique samples col - lected in this study , due to low recovery of bacterial geno - mic material from several sites ( intra - operative oral cavity , surgical drapes , post - operative hospital environment ) , only the nasal cavity and the pre - operative and post - operative oral swabs subsequently underwent DNA sequencing . 16S sequencing : effects of topical antisepsis on the oral microbiome and association with SSI . 16S rDNA sequencing was performed in all study patients on pre - Figure 1 . Study pro ﬁ le . Articles www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 5 operative and post - operative oral swabs to evaluate the impact of topical mucosal antisepsis on the oral micro - biome and its association with SSI . Measures of alpha - and beta - diversity demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in the microbial diversity in the post - operative period , suggesting oral re - colonization with diverse bacteria after surgery ( Figure 2 ) . To determine speciﬁc changes in microbial taxa , linear discriminant analysis effect size ( LEfSe ) was performed . 26 Several orders of patho - genic bacteria were identiﬁed which were signiﬁcantly enriched in the oral cavity in the pre - operative or intra - operative periods , including Pseudomonales and Enterobacterales , which were subsequently less preva - lent in the post - operative samples ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) . Speciﬁc features of the pre - operative and post - operative oral microbiomes were then assessed for association with SSI . While features of the pre - operative microbiome were not found to signiﬁcantly predict SSI , a unique set of 21 amplicon sequence variants from the post - operative microbiome were signiﬁcantly associated with SSI ( model accuracy 0 ¢ 8 , AUC 0 ¢ 75 , Supplementary Figure 3 ) . In particu - lar , the combined presence of two organisms , Actino - myces sp and Pseudomonas formosensis , in the post - operative microbiome represented the most impor - tant identiﬁed predictors of SSI . Genomic and metagenomic sequencing : source - track - ing of the infectious organisms . In cases of SSI , we attempted genomic mapping of the infectious organism to identify where in the peri - operative environment that strain may have originated . To achieve this , the bacterial strain which was isolated from the purulence of the SSI was sub - cultured from glycerol stock and underwent WGS . WGS was successful in two of the three cases of SSI . In one case ( S . epidermidis ) the organism could not be re - cultured from glycerol stock and , therefore , could not undergo WGS and further analysis . Next , genome sequencing was performed on previously extracted and preserved bacterial DNA from the nasal and oral swabs for each patient . Of the two cases with available WGS for the infectious organism , one ( Eikenella sp ) under - went metagenomic sequencing of the peri - operative nasal and oral samples . In the second case , the same species ( P . aeruginosa ) was cultured from the SSI and both the pre - operative and post - operative oral swabs and , therefore , these samples were sub - cultured from glycerol stock and underwent WGS for comparison to the infectious organism via pangenome analysis . Sequencing mapping and pangenome analyses revealed the oral cavity as the origin of the infectious organism in the two analyzable cases . In the case of SSI with Eikenella sp , despite not being identiﬁed by micro - biologic culture in the peri - operative environment , the WGS mapped speciﬁcally to the pre - operative oral microbiome and was not found in the nasal cavity or post - operative oral microbiome ( Figure 2 ) . In the case of SSI with P . aeruginosa , pangenome analysis of the WGS revealed all samples had identical genome sequences apart from three singletons lost from the infectious organism and post - operative isolate . While PSI - BLAST search revealed that the function of these genes is unknown , there was an associated increased resistance to tetracycline identiﬁed in P . aeruginosa from the post - operative oral sample and SSI , as com - pared with the pre - operative isolate . Discussion Upfront surgery remains an essential component in the management of HNC . For many patients with advanced oral cavity or laryngeal / hypopharyngeal cancers , open resection with vascularized ﬂap reconstruction contin - ues to maximize oncologic control . Further , with the increasing use of non - surgical therapies for organ Intervention assessed Oral microbial samples compared N Log 10 mean difference 95 % con ﬁ dence interval P - value Pre - operative decolonization ( PI / CHG ) Pre - operative prior to decolonization vs Intra - operative prior to antiseptic irrigation 25 1 . 5755 1 . 1563 1 . 9948 < . 0001 Intra - op antiseptic irrigation ( PI / CHG ) Intra - operative before antiseptic irrigation vs Intra - operative after antiseptic irrigation 25 2 . 3798 1 . 6823 3 . 0773 < . 0001 Post - op topical antisepsis ( tetracycline ) Intra - operative after antiseptic irrigation vs Post - operative after topical antisepsis 25 0 . 0729 - 0 . 8848 1 . 0305 0 . 8765 Overall topical antiseptic bundle Pre - operative prior to decolonization vs Post - operative after topical antisepsis 25 4 . 0282 3 . 1344 4 . 9219 < . 0001 Table 2 : Change in oral bacterial bioburden in response to topical mucosal antisepsis . Articles 6 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 preservation for other head and neck disease stages and subsites , greater numbers of patients with locoregional cancer recurrence or intractable complications related to radiotherapy will similarly require open upper aerodi - gestive tract resection and reconstruction for oncologic or functional indications . All such cases come with a signiﬁcant risk of post - operative SSI , which results in immense physical and ﬁnancial strain on patients , pro - viders , and hospital systems . 5 , 27 Despite more than four decades of extensive study on risk factors for SSI and the optimization of prophy - lactic intravenous antibiotic regimens , there has been little change in infection rates after HNC surgery . 3 Although numerous clinical risk factors have been iden - tiﬁed , the microbial features associated with infection remain poorly understood . However , a microbial approach to understanding SSI after HNC surgery may lead to advances beyond what has been accomplished through study of clinical risk factors . In particular , this prospective clinical trial illuminated three key avenues through which a microbial approach may lead to improvements in preventing SSI after HNC surgery : ( 1 ) decreasing oral bacterial bioburden , ( 2 ) understanding the impact of the oral microbiome on SSI , and ( 3 ) source - tracking of the infectious organisms which lead to SSI . Decreasing oral bacterial bioburden . The results of this trial demonstrated that oral mucosal topical antisepsis signiﬁcantly decreased bacterial bioburden at the oral surgical site and is most effective in the pre - operative and intra - operative settings . While certain opportunistic pathogenic species did persist through treatment ( P . aeruginosa , S . marcenses ) , topical antiseptic therapy signiﬁcantly decreased overall oral CFU counts and eradicated 60 % of opportunistic pathogenic bacteria identiﬁed in the pre - operative oral cavity . The overall quantitative decrease in oral bacterial abundance in response to topical antiseptic therapy exceeded our pre - study targeted change . These ﬁndings are signiﬁcant because in HNC surgery the oral cavity becomes contin - uous with the surgical wound and neck soft tissues after tumor resection . While the threshold level required to affect SSI rates remains uncertain , a signiﬁcant decrease in oral bacterial bioburden and pathogenic iso - lates may lead to decreased wound contamination and fewer SSI . Further , as demonstrated by genomic source - tracking in this study , for many cases of SSI the causative organism is present in the oral cavity pre - oper - atively and leads to infection despite no clinically appar - ent post - operative orocervical ﬁstula . This ﬁnding suggests that pathogen eradication through topical mucosal therapies may translate to fewer clinical SSI . A ﬁnal important consideration in the use of topical anti - sepsis to decease wound bioburden is the impact of non - oral aerodigestive tract surgical sites ( pharynx and larynx ) . In these cases , although the oral cavity may not be directly violated , the adjacent pharyngeal mucosa P a t i e n t SS I P r e - o p e r a t i ve o r a l p r i o r t o a n y t o p i c a l m u c o s a l a n t i s e p s i s P r e - o p e r a t i ve n a s a l I n t r a - o p e r a t i ve o r a l p r i o r t o i n t r a - o p e r a t i ve a n t i s e p t i c i rr i g a t i o n I n t r a - o p e r a t i ve o r a l p r i o r t o i n t r a - o p e r a t i ve a n t i s e p t i c i rr i g a t i o n I n t r a - o p e r a t i ve s u r g i c a l d r a p e s Po s t - o p e r a t i ve o r a l Po s t - o p e r a t i ve h o s p i t a l r oo m e n v i r o n m e n t 12 S t ap h y l o cc o c u s e p i d e r m i d i s N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l n a s a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a N o g r o w t h N o g r o w t h 17 E i k e n e ll a s p N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a * 1 . N o r m a l n a s a l ﬂ o r a * 2 . S t ap h y l o c o cc u s e p i d e r m i d i s N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a * N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a * 1 . N o r m a l n a s a l ﬂ o r a * 2 . S t ap h y l o c o cc u s e p i d e r m i d i s N o g r o w t h G r o w t h o f o r a l ﬂ o r a * 21 P s e udo m o n a s a e r - ug i n o s a (cid:3) A m p i c illi n / s u l - b a c t a m r e s i s t a n t (cid:3) T e tr a c y c li n e r e s i s t a n t 1 . N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a 2 . P s e udo m o n a s a e r ug i n o s a (cid:3) A m p i c illi n / s u l b a c t a m r e s i s t a n t (cid:3) T e tr a c y c li n e s e n s i t i v e N o r m a l n a s a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a 1 . N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a 2 . P r op r i o n i ba c t e r i u m a c n e s 1 . N o r m a l o r a l ﬂ o r a 2 . P s e udo m o n a s a e r ug i n o s a (cid:3) A m p i c illi n / s u l - b a c t a m r e s i s t a n t (cid:3) T e tr a c y c li n e r e s i s t a n t N o g r o w t h T ab l e 3 : SS I m i c r o b i o l o g y a n d w h e t h e r t h e s a m e o r g a n i s m s w e r e i d e n t i ﬁ e d i n p e r i - o p e r a t i ve m i c r o b i o l o g i c c u l t u r e . * E i k e n e ll a s p n o t i d e n t i ﬁ e d . Articles www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 7 and associated oral salivary ﬂow becomes continuous with the neck soft tissues . For this reason , our protocol included pre - operative and intra - operative coverage of the entire exposed upper aerodigestive with the topical antiseptic agents for all cases . We hypothesize that , given the continuity of the oral cavity and pharynx , the microbial risk factors for SSI will be similar for oral and non - oral surgical subsites . Source - tracking of infectious organisms . Through a novel application of a genomic approach to oncologic surgery , this clinical trial has shed light on the peri - operative origin of organisms that lead to SSI after HNC surgery . In the two analyzable cases of SSI in this trial , both were found to have originated from the pre - operative oral cavity . Strikingly , SSI occurred with these bacterial strains despite the absence of detectable levels of these organisms intra - operatively after oral decon - tamination and without the development of a clinically apparent orocervical ﬁstula . This ﬁnding most likely suggests that minimal levels of these bacterial strains persisted through topical oral decontamination , subse - quently seeding the neck soft tissues either intra - opera - tively or in the early post - operative period . The impact of the oral microbiome . Despite a major reduction in overall bacterial counts from pre - operative levels , there appeared to be no clear adverse effect on the microbiome reconstitution . The post - operative oral microbiota demonstrated greater diversity than matched pre - operative samples with fewer pathogenic bacterial orders , including Pseudomonales and Enterobacterales . However , despite this greater diversity and fewer overall pathogenic organisms , several features of the post - oper - ative microbiome were found to correlate with SSI . Speciﬁcally , the combined presence of P . formosensis and Actinomyces sp were identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant risk factor for SSI in two of the three cases . While little is known about P . formosensis , the presence of Actinomyces colonization has been associated with delayed oral wound healing in previous reports . 28 These ﬁndings suggest the possibility that certain genera may create a post - operative oral milieu conducive to infection . In summary , this study provides preliminary evi - dence that the pre - operative oral cavity commonly har - bors the bacterial strains which will ultimately lead to infection , that a topical oral antiseptic bundle may be beneﬁcial in limiting infection rates , and that the com - position of the post - operative oral microbiome may play a role in susceptibility to SSI after HNC surgery . The primary limitations of this study relate to available sam - ple size , low frequency of SSI resulting in only two ana - lyzable cases for genomics , and a single - arm design . Another important limitations was the inability to recover sufﬁcient bacterial genomic material from the skin , surgical drapes , and hospital environment . These sites have very low bacterial counts and may require additional methodological optimization in future stud - ies to achieve more reliable metagenomic yield . The absence of these genomic data do limit the strength of our conclusions about the origin of the bacterial organ - isms that lead to infection . However , given that the pre - operative oral cavity was identiﬁed as the most likely source , any presence of the infectious organism at an additional peri - operative site would most likely repre - sent contamination from the oral cavity . Additionally , this trial involved a speciﬁc antiseptic bundle which may not be generalizable to other antiseptic regimens . Figure 2 . Genomic mapping of the whole genomic sequence of the Eikenella sp which caused surgical site infection on to the meta - genome of the pre - operative nasal cavity , pre - operative oral cavity , and post - operative oral cavity . The genome of the infectious organism closely aligns with an Eikenella sp organism identi ﬁ ed in the pre - operative oral environment but is not found in the meta - genome at the other sites . X - axis represents each gene in the Eikenella sp genome . Y - axis represents mean coverage for each gene . Articles 8 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 Further , given the persistence of select pathogens through treatment and the development of antibiotic - resistance in one case , these results provide the basis to reﬁne the topical regimen to both better eradicate pre - existing pathogens while also limiting the development of drug resistance . Finally , this study also established the feasibility of applying genomic methodology to oncologic surgery for tracking bacterial strains which cause SSI in the peri - operative period and could be extrapolated to study the etiology of infection in other surgical disease sites and specialties . Contributors All authors contributed signiﬁcantly to conception , design , analysis and interpretation of data . All authors performed critical editing and ﬁnal approval of the man - uscript . BB and BMe had full access to the microbio - logic data , wrote microbiologic study plan , and performed the microbiologic analyses and interpreta - tion . SA had full access to the genomic data , performed all the bioinformatics analyses , and wrote the bioinfor - matics methods and results . RF and CWL had full access to clinical study data , wrote the biostatistical plan , and performed all the biostatistical analysis for the microbiologic and clinical investigations . All other man - uscript sections were drafted by JZ . All study patients were treated clinically by JZ and BMa , both of whom have accessed and veriﬁed the data , and are responsible for the decision to submit the manuscript . Data sharing statement Individual level de - identiﬁed trial data and protocol will be shared on request with publication for researchers with a methodologically sound proposal after obtaining a data use agreement through the Medical College of Wisconsin . Proposals should be directed to jyzen ga @ mcw . edu . Declaration of interests None . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Alliance National Can - cer Institute Community Oncology Research Program ( NCORP ) Research Base grant 7UG1CA189823 ( PI : Zenga ) as well as the National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences , National Institutes of Health , through Grant Number UL1TR001436 . Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not neces - sarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the NIH . The authors thank the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center DNA Sequencing Facility for pro - viding 16S , whole genome , and metagenomic sequenc - ing services . Supplementary materials Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ebiom . 2022 . 104099 . References 1 American Cancer Society . Cancer statistics : analysis tool . https : / / cancerstatisticscenter . cancer . org . Accessed 9 April 2019 . 2 Mitchell RM , Mendez E , Schmitt NC , Bhrany AD , Futran ND . Antibi - otic prophylaxis in patients undergoing head and neck free ﬂap recon - struction . JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2015 ; 141 ( 12 ) : 1096 – 1103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamaoto . 2015 . 0513 . 3 Vila PM , Zenga J , Jackson RS . Antibiotic prophylaxis in clean - con - taminated head and neck surgery : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2017 ; 157 ( 4 ) : 580 – 588 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0194599817712215 . 4 Veve MP , Greene JB , Williams AM , et al . Multicenter assess - ment of antibiotic prophylaxis spectrum on surgical infections in head and neck cancer microvascular reconstruction . Otolar - yngol Head Neck Surg . 2018 ; 159 ( 1 ) : 59 – 67 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0194599818756299 . 5 Penel N , Lefebvre JL , Cazin JL , et al . Additional direct medical costs associated with nosocomial infections after head and neck cancer surgery : a hospital - perspective analysis . Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg . 2008 ; 37 ( 2 ) : 135 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijom . 2007 . 08 . 002 . 6 Graboyes EM , Garrett - Mayer E , Ellis MA , et al . Effect of time to ini - tiation of postoperative radiation therapy on survival in surgically managed head and neck cancer . Cancer . 2017 ; 123 ( 24 ) : 4841 – 4850 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cncr . 30939 . 7 Goel AN , Frangos MI , Raghavan G , et al . The impact of treatment package time on survival in surgically managed head and neck can - cer in the United States . Oral Oncol . 2019 ; 01 ( 88 ) : 39 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . oraloncology . 2018 . 11 . 021 . 8 Chen MM , Harris JP , Orosco RK , Sirjani D , Hara W , Divi V . Asso - ciation of time between surgery and adjuvant therapy with survival in oral cavity cancer . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2018 ; 158 ( 6 ) : 1051 – 1056 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0194599817751679 . 9 Cannon RB , Houlton JJ , Mendez E , Futran ND . Methods to reduce postoperative surgical site infections after head and neck oncology surgery . Lancet Oncol . 2017 ; 18 ( 7 ) : e405 – e413 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1470 - 2045 ( 17 ) 30375 - 3 . 10 Raine CH , Bartzokas CA , Stell PM , Gallway A , Corkill JE . Chemo - prophylaxis in major head and neck surgery . J R Soc Med . 1984 ; 77 ( 12 ) : 1006 – 1009 . 11 Ariyan S , Martin J , Lal A , et al . Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevent - ing surgical - site infection in plastic surgery : an evidence - based con - sensus conference statement from the American association of plastic surgeons . Plast Reconstr Surg . 2015 ; 135 ( 6 ) : 1723 – 1739 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / PRS . 0000000000001265 . 12 Saginur R , Odell PF , Poliquin JF . Antibiotic prophylaxis in head and neck cancer surgery . J Otolaryngol . 1988 ; 17 ( 2 ) : 78 – 80 . 13 Mandell - Brown M , Johnson JT , Wagner RL . Cost - effectiveness of prophylactic antibiotics in head and neck surgery . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 1984 ; 92 ( 5 ) : 520 – 523 . 14 Johnson JT , Yu VL , Myers EN , Muder RR , Thearle PB , Diven WF . Efﬁcacy of two third - generation cephalosporins in prophy - laxis for head and neck surgery . Arch Otolaryngol . 1984 ; 110 ( 4 ) : 224 – 227 . 15 Durand ML , Yarlagadda BB , Rich DL , et al . The time course and microbiology of surgical site infections after head and neck free ﬂap surgery . Laryngoscope . 2015 ; 125 ( 5 ) : 1084 – 1089 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / lary . 25038 . 16 Yang CH , Chew KY , Solomkin JS , Lin PY , Chiang YC , Kuo YR . Surgical site infections among high - risk patients in clean - contami - nated head and neck reconstructive surgery : concordance with pre - operative oral ﬂora . Ann Plast Surg . 2013 ; 71 ( 1 ) : S55 – S60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / SAP . 0000000000000046 . Articles www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022 9 17 LinS , MelkiS , LisgarisMV , AhadizadehEN , ZenderCA . Post - operative MRSA infections in head and neck surgery . Am J Otolaryngol . 2017 ; 38 ( 4 ) : 417 – 421 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . amjoto . 2017 . 03 . 013 . 18 Fournel I , Tiv M , Soulias M , Hua C , Astruc K , Aho Gl (cid:1) el (cid:1) e LS . Meta - analysis of intraoperative povidone - iodine application to prevent surgical - site infection . Br J Surg . 2010 ; 97 ( 11 ) : 1603 – 1613 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bjs . 7212 . 19 Goztok M , Terzi MC , Egeli T , Arslan NC , Canda AE . Does wound irrigation with clorhexidine gluconate reduce the surgical site infec - tion rate in closure of temporary loop ileostomy ? A prospective clin - ical study . Surg Infect ( Larchmt ) . 2018 ; 19 ( 6 ) : 634 – 639 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / sur . 2018 . 061 . 20 Funahara M , Yanamoto S , Ueda M , et al . Prevention of surgical site infection after oral cancer surgery by topical tetracycline : results of a multicenter randomized control trial . Medicine ( Baltimore ) . 2017 ; 96 ( 48 ) : e8891 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / MD . 0000000000008891 . 21 Stabenau KA , Akakpo KE , Richmon JD , et al . Postoperative wound infections in head and neck surgery : the current state of antiseptic and antibiotic practices . Oral Oncol . 2021 ; 118 : 105361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . oraloncology . 2021 . 105361 . 22 Schweizer ML , Chiang HY , Septimus E , et al . Association of a bun - dled intervention with surgical site infections among patients undergoing cardiac , hip , or knee surgery . JAMA . 2015 ; 313 ( 21 ) : 2162 – 2171 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jama . 2015 . 5387 . 23 Grandis JR , Vickers RM , Rihs JD , Yu VL , Johnson JT . Efﬁcacy of topical amoxicillin plus clavulanate / ticarcillin plus clavulanate and clindamycin in contaminated head and neck surgery : effect of anti - biotic spectra and duration of therapy . J Infect Dis . 1994 ; 170 ( 3 ) : 729 – 732 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / infdis / 170 . 3 . 729 . 24 Berr (cid:1) ıos - Torres SI , Umscheid CA , Bratzler DW , et al . Centers for disease control and prevention guideline for the prevention of sur - gical site infection , 2017 . JAMA Surg . 2017 ; 152 ( 8 ) : 784 – 791 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamasurg . 2017 . 0904 . 25 Consortium HMP . Structure , function and diversity of the healthy human microbiome . Nature . 2012 ; 486 ( 7402 ) : 207 – 214 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature11234 . 26 Segata N , Izard J , Waldron L , et al . Metagenomic biomarker discov - ery and explanation . Genome Biol . 2011 ; 12 ( 6 ) : R60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / gb - 2011 - 12 - 6 - r60 . 27 Sweeny L , Rosenthal EL , Light T , et al . Outcomes and cost implications of microvascular reconstructions of the head and neck . Head Neck . 2019 ; 41 ( 4 ) : 930 – 939 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hed . 25424 . 28 Silva PGB , de Codes (cid:1) E , Freitas MO , Martins JOL , Alves APNN , Sousa FB . Experimental model of oral ulcer in mice : comparing wound healing in three immunologically distinct animal lines . J Oral Maxillofac Pathol . 2018 ; 22 ( 3 ) : 444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4103 / jomfp . JOMFP _ 144 _ 17 . Articles 10 www . thelancet . com Vol 81 Month July , 2022