ORIGINAL ARTICLE Smart homes and their users : a systematic analysis and key challenges Charlie Wilson • Tom Hargreaves • Richard Hauxwell - Baldwin Received : 14 December 2013 / Accepted : 1 August 2014 / Published online : 4 September 2014 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag London 2014 Abstract Published research on smart homes and their users is growing exponentially , yet a clear understanding of who these users are and how they might use smart home technologies is missing from a ﬁeld being overwhelmingly pushed by technology developers . Through a systematic analysis of peer - reviewed literature on smart homes and their users , this paper takes stock of the dominant research themes and the linkages and disconnects between them . Key ﬁndings within each of nine themes are analysed , grouped into three : ( 1 ) views of the smart home—func - tional , instrumental , socio - technical ; ( 2 ) users and the use of the smart home—prospective users , interactions and decisions , using technologies in the home ; and ( 3 ) chal - lenges for realising the smart home—hardware and soft - ware , design , domestication . These themes are integrated into an organising framework for future research that identiﬁes the presence or absence of cross - cutting rela - tionships between different understandings of smart homes and their users . The usefulness of the organising frame - work is illustrated in relation to two major concerns— privacy and control—that have been narrowly interpreted to date , precluding deeper insights and potential solutions . Future research on smart homes and their users can beneﬁt by exploring and developing cross - cutting relationships between the research themes identiﬁed . Keywords Smart homes (cid:2) Users (cid:2) Technologies (cid:2) Households (cid:2) Energy (cid:2) Assisted living 1 Introduction Smart technologies are pervasive . Embedding information and communication technologies in consumer appliances such as phones and TVs and in infrastructures such as cities and grids promises enhanced functionality , connectivity and manageability . Major technology developers , service pro - viders and energy utilities are now lining up to extend smartness beyond speciﬁc devices to the home as a whole and linkthese smart homes into the meters , wires and pipesof the utility networks . The market for smart home appliances alone is projected to grow from $ 40 m in 2012 to $ 26bn in 2019 [ 46 , p . 78 ] . The advent of smart homes may ensure smart technologies become a commonplace feature of peo - ple’s lives , whether they are wanted or not [ 36 , p . 358 ] . Scientiﬁc and technological research on smart homes is burgeoning alongside this wave of applied technology development . Behind both the technology developers and researchers , advancing applied knowledge in this ﬁeld is a clear sense of purpose . Smart homes , it is argued , will ‘‘undoubtedly make our lives much more comfortable than ever’’ [ 51 , p . 110 ] . But will they ? A smaller , but growing , number of social science researchers are asking : Who are the users of smart homes , and why do they want or need them ? Will the technological promise of ‘‘customized , automated support that is so gracefully integrated with our lives that it ‘disappears’’’ [ 20 , p . 1579 ] be fulﬁlled ? Might there be unexpected or perverse consequences ? Are smart homes an inevitability or a choice ? The essence of a smart home is information and com - munication technologies ( ICTs ) distributed throughout rooms , devices and systems ( lighting , heating , ventilation ) relaying information to users and feeding back user or automated commands to manage the domestic environment C . Wilson ( & ) (cid:2) T . Hargreaves (cid:2) R . Hauxwell - Baldwin School of Environmental Sciences , University of East Anglia , Norwich NR4 7TJ , UK e - mail : charlie . wilson @ uea . ac . uk 123 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 014 - 0813 - 0 [ 31 ] . Irrespective of the particular technological conﬁgu - ration of a smart home , its purpose—according to tech - nology developers—is ‘‘to improve the living experience’’ in some way [ 35 , 54 ] . This may be through new func - tionality such as remote control and automation of appli - ances , through enhancement of existing functionality such as heating management , through improved security or through the provision of assisted living services by moni - toring , alerting and detecting health incidents [ 56 ] . Smart homes are also the end - use node of the smart energy sys - tem that allows utilities to respond to real - time ﬂows of information on energy demand fed back by smart meters from millions of homes [ 23 ] . Despite this broad range of potential and assumed ben - eﬁts , a clear user - centric vision of smart homes is currently missing from a ﬁeld being overwhelmingly ‘‘pushed’’ by technology developers [ 65 , 70 ] . This is a critical oversight given that the overall success of smart homes , whatever eventual form they may take , hinges fundamentally on their adoption and use by real people in the context of their normal everyday lives . This article takes stock of what is understood to date about smart homes and their users . We conducted a systematic literature review and the - matic analysis of 150 peer - reviewed academic publications that explicitly address ‘‘smart homes’’ and ‘‘users’’ ( Sect . 2 ) . We identiﬁed nine inter - related lines of enquiry and the key ﬁndings within each . We organised these themes in three groups : view and visions for the smart home ( Sect . 3 ) ; understandings of users and the use of smart homes ( Sect . 4 ) ; and challenges to the realisation of smart homes ( Sect . 5 ) . We use this analysis to develop an organising framework for further research on smart home users designed to bring coherence and comprehensiveness to an important and growing ﬁeld ( Sect . 6 ) . We illustrate how the organising framework helps to identify cross - cutting linkages as well as disconnects by applying it to explore two key issues—privacy and control . We conclude by calling for future research to build on the organising framework to develop more comprehensive understandings of the relationships between smart homes and their users ( Sect . 7 ) . In so doing , we contend that the central user - related challenge for smart home development is not as simple as improving their reliability and functionality , or designing out concerns around trust , privacy or user - friendliness . Rather , the challenge is to recognise these issues as parts of a broader effort to redeﬁne the notion of ‘‘smart’’ itself , seeing it as emerging within users’ everyday lives and in the ways technologies are used in the home , not as something that resides in technologies themselves . This contribution is timely as the number of research publications on smart home users is growing exponentially ( Fig . 1 ) , but has largely followed rather than led a strongly technology push ﬁeld [ 36 ] . A recent review of the barriers to smart home adoption found users lacked a clear sense of smart home beneﬁts [ 8 ] . Meanwhile , large - scale national smart meter rollouts are underway [ 19 ] and off - the - shelf smart home technologies are becoming more widely available around the world [ 46 ] . It is important , therefore , to synthesise smart homes and user research so far , and set out markers for ongoing and future research . 2 Method : systematic literature review We conducted a systematic search of the peer - reviewed literature using key words denoting ‘‘user’’ as well as ‘‘smart home’’ . Speciﬁcally , in July 2012 , we searched the Scopus database using the search string ‘‘Smart’’ AND ‘‘Home’’ AND ‘‘User’’ AND ‘‘Technology’’ and included a total of 23 synonyms and variants ( e . g . ‘‘Residen * ’’ and ‘‘Hous * ’’ in lieu of ‘‘Home’’ , with the * capturing different possible word endings , e . g . ‘‘House’’ , ‘‘Housing’’ ) . For further details on the search protocol , see [ 39 ] . This initial search yielded 12 , 310 articles . In two initial sifts , we reduced the sample to 538 articles by reviewing titles , and then titles and abstracts , and excluding all spu - rious or otherwise irrelevant hits . We then used a ﬁnal sift to exclude articles which mentioned or referenced users but on closer examination did not focus on users either directly or indirectly in the research and analysis . The ﬁnal sample was 150 articles that either explicitly investigated pro - spective users of smart homes or implicitly considered users through inferences on the usability , design or attractiveness of smart home technologies . Using the Scopus disciplinary classiﬁcations , this set of 150 articles was dominated by engineering and technical sciences ( 61 % ) with the remainder split evenly between health - related disciplines ( 19 % ) and the social sciences ( 20 % ) ( see Fig . 1 for details ) . From our review of this set of 150 articles , we identiﬁed an initial set of themes which were iteratively revised , expanded and organised hierarchically , noting the key ﬁndings and references within each theme . For further details of the thematic coding method , see [ 39 ] . An anno - tated bibliography of over 70 articles is freely available for download at http : / / www . reﬁtsmarthomes . org / ? attachment _ id = 725 . The ﬁnal set of nine themes , organised in three sets of three , are as follows : 1 . Views of the smart home i . functional ii . instrumental iii . socio - technical 464 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 2 . Users and the use of the smart home i . prospective users ii . interactions and decisions iii . technology in the home 3 . Challenges for realising the smart home i . hardware and software ii . design iii . domestication The ﬁrst set of themes describes three views of the smart home . These views provide the context and underlying rationale for industry activity and scientiﬁc research , offering different and at times competing visions or interpretations of what smart homes are and what they are for . The second set of themes relate speciﬁcally to the users and use of smart homes . They begin with basic questions about who smart home users are and what speciﬁc characteristics they have . They then extend to different views of the form , frequency and function of user interactions with smart technolo - gies in the home . The ﬁnal set of themes turns to the principal challenges for realising the smart home in the near - term future , distinguishing hardware and software development issues from design and usability chal - lenges . More fundamental questions are also asked about the users of smart technologies amidst the com - plex and irregular rhythms and patterns of everyday life in the home . 3 Why the smart home ? Why is the smart home a growing and potentially important ﬁeld of research and development ? Three broad views are evident in the literature : a functional view ; an instrumental view ; and a socio - technical view . The functional view sees smart homes as a way of better managing the demands of daily living through technology . The instrumental view emphasises smart homes’ potential for managing and reducing energy demand in households as part of a wider transition to a low - carbon future . The socio - technical view sees the smart home as the next wave of development in the ongoing electriﬁcation and digitalisation of everyday life . 3 . 1 The functional view Proponents of the functional view contend that extending and integrating the functionality already provided in homes by a range of information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) will contribute to ‘‘better living’’ ( e . g . [ 32 , 59 ] ) . Much of the technologically oriented literature on smart homes presents their beneﬁts for end - users as both obvious and manifold : comfort , security , scheduling tasks , conve - nience through automation , energy management and efﬁ - ciency ; and for speciﬁc end - users , health and assisted living [ 20 , 63 ] . Balta - Ozkan et al . [ 8 ] group these beneﬁts in three categories : lifestyle support , energy management and safety . User - centric research clearly emphasises the enhance - ment of existing services not the provision of new ones : ‘‘the point of technology is not to replace experiences that 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 2012 ( J u l y ) 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 nu m b e r o f a r t i c l es In depth consideration of users ( accepted in final sift , n = 150 ) Cursory mention only of users ( rejected in final sift , n = 388 ) Computer Science , Engineering & Mathematics61 % Medicine , Health , Nursing & Biology19 % Social Sciences ( inc . Economics , Psychology & Energy ) 20 % Fig . 1 Peer - reviewed research on smart home users . Notes : Left panel shows exponential growth in published articles using search terms ‘‘smart homes’’ and ‘‘users’’ ( and variants thereof—see text for details ) . Right panel shows broad non - exclusive disciplinary group - ings for n = 150 publications reviewed Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 465 123 we already enjoy today with our families … [ but to ] support or enhance experiences you already enjoy … but in new ways’’ [ 40 , p . 258 ] . As examples , smart homes can deliver better - connected workspaces [ 15 ] , enhance existing tele - visions through interactivity [ 11 ] and even help overcome digital divides by including elderly and other households currently marginalised from the information society [ 54 ] . The functional view points to a wide variety of tasks and activities that smart homes could help people achieve : remotely controlling speciﬁc appliances , improving mem - ory and recall through automated reminders , enhancing security through simulated occupancy when homes are empty , and so on [ 14 , 56 , 59 ] . These correspond in broad terms with users’ perceived needs for improved comfort , convenience , security and entertainment [ 3 ] . Improved security , in particular , is of clear value to users [ 49 ] . The most clearly resolved functional view of ‘‘better living’’ is articulated by researchers in the health and social care domain . Here , smart homes can ‘‘contribute to the support of the elderly , people with chronic illness and disabled people living alone at home … ( by improving the quality and variety of information transmitted to the cli - nician’’ [ 16 , p . 93 ] ) . This decision support functionality is centred on monitoring through wearable , implantable and sensing devices to facilitate preventative care and detect adverse health incidents [ 17 ] . Other health researchers examine speciﬁc vulnerabilities , such as individuals living with serious mental illness , emphasising that caregivers rather than individuals are often the direct beneﬁciaries [ 34 ] . 3 . 2 The instrumental view A more clearly instrumental or goal - oriented view of smart homes emphasises their potential to help achieve energy demand reduction goals , with associated beneﬁts for households , utilities and policymakers . The aims of households trying to save money and energy align with the efforts of utilities improving energy system management and the objectives of policymakers pursuing greenhouse gas emission reduction and a secure and reliable energy supply . The instrumental view thus sees the smart home as an important technological solution in delivering an affordable low - carbon energy transition ( e . g . [ 50 , 53 ] or sustainability more generally [ 18 ] . This builds on existing research in the commercial and institutional sectors on ‘‘intelligent’’ buildings with automated energy manage - ment systems [ 13 , 77 ] . In the instrumental view , core components of the smart home are smart meters , smart energy - using appliances and energy management functionality to enable user - control and programmed optimisation of appliance use and micro - generation [ 57 ] . Energy smart homes thus encourage a transformation of passive end - users into ‘‘micro - resource managers’’ [ 71 , p . 227 ; see also 33 ] . Personalised , tailored and real - time information and feedback on energy use ( and tariffs ) via smart meters and in - home displays help to ‘‘make energy visible’’ [ 37 , 76 ] . Smart technologies also open up a suite of options for household energy manage - ment that were not possible under previous ‘‘dumb’’ sys - tems of monthly feedback via energy bills . Smart homes , this view suggests , will enable energy to be cut , trimmed , switched , upgraded or shifted [ 62 ] . However , demonstrated energy savings from the use of smart home technologies in studies or ﬁeld trials are rela - tively small , although potential savings ( or ‘‘shaving’’ ) during peak times can be more pronounced [ 22 , 26 , 78 ] . Large - scale trials of smart meters and in - home displays in the UK demonstrated around 3 % energy reductions on average [ 1 ] . Households’ appetite or capacity for reducing energy bills in response to information feedback and price incentives appears limited , and interest in information and price signals rapidly wears off [ 38 , 74 ] . Energy utilities are key proponents of the instrumental view but are interested less in household - level energy savings and more on the rollout of smart meters . These will provide utilities with real - time information on both supply and demand distributed across the millions of nodes of the distribution network [ 58 ] . Linked in - home displays com - municating usage and cost information to end - users enable utilities to charge for electricity at its marginal cost , pro - viding a price signal to shift or curtail demand when supply is expensive or in short supply [ 4 , 42 ] . Individual homes are thus integrated into wider ‘‘smart grids’’ , with consid - erably improved energy management functionality for utilities , and potential efﬁciency gains with associated ﬁnancial and environmental beneﬁts [ 57 ] . This utility - dri - ven instrumental view is already strong in the USA ( e . g . [ 26 , 30 ] ) and is increasingly receiving attention in Europe as the rationale behind smart meter rollouts and smart grid development ( e . g . [ 19 , 23 ] . 3 . 3 The socio - technical view The functional and instrumental views dominated the lit - erature reviewed , but a third ‘‘socio - technical’’ perspective on smart homes is also evident . Rather than focussing on the speciﬁc functions smart homes can offer or seeing smart homes as useful tools to realise broader energy objectives , the socio - technical view sees smart homes as simply the latest ( or perhaps the next ) episode in the coe - volving relationship between technology and society . The socio - technical view emphasises how the use and meaning of technologies will be socially constructed and iteratively negotiated , rather than being the inevitable outcome of assumed functional beneﬁts [ 5 ] . 466 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 Røpke and colleagues contextualise ‘‘the pervasive integration of ICT into everyday practices’’ [ 66 , p . 1771 ] as part of what they call the ‘‘third round of household elec - triﬁcation’’ . Building on Schwartz - Cowan’s [ 68 ] seminal work on the ‘‘industrialisation of the home’’ , they see the electriﬁcation and digitalisation of the home as the latest round of socio - technical change . Previous rounds involved lighting ( early 1890s ) and power and heating ( 1940s – 1970s ) . The core technology of the current round is the micro - chip , which has enabled the creeping digitalisation of almost all aspects of everyday life . Technology developers’ visions nourish this socio - technical interpretation . Park et al . [ 59 ] , for example , sketch out working prototypes for smart pens , pillows , dressing tables , doormats , picture frames , sofas , walls , windows and so on , with a correspondingly broad array of services , from remembering , reminding , smelling , lighting , recognising , sounding , connecting and reinvigorating . Taylor et al . [ 73 ] emphasise the potential for almost all ‘‘surfaces’’ ( doors , walls , bowls ) to become ‘‘smart’’ digital displays in an ‘‘ecology of surfaces’’ with and through which users interact . Even in the health domain with its more overt surveillance and monitoring function over vulnerable household members , smart technology is to be ‘‘embedded seamlessly in the everyday objects of our lives’’ [ 45 , p . 539 ] . The socio - technical view of smart homes is distinctive in arguing that such technological developments always , and necessarily , co - evolve with broader and longer - term societal changes that may include indirect and unintended consequences . Smart homes are important and interesting precisely because of these potentially transformative but as yet unknown effects . Social practices within everyday life at home may be combined or scheduled in new ways [ 55 ] . Differentiated identities , and particularly gender roles , associated with key household practices such as housework and leisure may be reinforced or destabilised [ 9 , 64 ] . Smart home technologies may also change how householders’ understand , experience and construct meaning around their homes and domestic life more generally [ 6 , 25 ] . 4 Who uses smart homes and how ? Analysis of reports , studies , websites and promotional material produced by smart home technology developers and service providers reveals a notable absence of user - focused research [ 39 ] . User - oriented studies in actual smart home environments are notable exceptions rather than the rule ( e . g . [ 57 ] ) . The resulting implicit ( rather than explicit ) understanding and representation of smart home users distinguishes : ( 1 ) who prospective users of smart homes might be ; ( 2 ) how these users might interact with and make decisions about smart home technologies ; and ( 3 ) how broader conceptualisations of the home as the adoption environment for smart home technologies conditions both users and use . 4 . 1 Prospective users of smart homes There are few speciﬁc and differentiating characteristics of prospective smart home users identiﬁed in the literature . The major exception is in smart homes for assisted living which emphasise active ageing and independence , self - determination and freedom of choice , and changing and inter - dependent needs of an ageing population [ 32 , 54 ] . Speciﬁc needs of elderly smart home users include easily accessible contact with emergency help , assistance with hearing or visual impairments and automatic systems to detect and prevent falls [ 10 , 14 , 43 ] . Vulnerable users in assisted living smart homes comprise more than just the elderly . Chan et al . [ 17 ] , for example , highlight the potential for smart homes to incorporate wearable and implantable devices that can monitor various physiological parameters of patients . Giger et al . [ 34 ] focus on those with serious mental illness . Orpwood et al . [ 56 ] highlight the speciﬁc user - interface requirements of dementia sufferers . Beyond these speciﬁc characteristics of health - related users , the identities of prospective smart home users have to be inferred . According to the instrumental view , users are information and price - responsive , and broadly rational in seeking to manage domestic energy use ( e . g . [ 23 , 50 ] ) . In the functional view , technophile users are attracted to an ICT - enhanced lifestyle , and the potential for control and automation offered by the smart home ( e . g . [ 20 , 59 ] ) . A small number of articles imply another type of user : the incremental home improver . The development of modular , affordable and accessible smart home technologies enables their incorporation into existing as well as new - build homes . Potential users may therefore include low - and middle - income households , as well as high - income tech - nophiles ( e . g . [ 53 ] ) . A ﬁnal type of prospective user , pre - valent in the more socio - technical studies reviewed , identiﬁes women , children and families rather than unitary households or individual users [ 25 ] . Richardson [ 64 ] and Berg [ 9 ] , for example , emphasise that women and children will be smart home users as well as men and therefore that distinct gender roles and identities should be recognised during technological design and development . These types of prospective smart home user—elderly or vulnerable householders , rational energy users , techno - philes , home improvers and differentiated families—are not exclusive . With the exception of health - related users , they are also inferred or assumed rather than explicitly identiﬁed in smart home user research . Arguably , this lack of focus on who the actual users of smart homes will be or Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 467 123 on what they might want has contributed to the limited diffusion of smart homes to date : ‘‘If the history of research into this area attests to anything , it is the narrowness of the appeal of smart homes to a wider population’’ [ 73 , p . 383 ] . 4 . 2 User decisions and interactions with smart home technologies Users must interact or interface with smart home technol - ogies in some way , but these interactions can be more or less frequent and more or less passive or active ( e . g . [ 41 ] ) . In a recent , inﬂuential depiction of the smart home , Cook reduces user interactions with smart home systems to one - off goal - setting : ‘‘computer software playing the role of an intelligent agent perceives the state of the physical envi - ronment and residents using sensors , reasons about this state using artiﬁcial intelligence techniques and then takes actions to achieve speciﬁed goals , such as maximizing comfort of the residents’’ [ 20 , p . 1579 ] . Users are inter - preted as having ﬁxed and stable needs and preferences that homes , rather than the users themselves , can manage optimally . Smart homes as intelligent and context - aware learning systems remove the need for any active user involvement at all by automating functions according to users’ revealed habits ( e . g . [ 24 , 52 , 67 ] ) . These visions of intelligent homes are countered by the complexity , potential inﬂexibility and poor manageability of fully automated smart homes that are cited as key bar - riers to their adoption [ 8 , 12 ] . A long - standing irony in human – computer interactions is that ‘‘the more advanced a control system , the more crucial may be the contribution of the human operator’’ [ 7 , p . 775 ] . End - users rank automa - tion as a desirable feature of smart homes , but this is qualiﬁed by calls for such automation to be strictly limited to chains of functions that users could programme or set - up themselves : ‘‘computers should not make choices for users , but the other way around’’ [ 49 , p . 240 ] . Indeed , alongside automation , another important role of the smart home in most current visions is to provide useful information to users about various aspects of household functioning ( e . g . room temperatures or occupancy , appliance conditions , energy usage ) in an effort to help them make more informed choices and decisions . User interactions with smart homes might therefore range from a one - off input of preferences for the domestic environment ( ‘‘set and forget’’ ) to ongoing , repeated and adaptive decision - making and control . This latter possi - bility leads to a small strand of research focussed on how users make decisions about smart home technologies . The instrumental view assumes users respond rationally to improved feedback , information and price signals ( e . g . [ 78 ] ) . Alternative framings of domestic decision - making have emphasised its emotional , negotiated and pragmatic character . Friedewald et al . [ 32 ] , for example , recognise users as being ‘‘emotional’’ and having moods , as holding cherished ideals and as valuing communication and inter - actions with people . Such characteristics orient decisions about the use of smart home technologies very differently from preferences for minimising energy costs . The domestic environment is also characterised by ‘‘co - pre - sence’’ , meaning one individual’s goals and preferences may not be shared by others and so must be pragmatically negotiated ( see also [ 36 – 38 ] ) . 4 . 3 Characterising the ‘‘home’’ in smart homes Within much of the technologically focussed literature on smart homes , the domestic environment is simply the ‘‘taken for granted’’ backdrop within which technology will be used [ 64 ] . In their content analysis of smart home marketing materials , Hargreaves et al . [ 39 ] found that most images of smart homes depicted them as sterile , bland and neutral spaces that appeared unlived in . Such depictions are unsurprising given that much of the technological research and testing of smart home equipment occurs in artiﬁcially constructed test homes ( e . g . [ 17 ] ) . These are little more than ‘‘a set of walls and enclosed spaces ’’ [ 73 , p . 383 our emphasis ] . Increasingly , however , this view is giving way to a more complex understanding of homes which sees them as internally differentiated , emotionally loaded , shared and contested places . Ethnographic and sociological research on the use of ICTs in domestic contexts ﬁnds homes are actively divided by their occupants into functionally and interpretively distinct spaces . Communication technologies tend to be used and stored in different places within the home for quite different purposes [ 21 ] . These places may be ‘‘eco - logical habitats’’ ( where communication media is kept ) , ‘‘activity centres’’ ( where media is produced , consumed and transformed ) and ‘‘coordinate displays’’ ( where media are displayed and made available to others in order to coordinate activities ) . All these places play signiﬁcant roles in the ﬂow and communication of information within homes . The spatial layout of speciﬁc technologies also actively divides up homes , with certain activities being undertaken in particular places ( e . g . [ 6 , 40 , 75 ] ) . Tech - nologies and objects as ‘‘clutter’’ can help people give meaning and order to domestic space as part of the per - petual project of organising and constructing the home [ 72 ] . This internal differentiation of the home matters for how , where , how often and by whom smart home tech - nologies are likely to be used . Domestic environments can also be emotionally charged . Haines et al . [ 36 ] identiﬁed the importance of memories and relationships in a study of what end - users might value in smart homes . Baillie and Benyon [ 6 , p . 227 ] 468 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 similarly argue that ‘‘homes are places loaded with emo - tion , meaning and memories’’ . Domestic technologies will not serve solely functional purposes , but will be used and understood within broader and pre - existing household ‘‘moral economies’’—the unique and normally unques - tioned sets of values , routines and practices that underpin domestic life [ 38 , 69 , 76 ] . Moreover , although households may be a convenient unit of analysis , families are plural ( e . g . [ 25 ] ) . Homes must be understood as shared and contested places in which different household members may have different under - standings , preferences , rights , responsibilities and emo - tional associations . Richardson [ 64 ] , for example , focuses attention on the gendered nature of technology use ( see also [ 9 ] ) . She illustrates how technologies are often designed in ways that fail to respond sufﬁciently to how women as opposed to men and children use domestic spaces . Baillie and Benyon [ 6 ] further distinguish between more active users—who set and enforce the rules for technology use at home—and more passive users who comply with ( and at times resist ) these rules . 5 What are the user - related challenges for realising smart homes ? The smart home is yet to be realised at scale , despite the various views and propositions of the beneﬁts it can pro - vide to households . The technical literature that dominates smart home and user research ( see Fig . 1 ) identiﬁes the key technological and design challenges to be overcome . Spe - ciﬁc issues within these two sets of challenges are in line with the social barriers to the adoption of smart homes identiﬁed in public deliberative workshops by Balta - Ozkan et al . [ 8 ] : loss of control , reliability , privacy , trust , cost and irrelevance . However , there is a third set of challenges that more explicitly situates users in the adoption environment of the home and examines how and whether smart home technologies may be effectively domesticated . 5 . 1 Developing technologies for smart home users Numerous research , development , testing and trialling challenges need to be overcome before the widespread commercialisation of smart homes becomes a realistic prospect . Key technical issues include : ( 1 ) monitors and sensors that can reliably detect and sense what is going in the home , and algorithms that can accurately infer activi - ties and patterns from the resulting abundance of data ; ( 2 ) interoperability and retrospective compatibility of smart home technologies , supported by well - designed and ﬂexi - ble standards ; and ( 3 ) functional reliability and manage - ability [ 20 ] . The salience of these technological challenges varies widely depending on the technologists’ underlying vision for the smart home . For Friedewald et al . [ 32 ] , reliability is the central challenge as this attribute will underpin user - friendliness and empowerment . Smart homes must neither fail nor do unpredictable things . Edwards and Grinter [ 29 ] highlight several different aspects of the reliability challenge , including : debugging smart homes created ‘‘accidentally’’ by technologies introduced piecemeal ; administering and ﬁxing smart homes through self - healing systems that remove the need for household or third party system administrators ; and inferring occupancy activity from sensor data that may be both ambiguous and unreliable . Reliability is most important in smart homes for assisted living in which failures to sense or make inaccurate inferences about the nature of occupant behaviour could have life - threatening consequences . As Orpwood et al . [ 56 , p . 162 ] note with regards to dementia sufferers : ‘‘judge - ments made [ on human behaviour ] are always going to be probabilistic , and the designer has to incorporate means of dealing with errors , particularly in safety critical situations’’ . A recurring theme in discussions around reliability , debugging and interoperability of smart home technologies is the importance of ‘‘future prooﬁng’’ to ensure compati - bility both between successive generations of smart home technologies as well as between interacting components . Modularity , ﬂexibility and retrospective compatibility are frequently cited as necessary technological attributes ( e . g . [ 61 ] ) . Future prooﬁng also insulates smart home technolo - gies from changes in regulatory frameworks , standards and policy objectives , particularly in the energy domain [ 53 ] . 5 . 2 Designing technologies for smart home users The acceptability of smart homes to users is closely linked to issues of security , privacy and trust as well as practical and ergonomic concerns with user - friendliness . These issues present critical design challenges that relate to the interactions between users and smart home technologies . With respect to security , for example , Cook observes that ‘‘many individuals are reluctant to introduce sensing technologies into their home , wary of leaving digital trails that others can monitor and use to their advantage , such as to break in when the house is empty’’ [ 20 , p . 1578 ] . In smart homes for assisted living , Demiris et al . [ 27 ] simi - larly note user concerns with privacy arguing that tech - nologies that detect and monitor activity within the home risk being seen as intrusive violations in the domestic environment . For energy smart homes , concerns around both data security and the potential for utilities to monitor or even control household demand have led to consumer Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 469 123 backlashes against smart metering [ 2 , 23 ] . In the UK , a recent study on attitudes and values towards energy system change found general support for the development of smart homes , but with caveats around data sharing and a per - ceived loss of control through remote interference from utilities [ 60 ] . Paetz et al . [ 57 ] report similar ﬁndings from Germany . How smart homes are designed will condition their acceptability to prospective users . Cook [ 20 ] advocates for clearly deﬁning and guaranteeing levels of privacy and the safety and security of technologies . Paetz et al . [ 57 ] suggest the need for much greater levels of transparency and accountability on behalf of smart home developers—par - ticularly energy utilities—and the need to make explicit exactly how all stakeholders may beneﬁt from smart home development . Rohracher [ 65 ] argues that many of these issues might be avoided if more participatory approaches to design were employed . He suggests engaging with a wide range of different stakeholders even at the visioning stage for smart home technologies , to ensure that the widest possible range of interestsand concerns are recognised and addressed . Several other studies highlight more narrowly framed design challenges regarding the user - friendliness of smart homes . Park et al . [ 59 , p . 189 ] , for example , outline the immense variety of potential smart applications but caution against ‘‘overpowering’’ users with ‘‘complex technolo - gies’’ . Several studies have highlighted the difﬁculties of creating intuitive and easy - to - use user - interfaces given the level of complexity and number of user - control options that can potentially lie behind the interface ( e . g . [ 28 , 49 , 59 ] ) . User - centred design is widely cited as a useful response to smart home design challenges . Orpwood et al . [ 56 ] identify a number of simple design solutions that could help overcome speciﬁc difﬁculties faced by dementia suf - ferers , including wariness of new devices and forgetful - ness . By working with carers , researchers could identify simple and often low - tech solutions such as making devi - ces look familiar , concealing them from view so as to avoid causing alarm and providing prompts and reminders rather than taking control away from users . Different groups of users are likely to require different design solutions , not only just between households but also between cultures . Jeong et al . [ 47 ] , for example , reveal stark differences in the understanding of and demand for control between USA and Korean smart home users . 5 . 3 Situating smart home technologies amid everyday life at home ‘‘More than control of their devices , families desire more control over their lives ’’ [ 25 , p . 20 emphasis in original ] . Accordingly , the central user - related challenge for the realisation of smart homes is to align and adapt technologies with the messy and differentiated nature of users’ everyday lives at home [ 41 ] . New technologies are rarely used in homes in the ways their designers intend because they must always enter pre - existing environments that are contested , emotionally charged and dynamic ( e . g . [ 40 ] ) . These apparently chaotic domestic environments possess their own ‘‘smartness’’ or ‘‘intelligence’’ in the way , for example , that households manage communications [ 21 ] , make use of surfaces such as tables or fridges [ 73 ] or organise the ﬂow of clutter and mess through the home [ 72 ] . Smart home technology development to date has assumed everyday life is made up of speciﬁc , repetitive and relatively predictable routines and schedules . But on closer examination , life at home is ‘‘organic , opportunistic and improvisational’’ [ 25 , p . 19 ] . This generates new sets of design principles for gener - ating technologies that align with and support users in managing everyday life . Technologies can be built ‘‘for ambiguity , instability , concealment , and disinterest , and to be treated casually’’ [ 72 , p . 21 ] . Davidoff et al . [ 25 ] offer a set of seven principles that suggest new technologies should account for ‘‘the organic evolution of routines and plans’’ , ‘‘periodic changes , exceptions and improvisation’’ , ‘‘breakdowns’’ , ‘‘multiple , overlapping and occasionally conﬂicting goals’’ and that should ‘‘participate in the con - struction of family identity’’ [ 25 , p . 28 ] . Unless the smart home concept is re - thought in these ways , it is unlikely to succeed . Yet as Howard and col - leagues caution , such principles would be ‘‘ﬁendishly difﬁ - cult to apply to technology research’’ [ 44 , p . 329 ] . The central user - related challenge for the realisation of smart homes is therefore not to improve the reliability or func - tionality of technologies , nor to design out concerns around trust , privacy or user - friendliness , but to re - deﬁne the notion of ‘‘smart’’ itself , recognising that it emerges within users’ everyday lives and in the ways technologies are used in the home . As Taylor and colleagues explain : ‘‘it is people who imbue their homes with intelligence by continually weaving together things in their physical worlds with their everyday routines and distinct social arrangements’’ [ 73 , p . 383 ] . 6 Discussion Our thematic analysis of the literature on smart homes and their users was organised under three meta - themes : ( 1 ) visions or ‘‘grand narratives’’ for the smart home ; ( 2 ) users and their uses of smart homes ; and ( 3 ) user - related chal - lenges to realising smart homes . Within each of these meta - themes , we distinguished three distinct lines of enquiry pursued by peer - reviewed research . These are summarised in Table 1 . Each line of enquiry provides its own answers to the key research questions about smart homes and their users . 470 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 T a b l e 1 C o r e t h e m e s i n s m a r t ho m e u s e r r e s ea r c h , a nd ho w t h e y a n s w e r k e y r e s ea r c h qu e s ti on s V i e w s o f t h e s m a r t ho m e F un c ti on a l I n s t r u m e n t a l S o c i o - t ec hn i ca l W h a t i s t h e s m a r t ho m e ? A m on it o r e d , s e n s e d e nv i r on m e n t t h a t i n f o r m s o cc up a n t s a ll o w i ng ac ti v e c on t r o l o r a u t o m a ti o n A n op ti m a ll y m a n a g e d bu il d i ng e n e r gy s y s t e m a ll o w i ng i n f o r m a ti on a nd p r i ce - r e s pon s i v e a d j u s t m e n t s t o b e h a v i ou r A d i g it a l , t ec hno l og i ca l , n e t w o r k e d v i s i on c on fr on t e d by t h e m und a n e r ea liti e s o f do m e s ti c li f e W h a t i s t h e pu r po s e o f t h e s m a r t ho m e ? I m p r ov e qu a lit y o f ho m e li f e t h r ough n e w s e r v i ce s a nd e nh a n ce d f un c ti on a lit y E n a b l e e n e r gy d e m a nd r e du c ti on i n t h e ho m e a nd i m p r ov e d s y s t e m m a n a g e m e n t by u tiliti e s N o i nh e r e n t pu r po s e , f un c ti on s e m e r g e t h r ough i n c o r po r a ti on i n t o p r ac ti ce s w it h i n t h e w i d e r t r a j ec t o r y o f I C T p e n e t r a ti on i n t o t h e ho m e U s e r s a nd u s e o f t h e s m a r t ho m e P r o s p ec t i v e u s e r s I n t e r ac ti on s w it h t ec hno l ogy H o m e s a s c o m p l e x p l ace s W ho u s e s s m a r t ho m e s ? U s e r s w it h s p ec i ﬁ c h ea lt h n ee d s o r u s e r s w ho a r e p r i ce o r i n f o r m a ti on r e s pon s i v e i n bo t h e x i s ti ng a nd n e w - bu il d ho m e s U s e r s s ee k i ng c on t r o l ov e r t h e do m e s ti c e nv i r on m e n t a nd e n e r gy u s a g e t h r ough ﬂ e x i b l e o r s c h e du l a b l e b e h a v i ou r s D i ff e r e n ti a t e d hou s e ho l d s w it h n e go ti a t e d r o l e s w it h i n t h e d i s ti n c t s p ace s o f t h e ho m e H o w i s t ec hno l ogy u s e d ? V a r i e s acc o r d i ng t o a pp li ca ti on w it h a ss i s t e d li v i ng s m a r t ho m e s e m ph a s i s i ng p a ss i v e u s a g e a nd e n e r gy s m a r t ho m e s ac ti v e u s a g e F r o m c on ti nuou s a nd ac ti v e u s e r - m e d i a t e d c on t r o l t o p a ss i v e o n e - o ff ‘‘ s e t a nd f o r g e t ’’ A g r a du a l a nd a d a p ti v e p r o ce ss o f do m e s ti ca ti on i n t o t h e e x i s ti ng dyn a m i c s o f r ou ti n e s a nd p r ac ti ce s C h a ll e ng e s f o r r ea li s i ng t h e s m a r t ho m e H a r d w a r e a nd s o f t w a r e D e s i gn a nd u s a b ilit y S it u a ti ng t ec hno l og i e s i n ho m e s H o w ca n s m a r t ho m e s b e r ea li s e d ? D e v e l op a nd i m p r ov e t ec hno l og i e s t o e n s u r e r obu s t n e ss a nd r e li a b ilit y a s b a s i s f o r s o c i a l acce p t a b ilit y D e s i gn f o r u s e r n ee d s ( no t v i ce v e r s a ) a nd a dd r e ss p r i v ac y c on ce r n s t h r ough c l ea r a nd t r a n s p a r e n t r i gh t s a nd r o l e s , a nd p a r ti c i p a t o r y c o - d e s i gn E n s u r e t ec hno l og i e s a r e a d a p t a b l e t o e v e r yd a y do m e s ti c c on t e x t s a nd a ll o w ﬂ e x i b ilit y f o r do m e s ti ca ti on a nd a pp r op r i a ti on W h a t r e s ea r c h a pp r o ac h e s a r e u s e f u l ? C o m pu t e r s c i e n ce , e l ec t r i ca l e ng i n ee r i ng , d e s i gn U s e r - ce n t r e d d e s i gn , hu m a n – c o m pu t e r i n t e r ac ti on , b e h a v i ou r a l a n d s o c i a l p s y c ho l ogy S o c i o l ogy , e t hnog r a phy , s c i e n ce a nd t ec hno l ogy s t ud i e s , i nnov a ti on s t ud i e s Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 471 123 Although Table 1 sets out different groupings of research themes , there is clearly much overlap . Figure 2 shows the main inter - relationships between the nine themes identiﬁed . The strong links in Fig . 2 between ‘‘functional’’ , ‘‘user - technology interactions’’ and ‘‘hardware and soft - ware’’ typify the engineering and technical scientiﬁc approach . Similarly , the strong links between ‘‘socio - technical’’ , ‘‘home as complex places’’ and ‘‘domesticating technologies’’ characterise a critical social scientiﬁc approach . The solid vertical lines in Fig . 2 , therefore , represent the concerns of different research traditions and disciplines shown in the ﬁnal row of Table 1 , and of the competing visions for smart homes . The functional view gives rise to a series of techno - logical challenges around how enhanced functionality can be efﬁciently and reliably delivered . This includes a detailed consideration of interactions between users and technology around issues such as control and automation . The instrumental view gives rise to a set of design chal - lenges around how users can be made to accept and align with the energy reduction goals of the smart home based on rational responses to information and price signals . The socio - technical view gives rise to a more foundational and broadly cast set of challenges relating to the balance between users and technologies in smart homes , recognis - ing the complex and contested nature of homes as places for technology adoption and use . Coherence and consistency between the lines of enquiry identiﬁed in the vertical relationships of Fig . 2 have come largely at the expense of strong cross - cutting horizontal linkages between research themes . Yet as and when smart homes diffuse more widely into the fabric of everyday life at home , the functional , instrumental and socio - technical views will increasingly interact and combine , presenting more ( and potentially more intractable ) challenges . The technological optimism and clarity of the func - tional view will confront the just - the - next - thing normality of the socio - technical view with all its ambiguities and uncertainties . Functional service enhancements in areas such as comfort and convenience will confound the energy management goals of the instrumental view amid the broader potential for smart homes to generate more resource - intensive trajectories of socio - technical change [ 48 ] . Introducing new technologies changes service expectations and use patterns , which in turn change sub - sequent demands , wants and needs for new technologies and the resources they consume , normalising ever more intensive ways of living [ 40 , 55 ] . These disconnects between research positioned within the functional and instrumental views , and research con - tributing to the socio - technical view are clearly shown in Fig . 2 . Efforts to develop stronger horizontal linkages provide a clear avenue for future research . This is best illustrated by example . Two salient issues in smart home user research concern privacy and control . Table 1 and Fig . 2 show how both issues could be approached from alternative and potentially complemen - tary angles that help expose and clarify key issues more clearly and generate wider insights . Privacy , access to data , and issues of trust , reliability and transparency are a major concern for prospective users of smart homes [ 27 ] . In the literature reviewed , these issues are considered primarily to be design chal - lenges affecting hardware and software developments that shape how users interact with technologies ( e . g . [ 20 , 57 ] ) . The socio - technical view of smart homes , however , sets issues of privacy within broader considerations of how the pervasive inﬂuence of ICT - enabled networks and net - working are blurring the lines between the private and the social , the domestic and the public . The instrumental beneﬁts to utilities of real - time information on energy demand and micro - generation rely on a recalculation of how much privacy ( on electricity and gas usage ) should be exchanged for how much potential for optimising home energy systems [ 33 ] . For users to become active ‘‘micro - resource managers’’ [ 71 ] , privacy is further forfeit through the market trades and transactions through which preferences are revealed . Fig . 2 Organising framework for research on smart homes and their users . Notes : Thick solid , solid and thin dashed lines denote strong , weak explicit and weak implicit inter - relationships , respectively , in smart home user research to date 472 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 Nor is privacy an issue simply between households ( us ) and utilities or smart home installers and maintenance operators ( them ) . Seeing smart homes as complex adoption environments for new technologies reveals how enhanced functionality for one household member may imply a loss of privacy for another . Privacy may be sought within the differentiated spaces of a home that smart home technol - ogies may inadvertently erode through communication , sharing and unitary control . Privacy is even constitutive of what a home means : any monitoring of the domestic environment challenges how occupants identify with their homes [ 10 ] . It is entirely unsurprising , therefore , that technologies designed to sense , interpret and control these uniquely emotional and memory - laden places evoke con - cerns over privacy [ 6 , 72 ] . Alongside privacy , issues of control and automation are another of the central uncertainties in the body of research concerned with what users might want or need from smart homes . And as with privacy , there are many contrasting perspectives on control and automation shown in the organising framework in Fig . 2 . Control can be about households protecting their domestic environments from outsiders ( security ) , or control can be about automating various functions and services [ 49 ] . Control can also be about autonomy and indepen - dence within the home ( mobile and always - on maintenance and care ) or about responding to information from outside the home ( utility price signals ) . Even the technologists’ vision in the functional view is unclear on the extent to which smartness should reside in the technologies— learning , inferring and pre - empting occupants’ behaviour ( e . g . [ 20 ] ) —or should reside in the users—maintaining active control or a watchful over - riding eye on automated functions [ e . g . 49 ] . These complexities are magniﬁed if questions are asked about the nature of the home as the arena in which issues of control and automation play out . Household members have different roles in this arena and in different spaces within this arena . Control over the interface with smart home technologies thereby translates into shifts of control within the different genders and generations in a household ( e . g . [ 38 ] ) . By failing to recognise that users value time , roles and relationships in their domestic lives , rather than nar - rowly circumscribed technologies and functionalities , there are growing concerns that smart home technology is coming to dominate people , rather than the other way around [ 25 ] . Seeing smart homes as merely a small part of broader trajectories of socio - technical change dramatically shifts the framing of control again . Paradoxically , the greater individual control over the domestic environment that smart homes offer is entirely compatible with an individual’s loss of control over the broader social and technological system of which the domestic environment is a microscopic part . The holy grail for users may not be control over technologies but rather control over the hectic , chaotic and demanding domestic lives into which smart homes must ﬁt [ 8 , 25 ] . Figure 2 thus shows how both control and privacy mean different things in different parts of the smart home liter - ature . Deﬁning issues or problems narrowly and pursuing singular lines of enquiry precludes wider insights . Future research on smart homes and their users can beneﬁt immensely by explicitly tracing , exploring and seeking to strengthen the cross - cutting relationships between research themes highlighted in our organising framework summa - rised in Fig . 2 . 7 Conclusions Smart homes are an advancing wave of technological development whose success depends on a coalescence between the visions of technology developers for enhanced functionality and energy management , and the needs and demands of households in the complex places that are homes . User - focused research on smart homes is growing , dominated by engineering , technical sciences and design , but with a sizeable niche of health care - related research , and increasing attention from social scientists ranging from ethnographers and domestication theorists to economists and applied energy researchers . Yet there is a wide and growing recognition of the need to develop a better picture of who users are and how they might use smart homes ( e . g . [ 10 , 70 ] ) . Although two of the themes analysed from the literature ( on ‘‘user - technology interactions’’ and ‘‘accept - ability and usability’’ ) are most strongly informed by research on user - centred design , these themes have not typically been entry points for thinking about the purpose and use of smart homes . Rather , they have emerged as a consequence of a technological vision that is struggling to gain user acceptance . The result is that current visions of smart homes have a limited appeal to users and are per - ceived as failing to meet user needs [ 57 ] . This has given rise to what Nyborg and Røpke [ 55 ] term ‘‘funwashing’’ as smart home developers seek to broaden the appeal of smart homes because the basic functionality they offer has not proven as attractive as initially hoped . A systematic review of published literatures on smart homes and their users reveals a wide range of research themes and lines of enquiry , often characterised by particular and partial questions ( see Table 1 ) . An integrative approach to smart home user research is neither desirable nor practical , but a comprehensive framework for positioning and inter - relating research is . Our thematic analysis of the literature proposes such an organising framework ( see Fig . 2 ) . We Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 473 123 illustrate how this framework can advance future research on smart homes and their users in relation to two major con - cerns : privacy and control . In so doing , we argue that it provides a valuable tool to help others navigate the existing terrain of research on smart homes and to help map out new and more fruitful avenues for future research . Acknowledgments Andrew May provided comments on an earlier version of this paper that led to its substantial improvement . The research was been carried out as part of the REFIT project ( ‘‘Per - sonalised Retroﬁt Decision Support Tools for UK Homes using Smart Home Technology’’ ) . REFIT is a consortium of three universities— Loughborough , Strathclyde and East Anglia—and ten industry stakeholders funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council ( EPSRC ) under the Transforming Energy Demand in Buildings through Digital Innovation ( BuildTEDDI ) funding pro - gramme ( Grant Reference EP / K002457 / 1 ) . For more information see : www . reﬁtsmarthomes . org . References 1 . AECOM and OFGEM ( 2011 ) Energy demand research project : ﬁnal analysis . AECOM Limited , St . Albans 2 . AlAbdulkarim L , Lukszo Z , Fens T ( 2012 ) . Acceptance of pri - vacy - sensitive technologies : smart metering case in The Nether - lands . Third international engineering systems symposium CESUN 2012 , Delft University of Technology , 18 – 20 June 2012 3 . Aldrich FK ( 2003 ) Smart homes : past , present and future . In : Harper R ( ed ) Inside the smart home . Springer , London , pp 17 – 39 4 . Allcott H ( 2011 ) Rethinking real - time electricity pricing . Resour Energy Econ 33 ( 4 ) : 820 – 842 5 . Axsen J , Kurani KS ( 2012 ) Social inﬂuence , consumer behavior , and low - carbon energy transitions . Annu Rev Environ Resour 37 ( 1 ) : 311 – 340 6 . Baillie L , Benyon D ( 2008 ) Place and technology in the home . Comput Support Coop Work 17 : 227 – 256 7 . Bainbridge L ( 1983 ) Ironies of automation . Automatica 19 ( 6 ) : 775 – 779 8 . Balta - Ozkan N , Davidson R , Bicket M , Whitmarsh L ( 2013 ) Social barriers to the adoption of smart homes . Energy Policy . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2013 . 08 . 043 9 . Berg C ( 1994 ) A gendered socio - technical construction : the smart house . In : Cockburn C , Furst - Dilic R ( eds ) Bringing technology home : gender and technology in a changing Europe . Open Uni - versity Press , Buckingham 10 . Beringer R , Sixsmith A , Campo M , Brown J , McCloskey R ( 2011 ) . The ‘acceptance’ of ambient assisted living : developing an alternate methodology to this limited research lens . In : Towards useful services for elderly and people with disabilities . Proceedings of the 9th international conference on smart homes and health telematics ( ICOST 2011 ) , Montreal , Canada , June 2011 , pp 161 – 167 11 . Bernhaupt R , Obrist M , Weiss A , Beck E , Tscheligi M ( 2008 ) Trends in the living room and beyond : results from ethnographic studies using creative and playful probing . ACM Comput Entertain 6 ( 1 ) : 5 : 1 – 5 : 23 12 . Bernheim Brush AJ , Lee B , Mahajan R , Agarwal S , Saroiu S , Dixon C ( 2011 ) Home automation in the wild : challenges and opportunities . In : ACM CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Vancouver , Canada : No pagination , 7 – 12 May 2011 13 . Bull R , Fleming P , Irvine K , Rieser M ( 2013 ) Are people the problem or the solution ? A critical look at the rise of the smart / intelligent building and the role of ICT enabled engagement . ECEEE Summer Study ( European Council for an Energy Efﬁ - cient Economy ) . Toulon , France 14 . Cesta A , Cortellessa G , Rasconi R , Pecora F , Scopelliti M , Tiberio L ( 2011 ) Monitoring elderly people with the robocare domestic environment : interaction synthesis and user evaluation . Comput Intell 27 ( 1 ) : 60 – 82 15 . Chae HH , Kim MJ ( 2011 ) Approaches to smart home with a focus on workspace in single household . Towards useful services for elderly and people with disabilities . In : Abdulrazak B , Giroux S , Bouchard B , Pigot H , Mokhtari M ( eds ) Proceedings of the 9th international conference on smart homes and health telematics ( ICOST 2011 ) , Montreal , Canada , June 2011 . Springer , Berlin , pp 319 – 323 16 . Chan M , Campo E , Esteve D , Fourniols J ( 2009 ) Smart homes— current features and future perspectives . Maturitas 64 : 90 – 97 17 . Chan M , Esteve D , Escriba C , Campo E ( 2008 ) A review of smart homes—present stat and future challenges . Comput Methods Programs Biomed 91 : 55 – 81 18 . Chetty M , Tran D , Grinter RE ( 2008 ) Getting to green : under - standing resource consumption in the home . In : 10th international conference on ubiquitous computing ( UbiComp 2008 ) . Seoul , South Korea , pp 242 – 251 19 . Christensen TH , Ascarza A , Throndsen W , Gram - Hanssen K , Friis F ( 2013 ) The role of households in the smart grid : a com - parative study . European Council for an Energy Efﬁcient Econ - omy ( ECEEE ) Summer Study 2013 , Toulon / Hye ` res , France , 3rd – 8th June 2013 20 . Cook DJ ( 2012 ) How smart is your home ? Science 335 ( 6076 ) : 1579 – 1581 21 . Crabtree A , Rodden T ( 2004 ) Domestic routines and design for the home . Comput Support Coop Work 13 : 191 – 220 22 . Darby S ( 2006 ) The effectiveness of feedback on energy con - sumption : a review for DEFRA of the literature on metering , billing and direct displays , environmental change institute . Uni - versity of Oxford , Oxford 23 . Darby S ( 2010 ) Smart metering : what potential for householder engagement ? Build Res Inf 38 ( 5 ) : 442 – 457 24 . Das SK , Cook DJ , Battacharya A , Heierman EO III , Lin T - Y ( 2002 ) The role of prediction algorithms in the MavHome smart home architecture . IEEE Wirel Commun 9 : 77 – 84 25 . Davidoff S , Lee MK , Yiu C , Zimmerman J , Dey AK ( 2006 ) Principles of smart home control . Lect Notes Comput Sci 4206 : 19 – 34 26 . Davis AL , Krishnamurti T , Fischhoff B , Bruine de Bruin W ( 2013 ) Setting a standard for electricity pilot studies . Energy Policy ( pre - print available online : doi : 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2013 . 07 . 093 ) 27 . Demiris G , Hensel K , Skubic M , Rantz M ( 2008 ) Senior resi - dents’ perceived need of and preferences for ‘smart home’ sensor technologies’ . Int J Technol Assess Health Care 24 ( 1 ) : 120 – 124 28 . Demiris G , Rantz MJ , Aud MA , Marek KD , Tyrer HW , Skubic M , Hussam AA ( 2004 ) Older adults’ attitudes towards and per - ceptions of ‘smart home’ technologies : a pilot study . Med Inform Internet Med 29 ( 2 ) : 87 – 94 29 . Edwards WK , Grinter RE ( 2001 ) At home with ubiquitous computing : seven challenges . Lect Notes Comput Sci 2201 : 256 – 272 30 . Enright T , Faruqui A ( 2012 ) A bibliography on dynamic pricing of electricity . The Battle Group , Cambridge 31 . Firth SK , Fouchal F , Kane T , Dimitriou V , Hassan T ( 2013 ) Decision support systems for domestic retroﬁt provision using smart home data streams . In : Proceedings of CIB W78 2013 : 474 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123 move towards Smart Buildings , Infrastructure and Cities , Beijing , China 32 . Friedewald M , Da Costa O , Punie Y , Alahuhta P , Heinonen S ( 2005 ) Perspectives of ambient intelligence in the home envi - ronment . Telematics Inform 22 : 221 – 238 33 . Geelen D , Reinders A , Keyson D ( 2013 ) Empowering the end - user in smart grids : recommendations for the design of products and services . Energy Policy 61 : 151 – 161 34 . Giger JT , Markward M ( 2011 ) The need to know caregiver perspectives toward using smart home technology . J Soc Work Disabil Rehabil 10 ( 2 ) : 96 – 114 35 . Gracanin D , McCrickard S , Billinglsey A , Cooper R , Gatling T , Irvin - Williams EJ , Osborne F , Doswell F ( 2011 ) Mobile inter - faces for better living : supporting awareness in a smart home environment . Lect Notes Comput Sci 6767 : 163 – 172 36 . Haines V , Mitchell V , Cooper C , Maguire M ( 2007 ) Probing user values in the home environment within a technology driven smart home project . Pers Ubiquit Comput 11 : 349 – 359 37 . Hargreaves T , Nye M , Burgess J ( 2010 ) Making energy visible : a qualitative ﬁeld study of how householders interact with feedback from smart energy monitors . Energy Policy 38 : 6111 – 6119 38 . Hargreaves T , Nye M , Burgess J ( 2013 ) Keeping energy visible ? How householders interact with feedback from smart energy monitors in the longer term . Energy Policy 52 : 126 – 134 39 . Hargreaves T , Wilson C ( 2013b ) Who uses smart home tech - nologies ? Representations of users by the smart home industry . European Council for an Energy Efﬁcient Economy ( ECEEE ) Summer Study 2013 . Toulon / Hye ` res , France , 3rd – 8th June 2013 40 . Heath P , Bell N ( 2006 ) The changing world of home technology : a Microsoft case study . Inf Soc 22 ( 4 ) : 251 – 259 41 . Herczeg M ( 2010 ) The smart , the intelligent and the wise : rolse and values of interactive technologies . In : Proceedings of the ﬁrst international conference on intelligent interactive technologies and multimedia , Allahabad , India , pp 17 – 26 . 28 – 30 Dec 2010 42 . Herter K , McAuliffe P , Rosenfeld A ( 2007 ) An exploratory analysis of California residential customer response to critical peak pricing of electricity . Energy 32 : 25 – 34 43 . Hoof JV , Kort HSM , Rutten PGS , Duijnstee MSH ( 2011 ) Age - ing - in - place with the use of ambient intelligence technology : perspectives of older users . Int J Med Informatics 80 : 310 – 331 44 . Howard S , Kjedskov J , Skov MB ( 2007 ) Pervasive computing in the domestic space . Pers Ubiquit Comput 11 : 329 – 333 45 . Hussain S , Erdogan SZ , Park JH ( 2009 ) Monitoring user activi - ties in smart home environments . Inf Syst Front 11 : 539 – 549 46 . International Energy Agency ( IEA ) ( 2013 ) Energy efﬁciency market report . International Energy Agency ( IEA ) , Paris , France 47 . Jeong K , Salvendy G , Proctor RW ( 2010 ) Smart home design and operation preferences of Americans and Koreans . Ergonomics 53 ( 5 ) : 636 – 660 48 . Koomey JG , Scott Matthews H , Williams E ( 2013 ) Smart everything : will intelligent systems reduce resource use ? Annu Rev Environ Resour 38 ( 1 ) : 311 – 343 49 . Koskela T , Va¨a¨na¨nen - Vainio - Mattila K ( 2005 ) Evolution towards smart home environments : empirical evaluation of three user interfaces . Pers Ubiquit Comput 8 : 234 – 240 50 . Lewis SCR ( 2012 ) Energy in the smart home . In : Harper R ( ed ) The connected home : the future of domestic life . Springer , London , pp 281 – 300 51 . Lin Y - J , Latcham HA , Lee M , Katar S ( 2002 ) A power line communication network infrastructure for the smart home . IEEE Wirel Commun 9 : 104 – 111 52 . Ma T , Kim Y - D , Ma Q , Tang M , Shou W ( 2005 ) Context - aware implementation based on CBR for smart home . In : International conference on e - technology , e - commerce and e - service ( IEEE 2005 ) . Hong Kong , March / April 2005 , pp 112 – 115 53 . Martiskainen M , Coburn J ( 2011 ) The role of information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) in household energy con - sumption—prospects for the UK . Energ Efﬁ 4 : 209 – 221 54 . McLean A ( 2011 ) Ethical frontiers of ICT and older users : cultural , pragmatic and ethical issues . Ethics Inf Technol 13 : 313 – 326 55 . Nyborg S , Røpke I ( 2013 ) Constructing users in the smart grid— insights from the Danish eFlex project . Energ Efﬁ . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12053 - 013 - 9210 - 1 56 . Orpwood R , Gibbs C , Adlam T , Faulkner R , Meegahawatte D ( 2005 ) The design of smart homes for people with dementia— user interface aspects . Univ Access Inf Soc 4 : 156 – 164 57 . Paetz A - G , Dutschke E , Fichtner W ( 2012 ) Smart homes as a means to sustainable energy consumption : a study of consumer perceptions . J Consum Policy 35 : 23 – 41 58 . Palensky P , Kupzog F ( 2013 ) Smart Grids . Annu Rev Environ Resour 38 ( 1 ) : 201 – 226 59 . Park SH , Won SH , Lee JB , Kim SW ( 2003 ) Smart home—dig - itally engineered domestic life . Pers Ubiquit Comput 7 : 189 – 196 60 . Parkhill KA , Demski C , Butler C , Spence A , Pidgeon N ( 2013 ) Transforming the UK energy system : public values , attitudes and acceptability—synthesis report . London , UK , UK Energy Research Centre ( UKERC ) 61 . Perez F , Valderas P , Fons J ( 2011 ) Towards the involvement of end - users within model - driven development . Lect Notes Comput Sci 6654 : 258 – 263 62 . Pierce J , Schiano DJ , Paulos E ( 2010 ) Home , habits , and energy : examining domestic interactions and energy consumption . CHI 2010 : Home Eco Behavior , Atlanta , Georgia . 10 – 15 April 2010 63 . Rashidi P , Cook DJ ( 2009 ) Keeping the resident in the loop : adapting the smart home to the user . Syst Man Cybern A Syst Hum IEEE Trans 39 ( 5 ) : 949 – 959 64 . Richardson HJ ( 2009 ) A ‘smart house’ is not a home : the domestication of ICTs . Inf Syst Front 11 : 599 – 608 65 . Rohracher H ( 2003 ) The role of users in the social shaping of environmental technologies . Innov Eur J Soc Sci Res 16 ( 2 ) : 177 – 192 66 . Røpke I , Christensen TH , Jensen JO ( 2010 ) Information and communication technologies—a new round of household elec - triﬁcation . Energy Policy 38 : 1764 – 1773 67 . Saizmaa T , Kim HC ( 2008 ) Smart home design : home or house ? In : Third international conference on convergence and hybrid information technology ( ICCIT 2008 ) Busan , South Korea , Nov 2008 , pp 143 – 148 68 . Schwartz - Cowan R ( 1983 ) More work for mother . The ironies of household technology from the open hearth to the microwave . Basic Books , New York 69 . Silverstone R , Hirsch E , Morley D ( 1992 ) Information and communication technologies and the moral economy of the household . In : Silverstone R , Hirsch E ( eds ) Consuming tech - nologies : media and information in domestic spaces . Routledge , London , pp 9 – 17 70 . Solaimani S , Bouwman H , Baken N ( 2011 ) The smart home landscape : a qualitative meta - analysis . Lect Notes Comput Sci 6719 : 192 – 199 71 . Strengers Y ( 2011 ) Negotiating everyday life : the role of energy and water consumption feedback . J Consum Cult 11 ( 3 ) : 319 – 338 72 . Swan L , Taylor AS , Harper R ( 2008 ) Making place for clutter and other ideas of home . ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact 15 ( 2 ) : 9 : 9 – 9 : 24 73 . Taylor AS , Harper R , Swan L , Izadi S , Sellen A , Perry M ( 2007 ) Homes that make us smart . Pers Ubiquit Comput 11 : 383 – 393 74 . van Dam SS , Bakker CA , van Hal JDM ( 2010 ) Home energy monitors : impact over the medium - term . Build Res Inf 38 ( 5 ) : 458 – 469 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 475 123 75 . Venkatesh A , Kruse E , Shih CF ( 2003 ) The networked home : an analysis of current developments and future trends . Cogn Technol Work 5 ( 1 ) : 23 – 32 76 . Wallenborn G , Orsini M , Vanhaverbeke J ( 2011 ) Household appropriation of electricity monitors . Int J Consum Stud 35 : 146 – 152 77 . Wong JKW , Li H , Wang SW ( 2005 ) Intelligent building research : a review . Autom Constr 14 ( 1 ) : 143 – 159 78 . Wood G , Newborough M ( 2003 ) Dynamic energy - consumption indicators for domestic appliances : environment , behaviour and design . Energy Build 35 : 821 – 841 476 Pers Ubiquit Comput ( 2015 ) 19 : 463 – 476 123