An Owl in the Classroom : Development of an Interactive Storytelling Application for Preschoolers Iris Soute and Henk Nijmeijer Eindhoven University of Technology Den Dolech 2 , 5612 AZ Eindhoven , the Netherlands { i . a . c . soute , h . nijmeijer } @ tue . nl Abstract In research there is a considerable interest in developing interactive educational systems . However , the typical classroom remains a rather low - tech environment . Allowing teachers to create , adapt and share interactive learning applications might increase the uptake of technology in the classroom . In this paper a study is presented that explores the deployment of a robot - storytelling application for preschoolers , while simultaneously investigating the teacher’s requirements for a toolkit to create stories for the robot . The results suggest that a robot - storytelling application can be a valuable addition to the classroom and that indeed a toolkit for creating stories would increase its usefulness in the curriculum . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces – user - centered design , prototyping . General Terms Design , Human Factors . Keywords Children , Teachers , Education , Robotics , End - user development . 1 . INTRODUCTION Though within research there is a considerable interest in applying technology in education , so far the typical classroom remains a rather low - tech environment . One of the factors that influences the adoption of technology in the classroom is the ability for teachers to ‘shape their own curricula’ with it [ 1 ] . However , typically , applications available are pushed on the market with ‘fixed’ content – with very little means to adapt the content post - production . So , from the outset designing technology with the intention to support adaption by a teacher might possibly increase the adoption rate . It makes sense too , as teachers are the domain experts in education and are best informed on the capabilities and learning potential of their students . Also , as education is moving more and more towards ‘personalized learning’ teachers need to be equipped with tools that allow creation and curation of personalized learning experiences . Thus , in the design process of educational technology the teachers must be seen as one of the major stakeholders . However , in most research projects emphasize is put on the child , as the learner , and the teacher is deemed less important [ 5 , 9 ] . Furthermore , designers should take on the role of meta - designers ; instead of focusing primarily on the learning experience , they should focus on supporting the teacher to create a learning experience . Enabling end - users to develop their own content is not a novel idea , and is studied extensively in the field of end - user development [ 2 ] . Though most research is targeted at users professionally working with computers ( e . g . data scientists , working with Excel on a daily basis ) , more recently researchers are broadening the scope to include professionals such as teachers and physiotherapists to provide end - user development ( EUD ) environments for tangible and embodied technology ( e . g . [ 6 ] ) . We argue that , before teachers can inform designers on how they would use technology in the classroom , they need to experience it first : i . e . see it in action in the classroom . A complicating factor in the design process for educational technology is that teachers typically have very little time to be involved in the design process . In this paper we investigate the first step in developing technology that is designed for teachers to create learning experiences for young children ( 4 - 6 years ) , using a robot platform as a carrier and requiring minimal effort of the teacher during the process . First , in the next section the initial design process is described in which a robot - storytelling application was built . Next , the study , aimed at eliciting user - requirements for an end - user development environment is presented . Finally , in the conclusion a reflection on the process and application is given . 2 . INITIAL DESIGN PROCESS As a carrier for this project , we selected a small robot , an owl , manufactured by the start - up company WittyWorx 1 ( see Figure 1 ) . The robot is approximately 30cm in height , can move in six directions ( e . g . shake or nod his head , move up and down ) and has OLED eyes . Combining movement , sound and different eye configurations , the robot can express a range of emotions ( see Figure 2 ) . A group of four interaction designers brainstormed and prototyped several applications for the robot over the course of one week . These applications were presented to the teacher , who immediately took a liking to an application in which the robot interactively tells a story . In contrast to many interactive story telling applications developed in the IDC field ( see [ 4 ] for an overview ) that enable children to create their own stories , the robot interactively reads a story to a child , more resembling an e - book . It is generally accepted that being read stories is important for children to develop language and literary skills , to grow their vocabulary , to gain knowledge and cultural awareness , etc . [ 7 ] . In the interview , the teacher envisioned a need for such an application , illustrating it with the following scenario : in 1 http : / / www . wittyworx . com Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . IDC ' 14 , June 17 – 20 , 2014 , Aarhus , Denmark . Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2272 - 0 / 14 / 06… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2610467 261 preschool the teacher often reads aloud stories , engaging children in the story , but she also encourages the children to explore books individually . For this , a typical ( Dutch ) preschool classroom has a so - called ‘book corner’ – a small area in the classroom dedicated to books and reading . Children ‘read’ books individually here . Obviously , as pre - school children do not read yet , children mostly look at picture books , or once in a while are read to by older school children from other classes . However , the problem with this corner is that children find it boring and have trouble staying focused for a longer period of time . Therefor , the teacher saw added value to having a robot telling a story , keeping the children engaged by requiring interaction to progress the storytelling . Figure 1 : The IxI play robot Figure 2 : Selection of expressions As discussed previously , a robot - storytelling application would be of greater use if adaptable by the teacher – so that he / she can create stories that match for example the current curriculum , or a particular interesting topic for a child . To investigate in what way the creation of stories could be best supported and also because the robot interaction was new for the children and teacher , a first version of the storytelling application was built , without the ability to create stories , for the teacher to gain experience with it in the class . 3 . STORY TELLING APPLICATION Based on the teacher’s recommendations , two books were selected as source material , taking from the books both story line as well as images that corresponded with parts of the story ( see Figure 3 ) . The images are printed on cards that contain visual markers , enabling the robot to identify each card using its camera . Six cards were created per story . A robot - storytelling session occurs as follows : a child is given a set of cards . The robot reads aloud a part of a story and then prompts the child to select the card showing the image that belongs to that particular part of the story and show that to the robot . The prompt is an auditory cue ( a ‘ping’ ) ; at this point the robot does not offer additional verbal cues . If the child selects the correct card , the robot acknowledges this by excitedly nodding his head and continues with the story . If a wrong card is selected , the robot shakes his head , and verbally prompts the child to try again ( “No , that is not the correct card . Please try again . ” ) . If the child would again select a wrong card , the robot verbally reveals the correct card , by indicating the color of the card ( each card is lined with a distinct color ) ( “The correct card is the card with the yellow edge” ) . Other than these two supporting sentences , the robot offers no additional verbal cues and sticks verbatim to the story line as it is in the original book . Figure 3 : Selection of cards with images of the story With regard to movements : during the storytelling the robot blinks its eyes at random intervals . Also , the robot executes random movements during story telling . However , after the prompt , the robot stops the random movements and waits for the child to present a card . The application was pilot tested with two children ( age 5 and 6 ) , which verified that children understood the interaction and a few minor technical issues were revealed and fixed . 4 . STUDY The main aim of our study was to expose teachers to the robot , as it would be used in a regular school context , with the intention to identify requirements for an environment that would allow teachers to create their own stories for the robot . As a secondary aim we were interested in exploring the children’s reaction to the robot and the storytelling application . 4 . 1 Setup 4 . 1 . 1 Participants 24 children , aged 4 - 6 , from a pre - school class in the Netherlands participated in this study , as well as the two teachers ( both female ) of this class - one teacher taught Mondays and Tuesdays , the other the rest of the week . Beforehand , the parents were asked for consent for their children’s participation . 4 . 1 . 2 Procedure The main aim of the study was to confront the teachers with the robot in their regular context , to enable them to reflect how they would integrate the use of the robot in their daily routine . Therefor , the sessions took place at school ; the importance of testing the robot “in the wild” is generally acknowledged [ 10 ] , as there are so many external factors that can influence the actual use of the robot . All children of the class were allowed to interact with the robot , though , due to time constraints , the teachers could only be present in six sessions . The sessions in which the teacher could not be present were afterwards discussed using the observation log that was kept during the sessions . The robot was placed outside the classroom , in a common area in between classrooms . It was set on a small table , with a child 262 sitting in front of it on a small chair ( see Figure 4 ) . The laptop , that controlled the robot movement and interaction , was placed within reach of the researcher , but not in the direct field of view of the children . Figure 4 : Preschooler showing a card to the robot for identification Before the sessions each teacher was introduced to the robot and given a demonstration of the storytelling application . After this , the teacher immediately reflected on how she expected that children would react to the robot . The sessions with the children took place during three days in one week . On the first morning the children were introduced to the robot , and were told what to expect . Next , children were arranged in pairs of two at the teacher’s discretion , and these pairs participated in the evaluation throughout the morning , temporarily leaving the regular routine . Whenever the schedule allowed , the teacher would join the evaluation , assuming a passive , observing , role . At the start of a session , the children were shortly re - introduced to the robot . They were assured that at all times they were allowed to quit the session , using a common phrase also used in class to stop unwanted situations . Next they were allowed to pick one of the two stories and the researcher would shortly discuss with the children the cards corresponding with that story . Then the robot would start telling the story and children were asked to show the appropriate cards , according to the story line . A session took between three to eight minutes and one researcher was present to guide and observe the process . No metrics of the child’s performance were logged . Events such as children needing help , or an unexpected reaction of a child were recorded in an observation log . At the end of each day the researcher interviewed the teacher that was present that day . During the semi - structured interview , the observations made by the researcher of each child’s session were discussed . Furthermore , the teacher’s own observation of the use of the system was discussed . 4 . 2 Results and Discussion Though the initial plan was to evaluate the robot with pairs of children , after five sessions it became clear that this would not be the optimal setting for use . The teacher had assumed that when working in pairs , children would collaborate and help each other out – but this did not happen at all . In contrast , we observed that at the start of the story children would agree on turn taking , each child patiently waiting for his / her turn , without helping the other out when he / she would get stuck . We also observed that children would ( unintentionally ) distract each other : a movement or sound would cause a child to shift focus from the robot to the other child . As the robot has no means of detecting such shifts in focus , he would continue his story , resulting in the child missing part of the storyline . The teacher and researcher agreed to continue the tests with single users , not pairs . The sessions in which the teachers were present gave them much insight in the robot’s use , and the interviews afterwards provided valuable information : even though the teachers had had a demonstration of the robot before the sessions , seeing it in action with children provided new insights . Interestingly , after observing the children the teachers became aware of the fact that the application trained a skill that they had not anticipated beforehand . Namely , they argued it practices the skill of ‘listening comprehension’ , i . e . a child must comprehend the auditory information to transform it to visual information . The teachers valued this highly , as they deemed it a preparatory skill for ‘reading comprehension’ skills – a skill that becomes very important in later classes . Furthermore , in relation to the children’s performance : in a toolkit for creating stories , the teachers would like the possibility to differentiate in the level of support or scaffolding the robot gives . For some children , the amount of support given now was sufficient ; other children would have benefitted if the robot had provided more guidance or support . For example , extending the auditory cues with verbal prompts with more information when a card must be selected , e . g . by letting the robot ask a question , to give more guidance in identifying a card . As the teacher knows a child’s capabilities best , she would like to be able to set this per child . Also , as the idea is that this application is used unsupervised , the teacher would like to receive a summary of the child’s performance after the session , e . g . indicating the correct and incorrect number of cards and the time it took to complete the session . When asked how often they would use such a robot in class , they answered that they probably would use it on a daily basis . However , they envisioned that they would create approximately two stories per month . They expected that not all teachers would be eager to create stories , but would be happy to use stories created by other teachers . Furthermore , they mentioned that the use of the robot would definitely not replace the story reading sessions of the teacher ; rather they saw it as a supplementary activity to increase the number of reading sessions in an engaging way . Though no exact metrics on performance were logged , we found that all children were able to finish their story within reasonable time . Still , the range of how well children performed was quite broad : some children did need help from the researcher , while others flawlessly went through the session , not needing help at all . This seemed not to be related to age : some of the four year olds performed better ( in terms of speed and identifying correct cards ) than some of the six year olds . When reviewing the researcher’s notes of each session with the teacher , the teacher confirmed that generally a child’s behavior and performance was in line with what she expected from that child , based on classroom behavior . Causes for needing help originated from several sources : not understanding what was expected , most particularly the first time the robot prompted for a card . In general , one demonstration was enough to remedy this . Another reason for needing help was when a child was distracted during the storytelling . Then , he / she would 263 ( obviously ) find it difficult to identify the correct card . The researcher would help out , as there was no means to have the robot repeat that particular part of the story . Furthermore , there was one technical issue that sometimes caused the robot’s camera to lose focus , resulting in a prolonged time for card identification . The children did not seem too perturbed by this . Regarding the interactive behavior of the robot , after the first day we identified behavior that had gone unnoticed during the development of the application : namely that when the robot was given a command for a movement , any subsequent movement commands given during that movement would be completely disregarded , but other cues would go through ( such as the audio cue for the prompt ) . Only after completing a movement , the robot would be accepting commands for new movements . As a result , when a child would be very fast in identifying and showing a card , it could happen that the auditory cue was given during the execution of a previous random movement . If the correct card was presented while the robot was still moving , the “acknowledging” movement would be sent to the robot , but the story would immediately continue disregarding the acknowledgment . We observed this happening with one child , who consistently very rapidly identified each card , and never received the “acknowledging” movement . Though he did not mention anything and kept on performing well , he did seem a bit confused whether he was doing it right . In contrast , in observing the other children we saw that the “acknowledging” movement was engaging and fun and they immediately understood that they had identified the correct card . We observed that this robot was appropriate for use for this age group and children were attracted by its ‘cute’ looks . Furthermore , the interaction of the robot seemed appealing ; we observed several instances were children ‘mirrored’ the movements of the robot , enjoying the interaction . This is inline with findings of other studies in Child - Robot interaction for preschoolers [ 3 ] . 5 . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Though a single study is too limited to result in conclusive findings , a few tentative remarks can be made . First , the use of a robot as storytelling medium was engaging for the children ; especially the movements seem to be a very natural way to interact with children . However , this study also suggests that such interactions must be carefully designed , as a badly timed movement can negatively influence the user experience . Furthermore , it indeed turned out to be valuable to expose the teachers to the robot as a means of identifying user requirements for an end - user development toolkit . Seeing the robot in action in context allowed the teachers to reflect better on possible usage scenarios and their requirements for an eventual toolkit . Moreover , the study was set up in such a way that it did not require a heavy time commitment of the teacher , suggesting that , in the case that involving teachers as co - designers is not a viable option , the approach followed here is a good alternative . Finally , the study suggests that a toolkit is indeed needed to better support each child’s capabilities and create additional content . Though the question of what functionality an eventual toolkit should support was addresses , future research should investigate how a toolkit can be implemented in a way appropriate for teachers , also with respect to how the robot interactions are to be designed by the teacher . Earlier work in EUD for computer based learning systems , such as [ 8 ] , suggest that it is indeed feasible to develop tools and methods that allow teachers to create educational content . This work extends that line of research by moving from a desktop environment to robot - enhanced learning experience , opening up interesting challenges in interaction design such as programming movements and designing robot - child interaction by non - technical users . As Tetteroo et al . [ 11 ] suggest , such design issues pose a real challenge , which are still relatively unexplored . 6 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks go to all the children and teachers involved in this project . Furthermore , we are very grateful to Linda de Valk , Daniel Tetteroo and Nikos Batalas for contributing to the initial design . Finally , we would like to thank WittyWorx for making available their robot for this research . We acknowledge the support of the Innovation - Oriented Research Programme ‘Integral Product Creation and Realization ( IOP IPCR ) ’ of the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Cuban , L . 2009 . Oversold and Underused : Computers in the Classroom . Harvard University Press . [ 2 ] Fischer , G . 2009 . End - User Development and Meta - design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation . End - User Development . V . Pipek , M . Rosson , B . de Ruyter , and V . Wulf , eds . Springer Berlin / Heidelberg . 3 – 14 . [ 3 ] Fridin , M . 2014 . Kindergarten social assistive robot : First meeting and ethical issues . Computers in Human Behavior . 30 , ( Jan . 2014 ) , 262 – 272 . [ 4 ] Garzotto , F . 2014 . Interactive storytelling for children : a survey . International Journal of Arts and Technology . 7 , 1 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 5 – 16 . [ 5 ] Good , J . and Robertson , J . 2006 . CARSS : A framework for learner - centred design with children . International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education . 16 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 381 – 413 . [ 6 ] Hochstenbach - Waelen , A . , Timmermans , A . , Seelen , H . , Tetteroo , D . and Markopoulos , P . 2012 . Tag - exercise Creator : Towards End - user Development for Tangible Interaction in Rehabilitation Training . Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems ( New York , NY , USA , 2012 ) , 293 – 298 . [ 7 ] Isbell , R . , Sobol , J . , Lindauer , L . and Lowrance , A . 2004 . The Effects of Storytelling and Story Reading on the Oral Language Complexity and Story Comprehension of Young Children . Early Childhood Education Journal . 32 , 3 ( Dec . 2004 ) , 157 – 163 . [ 8 ] Marchiori , E . J . , Torrente , J . , del Blanco , Á . , Moreno - Ger , P . , Sancho , P . and Fernández - Manjón , B . 2012 . A narrative metaphor to facilitate educational game authoring . Computers & Education . 58 , 1 ( Jan . 2012 ) , 590 – 599 . [ 9 ] Robertson , J . , Macvean , A . and Howland , K . 2012 . Embedding Technology in the Classroom : The Train the Teacher Model . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( New York , NY , USA , 2012 ) , 20 – 29 . [ 10 ] Salter , T . , Werry , I . and Michaud , F . 2008 . Going into the wild in child – robot interaction studies : issues in social robotic development . Intelligent Service Robotics . 1 , 2 ( Apr . 2008 ) , 93 – 108 . [ 11 ] Tetteroo , D . , Soute , I . and Markopoulos , P . 2013 . Five Key Challenges in End - user Development for Tangible and Embodied Interaction . Proceedings of the 15th ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction ( New York , NY , USA , 2013 ) , 247 – 254 264