neXtProt : a knowledge platform for human proteins Lydie Lane 1 , 2 , Ghislaine Argoud - Puy 1 , Aurore Britan 1 , Isabelle Cusin 1 , Paula D . Duek 1 , Olivier Evalet 1 , Alain Gateau 1 , Pascale Gaudet 1 , * , Anne Gleizes 1 , Alexandre Masselot 3 , Catherine Zwahlen 1 and Amos Bairoch 1 , 2 1 CALIPHO group , Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , CMU - 1 , rue Michel Servet 1211 Geneva 4 , Switzerland , 2 Department of Human Protein Sciences , Faculty of Medicine , University of Geneva and 3 GeneBio , c / o Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , CMU - 1 , rue Michel Servet 1211 Geneva 4 , Switzerland Received November 11 , 2011 ; Accepted November 11 , 2011 ABSTRACT neXtProt ( http : / / www . nextprot . org / ) is a new human protein - centric knowledge platform . Developed at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics ( SIB ) , it aims to help researchers answer questions relevant to human proteins . To achieve this goal , neXtProt is built on a corpus containing both curated know - ledge originating from the UniProtKB / Swiss - Prot knowledgebase and carefully selected and filtered high - throughput data pertinent to human proteins . This article presents an overview of the database and the data integration process . We also lay out the key future directions of neXtProt that we consider the necessary steps to make neXtProt the one - stop - shop for all research projects focusing on human proteins . INTRODUCTION In the last 30 years , massive resources have been deployed to understand the molecular components and processes of human cells , both for clinical and fundamental research applications . While this effort has been ﬁrst targeted toward the sequencing of the genome and the mapping of its transcriptome , it has now shifted toward the studies of the major actors of life , proteins . The mo - lecular and functional complexity of human proteins is challenging and requires bioinformatics resources speciﬁc - ally aimed at capturing , integrating and maintaining up - to - date the available knowledge about them . In a step toward this end , the UniProt / Swiss - Prot group has completed the manual annotation of the full set of human proteins , derived from about 20 000 genes , in September 2008 ( 1 ) . The proteomic space generated from these gene products is enormous , up to an estimated 1 million different protein species derived from DNA re - combination , alternative mRNA splicing and the wealth of protein post - translational modiﬁcations ( PTMs ) . However , as estimated from the UniProtKB / Swiss - Prot knowledgebase content , (cid:2) 25 % of those proteins ( i . e . around 5000 ) have not yet been studied experimentally . For the remainder , the information available is often scarce . Many proteins have not been completely analyzed with respect to their abundance , distribution , subcellular localization and interactions with other bio - molecules , post - translational modiﬁcations or—even more critical—function . The more complete our under - standing of human proteins is the better equipped we will be to understand the functioning of the human body at molecular level . The neXtProt knowledge platform , for and by the researcher community Data are easier to generate than knowledge . Much undis - covered knowledge is hidden in large sets of heterogeneous and noisy data distributed across a multitude of resources and web sites . The problem is intensiﬁed by the fact that databases regularly become obsolete after a few years due to lack of ﬁnancial support . This trend is especially true for research on human biology , owing to the sheer quantity of resources at the disposal of researchers . To address these issues , we have created neXtProt ( http : / / www . nextprot . org / ) , a web - based protein know - ledge platform on human proteins ( see screenshot of the home page in Figure 1 ) . The ultimate goal for neXtProt is to serve for research on human the same role that Model Organism Databases ( MODs ) serve for model species . neXtProt is developed within the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics ( SIB ) ( www . isb - sib . ch ) , which has exten - sive expertise in building high - quality protein - centric re - sources such as UniProtKB / Swiss - Prot ( 2 ) , PROSITE ( 3 ) , ENZYME ( 4 ) , STRING ( 5 ) and the Swiss - Model Repository ( 6 ) . neXtProt is being developed as a service for the com - munity , and is using the knowledge and the expertise of the community to populate it with very high quality data and tools . For each data type we need to incorporate , we identify groups that have expertise in that area and * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Tel : + 41 022 379 4917 ; Fax : + 41 22 379 5858 ; Email : pascale . gaudet @ isb - sib . ch D76 – D83 Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue Published online 1 December 2011 doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkr1179 (cid:2) The Author ( s ) 2011 . Published by Oxford University Press . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 3 . 0 ) , which permits unrestricted non - commercial use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 collaborate with them to integrate data . In addition to making neXtProt and its users beneﬁt from expert data in all areas , this philosophy helps us ensure that our data are up to date and helps advertise both neXtProt and our collaborators’ resources to our respective user com - munities via reciprocal cross - links . neXtProt content : data and ontologies The primary data set in neXtProt comes from the high - quality solid work that has been the hallmark of UniProtKB / Swiss - Prot since its inception in 1986 : we integrate all the information from the Swiss - Prot human entries . The information captured by Swiss - Prot , however , is only a small fraction of what is available . The fact that neXtProt is centered on a single species , human , makes it possible to widen not only the quantity but also the range of data being captured . While we are still early in the neXtProt development path , we have already integrated a signiﬁcant amount of additional information relevant to human proteins , notably : . Extensive protein expression information obtained by immunohistochemistry on healthy tissues from the Human Protein Atlas ( HPA ) ( 7 ) . . Micro - array and cDNA expression information in healthy tissues originating from ArrayExpress ( 8 ) and UniGene ( 9 , 10 ) . This RNA - based expression data have been meta - analyzed by the SIB Evolutionary Bioinformatics group and is available in the Bgee resource ( 11 ) . . Subcellular localization results from two different high - throughput projects : DKFZ GFP - cDNA localiza - tion ( 12 , 13 ) ; and Weizmann Institute of Science’s Kahn Dynamic Proteomics Database ( 14 ) . . We have started to integrate high - quality mass spectrometry - derived proteomics information and , in particular , a number of published sets of N - glycosyla - tion and phosphorylation sites . We also store peptide / protein identiﬁcation results from experiments carried out in the context of the HUPO plasma ( 15 ) and brain ( unpublished ) initiatives obtained from PeptideAtlas ( 16 ) , as well as some sets directly submitted to us by a network of collaborators . . The Gene Ontology ( GO ) ( 17 , 18 ) annotations of all human proteins as captured by GOA ( 19 ) . . The mapping of proteins to their genomic transcripts on the human genome using Ensembl ( 20 ) . . Additional single - amino acid polymorphism ( SAPs ) variants obtained from dbSNP ( 9 ) and Ensembl . . Additional identiﬁers , including cDNA clone names encoding for the proteins , Affymetrix and Illumina DNA probesets ; cross - references to CCDS ( 21 ) and HPRD ( 22 ) . . Abstracts of all articles from PubMed that are cited in human Swiss - Prot entries as well as some cited by other resources such as Entrez Gene ( GeneRIFs ) ( 9 ) , MINT ( 23 ) and PDB ( 24 ) and which have been Figure 1 . The neXtProt home page grants access to the database via a search tool . Users can sign - in ( top right ) to create a personal account that allows them to personalize their usage of the platform by keeping a history of their queries and favoring or tagging search results . The home page also links to pages with more information about the current content of the platform in term of integrated resources ( ‘release details’ link at the bottom right ) . Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D77 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 computationally mapped to the relevant protein entry by the UniProt consortium . Ontologies and controlled vocabularies ( CVs ) are essen - tial for consistent annotation and powerful data retrieval . A large number of vocabularies exist that cover various areas of biology . It is a challenge to choose the most ap - propriate vocabularies with respect to completeness , how well it represents the data we are capturing and how much interoperability it provides with other re - sources . Ontology and CVs are therefore an essential com - ponent of neXtProt . We have imported into neXtProt the Gene Ontology ( GO ) , UniProt disease , keyword , post - translational modi - ﬁcation and subcellular location ontologies , UniPathway ( 25 ) , enzyme classiﬁcation ( ENZYME ) and part of the Medical Subject Headings ( MeSH ) ( 26 ) . We also created mini - CVs based on UniProtKB annotations to cater for domains , protein families , protein - bound metal ligands and topology . Available ontologies and controlled vocabularies , including MeSH , eVoc ( 27 ) , BRENDA tissue ontology ( 28 ) and FMA ( 29 ) , describe human anatomy with differ - ent scopes , coverage and precision levels . Since none of them allowed us to integrate and compare data from dif - ferent resources ( e . g . microarrays / ESTs from Bgee and immunohistochemistry from HPA ) keeping the original granularity , we developed our own tissue and cell - type ontology . neXtProt interface and functionalities Users access the platform through an intuitive , simple interface centered on a Google - like search functionality that enables both simple ( free text ) and relatively complex queries ( through the use of search topics ) ( Figure 2 ) . Users can choose to search in neXtProt for protein entries , publications or terminologies ( ontologies and controlled vocabularies ) . Once a search has been made , it is possible to ﬁlter the results according to a number of criteria . The search results are displayed either as simple lists or as mini - summaries . Users of neXtProt can sign - in to create a personal account that allows them to personalize their usage of Figure 2 . The Search Results page . neXtProt is indexed across several biological areas , corresponding to the different views found on each entry ( some data are present in multiple indexes ) . This allows users to make complex searches , for example ﬁnding all proteins localized to the lysosomes and expressed in the brain . From the search results page , it is possible to do various exports : obtain the list of proteins as an Excel ﬁle ; the protein sequences as FASTA or PEFF , or the entire entry in XML format . When a user is logged in , checkboxes appear next to each entry , so that s / he is able to select speciﬁc entries for which the data are exported . D78 Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 the platform by keeping a history of their queries and favoring or tagging the search results . neXtProt provides an original way of visualizing proteins entries : they can be seen from three different per - spectives : the ‘Protein’ , the underlying ‘Gene’ and the ‘References’ used to annotate it . The protein and gene perspectives are further subdivided in views that put the available information in context : function , medical , ex - pression ( Figure 3 ) , interactions , localization , sequence ( Figure 4 ) , proteomics , structures , exons ( Figure 5 ) and protein and gene identiﬁers . Special efforts have been made to document speciﬁc information on splice isoforms . For example , in the ‘sequence view’ , the differ - ent splice isoforms can be graphically compared , high - lighting the shared and speciﬁc sequence features ( domains , sites , etc . ) of each form . neXtProt also provides a dedicated page for each term from our controlled vocabularies and ontologies . These pages display graphical and tree representations of the ontologies , as well as links to proteins annotated with these terms or their children ( Figure 6 ) . Similarly , there are pages for publications : these pages display the full publication record , including the abstract as well as the list of proteins that were annotated with that publication . In term of tools , neXtProt provides access to a simple BLAST ( 30 ) implementation and we are currently beta - testing a tool to analyze enrichment of lists of proteins in term of various categories of annotations such as GO terms , domains , subcellular locations , etc . neXtProt provides export functionality , namely , the download of lists of protein entries as text or Excel ﬁles , the corresponding sequences in FASTA format and the complete set of annotations in XML . To cater the needs of the proteomics community , we are the ﬁrst resource to have implemented export of sequences and annotations of PTMs and variants in the PEFF format ( 31 ) which has been developed in the context of the HUPO Proteomics Standards Initiative . Bulk download of the full complement of sequence and annotations is also avail - able through our anonymous ftp site ( ftp . nextprot . org ) . Through the ftp site , users can also download our CVs and our ontology for human anatomy . neXtProt’s unique approach to data quality Not all data published or available in public repositories are of the same quality . However , this fact has rarely been captured in databases , whose attitude is often that the user should be able to view all data to make a judgment on the reliability of the information s / he is presented with . This attitude tends to overwhelm the user with too much infor - mation , often making it simply impracticable to evaluate it ; and requires that all users have expertise in all ﬁelds . In an attempt to overcome this problem , we are providing neXtProt users with a data integration philosophy based on a three - tier quality system : . Gold : highest quality data , corresponding to error rates of < 1 % . . Silver : good quality data , corresponding to error rates of < 5 % . Silver data are marked as such in the annotations . Figure 3 . The Expression Data view displays data via a browser of the neXtProt human anatomy ontology . Currently , the data presented come from two different sources : Bgee and HPA ( see text ) . Data are captured and displayed at the original granularity level ( Loupe symbols ) , and is propagated to higher levels using the ontology to be comparable across the data sets . The tool provides a menu to toggle between showing only Gold data and showing both Gold and Silver data . An icon next to the annotation indicates the silver data . Unmarked data is gold . Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D79 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 . Bronze : data deemed of a lower quality that we do not integrate in neXtProt . Within neXtProt , users can choose to view and search only ‘Gold’ data ( the default option ) , or view both ‘Gold’ and ‘Silver’ . The grading of experimental data is not a trivial process and there is no simple rule that can be applied across the large landscape of high - throughput technologies that produce the data that need to be integrated into neXtProt . To make our quality - grading criteria transparent to users , we are documenting these criteria in a metadata information record linked to the relevant experiments . Whenever possible , we establish the quality thresholds—bronze , silver and gold—with the group who has produced the data . We expect that quality grading will be a dynamic process where users’ feedback will play an important role . FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS neXtProt aims to act as a central hub for all knowledge on human proteins . To achieve this , we are constantly integrating new data from widely used resources . Some key developments planned for the near future are described here . neXtProt has been selected to be the knowledge plat - form for the newly launched HUPO Human Proteome Project ( HPP ) ( 32 ) . To this end , neXtProt will need to integrate data and tools aimed to support the HPP . Among other developments , this means increasing the amount of proteomics data ( post - translational modiﬁca - tions and peptide identiﬁcation ) and extending its scope toward quantiﬁcation results obtained from selected reaction monitoring ( SRM ) experiments . We are collaborating with the STRING group ( http : / / string - db . org / ) to integrate human protein network information ( 5 ) . This , together with an increase of protein – protein interaction data provided by Intact ( 33 ) and other members of the IMEx consortium of interaction databases ( 34 ) , will allow neXtProt users to explore graph - ically the functional protein complexes and their dynamic and spatial regulation through a Cytoscape plugin ( 35 ) . Information on protein networks will be complemented Figure 4 . The Sequence Viewer , accessible from the Sequence view , displays - in addition to the sequence itself , the different features of the sequence ( processing , regions , modiﬁed residues , topological information , variants , sequence conﬂicts , etc . ) as a graphical overview and a table view . When a feature is selected , either from the graphical viewer or from the feature table , the corresponding sequence is immediately highlighted on the right . The sequence viewer also provides direct access to the BLAST tool , which has the option of using the full sequence , a selection corresponding to a sequence feature or any other sub - sequence selected by the user . D80 Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 by data on interactions between proteins and small molecules ( such as drugs ) and between proteins and nucleic acids . While neXtProt only caters for human proteins , we want to provide the phylogenetic range of species in which a given human protein exists . We will also extract from Swiss - Prot experimental information carried out in organisms other than human but providing information directly relevant to the cognate human protein ( s ) . For example , selected phenotypes from knock out or knock down experiments in mouse or zebraﬁsh or enzyme char - acterization of bovine or pig counterparts . In terms of tools and interface , we want to build an intuitive and powerful system , having capacities that are not yet available in other life sciences platforms . This is why we want to add a number of tools to neXtProt . Among them , we are planning to provide an advanced search option that will allow to speciﬁcally retrieve any stored data item and to carry out complex ( including Boolean and analytical ) queries ; a multiple sequence aligner with a user - friendly interface and a 3D structure viewer that enables protein sequence annotations ( PTMs , domains , variants , etc . ) to be displayed overlaid on the structural view . We are also exploring how we can allow users who have created personal accounts to customize our platform and to allow them to participate in group discussions and data sharing activities . Currently , URLs for searches and dis - played pages are REST - compatible but this is not sufﬁ - cient to allow third party developers to make full use of our platform and of the data available in neXtProt . This is why we are currently developing an Application Programming Interface ( API ) for neXtProt . This API will be used to integrate the future 3D structure viewer de - veloped by BIONEXT ( http : / / www . bio - next . com ) in the context of a collaborative research project . Figure 5 . The Exon view , available from the Gene perspective , gives the precise coordinates of all protein isoforms that can be mapped on Ensembl transcripts , based on exons . For each exon , its position on the gene is shown , as well as the length if the exon in nucleotides . The coding regions are represented by a small glyph , in which coding fragments are shown with a large green line , and non - coding sequences by a thin gray line . ( Strictly non - coding exons are not shown . ) The ﬁrst and the last amino acid of each exon are shown , and the reading frame of each exon is indicated by red labeling of the amino acids . For example , Val 96 – Ile 110 means that the ﬁrst amino acid of that exon ( Val ) is completely encoded within that exon , while only the ﬁrst nucleotide of the last one ( Ile ) is encoded in that exon . Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D81 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 CONCLUSIONS We have created neXtProt , a new protein knowledge platform on human proteins . It extends the high - quality UniProtKB / Swiss - Prot annotations for human proteins to include several new data types . The development of neXtProt is just beginning and will continue to expand with respect to the quantity and scope of data presented . We are convinced that the comprehensive biocuration of human proteins is a community endeavor . With this in mind , neXtProt is being built as a participative platform and we look forward to receiving users’ input for its future development . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank the UniProt groups at SIB , EBI and PIR for their dedication in providing up - to - date high - quality annotations for the human proteins in Swiss - Prot thus providing neXtProt with a solid founda - tion . The authors thank Laurent - Philippe Albou , Fre´de´ric Bastian , Pierre - Alain Binz , Christine Carapito , Eric Deutsch , Nasri Nahas , Marc Robinson - Rechiavi , Mathias Uhlen , Christian von Mering for stimulating dis - cussions , advices and / or providing us data . From 2009 to 2011 , neXtProt has been jointly developed by the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics ( SIB ) and GeneBio SA . Figure 6 . For each term within the ontologies and hierarchical controlled vocabularies , a dedicated page shows its deﬁnition , synonyms and cross - references to other ontologies . In addition , the Graphical Ontology Viewer shows the relationship of that term to all its parents . D82 Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018 FUNDING The SIB ; Genebio SA ; the Swiss Confederation’s Commission for Technology and Innovation ( CTI , grant 10214 . 1 PFLS - LS ) ; the neXtProt server is hosted by VitalIT ; the bioinformatics competence center that supports and collaborates with life scientists in Switzerland . Funding for open access charge : SIB . Conﬂict of interest statement . None declared . REFERENCES 1 . The UniProt Consortium . ( 2009 ) The Universal Protein Resource ( UniProt ) 2009 . Nucleic Acids Res . , 37 , D169 – D174 . 2 . The UniProt Consortium . ( 2011 ) Ongoing and future developments at the Universal Protein Resource . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D214 – D219 . 3 . Sigrist , C . J . , Cerutti , L . , de Castro , E . , Langendijk - Genevaux , P . S . , Bulliard , V . , Bairoch , A . and Hulo , N . ( 2010 ) PROSITE , a protein domain database for functional characterization and annotation . Nucleic Acids Res . , 38 , D161 – D166 . 4 . Bairoch , A . ( 2000 ) The ENZYME database in 2000 . Nucleic Acids Res . , 28 , 304 – 305 . 5 . Szklarczyk , D . , Franceschini , A . , Kuhn , M . , Simonovic , M . , Roth , A . , Minguez , P . , Doerks , T . , Stark , M . , Muller , J . , Bork , P . et al . ( 2011 ) The STRING database in 2011 : functional interaction networks of proteins , globally integrated and scored . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D561 – D568 . 6 . Kiefer , F . , Arnold , K . , Kunzli , M . , Bordoli , L . and Schwede , T . ( 2009 ) The SWISS - MODEL Repository and associated resources . Nucleic Acids Res . , 37 , D387 – D392 . 7 . Uhlen , M . , Oksvold , P . , Fagerberg , L . , Lundberg , E . , Jonasson , K . , Forsberg , M . , Zwahlen , M . , Kampf , C . , Wester , K . , Hober , S . et al . ( 2010 ) Towards a knowledge - based Human Protein Atlas . Nat . Biotechnol . , 28 , 1248 – 1250 . 8 . Parkinson , H . , Sarkans , U . , Kolesnikov , N . , Abeygunawardena , N . , Burdett , T . , Dylag , M . , Emam , I . , Farne , A . , Hastings , E . , Holloway , E . et al . ( 2011 ) ArrayExpress update—an archive of microarray and high - throughput sequencing - based functional genomics experiments . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D1002 – D1004 . 9 . Sayers , E . W . , Barrett , T . , Benson , D . A . , Bolton , E . , Bryant , S . H . , Canese , K . , Chetvernin , V . , Church , D . M . , DiCuccio , M . , Federhen , S . et al . ( 2011 ) Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D38 – D51 . 10 . Pontius , J . U . , Wagner , L . and Schuler , G . C . ( 2003 ) Ch . 21 . In : McEntyre , J . and Ostell , J . ( eds ) , The NCBI Handbook . National Center for Biotechnology Information , Bethesda , MD . 11 . Bastian , F . P . G . , Roux , J . , Moretti , S . , Laudet , V . and Robinson - Rechavi , M . ( 2008 ) Data Integration in the Life Sciences , Vol . 5109 . Springer , Berlin / Heidelberg , pp . 124 – 131 . 12 . Liebel , U . , Starkuviene , V . , Erﬂe , H . , Simpson , J . C . , Poustka , A . , Wiemann , S . and Pepperkok , R . ( 2003 ) A microscope - based screening platform for large - scale functional protein analysis in intact cells . FEBS Lett . , 554 , 394 – 398 . 13 . Simpson , J . C . , Wellenreuther , R . , Poustka , A . , Pepperkok , R . and Wiemann , S . ( 2000 ) Systematic subcellular localization of novel proteins identiﬁed by large - scale cDNA sequencing . EMBO Rep . , 1 , 287 – 292 . 14 . Sigal , A . , Danon , T . , Cohen , A . , Milo , R . , Geva - Zatorsky , N . , Lustig , G . , Liron , Y . , Alon , U . and Perzov , N . ( 2007 ) Generation of a ﬂuorescently labeled endogenous protein library in living human cells . Nat . Protocols , 2 , 1515 – 1527 . 15 . Farrah , T . , Deutsch , E . W . , Omenn , G . S . , Campbell , D . S . , Sun , Z . , Bletz , J . A . , Mallick , P . , Katz , J . E . , Malmstrom , J . , Ossola , R . et al . ( 2011 ) A high - conﬁdence human plasma proteome reference set with estimated concentrations in PeptideAtlas . Mol . Cell . Proteomics , 10 , M110 006353 . 16 . Deutsch , E . W . ( 2010 ) The PeptideAtlas Project . Methods Mol . Biol . , 604 , 285 – 296 . 17 . Ashburner , M . , Ball , C . A . , Blake , J . A . , Botstein , D . , Butler , H . , Cherry , J . M . , Davis , A . P . , Dolinski , K . , Dwight , S . S . , Eppig , J . T . et al . ( 2000 ) Gene ontology : tool for the uniﬁcation of biology . The Gene Ontology Consortium . Nat . Genet . , 25 , 25 – 29 . 18 . Gene Ontology Consortium . ( 2010 ) The Gene Ontology in 2010 : extensions and reﬁnements . Nucleic Acids Res . , 38 , D331 – D335 . 19 . Barrell , D . , Dimmer , E . , Huntley , R . P . , Binns , D . , O’Donovan , C . and Apweiler , R . ( 2009 ) The GOA database in 2009 – an integrated Gene Ontology Annotation resource . Nucleic Acids Res . , 37 , D396 – D403 . 20 . Flicek , P . , Amode , M . R . , Barrell , D . , Beal , K . , Brent , S . , Chen , Y . , Clapham , P . , Coates , G . , Fairley , S . , Fitzgerald , S . et al . ( 2011 ) Ensembl 2011 . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D800 – D806 . 21 . Pruitt , K . D . , Harrow , J . , Harte , R . A . , Wallin , C . , Diekhans , M . , Maglott , D . R . , Searle , S . , Farrell , C . M . , Loveland , J . E . , Ruef , B . J . et al . ( 2009 ) The consensus coding sequence ( CCDS ) project : identifying a common protein - coding gene set for the human and mouse genomes . Genome Res . , 19 , 1316 – 1323 . 22 . Goel , R . , Muthusamy , B . , Pandey , A . and Prasad , T . S . ( 2011 ) Human protein reference database and human proteinpedia as discovery resources for molecular biotechnology . Mol . Biotechnol . , 48 , 87 – 95 . 23 . Ceol , A . , Chatr Aryamontri , A . , Licata , L . , Peluso , D . , Briganti , L . , Perfetto , L . , Castagnoli , L . and Cesareni , G . ( 2010 ) MINT , the molecular interaction database : 2009 update . Nucleic Acids Res . , 38 , D532 – D539 . 24 . Rose , P . W . , Beran , B . , Bi , C . , Bluhm , W . F . , Dimitropoulos , D . , Goodsell , D . S . , Prlic , A . , Quesada , M . , Quinn , G . B . , Westbrook , J . D . et al . ( 2011 ) The RCSB Protein Data Bank : redesigned web site and web services . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D392 – D401 . 25 . Morgat , A . C . E . , Coudert , E . , Axelsen , K . B . , Keller , G . , Bairoch , A . , Bridge , A . , Bougueleret , L . , Xenarios , I . and Viari , A . ( 2012 ) UniPathway : a resource for the exploration and annotation of metabolic pathways . Nucleic Acids Res . , 40 , D761 – D769 . 26 . Sewell , W . ( 1964 ) Medical subject headings in Medlars . Bull . Med . Libr . Assoc . , 52 , 164 – 170 . 27 . Kelso , J . , Visagie , J . , Theiler , G . , Christoffels , A . , Bardien , S . , Smedley , D . , Otgaar , D . , Greyling , G . , Jongeneel , C . V . , McCarthy , M . I . et al . ( 2003 ) eVOC : a controlled vocabulary for unifying gene expression data . Genome Res . , 13 , 1222 – 1230 . 28 . Gremse , M . , Chang , A . , Schomburg , I . , Grote , A . , Scheer , M . , Ebeling , C . and Schomburg , D . ( 2011 ) The BRENDA Tissue Ontology ( BTO ) : the ﬁrst all - integrating ontology of all organisms for enzyme sources . Nucleic Acids Res . , 39 , D507 – D513 . 29 . Mejino , J . V . Jr , Agoncillo , A . V . , Rickard , K . L . and Rosse , C . ( 2003 ) Representing complexity in part - whole relationships within the foundational model of anatomy . AMIA Annu . Symp . Proc . , 450 – 454 . 30 . Altschul , S . F . , Gish , W . , Miller , W . , Myers , E . W . and Lipman , D . J . ( 1990 ) Basic local alignment search tool . J . Mol . Biol . , 215 , 403 – 410 . 31 . Orchard , S . , Hoogland , C . , Bairoch , A . , Eisenacher , M . , Kraus , H . J . and Binz , P . A . ( 2009 ) Managing the data explosion . A report on the HUPO - PSI Workshop . August 2008 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . Proteomics , 9 , 499 – 501 . 32 . Legrain , P . , Aebersold , R . , Archakov , A . , Bairoch , A . , Bala , K . , Beretta , L . , Bergeron , J . , Borchers , C . H . , Corthals , G . L . , Costello , C . E . et al . ( 2011 ) The human proteome project : current state and future direction . Mol . Cell Proteomics , 10 , M111 009993 . 33 . Aranda , B . , Achuthan , P . , Alam - Faruque , Y . , Armean , I . , Bridge , A . , Derow , C . , Feuermann , M . , Ghanbarian , A . T . , Kerrien , S . , Khadake , J . et al . ( 2010 ) The IntAct molecular interaction database in 2010 . Nucleic Acids Res . , 38 , D525 – D531 . 34 . Orchard , S . , Aranda , B . and Hermjakob , H . ( 2010 ) The publication and database deposition of molecular interaction data . Curr . Protoc . Protein Sci . , Chapter 25 , Unit 25 23 . 35 . Shannon , P . , Markiel , A . , Ozier , O . , Baliga , N . S . , Wang , J . T . , Ramage , D . , Amin , N . , Schwikowski , B . and Ideker , T . ( 2003 ) Cytoscape : a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks . Genome Res . , 13 , 2498 – 2504 . Nucleic Acids Research , 2012 , Vol . 40 , Database issue D83 D o w n l oaded f r o m h tt p s : / / a c ade m i c . oup . c o m / na r / a r t i c l e - ab s t r a c t / 40 / D 1 / D 76 / 2903329 b y gue s t on 26 N o v e m be r 2018