Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 12 , 265 – 277 , February 2001 Integrin - mediated Adhesion Regulates Cell Polarity and Membrane Protrusion through the Rho Family of GTPases h V Elisabeth A . Cox , * Sarita K . Sastry , † and Anna Huttenlocher * ‡ * Departments of Pediatrics and Pharmacology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 ; and † Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 Submitted June 22 , 2000 ; Revised September 26 ; Accepted November 8 , 2000 Monitoring Editor : W . James Nelson Integrin - mediated adhesion is a critical regulator of cell migration . Here we demonstrate that integrin - mediated adhesion to high ﬁbronectin concentrations induces a stop signal for cell migration by inhibiting cell polarization and protrusion . On ﬁbronectin , the stop signal is gener - ated through a 5 b 1 integrin - mediated signaling to the Rho family of GTPases . Speciﬁcally , Cdc42 and Rac1 activation exhibits a biphasic dependence on ﬁbronectin concentration that parallels optimum cell polarization and protrusion . In contrast , RhoA activity increases with increasing substratum concentration . We ﬁnd that cross talk between Cdc42 and Rac1 is required for substratum - stimulated protrusion , whereas RhoA activity is inhibitory . We also show that Cdc42 activity is inhibited by Rac1 activation , suggesting that Rac1 activity may down - regulate Cdc42 activity and promote the formation of stabilized rather than transient protrusion . Furthermore , expression of RhoA down - regulates Cdc42 and Rac1 activity , providing a mechanism whereby RhoA may inhibit cell polarization and protrusion . These ﬁndings implicate adhesion - dependent signaling as a mechanism to stop cell migration by regulating cell polarity and protrusion via the Rho family of GTPases . INTRODUCTION Cell migration plays a central role in both normal and patho - logical processes , including embryonic development , wound healing , inﬂammation , and tumor metastasis ( Trinkaus , 1984 ) . Integrin - mediated adhesion to the extracel - lular matrix is a critical regulator of cell migration speed for many cell types , including ﬁbroblasts and carcinomas . These cell types exhibit a biphasic relationship between cell migra - tion speed and substratum concentration ( Goodman et al . , 1989 ; DiMilla et al . , 1993 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Ho et al . , 1997 ; Palecek et al . , 1997 ) , with maximum migration rates at intermediate adhesiveness where cells can both efﬁciently form adhesions at the cell front and release adhesive con - tacts at the cell rear ( DiMilla et al . , 1991 ; Duband et al . , 1991 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1995 ) . Previous studies have implicated reduced adhesive release at the cell’s rear as an important mechanism for inhibited migration under conditions of high cell substratum adhesiveness ( Marks et al . , 1991 ; Hendey et al . , 1992 ; Jay et al . , 1995 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1997 ; Cox and Huttenlocher , 1998 ; Palecek et al . , 1998 ) . Integrins are a family of heterodimeric cell surface adhe - sion receptors that bind to speciﬁc extracellular matrix com - ponents and cluster in the membrane to form organized adhesive contacts called focal complexes or focal adhesions ( Hynes , 1992 ) . To migrate , cells must coordinately assemble and disassemble integrin - containing adhesive complexes . Integrin - containing adhesive complexes regulate cell migra - tion by performing both an adhesive function , linking the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton , and a signal transduction function by regulating molecules important for cell motility ( Clark and Brugge , 1995 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1995 ; Ilic et al . , 1995 ; Cary et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Anand - Apte et al . , 1997 ; Klemke et al . , 1997 ; Cox and Huttenlocher , 1998 ; Klemke et al . , 1998 ; Pa - lecek et al . , 1999 ) . Recent studies have demonstrated that integrin - mediated adhesion to the extracellular matrix reg - ulates the activity of the Rho family of small GTP - binding proteins ( Barry et al . , 1997 ; Clark et al . , 1998 ; Price et al . , 1998 ; Ren et al . , 1999 ; del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) . Rho family members , which include Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA , cycle between an active GTP - bound state and an inactive GDP - bound state . Members of this family play an important role in regulating h V Online version of this article contains video material for Fig - ure 1 . The online version is available at www . molbiolcell . org . ‡ Corresponding author . E - mail address : huttenlocher @ facstaff . wisc . edu . Abbreviations used : fMLP , formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylala - nine . © 2001 by The American Society for Cell Biology 265 cell migration ( Allen et al . , 1998 ; del Pozo et al . , 1999 ; Nobes and Hall , 1999 ; Ridley et al . , 1999 ; Banyard et al . , 2000 ) . Cdc42 stimulates the formation of ﬁlopodia and regulates cell po - larity ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ; Allen et al . , 1998 ; Nobes and Hall , 1999 ) , whereas Rac1 induces lamelli - podia ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . Cdc42 and Rac1 signal to form new focal complexes at the leading edge of the cell that promote membrane rufﬂing and the formation of lamellipo - dia ( Hotchin and Hall , 1995 ; Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . RhoA stimulates the forma - tion of stress ﬁbers ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) and is required for the maturation of adhesive contacts into focal adhesions ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Hotchin and Hall , 1995 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Here we demonstrate that integrin - mediated adhesion regulates cell polarization and protrusion . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that high substratum concentrations induce a “stop” signal that inhibits cell polarization and protrusion . In con - trast to previous studies that have implicated adhesive re - lease as rate limiting to migration speed at high substratum concentrations , our studies implicate a novel mechanism , i . e . , an adhesion - dependent stop signal that regulates cell polarization and protrusion . We ﬁnd that the stop signal mediated by high ﬁbronectin concentrations is transduced through the Rho family of proteins . We show that a biphasic relationship exists between ﬁbronectin - coating concentra - tion and Cdc42 and Rac1 activation that parallels optimum polarization and protrusion . In contrast , RhoA activity in - creases and plateaus , remaining elevated at high substratum concentrations . We also ﬁnd that RhoA activity can inhibit substratum - stimulated protrusion by down - regulating Cdc42 and Rac1 activity . Further evidence for the impor - tance of cross talk between the Rho family of GTPases is provided by our observation that Rac1 can directly down - regulate Cdc42 activity . Together , the ﬁndings implicate adhesion - dependent signaling as a mechanism to “stop” cell migration , through regulating cell polarization and protru - sion via the Rho family of GTPases . MATERIALS AND METHODS Vectors The pEXVmyc - w . t . RhoA , pRK5myc - L63RhoA , pEXVmyc - N17Cdc42 , and pEXVmyc - N17Rac1 , and pRK5myc - L61Rac1 were provided by Alan Hall ( University College London , London , United Kingdom ) . Inserts were removed from the pEXVmyc vectors via Eco RI digestion and cloned into the pIRES - EGFP vector ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) . The insert was removed from the pRK5myc - L61Rac1 vector via Bam HI and Eco RI digestion and cloned into the pIRES - EGFP vector . CMV5 - N19RhoA was provided by Martin Schwartz ( The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . The pLEX A GST - PBD and pGEX 2T GST - RBD vectors used in the Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA activity assays were obtained from Keith Burridge ( Uni - versity of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC ) . pcDNA3 . 1 and pcDNA3 . 1hygro - lacZ were purchased from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Antibodies and Reagents Fibronectin was puriﬁed from human plasma by afﬁnity chroma - tography as previously described ( Ruoslahti et al . , 1982 ) . Fibrinogen and anti - vinculin antibody were purchased from Sigma Chemical ( St . Louis , MO ) . Rhodamine - labeled phalloidin was obtained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Anti - Cdc42 and anti - Rac1 antibody were obtained from Transduction Laboratories ( San Diego , CA ) . Anti - RhoA antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) . Goat anti - mouse antibody conjugated to horse - radish peroxidase and sheep anti - mouse antibody conjugated to ﬂuorescein were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch ( West Grove , PA ) . Cell Culture and Transfection Neutrophils were puriﬁed from human blood using Polymor - phprep solution ( Nycomed , Oslo , Norway ) according to the manu - facturer’s instructions . CHO - K1 cells ( Chinese hamster ovary ﬁbro - blast - like cells ) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) . The cells were grown at 37°C and 10 % CO 2 in complete growth media : sodium bicarbonate - buffered Dul - becco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium ( DME ) with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM glutamine , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 1 % nones - sential amino acids , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 m g / ml strepto - mycin ( Sigma Chemical ) . CHO cells were transiently transfected using 4 m g of DNA and 15 m l of Lipofectamine ( Life Technologies , Gaithersburg , MD ) accord - ing to the manufacturer’s instructions with the following exception : after adding the DNA : lipid complexes to the cells , 2 ml of complete growth media was added and cells were incubated for 12 h before washing . For cotransfections , a ratio of 1 : 8 ( pIRES - N17Rac : pEXV - N17Cdc42 or pcDNA3 . 1 ) was used . In cotransfection experiments , only green ﬂourescence protein ( GFP ) - positive cells were analyzed . GFP - positive cells should express N17Rac because the IRES - EGFP vector ( Clontech ) contains an internal ribosomal entry site that permits the gene of interest ( N17Rac ) and the EGFP gene to be translated from a single bicistronic mRNA . Cells were used in experiments 48 – 60 - h posttransfection . Before use in serum - free ex - periments , cells were plated for 24 h and then incubated for 12 – 18 h in growth media with reduced ( 1 % ) FBS . To plate cells for experi - ments , cells were removed with 0 . 02 % EDTA in phosphate - buffered saline , washed with phosphate - buffered saline , washed with 1 3 Puck’s Saline G ( to deplete growth factors ) , and washed 2 3 with DME 1 ( growth media without FBS ) supplemented with 0 . 2 % bo - vine serum albumin ( BSA ) . The cells were plated in DME 1 with 0 . 2 % BSA onto ﬁbronectin - coated nontissue culture plastic plates blocked with 2 % BSA . Cells were seeded onto 35 - mm plates at 1 . 5 3 10 5 / plate for time - lapse videomicroscopy experiments . For use in experiments with the growth factor - supplemented media , CCMI ( Hyclone Laboratories , Logan , UT ) cells were plated for 24 – 36 h before use . For all experiments , “low” substratum concentration denotes 1 – 2 m g / ml ﬁbronectin , “intermediate” denotes 3 – 10 m g / ml , “high” denotes 20 – 40 m g / ml , and “very high” denotes 50 – 100 m g / ml ﬁbronectin . Time - Lapse Videomicroscopy . Neutrophils were plated in CCM1 onto 35 - mm dishes coated with ﬁbrinogen or ﬁbronectin . Five minutes after plating , 1 3 10 2 8 M formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine ( fMLP , Sigma Chemical ) was added to the dish to activate the neutrophils . After a 5 - min incubation with the fMLP , plates were placed on a heated micro - scope stage and supplied 10 % CO 2 . Images were collected 5 – 10 min after cells were placed on the stage using ISee analytical software ( Inovision , Raleigh , NC ) . CHO - K1 cells were plated as described above and incubated for 1 h at 37°C in 10 % CO 2 . The plated cells were either placed directly onto a heated microscope stage with 10 % CO 2 , or the system was closed and placed onto a heated stage . To close the system , the plate was ﬁlled completely with 10 % CO 2 - saturated media ( DME 1 with 0 . 2 % BSA , or CCMI ) and sealed with vacuum grease and a 40 - mm glass coverslip ( Bioptechs , Butler , PA ) . A constant pH of 7 . 0 – 7 . 4 and temperature of 37°C was maintained during taping . Cells were allowed to equilibrate on the microscope stage for 1 h before images were captured for analysis . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 266 Transient Membrane Protrusion Analysis Transient membrane protrusion analysis was performed using a 20 3 objective on an Olympus IX - 70 inverted microscope ( Olympus America , Melville , NY ) . Images were captured at 15 - s intervals for 5 min using an LG3 frame grabber ( Scion , Frederick , MD ) and three or four different ﬁelds were analyzed per condition per experiment using Scion Image software . Scion Image is a variation of NIH Image , which was developed at the U . S . National Institutes of Health and is available at http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / . A macro for transient membrane protrusion was written for Scion Image based on a previously described program ( Araki et al . , 1996 ) . Subsequent images in the stack were overlaid with each other and a difference image was created for each by subtracting the gray level values ( 0 – 255 , white - black ) for each pixel in the image , multiplying by 0 . 5 and adding 128 . A 5 % threshold was applied to the difference image so that any pixel undergoing more than a 5 % change in gray level value ( falling in the range of 0 – 113 or 143 – 255 ) was scored as positive . This threshold was chosen because it detects membrane activity at the cell edge while minimizing the detection of intracel - lular vesicle and organelle movement . A binary image was then created in which positive pixels were displayed as white against a black background . The white pixels in a selected area encompassing a cell were then scored . The analysis was performed for every cell that did not divide or come into contact with other cells during the experiment . For each experiment , the average number of pixels exceeding the 5 % threshold per 15 - s interval was determined for each condition . Then the average ( transient protrusion index ) and SD for three experiments were calculated . For each condition , 18 – 50 cells were quantiﬁed in total from three to four separate experi - ments . Stabilized Membrane Protrusion Analysis Stabilized membrane protrusion analysis was performed using a 20 3 objective on an Olympus IX - 70 inverted microscope ( Olympus America ) . Images were captured at 5 - min intervals for 1 h and four ﬁelds were examined on each plate using an automated stage ( Ludl Electronic Products , Hawthorne , NY ) . Cells in each pair of sequen - tial images were traced and overlaid . ISee analytical imaging soft - ware ( Inovision ) was used to calculate the protrusion area ( m m 2 ) and total cell area ( m m 2 ) for each set of overlaid images . Contacting or dividing cells were omitted . For each experiment , the average area of protrusion per 5 - min interval was determined and normal - ized to the average cell area for the condition . Then the average normalized protrusion area and SD were determined for three experiments . For each condition , 15 – 30 cells were quantiﬁed in total from three to four separate experiments . Immunoﬂuorescence Cells were prepared for use in immunoﬂuorescent cell staining experiments as described for time - lapse videomicroscopy . Glass coverslips were acid washed , silanated , conjugated to ﬁbronectin , and blocked with 2 % BSA using previously described methods ( Crowley and Horwitz , 1995 ) . Cells were plated at a density of 2 3 10 4 / coverslip in DME 1 with 0 . 2 % BSA . After a 3 - h incubation at 37°C , 10 % CO 2 , cells were ﬁxed and stained for vinculin and actin as described previously ( Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ) . Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA Activity Assays All activity assays were performed with serum - starved CHO - K1 cells cultured as described above . For activity assays , cells were transfected as described above except cells were initially incubated for 2 h after addition of the lipid : DNA complexes in DME 1 to boost transfection efﬁciency . After 2 h , the cells were supplemented with 10 % FBS and the transfection was completed as described . Trans - fection efﬁciency was typically 80 – 90 % , as determined by b - galac - tosidase staining of control cells transfected with pcDNA3 . 1hygro - lacZ . Serum - starved cells were plated onto 10 - cm nontissue culture plates coated with ﬁbronectin and blocked with BSA ( as described above ) at a concentration of 1 . 5 3 10 6 cells / plate . Cells were plated in serum - free conditions as described above . After a 3 - h incubation , lysates were collected and activity assays were performed as de - scribed ( Bagrodia et al . , 1998 ) . To assay the activity of Cdc42 and Rac1 , cell lysate was afﬁnity precipitated with a PAK binding do - main - GST fusion protein that only binds to the active , GTP - bound form of Rac1 . The total cell lysates and the afﬁnity - precipitated products were run on an SDS - PAGE gel , transferred to nitrocellu - lose , and blotted for Cdc42 or Rac1 . Staining was detected using enhanced chemiluminescence and densitometry was performed us - ing Scion Image ( Scion , Frederick , MD ) . The RhoA assay was performed as described ( Ren et al . , 1999 ) . This assay is similar to the Rac1 activity assay , only a Rhotekin binding domain - GST fusion protein , which binds to the GTP - bound form of RhoA , was used for the afﬁnity precipitation . The total cell lysates and the afﬁnity - precipitated products were run on an SDS - PAGE gel , transferred to nitrocellulose , and blotted for RhoA . Stain - ing was detected using enhanced chemiluminescence . RESULTS Substratum Concentration Regulates Cell Polarization and Membrane Protrusion The migration speed of CHO - K1 cells displays a biphasic dependence on substratum concentration , with maximum migration at intermediate substratum concentrations ( Hut - tenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Palecek et al . , 1997 ) . CHO cell migration on ﬁbronectin is dependent on the a 5 b 1 integrin because the function - perturbing antibody , PB1 , blocks migration on ﬁ - bronectin ( Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ) . To determine a mech - anism for reduced migration rates of cells plated on high concentrations of substratum , we examined cell morphology using time - lapse videomicroscopy . We ﬁnd that CHO cells and neutrophils show a substrate concentration - dependent effect on cell polarization and protrusion ( Figure 1 ) . We examined the morphology of CHO cells plated onto a range of ﬁbronectin concentrations in the presence and ab - sence of exogenous growth factors . In the presence of the growth factor - supplemented media CCM1 , CHO cells dem - onstrate optimum polarization at intermediate substratum concentrations that support maximum migration ( Figure 1B ) . At low substratum concentrations , cells do not spread , polarize , or protrude ( Figure 1A ) . At high ligand concentra - tions in the presence of growth factors , cells spread maxi - mally but display a less polarized morphology with less protrusive activity ( Figure 1C ) . Some cells plated on high ﬁbronectin concentrations polarize , and migration of these cells is limited by rear detachment rate ( Figure 1C , asterisks ) . However , cells plated on very high substratum concentra - tions do not polarize and exhibit reduced protrusive activity ( Figure 1D ) . These ﬁndings suggest that ﬁbronectin concen - tration regulates membrane protrusion and polarization and contributes to the inhibition of migration on high substra - tum concentrations . To examine how ﬁbronectin - coating concentration regu - lates cell morphology and polarization in cells independent of exogenous growth factors , we examined serum - starved CHO cells plated on different concentrations of ﬁbronectin in a growth factor - free media . In the absence of exogenous growth factors , CHO cells display substratum - stimulated membrane - protrusive activity and polarization at an inter - mediate ﬁbronectin - coating concentration , suggesting that Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 267 ﬁbronectin alone is sufﬁcient to stimulate membrane protru - sion without exogenous growth factors ( Figure 1F , video ) . However , the effects are less robust than those seen in the presence of growth factors and , in contrast to cells plated in CCM1 , the cells generally do not translocate . Fibronectin - coating concentration also regulates cell morphology and protrusion under growth factor - free conditions , where the effects of high ﬁbronectin concentration on cell morphology are more dramatic . On high ﬁbronectin concentrations , CHO cells are spread ( average cell area 5 4339 6 360 m m 2 ) but Figure 1 . Substratum concentration regulates the polarity of CHO cells ( A – H ) and neutrophils ( I – J ) . Phase pictures ( 20 3 ) of CHO cells plated on low ( A and E ) , intermediate ( B and F ) , high ( C and G ) , and very high ( D and H ) concentrations of ﬁbronectin . Cells were plated in CCMI ( A – D ) or serum - starved and plated in growth factor - free media ( E – H , video sequences for these experiments are available online ) . Cells do not spread well and fail to polarize on low concentrations of ﬁbronectin . Cells polarize well on intermediate concentrations , less on high concentrations , and only minimally on very high ﬁbronectin concentrations . Note the reduction in cell spreading exhibited by serum - starved cells plated onto very high concentrations of ﬁbronectin ( H ) . Asterisks indicate cells on a high ﬁbronectin concentration in CCMI , which exhibit inhibited tail release . Phase pictures ( 20 3 ) of neutrophils plated on intermediate ( I ) and very high ( J ) concentrations of ﬁbrinogen . Polarization and cell spreading are inhibited on very high concentrations of ﬁbrinogen . Bar , 20 m m . Video sequences show serum - starved CHO cells plated on intermediate ( Figure 1F . mov ) , high ( Figure 1G . mov ) , or very high ( Figure 1H . mov ) concentrations of ﬁbronectin . Video material is available at www . molbiolcell . org . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 268 exhibit no polarization or protrusion ( Figure 1G , video ) . In a manner analogous to neutrophils , CHO cells plated at very high ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations are less spread ( av - erage cell area 5 3271 6 106 m m 2 ) , do not polarize , and exhibit only minimal membrane protrusion ( Figure 1H , vid - eo ) . Together , these ﬁndings suggest that adhesion - depen - dent signaling pathways regulate cell polarization and pro - trusion in a substratum concentration - dependent manner . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that neutrophils , which are less adhe - sive and migrate more rapidly than ﬁbroblasts , also exhibit reduced cell polarity and spreading at high substratum con - centrations . Neutrophils were stimulated with the chemoat - tractant fMLP , plated on different concentrations of ﬁbrinogen or ﬁbronectin , and observed using time - lapse videomicros - copy . At very high ﬁbrinogen or ﬁbronectin - coating concentra - tions neutrophils do not polarize and are less spread than cells plated on intermediate concentrations of ligand ( Figure 1J ) . Intermediate concentrations of ligand promote maximum po - larization with visible membrane protrusion ( Figure 1I ) . To - gether , these ﬁndings suggest that high ligand - coating concen - trations induce a stop signal that inhibits the polarization and migration of many cell types , including ﬁbroblasts and neutro - phils . This is in contrast to previous studies that have impli - cated release of attachments at the cell rear as the rate - limiting step of cell migration on high substratum concentrations . CHO Cells Exhibit Reduced Transient and Stabilized Membrane Protrusion on High Coating Concentrations of Fibronectin To quantify the effects of ﬁbronectin - coating concentration on membrane protrusive activity in CHO cells , two assays of membrane protrusion were used . The assays were designed to quantify the two prominent types of membrane activity typically observed in adherent CHO cells by time - lapse videomicroscopy . The ﬁrst type of activity analyzed is tran - sient membrane protrusion , which occurs predominantly at the cell periphery . Quantiﬁcation of transient membrane protrusion is performed using an assay that calculates the changes in pixel intensity that occur at the cell periphery over short 15 - s time intervals . In general , migratory cells display transient membrane protrusion , although this activ - ity does not mean that the cell will necessarily undergo changes in net cell area or translocate . However , cells that are nonmigratory are generally quiescent with an absence of transient membrane protrusion ( Huttenlocher et al . , 1998 ) . The second type of activity quantiﬁed is stabilized mem - brane protrusion , which measures the stabilized protrusion area over longer , 5 - min time intervals . In general , cells that display stabilized protrusive activity will migrate and trans - locate . Using these two assays we examined the relationship between substratum concentration and membrane protru - sive activity in CHO cells . Examples of cells used in the transient and stabilized membrane protrusion analysis are shown in Figures 2A and 3A , respectively . We ﬁnd that ﬁbronectin stimulates membrane protrusion in the absence of exogenous growth factors in serum - starved cells , suggest - ing that ﬁbronectin alone is sufﬁcient to stimulate membrane protrusion ( Figures 2B and 3B ) . However , this membrane activity is substratum concentration - dependent with cells exhibiting maximum transient and stabilized protrusion at an intermediate substratum concentration . There is a strik - ing reduction in membrane protrusion at high substratum concentrations where the cells are quiescent . This shutdown in membrane activity was not dependent on a more spread morphology because cells on a very high substratum con - centration are often “rounded” but still display an absence Figure 2 . Substratum concentration regulates transient membrane protrusion in CHO cells . Quantitative analysis was performed to assay transient membrane protrusion in CHO cells . Cells were plated onto intermediate ( 1 ) , high ( 2 ) , and very high ( 3 ) concentra - tions of ﬁbronectin for 2 – 4 h before analysis . ( A ) Examples of serum - starved cells used in transient membrane protrusion analysis ( performed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . Images were taken at 15 - s intervals for 5 min . Subsequent images were overlaid and pixels undergoing a change in gray level value of 5 % or more were scored as positive ( white pixels on black background in far right column ) . This was done for all images in the stack and results were quantiﬁed as described in MATERIALS AND METH - ODS . ( B ) Summarized results from three experiments using tran - sient membrane protrusion analysis . Gray bars represent data from cells plated in CCMI and white bars represent data from serum - starved cells plated in serum - free media . The transient protrusion index is the average number of pixels per cell undergoing a 5 % or more change in gray level value per 15 - s interval . Data are the average of three experiments and error bars represent the SD . Transient membrane protrusion is maximal at an intermediate ﬁ - bronectin concentration and reduced on higher concentrations . Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 269 of transient and stabilized protrusion . In the presence of growth factors , a similar trend is observed with cells exhib - iting optimal membrane activity at intermediate ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations and reduced membrane activity at higher concentrations of ﬁbronectin ( Figures 2B and 3B ) ; this correlates with ﬁndings from a recent study of stabilized membrane protrusion in EGF - stimulated cells ( Maheshwari et al . , 1999 ) . To summarize , we ﬁnd that substratum concen - tration regulates the membrane protrusion and cell mor - phology of CHO - K1 cells . These ﬁndings suggest that sub - stratum concentration regulates intracellular signaling pathways important for membrane protrusion and polariza - tion . Fibronectin Concentration Regulates Focal Adhesion Morphology To establish a role for adhesive signaling in the substratum - dependent effects on cell polarization and membrane activ - ity , serum - starved CHO cells were plated on different con - centrations of ﬁbronectin and focal adhesion morphology was examined . Serum - starved CHO cells exhibit striking differences in focal adhesion and actin organization when adherent for 3 h to coverslips coated with different concen - trations of ﬁbronectin ( Figure 4 ) . Cells plated on intermedi - ate concentrations of ﬁbronectin are less spread and display visible membrane protrusion . These cells have punctate ad - hesive complexes located around the cell periphery and a poorly organized actin cytoskeleton ( Figure 4 , A and D ) . Cells plated on high ﬁbronectin concentrations are more spread and have a polygonal morphology . These cells have more prominent focal adhesions with peripheral stress ﬁbers ( Figure 4 , B and E ) . In contrast , cells plated on very high concentrations of ﬁbronectin are less spread and less polar - ized . These cells display stronger focal adhesions through - out the cell with more centrally distributed stress ﬁbers ( Figure 4 , C and F ) . These results demonstrate that cells adhering to coverslips coated with different concentrations of ﬁbronectin form integrin - containing adhesive complexes that differ in size , number , and location . The small punctate focal complexes that form at intermediate ﬁbronectin - coat - ing concentrations are similar to focal complexes mediated by Cdc42 and Rac1 ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In contrast , the more prominent , centrally located complexes with central stress ﬁbers that form at very high ﬁbronectin - coating con - centration are similar to the focal adhesions mediated by the small GTPase , RhoA ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . These ﬁndings suggest that different ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations may regulate cell morphology and migration by modulating intracellular signaling via the small GTPases Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA . Cdc42 and Rac1 Activity Are Maximal at an Intermediate Fibronectin Concentration , whereas RhoA Activity Increases with Increasing Fibronectin Concentration To determine whether ﬁbronectin concentration regulates Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA activity , activity assays were per - formed using serum - starved CHO cells plated on different concentrations of ﬁbronectin . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA activity is differentially regulated by ﬁbronectin concentration . The activity levels of Cdc42 and Rac1 exhibit a biphasic pattern with respect to ﬁbronectin - coating concentration , with optimal activity occurring at an intermediate substratum concentration ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . Figure 3 . Substratum concentration regulates stabilized mem - brane protrusion in CHO cells . Quantitative analysis was performed to assay stabilized membrane protrusion in CHO cells . Cells were plated onto intermediate ( 1 ) , high ( 2 ) , and very high ( 3 ) concentra - tions of ﬁbronectin for 2 – 4 h before analysis . ( A ) Examples of serum - starved cells used in stabilized membrane protrusion analy - sis ( performed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . Images were taken at 5 - min intervals for 1 h . Subsequent images were overlaid and the area of protrusion ( shaded in far right col - umn ) was calculated and normalized to the total cell area . This was done for all images in the stack and results were quantiﬁed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS . ( B ) Summarized re - sults from three experiments using stabilized membrane protrusion analysis . Gray bars represent data from cells plated in CCMI and white bars represent data from serum - starved cells plated in serum - free media . Standardized stabilized protrusion is the average area of protrusion normalized to the total cell area per cell per 5 - min interval . Data are the average of three experiments and error bars represent the SD . Stabilized membrane protrusion is maximal at an intermediate ﬁbronectin concentration and reduced on higher con - centrations . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 270 Cdc42 and Rac1 activity levels are reduced at both higher and lower ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations . This is the ﬁrst study that demonstrates that the activity of signaling mole - cules critical for cell movement exhibits a biphasic depen - dence on cell substratum adhesion . The activity of Cdc42 and Rac1 parallels the biphasic dependence of cell speed with substratum concentration , implicating reduced adhe - sion - dependent signaling via Cdc42 and Rac1 as a mecha - nism that contributes to reduced migration rates under con - ditions of high cell - substratum adhesion . In contrast to Cdc42 and Rac1 activity , RhoA activity increases and then plateaus , remaining elevated at high substratum concentra - tions ( Figure 5C ) . Therefore , Cdc42 and Rac1 activity is maximal at intermediate substratum concentrations that support membrane polarization and protrusion , whereas RhoA activity remains elevated at higher substratum con - centrations . Substratum - stimulated Membrane Protrusion Requires the Activity of Cdc42 and Rac1 but Is Inhibited by RhoA To investigate whether adhesion - dependent activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 is required for ﬁbronectin - stimulated mem - brane protrusion , cells were transiently transfected with vec - tors that coexpress GFP and either dominant negative Cdc42 or Rac1 . Expression of the proteins was determined by iden - tifying GFP - positive cells . Membrane protrusive activity was examined in transfected cells plated onto an intermedi - ate concentration of ﬁbronectin using the two membrane protrusion assays described above . Expression of N17Cdc42 blocked both transient and stabilized membrane protrusion , suggesting that Cdc42 is required for ﬁbronectin - stimulated membrane activity ( Figure 6 , A and B ) . Interestingly , expres - sion of N17Rac1 inhibited stabilized membrane protrusion , but promoted rather than inhibited transient membrane ac - tivity . To determine whether the transient membrane pro - trusion stimulated by N17Rac1 is dependent on Cdc42 , cells were cotransfected with pIRES - EGFP - N17Rac1 and pEXV - mycN17Cdc42 at a 1 : 8 ratio and transient protrusive activity was assayed in GFP - positive cells . Expression of N17Cdc42 blocks the transient protrusive activity stimulated by N17Rac1 ( Figure 6C ) . Since inhibiting Rac1 leads to an up - regulation of Cdc42 - mediated transient protrusive activity , the ﬁndings suggests that Rac1 may down - regulate Cdc42 activity . To test this possibility , cells were transfected with wild - type Rac1 or L61Rac ( constitutively active ) and Cdc42 Figure 4 . Substratum concentration reg - ulates focal adhesion morphology in se - rum - starved CHO cells . Cells ( 60 3 ) were plated for 3 h on silanated glass coverslips coated with intermediate ( A and D ) , high ( B and E ) , and very high ( C and F ) ﬁ - bronectin concentrations and stained for vinculin ( A – C ) and actin ( D – F ) . On higher substratum concentrations , cells form stronger , more centrally located adhe - sions and stress ﬁbers . Bar , 20 m m . Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 271 activity assays were performed . Both wild - type and L61Rac down - regulate Cdc42 activity ( Figure 7 , A and B ) . These ﬁndings suggest that Rac1 inhibits Cdc42 - mediated tran - sient protrusive activity by down - regulating Cdc42 activity . Rac1 - mediated inhibition of transient nondirectional mem - brane rufﬂing may be an important mechanism for the gen - eration of directional stabilized protrusions . Collectively , these results demonstrate that Cdc42 and Rac1 activity is necessary for substratum - stimulated membrane activity and cross talk between Cdc42 and Rac1 is important for the formation of membrane protrusion . In contrast to Cdc42 and Rac1 , we ﬁnd that the expression of wild - type RhoA inhibits substratum - stimulated transient and stabilized membrane protrusion ( Figure 6 , A and B ) . In addi - tion , the expression of RhoA generally produces a more spread , less polarized morphology at an intermediate substra - tum concentration ( RhoA - transfected cells have an average cell area of 4500 6 1000 m m 2 versus control cells , which have an average area of 1760 6 320 m m 2 ) . However , on high ﬁbronectin concentrations ( at which cells are typically well spread ) expres - sion of RhoA promotes a less spread , less polarized morphol - ogy with inhibited membrane protrusive activity , typical of cells normally plated on very high ﬁbronectin concentrations ( our unpublished results ) . These results demonstrate that RhoA activity , in contrast to Cdc42 and Rac1 , inhibits substra - tum - stimulated polarization and protrusion and promotes cell spreading on intermediate ﬁbronectin concentrations . There - fore , RhoA expression promotes phenotypic traits associated with adhesion to higher substratum concentrations . To determine a mechanism for the inhibition of polarization and protrusion induced by RhoA , the effects of RhoA expres - sion on Cdc42 and Rac1 activity were examined . Activity as - says were performed on an intermediate ﬁbronectin - coating concentration with cells transiently transfected with control vector , wild - type RhoA , or L63RhoA ( constitutively active ) . We ﬁnd that expression of RhoA and L63RhoA down - regu - lates Cdc42 and Rac1 activity ( Figure 8 ) . This suggests that RhoA may inhibit polarization and protrusion through down - regulating Cdc42 and Rac1 activity . To determine whether RhoA is required for the inhibition of membrane polarization and protrusion observed at high ligand density , cells were transfected with dominant negative RhoA and observed on a high ﬁbronectin - coating concentration through time - lapse videomicroscopy . We ﬁnd that dominant negative RhoA did not increase the polarization or protrusive activity of cells on high ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations ( our unpublished re - sults ) . This suggests that RhoA - independent mechanisms may contribute to reduced Cdc42 and Rac1 activity , and the inhibi - tion of polarization and protrusion that occurs on high ﬁ - bronectin concentrations . Together , the ﬁndings suggest that cross talk between Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA plays a central role in the adhesion - dependent regulation of cell polarization and protrusion . DISCUSSION The migration rates of many cell types , including ﬁbroblasts and carcinomas , exhibit a biphasic dependence on cell sub - stratum adhesiveness , with optimal speeds occurring at in - termediate levels of adhesiveness ( Goodman et al . , 1989 ; DiMilla et al . , 1993 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Ho et al . , 1997 ; Palecek et al . , 1997 ) . We have also demonstrated that neu - trophils , which move more rapidly than ﬁbroblasts , exhibit a biphasic relationship between cell speed and substratum concentration with maximum migration rates occurring at intermediate substratum concentrations ( Huttenlocher , un - published data ) . The biphasic dependence of cell migration speed on cell substratum adhesiveness , therefore , appears to be an important regulatory mechanism that governs the migration of both slow - moving cell types , such as ﬁbro - blasts , as well as the more rapid , gliding movements of leukocytes . Previous studies have implicated cell detachment as the rate - limiting step to cell migration speed under conditions of high cell substratum adhesiveness ( Lauffenberger and Hor - witz , 1996 ; Cox and Huttenlocher , 1998 ; Palecek et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , we and others have demonstrated that mechanisms Figure 5 . Cdc42 and Rac1 activation exhibit a biphasic dependence on substrate concentration , whereas RhoA activation increases with increasing substratum concentration . ( A ) Representative blot show - ing that Cdc42 activation is optimal at an intermediate ﬁbronectin concentration . Serum - starved CHO cells were kept in suspension ( 1 and 5 ) or plated onto low ( 2 and 6 ) , intermediate ( 3 and 7 ) , or very high ( 4 and 8 ) concentrations of ﬁbronectin for 3 h and activity assays were performed as described in MATERIALS AND METH - ODS . Afﬁnity - precipitated Cdc42 - GTP was run in lanes 1 – 4 and total cell lysate was run in lanes 5 – 8 . ( B ) Representative blot show - ing that Rac1 activation is optimal at an intermediate ﬁbronectin concentration . Serum - starved CHO cells were plated onto low ( 1 and 4 ) , intermediate ( 2 and 5 ) , or very high ( 3 and 6 ) concentrations of ﬁbronectin for 3 h and activity assays were performed as de - scribed in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Afﬁnity - precipitated Rac1 - GTP was run in lanes 1 – 3 and total cell lysate was run in lanes 4 – 6 . ( C ) Representative blot showing that RhoA activation increases with increasing ﬁbronectin concentration . Serum - starved CHO cells were kept in suspension ( 1 and 5 ) or plated onto low ( 2 and 6 ) , intermediate ( 3 and 7 ) , or very high ( 4 and 8 ) concentrations of ﬁbronectin for 3 h and activity assays were performed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Afﬁnity - precipitated RhoA - GTP was run in lanes 1 – 4 and the total cell lysate was run in lanes 5 – 8 . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 272 that reduce cell detachment rate are inhibitory to cell migration speed , supporting the importance of cell detachment as a mechanism to modulate cell migration rate ( Marks et al . , 1991 ; Hendey et al . , 1992 ; Jay et al . , 1995 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1997 ; Cox and Huttenlocher , 1998 ; Palecek et al . , 1998 ) . However , we now provide evidence that cell substratum adhesiveness also regu - lates cell polarization and protrusion . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that high substratum concentrations induce a stop signal that in - hibits cell polarization and protrusion . The substratum concentration dependence of cell polariza - tion and protrusion suggests that integrin - mediated adhesive signaling pathways may be involved in regulating adhesion - dependent membrane protrusive activity . Speciﬁcally , the sub - stratum concentration - dependent effects on the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesions implicate adhesive signaling via the Rho family of GTPases . Recent studies have demonstrated that integrin - mediated adhesion regulates the activities of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA and these activities are required for normal cell spreading ( Barry et al . , 1997 ; Clark et al . , 1998 ; Price et al . , 1998 ; Ren et al . , 1999 ; del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) . Here , we provide evidence that a 5 b 1 integrin - mediated adhe - sion to ﬁbronectin differentially regulates the activities of Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA . In serum - starved CHO cells , Cdc42 and Rac1 activity demonstrate a biphasic dependence on ﬁ - bronectin concentration , with maximum activity occurring at intermediate substratum concentrations that support mem - brane protrusion and polarization . This is the ﬁrst study to demonstrate a clear biphasic dependence of an adhesion - reg - ulated signaling pathway on substratum concentration . A re - cent study demonstrated that the activity of FAK and ERK2 , unlike Cdc42 and Rac1 , increases monotonically with ligand concentration ( Asthagiri et al . , 1999 ) . Like FAK and ERK2 ac - tivity , we ﬁnd that RhoA activity also increases with increasing ﬁbronectin concentration but plateaus at an intermediate li - gand concentration . Therefore , Cdc42 and Rac1 are optimally active at substratum concentrations that stimulate polarization and protrusion , whereas RhoA continues to be active at higher substratum concentrations where polarization and protrusion are inhibited . Other recently published reports have demon - strated that the balance between Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA activ - ity is a critical determinant of the cell phenotype during cell migration , invasion , and neurite outgrowth ( van Leeuwen et al . , 1997 ; Sander et al . , 1999 ; Banyard et al . , 2000 ; Zondag et al . , 2000 ) . To test whether substratum - stimulated membrane protru - sion requires the activity of Cdc42 and Rac1 we expressed dominant negative forms of the proteins to inhibit their activ - ity . We ﬁnd that Cdc42 is required for transient and stabilized substratum - stimulated membrane activity , whereas Rac1 activ - ity is required for stabilized protrusion but not transient activ - ity . These ﬁndings are in agreement with reports in the litera - ture that suggest that Cdc42 acts upstream of Rac1 to stimulate transient protrusive activity ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . Interest - ingly , inhibiting Rac1 activity stimulates transient membrane Figure 6 . Cross talk between Cdc42 and Rac1 is required for substratum - stimulated membrane activity , whereas RhoA activity is inhibitory . ( A and B ) CHO cells were transfected with control vector , or vectors expressing N17Cdc42 ( dominant negative Cdc42 ) , N17Rac1 ( dominant negative Rac1 ) , or wild - type RhoA . Analysis was performed using serum - starved cells 2 – 4 h after plating on an interme - diate concentration of ﬁbronectin . ( A ) Summarized results from three experiments using transient membrane protrusion analysis . The transient protrusion index was determined for the control and standardizedto100 . Thetransientprotrusionindexforotherconditionswasdeterminedasapercentage of control with the error bars representing the SD . ( B ) Histogram showing results from three experi - ments using stabilized membrane protrusion analysis . The standardized stabilized protrusion was determined for controls and standardized to 100 . The relative standardized stabilized protrusion for other conditions was determined as a percentage of control with the error bars representing the SD . ( C ) Dominant negative Cdc42 inhibits the transient membrane activity stimulated by dominant negative Rac1 . Cellswerecotransfectedina1 : 8ratiowithpIRES - EGFP - N17RacandeitherpcDNA3 . 1 ( control ) or pEXV - N17Cdc42 . Cotransfected cells were identiﬁed through ﬂuorescence and transient membrane activity was quantiﬁed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS . The transient protrusion index was determined for the control and standardized to 100 . The transient protrusion index for cells cotransfected with N17Cdc42 was determined as a percentage of control with the error bars represent - ing the SD . Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 273 protrusion , and this effect is mediated by Cdc42 activity . Fur - thermore , expression of wild - type and constitutive active Rac1 down - regulates Cdc42 activity . These ﬁndings implicate a novel mechanism in which Rac1 activity may feedback to inhibit the transient membrane protrusion stimulated by Cdc42 . Transient Cdc42 - mediated protrusive activity , includ - ing ﬁlopodia , is important for the sensing of chemotactic gra - dients and the establishment of cell polarity ( Allen et al . , 1998 ; Nobes and Hall , 1999 ; Ridley et al . , 1999 ) . CHO cells do not form classic ﬁlopodia but rather exhibit transient protrusive activity that , like ﬁlopodia , may perform a gradient - sensing function required for the establishment of cell polarity and the subsequent generation of lamellipodia and stabilized protru - sion . Although the sensing function provided by transient pro - trusion is important to determine the location of stabilized protrusion formation , our ﬁndings suggest that the generation of stabilized protrusions by Rac1 may require localized down - regulation of Cdc42 - stimulated transient protrusive activity . In contrast to Cdc42 and Rac1 , we provide evidence that RhoA activity inhibits substratum - stimulated transient and stabilized protrusion . This is in agreement with a recent report demonstrating that RhoA inhibition promotes Rac1 - mediated membrane protrusion and focal complex forma - tion ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Although a recent study has shown that Cdc42 and Rac1 directly down - regulate RhoA activity , there is no direct evidence in that system that RhoA regu - Figure 7 . Rac1 down - regulates Cdc42 activity . ( A ) Representative blot showing that Cdc42 activity is inhibited in cells expressing wild - type and L61Rac1 . Cells were transiently transfected with control vector ( 1 and 4 ) , wild - type Rac1 ( 2 and 5 ) , or L61Rac1 ( 3 and 6 ) ( constitutively active ) , and Cdc42 activity assays were performed as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Afﬁnity - precipi - tated Cdc42 - 6TP was run in lanes 1 – 3 , and total cell lysate was run in lanes 4 – 6 . ( B ) Results from densitometry analysis of three exper - iments . The signal obtained for cells transfected with control vector was assigned a relative intensity of 100 . For other samples , the intensity of signal was determined as a percentage of control . Error bars represent the SD . Figure 8 . RhoA down - regulates Cdc42 and Rac1 activity . Cells were transiently transfected with either control vector , wild - type RhoA , or L63RhoA ( constitutively active ) , and Cdc42 / Rac1 activity assays were performed as described in MATERIALS AND METH - ODS . ( A and C ) Representative blots showing that Cdc42 ( A ) and Rac1 ( C ) activity are reduced in CHO cells that express wild - type and L63RhoA . Cells were transfected with control vector ( 1 and 4 ) , wild - type RhoA ( 2 and 5 ) , or L63RhoA ( 3 and 6 ) and plated onto an intermediate ﬁbronectin - coating concentration . Afﬁnity - precipi - tated Cdc42 - GTP or Rac1 - GTP was run in lanes 1 – 3 and total cell lysate was run in lanes 4 – 6 . ( B and D ) Results from densitometry analysis of three experiments from the Cdc42 ( B ) and Rac ( D ) activity assays . The signal obtained for cells transfected with control vector was assigned a relative intensity of 100 . For other samples , the intensity of signal was determined as a percentage of control . Error bars represent the SD . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 274 lates Cdc42 or Rac1 activity ( Sander et al . , 1999 ) . However , our ﬁndings directly demonstrate that increased RhoA ac - tivity inhibits cell protrusion and polarization under adhe - sive conditions that are normally supportive . Furthermore , in CHO cells we ﬁnd that wild - type and constitutively active RhoA down - regulate Cdc42 and Rac1 activity . Therefore , RhoA may inhibit polarization and protrusion through down - regulating Cdc42 and Rac1 activity . The inhibition of polarization and protrusion observed on high substratum concentrations , however , could not be reversed by expres - sion of dominant negative RhoA , suggesting that RhoA - independent mechanisms may contribute to the reduced activity levels of Cdc42 and Rac1 on high ﬁbronectin - coating concentrations . Together , these ﬁndings support a hypothetical model ( Figure 9 ) in which cell migration rate is optimal at interme - diate substratum concentrations at which Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA are active . Cdc42 and Rac1 may stimulate cell migra - tion by promoting protrusion , polarization , and the forma - tion of focal complexes . RhoA may contribute to migration by stimulating contractility and promoting more stabilized adhesive contacts that are necessary to generate the traction required for cell movement . Integrin - mediated signaling on high ﬁbronectin concentrations inhibits Cdc42 and Rac1 ac - tivity and promotes RhoA activity . Inhibited Cdc42 and Rac1 activity in combination with high RhoA activity results in a loss of cell polarity , lack of protrusion , and inhibited migration . Furthermore , cross talk between the GTPases plays a central role in regulating adhesion - dependent cell polarization and protrusion ( see model in Figure 9 ) . Substratum - mediated regulation of cell polarization and protrusion is likely to play a critical role in vivo , where cells are exposed to different extracellular environments with variable concentrations of extracellular matrix components and growth factors . In general , extracellular matrix concen - trations in vivo are not supportive for cell motility . Our ﬁndings support a model in which high ligand concentra - tion may normally induce a stop signal for membrane pro - trusion and cell polarization . There is evidence that many cell types , including tumor cells ( Rooprai et al . , 1998 ) , epi - thelial cells ( Legrand et al . , 1999 ) , and osteoclasts ( Sato et al . , 1997 ) , stimulate migration by degrading extracellular matrix components at the leading edge through the secretion of matrix metalloproteinases . Secretion of matrix metallopro - teinases also occurs at the edges of closing wounds ( Bullard et al . , 1999 ; Legrand et al . , 1999 ; Lu et al . , 1999 ) and at the advancing edge of tumors during metastasis ( Airola et al . , 1997 ) . Selective degradation of the extracellular matrix may reduce the concentration of ligands to levels that stimulate Cdc42 and Rac1 activity , thereby promoting membrane pro - trusion and directional cell movement . A second example of an important mechanism that likely operates in vivo to Figure 9 . Schematic to demonstrate how integrin - mediated signaling on different substratum concentrations regulates cell polarity and protrusion via the Rho family GTPases . This model also highlights pro - posed cross talk interactions that may oc - cur between Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA . On intermediate ﬁbronectin concentrations in - tegrin - mediated signaling activates Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA , resulting in cell polariza - tion , protrusion , and migration . On higher ﬁbronectin concentrations , integrin - mediated signaling inhibits Cdc42 and Rac1 activity but stimulates RhoA activity . Thisresultsinlossofcellpolarity , inhibited protrusion , andinhibitedmigration . Onall substratum concentrations , cross talk be - tween the Rho family of GTPases is likely to inﬂuence protrusive activity . Solid black lines indicate interactions that have been documented both here and in other recent articles . Speciﬁcally , integrin - mediated sig - naling has been shown to activate Cdc42 , Rac1 , and RhoA ( Barry et al . , 1997 ; Clark et al . , 1998 ; Price et al . , 1998 ; Ren et al . , 1999 ; del Pozo et al . , 2000 ) ; and an antagonistic relationship has been proposed between RhoA and Rac1 ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Dot - ted black lines indicate new interactions that have been documented in this article . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that Rac1 and RhoA can inhibit Cdc42 activity . Gray lines indi - cate interactions that have been proposed inpreviouspublications . Forexample , sev - eral recent studies have demonstrated that Cdc42 and Rac1 can inhibit RhoA activity ( van Leeuwen et al . , 1997 ; Sander et al . , 1999 ; Zondag et al . , 2000 ) . Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 275 inhibit membrane - protrusive activity is contact - mediated in - hibition of cell migration . Our previous studies have dem - onstrated that a 5 integrin and cadherin adhesive signaling pathways cross talk to regulate contact - mediated inhibition of membrane - protrusive activity and cell migration ( Hutten - locher et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , a 5 integrin can mediate a shutdown of motile activity during cell - cell contact and in cases of high cell substratum adhesiveness . In summary , our ﬁndings demonstrate that high substra - tum concentration can induce a stop signal for cell migration by inhibiting cell polarity and protrusion through integrin - mediated signaling pathways via the Rho family of GTPases . This phenomenon is likely to be an important regulatory mechanism in vivo during both normal and pathological cell migrations . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Amit Bhatt , Patricia Keely , and Keith Burridge for useful discussions , and Shannon Smith for excellent technical assistance . This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute ( R01 CA85862 - 01 ) and by a research grant from the Arthritis Foundation . S . S . was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM - 29860 ( to K . Burridge ) . REFERENCES Airola , K . , Johansson , N . , Kariniemi , A . L . , Kahari , V . M . , and Saari - alho - Kere , U . K . ( 1997 ) . Human collagenase - 3 is expressed in malig - nant squamous epithelium of the skin . J . Invest . Dermatol . 109 , 225 – 231 . Allen , W . E . , Zicha , D . , Ridley , A . J . , and Jones , G . E . ( 1998 ) . A role for Cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1147 – 1157 . Anand - Apte , B . , Zetter , B . R . , Viswanathan , A . , Qiu , R . G . , Chen , J . , Ruggieri , R . , and Symons , M . ( 1997 ) . Platelet - derived growth factor and ﬁbronectin - stimulated migration are differentially regulated by the Rac and extracellular signal - regulated kinase pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30688 – 30692 . Araki , N . , Johnson , M . T . , and Swanson , J . A . ( 1996 ) . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the completion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1249 – 1260 . Asthagiri , A . R . , Nelson , C . M . , Horwitz , A . F . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1999 ) . Quantitative relationship among integrin - ligand bind - ing , adhesion , and signaling via focal adhesion kinase and extracel - lular signal - regulated kinase 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 27119 – 27127 . Bagrodia , S . , Taylor , S . J . , Jordon , K . A . , Van Aelst , L . , and Cerione , R . A . ( 1998 ) . A novel regulator of p21 - activated kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 23633 – 23636 . Banyard , J . , Anand - Apte , B . , Symons , M . , and Zetter , B . R . ( 2000 ) . Motility and invasion are differentially modulated by Rho family GTPases . Oncogene 19 , 580 – 591 . Barry , S . T . , Flinn , H . M . , Humphries , M . J . , Critchley , D . R . , and Rid - ley , A . J . ( 1997 ) . Requirement for Rho in integrin signaling . Cell . Adhes . Commun . 4 , 387 – 398 . Bullard , K . M . , Lund , L . , Mudgett , J . S . , Mellin , T . N . , Hunt , T . K . , Murphy , B . , Ronan , J . , Werb , Z . , and M . J . Banda , M . J . ( 1999 ) . Im - paired wound contraction in stromelysin - 1 - deﬁcient mice . Ann . Surg . 230 , 260 – 265 . Cary , L . A . , Chang , J . F . , and Guan , J . L . ( 1996 ) . Stimulation of cell migration by overexpression of focal adhesion kinase and its asso - ciation with Src and Fyn . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1787 – 1794 . Cary , L . A . , Han , D . C . , Polte , T . R . , Hanks , S . K . , and Guan , J . L . ( 1998 ) . Identiﬁcation of p130Cas as a mediator of focal adhesion kinase - promoted cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 211 – 221 . Clark , E . A . , and Brugge , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Integrins and signal transduc - tion pathways : the road taken . Science 268 , 233 – 239 . Clark , E . A . , King , W . G . , Brugge , J . S . , Symons , M . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Integrin - mediated signals regulated by members of the Rho family of GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 573 – 586 . Cox , E . A . , and Huttenlocher , A . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of integrin - mediated adhesion during cell migration . Microsc . Res . Tech . 43 , 412 – 419 . Crowley , E . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1995 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation and cytoskeletal tension regulate the release of ﬁbroblast adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 525 – 537 . del Pozo , M . A . , Price , L . S . , Alderson , N . B . , Ren , X . D . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Adhesion to the extracellular matrix regulates the coupling of the small GTPase Rac to its effector PAK . EMBO J . 19 , 2008 – 2014 . del Pozo , M . A . , Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Tejedor , R . , Serrador , J . M . , and Sanchez - Madrid , F . ( 1999 ) . Rho GTPases control migration and polarization of adhesion molecules and cytoskeletal ERM compo - nents in T lymphocytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 3609 – 3620 . DiMilla , P . A . , Barbee , K . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Mathe - matical model for the effects of adhesion and mechanics on cell migration speed . Biophys . J . 60 , 15 – 37 . DiMilla , P . A . , Stone , J . A . , Quinn , J . A . , Albeda , S . M . , and Lauffen - burger , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Maximal migration of human smooth muscle cells on ﬁbronectin and type IV collagen occurs at an intermediate attachment strength . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 729 – 737 . Duband , J . L . , Dufour , S . , Yamada , S . S . , Yamada , K . M . , and Thiery , J . P . ( 1991 ) . Neural crest cell locomotion induced by antibodies to beta 1 integrins . A tool for studying the roles of substratum molec - ular avidity and density in migration . J . Cell Sci . 98 , 517 – 532 . Goodman , S . L . , Risse , G . , . and von der Mark , K . ( 1989 ) . The E8 subfragment of laminin promotes locomotion of myoblasts over extracellular matrix . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 799 – 809 . Hendey , B . , Klee , C . B . , and F . R . Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1992 ) . Inhibition of neutrophil chemokinesis on vitronectin by inhibitors of calcineurin . Science 258 , 296 – 299 . Ho , W . C . , Heinemann , C . , Hangan , D . , Uniyal , S . , Morris , V . L . , and B . M . Chan , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Modulation of in vivo migratory function of alpha 2 beta 1 integrin in mouse liver . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 1863 – 1875 . Hotchin , N . A . , and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . The assembly of integrin adhe - sion complexes requires both extracellular matrix and intracellular Rho / Rac GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1857 – 1865 . Huttenlocher , A . , Sandborg , R . R . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1995 ) . Adhe - sion in cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 697 – 706 . Huttenlocher , A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Mod - ulation of cell migration by integrin - mediated cytoskeletal linkages and ligand - binding afﬁnity . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 1551 – 1562 . Huttenlocher , A . , Lakonishok , M . , Kinder , M . , Wu , S . , Truong , T . , Knudsen , K . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Integrin and cadherin synergy regulates contact inhibition of migration and motile activ - ity . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 515 – 526 . Huttenlocher , A . , Palecek , S . P . , Lu , Q . , Zhang , W . , Mellgren , R . L . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Ginzberg , M . H . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of cell migration by the calcium - dependent protease Calpain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32719 – 32722 . Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 – 25 . E . A . Cox et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 276 Ilic , D . , Furuta , Y . , Kanazawa , S . , Takeda , N . , Sobue , K . , Nakatsuji , N . , Nomura , S . , Fujimoto , J . , Okada , M . , Yamamoto , T . , and S . Aizawa , S . ( 1995 ) . Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhe - sion contact formation in cells from FAK - deﬁcient mice . Nature 377 , 539 – 544 . Jay , P . Y . , Pham , P . A . , Wong , S . A . , and Elson , E . L . ( 1995 ) . A mechan - ical function of myosin II in cell motility . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 387 – 393 . Klemke , R . K . , Cai , S . , Giannini , A . L . , Gallagher , P . J . , de Lanerolle , P . , and Cheresh , D . A . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of cell motility by mitogen - activated protein kinase . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 481 – 492 . Klemke , R . K . , Leng , J . , Molander , R . , Brooks , P . C . , Vuori , K . , and Cheresh , D . A . ( 1998 ) . CAS / Crk coupling serves as a “molecular switch” for induction of cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 961 – 972 . Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . , and Lim , L . ( 1995 ) . The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and ﬁlopodia in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 1942 – 1952 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 1 – 20 . Legrand , C . , Gilles , C . , Zahm , J . M . , Polette , M . , Buisson , A . C . , Kaplan , H . , Birembaut , P . , and Tournier , J . M . ( 1999 ) . Airway epi - thelial cell migration dynamics . MMP - 9 role in cell - extracellular matrix remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 517 – 529 . Lu , P . C . , Ye , H . , Maeda , M . , and Azar , D . T . ( 1999 ) . Immunolocal - ization and gene expression of matrilysin during corneal wound healing . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 40 , 20 – 27 . Maheshwari , G . , Wells , A . , Grifﬁth , L . G . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1999 ) . Biophysical integration of effects of epidermal growth factor and ﬁbronectin on ﬁbroblast migration . Biophys . J . 76 , 2814 – 2823 . Marks , P . W . , Hendey , B . , and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1991 ) . Attachment to ﬁbronectin or vitronectin makes human neutrophil migration sen - sitive to alterations in cytosolic free calcium concentration . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 149 – 158 . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1999 ) . Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1235 – 1244 . Palecek , S . P . , Cox , E . A . , Huttenlocher , A . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1999 ) . Integrin adhesion in cell migration . In : Ad - vances in Molecular and Cell Biology , vol 28 , ed . E . E . Bittar , D . R . Garrod , A . J . North , and M . A . J . Chidgey , JAI Press , Stamford , CT 367 – 388 . Palecek , S . P . , Huttenlocher , A . , Horwitz , A . F . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Physical and biochemical regulation of integrin release during rear detachment of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 929 – 940 . Palecek , S . P . , Loftus , J . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1997 ) . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature 385 , 537 – 540 . Price , L . S . , Leng , J . , Schwartz , M . A . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 1998 ) . Ac - tivation of Rac and Cdc42 by integrins mediates cell spreading . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1863 – 1871 . Ren , X . D . , Kiosses , W . B . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cy - toskeleton . EMBO J . 18 , 578 – 585 . Ridley , A . J . , Allen , W . E . , Peppelenbosch , M . , and Jones , G . E . ( 1999 ) . Rho family proteins and cell migration . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 111 – 123 . Ridley , A . J . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein Rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 , 389 – 399 . Rooprai , H . K . , Van Meter , T . , Rucklidge , G . J . , Hudson , L . , Everall , I . P . , and Pilkington , G . J . ( 1998 ) . Comparative analysis of matrix metalloproteinases by immunocytochemistry , immunohistochemis - try and zymography in human primary brain tumors . Int . J . Oncol . 13 , 1153 – 1157 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . , and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 – 648 . Ruoslahti , E . , Hayman , E . G . , Pierschbacher , M . , and Engvall , E . ( 1982 ) . Fibronectin : puriﬁcation , immunochemical properties , and biological activities . Methods Enzymol . 82 , 803 – 831 . Sander , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , van der Kammen , R . A . , and Collard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Rac down - regulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1009 – 1022 . Sato , T . , del Carmen . M . , Ovejero , Hou , P . , Heegaard , M . , Ku - megawa , N . T . , Foged , and Delaisse , J . M . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of the membrane - type matrix metalloproteinase MT1 - MMP in osteoclasts . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 589 – 596 . Trinkaus , J . P . ( 1984 ) . Cells into Organs , 2nd ed . , Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey : Prentice - Hall . van Leeuwen , F . N . , Kain , H . E . , Kammen , R . A . , Michiels , F . , Kranen - burg , O . W . , and Collard , J . G . ( 1997 ) . The guanine nucleotide ex - change factor Tiam1 affects neuronal morphology : opposing roles for the small GTPases Rac and Rho . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 797 – 807 . Zondag , G . C . , Evers , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , Janssen , L . , van der Kammen , R . A . , and Collard , J . G . ( 2000 ) . Oncogenic Ras down - regulates . Rac activity , which leads to increased Rho activity and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 775 – 782 . Integrin Regulation of Cell Protrusion Vol . 12 , February 2001 277