Overcoming Legacy Bias : Re - Designing Gesture Interactions in Virtual Reality With a San Community in Namibia Emilie Maria Nybo Arendttorp Department of Architecture , Design , and Media Technology , Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark emna @ create . aau . dk Heike Winschiers - Theophilus Namibia University of Science and Technology ( NUST ) Windhoek , Namibia hwinschiers @ nust . na Kasper Rodil Department of Architecture , Design , and Media Technology , Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark kr @ create . aau . dk Christof Magoath Donkerbos community Namibia Figure 1 : Participants in Donkerbos using VR in the bush of Namibia ABSTRACT Recent improvements in hand - tracking technologies support novel applications and developments of gesture interactions in virtual reality ( VR ) . Current implementations are mostly convention - based , originating in a Western technological context , thereby creating a legacy bias in gesture interaction implementations . With expanding application contexts and growing user groups and contexts , the design and selection of gestures need to be diversifed . In this paper we present an exploration of natural gestures , followed by their implementation in a VR application and co - design of new gestures with a marginalized San community in Namibia . This study con - tributes to the still scarce empirical work in user - driven gesture Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517549 design research , aiming to reduce legacy bias , on a methodologi - cal and technical level as well as through engaging non - WEIRD participants . Our fndings confrm the applicability of our method , combined with Partner and Priming suggested by Morris et al . , to the design of gestures inspired by natural interactions . We also consider the implementation of user - designed gestures to be nec - essary to asses usability , usefulness and technical issues in VR . Furthermore , the research directly advances the HCI agenda for diversity , through an ongoing research and design partnership with an indigenous community in Southern Africa , thereby challenging systemic bias and promoting design for the pluriverse . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Virtual reality ; Field studies ; Interaction techniques . KEYWORDS Virtual Reality , Hand Gestures , Natural Interaction , Namibia , San , User Experiences , Indigenous People , Diversity , Community CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . ACM Reference Format : Emilie Maria Nybo Arendttorp , Kasper Rodil , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , and Christof Magoath . 2022 . Overcoming Legacy Bias : Re - Designing Gesture Interactions in Virtual Reality With a San Community in Namibia . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517549 1 INTRODUCTION Virtual Reality ( VR ) has become more popular in recent years [ 62 ] with a growing number of end - users , usage contexts as well as application areas , which necessitates special focus on diversity in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . With the release of the Ocu - lus Quest 2 [ 49 ] and the HoloLens 2 [ 37 ] , hand - tracking features have promoted gesture - based interactions . Gestures are a universal communication method , through motion of body parts , such as hands and fngers , with an associated information [ 42 ] . A gesture can be understood by itself , or complementing verbal communi - cation , gestures are often used to emphasise or clarify statements , for example in intercultural conversations [ 42 ] . The use and inter - pretation difers across contexts and the choice and meaning of gestures is defned within cultural settings [ 2 , 6 , 42 ] . For instance , the pointing gesture , which can vary from using a specifc fnger to entire hand , always intends to draw the listeners attention to an object / direction . Human - Computer Interactions are based on pre - defned commands and corresponding gestures , and not neces - sary on natural everyday gestures [ 58 ] . Current VR systems might use the pinch gesture for interacting with the system’s main menu . Although considered as " natural " by numerous authors [ 7 , 45 , 71 ] , it is only used in Human - Computer Interactions and not in everyday life interactions , as noted by Norman [ 47 ] : " Natural User Interfaces are not natural " . Many gesture - based applications are designed by professional system developers often without any input from end - users [ 77 ] . Thus Romani et al . [ 58 ] , Wu et al . [ 77 ] among others , have sug - gested involving users in the gestural language creation process . Considering that there is no established gesture vocabulary for specifc applications [ 70 ] , it suggests involving end - users within the context of use into the defnition of gesture vocabularies . The majority of physiological behavior research has been done with Western , Educated , Industrialised , Rich and Democratic ( WEIRD ) informants and participants [ 22 ] , which in the context of design - ing natural interfaces and interactions have a legacy bias [ 40 ] . To overcome such a legacy bias Morris et al . [ 40 ] developed the three P’s ( Partners , Production , and Priming ) method , where WEIRD participants work around their biases , ideate and defne new and diferent gestures . However , with a growing awareness for inclu - sion and diversity in HCI , as a measure to attenuate inequity and systemic bias in technology design , research and education , " par - ticipation of underrepresented minorities must be sought in all our activities " [ 50 ] . However , at this moment there is a paucity of VR gesture research and design involving users and non - users from the Global South , as participants and even less as co - designers . Inclusive design and a focus on diversity becomes crucial in a time where new radical ideas of transforming the internet , and new modes of transformative system - social interaction as an " embodied internet " , recently labelled as the Metaverse , takes form . As Face - book’s CEO mentions the Metaverse is about " being engaged more naturally . . . we orient ourselves and think about the world through people and the interactions we have with people and what we do with them " [ 44 ] . When we imagine this virtual space , which some of the largest corporations portray as a future meeting space of people , we wonder whose embodiment and natural interactions might be implemented ? We ask ourselves how and if these thoughts about an encompassing digital World of social life and productivity refect people in the Global South , and whether user groups who were not part of the design or modelling processes have to " . . . leave his or her surrounding culture behind while interacting with the newly implemented technology " [ 36 ] ? Therefore as technology designers we need to embrace pluriversal design and " this implies a transition from One - World concepts such as ‘globalization’ and ‘global studies’ to concepts centered on the pluriverse as made up of a multiplicity of mutually - entangled and co - constituting but distinct worlds " [ 15 , p . 19 ] . The pluriverse notion challenges disciplinary confnements and broadens the horizon both geographically and mentally while paying respect and giving recognition to diversity and otherness [ 5 ] . We postulate , only through the inclusion of non - WEIRD people in the design of technologies from the onset , can we overcome legacy bias , investigate diferent approaches to interaction and at - tain pluriversal technologies and spaces encompassing many ways of thinking - and interacting with digital content in culturally , at times diferent , but personally meaningful ways . In this paper , we share our collaborative research endeavour with a remote rural San community in Southern Africa in which we jointly explored natural and in - situ self - created gestures and their applicability in a VR system ( see Figure 1 ) . We recognize that the development of a gesture vocabulary for VR is not as straight forward as simply translating human - human gestures to computer - human interactions , but that it consists of an active design pro - cess considering technological , practical and socio - cultural aspects . Through the inclusion of indigenous and marginalised communities in technology design itself , we are able to develop more diverse human - computer interactions , encompassing other value systems and new ways of thinking . This fosters the realisation of inclusive innovation whereby previously excluded populations are contribut - ing to novel concepts and technologies not only for local but also global markets . In the following section we deliberate on related work in design - ing for diversity and VR gesture design with a focus on overcoming legacy bias . We then present our empirical study with the com - munity , describing the context , interactions , and research design , followed by a detailed description of methods and fndings . We fur - ther discuss the inclusion of indigenous communities to overcome the legacy bias and open questions in regard to translating natural or in - situ created gestures into a VR system . 2 RELATED WORK In this section we frst elaborate on diversity and designing at the margins from a political , methodological and ethical perspective framing our work . We then introduce VR gesture concepts and methods focusing on overcoming legacy bias , guiding our study methodology . Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA 2 . 1 Diversity and Designing at the Margins of HCI 2 . 1 . 1 Shifing perspectives . HCI scholars have long recognised that signifcant segments of the world’s population have been over - looked [ 66 ] . However having maintained a Eurocentric perspective of " othering " [ 66 ] , applying cross - cultural lenses to highlight dif - ferences [ 73 ] , and focusing on defcits [ 21 ] has placed entire user groups " at the margins of HCI " . Embedded in a " rhetoric of compas - sion " , HCI researchers focused on developing solutions for disad - vantaged , such as poor , elderly , disabled , illiterate , under - resourced , living in under - developed countries , thereby perpetuating an asym - metrical relationship and dependency between those who " need and those who can help " [ 56 ] . Harrington [ 21 ] reminds us that though it is important to under - stand injustices " it is equally crucial not to allow these issues to singularly defne these communities . . . . The push for inclusive de - sign , or design that resists the impulse to position marginalized communities as edge cases , suggests that we consider other socio - cultural factors that impact people’s interactions with the world around them . . . . additionally , we may begin to look to engaging these communities as a way to decolonize design by thinking of design as a tool of understanding , not a skill that polarizes " us " versus " them " . " This sentiment has been shared by numerous authors promoting a " rhetoric of engagement " [ 56 ] , decolonisation lens [ 34 , 61 ] , tran - scultural approach [ 73 ] , pluriversal design [ 15 ] recognising the inherent entanglement of the worlds and their perspectives . With this in mind , the HCI community has shifted their attention to Diversity and Inclusion . However concerned with a tokenization of dealing with diversity in HCI , Dankwa and Draude [ 11 ] postulate that at the core structures and institutionalised marginalisation need to be confronted and knowledge , and practices in HCI need to be questioned frst . With a systemic oppression researchers and co - designers from marginalised groups , have equally been pushed to " the margins of HCI " [ 14 ] . Although " HCI should be aware of our inherent bias and Westernized thinking " [ 36 ] it still normalises Western studies as universally applicable , framing other contexts and user groups as exotic only worthwhile being studied because they are underserved or diferent , alongside with the judgement of the credibility of local researchers , their methods and knowl - edges [ 34 ] . Motivated to create a more just and fair society , and recognising HCI researchers’ responsibilities , debates on Diversity and Inclusion in HCI have intensifed , framed in various theories and standpoints , such as critical - race theory [ 50 ] , intersectionality [ 13 , 75 ] , African standpoint [ 1 ] , black feminist [ 14 ] , and decolonisa - tion [ 34 , 61 ] . In conclusion , we reiterate Ogbonnaya - Ogburu et al . [ 50 ] ’s statement that " participation of underrepresented minorities must be sought in all our activities " , including technology design , research and knowledge production , in our attempt to design for the pluriverse . 2 . 1 . 2 Methodological approaches to designing with marginalized groups . It has become clear that traditional methods in HCI , such as user - centred design , do not support co - design processes with marginalized populations [ 13 ] . Irani and colleagues suggest to take a community - centric view [ 24 ] , which numerous authors have adopted sharing their experiences on community grounded confict resolution as a necessity for collaboration [ 38 ] , reciprocity and time spent together with communities outside of the design agenda [ 8 ] , adoption of technology in contexts of hierarchical social structures [ 3 ] , value clashes in patriarchal systems [ 64 ] . Peters et al . [ 52 ] provides guidelines in regards to building and maintaining trust and managing expectations throughout the project . Based on empirical work with indigenous and marginalised communities in Southern Africa Winschiers - Theophilus et al . [ 72 ] conceptualised community - based co - design , framed within an Afrocentric research paradigm [ 39 ] and Ubuntu - inspired epistemology [ 65 ] . A community insider perspective emphasises the importance of mutual learning , respect for cultural values and harmony [ 28 ] , in which the object of design becomes a boundary object for joint meaning making within a participatory approach to design [ 73 ] . 2 . 1 . 3 An ethical approach : Community Interaction protocols . Dis - courses and implementations of research collaborations between indigenous communities and HCI researchers have been controver - sial . They are often pivoting between approaches and concepts of inclusion and diversity , post - and de - colonisation , protection and patronization from mostly Euro - centric perspectives . And to make matters worse , the discourses , developed ethical guidelines and project conceptualisations are led by non - indigenous academics , rendering many arguments and decisions fawed [ 1 ] . Fundamental common mis - conceptions have been that indigenous people are necessary subjects of research rather than collaborators , vulnerable , oblivious and dependent thus in need of protection , enlightening and empowerment ( points elaborated in [ 54 ] ) . Ethical guidelines have been built on these premises rather than promoting memoran - dum of understandings as they are signed between two " recognized " knowledge entities , such as universities or in this case with an in - digenous community . While ethical guidelines have been biased and non - inclusive , a number of indigenous communities have mean - while created their own research protocols , such as the San [ 23 ] . A challenge remains the lack of understanding and interpreting indigenous protocols correctly by academics [ 19 ] . We postulate that interaction protocols are to be determined jointly by both parties in - situ , continuously evolving [ 30 ] . 2 . 2 Gestures Types Previously , Billinghurst and Buxton [ 6 ] defned four gesture types , followed by Aigner et al . [ 2 ] with a more refned distinction of fve gesture types ( see Table 1 ) . These are based on a mid - air hand gesture study , analysing participants gesticulating in a muted video system . In this paper , we align our analysis with Aigner’s work and terminology . 2 . 3 Legacy Bias in Gesture Design “I think I’m kind of stuck in legacy . ” was a sentence stated by a par - ticipant of a gesture study by Morris et al . [ 41 ] . Legacy bias occurs when participants and informants transfer previous user interac - tion experiences into the design and evaluation of new interactions . While emerging technologies ofer new afordances old interaction paradigms are replicated . For instance , participants presented with a multi touch screen suggested mouse single - point interactions [ 74 ] . The implementation of the pinch gesture is yet another example of a legacy bias . The pinch gesture was inspired by resizing gestures Pointing indicates direction , not necessarily with a stretched index fnger . Semaphoric gestures provides postures and move - ments to have a specifc meaning . They can be per - formed static , dynamic and in strokes . The meaning of semaphoric gestures change based on the background and experience of the individual person . Semaphoric gestures are , therefore , the ones referred to when talk - ing about cultural gestures . Pantomimic gestures demonstrate a specifc task by mimicking a movement with specifc placements of the hands . Such as grabbing an invisible glass moving it to the mouth , mimicking how to drink . Defned by low - level gestures of grabbing , moving and releasing an object . Iconic gestures are used to communicate shapes , sizes and motion paths , and can be performed using static and dynamic gestures . Manipulation gestures are used to guide a movement , where the movement of the gesture is closely related to the movement of the object . Before continuing the gesture the person would await the response of the system , instead of performing beforehand . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . Table 1 : Gesture types adopted from Aigner et al . [ 2 ] in Myron Krueger’s Videoplace from the eighties [ 43 ] . Commercial VR systems implemented the pinch gesture , which is easily de - tected by the system and can be learned efortlessly by the users . A study conducted by Beşevli et al . [ 4 ] identifed the pinch among the preferred gestures despite other gestures being more practical and having greater afordance . This result could be due to the bias of the participants being WEIRD [ 31 ] , therefore making judgement on the basis of their previous experiences . The TULIP menu explored the usability of a menu placed on the hand , with items ftted on the fnger tips and the use of pinching for selection [ 7 ] . A usability test showed that it was difcult to learn even though it was believed to take advantage of natural asymmetry . A concern for development of new interactions is autonomous technology , from where all interactions have been designed based on what is technical possible [ 27 ] rather than human comfort . Re - sulting in the user having to adapt and learn how to use the tech - nology . Having a lack of concern for the human input can cause stress and fatigue for the user in the long term . Furthermore , the technical limited interactions might be impossible to perform by the user or have an illogical imposed functionality [ 33 ] . Developers and users who have accepted technology to control the development can be blinded to continue developing with the human in focus [ 46 ] making them infuenced by legacy bias . 2 . 4 Exploring New Gestures for VR Vogiatzidakis and Koutsabasis [ 70 ] reviewed 47 papers describing gesture studies , of which only 15 use a method to reduce legacy bias in their gesture elicitation of mid - air interactions . 45 out of 47 gesture papers used the Wizard of Oz method in their experiments , without ever implementing the gestures identifed . Among those 45 , only four studies [ 10 , 25 , 51 , 78 ] extracted new interaction gestures for VR . Yan et al . [ 78 ] recorded gestures for later development of a functional prototype . Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA 2 . 4 . 1 Mimicking real world . Natural interactions are to be created Diverse user groups , especially the ones with little prior exposure based on how people normally interact with the world surrounding to technologies , can diminish legacy bias if included in early stage them [ 69 , 76 ] , making use of afordance and signifers for inter - design and testing of gestures . actions to be self - explanatory [ 46 ] . Singh [ 60 ] suggests that VR menu design should try to mimic the real world and not be limited 3 RESEARCH CONTEXT to the same 2D world seen on a computer or mobile phone . They This study is part of a wider project concerned with the digitization conceptualized a VR cat that follows the user around , functioning of indigenous knowledge by indigenous people . It is carried out as a tool box using direct interaction to grab objects and place them within a collaborative context , following established protocols and in the scene . Yu and Bowman [ 79 ] explored waving gestures , such based on previous studies by other afliated research teams . In the as palm facing inwards and waving the hand towards the body . next sections we frst present the community and the collabora - They took inspiration from Star Wars and how we signal one an - tion context before describing the research team and community other , resulting in participants suggesting that the gestures were participants of this specifc study and the research approach . familiar and intuitive . Wu et al . [ 77 ] investigated the use of natural hand gestures in the context of online shopping , comparing users’ 3 . 1 The San Community in Donkerbos own gestures designs to ray cast interactions . Compared to the The San , a collective of diferent tribes , constitutes about 30 . 000 ray casting interaction , their design gestures were preferred . The people living in Namibia , which represents approximately 1 . 5 % designed gestures included double - tap , and shrinking enlarging of the population [ 17 ] . Indigenous to the region , they are known objects , swiping , etc . Similarly Kuhnert [ 59 ] made the hands act to have been one of the oldest tribes of hunter - gatherers on the natural inside of VR . For instance when pressing down button , a African continent . In contemporary Namibia , San people are classi - the fnger tip also visually bends seemingly reacting to the surface fed as marginalised , supported by of the button . This can numerous initiatives including create the same experience as the rubber a dedicated government directorate responsible to increase their hand illusion , where the user feels that the visual efect afects their access to resources , educational success , and own hand [ 68 ] . agency [ 16 ] . Donkerbos is remotely situated in the Central - Eastern part of 2 . 4 . 2 Methods overcoming legacy bias . Morris et al . [ 41 ] have devel - Namibia , in the middle of the Kalahari Desert , only reachable by oped the three P’s of Production , Priming , and Partners method to foot , donkey , horse or 4x4 car . Approximately 200 , mostly Ju / ’hoansi address legacy bias and encourage the creation of new independent speakers , were resettled to this communal farm land , on which they gestures . have built their own houses with available materials , such as metal In Production the designers think of as many gestures as possible sheets ( see Figure 2 : left ) with only few households having solar for the same thing , looking for new original ideas . This method panels for electricity . There is limited access to water via the com - was used by Chan et al . [ 9 ] , asking users to suggest three gestures munity borehole ( see Figure 2 : right ) , which works through a solar for the same interaction . However , users struggled to suggest three panel in the day , and a costly diesel generator allows for pumping gestures , especially after already having identifed one preferred during the night . Since 2020 they have a steady cell phone and gesture . Wu et al . [ 77 ] suggest a simplifed 1 - to - 2 method where internet connection through a nearby telecommunication tower . two gestures are elicited for one task . The settlement consists of more than 30 households , usually Priming is asking the designer about new technology that does comprising of a couple with 3 - 7 children . Primary learners attend a not exist yet , and how they want to interact with it . North et al . government school approximately 5 km from the settlement . Most [ 48 ] found that people who interact with physical items frst tend community members have not completed secondary school but a to transfer the natural real life interaction into their design ideas . few speak conversational English . They sustain themselves with The fnal method is Partners , where gestures are used to com - home gardening and wild plants , minimal government subsidies , municate to a partner without words . The suggestion from Morris and other supporting income , such as craft sales and temporal et al . is to do it through a game similar to charades as the game work . Everyday life takes place outside with daily activities , which encourages the partner to make as many attempts of the gestures are diferent for women and men . The women’s chores include as needed until interpreted correctly by the other partner . Each taking care of and raising the children , washing clothes , collecting of the three P’s methods can be independently integrated into a frewood and cooking . They also make jewelry from beads , knit , and gesture study . Vogiatzidakis and Koutsabasis [ 70 ] identifed 15 of perform traditional dances on rare visitors occasions . The men take the 47 reviewed papers which made use of one or more of the three care of their small life stocks , while few also go hunting . In 2020 P’s . Production was the most frequently used technique . they built a temporal living museum as well as started operating a community camp site for visitors . In the evenings , they come 2 . 4 . 3 Inclusion of diverse design participants . The exclusion of par - together and sometimes watch movies on the laptop , or dance , but ticipants from other cultures of in gestures limits the the design at no point is there any consumption of alcohol in the village . development [ 40 ] . It is important to include non - WEIRD users to question and challenge the development of gestures used for inter - action . As an example , climbing a ladder in VR is an established 3 . 2 Research Collaboration with the San mechanic , referred in literature as an asynchronous bi - manual sym - Community in Donkerbos metric interaction [ 26 ] . However , a group of indigenous people A long term collaboration between the local University and the experienced this seemingly simple implementation of climbing a San community in Donkerbos was established in 2017 under the ladder only using ones hands as a highly unnatural interaction [ 54 ] . auspices of the inclusive and collaborative tech innovation hub , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . Figure 2 : The left of the fgure shows a typical dwelling in the community . The right of the fgure shows the community borehole which was seed funded by the Embassy of Finland . The frst inno - vation project entailed the design and production of augmented reality souvenirs , where the proft of the purchase is paid into the community account . Over the years numerous other projects were initiated either by the community , the researchers or the industry . Each project is carefully scrutinised by the community in regards to possible benefts and harms and by the researchers in regards to fea - sibility and only commenced upon consensus . The involvement of the local telecommunication industry is driven by a national move - ment of rural development yet under the collaboration with the University promoting cutting - edge technology development and innovations . Thus they are providing funding without constraints on the research and innovation activities . The impact of the projects on the community and individual members is manifold and intertwined afecting technical skills and capacity building , access to resources and infrastructures , as well as socio - cultural practices and values . For example , individuals volun - tarily participating in the projects have over time been exposed to diferent technologies , such as AR / VR ( [ 53 ] [ 54 ] ) , web applications , and multi - media productions , being trained alongside in among others computer literacy , media production , website development and maintenance . Besides donations of cell phones , the community produced their own COVID video for a competition in which they won a laptop . All devices are shared among community members . Through access to the internet they have also been able to apply for several local ( collaboration ) funds , with only mentoring sup - port from us . Their self - initiated camp site and living museum has recently received infrastructural funding and a full website devel - oped in collaboration with local students . In terms of socio - cultural practices and values we have observed a number of shifts over time including the rediscovery and pride of their traditions , increased involvement of women in technical activities , improvement of lan - guage skills , but equally internal disputes around the fnances and the new roles taken up by individuals . Many of the debates around expressed conficts were transformed into community dialogues facilitated by our late colleague , a San woman , researcher and ac - tivist . We acknowledge that Suchman’s notion of entry into social relations for design to happen [ 63 ] carries responsibilities of all stakeholders involved . We equally recognize that working together transcends the immediate research objective and echoes the points by Wong - Villacres and colleagues , who stress " . . . potential that might be harnessed for realizing techno - social opportunities . . . " [ 75 ] can be an innovative space at the margin . The VR gesture design project collaboration builds on the previ - ously created relations , following the established communication protocol as endorsed by the community [ 30 ] . It emphasises con - tinuous communication pre - and post - feld , as well as in - situ . It determines the role of individual community members such as in this case one community member being engaged at all levels in - cluding research activity design , documentation , facilitation , and co - authoring . The paper and reviewer comments have been shared and discussed through the community researcher with community representatives and participants . Responses and edits have been verbally communicated for insertion in the paper , for which fnal approval for dissemination is granted while awaiting publication acceptance . In regards to the impact of the participation in the VR study , the community members acknowledge that there is no immediate fnancial beneft . They said : " We participate in technology sessions because we want to learn , we want to explore new things , refresh our mind " and " We do our own exploration frst and make our own decision about it later " referring to the use , usefulness and possible applications . In regards to the VR it has been agreed to implement one of the San stories with the new gestures in the coming year . 3 . 3 Study Team 3 . 3 . 1 Researchers . The research team consisted of an Erasmus exchange post - graduate student from a European University , co - supervised by an associate Professor from the sending university and a local professor in Namibia , both specialised in participatory design of technologies with indigenous communities . One commu - nity researcher who has been coordinating and facilitating research activities as well as contributing to the design and conceptual dis - cussions has been engaged in all previous collaboration projects as well as has attended specialised workshops and training in media production , crowd sourcing strategies , and development . 3 . 3 . 2 Community participants . During each visit’s welcome meet - ing the diferent projects , tasks ahead and criteria for participation Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA are discussed . Community members then or later select which activ - ities they would like to be part of depending on their own interest and availability . In the instance of the VR gesture study for ex - ample where the VR exploration session expands over two days , individual participants join at their own convenience . Our commu - nity co - researcher however ensures that there is a steady stream of individuals , with sessions only being interrupted by extreme weather conditions , insufcient day light or lunch . The participants representing the entire community spectrum , vary in terms of age , education , technology exposure , personality , and any other cate - gory possibly of interest . We recorded declared estimated ages of participants considering that some do not have an identifcation card and many do not know their exact birth date . Thus the range is supposedly between 18 and 65 years . In regard to formal educa - tion most attended primary school ( grade 7 ) and a few attended secondary school without completing it . Prior technology exposure depends on whether the individual participated in previous tech - nology activities under the collaboration or has access to devices otherwise . The community cell - phones and laptop are usually di - rectly operated by a few members only . With community members choosing project participation , especially when run concurrently , we observed for example , that the VR participants did not get in - volved in the website project . Thus most of the VR participants experienced one controller - based VR session in 2019 [ 54 ] , and twice VR as part of this gesture study . 3 . 4 Research Approach This study is based on a pragmatic research paradigm using Re - search through Design ( RtD ) . Making use of methods and processes from design practice , it can result in new design methods , research that allows for efectively applying the theories produced and new products and systems that in itself is a type of implicit , theoretical contribution [ 81 ] . RtD in HCI is a practice that aims to improve cur - rent state - of - the - art technologies by enabling new afordances and interactions between humans and technology . In RtD , researchers play an active role in the construction of desirable technologies [ 80 ] . Gaver [ 18 ] promotes RtD as an explorative tool to determine what is possible rather than as a systematic and meticulous approach . For example Kauhondamwa et al . [ 29 ] applied RtD in their co - design of a wearable augmented reality product with San youth , starting with an exploration of self , technology , and design concepts before launching into the co - design and development process itself . A similar process was used in this study , as is described in the next section . 4 METHODOLOGY The research consisted of a number of phases as depicted in Figure 3 . First an exploratory study was conducted in the feld consisting of one gesture session and one technology VR exploration session . Interpretation of the data from the feld formed the basis of a design used to implement a prototype for the VR headset Oculus Quest 2 . The developed prototype was brought to the feld for re - design based on three sessions , followed by a refection phase . Figure 3 : Research phases . The blue fgures represent aca - demics , the yellow fgures represent the participants from the San community . The ones with hats represent San com - munity facilitators and researchers 4 . 1 Exploration of Gestures and VR The frst phase conducted in the community consisted of a natural gesture exploration and a VR application session . 4 . 1 . 1 Partner based gesture exploration sessions . During this study one gesture session was conducted during the exploration and another during the re - design phase . The frst gesture session formed the basis of the design and functioned as a method to observe if the gesture types of Aigner et al . [ 2 ] were valid in Donkerbos . The second gesture session was conducted to resolve ambiguities and open questions in regard to gesture interpretations ( we therefore describe both in this section ) . Both sessions were partner - based , following the suggestion of Morris et al . [ 40 ] , charades was the inspiration for the gesture sessions . The participants were divided into groups of respectively two and four participants per group . In both sessions one participant ( gesturer ) was showing gestures , where the other participants responded to the gestures ( gesture - receivers ) . By using the method of Partner , the gestures performed will be natural and based on the San communities’ own gestures used . The frst session was attended by 12 participants ( 8 men , 4 women ) forming 6 groups of 2 . For the second session there were 24 participants ( 15 men , 9 women ) forming 6 groups of 4 . To ensure the groups could not see each other while gesticulating , the active group walked behind a large car to keep them out of sight . Within the groups , they were instructed to stand far away from each other to prohibit the temptation of verbal communication . The assign - ments for the participants got explained strictly through speech and a notebook containing drawings and text of the assignments . Throughout the sessions there was no deviation from the protocol . The setup consisted of one interviewer , a camera recording gestures , a translator when needed as not all participants spoke English , and one group of participants , thereby , either two or four participants . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . This frst gesture session consisted of three diferent assignments with the intention of uncovering the fve gesture types described by Aigner et al . [ 2 ] , comparing if the participants in Donkerbos made use of the same gesture types . The participants were to go through the assignments of drawing , direction and charades . Drawing assignment . The drawing assignment consisted of the gesturer showing simple shapes such as squares , circles and trian - gles making it possible to observe whether or not the participants used iconic gestures for shapes and sizes . The gesture - receiver was given a piece of paper and a pen to draw the shapes and sizes performed by the gesturer . Direction assignment . For direction the gesturer was to perform a gesture for each : walk closer , walk away , left , right , closer right , and away left . The gesture - receiver were to walk in the direction they interpreted the gesture performed . Charade assignment . The gesturer had to perform actions such as : eating , move a large round object , move a small / tiny object , drinking . The gesture - receiver had to tell the gesturer and facilitator what they thought the gesture meant to confrm the meaning of the gesture . The frst two assignments provided opportunities for iconic and semaphoric gestures . Charades allowed for a more specifc search of pantomimic and manipulative gestures . Second gesture session . This session was designed to answer very specifc gesture questions which arose after the frst gesture session . These questions were not answered during the frst session . We wanted to investigate specifcally whether upon the gesture move forward no one , one person or all would move . We also wanted to elicit gestures for deletion and creation of object , as well as object - relative positioning . Thus one gesturer was given the instructions as itemized below . • Move forwards gesture without looking at one of the three group members • Delete the tent • Move forwards gesture without looking at one of the three group members • Create a fre • Move forwards gesture without looking at one of the three group members • Place the fre next to the pot Among the 3 gesture - receivers one held a tent image , one a pot and the third person had a fre image and another image lying on the foor in front of her / him . Thus the gesturer performed for all 3 receivers . 4 . 1 . 2 Exploration of VR session . The purpose of this session was to expose community members for their frst time to a gesture - based application in VR . The Hands Physics Lab ( HPL ) [ 59 ] on an Oculus Quest 2 was used . This allowed the participants to experience what is possible , which then could inform their design . The participation was voluntarily , which resulted in 27 community members ended up participating in their own pace , and data from these sessions was not explored further . The VR headset was set up inside a gazebo ( see Figure 4 ) . Two of the sides on the gazebo were opened , allowing the community to watch and to let enough light in for the headset to track the hands . If there was too much light , or if the setting was too dark , it could infuence the tracking on the Quest 2 . A San who spoke English took charge within the VR gazebo after having familiarized himself with the system as well as having discussed the research intentions . Not all participants spoke English hence the need for a San facilitator to guide the participants through the possible interactions , without giving too much guidance . 4 . 2 Prototyping a VR Campsite Contrary to previous VR explorations in Donkerbos , where fc - tional and unreal scenarios where demonstrated , we decided to replicate parts of their everyday life . As the community was cur - rently planning the construction of a campsite for tourists , yet could not visualise it , we decided to create a VR campsite planning application . Most importantly dominant gestures elicitated during the exploration phase were to be implemented . Unity [ 67 ] was used to develop the prototype for the Oculus Quest 2 using the Oculus Integration package from Unity Asset Store . In this package a sample scene exist making use of buttons responding to hands . These buttons were reused to activate eight Figure 4 : Gazebo setup seen from inside and outside the gazebo Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA diferent objects within the prototype . In the Oculus package vir - tual hands are available that can interact with the buttons . Taking inspiration from the conversation with the San regarding future plans for the campsite , objects such as tents , a freplace , a gazebo , toilets etc . were included as place - able objects . Eight objects were 3d - modelled and incorporated , which could be activated by the use of one of the eight buttons . The empty environment was created as a terrain object from inside Unity , making it look as much as possible as a the cleared campsite in Donkerbos . Five movement buttons were added for : forward , backward , left , right and clock - wise rotation , and eight buttons for moving the objects . Two panels used to contain the object buttons and movement buttons can be seen in Figure 5a . Three static gestures got implemented based on the frst gesture session . The static gestures were stop , pointing and thumbs - up . A delay of 2 seconds was added to the point gesture , reducing the change for selecting an object by accident . The thumbs - up and stop gestures were easily detected by the headset . The thumbs - up deselected the active object , as indicating " done with moving this object " . The stop gesture was implemented to halt the movement of an object once activated . An animated dog was implemented to walk randomly around the scene at all time to mimic real life . In Donkerbos , there are many semi - domesticated dogs roaming around people and food but hardly being considered a pet . The animated dog was implemented to see which and if any spontaneous natural gestures occur as a reaction to the animated dog eating the unprotected food object ( see the dog in Figure 5b ) . 4 . 3 Re - Design of VR Prototype Participants frst used the VR application , then whenever four had completed they were engaged in the second gesture session and afterwards in the co - design session as a group . We ensured that each group had an English speaker to translate between the academics and the community members throughout the session . 4 . 3 . 1 Evaluating the virtual campsite prototype . The VR evaluation session was once more setup in a gazebo , as in Section 4 . 1 . 2 , to optimize the performance of the hand tracking . This time all sides but one was closed to hide the one using the VR headset , so the rest of the community could not see how to interact with the system . To evoke natural gestures it was important that each person made their own gestures and attempts of using the system . Closing the sides of the gazebo made sure participants did not copy each other . There were always three people inside the gazebo , one technical assistant in charge of the VR headset and camera , one San facilitator , and one San participant . 25 participants ( 16 men , 9 women ) tried the prototype . The technical assistant made sure the VR environment was always calibrated having the correct foor level , responsible for starting and stopping the video recording inside the headset , and that the camera outside was aimed at the participant’s hands . This provided a clear image of the gestures performed and in what context they were performed , Figure 6 shows an example of com - bining recordings for a participant . To make the recording on the inside of the headset , the proximity sensor of the VR headset had to be covered with a small piece of paper attached with a tape . As such , the sensor did not detect when the headset was removed ( a ) The panels showing all eight object buttons at the top panel , and the buttons used for movement at the bottom panel . ( b ) Image of the dog walking around and the fre object being active . The yellow outline of the fre indicates that the object is active . Figure 5 : Screenshots of the prototype designed for testing in Donkerbos Figure 6 : Recordings of the VR evaluation , seen from outside ( left ) and inside ( right ) the headset from the assistant to the participant keeping the recording going . Combined with the recordings the facilitator made observations CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . of the participants during the refection session with the other re - searchers . As the facilitator was San many observations could be made from both speech and actions . With the language barrier it would not have been possible to ask follow up questions nor help the participant if being stuck . Many observations can get lost when the facilitator does not understand what the participant is doing . Strong positive outbursts by a participant , would not have been understood without a San facilitator . The recordings resulted in a 4 hours and 28 minutes long video which was analysed focusing on the use of gestures and the times they occurred . Hence observing the use of the stop , pointing , and thumbs - up gestures as mentioned in the following list : • The stop hand : Whether all participants used the stop hand gesture , and how long it took them to fgure it out . Four categories were made to diferentiate between speeds : 1 , instant . 2 , fast . 3 , trying out something else , but eventually uses it . 4 , never used . • Pointing : Whether the participants tried to use the pointing gestures , if they were successful or if the cause of problems was a technical issue or due to the participants way of point - ing . • Thumbs - up : Whether the participants used the thumbs - up and when . If it was after placing an object , after being com - pletely done within the system , or another reason . • Other gestures : If any of the participants used another ges - ture trying to interact with the system . 4 . 3 . 2 Co - design session for further development . Each group ses - sion consisted of four community participants and two academics , who sat around a table with a printed empty scene and control board from the VR as well as individual objects and gestures printed on cards for easy arrangements during the design session . The printed gestures can be seen in Figure 7 . There were also empty cards for creation of new objects and gestures . The participants were prompted to comment on the prototype : icons , the objects , imple - mented gestures , and decision on buttons vs gestures on a case by case scenario . Asking the community regarding this new sys - tem that does not exist yet , followed the method of Priming by Morris et al . [ 40 ] , in a co - design context where the participants invent and show gestures for new interactions . As the participants before the design session had both participated in a gesture session and VR session we followed North et al . [ 48 ] suggestion of having the participants do something in real life before designing , in or - der to transfer real - life natural gestures into VR . Thus we had a lunch break and community members were engaged in making fre , cooking , and eating . In the design session the participants were encouraged to criticise , include new ideas , and change existing features . Scenarios were discussed and played through using the cards and the empty scene . These combined tools functioned as a tangible paper prototype [ 20 ] . The answers from each group were recorded on video and notes , with a pre - formatted table containing the following interactions : Object manipulation : create , delete , select ; Movement : Left , right , forwards , backwards , rotation ; Scaling : Bigger , smaller ; Select type : Seeing options and swiping between them . 5 FINDINGS FROM THE FIELD STUDIES The following sections present the gestures observed and video recordings during both feld studies thereby including two gesture sessions , reactions from two VR sessions , and desired changes from the co - design session . 5 . 1 Observed Gestures in the Field A total of 119 gestures were recorded during the three assignments of drawing , direction and charades . The gestures were counted and analysed based on a 14 . 20 minutes edited video from the session . The 14 . 20 minutes is a shortened version only containing snippets of when a participant was performing a gesture . The observed gestures got compared to the gesture types of Aigner et al . [ 2 ] to identify the used gestures . The 119 gestures were categorized into the 5 defned gesture types of pointing , semaphoric , pantomimic , Figure 7 : Illustrations of all the recorded gestures that were used during the gesture sessions Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA iconic , manipulation . The gestures were noted down in a separate document containing the timestamp of when it was used , who performed the gestures , and a textual description of the gesture . The recordings were categorised in chronological order , meaning all similar assignments were sorted together . So when analysing the video all drawing assignments came in order . This made it possible to compare the diferent solutions and to determine which gesture type was used to solve the assignments . Figure 8 visualize which gesture type were used for the three diferent assignments and the feedback gestures of correct or wrong . Semaphoric and pointing gestures were the main gestures used for the direction assignment e . g . walk away , left . The fgure shows the usage of all fve gestures types , however with cultural variations from Aigner et al . [ 2 ] type descriptions . 5 . 1 . 1 Similarities in pointing , iconic , and manipulation Gestures . Pointing and iconic gestures were not observed to have a cultural diference as they matched the descriptions of Aigner et al . [ 2 ] . Dur - ing the drawing assignment of the frst feld study , the participants were observed to use iconic gestures not noticing any cultural dif - ferences . Pointing gestures were at times replaced with gaze , as the gesturer looked in the direction of the intended gesture - receiver instead of pointing . It was noticed that the gesture - receivers did not move unless they were sure the gesture was intended for them . We confrm Aigner et al . [ 2 ] fndings that people tend not to use manipulation gestures . Only one participant used manipulation gestures to solve the drawing assignments . Drawing slowly in the air waiting for the gesture - receiver after each line , waiting for a reaction before continuing with a new line . These gestures were difcult for the partner to follow which was clearly seen on the drawing on his paper . The other groups made use of iconic gestures , completing the shape and size in one go , allowing the gesture - receiver to have more than one line visualized . Only one person during both gestures sessions made use of manipulations gestures in a total of two times . 5 . 1 . 2 Diferences in semaphoric and pantomimic Gestures . Semaphoric gestures change based on cultural diference [ 2 ] [ 42 ] [ 6 ] . However , the static thumbs - up and stop hand and the dynamic index fnger moving back and forth as a " wrong " or " no " recorded in Donker - bos is equally encountered in other parts of the world . However , another gesture was also used for " wrong " or " no " in Donkerbos , where a lose hand was shaking side to side . The " no " gestures can be seen on the three bottom gestures in Figure 7 K , L and M . 5 . 1 . 3 Contextual diferences . in the semaphoric gestures were ob - served during the charades assignment of the frst feld study . An example was showing " drinking " . The motion of gesturing drinking can in Global North contexts be shown by pouring water from a jug into a cup and drinking it . In Donkerbos a participant mimicked the cup in his hand and then bend down as if flling the cup from a barrel or a river . Although still being an understandable gesture in the Global North it is not normal getting water from a barrel in everyday life . 5 . 1 . 4 Gender diferences . where recorded in gestures showing " eat - ing " . The women scooped with their hands the imaginary food to their mouth . The men made a thumbs - up gesture with both hands and moved them alternately up and down to the mouth . This semaphoric gesture used to mimic eating would properly not be seen nor understood in a Global North context . All the male Figure 8 : The gesture type distribution of the 119 gestures used during the frst gesture session , divided into the three diferent assignments and feedback gestures . The colors of the gesture types correspond to the colors used in Table 1 . Note that there was a total of six participants , but the participants may have tried more than one gesture method to solve the assignments CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . participants showed this gesture and the gesture - receivers did not need many seconds to guess its meaning . The gestures used for eating can be seen in Figure 9 . Even more interesting was the ges - ture to rotate an object , whereby men used a pantomimic gesture of grabbing the imaginary object with both hands and imitate a rotation efort , while the women used iconic dynamic gestures showing a motion path turning the fnger to indicate rotation , in like " ordering " movement . 5 . 1 . 5 Point and gaze or pantomimic gestures for selection . Having more than one person to guide , the gesturer indicated who should perform the action by either looking at or pointing towards the gesture - receiver who were to do it . When showing " remove tent object " three of the gesturers used iconic dynamic gestures to shape the paper and not the tent , where the other three groups did not refer to the object nor the paper . All six groups used semaphoric gestures to show " move it away " or " put it down " . There was given little to no consideration to the paper or what was represented on it indicating that when selecting something pantomimic gesture are not to be used , but rather pointing or gaze . However , when " creating fre " was requested from a receiver who had the fre sign and toilet sign , the gesture of simply picking up an object led to the receiver picking up both or randomly the wrong one . Pointing did not help the receiver as it was not clear which one . At that point the use of pantomimic gesture seemed to be the solution , as when staring to make a gesture representing fre the right paper got picked up ( Figure 9 ) . 5 . 2 Reactions to and Gestures Used in the VR 5 . 2 . 1 Observed VR reactions . VR has the capability to engage and immerse the user in their visual surroundings [ 57 ] . The reactions of the participants in Donkerbos demonstrated immersion . When the participants were exploring the Hand Physics Lab [ 59 ] big smiles occurred among the users ( and the audience ) . They were jumping , yelling , exploring and hitting out in the air completely engaged in the experience . Even though all expressed excitement for the experience , the men were more contained in their reactions . For instance , one feature of the application was a small skeleton that the user can pick up , which will make it move . The men grabbed the skeleton and quickly let go shaking their hand . The women picked it up and screamed out loud while also shaking their hand . The skeleton experience linked previous user participants with the next ones , encouraging them to pick it up . Even the participants who had not tried the system yet joined in the fun , which confrms previous exploration of VR as in creating collective experiences [ 54 ] . A major diference to previous experiences with the community has been the eagerness of the women to participate in the VR projects . Even motherhood did not hold them back from exploring the VR , with their babies and toddler tied to the back during the experience . 5 . 2 . 2 Gestures used in the VR prototype . Three gestures were im - plemented in the prototype ; stop , pointing and thumbs - up . The stop hand were to be used when wanting to stop an object from moving from where the majority used the stop hand instantly . Two out of 25 participants never used the stop gesture , from where one never got an object to move . The distribution of the use of the stop gesture can be seen in Figure 10 . The other two gestures , point - ing and thumbs - up , were rarely used , and often by accident . The pointing gesture caused problems as the participant had to stay still for 2 seconds for the gesture to work . Although , sometimes the participants were relaxing their hands with the index fnger pointed out , resulting in unintended selection through the point . The thumbs - up gesture was sometimes used when the participant was done , and used a state of showing complete . When objects were close enough many tried to grab them and control the objects using their bare hands . This furthermore shows the immersion of the participants . The dog did create reactions among the participants . The men seemed to fnd it funny , while some women were afraid of it . When the dog went to eat the food , it caused participants to try and scare it by waving it away or getting it to stop using the stop gesture . Meaning that the dog was successful in recreating the natural reactions to the dog eating unattended food . It was observed that the buttons were more intuitive for the creation of objects than for moving them . For the latter at times the facilitator had to provide usage guidance . The elderly participants took longer in understanding the system , where as the younger participants got comfortable and wanted to stay in there . Figure 9 : The two diferent gestures used for showing eating is represented on the left and middle image . The right image is a fre gesture performed by a participant Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Having experienced controllers previously 20 out 24 participants stated they preferred hand gesture interactions . Figure 10 : Elicitation of the stop gesture and how fast the participants were to perform the gesture 5 . 2 . 3 Usage of the implemented gestures in Donkerbos . The three implemented gestures were discussed with the community to under - stand in which way they are used in the context of their everyday lives . First and foremost it is important to understand life takes place outside in Donkerbos , meaning that communication at times takes place over a distance using gestures . An example is the stop gesture . The community expressed this gesture to be used when one person is walking away , turns around , and can then receive a stop gesture and a wave to come back . To get the attention of the person in the frst place , one could yell for them , but the distance is too great to actually communicate through speech . The example given by the community of when the pointing gesture is used , was when telling children to go and pick something up . This could be for an item a few meters away or indicate a direction for an item far away . Thereby functioning as a general direction gesture or for a specifc item . The thumbs - up gesture occurs as feedback within the community , as a positive response used for example when having nice food . 5 . 3 Co - design Session Six groups consecutively participated in the co - design session . We report fndings on group participation , their discussion of changes and then the comments upon the implemented gestures in the prototype . 5 . 3 . 1 Group participation and dynamics . Each group was highly engaged in the design session with all individuals actively participat - ing . Having just experienced the VR prototype with a combination of buttons and gestures , the one group chose to work with one interaction type only while the other groups all had combinations of buttons and gestures . This in itself does not suggest any type of legacy bias , but rather diverse inspirations of the groups . It was surprising to see how creative they were in combining buttons to solve tasks that others chose to solve with gestures . The opposite case was a group which was highly explorative in the gesture space , but did not include buttons beyond initiating a chain of gestures ( later described as composite gestures ) . Each group , composed of individuals with diferent personalities , had their own dynamics and focus , as we typically see when engag - ing diferent groups in exploratory design work . As an example , all groups were told that they could change whatever they experienced in the prototype and frame it as they would like to . As a result , some groups quickly had ideas for change , while others were spending more time before deciding on changes necessary . All groups were active in sharing ideas in regards to the application , its content and interaction techniques . This speaks to the openness of the session in enabling the participants with very little VR experience to ideate and re - design VR as a technology . 5 . 3 . 2 Interaction techniques . Five out of six groups were confdent in creating interaction commands with a mixture of buttons and gestures . For instance , the gesture to select features and appear - ances ( like color or type ) for an object , was often designed using a combination of buttons and gestures : the button should activate the diferent feature options , while a gesture , e . g . pointing , should be used to select the appearance of said object . Figure 11 provides an aggregation of created gestures and button use , showing a pref - erence for gesture use . 5 . 3 . 3 Review of implemented gestures . From this session , it became clear that the stop hand was correctly understood and implemented in the prototype , as all groups wanted to keep this gesture . Corre - sponding with the fnding from the VR session , where the stop hand came naturally to 23 of the 25 participants . All of the groups wanted to stop the movement of the object using the stop gesture , rather than having to keep showing the movement gesture or holding the movement button . The thumbs - up gesture was still wanted despite few using it . It should however only be used when everything is in place and used as a way of saying " done " . It could also be a way of saying " done , now exit " . The pointing gesture was suggested to select objects as implemented . However , the prototype experienced some technical difculties as one had to be precise in the pointing gesture for it to work . When the groups suggested the pointing gestures they showed how to use it , it was a short and precise point , suggesting the implemented delay of 2 seconds should be deleted or shorter , despite sometimes being used by accident . 6 DISCUSSION While multiple methods exist in eliciting natural gestures or co - designing and creating gestures ready for implementation , we pos - tulate that the decision to use natural gestures in VR is not as straightforward as ’just coding’ them , but certain aspects need to be considered . 6 . 1 Natural Gestures to Virtual Reality : Questions of Transferability Before discussing the transferability of natural gestures necessitates setting a conceptual boundary on the transferability concept itself . Research in gesture transferability exists , for example as seemless transferability of gestures across device types ( for example [ 12 ] ) . In the context of this work we discuss transferability on two dimen - sions . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . Figure 11 : The distribution of answers regarding the use of buttons , gestures or a combination of both . Please note that even though scale is one category in this fgure , the participants showed two diferent gestures for bigger and smaller • a : transfer of natural gestures from natural settings into interaction schemes in VR • b : transfer of natural gestures from natural settings , and their meaningfulness in other contexts as interaction schemes in VR 6 . 1 . 1 The transfer of natural gestures from natural setings into in - teraction schemes in VR . We recognize that natural gestures used in human - human communication are not necessarily directly trans - ferable to interactions in VR . For example , we implemented the thumbs - up gesture frequently used in everyday life by the San ( and other people around the globe ) in the VR prototype . How - ever , during the evaluation session only 2 of the 25 participants used the thumbs - up gesture indicating that they are satisfed with the fnal placement of an object . Upon further discussion with the community it was agreed that the thumbs - up does not serve its purpose in the VR and should only be used as a concluding gesture to close the programme . On the other hand , the stop gesture was immediately adopted in VR interactions . We conclude that natural gestures suggested by users need to be implemented and evaluated to assess their usefulness in VR . The sessions in Donkerbos showed that natural gestures became manipulation gestures in the context of the design of the prototype . Aigner et al . [ 2 ] states that manipulation gestures rarely are used in real life , which we confrmed . However , that does not mean they must be avoided in the context of VR . When using direction gestures the participants made use of semaphoric gestures . When given a " come closer " gesture a human need time to react and act upon the gesture . However , in the context of a system one would expect the system to react instantly . If the system does not react instantly there is a chance the user will either think it is broken or that they are doing something wrong [ 46 ] . Hence , the semaphoric gestures observed in the feld transform into manipulations gestures within the context of VR as the system is expected to respond immediately . These fndings suggest that the applicability of natural gestures in VR must be explored before a wider implementation . 6 . 1 . 2 Transfer of gestures between contexts : technical and human considerations . Transferability of natural gestures and their mean - ingfulness in other natural settings as interaction in VR has not been investigated in this study ( to the best of our knowledge nor in other studies ) . Clearly , there is a natural research point for the future to investigate usefulness of gestures from Donkerbos in perhaps more VR saturated contexts . As an example , throughout the co - design groups there was no agreement on the gesture for deleting an ob - ject . The participants used diferent gestures , such as " put it down " or " go away " . They also distinguished between deleting objects and people . This confrms fndings by Rodil et al . [ 55 ] , in which a group of indigenous designers agreed upon " go back where you came from " as an ontological concept rather than a visual " delete " metaphor in the interface . Similarly , the Donkerbos participants suggested for people to literally " walk away beyond the horizon " , and created the corresponding gesture . These gestures might be culturally bound by the context of participants , and does not guar - antee meaningfulness in widely diferent contexts . Research could establish whether there are overlaps in certain contexts , which informs a type of transferability . Perhaps the interaction design of VR gestures could in fact refect the diversity of its users instead of contrasting , globalizing and unifying into one type . Then in some use contexts a set of gestures are highly localized to its users , and then again in another case people in one cultural context might Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA fnd gestures from other contexts more ftting for their interaction than the one set pre - programmed for them . The pinch might not be ready to be replaced yet , as alternatives are yet not as efcient nor recognizable as dynamic gestures through current implementation options . A very limited amount of gestures have been implemented as many studies make use of the Wizard of Oz method [ 70 ] , which could either indicate a challenge for implementation beyond established schemes , or it speaks mostly of the work of designers and not implementers . No matter the reason , natural gestures must be possible to implement in technical systems for natural gestures to transfer into use . Technological advances such as Google’s Soli project [ 35 ] utilizing radar might allow us to bypass gestures having to be recognized by the camera , thereby opening up for much more sophisticated gestures - such as composite , dynamic semaphoric ones . 6 . 2 Observed Complexities in Advance of Gesture Implementation Through out this study it has become clear that creating a universal gesture library is neither possible nor desirable . While user - created gestures need to be validated against technical constraints we also imply that further research into for example gender - sensitive ges - tures should be carried out . Thus designing for the pluriverse sug - gests the implementation of multiple gestures for the same interac - tion . 6 . 2 . 1 Complexity with composite gestures . Composite gestures is a combination of multiple gestures to perform a system action . While composite gestures are prevalent in certain human and system - interaction contexts ( such as multi - modal composite utterances in sign language or as uni - modal ’combos’ of key - pressed actions while gaming ) , their complexity needs to be evaluated for their suitability to be implemented in VR . One group of participants created a composite gesture for the command " duplicate an object " . It was composed of one button click and three gestures , as depicted in Figure 12 . This specifc example was meaningful for the group in Donkerbos , and shows how the community designed a compos - ite VR gesture based on natural meaningful gestures accounting for their own local context while being considered by them to be meaningful for the VR context on their own terms . We maintain , besides the challenge of implementing such a complex gesture , the sequence is not necessarily intuitive to other users including the other San groups . It implies that further discussions across the groups should take place in order to streamline the gesture design for the duplication action before implementation . Notwithstand - ing the technical challenges of detecting composite gestures , their timing and accurateness in space , yet clearly there is a lot of future potential in investigating how these composite gestures , originat - ing from the local , might or might not be meaningful for other populations in diferent use contexts . 6 . 2 . 2 Gender and individual diferences in gesticulation . Having recorded individual and gender - based diferences in gestures sug - gested ( 5 . 1 . 4 ) , we question in which way to consider those in the implementation . As it was noticed men and woman at times had diferent gestures to show the same . For example , gesticulating " eating " , a clear gender diference was recorded . Similarly the ges - ture for rotation , where the men mimicked a physical grabbing and rotating while the women pointed with their fnger " ordering a rotation " . To embrace the diferences one suggestion would be to allocate multiple gestures to one action in the system to cater for diversity . We postulate that more research should be conducted in gender - related gestures to guide further system implementa - tions . Expanding the interaction gesture research within VR could potentially lead to multiple parameters such as culture specifc , or geographical - bound , similarly to selecting language within the setup of the VR system . 6 . 3 Overcoming Legacy Bias In an attempt to overcome legacy bias two approaches can be taken , either methodological or co - designing with non - WEIRD partici - pants . Ideally a combination of methodological steps and the en - gagement of diverse user groups should be targeted to reduce biases . 6 . 3 . 1 A methodological approach . In an attempt to overcome legacy bias and elicit new natural gestures Morris et al . [ 40 ] have brought forward the 3P’s method . Vogiatzidakis and Koutsabasis [ 70 ] sys - tematic review of 47 gesture papers reveals that 15 use one of the 3P’s methods only . However the 4 / 47 papers in the feld of VR do not make use of Morris et al . [ 40 ] 3P’s or any other method to at - tempt to reduce legacy bias . On the contrary Ortega et al . [ 51 ] even take base in Köpsel and Bubalo [ 32 ] claim of making use of legacy bias in an attempt to develop something that already feels " natu - ral " to the user . In our case , having used Partner and Priming in Figure 12 : The gesture combination used to duplicate an object CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Arendtorp et al . combination with co - design and experiencing VR implementations of new gestures proved to be a suitable methodology in promot - ing fresh design ideas , inspired by natural interactions in the real world and in VR . The frst VR experience purposefully exposed the participants to diferent interaction types namely gestures and buttons , as to not create partiality . Combining the 3P’s methods with iterations of dedicated ( re ) design sessions followed by expe - rienced VR implementations allows the participants to refect on the practicality of their designs and necessary modifcations from natural settings . 6 . 3 . 2 Diversity of participating designers . Many systems are de - signed with WEIRD participants or based on their input [ 22 ] , thereby implicitly replicating a Western or legacy bias . Engaging non - WEIRD participants reduces bias in general and reduces legacy bias depending on the participants prior habitual experience of technologies . Thus people who never interacted with technology can by default not introduce any legacy bias . Therefore involving participants from the San community in Donkerbos limited the risk of introducing a legacy bias , considering the participant’s extremely low exposure to possibly infuencing digital technologies , such as WIMP Interface ( Windows , Icons , Menus and Pointers ) . We further argue that participants designing gestures for VR , are more likely to tab into previous experiences from a natural setting rather than from previous unrelated technology usages . However we agree that non - WEIRD participants , who frequently use technologies , equally introduce a legacy bias in the design of gestures as their WEIRD counterparts , unless methods , such as the 3P’s are used to reduce the bias and calibrate participants’ focus on natural settings . We postulate that in general , indigenous and marginalised communi - ties provide alternative viewpoints , thereby enriching the design of any technology . We would further like to note that the inclusion of indigenous people can contribute to continuous development of new technologies , not only for them and their context , but mak - ing space for extending creativity into other populations usually disconnected from this conversation . 6 . 4 Permanence by Design : A Cultural Legacy Bias or a Functional Legacy Bias ? Implementing gesture - based systems by following established in - teraction design conventions has a root in either requirements by the technology ( what the algorithms and code can detect ) or by its users ( what people fnd meaningful ) . The inclusion of other people into cultural , digital production requires a questioning of the tech - nology itself , not only what it can produce . Therefore , the question of bias , whether cultural or functional is also , fundamentally , a question about permanence . Currently , legacy bias is connected with origins of technology innovation , however , doing research outside this context will eventually create a new legacy bias , mak - ing new cultural biases . The legacy bias created will contain new constraints and challenges connected with designing interactive systems as human culture changes . Recognizing indigenous peoples own rights to change their culture ( in opposition to outsiders who for various reasons prefer that they remain static ) also underscores that any gestures found in the community might very - well change over time and become obsolete . This catapults a future problem into the presence ; what does it all matter if there will always be a bias ? What matters is that new users , in new contexts can defne for themselves what they consider meaningful , which is a process that must be iterative - just as designing and maintaining interactive systems to be relevant is a continuous modelling . 7 CONCLUSION This paper contributes to the still scarce work done in user - driven gesture design for VR , with an emphasis on reducing leagacy bias , through a methodological approach as well as the inclusion of a previously excluded user group , namely an indigenous remote rural community in Namibia , followed by a technical implementation . We confrm the occurrence of the fve gesture types as defned by Aigner et al . [ 2 ] , as well as a high contextual and cultural interpre - tation of pantomic and semaphoric gestures . In our methodological approach to elicitation of natural gestures and user - created ges - tures we combine Partner and Priming as proposed by Morris et al . [ 40 ] with dedicated ( re ) design sessions and exploration and eval - uation of gesture implementions in VR . This approach allowed the participants to take design decisions based on the realisation of natural interactions , usefulness in the VR setting and possible technical constraints . We postulate that their design was inspired by their natural context as well as their VR experience as part of this study . For example , the participants confrmed the stop ges - ture as essential while the thumps - up usage was re - assessed and assigned to another interaction . We consider the implementation of user - suggested gestures as a signifcant component of the design process to validate the usability , usefulness and technical issues . However , as Vogiatzidakis and Koutsabasis [ 70 ] systematic review has shown most gesture studies only apply a wizard of Oz method without implementation . Furthermore , at a time were digital technologies encroach , and determine transformations in social interactions , such as the Meta - verse and AI , it is more important than ever to recognise the possible but also necessary contributions from researchers and users cur - rently situated " at the margins of HCI " . This study directly advances the HCI agenda for diversity , through empirical work as part of an ongoing research and design partnership with an indigenous community in Southern Africa , thereby challenging systemic bias and promoting design for the pluriverse . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge the funding from MTC Namibia , who is supporting the rural development and innovation project under the NUST - MTC MOU . This publication is based upon work supported by EU Erasmus + International Credit Mobility grant 2020 - 1 - DK01 - KA107 - 074892 We are grateful to the entire Donkerbos community who have been excellent hosts and research partners over the years . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Muhammad Sadi Adamu . 2020 . Adopting an African Standpoint in HCI4D : A Provocation . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3382833 [ 2 ] Roland Aigner , Daniel Wigdor , Hrvoje Benko , Michael Haller , David Lindbauer , Alexandra Ion , Shengdong Zhao , and JTKV Koh . 2012 . Understanding mid - air hand gestures : A study of human preferences in usage of gesture types for hci . Microsoft Research TechReport MSR - TR - 2012 - 111 2 ( 2012 ) , 30 . [ 3 ] Niina Arvila , Anabel Fischer , Pietari Keskinen , and Marko Nieminen . 2018 . Mo - bile Weather Services for Maasai Farmers : Socio - Cultural Factors Infuencing Overcoming Legacy Bias CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA the Adoption of Technology . In Proceedings of the Second African Conference for Human Computer Interaction : Thriving Communities ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( AfriCHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 4 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3283458 . 3283466 [ 4 ] Ceylan Beşevli , Oğuz Turan Buruk , Merve Erkaya , and Oğuzhan Özcan . 2018 . Investigating the Efects of Legacy Bias : User Elicited Gestures from the End Users Perspective . In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference Companion Pub - lication on Designing Interactive Systems ( Hong Kong , China ) ( DIS ’18 Com - panion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 277 – 281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3197391 . 3205449 [ 5 ] Arda Bilgen , Aftab Nasir , and Julia Schöneberg . 2021 . Why positionalities mat - ter : refections on power , hierarchy , and knowledges in “development” research . Canadian Journal of Development Studies / Revue canadienne d’études du développe - ment 42 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 18 . [ 6 ] Mark Billinghurst and Bill Buxton . 2011 . Gesture based interaction . Haptic input 24 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 35 . [ 7 ] Doug Bowman , Chadwick Wingrave , Joshua Campbell , and Vinh Ly . 2001 . Using pinch gloves ( tm ) for both natural and abstract interaction techniques in virtual environments . [ 8 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Ronald Schroeter , and Anita Lee Hong . 2014 . Beyond Ethnography : Engagement and Reciprocity as Foundations for Design Research out Here . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 1183 – 1186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557374 [ 9 ] Edwin Chan , Teddy Seyed , Wolfgang Stuerzlinger , Xing - Dong Yang , and Frank Maurer . 2016 . User Elicitation on Single - Hand Microgestures . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose , California , USA ) ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3403 – 3414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858589 [ 10 ] Li - Chieh Chen , Yun - Maw Cheng , Po - Ying Chu , and Frode Eika Sandnes . 2016 . The Common Characteristics of User - Defned and Mid - Air Gestures for Rotating 3D Digital Contents . In Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Interaction Techniques and Environments , Margherita Antona and Constantine Stephanidis ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 15 – 22 . [ 11 ] Nana Kesewaa Dankwa and Claude Draude . 2021 . Setting Diversity at the Core of HCI . In Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Design Methods and User Experience , Margherita Antona and Constantine Stephanidis ( Eds . ) . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 39 – 52 . [ 12 ] Tilman Dingler , Rufat Rzayev , Alireza Sahami Shirazi , and Niels Henze . 2018 . Designing Consistent Gestures Across Device Types : Eliciting RSVP Controls for Phone , Watch , and Glasses . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173993 [ 13 ] Sheena Erete , Aarti Israni , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . An intersectional approach to designing in the margins . Interactions 25 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 66 – 69 . [ 14 ] Sheena Erete , Yolanda A Rankin , and Jakita O Thomas . 2021 . I can’t breathe : Refections from black women in CSCW and HCI . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW3 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 23 . [ 15 ] Arturo Escobar . 2015 . Transiciones : a space for research and design for transitions to the pluriverse . Design Philosophy Papers 13 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 13 – 23 . [ 16 ] Kileni Fernando , Tertu Fernandu , Simpson Kapembe , Kamati Isay , and Japeni Hof - feni . 2018 . A Contemporary Expression of the Namibian San Communities’ Past and Present Suferings Staged as an Interactive Digital Life Performance . In Digi - tisation of Culture : Namibian and International Perspectives . Springer , Singapore , 205 – 221 . [ 17 ] International Work Group for Indigenous Afairs . 2019 . Indigenous World 2019 : Namibia . https : / / www . iwgia . org / en / namibia / 3506 - iw2019 - namibia Last ac - cessed 04 June , 2021 . [ 18 ] William Gaver . 2012 . What Should We Expect from Research through Design ? . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Austin , Texas , USA ) ( CHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 937 – 946 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208538 [ 19 ] Naska Goagoses , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , and Tariq Zaman . 2019 . Com - munity protocols for researchers : using sketches to communicate interaction guidelines . Ai & Society 35 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 675 – 687 . [ 20 ] Saul Greenberg , Sheelagh Carpendale , Nicolai Marquardt , and Bill Buxton . 2011 . Sketching user experiences : The workbook . Elsevier , Massachusetts , MA , USA . [ 21 ] Christina N Harrington . 2020 . The forgotten margins : what is community - based participatory health design telling us ? Interactions 27 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 24 – 29 . [ 22 ] Joseph Henrich , Steven J Heine , and Ara Norenzayan . 2010 . The weirdest people in the world ? Behavioral and brain sciences 33 , 2 - 3 ( 2010 ) , 61 – 83 . [ 23 ] South African San Institute . 2017 . SAN CODE OF RESEARCH ETHICS . TRUST . http : / / trust - project . eu / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 03 / San - Code - of - RESEARCH - Ethics - Booklet - fnal . pdf Last accessed 17 - 3 - 2022 . [ 24 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial Computing : A Lens on Design and Development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Atlanta , Georgia , USA ) ( CHI ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1311 – 1320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 [ 25 ] Hessam Jahani - Fariman . 2017 . Developing a User - Defned Interface for In - Vehicle Mid - Air Gestural Interactions . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces Companion ( Limassol , Cyprus ) ( IUI ’17 Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 165 – 168 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3030024 . 3038277 [ 26 ] Jason Jerald . 2015 . The VR Book : Human - Centered Design for Virtual Reality . Morgan and Claypool Publishers . [ 27 ] David M Kaplan . 2009 . Readings in the Philosophy of Technology . Rowman & Littlefeld Publishers , 4501 Forbes Boulevard , Maryland . [ 28 ] Gereon Koch Kapuire , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , and Edwin Blake . 2015 . An insider perspective on community gains : A subjective account of a Namibian rural communities perception of a long - term participatory design project . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 74 ( 2015 ) , 124 – 143 . [ 29 ] Maria Kauhondamwa , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Simson Kapembe , Hiskia Costa , Jan Guxab , Isay Kamati , and Helena Afrikaner . 2018 . Co - Creating Per - sonal Augmented Reality Accessories to Enhance Social Well - Being of Urban San Youth . In Proceedings of the Second African Conference for Human Computer Interaction : Thriving Communities ( Windhoek , Namibia ) ( AfriCHI ’18 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 10 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3283458 . 3283480 [ 30 ] Peter Kaulbach , Helena Afrikaner , Brit Stichel , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2021 . Crafting Communication Protocols with a San Community in Namibia . In 3rd African Human - Computer Interaction Conference : Inclusiveness and Empower - ment ( Maputo , Mozambique ) ( AfriCHI 2021 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 170 – 173 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448696 . 3448747 [ 31 ] Mathias Kölsch , Andrew C Beall , and Matthew Turk . 2003 . The postural comfort zone for reaching gestures . In Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting , Vol . 47 ( 4 ) . SAGE Publications Sage CA : Los Angeles , CA , SAGE Publications , Los Angeles , LA , USA , 787 – 791 . [ 32 ] Anne Köpsel and Nikola Bubalo . 2015 . Benefting from legacy bias . interactions 22 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 44 – 47 . [ 33 ] Philip Kortum . 2008 . HCI beyond the GUI : Design for haptic , speech , olfactory , and other nontraditional interfaces . Elsevier , Massachusetts , MA , USA . [ 34 ] Shaimaa Lazem , Danilo Giglitto , Makuochi Samuel Nkwo , Hafeni Mthoko , Jessica Upani , and Anicia Peters . 2021 . Challenges and paradoxes in decolonising HCI : A critical discussion . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) ( 2021 ) , 1 – 38 . [ 35 ] Jaime Lien , Nicholas Gillian , M Emre Karagozler , Patrick Amihood , Carsten Schwesig , Erik Olson , Hakim Raja , and Ivan Poupyrev . 2016 . Soli : Ubiquitous gesture sensing with millimeter wave radar . ACM Transactions on Graphics ( TOG ) 35 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 1 – 19 . [ 36 ] Samantha Merritt and Shaowen Bardzell . 2011 . Postcolonial Language and Culture Theory for HCI4D . In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI EA ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1675 – 1680 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979827 [ 37 ] Microsoft . 2019 . HoloLens 2 . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / hololens Ac - cessed 05 June , 2021 . [ 38 ] Queeneth Mkabela . 2005 . Using the Afrocentric method in researching indigenous African culture . The qualitative report 10 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 178 – 190 . [ 39 ] Queeneth Mkabela . 2005 . Using the Afrocentric method in researching indigenous African culture . The qualitative report 10 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 178 – 190 . [ 40 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Andreea Danielescu , Steven Drucker , Danyel Fisher , Bongshin Lee , MC Schraefel , and Jacob O Wobbrock . 2014 . Reducing legacy bias in gesture elicitation studies . interactions 21 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 40 – 45 . [ 41 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Jacob O . Wobbrock , and Andrew D . Wilson . 2010 . Un - derstanding Users’ Preferences for Surface Gestures . In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2010 ( Ottawa , Ontario , Canada ) ( GI ’10 ) . Canadian Information Process - ing Society , CAN , 261 – 268 . [ 42 ] Sarah Muser . 2015 . Gestures in Human - Computer - Interaction . Ludwig - Maximilians - University of Munich , Munich . [ 43 ] Myron Krueger . 1985 . Videoplace ( 1985 ) . https : / / https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = d4DUIeXSEpk & t = 163s Accessed 05 June , 2021 . [ 44 ] Casey Newton . 2021 . MARK IN THE METAVERSE : Facebook’s CEO on why the social network is becoming ‘a metaverse company . The Verge . https : / / www . theverge . com / 22588022 / mark - zuckerberg - facebook - ceo - metaverse - interview Accessed : 2021 - 12 - 17 . [ 45 ] Tao Ni , Doug A Bowman , Chris North , and Ryan P McMahan . 2011 . Design and evaluation of freehand menu selection interfaces using tilt and pinch gestures . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 69 , 9 ( 2011 ) , 551 – 562 . [ 46 ] Don Norman . 2013 . The design of everyday things : Revised and expanded edition . Basic books , 250 West 57th Street , 15th Floor , New York . [ 47 ] Donald A Norman . 2010 . Natural user interfaces are not natural . interactions 17 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 6 – 10 . [ 48 ] Chris North , Tim Dwyer , Bongshin Lee , Danyel Fisher , Petra Isenberg , George Robertson , and Kori Inkpen . 2009 . Understanding Multi - touch Manipulation for Surface Computing . In Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2009 , Tom Gross , Jan Gulliksen , Paula Kotzé , Lars Oestreicher , Philippe Palanque , Raquel Oliveira Prates , and Marco Winckler ( Eds . ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Berlin , Heidelberg , 236 – 249 . [ 49 ] Oculus . 2020 . Oculus : All - in - One , One - for - All . https : / / www . oculus . com / quest - 2 / Last accessed 04 June , 2021 . [ 50 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela D . R . Smith , Alexandra To , and Kentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376392 [ 51 ] Francisco R Ortega , Alain Galvan , Katherine Tarre , Armando Barreto , Naphtali Rishe , Jonathan Bernal , Ruben Balcazar , and Jason - Lee Thomas . 2017 . Gesture elicitation for 3D travel via multi - touch and mid - Air systems for procedurally generated pseudo - universe . In 2017 IEEE symposium on 3D User Interfaces ( 3DUI ) . IEEE , 144 – 153 . [ 52 ] Anicia N . Peters , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Kagonya Awori , Nicola J . Bidwell , Edwin Blake , Arun Kumar , and Shilumbe Chivuno - Kuria . 2014 . Collaborating with Communities in Africa : A Hitchhikers Guide . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI EA ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1969 – 1974 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581313 [ 53 ] Kasper Rodil , Martin Kamp Larsen , Mikkel Laursen , Tobias Frost Andersen , Weronika Korbutt , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2020 . A Demonstration of an Interactive Virtual Reality Prototype for Exploring the Cultural Heritage of Southern African Rock Art . In 22nd International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services ( Oldenburg , Germany ) ( MobileHCI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 26 , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3406324 . 3410536 [ 54 ] Kasper Rodil , Donovan Maasz , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2020 . Moving Virtual Reality out of Its Comfort Zone and Into the African Kalahari Desert Field : Experiences From Technological Co - Exploration With an Indigenous San Community in Namibia . In 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology ( Virtual Event , Canada ) ( VRST ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 5 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385956 . 3418955 [ 55 ] Kasper Rodil , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Kasper L . Jensen , and Matthias Rehm . 2012 . Homestead Creator : A Tool for Indigenous Designers . In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design ( Copenhagen , Denmark ) ( NordiCHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 627 – 630 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2399016 . 2399111 [ 56 ] Yvonne Rogers and Gary Marsden . 2013 . Does he take sugar ? Moving beyond the rhetoric of compassion . interactions 20 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 48 – 57 . [ 57 ] Yvonne Rogers , Helen Sharp , and Jenny Preece . 2011 . Interaction design : beyond human - computer interaction . John Wiley & Sons , West Sussex , United Kingdom . [ 58 ] Luciana A . S . Romani , Daniel Y . T . Chino , Letricia P . S . Avalhais , Willian D . Oliveira , Renata R . V . Gonçalves , Caetano Traina , and Agma J . M . Traina . 2013 . Involving Users in the Gestural Language Defnition Process for the NInA Frame - work . In Proceedings of the 12th Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems ( Manaus , Brazil ) ( IHC ’13 ) . Brazilian Computer Society , Porto Alegre , BRA , 280 – 283 . [ 59 ] Holonautic Sidequest . 2020 . Hand Physics Lab . https : / / sidequestvr . com / app / 750 / hand - physics - lab Last accessed 12 January , 2021 . [ 60 ] Narendra Singh . 2019 . How to design Virtual Reality menus that do not suck . Medium . https : / / uxdesign . cc / how - to - design - virtual - reality - menus - that - do - not - suck - 9c06eb1df865 Last accessed 17 - 3 - 2022 . [ 61 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Daria Loi , Rogério Abreu de Paula , Asnath Paula Kambunga , Marly Muudeni Samuel , and Tariq Zaman . 2021 . Decolonizing Design Practices : Towards Pluriversality . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3441334 [ 62 ] Ivan Stevanovic . 2019 . 30 Virtual Reality Statistics for 2020 . https : / / kommandotech . com / statistics / virtual - reality - statistics / [ 63 ] Lucy Suchman . 2002 . Located accountabilities in technology production . Scandi - navian journal of information systems 14 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 7 . [ 64 ] Sharifa Sultana , François Guimbretière , Phoebe Sengers , and Nicola Dell . 2018 . Design Within a Patriarchal Society : Opportunities and Challenges in Designing for Rural Women in Bangladesh . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi - org . zorac . aub . aau . dk / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174110 [ 65 ] Leyla Tavernaro - Haidarian . 2018 . A relational model of public discourse : The African philosophy of Ubuntu . Routledge . [ 66 ] Alex S . Taylor . 2011 . Out There . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CHI ’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 685 – 694 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979042 [ 67 ] Unity Technologies . 2005 . Unity . https : / / unity . com Last accessed 06 June , 2021 . [ 68 ] Manos Tsakiris and Patrick Haggard . 2005 . The rubber hand illusion revisited : visuotactile integration and self - attribution . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance 31 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 80 . [ 69 ] Alessandro Valli . 2008 . The design of natural interaction . Multimedia Tools and Applications 38 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 295 – 305 . [ 70 ] Panagiotis Vogiatzidakis and Panayiotis Koutsabasis . 2018 . Gesture elicitation studies for mid - air interaction : A review . Multimodal Technologies and Interaction Arendtorp et al . 2 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 65 . [ 71 ] Andrew D . Wilson . 2006 . Robust Computer Vision - Based Detection of Pinching for One and Two - Handed Gesture Input . In Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( Montreux , Switzerland ) ( UIST ’06 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 255 – 258 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1166253 . 1166292 [ 72 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Nicola J Bidwell , and Edwin Blake . 2012 . Altering participation through interactions and refections in design . CoDesign 8 , 2 - 3 ( 2012 ) , 163 – 182 . [ 73 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Tariq Zaman , and Colin Stanley . 2019 . A classif - cation of cultural engagements in community technology design : introducing a transcultural approach . Ai & Society 34 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 419 – 435 . [ 74 ] Jacob O . Wobbrock , Meredith Ringel Morris , and Andrew D . Wilson . 2009 . User - Defned Gestures for Surface Computing . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Boston , MA , USA ) ( CHI ’09 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1083 – 1092 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518866 [ 75 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Arkadeep Kumar , Aditya Vishwanath , Naveena Karusala , Betsy DiSalvo , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Designing for Intersections . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Hong Kong , China ) ( DIS ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 45 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196794 [ 76 ] Adam Grant Worrallo . 2020 . A multiple optical tracking based approach for enhancing hand - based interaction in virtual reality simulations . [ 77 ] Huiyue Wu , Weizhou Luo , Neng Pan , Shenghuan Nan , Yanyi Deng , Shengqian Fu , and Liuqingqing Yang . 2019 . Understanding freehand gestures : a study of freehand gestural interaction for immersive VR shopping applications . Human - centric Computing and Information Sciences 9 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 26 . [ 78 ] Yukang Yan , Chun Yu , Xiaojuan Ma , Xin Yi , Ke Sun , and Yuanchun Shi . 2018 . VirtualGrasp : Leveraging Experience of Interacting with Physical Objects to Facili - tate Digital Object Retrieval . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173652 [ 79 ] Run Yu and Doug A Bowman . 2018 . Force push : Exploring expressive gesture - to - force mappings for remote object manipulation in virtual reality . Frontiers in ICT 5 ( 2018 ) , 25 . [ 80 ] John Zimmerman and Jodi Forlizzi . 2014 . Research Through Design in HCI . In Ways of Knowing in HCI , Judith S . Olson and Wendy A . Kellogg ( Eds . ) . Springer New York , New York , NY , 167 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 0378 - 8 _ 8 [ 81 ] John Zimmerman , Erik Stolterman , and Jodi Forlizzi . 2010 . An Analysis and Critique of Research through Design : Towards a Formalization of a Research Approach . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Aarhus , Denmark ) ( DIS ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 310 – 319 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858228