390 | JULY 2012 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / nrrheum Arthritis Research UK Pain Centre , University of Nottingham , Clinical Sciences Building , City Hospital , Hucknall Road , Nottingham NG5 1PB , UK ( P . I . Mapp , D . A . Walsh ) . Correspondence to : D . A . Walsh david . walsh @ nottingham . ac . uk Mechanisms and targets of angiogenesis and nerve growth in osteoarthritis Paul I . Mapp and David A . Walsh Abstract | During osteoarthritis ( OA ) , angiogenesis is increased in the synovium , osteophytes and menisci and leads to ossification in osteophytes and the deep layers of articular cartilage . Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors might both be upregulated in the osteoarthritic joint ; however , vascular growth predominates , and the articular cartilage loses its resistance to vascularization . In addition , blood vessel growth is increased at—and disrupts—the osteochondral junction . Angiogenesis in this location is dependent on the creation of channels from subchondral bone spaces into noncalcified articular cartilage . Inflammation drives synovial angiogenesis through macrophage activation . Blood vessel and nerve growth are linked by common pathways that involve the release of proangiogenic factors , such as vascular endothelial growth factor , β ‑nerve growth factor and neuropeptides . Proangiogenic factors might also stimulate nerve growth , and molecules produced by vascular cells could both stimulate and guide nerve growth . As sensory nerves grow along new blood vessels in osteoarthritic joints , they eventually penetrate noncalcified articular cartilage , osteophytes and the inner regions of menisci . Angiogenesis could , therefore , contribute to structural damage and pain in OA and provide potential targets for new treatments . Mapp , P . I . & Walsh , D . A . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 8 , 390 – 398 ( 2012 ) ; published online 29 May 2012 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nrrheum . 2012 . 80 Introduction Angiogenesis , defined as blood vessel outgrowth from pre - existing vasculature , is essential for growth and develop ment , the reproductive cycle and tissue repair . How ever , angiogenesis is also associated with pathology , notably in cancer and arthritis . Although the contribu - tion of blood vessel growth to inflammation and synovial hyperplasia in rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) is well recog - nized , its importance in osteoarthritis ( OA ) has not been as extensively investigated . Initial studies identified the potential contribution of increased angiogenesis to osteo - phyte formation in OA , 1 and subsequent work has demon - strated increased angiogenesis in articular cartilage , 2 the synovium 3 and menisci 4 in patients with this disease . Angiogenesis and sensory nerve growth are closely integrated processes that potentially link the growth of blood vessels to pain in patients with OA . Angiogenesis is regulated by the balance of proangiogenic and antiangio - genic factors , which is modulated by the presence of either a facilitating or inhibitory extracellular matrix environ - ment . Pathological neovascularization in OA represents a disruption of these normal homeostatic mechanisms . The precise molecular pathways that modulate angiogenesis in the osteoarthritic joint remain incompletely understood ; however , proangiogenic factors produced within the osteoarthritic joint include prosta glandins , nitric oxide , regulatory peptides , cytokines , chemokines and growth factors , especially vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) . Antiangiogenic factors include protease inhibi - tors , matrix fragments and factors implicated in the reso - lution of inflammation . Detailed lists of the angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors present within osteoarthritic joints have been published elsewhere . 3 In this Review , we focus on the interplay between angio - genesis and nerve growth , particularly in the synovial and osteochondral environments , in patients with OA . The possible contribution of angiogenesis to both struc - tural damage and pain in OA , and the potential oppor - tunities for novel treatments that target angio genesis , are also discussed . Normal synovial joint vasculature The knee is the most - studied joint , and its anatomy is con - sidered typical of synovial joints . In the knee , the articu - lar cartilage and the inner two - thirds of the meniscus are exposed to marked biomechanical stress and are normally avascular ( Figure 1a ) , probably because blood vessels are vulnerable to mechanical loading and vasculariza - tion would compromise the tissue biomechanics . The articular cartilage and inner meniscus , therefore , rely upon oxygen and nutrients from blood vessels in adja - cent structures . Nutrient transfer occurs by both diffusion and convection . 5 The periosteum and synovium contain dense capillary networks that are particularly close to the surface in areas adjacent to avascular bone or cartilage . 6 Subatmospheric pressures within the virtual cavity of the normal joint ensure apposition between the synovium and articular cartilage , and facilitate the transfer of nutrients Competing interests D . A . Walsh declares an association with the following company : Pfizer . Please see the article online for full details of the relationship . P . I . Mapp declares no competing interests . R E V I E W S © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 8 | JULY 2012 | 391 and oxygen from the superficial synovial blood vessels to the avascular cartilage . 7 Joint movement enhances convec - tion as synovial fluid is compressed from , and imbibed by , the articular cartilage during compression cycles . 8 Chondrocytes within the non calcified articular cartilage and meniscus communicate with synovio cytes and syno - vial blood vessels through the synovial fluid . However , a degree of compart mentalization of pro angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors might be provided by the rich expression of peptidases by peri vascular cells , and the inherent instability of many vascular regulators , such as nitric oxide . 9 Sites of angiogenesis in OA The sequence of pathological events in OA is not com - pletely understood and it can be difficult to discriminate between synovial joint pathology ( Figures 1 and 2 ) and normal age - related changes . The synovium and osteo - chondral junction have both been implicated as early sites of new blood vessel growth in OA , 10 – 12 and increases in meniscal vascularization have been quantified in post - mortem tissue samples from knees that show the early features of chondropathy . 4 Osteophytes can develop during the progression of OA and vascularized pannus is most often described in late disease . 13 Synovium Although OA is often thought of as a degenerative disease , inflammation in the synovium is increasingly recognized as being of both pathological and clinical importance . 14 , 15 Synovitis in OA can be persistent or episodic and cyclo - oxygenase inhibitors and glucocorticosteroids might both reduce inflammation and provide symptomatic relief . Histological analysis and imaging studies that were not restricted to patients with extensive radiographic damage have shown marked synovitis in approximately one - third of patients with symptomatic OA . 16 , 17 Histological evi - dence of inflammation is typified by synovial hyper plasia , macrophage infiltration and angiogenesis ( Figure 2e ) , although lymphoid aggregates can also be observed . 16 , 18 Synovial inflammation and angiogenesis in some patients with OA might be comparable to that seen in indivi duals with RA . 19 The extent of synovial angiogenesis in OA increases with increasing macrophage infiltration and histo logical grade of inflammation . 16 This increase prob - ably results from the production of proangiogenic factors , such as VEGF , by the inflamed synovium . Increased angiogenesis adjacent to the medial joint line 11 and menisci 4 has been demonstrated , although other synovial regions are less well investigated . Osteochondral junction The osteochondral junction encompasses the region between the deepest noncalcified cartilage and the marrow spaces immediately beneath the subchondral bone plate . It includes the tidemark—a histologically characterized basophilic boundary between calcified and noncalcified cartilage . In OA , increased osteoclast activ - ity causes channels to extend from the subchondral bone into the articular cartilage and ultimately pass across the Key points ■ Angiogenesis contributes to synovitis , osteochondral damage , osteophyte formation and meniscal pathology in patients with osteoarthritis ( OA ) ■ Angiogenesis is intimately linked to sensory nerve growth through shared regulatory pathways ■ Nerve growth along new blood vessels into structures that are normally not innervated could contribute to pain in OA ■ Inhibition of subchondral bone turnover can prevent osteochondral angiogenesis and reduce pain in animal models of OA ■ Inhibition of angiogenesis could potentially be used to treat OA tidemark into the normally avascular noncalcified carti - lage ( Figures 1b ) . Chan nel formation is associated with fibrovascular replace ment and infiltration of inflamma - tory cells into the subchondral marrow spaces . 20 Blood vessels grow from the subchondral bone to occupy the osteochondral channels and are accompanied by ex tensions of sympathetic and sensory nerves . 10 Menisci Menisci are cresent - shaped wedges of fibrocartilage that reduce friction , disperse weight between the femoral con - dyles and tibial plateaux , and contribute to propriocep - tion . Meniscal vascular densities are increased in patients with OA owing to inward growth of blood vessels and peri vascular nerves through the fibrocartilage junction towards the inner meniscal edge ( Figures 1e and 2d ) . 4 The contribution of meniscal angiogenesis to symptom progression and joint pathology in OA is unclear but some studies suggest that angiogenesis contributes to the disruption of collagen texture and leads to weakening of the meniscus . 21 However , surgical removal of ‘degen - erate’ menisci might not reliably improve the patient’s symptoms , possibly indicating a balance between the meniscus as a source of pain and its role in maintaining joint biomechanics . Osteophytes Osteophytes are bony growths that develop at the edges of osteoarthritic joints ( Figure 1d ) . In histological appear - ance , ( Figure 2b ) they resemble the epiphysial growth plate ; 22 both regions display chondrocyte hypertrophy , new cartilage formation and vascularization leading to endochondral ossification . 23 Neovascularization is thought to be stimulated by VEGF , which is expressed by hyper trophic chondrocytes . Antiangiogenic therapies can reduce marginal bone growth in animal models of arthritis , 24 although the relevance of this new bone to pain remains ill - defined . Pannus Pannus , a mesenchymal tissue attached to the articular sur face , is characteristic of RA ; this tissue is formed when inflamed synovium adheres to and invades cartilage and under lying bone . Pannus is also seen in patients with OA ( Figure 2c ) , although its origins might differ in these two diseases . Some pannus in osteoarthritic joints does origi - nate from the marginal synovium . However , mesenchymal tissue can also grow from the sub chondral marrow spaces REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 392 | JULY 2012 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / nrrheum Normal OA a b b c c e e f f d d SynoviumCapsule Meniscus Cartilage Subchondral bone Marrow space Lacunae Chondrocyte Osteophyte New blood vessel Pre - existing blood vessel ‘Ghost’ vessel to occupy deep fissures through the subchondral bone plate and articular cartilage , and eventually coat the adjacent articular surface . Similarly , mesenchymal tissues might occupy large defects in the articular surface and recruit stem cells , which differentiate into chondrocytes and produce fibrocartilage . Osteoarthritic pannus can be either vascularized or avascular . 13 Blood vessels in vascularized pannus commonly originate as extensions from the sub - chondral bone ( Figure 1c ) . The contribution of pan nus to pain or other pathology in OA , and whether angio genesis contributes to pannus growth , remain little understood . Proangiogenic mechanisms in OA Increased macrophage infiltration Synovial angiogenesis is associated with , and apparently dependent on , inflammation . 25 In OA , increased angiogen - esis in the synovium is associated with chronic synovitis , 16 which is characterized by increased infiltration of mac - rophages . 15 These cells might provide a key stimulus for synovial angiogenesis through the production of proangio - genic factors , such as VEGF . 12 Macrophages are important for the killing of pathogens and for initiating tissue repair . Activated macrophages occur in two distinct activation Figure 1 | Sites of angiogenesis in the osteoarthritic knee . a | The structure of the normal knee ( left ) and sites of angiogenesis in OA ( right ) . The synovium is continuous with the periosteum and apposed to cartilage . The meniscus merges with the collagenous capsule . Subchondral bone contains marrow spaces . The tidemark between calcified and noncalcified cartilage is indicated by a dashed line . b | Osteoclasts and chondroclasts ( brown ) cut channels through the tidemark at the osteochondral junction and invade the normally avascular cartilage . Channels are occupied by vascularized mesenchymal tissue and endochondral ossification results in a bone cuff surrounding the channel . Pre‑existing blood vessels are shown in orange , neovasculature in red , and chondrocytes as green circles . c | A fissure from the articular surface communicates with subchondral bone spaces . Vascularized mesenchymal tissue extends from the subchondral bone through the fissure and over the articular surface forming pannus . d | Osteophyte formation resulting from cartilage deposition . Chondrocytes apoptose , leaving lacunae , which become vascularized from the closest underlying bone spaces , recapitulating endochondral ossification at the epiphyseal growth plate . e | Blood vessels grow from mesenchymal tissue at the meniscal base ( purple ) towards its tip . f | Angiogenesis and synovial lining cell hyperplasia redistribute blood vessels from the superficial to the deep synovial layers . White ‘ghost’ vessels schematically indicate the reduction from normal vascularity at the synovial surface . Arrows in b – f indicate the overall direction of neovascularization . Abbreviation : OA , osteoarthritis . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 8 | JULY 2012 | 393 states . 26 M1 macrophages are thought to contribute to host defence ; they express inducible nitric oxide synthase ( iNOS ) and proinflammatory cytokines . By contrast , alternatively activated or M2 macrophages are thought to facilitate tissue repair ; in humans these cells express CD163 and CD206 27 cell surface markers , arginase - 1 , and high levels of anti - inflammatory cytokines . 28 iNOS - positive M1 macrophages are present in the synovium in patients with OA . 29 However , the balance ( termed polar - ization ) between M1 and M2 macrophages in this disease has not been determined . Both M1 and M2 macrophages produce VEGF and could , therefore , stimulate angiogen - esis . However , M2 macrophages are less sensitive than M1 macrophages to endogenous antiangiogenic factors such as IL - 10 . This reduced sensitivity results in sustained VEGF production , which might contribute to the prominent role of M2 macrophages in facilitating vascular growth . 30 The effects of altering macro phage polarization in the osteo - arthritic joint have not been elucidated . Further study is required to determine whether there is an optimal balance of macro phage proinflammatory and angiogenic activities for the prevention of OA , or whether such a balance could be achieved by therapeutic interventions . Reduced cartilage resistance to angiogenesis In OA , proangiogenic factors ( such as VEGF ) are pro - duced by chondrocytes 31 and the synovium , 23 , 20 as well as in the subchondral bone , marrow spaces and adjoining osteochondral channels . Chondrocytes in normal joints produce antiangiogenic factors , such as troponin I 32 and thrombospondin . 33 In addition , a broad spectrum of anti - angiogenic protease inhibitors , including tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases , plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and antileukoproteinase 2 are upregu lated in cartilage from osteoarthritic joints . However , the predominant localiza - tion of these inhibitors to superficial chondrocytes might make them too distant to prevent angiogenesis at the osteochondral junction . Proangiogenic stimuli alone might be insufficient to overcome the resistance of normal articular cartilage to neovascularization , which is at least partly due to its matrix composition . 34 However , cartilage from patients with OA is less able to remain avascular than normal car - tilage , as demonstrated by increased vascular invasion when placed onto chick chorioallantoic membranes . 35 In these experiments , vascularization of articular cartilage was associated with proteoglycan loss , and facilitated by proteoglycan depletion . Deposition of types I and X col - lagen around the invading vessels represents a pheno typic shift of cartilage towards ossification following vascular - ization . 36 Indeed , in patients with OA , vascular channels that invade noncalcified articular cartilage become associ - ated with cuffs of new bone , which represent an advanc - ing wave of endo chondral ossification that contributes to thickening of the subchondral bone plate . Linkage of vascular and nerve growth In the normal joint , neurovascular interactions could con - tribute to overall homeostasis . However , they might also be involved in pathogenesis in OA . Normal anatomy Innervation of the normal joint parallels that of its blood vessels , and tissues that are normally avascular ( such as articular cartilage and the inner two - thirds of the meniscus ) are also aneural . 37 , 38 Within the normal joint , perivascular sensory nerves containing substance P and calcitonin gene - related peptide - 1 have been localized to the synovium , 39 ligament and tendon insertions , 40 sub - chondral bone , 41 and the outer one - third of the meniscus . 4 Nonmyelinated sensory nerves can be either peptidergic or nonpeptidergic , although the latter type seems to be predominantly localized to superficial structures , such as the skin , and has been difficult to identify deep within the knee joint . 42 In the synovium , sympathetic nerves con - taining tyrosine hydroxylase or neuropeptide Y display a similar distribution to that of sensory nerves . 39 Pathology Angiogenesis is associated with perivascular nerve growth in a wide range of pathologies , including subcutaneous granulomas 43 and bone metastases . 44 Fine non myelinated sensory nerves accompany blood vessels in the joint and grow along new blood vessels during the late stages of angiogenesis . As nerves grow more slowly than blood a b c d e Cartilage Cartilage Articularcartilage SC SC Bone Bone Figure 2 | Histological appearance of regions of neovascularization in human osteoarthritis . Blood vessels are indicated by black arrows and the direction of new blood vessel formation by red arrowheads . a | Vascular channel with bone cuff breaching the osteochondral junction . Stains used : safranin O ( pink ) , proteoglycan ; fast green ( green ) , bone ; haematoxylin counterstain ( blue ) . b | Haematoxylin and eosin stained osteophyte showing sites of vascularization and accompanying new bone formation . c | Haematoxylin and eosin stained , vascularized pannus adherent to articular cartilage . Debris can be seen within the SC . d | Blood vessels at the fibrocartilage junction of the meniscus . The meniscal base is to the right . Sample immunostained for the endothelial marker CD34 ( black ) . e | Proliferating blood vessels in the synovial endothelium . Double immunostaining for the endothelial marker CD31 ( red ) and the nuclear proliferation marker Ki67 ( black ) . Abbreviation : SC , synovial cavity . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 394 | JULY 2012 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / nrrheum vessels , innervation of the newly formed blood vessels can seem to be reduced . In rodent models , for example , new sensory nerves are first evident 2 weeks after onset of angiogenesis . 43 Synovitis might , therefore , be associ - ated with reduced immuno staining for markers spe - cific to sensory nerves , particularly when angiogenesis and stromal hyperplasia outstrip the capacity for nerve growth , as occurs in RA . 39 In OA , new blood vessels that cross the tidemark in articular cartilage might be associ - ated with sensory nerves , as might those in developing osteophytes 10 and those that penetrate the inner regions of the meniscus . 4 Pain , the most common problem of patients with arthritis , is mediated by sensory nerves . Perivascular nerve growth might contribute to pain in OA because nerve growth is associated with peripheral sen - sitization , and nerves in structures that are not normally innervated could be exposed to chemical and mechanical stimulation . Thus , neovascularization could contribute to pain in patients with OA because of the accompanying sensory innervation . The perivascular localisation of these new nerve fibres also suggests that the direction of nerve growth is regu - lated by adjacent blood vessels . Many regulators of nerve growth can be produced by vascular cells and cells in the perivascular environment . 10 The growth of blood vessels and nerves are closely interacting processes that are increasingly recognized to share regulatory pathways . Soluble proteins , cell – cell interactions and extracellular matrix components ( such as protoglycans ) might also inhibit inappropriate nerve growth . In turn , perivascular nerves might regulate angiogenesis , as described below . Mechanisms of nerve growth The neuropeptides , calcitonin gene - related peptide - I and substance P , primarily act on specific vascular recep - tors to regulate blood flow and permeability but also to stimulate endothelial cell proliferation , migration and tube formation , which increase blood vessel growth . 45 Sympathetic neuropeptides , such as neuro peptide Y , are acute vasoconstrictors , but could subsequently increase blood flow through promoting angiogenesis . 46 However , despite extensive evidence of their proangiogenic poten - tial , specific roles for neuropeptides in physiological or pathological angiogenesis have been difficult to confirm . As neuropeptides are present in normal tissues and released acutely during injury or stress , they are well placed to initiate blood vessel growth prior to inflamma - tory cell recruitment or the upregulation of other factors that can maintain angio genesis . Acute inflammation induced by sensory - nerve activation has been termed ‘neurogenic inflammation’ and , similarly , initiation of blood vessel growth by these factors can be thought of as ‘neurogenic angio genesis’ . 47 Indeed , results from animal models suggest a proangiogenic role for neuropeptides during acute synovitis , and that neuropeptide receptor antagonists can inhibit vessel growth in this context . 48 , 49 We have proposed that this early angiogenesis might be a key factor that leads to the persistence of synovitis , since inhibition of angiogenesis can facilitate resolution of this inflammatory condition . 50 Nerve growth is guided by interacting classes of mol - ecules : semaphorins and their receptors , the neuro - pilins ; plexins ; netrins ; and the slit – robo family of cell signalling molecules . 51 Semaphorins are the best - studied nerve guidance molecules . Their effects on nerve termi - nals are mediated by members of two interacting recep - tor families : neuropilins , which bind to semaphorins , and plexins , which are necessary for signal transduc - tion . Semaphorins 3A , 3C and 3F typically inhibit nerve growth ; semaphorin 3A binds to neuropilin - 1 to repulse sensory neurons 52 and semaphorins 3C and 3F 53 bind to neuropilin - 2 to repulse sympathetic neurons . Sema phorins 3C , 3F and the human homologue of mouse semapho - rin 3E have been localized to normal and osteoarthritic human synovium , 53 – 55 and semaphorin 3A is expressed by endothelial cells and macrophages . 51 The semaphorin receptors neuropilin - 1 and neuropilin - 2 have been local - ized to the osteoarthritic synovium , 54 and n europilin - 1 is also expressed by endothelial cells . 51 , 56 In RA , expression of semaphorin 3C is increased in as sociation with decreased sympathetic innervation . 53 Nerve growth and survival might also be stimulated by highly pleiotropic growth factors , such as hepatocyte growth factor and VEGF , which are proangiogenic . 51 Semaphorins and the VEGF isoform VEGF 165 interact in mutually antagonistic autocrine pathways to regu - late angiogenesis . 51 Neuropilin - 1 acts as a coreceptor for VEGF 165 , facilitating its interaction with VEGF recep - tor 2 ( VEGFR2 ) and thereby promoting angiogenesis . 57 During synovitis , VEGFR2 and neuropilin - 1 are both upregulated in parallel with increased vascular density . 56 The binding of semaphorin 3A to neuropilin - 1 on endo - thelial cells inhibits VEGF - induced activation of VEGFR2 , thereby inhibiting angiogenesis . Similarly , semaphorin 3F can inhibit angiogenesis by binding to neuropilin - 2 , and semaphorins 3D , 3E and 3G might also be antiangiogenic in vitro . 58 Semaphorins , therefore , not only inhibit nerve growth , but also inhibit angiogenesis . Semaphorins and their receptors can also regulate the functions of other non - neuronal cells . Neuropilin - 1 , when expressed on synovial fibroblasts , might inhibit synovial invasion 59 and , when expressed in osteoarthritic carti - lage , could mediate VEGF - enhanced metallo proteinase expression . 60 The expression of semaphorins 3A and 3F by hypertrophic chondrocytes further indicates their poten - tial role in endochondral ossification . 61 Semaphorin 3A and neuropilin - 1 are also expressed by regulatory T cells , and semaphorin 3A overexpression on these cells inhib - ited inflammation , possibly by increasing IL - 10 and reducing IL - 17 expression . 62 Peptidergic sensory nerves grow in response to β - nerve growth factor ( β - NGF ) , which acts on tyrosine receptor kinase A and p75 . Interactions between angiogenesis and nerve growth are further indicated by evidence of the angiogenic activity of β - NGF ( Figure 3 ) . 63 In vitro , β - NGF increases the proliferation of human dermal , umbilical vein and choroidal cells , and rat brain endothelial cells . 64 – 67 β - NGF also increases migration of human choroidal and pig aortic endothelial cells , 68 , 69 and promotes capillary tube formation by human umbilical vein endothelial cells REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 8 | JULY 2012 | 395 in vitro . 70 The proangiogenic potential of β - NGF is con - firmed by in vivo stimulation of blood vessel growth in a variety of animal models , including chick chorio allantoic membranes , 65 , 71 , 72 rats 73 , 74 and mice . 70 , 75 – 77 Inhibition of β - NGF can also reduce new blood vessel growth in a number of mouse models of pathological angiogenesis . 77 – 79 Therapeutic implications Blood vessel growth could contribute to structural progres - sion , tissue differentiation and pain in OA . In the future , it might be possible to use angiogenesis inhibitor therapy to reduce the ossification of osteophytes and the deep layers of articular cartilage , and the anti - inflammatory effects of angiogenesis inhibition might also slow the progression of joint damage in patients with the disease . Pain - related behaviour decreases with angio genesis inhibitor treat - ment in animal models of OA , although which aspects of inhibition of blood vessel growth contribute most to this analgesic activity is unclear . 11 Nonetheless , these find - ings provide support for the development of antiangio - genic treatments for patients with OA . The relevance of ossification and joint damage to the symptoms of OA is , however , not completely understood . Inhibiting inflam - mation , reducing cartilage and meniscus innervation and maintaining the integrity of the osteochondral junction could derive direct symptomatic benefit for patients with OA , and angio genesis inhibition might reduce pain by moderating each of these pathological processes . Angiogenesis could be inhibited directly by agents that act on vascular cells , or indirectly by removing the stimulus for blood vessel growth , for example by reduc - ing inflammation . Furthermore , angiogenesis could be prevented by inhibiting the matrix degradation and osteochondral channel formation that are necessary for the growth of blood vessels . Strategies could also be developed to reduce adverse sequelae to angiogenesis , for example nerve growth or ossification . Direct - acting antiangiogenic agents , such as VEGF blockers and recep - tor tyrosine kinase inhibitors , have been developed with the aim of reducing tumour growth and metastasis . As the mechanisms of neovascularization are similar in tumours and osteoarthritic joints , these drugs might have poten - tial for the treatment of OA . For example , VEGF can be inhibited using blocking antibodies directed to itself or to VEGFR2 , or by inhibiting its tyrosine kinase signal - ling . The VEGF - blocking antibodies bevacizumab and ranibizumab are already in use in clinical oncology and could have potential for the treatment of OA . In addition , ramucirumab , a monoclonal antibody directed against VEGFR2 , is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumours . 80 – 82 Small - molecule VEGFR2 antagonists have proven difficult to generate , but receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors , such as sunitinib , vandetanib and sora - fenib , have been approved by the FDA for treat ment of late stage cancers . As these agents typically target a range of growth factor receptors , the conclusions that can be drawn regarding the mechanisms underlying their effects in interventional studies are limited . Synovitis has been associated with progressive joint damage in both animal models and clinical studies . Although inhibition of synovitis using glucocortico steroids can reduce both angiogenesis and joint damage in rodents , 6 the disease - modifying effects of anti - inflammatory strate - gies in humans have been dis appointing . The angiogenesis inhibitor PPI 2458 reduced synovitis , structural damage and pain - related behaviours in an animal model of OA . 11 However , as this treatment also reduced vascularization of osteochondral channels , the researchers could not deter - mine whether the reduction in pain behaviour was due to synovial or osteo chondral effects , or a combination of the two . Angiogenesis is important for several physiological processes , including growth in utero and during child - hood , the female reproductive cycle and wound healing . Agents that inhibit all angiogenesis might , therefore , have restricted value in chronic , non - fatal conditions such as OA . FDA approvals for the use of anti - angiogenic agents have largely been restricted to the treatment of late - stage cancers , where the potential benefits might outweigh the risks . Treatments that inhibit pathological , but not physio - logical , angiogenesis might have a reduced propensity for adverse events . The osteochondral junction is an attractive site for targeted intervention , as osteochondral channel formation is a prerequisite for blood vessel and nerve growth . Bisphosphonates 83 or matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors 84 can inhibit osteo chondral channel formation and , therefore , prevent cartilage vascularization . Bisphosphonates inhibit osteoclast and / or chondro - clast activity , and reduce pain behaviour and gait abnor - malities in several animal models of OA . 83 , 85 These agents also inhibit subchondral bone turnover , reduce Sensorynerve Trk - A Trk - A CGRPR Trk - A NK1 VEGFR2 p75 β - NGF β - NGF VEGF Endothelial cell Angiogenesis Apoptosis CGRP - I SP Macrophage Figure 3 | Potential proangiogenic and antiangiogenic effects of β ‑NGF . Binding of β ‑NGF to Trk‑A on the endothelial cell surface can directly stimulate endothelial cell proliferation , migration and capillary tube formation . Furthermore , binding of β ‑NGF to Trk‑A on sensory nerve terminals might promote the release of angiogenic neuropeptides , SP and CGRP‑I , which bind to their receptors on endothelial cells and stimulate angiogenesis . Similarly , binding of β ‑NGF to Trk‑A on macrophages initiates release of VEGF , which also binds to its receptor on endothelial cells and stimulates angiogenesis . Conversely , binding of β ‑NGF to p75 on endothelial cells might inhibit endothelial survival ( by inducing apoptosis ) and encourage vascular regression . Abbreviations : CGRP‑I , calcitonin gene‑related peptide‑I ; CGRPR , calcitonin gene‑related peptide type I receptor ; β ‑NGF , β ‑nerve growth factor ; NK1 , neurokinin‑1 receptor ; SP , substance P ; Trk‑A , high‑affinity nerve growth factor receptor ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; VEGFR2 , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 396 | JULY 2012 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / nrrheum sub chondral bone loss , chondropathy and fissuring , and might inhibit osteophyte formation . 86 , 87 However , the initial clinical studies of bisphosphonate therapy in patients with OA produced mixed results . 88 , 89 Poor clini - cal efficacy in terms of the reduction in signs or symp - toms of OA could be explained by the use of insufficient dosages that did not adequately inhibit bone remodelling , or by the inclusion of participants without subchondral pathological activity . 86 A subsequent placebo - controlled trial , in which the potent bisphosphonate zoledronate was administered to patients with MRI evidence of bone marrow lesions , demon strated a reduction in the size of lesions and improved symptoms in individuals who received the active treatment . 90 Bone marrow lesions corres pond to histological changes associated with osteochondral angiogenesis , but further research would be required to determine whether reduced osteochondral angiogenesis contributed to the clinical benefit observed with zoledronate therapy in this study . Dual inhibition of angiogenesis and nerve growth could be an attractive therapeutic strategy for patients with OA if the neoinnervation that accompanies blood vessel growth contributes to pain progression . Although β - NGF might have proangiogenic effects , whether its inhibition would be sufficient to prevent new blood vessel growth in joints affected by OA remains unknown . The β - NGF inhibitor tanezumab has proved efficacious in reducing pain in patients with OA . 91 However , data from clinical trials of tanezumab and fulranumab showed rapid and unexpected joint destruction or progressive OA in a minority of participants receiving the active drugs . 92 The rapid clinical efficacy of β - NGF inhibition might be attributable to reduction of this molecule’s effects on the sensitivity of sensory nerves , although long - term effects of β - NGF inhibition on nerve and vascular growth remain incompletely understood . Finally , tissue engineering offers hope for repairing articular cartilage defects and improving the prognosis of patients with OA . A variety of scaffolds and cell types are being combined to optimize cartilage growth and inte - gration and maintain chondrocyte phenotype . Preventing vascularization of the implanted tissues is important in order to maintain their biomechanical properties and prevent endochondral ossification . Incorporation of plasmid vectors encoding endostatin , an endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor , into the mesenchymal stem cells and chondrocytes used to seed cartilaginous constructs is a potential strategy for maintaining the engineered c artilage phenotype . 93 Conclusions In OA , angiogenesis has been demonstrated in the synovium , osteophytes , menisci and the osteo chondral junction . Angiogenesis might facilitate inflammation and contribute to structural disease progression through its essential role in endochondral ossification . Further more , blood vessel growth could contribute to pain through enhanced inflammation , disruption of the osteo chon - dral junction and inappropriate sensory innervation of vulnerable joint structures . Angiogenesis could also threaten the phenotypic stability of engineered carti - lage tissues . Although understanding of these issues has increased , the temporal sequence of structural changes and their relevance to symptoms , particularly in early OA , remain incompletely understood . As well as bone marrow lesions and synovitis , the pathological contribu - tions of meniscal changes and pannus deserve further study . One possibility is that angiogenesis might con - tribute to critical steps in the progression of OA , similarly to the ‘angiogenic switch’ in solid tumours . Mechanisms of angio genesis in OA , including possible contributions of macrophage polarization and β - NGF , are not completely understood . The precise mechanisms by which inhibi - tion of angio genesis reduces pain in animal models of OA are unknown , as is whether blocking the nerve growth associated with angiogenesis could provide sustained analgesia . Finally , more work is needed to determine which consequences of angiogenesis inhibition will be beneficial , and whether adverse events associated with inhibition of physiological angiogenesis can be avoided . Despite these knowledge gaps , the therapeutic potential of inhibiting blood vessel or nerve growth in OA is already apparent . Angiogenesis at the osteochondral junction might provide a particularly favourable opportunity for intervention . Blood vessel growth into articular cartilage is dependent on its unique matrix environment , which offers the potential for site - specific targeting of anti - angiogenic therapies . Treatments that could inhibit the pathological nerve growth that accompanies angio genesis have reached the early stages of clinical development , and positive findings from studies of β - NGF inhibitors support the exploration of other molecular targets that link angiogenesis with innervation . Furthermore , the ( often restricted ) joint distribution of OA raises the possi - bility that local drug administration could avoid systemic adverse events . The ongoing develop ment of therapies that inhibit angio genesis and associated nerve growth clearly has the potential to improve the lives of people with OA in the near future . Review criteria We searched for original articles in PubMed , OVID and Google , using the following search terms : “synovium” , “vasculature” , “oxygen tension” , “capillary density” , “atmospheric pressure” , “movement” , “nutrient transfer” , “cartilage” , “nutrients” , “osteoarthritis” , “angiogenesis” , “antiangiogenic therapies” , “meniscus” , “osteochondral junction” , “osteophytes” , “pannus” , “rheumatoid arthritis” , “arthritis” , “chondrocyte” , “articular cartilage” , “nerve growth” , “neuropeptide ( s ) ” , “nerve growth factor and receptors” , “vascular endothelial cell growth factor and receptors” , “persistence of synovitis” , “animal models” , “substance P” , “calcitonin gene‑related peptide” , “neuropeptide Y” , “galanin” , “somatostatin” , “semaphorin” , “neuropilin” , “plexin” , “netrin” and “robo / slit” , alone and in combination . All articles identified were English‑language , full‑text papers . We also searched the reference lists of key articles and the authors’ own publications for further relevant papers . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 8 | JULY 2012 | 397 1 . Brown , R . A . & Weiss , J . B . Neovascularisation and its role in the osteoarthritic process . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 47 , 881 – 885 ( 1988 ) . 2 . Fransès , R . E . , McWilliams , D . F . , Mapp . , P . I . & Walsh , D . A . Osteochondral angiogenesis and increased protease inhibitor expression in OA . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18 , 563 – 571 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Bonnet , C . S . & Walsh , D . A . Osteoarthritis , angiogenesis and inflammation . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 44 , 7 – 16 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Ashraf , S . et al . Increased vascular penetration and nerve growth in the meniscus : a potential source of pain in osteoarthritis . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 70 , 523 – 529 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Levick , J . R . & Knight , A . D . Osmotic flows across the blood‑joint barrier . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 46 , 534 – 539 ( 1987 ) . 6 . Stevens , C . R . , Blake , D . R . , Merry , P . , Revell , P . A . & Levick , J . R . A comparative study by morphometry of the microvasculature in normal and rheumatoid synovium . Arthritis Rheum . 34 , 1508 – 1513 ( 1991 ) . 7 . Blake , D . R . et al . Hypoxic‑reperfusion injury in the inflamed human joint . Lancet 1 , 289 – 293 ( 1989 ) . 8 . O’Hara , B . P . , Urban , J . P . & Maroudas , A . Influence of cyclic loading on the nutrition of articular cartilage . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 49 , 536 – 539 ( 1990 ) . 9 . Walsh , D . A . , Mapp . , P . I . , Wharton , J . , Polak , J . M . & Blake , D . R . Neuropeptide degrading enzymes in normal and inflamed human synovium . Am . J . Pathol . 142 , 1610 – 1621 ( 1993 ) . 10 . Suri , S . et al . Neurovascular invasion at the osteochondral junction and in osteophytes in osteoarthritis . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 66 , 1423 – 1428 ( 2007 ) . 11 . Ashraf , S . , Mapp . , P . I . & Walsh , D . A . Contributions of angiogenesis to inflammation , joint damage , and pain in a rat model of osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 63 , 2700 – 2710 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Mapp . , P . I . et al . Angiogenesis in two animal models of osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 16 , 61 – 69 ( 2008 ) . 13 . Shibakawa , A . et al . Presence of pannus‑like tissue on osteoarthritic cartilage and its histological character . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 11 , 133 – 140 ( 2003 ) . 14 . Smith , M . D . , Triantafillou , S . , Parker , A . , Youssef , P . P . & Coleman , M . Synovial membrane inflammation and cytokine production in patients with early osteoarthritis . J . Rheumatol . 24 , 365 – 371 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Bondeson , J . et al . The role of synovial macrophages and macrophage‑produced mediators in driving inflammatory and destructive responses in osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 647 – 657 ( 2010 ) . 16 . Haywood , L . et al . Inflammation and angiogenesis in osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 48 , 2173 – 2177 ( 2003 ) . 17 . Conaghan , P . G . et al . MRI and non‑cartilaginous structures in knee osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 14 ( Suppl . A ) , A87 – A94 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Revell , P . A . , Mayston , V . , Lalor , P . & Mapp . , P . The synovial membrane in osteoarthritis : a histological study including the characterisation of the cellular infiltrate present in inflammatory osteoarthritis using monoclonal antibodies . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 47 , 300 – 307 ( 1988 ) . 19 . Walsh , D . A . , Wade , M . , Mapp . , P . I . & Blake , D . R . Focally regulated endothelial proliferation and cell death in human synovium . Am . J . Pathol . 152 , 691 – 702 ( 1998 ) . 20 . Walsh , D . A . et al . Angiogenesis and nerve growth factor at the osteochondral junction in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 49 , 1852 – 1861 ( 2010 ) . 21 . Petersen , W . & Tillmann , B . Collagenous fibril texture of the human knee joint menisci . Anat . Embryol . ( Berl . ) 197 , 317 – 324 ( 1998 ) . 22 . Aigner , T . , Dietz , U . , Stöss , H . & von der Mark , K . Differential expression of collagen types I , II , III , and X in human osteophytes . Lab . Invest . 73 , 236 – 243 ( 1995 ) . 23 . Hashimoto , S . et al . Development and regulation of osteophyte formation during experimental osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 10 , 180 – 187 ( 2002 ) . 24 . Lainer‑Carr , D . & Brahn , E . Angiogenesis inhibition as a therapeutic approach for inflammatory synovitis . Nat . Clin . Pract . Rheumatol . 3 , 434 – 442 ( 2007 ) . 25 . Walsh , D . A . et al . Angiogenesis in the synovium and at the osteochondral junction in osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 15 , 743 – 751 ( 2007 ) . 26 . Mantovani , A . , Sica , A . & Locati , M . Macrophage polarization comes of age . Immunity 23 , 344 – 346 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Aron‑Wisnewsky , J . et al . Human adipose tissue macrophages : m1 and m2 cell surface markers in subcutaneous and omental depots and after weight loss . J . Clin . Endocrinol . Metab . 94 , 4619 – 4623 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Hamilton , J . A . & Tak , P . P . The dynamics of macrophage lineage populations in inflammatory and autoimmune diseases . Arthritis Rheum . 60 , 1210 – 1221 ( 2009 ) . 29 . McInnes , I . B . et al . Production of nitric oxide in the synovial membrane of rheumatoid and osteoarthritis patients . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 1519 – 1524 ( 1996 ) . 30 . Wu , W . K . , Llewellyn , O . P . , Bates , D . O . , Nicholson , L . B . & Dick , A . D . IL‑10 regulation of macrophage VEGF production is dependent on macrophage polarisation and hypoxia . Immunobiology 215 , 796 – 803 ( 2010 ) . 31 . Pufe , T . , Petersen , W . , Tillmann , B . & Mentlein , R . The splice variants VEGF121 and VEGF189 of the angiogenic peptide vascular endothelial growth factor are expressed in osteoarthritic cartilage . Arthritis Rheum . 44 , 1082 – 1088 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Pfander , D . , Cramer , T . , Deuerling , D . , Weseloh , G . & Swoboda , B . Expression of thrombospondin‑1 and its receptor CD36 in human osteoarthritic cartilage . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 59 , 448 – 454 ( 2000 ) . 33 . Moses , M . A . et al . Troponin I is present in human cartilage and inhibits angiogenesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 2645 – 2650 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Eisenstein , R . , Sorgente , N . , Soble , L . W . , Miller , A . & Kuettner , K . E . The resistance of certain tissues to invasion : penetrability of explanted tissues by vascularized mesenchyme . Am . J . Pathol . 73 , 765 – 774 ( 1973 ) . 35 . Fenwick , S . A . , Gregg , P . J . & Rooney , P . Osteoarthritic cartilage loses its ability to remain avascular . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 7 , 441 – 452 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Walker , G . D . , Fischer , M . , Gannon , J . , Thompson , R . C . Jr & Oegema , T . R . Jr . Expression of type‑X collagen in osteoarthritis . J . Orthop . Res . 13 , 4 – 12 ( 1995 ) . 37 . Wilson , A . S . , Legg , P . G . & McNeur , J . C . Studies on the innervation of the medial meniscus in the human knee joint . Anat . Rec . 165 , 485 – 491 ( 1969 ) . 38 . Day , B . , Mackenzie , W . G . , Shim , S . S . & Leung , G . The vascular and nerve supply of the human meniscus . Arthroscopy 1 , 58 – 62 ( 1985 ) . 39 . Mapp . , P . I . Innervation of the synovium . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 54 , 398 – 403 ( 1995 ) . 40 . Lanzetta , A . et al . The nervous structures of anterior cruciate ligament of human knee , healthy and lesioned , studied with confocal scanning laser microscopy . Ital . J . Anat . Embryol . 109 , 167 – 176 ( 2004 ) . 41 . Reimann , I . & Christensen , S . B . A histological demonstration of nerves in subchondral bone . Acta Orthop . Scand . 48 , 345 – 352 ( 1977 ) . 42 . Mapp . , P . I . et al . Substance P‑ , calcitonin gene‑related peptide‑ and C‑flanking peptide of neuropeptide Y‑immunoreactive fibres are present in normal synovium but depleted in patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Neuroscience 37 , 143 – 153 ( 1990 ) . 43 . Walsh , D . A . et al . Innervation and neurokinin receptors during angiogenesis in the rat sponge granuloma . Histochem . J . 28 , 759 – 769 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Jimenez‑Andrade , J . M . , Ghilardi , J . R . , Castañeda‑Corral , G . , Kuskowski , M . A . & Mantyh , P . W . Preventive or late administration of anti‑NGF therapy attenuates tumor‑induced nerve sprouting , neuroma formation , and cancer pain . Pain 152 , 2564 – 2574 ( 2011 ) . 45 . Fan , T . P . , Hu , D . E . , Guard , S . , Gresham , G . A . & Watling , K . J . Stimulation of angiogenesis by substance P and interleukin‑1 in the rat and its inhibition by NK1 or interleukin‑1 receptor antagonists . Br . J . Pharmacol . 110 , 43 – 49 ( 1993 ) . 46 . Movafagh , S . , Hobson , J . P . , Spiegel , S . , Kleinman , H . K . & Zukowska , Z . Neuropeptide Y induces migration , proliferation , and tube formation of endothelial cells bimodally via Y1 , Y2 , and Y5 receptors . FASEB J . 20 , 1924 – 1926 ( 2006 ) . 47 . Seegers , H . C . , Hood , V . C . , Kidd , B . L . , Cruwys , S . C . & Walsh , D . A . Enhancement of angiogenesis by endogenous substance P release and neurokinin‑1 receptors during neurogenic inflammation . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 306 , 8 – 12 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Seegers , H . C . , Avery , P . S . , McWilliams , D . F . , Haywood , L . & Walsh , D . A . Combined effect of bradykinin B2 and neurokinin‑1 receptor activation on endothelial cell proliferation in acute synovitis . FASEB J . 18 , 762 – 764 ( 2004 ) . 49 . Mapp . , P . I . , McWilliams , D . F . , Turley , M . J . , Hargin , E . & Walsh , D . A . A role for the sensory neuropeptide calcitonin gene‑related peptide in endothelial cell proliferation in vivo . Br . J . Pharmacol . 166 , 1261 – 1271 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Ashraf , S . , Mapp . , P . I . & Walsh , D . A . Angiogenesis and the persistence of inflammation in a rat model of proliferative synovitis . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 1890 – 1898 ( 2010 ) . 51 . Carmeliet , P . & Tessier‑Lavigne , M . Common mechanisms of nerve and blood vessel wiring . Nature 436 , 193 – 200 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Masuda , T . & Shiga , T . Chemorepulsion and cell adhesion molecules in patterning initial trajectories of sensory axons . Neurosci . Res . 51 , 337 – 347 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Miller , L . E . et al . Increased prevalence of semaphorin 3C , a repellent of sympathetic nerve fibers , in the synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 50 , 1156 – 1163 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Fassold , A . et al . Soluble neuropilin‑2 , a nerve repellent receptor , is increased in rheumatoid arthritis synovium and aggravates sympathetic fiber repulsion and arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 60 , 2892 – 2901 ( 2009 ) . 55 . Seki , T . , Selby , J . , Haupl , T . & Winchester , R . Use of differential subtraction method to identify genes that characterize the phenotype of cultured rheumatoid arthritis synoviocytes . Arthritis Rheum . 41 , 1356 – 1364 ( 1998 ) . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 398 | JULY 2012 | VOLUME 8 www . nature . com / nrrheum 56 . Ikeda , M . , Hosoda , Y . , Hirose , S . , Okada , Y . & Ikeda , E . Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor isoforms and their receptors Flt‑1 , KDR , and neuropilin‑1 in synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritis . J . Pathol . 191 , 426 – 433 ( 2000 ) . 57 . Matthies , A . M . , Low , Q . E . , Lingen , M . W . & DiPietro , L . A . Neuropilin‑1 participates in wound angiogenesis . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 289 – 296 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Kigel , B . , Varshavsky , A . , Kessler , O . & Neufeld , G . Successful inhibition of tumor development by specific class‑3 semaphorins is associated with expression of appropriate semaphorin receptors by tumor cells . PLoS ONE 3 , e3287 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Kong , J . S . et al . Anti‑neuropilin‑1 peptide inhibition of synoviocyte survival , angiogenesis , and experimental arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 179 – 190 ( 2010 ) . 60 . Enomoto , H . et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor isoforms and their receptors are expressed in human osteoarthritic cartilage . Am . J . Pathol . 162 , 171 – 181 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Gomez , C . et al . Expression of Semaphorin‑3A and its receptors in endochondral ossification : potential role in skeletal development and innervation . Dev . Dyn . 234 , 393 – 403 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Catalano , A . The neuroimmune semaphorin‑3A reduces inflammation and progression of experimental autoimmune arthritis . J . Immunol . 185 , 6373 – 6383 ( 2010 ) . 63 . Nico , B . , Mangieri , D . , Benagiano , V . , Crivellato , E . & Ribatti , D . Nerve growth factor as an angiogenic factor . Microvasc . Res . 75 , 135 – 141 ( 2008 ) . 64 . Raychaudhuri , S . K . , Raychaudhuri , S . P . , Weltman , H . & Farber , E . M . Effect of nerve growth factor on endothelial cell biology : proliferation and adherence molecule expression on human dermal microvascular endothelial cells . Arch . Dermatol . Res . 293 , 291 – 295 ( 2001 ) . 65 . Cantarella , G . et al . Nerve growth factor‑ endothelial cell interaction leads to angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo . FASEB J . 16 , 1307 – 1309 ( 2002 ) . 66 . Moser , K . V . , Reindl , M . , Blasig , I . & Humpel , C . Brain capillary endothelial cells proliferate in response to NGF , express NGF receptors and secrete NGF after inflammation . Brain Res . 1017 , 53 – 60 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Steinle , J . J . & Granger , H . J . Nerve growth factor regulates human choroidal , but not retinal , endothelial cell migration and proliferation . Auton . Neurosci . 108 , 57 – 62 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Tanaka , A . , Wakita , U . , Kambe , N . , Iwasaki , T . & Matsuda , H . An autocrine function of nerve growth factor for cell cycle regulation of vascular endothelial cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 313 , 1009 – 1014 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Rahbek , U . L . , Dissing , S . , Thomassen , C . , Hansen , A . J . & Tritsaris , K . Nerve growth factor activates aorta endothelial cells causing PI3K / Akt‑ and ERK‑dependent migration . Pflugers Arch . 450 , 355 – 361 ( 2005 ) . 70 . Park , M . J . et al . Nerve growth factor induces endothelial cell invasion and cord formation by promoting matrix metalloproteinase‑2 expression through the phosphatidylinositol 3‑kinase / Akt signaling pathway and AP‑2 transcription factor . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 30485 – 30496 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Lazarovici , P . , Gazit , A . , Staniszewska , I . , Marcinkiewicz , C . & Lelkes , P . I . Nerve growth factor ( NGF ) promotes angiogenesis in the quail chorioallantoic membrane . Endothelium 13 , 51 – 59 ( 2006 ) . 72 . Lazarovici , P . , Marcinkiewicz , C . & Lelkes , P . I . Cross talk between the cardiovascular and nervous systems : neurotrophic effects of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and angiogenic effects of nerve growth factor ( NGF ) ‑ implications in drug development . Curr . Pharm . Des . 12 , 2609 – 2622 ( 2006 ) . 73 . Seo , K . , Choi , J . , Park , M . & Rhee , C . Angiogenesis effects of nerve growth factor ( NGF ) on rat corneas . J . Vet . Sci . 2 , 125 – 130 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Calza , L . , Giardino , L . , Giuliani , A . , Aloe , L . & Levi‑Montalcini , R . Nerve growth factor control of neuronal expression of angiogenetic and vasoactive factors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 4160 – 4165 ( 2001 ) . 75 . Santos , P . M . , Winterowd , J . G . , Allen , G . G . , Bothwell , M . A . & Rubel , E . W . Nerve growth factor : increased angiogenesis without improved nerve regeneration . Otolaryngol . Head Neck Surg . 105 , 12 – 25 ( 1991 ) . 76 . Graiani , G . et al . Nerve growth factor promotes reparative angiogenesis and inhibits endothelial apoptosis in cutaneous wounds of type 1 diabetic mice . Diabetologia 47 , 1047 – 1054 ( 2004 ) . 77 . Liu , X . et al . Neuronal‑driven angiogenesis : role of NGF in retinal neovascularization in an oxygen‑induced retinopathy model . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 51 , 3749 – 3757 ( 2010 ) . 78 . Emanueli , C . et al . Nerve growth factor promotes angiogenesis and arteriogenesis in ischemic hindlimbs . Circulation 106 , 2257 – 2262 ( 2002 ) . 79 . Adriaenssens , E . et al . Nerve growth factor is a potential therapeutic target in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 68 , 346 – 351 ( 2008 ) . 80 . US National Library of Medicine . Phase III Study of docetaxel and ramucirumab or placebo in breast cancer . ClinicalTrials . gov [ online ] , http : / / www . clinicaltrials . gov / show / NCT00703326 ( 2012 ) . 81 . US National Library of Medicine . A study of paclitaxel with or without ramucirumab in metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma ( RAINBOW ) . ClinicalTrials . gov [ online ] http : / / www . clinicaltrials . gov / show / NCT01170663 ( 2011 ) . 82 . US National Library of Medicine . A study of chemotherapy and ramucirumab vs . chemotherapy alone in second line non‑small cell lung cancer patients who received prior first line platinum based chemotherapy ClinicalTrials . gov [ online ] http : / / www . clinicaltrials . gov / show / NCT01168973 ( 2012 ) . 83 . Strassle , B . W . et al . Inhibition of osteoclasts prevents cartilage loss and pain in a rat model of degenerative joint disease . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18 , 1319 – 1328 ( 2010 ) . 84 . Mapp . , P . I . , Walsh , D . A . , Bowyer , J . & Maciewicz , R . A . Effects of a metalloproteinase inhibitor on osteochondral angiogenesis , chondropathy and pain behavior in a rat model of osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18 , 593 – 600 ( 2010 ) . 85 . Moreau , M . et al . Tiludronate treatment improves structural changes and symptoms of osteoarthritis in the canine anterior cruciate ligament model . Arthritis Res . Ther . 13 , R98 ( 2011 ) . 86 . Agnello , K . A . , Trumble , T . N . , Chambers , J . N . , Seewald , W . & Budsberg , S . C . Effects of zoledronate on markers of bone metabolism and subchondral bone mineral density in dogs with experimentally induced cruciate‑deficient osteoarthritis . Am . J . Vet . Res . 66 , 1487 – 1495 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Jones , M . D . et al . In vivo microfocal computed tomography and micro‑magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of antiresorptive and antiinflammatory drugs as preventive treatments of osteoarthritis in the rat . Arthritis Rheum . 62 , 2726 – 2735 ( 2010 ) . 88 . Spector , T . D . et al . Effect of risedronate on joint structure and symptoms of knee osteoarthritis : results of the BRISK randomized , controlled trial [ ISRCTN01928173 ] . Arthritis Res . Ther . 7 , R625 – R633 ( 2005 ) . 89 . Bingham , C . O . 3 rd et al . Risedronate decreases biochemical markers of cartilage degradation but does not decrease symptoms or slow radiographic progression in patients with medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee : results of the two‑year multinational knee osteoarthritis structural arthritis study . Arthritis Rheum . 54 , 3494 – 3507 ( 2006 ) . 90 . Laslett , L . et al . Zoledronic acid reduces knee pain and bone marrow lesions over 1 year : a randomised controlled trial . Ann . Rheum . Dis . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / annrheumdis‑ 2011‑200970 91 . Lane , N . E . et al . Tanezumab for the treatment of pain from osteoarthritis of the knee . N . Engl . J . Med . 363 , 1521 – 1531 ( 2010 ) . 92 . Dixon , W . & Felson , D . T . Is anti‑TNF therapy safer than previously thought ? JAMA 306 , 2380 – 2381 ( 2011 ) . 93 . Jeng , L . , Olsen , B . R . & Spector , M . Engineering endostatin‑producing cartilaginous constructs for cartilage repair using nonviral transfection of chondrocyte‑seeded and mesenchymal‑stem‑ cell‑seeded collagen scaffolds . Tissue Eng . Part A 16 , 3011 – 3021 ( 2010 ) . Acknowledgements H . I . Walsh created the original artwork for Figure 1 . S . Ashraf , R . Hill , D . F . McWilliams , C . I . Pearson and A . Starling prepared the histological samples shown in Figure 2 . Author contributions Both authors contributed equally to researching data for the article and writing , editing and reviewing the manuscript . REVIEWS © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved