Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 © 2010 John Wiley & Sons A / S doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2010 . 01084 . x Toolbox A Comparison of GFP - Tagged Clathrin Light Chains with Fluorochromated Light Chains InVivo and InVitro Anika Hoffmann 1 , 2 , † , Philip N . Dannhauser 1 , † , Stephanie Groos 1 , Lars Hinrichsen 1 , 3 , Ute Curth 4 and Ernst J . Ungewickell 1 , ∗ 1 DepartmentofCellBiology , CenterofAnatomy , HannoverMedicalSchool , Carl - NeubergStr . 1 , D - 30625 Hannover , Germany 2 Currentaddress : DepartmentofPediatricPulmology andNeonatology , HannoverMedicalSchool , Carl - NeubergStr . 1 , D - 30625Hannover , Germany 3 Currentaddress : LohmannAnimalHealthGmbH & Co . KG , Heinz - Lohmann - Str . 4 , 27472Cuxhaven , Germany 4 DepartmentofBiophysicalChemistry , Centerof Biochemistry , HannoverMedicalSchool , Carl - Neuberg Str . 1 , D - 30625Hannover , Germany * Correspondingauthor : ErnstJ . Ungewickell , ungewickell . ernst @ mh - hannover . de † Theseauthorscontributedequallytotheworkpresented inthispaper . Clathrin triskelia consist of three heavy chains and three light chains ( LCs ) . Green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged LCs are widely utilized to follow the dynamics of clathrin in living cells , but whether they reﬂect faithfully the behavior of clathrin triskelia in cells has not been investigated yet thoroughly . As an alternative approach , we labeled puriﬁed LCs either with Alexa 488 or Cy3 dye and compared them with GFP - tagged LC variants . Cy3 - labeled light chains ( Cy3 - LCs ) were microinjected into HeLa cells either directly or in association with heavy chains . Within 1 – 2 min the Cy3 - LC heavy chain complexes entered clathrin - coated structures , whereas uncomplexed Cy3 - LC did not within 2 h . These ﬁndings show that no signiﬁcant exchange of LCs occurs over the time – course of an endocytic cycle . To explore whether GFP - tagged LCs behave functionally like endogenous LCs , we characterized them biochemically . Unlike wild - type LCs , recombinant LCs with a GFP attached to either end did not efﬁciently inhibit clathrin assembly invitro , whereas Cy3 - and Alexa 488 - labeled LC behaved similar to wild - type LCs invitro and in vivo . Thus , ﬂuorochro - mated LCs are a valuable tool for investigating the complex behavior of clathrin in living cells . Key words : electron microscopy , endocytosis , FRAP , live - cell imaging , microinjection Received 9 December 2009 , revised and accepted for publication 28 May 2010 , uncorrected manuscript published online 2 June 2010 , published online 23 June 2010 Clathrin - coated vesicles are important vehicles for the receptor - mediated uptake of nutrients , growth factors and hormones by eukaryotic cells . Vesicle formation at the plasma membrane is a highly dynamic process that requires coordinated reversible protein – protein and protein – lipid interactions . Biochemical approaches were instrumental in identifying the components of the endocytic machinery and of the protein domains involved in those interactions . Structural approaches provided insights into the molecular details of the protein – protein and protein – lipid interactions ( 1 , 2 ) . Static views of the endocytic process that were obtained by electron microscopy ( 3 , 4 ) were complemented by a seminal study of Keen et al . ( 5 ) , who followed the formation of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles in living cells upon expression of the green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged clathrin light chain isoform a ( LCa ) . Most eukaryotic cells express two LC isoforms , LCa and LCb , respectively , that associate tightly with the clathrin heavy chain ( 6 – 8 ) . The two isoforms are about 60 % identical in sequence and their distribution on clathrin triskelia is random ( 9 , 10 ) . In vitro LCs can only be dislodged from heavy chains by high concentrations of chaotropic reagents such as urea or thiocyanate ( 7 , 8 , 11 ) . Both LCs share a highly conserved central α - helical heavy chain binding domain , calcium binding sites , calmodulin binding sites and close to their respective N - terminal end a conserved 22 - residue long segment that binds the endocytic accessory proteins Hip1 and Hip1R ( 12 ) . Hip1 / 1R associates also with F - actin and thereby link the actin - based cytoskeleton to clathrin ( 12 – 16 ) . LCa has an Hsc70 - binding site ( 17 ) and the b form is a substrate for casein kinase 2 ( 18 ) . So far , the function of the LCb phosphorylation remains elusive . Under physiological conditions , the presence of LCs on clathrin triskelia inhibits their self - assembly into lattices unless this inhibitory effect is alleviated by the inter - action of clathrin with adaptors or endocytic accessory proteins ( 19 , 20 ) . A generally inhibitory effect of clathrin LCs on the maturation of coated pits was also evident from quantitative live - cell imaging of cells that had been partially depleted of endogenous LCs ( 21 ) . GFP - LCa was shown to associate with endogenous heavy chains without interfer - ing with basic clathrin functions such as receptor - mediated uptake of transferrin ( 5 ) . Therefore , GFP - tagged LCs are regarded as suitable reagents for studying clathrin in living cells . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments with GFP - LCa - expressing cells suggested that there is a rapid exchange ( t 1 / 2 ∼ 16 seconds ) between lattice - associated GFP - LCa and the cytosolic pool ( 22 ) . www . trafﬁc . dk 1129 Hoffmann et al . Given the tight association of LCs with clathrin heavy chains in vitro , it is assumed that the observed ﬂuo - rescence recovery after bleaching in vivo reﬂects the exchange of clathrin triskelia with bound GFP - LCa rather than that of free GFP - LCa ( 22 ) . According to one view , clathrin exchange could facilitate changes in the lattice structure that parallels the increasing curvature of an invaginating membrane ( 22 ) . The Hsc70 / auxilin chaperone pair that powers the uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles is also believed to be responsible for the clathrin exchange in living cells . This conjecture is supported by experiments that showed a reduction in the exchange rate of clathrin upon depletion of the cyclin G - associated protein kinase ( GAK ) / auxilin 2 in HeLa cells or upon the overexpres - sion of a functional inactive Hsc70 in HeLa cells ( 23 , 24 ) . Both manipulations also inhibited the receptor - mediated uptake of transferrin . Clathrin exchange ( as monitored by GFP - LCa ) was also inhibited either by exposing the cells to hypertonic sucrose solutions or after depletion of potas - sium ( 22 ) . Both procedures also inhibit clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( 25 – 27 ) . More recently , the behavior of GFP - labeled clathrin heavy chains and GFP - tagged LCs was analyzed by evanescent wave ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( 28 ) . Distinct differences in the dynamics of the subunits were observed upon brief transient expres - sion of the three proteins , which suggested that clathrin triskelia with bound GFP - LCb might be more dynamic than those with bound GFP - LCa . The interpretation of live - cell imaging data based on GFP - tagged subunits of oligomeric protein complexes is , however , complicated by the fact that the dynamics of the ﬂuorescent subunit might not necessarily reﬂect the dynamics of the complex . Moreover , the GFP moiety of the fusion protein might affect the functions of the tagged protein . We addressed these concerns by comparing the properties of GFP - tagged LCs with those of ﬂuorochromated LCs from pig brain in vivo and invitro . By utilizing ﬂuorochromated LCs in microinjection experiments , it could be clearly shown that LCs are also tightly associated invivowith heavy chains and that they do not exchange within the life times of coated vesicles or coated plaques . Contrary to a previous report ( 29 ) , we obtained no evidence for a signiﬁcant proportion of light chain - free heavy chains in HeLa cells . Moreover , ﬂuorochromated LCs appear to be functionally closer to endogenous LCs than the tested GFP - tagged species . Results CharacterizationofLCa - andLCb - expressingHeLa celllines To compare ﬂuorochromated LCs with GFP - tagged LCs , we ﬁrst generated cell lines that stably expressed GFP - LCa ( 22 ) and GFP - LCb , respectively , and characterized them in detail . Fluorescence microscopy of HeLa cells expressing the recombinant LCs displayed the typical pattern of clathrin as known from immunoﬂuorescence studies ( Figure 1 ) . Both GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb colocalized perfectly with adaptor complex ( AP ) 2 at the plasma mem - brane and with AP1 at the trans - Golgi network and on endosomes ( Figure 1 ) . We did not note any differences in the distribution between GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb . To deter - mine whether the stable expression of GFP - tagged LCs had any detrimental effects on endocytosis , we mixed untransfected HeLa cells with stable transfected GFP - LCa or GFP - LCb , respectively , and incubated them with Texas Red - labeled transferrin for 10 min at 37 ◦ C . By immunoﬂu - orescence , we did not detect any differences in transferrin uptake between wild - type and transfected cells ( Figure 1 ) . For primary adipocytes , it had been shown before that most of the clathrin at the plasma membrane that adheres to a substrate is organized in large stable coated patches that can exist for several minutes ( 30 ) . Nevertheless , they were shown to be active in endocytosis ( 30 ) . The substrate - adhering plasma membrane of several cell lines , including HeLa , 3T3 and COS cells , is also dominated by large long - lived clathrin patches or plaques that had been studied in detail by Saffarian et al . ( 31 ) . Our HeLa cell lines that stably express GFP - tagged LCs are also characterized by large stable clathrin patches or plaques that readily con - centrated and internalized ﬂuorescent transferrin . When the internalization was slowed by reducing the temper - ature to 25 ◦ C , we often captured small transferrin - laden vesicles leaving the stable patches ( Figure S1 ) . Occasion - ally , these vesicles were at least initially also associated with GFP - LCs . At 25 ◦ C , clathrin patches were cleared of transferrin within 6 – 8 min . We also examined stable GFP - LCa - and GFP - LCb - expressing cell lines by electron microscopy using ultrathin sectioning ( Figure 1C – E ) and surface replication of cellular cortices with platinum and carbon ( Figures 1F , G and S1 ) . The images that were obtained from sectioning showed coated structures of normal appearance . Platinum replica of the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane revealed large ﬂat clathrin - coated patches with budding vesicles near their edges ( Figures 1F , G and S1 ) . These views are typical for the substrate - adhering side of HeLa cells and are consistent with images from living cells showing small transferrin - ﬁlled and partially clathrin - coated vesicles leaving more stable clathrin patches . We also puriﬁed clathrin - coated vesicles from GFP - LCa - and GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cells and examined them by electron microscopy . They appeared morphologically indistinguish - able from coated vesicles puriﬁed from non - transfected cells ( Figure S2 ) . To determine the amount of incorporated GFP - LCs , clathrin was extracted from the vesicle mem - branes , puriﬁed by gel ﬁltration and analyzed by SDS gel electrophoresis . By densitometry of the stained protein bands , it was estimated that about half of the endoge - nous LCs associated with heavy chains had been replaced by recombinant GFP - tagged LCs in the stable transfected cells ( Figure S2 ) . The ﬂuorescence of GFP - LC in coated structures is known to recover from photobleaching with half - times ranging 1130 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 Clathrin Light Chain Dynamics Figure 1 : Stable expression of GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb in HeLa cells . A ) Colocalization of GFP - LCa with clathrin heavy chain and with the adaptor complexes AP2 and AP1 , respectively , and uptake of transferrin ( TF ) . B ) Staining of GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cells with antibodies to clathrin heavy chain , AP2 and AP1 , and endocytosis experiment with TF . For the TF uptake experiment , GFP - LC - expressing cells were mixed with non - transfected cells to allow the direct comparison in endocytic efﬁciency . Arrows point at groups of cells that express GFP - LCs . Bar : 10 μ m . C – E ) Immunogold electron microscopy of sections labeled with antibodies to GFP ; 10 - nm gold particles were attached to goat anti - rabbit antibodies . The labeling shows the presence of GFP - LCs at clathrin - coated membrane structures ( arrowheads ) . F and G ) Views of the cytoplasmic aspects of the plasma membrane from GFP - LC - expressing cells . GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb refer to the stable lines that express the respective fusion proteins . Bars : 100 nm . H ) Time – course of recovery of GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb after photobleaching at 37 ◦ C as a function of osmolality . Data sets represent the average of ﬁve scans obtained from different cells . Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 1131 Hoffmann et al . from 10 to 30 seconds , depending on temperature and possibly on the LC isoform ( 22 , 28 , 30 , 32 , 33 ) . The results that we obtained for the half - time of the recovery of stably expressed GFP - LCb and GFP - LCa fell within the same range . However , we did not observe any signiﬁcant differ - ences in the recovery between the two LC isoforms as pre - viously reported by others ( 28 ) ( Figure 1H ) . As expected , the recovery of the ﬂuorescence was completely blocked in hypertonic culture medium ( 22 ) ( Figure 1H ) , a condition that also blocks receptor - mediated endocytosis ( 26 ) . The hypertonicity of the medium was proposed to exert its effect on endocytosis by acidifying the cytosol and this in turn causes massive assembly of clathrin into small empty coats around the edges of ﬂat clathrin coats on the plasma membrane ( 34 ) . To quantify the sucrose - induced assembly of clathrin and to determine whether adaptors are also affected by hypertonic conditions , HeLa cells were lysed , separated by ultracentrifugation into a cytoso - lic and a particulate fraction and then analyzed by western blotting . Under physiological conditions , clathrin and AP2 partioned equally between the supernatant and pellet frac - tion ( Figure S3 ) . In 0 . 45 M sucrose , however , about 90 % of the clathrin and AP2 were found in the pellet fractions ( Figure S3 ) . The amount of AP1 and epsin in the pellet fraction increased from about 30 % , under physiological conditions , to about 70 % in 0 . 45 M sucrose ( Figure S3 ) . In all instances , the GFP - tagged LCs mirrored the behavior of the clathrin heavy chain . Dynamicsofclathrinlightchainsinlivingcells The rapid recovery of the GFP - LC ﬂuorescence after photobleaching is generally attributed to an exchange of GFP - LCs bound to clathrin heavy chains rather than the exchange of GFP - LCs perse ( 22 , 28 , 32 , 33 ) . Although LCs are known to bind tightly to heavy chains in vitro ( 7 , 8 ) , it is nevertheless conceivable that a rapid association / dissociation equilibrium of LCs might play a regulatory role in the coated vesicle transport cycle in vivo . To determine whether the in vivo GFP - LC dynam - ics is tightly coupled to the exchange of clathrin heavy chains ( triskelia ) , we followed the fate of invitro ﬂuores - cently labeled LCs after microinjection into living cells . To this end , highly puriﬁed LCs from pig brain were reacted with Cy3 - N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) or alternatively with Alexa 488 - NHS ester . The LCs incorporated reproducibly between 0 . 7 and 0 . 9 dye molecules per LC . The func - tional activity of the derivatized LCs was determined by binding them to clathrin from which the endogenous LCs had been dissociated with 1 . 3 M sodium thiocyanate ( 8 ) . Both , the Cy3 - ( Cy3 - LC ) and Alexa 488 - labeled light chains ( Alexa 488 - LCs ) , associated readily with light chain - free clathrin cages as shown by cosedimentation ( Figure S4 ) . Saturation of binding was achieved with about one LC per heavy chain ( Figure S4 ) . In competition binding experi - ments that were analyzed by analytical ultracentrifugation , the Alexa 488 - LCs were gradually displaced by unlabeled LCs from clathrin triskelia sedimenting with 8 . 8 S to give rise to a 1 . 76 S species corresponding to free clathrin LCs . From the degree of displacement of Alexa 488 - LC at equal molar concentrations of unlabeled LCs , it was estimated that the ﬂuorochromation of the LCs reduced their afﬁnity for heavy chains by a factor of 3 ( The dissociation constant of clathrin LCs for heavy chains is less than 2 × 10 − 8 M , see Refs 7 and 8 ) ( Figure S4C ) . Taken together , these results showed that the ﬂuorescently labeled LCs were functional at least in respect to clathrin binding . To follow the dynamics of LCs in cells , Cy3 - LCs were microinjected into GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cells either as free LCs or after reconstitution with light chain - free clathrin heavy chains . Already within 2 min , we noted the incorporation of heavy chain - associated Cy3 - LC into coated structures at the plasma membrane ( Figure 2A ) . In contrast , free LCs remained diffusely distributed through - out the cytosol and the nucleus ( Figure 2B ) . When the cells were ﬁxed 2 h after microinjection and viewed by confo - cal microscopy , we noted almost perfect colocalization of the Cy3 - LC – triskelia complexes with clathrin - coated structures containing GFP - LCb ( Figure 2C ) . In contrast , in cells that were microinjected with Cy3 - LC , only small amounts of the injected Cy3 - LC colocalized with clathrin puncta . Most of the Cy3 - LC were found in large ﬂu - orescent structures that did not coincide with clathrin heavy chains ( Figure 2D ) . These aggregates are proba - bly a ﬁxation artifact because they were not observed in living cells . Rapid incorporation of free Cy3 - LC into clathrin - coated structures was only observed in HeLa cells , where the endogenous LCs had been depleted by RNAi ( Figure 2E , F ) . These results indicate that in liv - ing cells free clathrin LCs do not exchange readily with endogenous LCs that are tightly associated with clathrin heavy chains . In contrast , heavy chains attached to Cy3 - LC before microinjection exchanged rapidly with endogenous triskelia in clathrin - coated structures . Our results also sug - gest that the concentration of light chain - free heavy chains must be low or not existing in HeLa cells , because other - wise we should have observed signiﬁcant incorporation of microinjected ﬂuorescent LCs into coated structures . To investigate the dynamics of microinjected LCs , they were labeled with Alexa 488 . For microinjection , they were ﬁrst reconstituted with heavy chains . The cells were ana - lyzed by FRAP and found to be slightly more dynamic than GFP - tagged LC ( Figure S5 ) . In summary , our results clearly showed that the rapid recovery of the ﬂuorescence in GFP - LC - expressing cells upon photobleaching indeed reﬂects the exchange of triskelia that are tightly associated with GFP - LCs rather than the exchange of free GFP - LCs . AlteredfunctionalpropertiesofGFP - taggedlight chains To address the question of whether the GFP moiety of recombinant LCs might impede their function , we puriﬁed them for invitrostudies . LCs fused to glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) and GFP were expressed in bacteria and adsorbed from lysates to glutathione - Sepharose . The GFP - tagged LCs were released from the resin by proteolytically cleaving off their GST moiety . One function of the LCs is the efﬁcient inhibition of clathrin assembly 1132 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 Clathrin Light Chain Dynamics Figure 2 : Microinjection of reconstituted Cy3 - LC heavy chain complexes and free Cy3 - LC . A ) Microinjection of clathrin triskelia complexed with Cy3 - LC into GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cells . Within 1 – 2 min of microinjection , punctate Cy3 ﬂuorescence was observed . B ) Microinjection of free Cy3 - LC . Note that they failed to enter clathrin - coated structures within 2 min . C ) Colocalization of Cy3 - LC heavy chain complexes with endogenous GFP - LCb - labeled coated structures . Microinjected cells were allowed to recover for 2 h at 37 ◦ C before they were ﬁxed and examined by confocal microscopy . Microinjected Cy3 - LC – triskelion complexes were seen to colocalize perfectly with endogenous GFP - LCb - containing clathrin puncta . D ) Microinjection of free Cy3 - LC . Even after 2 h of recovery , Cy3 - LCs were only rarely seen in clathrin - coated structures ( arrowheads ) , instead they tend to form large aggregates . E ) Microinjection of free Cy3 - LC into LC - depleted HeLa cells . Note that within 10 min Cy3 - LCs readily associate with clathrin - coated structures stained with anti - clathrin heavy chain . F ) Microinjection of free Cy3 - LC into mock - transfected HeLa cells ; no signiﬁcant colocalization with clathrin - coated structures was observed . into empty coats under physiological conditions ( 19 , 20 ) . When wild - type LCs were replaced by N - or C - terminally GFP - tagged LCs , we noted that they all failed to inhibit clathrin coat assembly signiﬁcantly ( Figure 3 ) . In contrast , Cy3 - and Alexa 488 - derivatized LCs behaved functionally like wild - type LCs ( Figure 3 ) . As judged by electron microscopy , the lattice structure of negatively stained coats that assembled in the presence of GFP - tagged LCs appeared indistinguishable from the ones with wild - type LCs ( Figure 3B ) . Electron micrographs of rotary shadowed triskelia reconstituted with N - terminally GFP - tagged LCs often revealed distinct globular particles close to the proximal leg segments that were not seen in wild - type triskelia . Most likely these particles correspond to the globular GFP molecule ( Figure 4 ) . Clathrin triskelia that had been reconstituted with LCs linked at their C - terminus to GFP ( LCb - GFP ) very often displayed a bulging central vertex or particles near the triskelion center ( Figure 4 ) . Discussion Clathrin LCs that are tagged with ﬂuorescent proteins have been proven useful for studying the dynamics of clathrin in living cells ( 5 , 35 ) . Eisenberg et al . ( 22 ) were the ﬁrst to observe that the ﬂuorescence of clathrin - coated patches or plaques that are found on the bottom side of substrate - adhering HeLa cells recovers Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 1133 Hoffmann et al . Figure 3 : Clathrin triskelia assembly in the presence of LCs . Clathrin heavy chains were allowed to assemble during overnight dialysis in the absence or presence of pig brain LCs , recombinant GFP - tagged LCs or a mixture of Cy3 - and Alexa 488 - ﬂuorochromated brain LCs . Note that two controls are shown ( track pairs 1 and 8 ) because the assembly experiments with GFP - LCs and ﬂuorochromated LC were performed with different heavy chain batches ( see also Materials and Methods ) . A ) Quantitation of clathrin assembly by ultracentrifugation and SDS – PAGE of supernatant ( s ) and pellet fraction ( p ) . B ) Electron micrographs of assembled cages after negative staining with 2 % uranyl acetate . after photobleaching within ∼ 60 seconds . The FRAP measurements were experimentally possible because clathrin - coated plaques often exist for many min - utes ( 22 , 31 ) . In contrast , the life time of small coated pits with diffraction - limited dimensions lasts from 30 to 60 seconds ( 31 ) – too fast for recording changes in the ﬂuorescence after bleaching . The recovery of clathrin LC ﬂuorescence in stable clathrin plaques is believed to reﬂect an exchange of clathrin triskelia with bound LCs between the plaques and the cytosolic pool , as opposed to an exchange of LCs only . This assumption was inferred from the observed stability of heavy chain – LC complexes in vitro ( 7 , 8 ) . In support of this conjecture , the results of our microinjection studies clearly showed that free ﬂuores - cent LCs did not enter coated plaques unless they were injected into cells that had been depleted of endogenous LCs by RNA interference . Also ﬂuorescent LCs complexed with heavy chains before injection , readily associated with coated plaques . Both results also suggest that in liv - ing cells the proportion of light chain - free heavy chains is 1134 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 Clathrin Light Chain Dynamics Figure 4 : Electron micrographs of clathrin triskelia with attached GFP - LCs . A ) Puriﬁed clathrin from pig brain . B ) Clathrin heavy chains reconstituted with LCb that carry a GFP fused to the N - terminus of the LC ( GFP - LCb ) . Note the particles along the proximal leg that do not occur in preparations of wild - type triskelia . C ) Clathrin heavy chains reconstituted with LCa that carry a GFP fused to the N - terminus of the LC ( GFP - LCa ) . Again , small particles are clearly visible along the proximal leg . D ) Clathrin heavy chains reconstituted with LCb that carry a GFP fused to the C - terminus of the LC ( LCb - GFP ) . In this case , the particles appear to be closer to the triskelion vertex . E ) Histogram quantifying the distance of GFP - LCa , GFP - LCb and LCb - GFP particles from the triskelion center . likely to be very small . This conclusion is further supported by the observation that puriﬁed triskelia from HeLa cells contain about one LC per heavy chain . Moreover , stud - ies with yeast ( 36 , 37 ) and biochemical investigations ( 38 ) showed that LCs are required for the efﬁcient trimerization of clathrin heavy chains . On the other hand , a report stated that in a number of tissues and cell lines , including HeLa , LCs are present in substoichiometric amounts relative to heavy chains ( 29 ) . At least for HeLa cells , we cannot conﬁrm these results . An explanation for this discrepancy might be found in the high protease sensitivity of LCs as well as in the semiquantitative nature of immunoblot - ting procedures that were employed to determine the stoichiometry between the clathrin subunits in the case of HeLa cells . Various treatments such as the exposure of cells to hypertonic media , ATP depletion or mild permeabilization with digitonin interfere with the exchange of clathrin in plaques . It has been reported that under certain conditions ( room temperature , the absence of ATP and hypertonic sucrose ) , GFP - LCa differs from GFP - LCb in exchange dynamics ( 28 ) . We did not observe any signiﬁcant differences in the behavior of the LCs in sucrose or at low cellular ATP concentrations ( not shown ) . The conﬂicting observations may be in part explained by experimental ’borderline conditions’ such as the use of 0 . 2 M sucrose in the medium or short incubation times at low concentrations of digitonin ( 28 ) . In both conditions , we noted variable and incomplete inhibition of LC dynamics , irrespective of LC type ( data not shown ) . The long - lived clathrin structures ( plaques ) that were selected for FRAP studies by us and others are typical for the ventral plasma membrane ( substrate - adhering side ) of HeLa cells , adipocytes , astrocytes and ﬁbroblasts ( 30 , 31 ) . There is agreement that plaques are active in internaliz - ing cargo but different mechanisms have been proposed that are , however , not mutual exclusive . We noted in HeLa cells small transferrin - containing structures depart - ing from stable plaques . Occasionally , small amounts of clathrin were also detected on these structures . Bellve et al . also had suggested that small vesicles might leave from stable plaques ( 30 ) . The formation of coated vesicles from plaques seems to occur predominantly at their rims or close to them , since we saw by electron microscopy no buds within the plaques [ Figures 1 , S1 and also Figure 2 in a recent review , ( 39 ) ] . Thus , some of the exchange of clathrin as revealed by FRAP might be accounted for by budding of coated vesicles , followed by recruitment of clathrin from the cytosolic pool to the site of the plaque . Saffarian et al . had recently pointed out that from time to time the plaques internalize abruptly without curving in ( 31 ) . This process was shown to be strictly actin - dependent . Whether this type of endocytosis constitutes an aberrant form as a result of the strong adhesion of the membrane to the substratum or a distinct physiological mechanism that goes beyond salvaging - trapped coat com - ponents remains to be seen . In any case , clathrin triskelia within these plaques are in a dynamic equilibrium with clathrin in the cytosolic pool . Under hypertonic conditions , this exchange ceases and endocytosis stops concomi - tantly . Cell fractionation showed that not only clathrin but also adaptors translocate in hypertonic conditions from the cytosolic pool to the particulate fraction ( Figure S3 ) . Endocytosis ceases under hypertonic conditions because clathrin ( 27 ) and adaptors are trapped in an assembled state . Under physiological conditions , clathrin exchange is catalyzed by Hsc70 and its cochaperones auxilin 1 and 2 ( 24 , 40 ) , but what is the purpose of this exchange ? It is possible that the exchange of triskelia from the lattice is linked to rearrangements within the lattice to accom - modate or power changes in membrane curvature , as suggested ﬁrst by Eisenberg et al . ( 32 ) . This view has Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 1135 Hoffmann et al . been challenged recently when it was proposed that small diffraction - limited coated structures recruit clathrin as they grow into a bud ( 31 ) . Alternatively , it is conceivable that the Hsc70 / auxilin chaperone system is used to increase the threshold for coat formation by terminating non - productive clathrin membrane interactions when the concentration of cargo or phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) is low . In fact such abortive events have been frequently observed in living cells ( 41 – 43 ) . The Hsc70 / auxilin chap - erone machinery is also utilized to uncoat coated vesicles after hydrolysis of PIP 2 to phosphatidyl - 4 - phosphate by phosphatases such as oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe enzyme ( OCRL ) or synaptojanin ( 44 , 45 ) . In case of large stable plaques , net uncoating might not take place because of the persistent presence of high - afﬁnity binding sites for clathrin and adaptors in the plasma membrane . Invagination does also not occur because of a strong asso - ciation of the plasma membrane with the substratum . The result will be futile clathrin exchange readily picked up in numerous FRAP experiments . A network of weak protein – protein interactions governs the progressive and ordered assembly and disassembly of clathrin coat components ( 46 ) . Changes in individual afﬁnities are likely to cause imbalances in the ﬁnely tuned network of interactions . In this context , our observation that GFP - tagged LCs switchinvitrofrom clathrin assembly inhibitors to clathrin assembly proteins is of signiﬁcance , because GFP - tagged LCs are widely used as reporters for studying clathrin dynamics in living cells . However , this profound change in the properties of GFP - tagged LCs does not affect basic functions , such as the clathrin - mediated uptake of transferrin , because the endocytosis machinery seems very robust and therefore can tolerate the incor - poration of LCs with altered afﬁnities . Also , at moderate expression levels of the GFP - LC , any signiﬁcant differ - ences in the uptake kinetics might be difﬁcult to detect . How could it be explained that GFP - tagged LCs lost their assembly inhibiting function ? In contrast to LCs per se , the globular GFP moiety is easily discerned by electron microscopy of rotary shadowed clathrin triskelia ( Figure 4 ) . When linked to the N - terminus of LCs , the GFP was seen close to the knee at the proximal triskelion leg segment . The LCs are known to run parallel to the proximal segment of the clathrin heavy chain , which has its C - terminus at the triskelion center ( 47 ) . Thus , a GFP particle near the knee is to be expected . Triskelia reconstituted with C - terminally GFP - tagged LCs revealed particles very close to the triske - lion center ( Figure 4 ) . About 70 residues , located in the central part of the LC sequence , fold into an α - helix on contact with the clathrin heavy chain ( 20 , 48 ) . This leaves on either end long and potentially ﬂexible segments ( ∼ 90 N - terminal and ∼ 70 C - terminal residues ) to which the GFP is attached . In addition , 5 and 42 amino acids long linker connects the GFP to LCa and LCb , respectively . The long ﬂexible segments might allow the GFP portions from neighboring LCs to contact each other and thereby could affect the conformation of regulatory LC segments . In this context , it should be borne in mind that enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) retains a weak tendency for dimerization ( 49 ) . In conclusion , the altered properties of GFP - tagged LCs should be seriously considered , especially for the interpretation of quantitative live - cell imaging data ( 21 , 43 ) . Fluorochromated LCs , which we have shown to behave in vitro and in vivo similar to wild - type LCs , offer an alternative in such critical and sensitive experiments . Materials and Methods AntibodiesandcDNAconstructs Mouse monoclonal antibodies ( mabs ) used for immunoﬂuorescence were X22 , anti - clathrin heavy chain ( 50 ) , AP . 6 , anti - α - adaptin ( 51 ) , mab 100 / 3 and anti - γ - adaptin ( 52 ) . A rabbit polyclonal anti - GFP used in electron microscopy was from Molecular Probes ; mouse mabs used for western blotting were anti - clathrin heavy chain ( BD Biosciences ; catalog number 610500 ) , anti - α - adaptin ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , mab 100 / 3 and anti - γ - adaptin . A mab against GFP was obtained from J . Wehland ( HZI ) . The mab to AP2 ( mab 100 / 2 ) and polyclonal rabbit antibodies to clathrin LCs were produced in our laboratory ( 52 ) , as was a polyclonal rabbit serum against the epsin peptide ’EERIRRGDDLRLQMA’ ( 53 ) . Fluorescein isothiocyanate - and rhodamine - labeled goat anti - mouse and goat anti - rabbit antibodies were from Molecular Probes . Secondary horseradish peroxidase - conjugated goat anti - mouse and goat anti - rabbit antibodies were from ICN . Texas Red - labeledtransferrin was from Molecular Probes . Goat anti - rabbit antibodies conjugated with 10 - nm gold particles were obtained from British BioCell . The GFP - LCa plasmid used was described previously ( 22 ) and kindly provided by L . Greene , NIH . The LCb DNA in puc18 was a kind gift from F . Brodsky , UCSF . Reagents Enzymes and other reagents for molecular biology were purchased from MBI Fermentas or New England Biolabs GmbH . Cell culture media and Alexa Fluor 488 carboxylic acid , succinimidyl ester ( Alexa 488 ) were from Invitrogen . siRNAs were purchased from Dharmacon . Cy3 - NHS was from GE Healthcare . Lipofectamine 2000 ™ was from Invitrogen , Geneticin from Biochrom AG and HiPerFect ™ from Qiagen . Cloning , expressionandpuriﬁcationofrecombinant fusionproteins The GFP - LCb DNA was constructed by excising the bovine brain LCb DNA from puc18 cloning vector with HindIII and EcoRI . Before digestion with EcoRI , the ends generated by HindIII were blunted with Klenow fragment . The LCb DNA was then inserted in between the EcoRI and SmaI sites of the EGFP - C - 2 vector . The sequences of both , GFP - LCa and GFP - LCb , were veriﬁed by sequencing ( MWG Biotech ) . HeLa SS6 cells grown in a 10 - cm Petri dish were transfected with 24 μ g DNA using 30 μ L Lipofectamine 2000 ™ . The cells were grown at 37 ◦ C under 5 % CO 2 in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium containing 10 % fetal calf serum for 2 days . Stably GFP - LC - expressing cells were selected with 0 . 8 mg / mL genecitin over a period of 6 weeks . GFP - positive cells were enriched twice bycellsortingusingaMoFlo ™ High - PerformanceCellSorter ( DakoGmbH ) . GST - GFP - LCa DNA was constructed by ﬁrst cutting the pEGFP - LCa parent vector with AgeI , followed by Klenow reaction and further digestion with SalI . TheexcisedfragmentwasinsertedintothepGEX - 6P - 2vectorthatwas cutwithEcoRI , bluntedwithKlenowandthendigestedwithSalI . GST - GFP - LCb was obtained by the same strategy from pEGFP - LCb . Using pEGFP - LCB as template , the LCb sequence was ampliﬁed with the following primers : sense , 5 (cid:4) - GTAAGAGGATCCATGGCTGATGACTTTGGCTTC - 3 (cid:4) ; antisense , 5 (cid:4) - AGAATGAAGCTTCTAGCGGGACAGCGGTGTCTG - 3 (cid:4) . The LCb DNA was subcloned into the PSTBLUE 1 Acceptor Vector ™ ( Merck ) 1136 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 Clathrin Light Chain Dynamics then excised with EcoRI and inserted into the EcoRI site of pGEX - 6P - 2 . Finally , GFP from pEGFP - N3 was inserted into pGEX - 6P - 2 - LCb via SalI and NotI . LCb - GFP was constructed by excising the LCb DNA withEcoRI from the Acceptor Vector ™ and inserting it into the EcoRI site of pEGFP - N3 . The GST - fusion proteins were puriﬁed from bacterial lysates by afﬁnity chromatography on GSH - Sepharose . GFP - tagged LCs were eluted from the matrix by digestion with PreScission ™ protease ( GE Healthcare ) . The LCs were further puriﬁed by gel ﬁltration on Superdex 200 ( GE Healthcare ) in 0 . 5 M Tris – HCl , 2 m M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) , pH 7 . 0 . Light chain - containing fractions were pooled , dialyzed against 25 m M HEPES , 125 m M potassium acetate and 5 m M magnesium acetate , pH 7 . 1 and concentrated in a Centricon YM - 10 centrifugal ﬁlter device ( Millipore GmbH ) to 0 . 5 – 1 mg / mL . Tissueculture , immunostainingandtransferrin uptake Cell culturing and immunostaining procedures , uptake experiments with Texas Red - labeled transferrin and imaging procedures were performed principally as described earlier by D¨uwel and Ungewickell ( 54 ) . In brief , to increase the proportion of unoccupied transferrin receptor , HeLa cells were kept in serum - free medium for 1 – 2 h . The cells were then warmed to 37 ◦ C for 10 min in CO 2 - independent medium containing 0 . 1 % BSA and 20 μ g / mL Texas Red - labeled transferrin . Subsequently , the cells were washed at room temperature in PBS and ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde . For live - cell imaging , the transferrin - depleted cells were incubated for 30 min at 12 ◦ C in CO 2 - independent medium , 0 . 1 % BSA and 20 μ g / mL TexasRed - labeledtransferrinto allow the transferrinto bind efﬁcientlyalso to receptors on the underside of the HeLa cells . After unbound transferrin was removed by several rinses with cold PBS , the cells were transferred to the microscope , warmed to 25 ◦ C and imaged . RNAsilencing HeLa cells ( strain SS6 ) were subjected to a combined knock - down of LCa and LCb using HiPerFect ™ transfection reagent ( Qia - gen ) , according to the manufacturer’s recommendation . siRNA - Oligos - targeting LCa ( AAGUAAUGGUCCAACAGACAG ) and LCb ( GAGCGA - GATTGCAGGCATA ) ( 55 ) were mixed in the ratio of 1 : 1 . The cells were transfected twice within 48 h and analyzed 72 h after the ﬁrst transfection . LabelingofclathrinlightchainswithCy3 - NHSester andAlexaFluor488carboxylicacid , succinimidyl ester Clathrin LCs were obtained by dissociating them from heavy chains in 1 . 3 M thiocyanate , 50 m M Tris – HCl , 2 m M EDTA , 1 m M dithiothreitol , pH 8 . 2 ( dissociation buffer ) ( 8 ) . The LCs were subsequently separated from the heavy chains by gel ﬁltration through a Superdex 200 HR 10 / 30 column connected to a fast - liquid chromatography system ( GE Healthcare ) . The column was equilibrated in dissociation buffer . For the reaction with Cy3 - NHS ester ( GE Healthcare ) , the LCs were transferred into 0 . 1 M NaHCO 3 , pH 8 . 3 at a concentration of 0 . 1 mg / mL . The Cy3 - NHS ester was dissolved at a concentration of 20 mg / mL in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) . Twenty - ﬁve microlitersof the Cy3 - NHS stock was added to 1 mL of the LC solution . After an incubation time of 1 h on ice , the reaction was stopped by adding Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 0 , to a ﬁnal concentration of 0 . 5 M . Free dye was completely removed by two consecutive gel ﬁltration steps using NAP ™ - 5 and NAP ™ - 10 gel ﬁltration columns ( GE Healthcare ) . Identical reaction conditions were used for labeling LCs with Alexa Fluor 488 carboxylic acid , succinimidyl ester . The degree of labeling was determined spectrophotometrically using the following relation : n = A max × MW [ Protein ] × ε dye ( 1 ) where n corresponds to the number of dye molecules per protein ; A max to the absorbance maximum of the dye ; ε to the molar extinction coefﬁcient of the dye ; [ protein ] to mass concentration of the protein and MW to the molar mass of the LC . The reaction conditions resulted in the attachment of 0 . 7 – 0 . 9 dye molecules per clathrin LC . Bindingassays Labeled LCs were dialyzed against 25 m M HEPES , 125 m M potassium acetate and 5 m M magnesium acetate , pH 7 . 1 and concentrated to 0 . 7 mg / mL with the aid of a Centricon YM - 10 centrifugal ﬁlter device . The functional activity of labeled LCs was tested in a biochemical clathrin binding assay . Light chain - free triskelia obtained by gel ﬁltration in 1 . 3 M KSCN ( 8 ) on Superdex 200 were assembled by dialysis against 0 . 1 M Mes , 1 m M EGTA , 0 . 5 m M MgCl 2 , 2 m M CaCl 2 , pH 6 . 5 ; 16 μ g clathrin cages were incubated with 3 μ g labeled LCs in 75 μ L for 60 min on ice . Unbound LCs were removed by ultracentrifugation at 72 , 000 × g for 20 min using a TLA 45 rotor in an Optima TL 100 Ultracentrifuge ( Beckman Coulter Inc . ) . The pellet was resuspended in 75 μ L 25 m M HEPES , 125 m M potassium acetate and 5 m M magnesium acetate , pH 7 . 1 and both supernatant and pellet fractions were analyzed by SDS – PAGE as described earlier ( 56 ) . For clathrin assembly inhibition by LCs , light chain - free heavy chains were dialyzed with and without equal molar amounts of wild - type , ﬂuorochromated or GFP - tagged LCs overnight against 0 . 1 M Mes , 1 m M EGTA , 0 . 5 m M MgCl 2 , pH 6 . 6 ( assembly buffer ) . The dialysis volume was 30 μ L and the clathrin concentration was 1 . 3 mg / mL . Assembled clathrin was separated from unassembled clathrin by ultracentrifugation and the two fractions were analyzed by SDS – PAGE ( see above ) . To determine whether the ﬂuorochromationhad an effect on the afﬁnityof LCs for heavy chains , clathrinheavychains ( 0 . 2 μ M ) wereincubatedovernightwithaﬁxed concentration of Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled LCs ( 0 . 23 μ M ) and increasing concentrations of unlabeled LCs in 137 m M NaCl , 2 . 7 m M KCl , 1 . 9 m M KH 2 PO 4 , 8 . 2 m M Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 1 m M dithiothreitol . BSA ( 0 . 1 mg / mL ) was also included to prevent protein adsorption to surfaces . LC binding was analyzed by analytical ultracentrifugation in a Beckman CoulterOptimaXL - Ianalytical ultracentrifugeequippedwithaﬂuorescence detection system ( see SupportingInformationfor experimental details ) . Microinjection Triskelia associated with ﬂuorescent LC were prepared for microinjection by incubating 11 μ g LC with 44 μ g light chain - free cages in 25 m M HEPES , 125 m M potassium acetate and 5 m M magnesium acetate , pH 7 . 1 , for 30 min on ice . Unbound LCs were removed by pelleting the cages for 20 min at 40 000 rpm in a TLA 45 rotor using an Optima TL 100 ultracentrifuge . The pellet was redissolved in 0 . 5 M Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 0 and then dialyzed overnight against 25 m M HEPES , 125 m M potassium acetate and 5 m M magnesium acetate , pH 7 . 4 , to minimize self - assembly of the clathrin . The ﬁnal concentration of the redissolved reconstituted clathrin was1 . 6 mg / mL . HeLacells , stablytransfectedwithGFP - LCb , wereseeded onto gridded glass bottom culture dishes ( MatTec Corporation ) . After 24 h , Cy3 - labeled LCs and triskelia , respectively , were microinjected with 180 hPa for 0 . 4 seconds under microscopic control . For this an InjectMan NI2 apparatus ( Eppendorf ) and Eppendorf Femtotips were used . Cells were photographed live either 1 min after microinjection or allowed to recover for 2 h at 37 ◦ C , then ﬁxed and viewed by confocal microscopy . HeLa cells depleted of endogenous LCs by RNAi were microinjected with Cy3 - LC ( 0 . 5 mg / mL ) and allowed to recover for exactly 10 min when the cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde . The clathrin heavy chain was stained with X22 mab . Cellfractionation Cell fractionation was performed essentially as described earlier ( 53 ) . In brief , cells grown on a 10 - cm Petri dish were lysed by freeze - thawing in 100 m M NaHPO 4 , 50 m M NaCl , 1 m M MgCl 2 , 1 m M EGTA , pH 7 . 4 , containingCompleteMINI protease inhibitorcocktail ( Roche ) . Cells exposed to sucrose were lysed in the presence of 0 . 45 M sucrose . Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 1137 Hoffmann et al . After lysis , the homogenates were centrifuged at 100000 × g for 20 min to separate the soluble fraction from the particulate fraction . PuriﬁcationofclathrinfromHeLacells Clathrin - coated vesicles were isolated as described by Hirst et al . ( 57 ) . HeLacellsweregrownin disheswitha combinedsurfaceof ca . 1200 cm 2 . After the Ficoll / sucrose step , the coated vesicles were concentrated by ultracentrifugation and extracted with 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 and 2 m M EDTA . Membranes were removed by ultracentrifugation at 91 , 000 × g for 30 min in a TLA - 55 rotor using a Beckman TL100 bench top ultracentrifuge . Clathrin was puriﬁed by gel ﬁltration through Superose 6 ( GE Healthcare ) in 0 . 5 Tris , pH 7 . 0 and 2 m M EDTA . Westernblotting Proteins were separated by SDS – PAGE using 9 – 19 % gradient gels ( 56 ) and then electroblotted onto Protran nitrocellulose transfer membrane ( Whatman GmbH ) . The following antibodies were used : anti - AP1 mab 100 / 3 , anti - AP2 ( mab 100 / 2 ) , anti - clathrin heavy chain , anti - clathrin LCs [ rabbit polyclonal antiserum , ( 52 ) ] , anti - epsin [ rabbit polyclonal against peptide EERIRRGDDLRLQMA , ( 53 ) ] ; horseradish peroxidase - coupled secondary antibodies were visualized by chemiluminescence reagent detection system ( GE Healthcare ) . Lightmicroscopy ThecellswereviewedwithanAxiovert200 Mepiﬂuorescencemicroscope and images recorded with an AxioCamMRm digital camera controlled by AxioVision ( Rel . 4 . 2 ) software ( Carl Zeiss AG ) . Confocal light microscopy wasperformedwithanLSM510MetaSystem ( CarlZeissAG ) . Finalﬁgures were arranged with Adobe Photoshop version 8 . 0 and Adobe Illustrator version 11 . 0 ( Adobe Systems Inc . ) . FRAP experiments were basically per - formed as described previously ( 58 ) . In brief , cells were grown on 30 - mm coverslips and mounted for live - cell imaging in a POCmini chamber ( Zeiss ) . The cells were imaged in CO 2 - independent medium supplemented with 0 . 1 % BSA ( Invitrogen ) using the Zeiss LSM 510 Meta Confocal Micro - scope and the 63 × / 1 . 4 oil differential interference contrast ( DIC ) objective ( Carl Zeiss AG ) . The cells were kept throughout the measurements at 37 ◦ C or were indicated at 25 ◦ C by using a microscope equipped with heating stage , incubator and objective heater . Areas within EGFP - LCa - or EGFP - LCb - transfected cells were bleached using the 488 - nm Ar laser line of the microscope at 100 % intensity for 20 iterations . This reduced the ﬂu - orescence intensity by 60 – 80 % . Recovery was monitored using the laser at 25 % of the maximum intensity . Images were analyzed with the LSM 510 software and Microsoft Excel . Each data point represents the average of ﬁve measurementstaken from at least two cells . For FRAPexperiments underhypertonicconditions , thecellswereincubatedfor15 mininmedium containing 0 . 45 M sucrose and then subjected to the measurements . Electronmicroscopy For epon embedding , stably GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa SS6 cells were detached from the culture dishes with trypsin - EDTA ( Gibco ) , pelleted , washed 3 × in PBS and ﬁxed in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate - HCl buffer , pH 7 . 3 , containing 4 % formaldehyde freshly prepared from paraformaldehyde . After washing in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate - HCl buffer , cell pellets were reacted with 1 % tannic acid ( Mallinckrodt ) and subsequently with 1 % Na 2 SO 4 ( Merck ) both in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodylate - HCl , and then stained enbloc with 1 % aqueous uranly acetate ( Merck ) . After dehydration in ascending concentrations of ethanol , the cells were embedded in epoxy resin ( Serva ) . For immunogold labeling , thin sections of about 70 nm were cut with an Ultracut E ( Leica ) ultramicrotome and collected on nickel grids . Immunostaining was performed as described earlier ( 59 , 60 ) . The sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Zeiss EM 10CR electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV . Pt / C replica of cellular cortices were prepared and immunolabeled following the procedure of Heuser ( 61 ) with the modiﬁcations as detailed earlier ( 58 ) . After critical point drying , Pt / C was deposited at an angle of 27 ◦ using a Balzer BAT 400 freeze fracture device . Puriﬁed coated vesicles were adsorbed to carbon - coated Formvar grids and negatively stained with 2 % uranyl acetate . Replicas and negatively stained samples were examined with an acceleration voltage at 120 kV with a Tecnai G 2 electron microscope from FEI . Acknowledgments We thank Heike B¨oning , Beate Großmann , Christiane Lemke and Huberta Ungewickell for expert technical assistance . The Cell Sorting Core Facility at the Hannover Medical School is thanked for their help . Our colleagues Frances Brodsky , Lois E . Green , J¨urgen Wehland and Linton Traub are thanked for providing important reagents for this work . Dr Joachim Greipel is thanked for helpful discussions on the competition binding experiments . The German Research Foundation ( DFG ) supported this study . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Figure S1 : Internalization of transferrin by stable clathrin plaques . A ) GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cells were incubated with 20 μ g / mL Texas Red - labeled transferrin for 30 min at 12 ◦ C and then washed in PBS to remove unbound transferrin . Slow internalizationwas initiated by replacing the PBS with medium and raising the temperature to 25 ◦ C . The uptake was recorded at a frame rate of 12 seconds . Selected images are shown . B ) Cellular cortex of the substrate - adherent side of a GFP - LCb - expressing HeLa cell . Note that clathrin - coated vesicles bud from the rims of clathrin plaques ( arrows ) or are not associated at all with plaques . Bar : 1 μ m . Figure S2 : Puriﬁcation of clathrin - coated vesicles and clathrin from non - transfected - [ wild type ( WT ) ] , GFP - LCa - and GFP - LCb - expressing HeLacells . Representativeviewsofclathrin - coatedvesiclesfromsucrose gradient fractions are shown in the upper panel . The coat structures of the coated vesiclesare of normal appearance , regardlessof origin . SDS – PAGE of puriﬁed clathrin extracted with 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 , from the respective coated vesicle preparation is shown in the lower panel . Bar : 100 nm . Figure S3 : Increased assembly of clathrin and endocytic proteins in cells exposed to hypertonic conditions . Western blot showing the distribution of clathrin ( heavy chain and LC ) , adaptors and epsin between the soluble ( s ) and particulate fractions ( p ) of HeLa cell lysates upon exposing the intact cells to hypertonic conditions . Non - transfected control cells : a and a (cid:4) ; GFP - LCb - transfected cells : b and b (cid:4) ; GFP - LCa - transfected cells : c and c (cid:4) . Figure S4 : Interaction of ﬂuorochromated LCs with clathrin heavy chains . A ) Cy3 - LCs ( 1 . 4 , 3 . 3 and 3 . 7 μ M ) were incubated with LC - free clathrin cages ( 0 . 9 μ M clathrin heavy chains ) for 60 min on ice . Unbound LCs were separated from the cages by ultracentrifugation . Supernatant ( s ) and pellet ( p ) fraction were analyzed by SDS – PAGE . Note that the modiﬁcation of the LCs gives rise to broadening of the LC bands . Binding of Cy3 - LCs to heavy chains is saturable with a stoichiometry of close to 1 ( 1 . 1 ± 0 . 17 ) . Small amounts of Cy3 - LC ( ∼ 10 % ) present in the pellet fractions 1p , respectively , represent incompletely removed supernatant rather than aggregation . B ) Binding of Alexa 488 - LC to clathrin cages saturates close to one LC per heavy chain . C ) Displacement of Alexa 488 - LC by unmodiﬁed LCs ; 0 . 23 μ M ﬂuorochromated LCs were incubated with 0 . 2 μ M clathrin heavy chains and increasing concentrations of unlabeled LCs ( 0 . 115 ; 0 . 23 ; 0 . 31 ; 0 . 38 and 0 . 77 μ M ) and then analyzed in an analytical ultracentrifugeequippedwith a ﬂuorescencedetectionsystem . Theextent of competition indicated a 3 - fold reduced afﬁnity of the ﬂuorochromated LCs compared with the unlabeled species . Figure S5 : Dynamics of GFP - LCb and Alexa 488 - labeled brain LCs . HeLa cells either stably transfected with GFP - LCb or microinjected with clathrin heavy chains combined with Alexa 488 - labeled LCs were bleached and allowed to recover at 37 ◦ C . Data sets represent the average of ﬁve scans obtained from different cells . 1138 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 Clathrin Light Chain Dynamics Please note : Wiley - Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . References 1 . Brodsky FM , Chen CY , Knuehl C , Towler MC , Wakeham DE . Biologi - calbasketweaving : formationandfunctionofclathrin - coatedvesicles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2001 ; 17 : 517 – 568 . 2 . Edeling MA , Smith C , Owen D . Life of a clathrin coat : insights from clathrin and AP structures . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 ; 7 : 32 – 44 . 3 . Roth TF , Porter KR . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito AedesAegypti . L . J Cell Biol 1964 ; 20 : 313 – 332 . 4 . Heuser J , Kirchhausen T . Deep - etch views of clathrin assemblies . J Ultrastruct Res 1985 ; 92 : 1 – 27 . 5 . Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 1 – 7 . 6 . Ungewickell E , Branton D . Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature 1981 ; 289 : 420 – 422 . 7 . Ungewickell E . Biochemical and immunological studies on clathrin light chains and their binding sites on clathrin triskelions . EMBO J 1983 ; 2 : 1393 – 1400 . 8 . Winkler FK , Stanley KK . Clathrin heavy chain , light chain interactions . EMBO J 1983 ; 2 : 1393 – 1400 . 9 . Jackson AP , Seow HF , Holmes N , Drickamer K , Parham P . Clathrin light chains contain brain - speciﬁc insertion sequences and a region of homology with intermediate ﬁlaments . Nature 1987 ; 326 : 154 – 159 . 10 . Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC , Parham P , Brodsky FM . Location and distribution of the light chains in clathrin trimers . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1983 ; 80 : 2481 – 2485 . 11 . Keen JH , Willingham MC , Pastan I . Clathrin and coated vesicle proteins immunological characterization . J Biol Chem 1981 ; 256 : 2538 – 2544 . 12 . Chen CY , Brodsky FM . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 6109 – 6117 . 13 . Legendre - Guillemin V , Metzler M , Lemaire JF , Philie J , Gan L , Hayden MR , McPherson PS . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 6101 – 6108 . 14 . Legendre - Guillemin V , Metzler M , Charbonneau M , Gan L , Chopra V , Philie J , Hayden MR , McPherson PS . HIP1 and HIP12 display differential binding to F - actin , AP2 , and clathrin . Identiﬁcation of a novel interaction with clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 19897 – 19904 . 15 . Senetar MA , Foster SJ , McCann RO . Intrasteric inhibition mediates the interaction of the I / LWEQ module proteins Talin1 , Talin2 , Hip1 , and Hip12 with actin . Biochemistry 2004 ; 43 : 15418 – 15428 . 16 . Wilbur JD , Chen CY , Manalo V , Hwang PK , Fletterick RJ , Brodsky FM . Actin binding by Hip1 ( huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ) and Hip1R ( Hip1 - related protein ) is regulated by clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 32870 – 32879 . 17 . DeLuca - Flaherty C , McKay DB , Parham P , Hill BL . Uncoating protein ( hsc70 ) binds a conformationally labile domain of clathrin light chain LCa to stimulate ATP hydrolysis . Cell 1990 ; 62 : 875 – 887 . 18 . Hill BL , Drickamer K , Brodsky FM , Parham P . Identiﬁcation of the phosphorylation sites of clathrin light chain LCb . J Biol Chem 1988 ; 263 : 5499 – 5501 . 19 . Ungewickell E , Ungewickell H . Bovine brain clathrin light chains impede heavy chain assembly in vitro . J Biol Chem 1991 ; 266 : 12710 – 12714 . 20 . Chen CY , Reese ML , Hwang PK , Ota N , Agard D , Brodsky FM . Clathrin light and heavy chain interface : alpha - helix binding superhelix loops via critical tryptophans . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 6072 – 6082 . 21 . Mettlen M , Stoeber M , Loerke D , Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 ; 3251 – 3260 . 22 . Wu X , Zhao X , Baylor L , Kaushal S , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 291 – 300 . 23 . Lee DW , Zhao X , Zhang F , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Depletion of GAK / auxilin 2 inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis and recruitment of both clathrin and clathrin adaptors . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 4311 – 4321 . 24 . Lee DW , Zhao X , Yim YI , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Essential role of cyclin - G - associated kinase ( auxilin - 2 ) in developing and mature mice . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 2766 – 2776 . 25 . Larkin JM , Brown MS , Goldstein JL , Anderson RG . Depletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis in ﬁbroblasts . Cell 1983 ; 33 : 273 – 285 . 26 . Daukas G , Zigmond SH . Inhibition of receptor - mediated but not ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 101 : 1673 – 1679 . 27 . Heuser JE , Anderson RG . Hypertonicmediainhibitreceptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 389 – 400 . 28 . Loerke D , Wienisch M , Kochubey O , Klingauf J . Differential control of clathrin subunit dynamics measured with EW - FRAP microscopy . Trafﬁc 2005 ; 6 : 918 – 929 . 29 . Girard M , Allaire PD , McPherson PS , Blondeau F . Non - stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed by quantitative comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles from brain and liver . Mol Cell Proteomics 2005 ; 4 : 1145 – 1154 . 30 . Bellve KD , Leonard D , Standley C , Lifshitz LM , Tuft RA , Hayakawa A , Corvera S , Fogarty KE . Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in primary cells . J Biol Chem 2006 ; 281 : 16139 – 16146 . 31 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e1000191 . 32 . Wu X , Zhao X , Puertollano R , Bonifacino JS , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Adaptor and clathrin exchange at the plasma membrane and trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 516 – 528 . 33 . Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Carreno S , Owen DJ , Smythe E , Drubin DG . Multiple roles for cyclin G - associated kinase in clathrin - mediated sorting events . Trafﬁc 2005 ; 6 : 1103 – 1113 . 34 . Heuser J . Effects of cytoplasmic acidiﬁcation on clathrin lattice morphology . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 401 – 411 . 35 . Perrais D , Merriﬁeld CJ . Dynamics of endocytic vesicle creation . Dev Cell 2005 ; 9 : 581 – 592 . 36 . Huang KM , Gullberg L , Nelson KK , Stefan CJ , Blumer K , Lemmon SK . Novel functions of clathrin light chains : clathrin heavy chain trimerization is defective in light chain - deﬁcient yeast . J Cell Sci 1997 ; 110 : 899 – 910 . 37 . Chu DS , Pishvaee B , Payne GS . The light chain subunit is required for clathrin function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 33123 – 33130 . 38 . Ybe JA , Ruppel N , Mishra S , VanHaaften E . Contribution of cysteines to clathrin trimerization domain stability and mapping of light chain binding . Trafﬁc 2003 ; 4 : 850 – 856 . 39 . Traub LM . Clathrin couture : fashioning distinctive membrane coats at the cell surface . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e1000192 . 40 . Hirst J , Sahlender DA , Li S , Lubben NB , Borner GH , Robinson MS . Auxilin depletion causes self - assembly of clathrin into membraneless cages in vivo . Trafﬁc 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 . 41 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 ; 118 : 591 – 605 . 42 . Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 113 – 124 . 43 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit matura - tion . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e57 . 44 . Mani M , Lee SY , Lucast L , Cremona O , Di Paolo G , De Camilli P , Ryan TA . The dual phosphatase activity of synaptojanin 1 is required for both efﬁcient synaptic vesicle endocytosis and reavailability at nerve terminals . Neuron 2007 ; 56 : 1004 – 1018 . 45 . Erdmann KS , Mao Y , McCrea HJ , Zoncu R , Lee S , Paradise S , Modregger J , Biemesderfer D , Toomre D , De Camilli P . A role of the Lowe syndrome protein OCRL in early steps of the endocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2007 ; 13 : 377 – 390 . Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140 1139 Hoffmann et al . 46 . Schmid EM , McMahon HT . Integratingmolecularandnetworkbiology to decode endocytosis . Nature 2007 ; 448 : 883 – 888 . 47 . Kirchhausen T , Toyoda T . Immunoelectron microscopic evidence for the extended conformation of light chains in clathrin trimers . J Biol Chem 1993 ; 268 : 10268 – 10273 . 48 . Fotin A , Cheng Y , Sliz P , Grigorieff N , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T , Walz T . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 2004 ; 432 : 573 – 579 . 49 . Shaner NC , Steinbach PA , Tsien RY . A guide to choosing ﬂuorescent proteins . Nat Methods 2005 ; 2 : 905 – 909 . 50 . Brodsky FM . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibodies . II . Identiﬁcation of in vivo forms of clathrin . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 101 : 2055 – 2062 . 51 . Chin DJ , Straubinger RM , Acton S , Nathke I , Brodsky FM . 100 - kDa Polypeptides in peripheral clathrin - coated vesicles are required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989 ; 86 : 9289 – 9293 . 52 . Ahle S , Mann A , Eichelsbacher U , Ungewickell E . Structural relation - ships between clathrin assembly proteins from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO J 1988 ; 7 : 919 – 929 . 53 . Hinrichsen L , Harborth J , Andrees L , Weber K , Ungewickell EJ . Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and alpha - adaptin - speciﬁc small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafﬁcking in HeLa cells . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 45160 – 45170 . 54 . Duwel M , Ungewickell EJ . Clathrin - dependent association of CVAK104 with endosomes and the trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 4513 – 4525 . 55 . Huang F , Khvorova A , Marshall W , Sorkin A . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 16657 – 16661 . 56 . Lindner R , Ungewickell E . Clathrin - associatedproteinsof bovine brain coated vesicles . An analysis of their number and assembly - promoting activity . J Biol Chem 1992 ; 267 : 16567 – 16573 . 57 . Hirst J , Miller SE , Taylor MJ , von Mollard GF , Robinson MS . EpsinR is an adaptor for the SNARE protein Vti1b . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 5593 – 5602 . 58 . Hinrichsen L , Meyerholz A , Groos S , Ungewickell EJ . Bending a membrane : how clathrin affects budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 ; 103 : 8715 – 8720 . 59 . Groos S , Reale E , Luciano L . Re - evaluation of epoxy resin sections for light and electron microscopic immunostaining . J Histochem Cytochem 2001 ; 49 : 397 – 406 . 60 . Hasse S , Ungewickell EJ , Groos S . Clathrin and clathrin - accessory proteins in rat kidney cortex epithelia . Histochem Cell Biol 2006 ; 126 : 219 – 229 . 61 . Heuser J . The production of ’cell cortices’ for light and electron microscopy . Trafﬁc 2000 ; 1 : 545 – 552 . 1140 Trafﬁc2010 ; 11 : 1129 – 1140