Cancer and Metastasis Reviews 12 : 255 - 274 , 1993 . © 1993 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . EGF receptor in neoplasia and metastasis Khashayarsha Khazaie 1 , Volker Schirrmacher 1 and Rosemarie B . Lichtner 2 1 Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 , 6900 Heidelberg , Germany , 2 Research Lab - oratories of Schering A G , Miillerstrasse 170 - 178 , 1000 Berlin 65 , Germany Key words : EGFR , neoplasia , metastasis Summary EGFR is a member of the tyrosine kinase family of cell surface receptors with a wide range of expression throughout development and in a variety of different cell types . The receptor can transmit signals to cells : i ) upon interaction with ligands such as EGF , TGFa , amphiregulin or heparin binding EGF , ii ) upon truncation or mutation of extracellular and / or intracellular domains , iii ) upon amplification of a basal receptor activity ( in the absence of ligand ) through cooperation with other cellular signaling pathways or nuclear events ( e . g . expression of v - erbA ) . The activated EGFR can exert pleiotropic functions on cells , depending on their tissue origin and state of differentiation . Under certain conditions it can also contribute to neoplasia and devel - opment of metastases . Such conditions can exist upon aberrant receptor / ligand expression and activation ( e . g . in the wrong cell ; at the wrong time ; in the wrong amounts ) . Aberrant signalling can also occur through constitutive EGFR activation . Oncogenic potential of EGFR has been demonstrated in a wide range of ex - perimental animals . EGFR is also implicated in human cancer , where it may contribute both to the initiation ( glioblastoma ) and progression ( epithelial tumors ) of the disease . EGFR may influence key steps in the pro - cesses of tumor invasion and dissemination . Involvement of EGFR in tumor spread may indicate a potential use of this receptor as a target for antimetastatic therapy . L Introduction The seed and soil hypothesis formulated by Steven Paget more than 100 years ago to explain the orga - notropism of cancer metastases appears still as a valid hypothesis which can be examined at the cel - lular and even molecular level . Signals from the soil , the microenvironment , are transmitted via cell - sur - face receptors into normal or neoplastic cells which then react according to their state of differentiation and development in a specific way . Members of the receptor tyrosine kinase family are frequently im - plicated in experimental models of neoplasia as well as in human cancer . One of the best studied receptor signaling systems from this family is the EGF - receptor ( EGFR ) . The receptor can be stim - ulated upon autocrine or paracrine interaction with corresponding ligands such as EGF and TGF - ( x . Abnormal receptor signaling can occur with trun - cated forms of receptors or receptor over - expres - sion which is observed in some forms of neoplastic development . Receptor stimulation by itself or in combination with other signals can have a variety of biological consequences . Expression and activity of EGFR have been link - ed with a number of human neoplastic diseases or pre - neoplastic stages . We shall discuss influences of the EGFR on cell growth and differentiation , cell - cell interactions , cell matrix adhesion , cell motility , ECM - degradation , invasion and metastasis . From these observations it becomes clear that this recep - tor system can influence a variety of cellular func - tions of importance for malignant growth and me - tastasis and could therefore also play an important role in various forms of human cancer and its pro - gression towards metastasis . 256 EXTRA - CELLULAR REGION DOMAINS [ NH2 I II HI ~ , ~ IV [ INTRA - CELLULAR REGION JM TK CT - T 654 . P 660 - 667 - K 721 / ATP - Y 992 . P - S 1046 . P Y 1068 - P Y 1086 - P Y 1148 . P - Y 1173 - P Y 1186 - P " ~ - COOH FUNCTIONS cys rich high affinity binding ( 3 ) cys rich ( 7 ) down regulation , via PKC mitogenic response ( 8 ) phosphorylation of tyr residues ( 4 , 5 ) ( 2O ) interaction with SH2 domains de . sensitization ( 11 , 12 ) ~ _ ~ kinase inhibitory ( 13 ' 14 , 15 , 16 ) & interaction with SH2 domains major tyr autophnsphorylation site Fig . 1 . A schematic diagram representing EGFR with its distinct domains and the functions attributed to them ( on the right ) . Relevant literature are cited accordingly . TM : transmembrane domain , JM : juxta - membrane domain , TK : tyrosine - kinase domain , CT : carboxy - terminal domain . 2 . The EGFR : a subclass I tyrosine kinase receptor 2 . 1 . structure and function A model of the EGFR domain structure is drawn in Fig . 1 . The mature human EGFR ( HER1 ) is a single polypeptide chain of 1186 amino acids , Mr170 , 000 daltons , containing approximately 40 , 000 daltons of N - linked oligosaccharide and in some cell types mannose phosphate [ for review see : 1 ] . The recep - tor traverses the plasma membrane with a single hy - drophobic anchor sequence . The extracellular ami - no terminal end can be divided into four domains , with the third domain being responsible for high af - finity binding to EGF and probably also other spe - cific ligands of the receptor . The intracellular car - boxy - terminal sequences encode tyrosine kinase and carboxy - terminal regulatory functions . The structural organisation of the EGFR is commonly shared by at least four other monomeric growth fac - tor receptors , HER2 / neu , HER3 , HER4 [ 2 ] and Xmrk , which together with EGFR / HER1 comprise the family of subclass I tyrosine kinase receptors ( for review see : 3 ) . The binding by EGFR of EGF was reported to have a 1 : 1 stoichiometry but two possible affinity states , with the majority of the cell surface ex - pressed receptors exhibiting the lower affinity state . Binding of ligand has been proposed to drive the dimerization or oligomerization of receptors . This process promotes the interaction between kinase domains leading to their activation [ for review see : 3 ] . Binding of ATP to a lysine residue at position 721 within the EGFR kinase domain is the key event required to initiate tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor . All known functions of the EGFR , ex - cluding ligand binding , appear to depend on the ty - rosine kinase activity [ 4 , 5 ] . At least two cytoplasmic regions , the juxtamem - brane and the carboxy terminal domains , regulate the affinity for ligand as well as the activity and specificity of the protein tyrosine kinase function [ 6 , 7 ; for review see 8 ] . The major regulatory sites are targets for phosphorylation by PKC or cross phos - phorylation by EGFR . Phosphorylation of C - ter - minal tyrosine residues is also important for the physical interaction of EGFR with other cellular proteins that carry compatible so called src homol - ogy 2 ( SH2 ) domains ( see Fig . 1 , and below ) . Trun - cation of the carboxy terminal domain has led to constitutive EGFR activity [ 17 , 18 ] . However , sur - prisingly receptor activation does not always seem correlate with receptor phosphorylation [ 19 ] . The SH2 domain is a common feature of many nonreceptor kinases which act in the signal cascade downstream of activated growth factor receptors . This is the major structural feature responsible for interaction of PLC - y , PI3 - kinase , and ras - GAP with the activated EGFR . Raf , a serine / threonine kinase which also associates with EGFR does not contain an SH2 domain . Recruitment of these molecules to the cell surface , their phosphorylation and / or con - formational modulation through interaction with EGFR have been proposed to lead to their activa - tion and secondary signal transduction . The affinity of EGFR for these molecules is variable , being high for PLC - y but particularly low for PI3 - kinase . Therefore , for some molecules and in some cell types successful interactions may dependent on the level of EGFR expression . The complexities of such interactions have been used as a basis to explain the cooperation of different receptors in the activation of growth as well as transformation associated changes [ for reviews see : 21 - 23 ] . 2 . 2 . Naturally occuring truncations At least two EGFR transcripts of 10 . 5 and 5 . 8 kb 257 and occasionally a smaller 2 . 6 kb transcript have been reported in RNA from a variety of human cell lines [ 6 , 24 ] . These transcripts correspond to mRNAs of 10 , 5 and 2 kb in rat cell lines and tissues [ 19 , 25 ] and , 12 and 9 kb in normal chicken embryo [ 26 ] . The two larger EGFR mRNAs have been gen - erally assumed to differ in size because of different lengths of poly - adenylated tails . However the smaller transcript ( 2 - 2 . 6 kb ) is truncated , and hy - bridises only to probes corresponding to the extra - cellular domain of EGFR . This truncated receptor has been detected in the A431 human vulva carcino - ma cell line [ 6 ] and other human squamous carcino - ma cell lines [ 27 ] as well as in the WS1 diploid hu - man fibroblast line ( Khazaie , unpublished ) . A cor - responding truncated EGFR was detected in nor - mal rat liver and in the MTLn3 rat mammary adenocarcinoma cell line [ 19 , 25 ] . The truncated EGFR transcript is by virtue of its expression in nomal rat liver and in diploid human fibroblasts , most likely a natural product arising from differential splicing of the EGFR gene tran - script . At least in the case of A431 cells the variant EGFR was shown to contain sequences from a nov - el gene fused at the C - terminal end [ 6 ] and to be secreted extracellularly [ 27 ] . The truncated EGFR can form in vitro a heterodimer with the intact re - ceptor and inhibit both basal and EGF - dependent kinase activity [ 28 ] , however expression of a genet - ically engineered soluble extracellular EGFR do - main had little if any effect on the growth and phe - notype of EGF stimulated NIH - 3T3 cells [ 29 ] . Al - though the physiological function of the protein is as yet unknown , it is tempting to speculate on the possibility of a potential regulatory interaction at the cell surface with the complete EGFR . 2 . 3 . Ligands The first known specific ligand for the EGFR was epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) / urogastrone , which seemed to have an epidermal proliferative function and antagonistic action on gastric acid secretion . EGF is expressed as a 1200 amino acid residue gly - cosylated transmembrane precursor or a 53 amino acid secreted product [ 30 - 32 ] . The secreted EGF is 258 usually considered to be a processed form of the transmembrane precursor . Several distinct pep - tides with specific EGFR binding properties are now known to exist . These include TGF - a , the pox virus growth factors , amphiregulin , and heparin binding EGF 33 , 34 ; for reviews see : 35 - 37 . Com - mon features of all these ligands are a cysteine rich region spanning a length of approximately 50 - 60 amino acid residues , and occurrence in two forms : as shorter secretory peptides , and as large mem - brane bound glycosylated putative precursors , which for EGF and TGF - a are also biologically ac - tive 38 , 39 . In adult tissues , EGF has been primarily local - ized to differentiated cells rather than to stem cells . In epidermis and various glandular tissues , both EGFR and EGF were expressed in differentiating cells 40 . Concentrations of TGF - ~ in the kidney are increased upon injury affecting a number of re - nal responses for reviews see : 41 , 42 . The kidneys are considered to be the major source of urinary EGF , while the prostate is the major source of EGF in the seminal fluid 43 , 44 . Likewise , the mammary tissue is the source of relatively high concentrations of EGF in milk 45 . The major sources of EGF in the CNS are macrophages , glial cells and neurons as well as uptake from the peripheral blood for re - view see : 46 , 47 . EGF - like peptide sequences are present in a va - riety of cell surface and extracellular proteins 45 . The potential function of these peptides as EGFR agonists is of interest , particularly in view of the re - ports on mitogenic activities of extracellular matrix proteins 48 , 49 . 3 . Role in normal development It is now established that the EGFR is expressed throughout development and in a variety of undif - ferentiated as well as differentiated cells for review see : 50 . EGFR and TGF - a are expressed in the preimplantation conceptus and may play a role in blastocoel expansion , embryo - uterine signalling , and the implantation process 51 - 54 . Among the functions attributed to EGFR activity are the pro - liferation and development of specific epithelial territories in the embryo , including branch point morphogenesis and maturation of early embryonic lung tissue , skin development , and promoting sur - vival of early progenitor cells of the cleft palate 55 , 56 ; for review see : 57 . EGFR exhibits a broad expression throughout the brain tissue , primarily in the early post - natal as - trocytes and purkinje cells and in the adult neu - rones of the cerebral cortex , where it may be impor - tant in promoting terminal differentiation 58 , 59 and determining the viability of neurones 60 ; for reviews see : 45 . Purified and cultured astrocytes but not oligodendrocytes respond mitogenically to EGF , in agreement with the higher levels of expres - sion of EGFR and EGF in astrocytic cells of glial origin 61 , 62 . In the hypothalamus , EGFR medi - ates the release of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone ( LHRH ) 63 . An interplay of the actions of EGFR and estro - gen receptor has been proposed to be required for the differentiation of normal mammary epithelial cells as well as the induction of uterine and vaginal growth 64 , 65 . EGFR expression is high in the cap - cell layer of the terminal end buds 66 , a proliferat - ing cell population 67 which is presumed to be the stem cell population of both the luminal and myoe - pithelial cells of the mammary ducts 68 . The cap cell layer is devoid of estrogen receptors which in - stead are abundant in the surrounding stromal cells 66 . It has been proposed that estrogen may regu - late the growth of cap - cells through a paracrine mechanism by stimulating the production of a pep - tide factor for which EGF or TGF - a are prime can - didates 69 . In ovariectomized mice , the exogenous delivery of either EGF or TGF - c ~ was sufficient to restore the pattern of normal ductal growth in the involuted mammary gland . In normal mice distinct - ly different patterns of immunolocalisation were observed for EGF ( inner layers of terminal end buds and in ductal cells of mammary epithelium ) and TGF - o ~ ( epithelial cap cell layer of the advanc - ing terminal end bud and in stromal fibroblasts at the base of the terminal end bud ) suggesting that each polypeptide plays a different role in normal mammary gland morphogenesis 70 . 4 . Role in malignant development Expression and activity of EGFR have been linked with a number of pre - malignant or malignant dis - eases . These include skin hyperplasia , erythroblas - tosis , and fibrosarcoma in animals ; and , in humans , notably benign hyperplasia of the skin , mammary carcinoma , glioblastoma , and hepatic carcinoma . In some instances truncations of the EGFR may be necessary to allow for its function as a dominant on - cogene . In others , over - expression may be needed to amplify a tumor promoting signal . However , it is also apparent that in some instances truncations or overexpression of EGFR are not necessary . Over - all , the combination of activation of EGFR , through autocrine or paracrine loops , and accumu - lation of appropriate genetic alterations may lead to neoplasia and metastasis . 4 . 1 . The oncogenic potential of EGFR in experimen - tal systems The nature of events subverted by EGFR activity may vary depending on the type of cancer studied . This conclusion is most evident when comparing the contribution to different neoplasias of , A : ab - erant expression , B : paracrine activation , C : trunca - tion of EGFR , or D : receptor activation in the con - text of complementing nuclear events . 4 . 1 . 1 . Truncations and aberrant expression in experi - mental neoplasia Initial interest in a transforming potential for the EGFR came from the realisation of the sequence homology between the cloned human receptor and the chicken v - erbB oncogene 71 . The v - erbB on - cogenes are retrovirally transduced and truncated form of the " chicken EGFR " . Expression of v - e rbB by the transforming retroviruses AEV - ES4 and AEV - H , led to erythroleukemia and fibrosarcoma in infected chicks , as well as to the transformation of bone marrow erythroblasts and chicken embryo fi - broblasts ( CEFs ) in culture for reviews see : 72 , 73 . A direct comparison of the transforming func - tions of v - erB and human EGFR was performed by simply using the AEV - ES4 retrovirus to express a 259 complete normal EGFR cDNA instead of v - erB 17 . Surprisingly , the complete human EGFR pro - moted the EGF dependent outgrowth of erythro - blasts from in vitro infected bone marrow cultures . Infection of young chicks with retroviral vectors that co - expressed v - erbA , an altered form of the thyroid hormone receptor gene 74 , 75 , and EGFR led to acute erythroleukemia . The major conse - quence of truncations affecting the extracellular amino terminal end ( removal of the ligand binding domain ) was constitutive activation of the receptor . Truncations of the intracellular carboxy terminal end had much wider consequences affecting not only receptor activity but also the biological func - tion of EGFR kinase . Truncation of 32 carboxy terminal amino acids removing the last two tyrosine autophosphoryla - tion sites ( see Fig . 1 ) conferred additional erythro - poietin receptor properties to human EGFR as as - sayed in primary chicken erythroblasts . Removal of a further 94 amino acids deleting more sites of tyro - sine autophosphorylation inactivated erythroid transformation without diminishing fibroblast transformation ( assayed in vitro ) by human EGFR . Thus , expression of the complete EGFR was suffi - cient to transform ( promote aberrant growth of ) immature erythroblasts , while truncations of the EGFR changed the function of EGFR in a lineage specific manner . In contrast to the apparent absence of EGFR in mature hematopoietic cells , recent observations in - dicate that this receptor is normally expressed in immature / progenitor hematopoietic cells 76 , 77 , Other reports suggest that the EGFR signal trans - duction pathway may function in transformed he - matopoietic cell lines 78 - 82 . Together these ob - servations suggest that EGFR may be a naturally occuring growth / survival factor for immature he - matopoietic cells , which in part explains how inap - propriate expression of this receptor may lead to manifestations of leukemia , the expansion of imma - ture hematopoietic cells . EGFR is abundantly and universally expressed in mature fibroblasts . Ligand induced activation and / or overexpression of the EGFR led to a num - ber of changes in the in vitro behaviour of primary chicken fibroblasts 17 as well as in established mu - 260 rine or rat fibroblast cell lines 83 , 84 which are as - sociated with neoplastic transformation , but did not promote invasive growth of fibroblasts in the chick - en embryo 85 or induce sarcoma in transgenic mice 86 ; Thomas von Rtiden , pets . comm . . These observations confirm earlier reports on the non - sarcomagenic character of v - erbB isolates with a complete C - terminus . Truncations of at least 23 car - boxy terminal amino acids of the chicken c - erbB seemed to be required for inducing sarcoma 87 - 89 . On the other hand , signals transmitted by the complete EGFR may cooperate with otherwise non - sarcomagenic nuclear oncogenes and lead to tumorigenic growth of fibroblasts 85 . This obser - vation may in part explain the apparently contra - dictory reports on the tumorigenic properties of EGF or TGF - a expressing established rodent cell lines 90 , 91 , suggesting that cooperative nuclear events 92 might have been overlooked in these cell lines . It is now understood that changes in the intracel - lular region of the EGFR not only induce ligand in - dependent activation of the EGFR but also change substrate recognition by EGFR kinase . Removal of the carboxy terminal tail of the EGFR significantly broadened the spectrum of cellular substrates for EGF dependent tyrosine phosphorylation 93 . Similar truncations markedly impaired EGF de - pendent increase of inositol phosphate formation in NIH3T3 cells 20 and the EGF dependent activa - tion of phospholipase A2 in CHO cells expressing ectopic human EGFR 94 . Even a single amino acid substitution , threonine for arginine at position 662 in the juxtamembrane domain , was sufficient to change both the pattern of intracellular proteins phosphorylated and mitogenic behavior of differ - ent transfected established cell lines in response to EGF 95 . Therefore the v - erbB oncogenes as well as truncated or mutated forms of the EGFR may be more than constitutively activated EGFR mole - cules , and can be expected to have distinct and nov - el properties . 4 . 1 . 2 . Aberrant activation in TGF - c ~ transgenic mice Paracrine , autocrine , and more recently adhesion activation of EGFR have been the focus of atten - tion for developmental biologists and tumor biol - ogists , attempting to explain controlled as well as self propagating mechanisms for growth , develop - ment , and neoplasia . Experiments with transgenic mice suggest that an autocrine mechanism involving the EGFR could be expected to play a role in the initiation and / or pro - gression of mammary and hepatocellular carcino - ma as well as pancreatic hyperplasia 96 , 86 . Trans - genic mice expressing TGF - cz were reported to de - velop hepatic carcinoma and abnormal breast tis - sue . Mammary carcinomas were observed in the post lactating gland . Evidently none of these neo - plias required amplification or truncation of the EGFR , but rather depended on the paracrine acti - vation of the endogenous receptor ( and perhaps complementing nuclear and / or environmental events ) . Transgenic mice over - expressing TGF - o ~ specifi - cally in the stratified squamous epithelia , devel - oped thicker epidermis and stunted hair growth as well as benign papillomas in regions of mechanical irritation or wounding . Areas of the skin that were subjected to mild irritation displayed localized leu - kocytic infiltration and granular layer loss , charac - teristic of psoriasis in humans 97 . These observa - tions are in agreement with those made on human cells , where an interplay of EGFR autocrine activ - ity and IGF - I receptor activity is believed to pro - mote the appearance of psoriatic lesions 98 , 99 , and in other instances promote skin carcinogenesis 100 - 102 . Interestingly , murine epidermal cells may be equally responsive to EGF as to other classi - cal chemical tumor promoters such as 12 - O - tetrade - canoylphorboM3 - acetate ( TPA ) for neoplastic transformation 103 - 105 . 4 . 2 . Involvement of EGFR in human tumors In the following sections we shall survey the evi - dence concerning the involvement of EGFR in hu - man mammary carcinoma , which so far is the most intensively investigated human cancer in connec - tion with EGFR . Other epithelial tumors will not be discussed in detail but only refered to . Glioblasto - ma , a non - epithelial tumor and the only human can - cer where truncation and over - expression of EGFR may play an important role , is briefly reviewed . The mechanism by which EGFR may contribute to ma - lignant transformation or progression of epithelial cells is not limited to mitogenic stimulation but is likely to involve a variety of cellular responses that have been associated with cellular migration and in - vasiveness . These will be discussed in the context of mechanisms of tumor progression and metastasis . 4 . 2 . 1 . EGFR and mammary carcinoma In human breast carcinoma a strong inverse corre - lation between the expression of estrogen receptor ( ER ) and EGFR [ 106 - 109 ; also see review : 110 ] as well as between EGFR and ER plus progesterone receptor ( PR ) [ 111 - 118 ] has been established . In hu - man breast carcinomas the percentage of EGFR positive tumors reported in the literature varies from 22 % to 67 % [ 117 ] . Differences in assay meth - odology , tumor biopsy sample selection and cut - off level seem to offer plausible explanations for this variation . In addition , endogenous TGFc ~ may lead to the occupation of EGFR ligand binding domain and receptor downregrulation resulting in underes - timations of receptor number when analysed by re - ceptor binding [ 119 ] . EGFR expression , particular - ly in ER negative patients [ 107 ] has been a marker of morphological and functional de - differentiation related to a poor prognosis [ 106 , 109 , 111 , 113 , 115 , 117 ] . Expression of EGFR in ER negative / EGFR pos - itive tumors was reported to be heterogeneous , sup - porting the existence of subsets of tumor cells with differential aggressive potentials [ 118 , 119 ] . Further - more it was demonstrated that expression of the EGFR in breast tumor metastases is frequently ele - vated compared to the primary tumor [ 106 , 109 ] , which suggests involvement of EGFR in the meta - static process . Recent reports indicate that cross - talk between EGFR and ER or PR in the mammary gland may have important consequences on the regulation of normal and aberrant growth . Elevated and some - times estrogen inducible expression of TGF - cz has been reported in both human and experimental mammary cancers as well as mammary tumor cell lines [ for review see : 120 , 121 ] . In cultured human 261 breast tumor cell lines expressing constitutively either ER and EGFR [ 122 ] or ER plus a transfected EGFR [ 123 ] a heterospecific receptor modulation could be identified . Thus the simultaneous induc - tion of ER and EGFR signal transduction in these cells was not tolerated . Prolonged cultivation of EGFR plus ER expressing cells with EGF resulted in loss of estrogen - dependent proliferation , despite the presence of high amounts of ER [ 123 ] . Further - more , prolonged cultivation of these cells with ta - moxifen resulted in anti - hormone resistant sub - clones expressing EGFR but lacking ER and PR [ 122 , 123 ] . It remains to be established if this observ - ed unresponsiveness or down - regulation of ER in EGFR expressing cultured mammary tumors dur - ing antiestrogen treatment could contribute to the failure of endocrine treatment in the clinic . 4 . 2 . 2 . Involvement of EGFR in other epithelial ma - lignancies A number of other epithelial malignancies have ( through experimental observation and or clinical correlations ) been linked with EGFR function . The most convincing of these are hepatic carcinoma , where an interaction of TGF - ~ / TGF - [ 3 signal trans - duction pathways may play a key role [ 124126 ] and prostatic hyperplasia / cancer [ for reviews see : 127 , 128 ] . Other epithelial carcinomas associated with EGFR activity include renal carcinoma [ 129 , 130 ] , bladder cancer [ 131 ] , epithelial malignancies de - rived from human oral tissue [ 132 ] , laryngeal cancer [ 133 ] , oesophageal tumors [ 134 - 136 ] , stomach can - cer [ 137 ] , colon carcinoma [ 138 , 139 ] , ovarian ade - nocarcinomas [ 140 ] , and lung cancer [ 141 , 142 ] . 4 . 2 . 3 . Truncations of EGFR in glioblastoma Glioblastoma is the only human cancer so far causa - tively linked to expression of truncated EGFR . Amplification and rearrangement of the EGFR lo - cus are also common features , and therefore pre - sumably constitutive over - activity of the receptor is involved [ 143 - 146 ] . However the extent to which mutations and truncations other than those affect - ing the extracellular domain , may contribute to the onset of glioblastoma is not sufficiently document - ed . Characteristic rearrangements of the EGFR gene in glioblastoma give rise to novel antigenic 262 epitopes . An antibody made to the rearranged se - quences of the EGFR in glioblastoma multiforme , the most malignant of human primary brain tumors , was shown to react with rearranged EGFRs in sev - eral patients with the same particular EGFR dele - tion mutation , demonstrating the potential use of common antibodies for diagnosis and treatment 147 . 5 . EGFR and mechanisms of tumor progression and metastasis Metastatic spread of tumors is a consequence of a series of events in which growth factors could be in - volved . Sequentially , tumor cells must proliferate , loose their anchorage dependence on the extracel - lular matrix ( ECM ) and their contacts with neigh - boring cells , pass through the vessel wall , enter the blood stream , seed the target organ and form a new colony 148 - 150 . During all these processes , tumor cells are submitted to a variety of environmental controls including growth factors from the host or from the tumor itself , as well as various substrates in contact with cells . EGF and TGF ~ are well known for their growth stimulating effects in a wide variety of systems . Accumulating evidence is presented that these growth factors have pleiotropic effects on cell motility , chemotaxis , secretion and differentia - tion which in some cases correlate with metastatic potential . 5 . 1 . Effects of EGF on tumor growth Besides the well known stimulatory effect , activa - tion of EGFR can inhibit growth of cells in tissue culture depending on the cell type , the number of receptors and the assay conditions . This may ex - plain occasional discrepancies in correlating the re - sponse of tumor cells to EGF in vitro with their re - sponse to EGF after transplantation into host ani - mals . 5 . 1 . 1 . Differential effects of EGF on growth of cultur - ed cells It has been shown that the effect of EGF on cell pro - liferation is dependent on the quantity of occupied EGFR and that occupation of additional EGFR in excess led to decreased growth stimulation and even to an inhibition of cells grown in monolayer tissue culture 151 , 152 . However , the growth of hu - man epidermoid A431 cells expressing high num - bers of EGFR ( 2 x 106 / cells ) was inhibited by EGF in monolayer culture , while it was stimulated under 3 - dimensional culture conditions 153 . Further - more , under tissue culture conditions the degree of cell - cell contacts may determine if EGF and TGF ~ induce either mitogenic or inhibitory signals as demonstrated with a human renal adenocarcinoma cell line 154 . 5 . 1 . 2 . Xenotransplants of EGFR expressing tumors in immune deficient mice A clear correlation between tumor growth and EGFR expression could be demonstrated in tumor xenografts . A relationship between a high number of EGFR and the tumorigenic potential in nude mice has been described for the human A431 cells 155 , human mammary MDA 468 cells 156 and a feline mammary carcinoma 152 . Ozawa 134 showed that growth rates of A431 human epidermal xenografts were markedly enhanced by EGF sup - plied by implanted osmotic pumps . Surgical remov - al of the submaxillary glands , a major source of EGF in male mice , decreased tumor growth rates in animals bearing transplanted mammary cancer 157 or human squamous cell carcinoma 158 . This inhibitory effect was reversed by supplying exog - enous EGE Implants of a human EGFR - expressing melanoma line in scid mice metastasized spontane - ously to multiple distant sites . Resection of the pri - mary tumor followed by the application of an EGFR specific MAb resulted in suppressed growth of established micrometastases 159 . Furthermore , an EGFR specific MAb inhibited growth of human epidermoid cells when transplanted subcutaneous - ly , intravenously or into the peritoneum of nude mice 160 . Moreover , the antitumor effect persist - ed when animals were treated with the F ( ab ) ' 2 frag - ment of the antibody suggesting that the antitumor effect was not due to immune mechanisms . 5 . 2 . The effects of EG F on metastasis in experimental systems 5 . 2 . 1 . Syngeneic animal models in which metastatic capability correlates with growth factor responsive - ness Tumor cells have been shown to demonstrate in vit - ro proliferative responses to defined growth fac - tors , such as platelet - derived growth factor , insulin - like growth factor , EGF and others . The ability to proliferate when stimulated with growth factors correlates in some systems with the metastatic capa - bility of the malignant cells as was shown in the mouse colon adenocarcinoma 26 for IGF - 1 [ 161 ] and in the 13762NF rat mammary adenocarcinoma system for transferrin [ 162 ] and EGF [ 163 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 . Syngeneic animal models in which metastatic capacity is enhanced by EGF In the rat rhabdomysarcoma ( RMS ) 9 - - 4 / 0 system , treatment of cultured tumor cells with 20 ng / ml EGF for 48 hours enhanced the lung colonising po - tential of i . v . injected tumor cells significantly [ 164 ] . In addition , tumor growth in the mediastinal lym - phatic tissue was observed in rats receiving EGF - treated cells . Furthermore , treatment of rats with EGF following ablation of the primary tumor re - sulted in a dramatic increase in the median number of spontaneous lung metastases , and high incidence of axillary lymph node and extrapulmonary ( mediastinal ) metastases as compared to saline treated animals . While this study clearly demon - strates that EGF can enhance the metastatic poten - tial of EGFR expressing tumors , it does not allow discrimination between the effects of EGF on the tumor cells or those on the host . In order to elucidate this question , closely related tumor cell clones with different metastatic potential and different levels of EGFR expression have to be used . Introduction of the gene for EGFR into the receptor negative clone should then confer meta - static capability to this cell clone . In order to per - form these studies we have chosen clones MTC and MTLn3 from the 13762 NF rat mammary adenocar - cinoma and introduced the gene for the human EGFR into low metastatic clone MTC . Our initial observations suggest that in this model system ex - 263 pression of EGFR may be a determining factor for metastasis of the tumor cells from the mammary fat pad to their target organ , the lungs . 5 . 3 . Effects of EGF on specific steps of the metastatic cascade While definitive experimental proof is still lacking that EGFR is involved in spontaneous metastasis , there are some indications that EGF can enhance the ability of cells to succeed in some steps of the metastatic cascade . Recent reviews have discussed in detail the basic mechanisms of tumor cell adhe - sion , invasion and motility [ 165 , 166 ] . Here we will concentrate on examples where stimulation of EGFR increased the potency of cells to succeed in these important steps of the metastatic cascade . 5 . 3 . 1 . Influence of EGF on the integrin receptor fam - ily , their ligands and adhesion to ECM Early work by Briles and Kornfeld [ 167 ] had indi - cated a correlation between tumor cell adherence to extracellular matrix proteins ( ECM ) in vitro and increased lung colonising potential of intravenously injected tumor cells . Subsequently the importance of cellular adhesion in lung colonising potential has been well documented by using closely related tu - mor cell clones of defined adhesive and metastatic properties [ for reviews see : 149 , 150 ] . Recently the integrins were identified as the ma - jor family of receptors by which cells attach to ECM . Accumulating data indicate that EGFR may directly influence the expression , organisation and function of the integrins . It has been known for a long time that EGF induces rapid changes in the in - teraction of tumor cells with their own ECM or de - fined matrices . For example , in the case of human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells it was observed that within minutes of exposure to this factor , the cells undergo rapid morphological changes result - ing in retraction of the cells from the tissue culture substrata as they become significantly more round - ed [ 168 - 170 ] and exhibit membrane ruffling , and ill - opodia [ 171 , 172 ] . When A431 cells where plated on - to collagen , addition of EGF did not interfere with attachment but modulated spreading of ceils [ 169 ] . 264 This effect was inhibited by cytochalasin B , a com - pound which interferes with the actin - associated microfilament system , indicating dissociation of linked integrin - cytoskeleton interaction . Our group recently described that EGF increased with - in 5 minutes adhesion of highly metastatic rat mam - mary adenocarcinoma cell clone MTLn3 to fibro - nectin . Treatment of closely related mammary ade - nocarcinoma cell lines with EGF enhanced lung colonising potential only when the cells expressed EGFR ( Lichtner et al . , in preparation ) . Recently evidence has been provided that EGFR activation can influence the interaction of cells with defined matrix components , by modulating the sub - unit organisation of the integrins . For example , en - terocyte sheet migration was stimulated by EGF on laminin but not on collagen I or fibronectin , indicat - ing modulation of a specific integrin subunit 173 . Indeed , integrin c ~ 1 subunit pools were decreased after EGF treatment on collagen - I but increased on laminin . The EGF induced changes in immunreac - tivity required protein synthesis since they were in - hibited by cylcoheximide . This is in line with a re - port 174 , that in quiescent Swiss 3T3 cells EGF in - duced rapid increase in vinculin and ~ l - integrin mRNA levels . Elucidation of the mechanism by which EGF affects integrin organisation and pool size awaits better understanding of the mechanisms which modulate integrins . In this respect it is of con - siderable interest , that the integrin 3 subunit con - tains in its intracellular domain a tyrosine residue whose neighboring sequences show high degree of homology with the tyrosine autophosphorylation site of the EGFR 175 . Perhaps critical interaction of integrins are influenced by EGFR mediated phosphorylation of these residues . However , EGFR mediated phosphorylation of integrins does not seem to happen in human KB cells 176 , and may be dependent on the cell type investigated . Several integrin subunits are phosphorylated up - on binding to ECM , suggesting that in addition to providing adhesive interactions with immobilised ECM proteins , integrins also modulate transmis - sion of intracellular signals 177 - 180 . Moreover transient tyrosine phosphorylation of protein ( s ) of 130 - 150 kd has been observed in KB carcinoma cells following cross linking of ~ 3131 integrins 176 . In mouse fibroblasts adhesion and spreading on fi - bronectin led to rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of a protein of similar size , termed focal adhesion kinase and suggested to be a component in the putative in - tegrin signalling pathway 181 , 182 . It has been pos - tulated that integrins may even share some of the intracellular signal transduction pathways of tyro - sine kinase receptors for reviews see : 183 , 184 . Integrins have been recognised not only as sys - tems to provide adhesive strength by interaction with immobilised ECM proteins , but also as sys - tems which aid the cell in recognising and respon - ding to environmental signals . EGFR activity has been reported to induce the production and secre - tion of matrix proteins in several cell lines . In - creased secretion of fibronectin was reported for normal rat liver cells 185 , and of fibronectin and laminin for the human breast cancer cell line PMC42 186 . In the latter study EGF induced in - creased production of matrix proteins might have been causative for the increased adherence of cul - tured PMC42 cell organoids . The modulation of in - tegrin function as well as production / secretion of ECM proteins by EGFR could have significant bi - ological consequences , making the EGFR system perhaps a key regulator of the cellular response to the microenvironment . 5 . 3 . 2 . Influence of EGFR on cell - cell contact and cy - toskeleton Recent reports have opened the possibility that EGFR activity may also directly influence cell - cell contact , another critical parameter known to define epithelial invasiveness 188 . Both EGFR and E - cadherins were shown to co - localise in the basolat - eral membrane of A431 cells 189 . Changes in the level of expression of E - cadherin or tyrosine phos - phorylation of the associated protein ~ - catenin , in MDCK epithelial cell line were shown to lead to rapid loss of cell - cell contact , acquisition of fibro - blastoid morphology and invasive phenotype 190 , 191 ; for reviews see ; 192 , 193 . Direct phosphoryla - tion of ~ - catenin by EGFR or contact of EGFR with transmembrane TGF - ~ or EGF on neighbor - ing cells are possible mechanisms that may relate to the role of EGFR in the acquisition of invasive properties . We had reported recently that EGFRs localise preferentially in the cell - cell contact areas of A431 cells and that negative control mechanisms pre - venting EGFR activation may be exerted by adja - cent cells 194 . However , in detergent - permeabil - ized cells the cytoskeleton - associated EGFRs were fully active . It is of interest that in the highly meta - static mammary adenocarcinoma clone MTLn3 , cy - toskeleton - associated EGFRs are highly suscepti - ble to phosphorylation in permeabilized cells , while in intact cells mitogenic stimulation occurs without detectable receptor phosphorylation 19 . A number of recent studies indicate that EGFR , is itself in part associated with the cytoskeleton 194 - 196 . Furthermore , a number of cytoskeletal components have been shown to be phosphorylat - ed in vivo and in vitro by EGFR kinase , such as fo - drin , spectrin , tubulin and microtubulin associated protein 2 , ezrin and lipocortin 1 196 , 197 , 199 . Cy - toskeletal associated EGFRs may have specialised functions since they are mainly of the high affinity class 196 , 197 , 200 . It has been proposed that activation of PI3 - ki - nase , which occurs through association with tyro - sine kinase receptors , may directly influence actin filament reorganisation . However , due to the low affinity of EGFR for PI3 - kinase , overexpression of this receptor may be needed to allow for these events for review see : 22 . 5 . 3 . 3 . Effects of EGF on cell motility Another parameter often associated with epithelial invasiveness is motility for reviews see : 192 , 193 , 201 - 203 . Cell motility requires several distinct steps that must occur in a coordinated fashion for cellular translocation to occur . Following the estab - lishment of adhesion to the underlying substratum , the cell must be able to form protrusions , establish - ing new adhesions and be able to break older ad - hesions for translocation to occur for review see : 165 . In order to clearly demonstrate an effect of EGF on cell motility it had to be separated from its effect on cellular growth . This has been demonstrated in several cell lines grown in tissue culture , such as rat intestinal epithelium cells 204 , the human em - 265 bryonal carcinoma cell line Tera - 2 205 , and ker - atinocytes 206 for review see : 202 . Similarly , the human epidermoid carcinoma KB cells 207 or hu - man glioma line K - 343 M6a 172 showed relatively high motility and grew dispersely as single cells when cultured with EGE while in the absence of EGF cells grew in clusters . The migration and spread of closely related human glioma cells from spheroids on a plastic substratum was increased by EGF 208 . 5 . 3 . 4 . Effects of EGF on the production ~ release of ECM degradative enzymes and on invasion Many different types of ECM degradative enzymes have been implicated in invasion by metastatic cells , such as metalloproteinases , aminopeptidases , serine proteinases , cysteine proteinases and aspar - tic proteinases for reviews see : 209 , 210 . EGF has been shown , among other growth factors and cyto - kines , to modulate the level of cell - secreted serine proteinases and metalloproteinases . In human squamous cell carcinoma , EGF influences plasmi - nogen activator - mediated proteolysis of ECM 211 . In lung and colon carcinoma EGF induced the syn - thesis of urokinase type plasminogen activator ac - tivity ( uPA ) 212 , 213 and in normal fibroblasts of collagenase respectively 214 . In mouse mammary adenocarcinoma cell lines EGF dependent secre - tion of proteinases was correlated with the meta - static properties of the cell lines 215 . Expression of transfected TGFa in a rat bladder carcinoma cell line resulted in highly mobile cells which produced a gelatinolytic activity not normally synthesized by untransfected or control neo transfected cells 216 . In RL 95 - 2 human endometrial adenosquamous carcinoma cells , EGF stimulated an increase in uPA 217 . In three cell lines with similar numbers of EGFR established from one patient with maxillary tumor , only one line responded to EGF with increased in - vasiveness into fibrin gels 218 . Subsequent analy - sis revealed that in this particular EGF - responsive cell line the production of the proteinase inhibitors PAI - 1 and TIMP was increased while the produc - tion of type IV collagenase and membrane bound PA were unaltered . 266 6 . Conclusions 1 . Expression of the EGFR , in contrast to initial expectations , is not restricted to a specific cellu - lar lineage but has been observed in a variety of different cell types throughout development . 2 . Biological functions of EGFR are equally varia - ble , ranging from providing signals for survival or terminal differentiation to inducing mitogenic response , cell motility , and invasion . 3 . EGFR activity has been shown to initiate or con - tribute to progression of neoplasia in a wide range of experimental systems ( cultured cells , retrovirally infected birds , rodent tumor model systems , and transgenic mice ) . 4 . In human malignancies , truncations or muta - tions of EGFR are rare events with exception of glioblastoma . This contrasts with the frequent deletions observed in the transduced EGFR genes of avian oncogenic retroviruses . 5 . In various human epithelial malignancies ex - pression of EGFR is associated with tumor pro - gression . In such carcinomas , paracrine or auto - crine activation of EGFR seems to be a common means of promoting growth and / or dissemina - tion . 6 . In human mammary tumors , an inverse correla - tion between expression of EGFR and ER in - dicates involvement of EGFR in tumor progres - sion . Interactions of EGFR and ER were also implicated in TGFa transgenic animals , leading to development of mammary carcinoma . 7 . EGF may support metastatic capacity of tumor cells by enhancing their ability to succeed in spe - cific steps of the metastatic cascade such as in - vasion , lodgement , extravasation , cell locomo - tion and growth in distant organs . The pleiotrop - ic effects of EGFR on cellular cytoskeletal reor - ganisation , adhesion , motility , expression and activation of proteases may be in many circum - stances a key to the success of cancer as a lethal disease . 8 . Future research should further elucidate the sig - naling pathways that are affected by EGFR and that can lead to transformation and / or tumor progression . Clarification is also needed with re - gard to the role of other tyrosine kinase recep - tors and of specific domains in these processes . Acknowledgements Dr . D . Henderson ( Schering A . G . , Berlin ) and Dr . G . Panayotou ( Ludwig Institute for Cancer Re - search , London ) are greatfully acknowledged for critical reading of the manuscript and for their invaluable contributions . Dr . R . Rosenberger ( NIMR , MRC , Mill Hill , London ) and Dr . E Alte - vogt ( DKFZ , Heidelberg ) have been sources of en - couragement and ideas . We are obliged to Dr . A . Ullrich ( Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry , Munich ) for his continuous interest and support . References 1 . Carpenter G , Cohen S : Epidermal growth factor . J Biol Chem 265 : 7709 - 7712 , 1990 2 . Plowman GD , Culouscou J - M , Whitney GS , Green JM , Carlton GW , Foy L , Neubauer MG , Shoyab M : Ligand - specific activation of HER4 / pl80 erbB4 , a fourth member of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor family . Proc Natl Acad Sci 90 : 1746 - 1750 , 1993 3 . Ullrich A , Schlessinger J : Signal transduction by receptors with tyrosine kinase activity . Cell 61 : 203 - 212 , 1990 4 . Honegger AM , Dull TJ , Felder S , Van Obberghen E , Bel - lot F , Szapary D , Schmidt A , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J : Point mutation at the ATP binding site of EGF receptor abolishes protein - tyrosine kinase activation and alters cel - lular routing . Cell 51 : 199 - 209 , 1987 5 . Moolenaar WA , Bierman AJ , Tilly BC , Verlaan I , Defize LHK , Honegger AM , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J : A point mutation at the ATP - binding site of the EGF - receptor abolishes signal transduction . EMBO J 7 : 707 - 710 , 1988 6 . Ullrich A , Coussens L , Hayfiick JS , Dull TJ , Gray A , Tam AW , Lee J , Yarden Y , Libermann TA , Schlessinger J , Downward J , Mayes ELV , Whittle N , Waterfield MD , See - burg PH : Human epidermal growth factor receptor cDNA sequence and aberrant expression of the amplified genes in A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells . Nature ( London ) 309 : 418 - 425 , 1984 7 . Downward J , Parker R Waterfield MD : Autophosphoryla - tion sites on the epidermal growth factor receptor . Nature 311 : 483 - 485 , 1984 8 , Carpenter G , Wahl MI : Handb Exp Pharmaco1951 : 69 - 171 , 1990 9 . Lin CR , Chen WS , Lazar CW , Carpenter CD , Gill GN , Evans RM , Rosenfeld MG : Protein kinase C phosphoryla - tion at Thr 654 of the unoccupied Epidermal Growth Fac - tor - receptor and EGF binding regulate functional receptor loss by independent mechanisms . Cell 44 : 839 - 848 , 1986 10 . Segatto O , Lonardo F , Wexler D , Fazioli F , Pierce JH , Bot - taro DR White ME DiFiore PP : The juxtamembrane re - gions of the Epidermal Growth Factor - Receptor and gp185erB 2 determine the specificity of signal transduction . Mol Cell Bio111 : 3191 - 3202 , 1991 11 . Countaway JL , Nairn AC , Davis RJ : Mechanism of desen - sitisation of the EGFR protein - tyrosine kinase . J Biol Chem 267 : 1129 - 1140 , 1992 12 . Theroux S J , Taglienti Sian C , Nair N , Countaway JL , Rob - inson HL , Davis R J : Increased oncogenic potential of erbB is associated with the loss of a COOH - terminal domain se - rine phosphorylation site . J Biol Chem 267 : 7967 - 7970 , 1992 13 . Honegger AM , Schmidt A , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J : Evi - dence for Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor - induced in - termolecuar autophosphorylation of the EGF - receptors in living cells . Mol Cell Bio110 : 4035 - 4044 , 1990 14 . Honegger AM , Dull TJ , Bellot F , van Obberghen E , Szap - ary D , Schmidt A , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J : Biological ac - tivities of EGF - receptor mutants with individually altered autophosphorylation sites . EMBO J 7 : 3045 - 3052 , 1988 15 . Honegger A , Dull TJ , Szapary D , Komoriya A , Kris R , Ull - rich A , Schlessinger J : Kinetic parameters of the protein tyrosine kinase activity of EGF - receptor mutants with in - dividually altererd autophosphorylation sites . EMBO J 7 : 3053 - 3060 , 1988 16 . Walton GM , Chen WS , Rosenfeld MG , Gill GN : Analysis of deletions of the carboxyl terminus of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor reveals self - phosphorylation at tyrosine 992 and enhanced in vivo tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of cell substrates . J Biol Chem 265 : 1750 - 1754 , 1990 17 . Khazaie K , Dull TJ , Graf T , Schlessinger J , Ullrich A , Beug H , Vennstr ~ m B : Trunction of the human EGFR leads to differential transforming potentials in primary avian fibro - blasts and erythroblasts . EMBO J 7 : 3061 - 3071 , 1988 18 . Massoglia S , Gray A , Dull TJ , Munemitsu S , Kung H - J , Schlessinger J , Ullrich A : Epidermal growth factor recep - tor cytoplasmic domain mutations trigger ligand - inde - pendent transformation . Mol Cell Bio110 : 3048 - 3055 , 1990 19 . Lichtner RB , Wiedemuth M , Kittmann A , Ullrich A , Schirrmacher V , Khazaie K : Ligand - induced activation of EGFR in intact rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells with - out detectable receptor phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 267 : 11872 - 11880 , 1992 20 . Vega QC , Cochet C , Filhol O , Chang C - R Rhee SG , Gill GN : A site of tyrosine phosphorylation in the C terminus of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor is required to acti - vate phospholipase C . Mol Cell Bio112 : 128 - 135 , 1992 21 . Cantley LC , Auger KR , Carpenter C , Duckworth B , Gra - ziani A , Kapeller R , Soltoff S : Oncogenes and signal trans - duction . Cell 64 : 281 - 302 , 1991 22 . Panayotou G , Waterfield M : Phosphatidylinositol 3 - ki - 267 nase : a key enzyme in diverse sinalling processes . Trends in Cell Biol Dec : 358 - 360 , 1992 23 . Panayotou G , Waterfield M : The assembly of signalling complexes by receptor tyrosine kinases . BioEssays , March 1993 , in press 24 . Merlino GT , Ishii S , Whang - Peng J , Knutsen T , Xu Y - H , Clark A J , Stratton RH , Wilson RK , Ma DR Roe BA , Hunts JH , Shimizu N , Pastan I : Structure and localization of genes encoding aberrant and normal epidermal growth factor receptor RNAs from A431 human carcinoma cells . Mol Cell Biol 5 : 1722 - 1734 , 1985 25 . Petch LA , Harris J , Raymond VW , Blasband A , Lee DC , Earp HS : A truncated , secreted form of the epidermal growth factor receptor is encoded by an alternatively spliced transcript in normal rat tissue . Mol Cell Biot 10 : 2973 - 2982 , 1990 26 . VennstrOm B , Bishop JM : Isolation and characterization of chicekn DNA homologous to the two putative oncogenes of avian erythroblastosis virus . Cell 28 : 135 - 143 , 1982 27 . Gamou S , Hirai M , Rikimaru K , Enomoto S , Sbimizu N : Biosynthesis of the epidermal growth factor receptor in hu - man squamous cell carcinoma lines : secretion of the trun - cated receptor - hyperproducing cells . Cell Struct Func 13 : 25 - 38 , 1988 28 . Basu A , Raghunath M , Bishayee S , Das M : Inhibition of tyrosine kinase activity of the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor by a truncated receptor form that binds to EGF : role for interreceptor interaction in kinase regula - tion . Mol Cell Biol 9 : 671 - 677 , 1989 29 . Redemann N , Holzmann B , yon Rfiden T , Wagner EE Schlessinger J , Ullrich A : Anti - oncogenic activity of sig - nalling - defective epidermal growth factor receptor mutants . Mol Cell Bio112 : 491 - 498 , 1992 30 . Cohen S , Elliott G : J Invest Dermato140 : 1 - 5 , 1963 31 . Gregory H : Isolation and structure of urogastrone and its relationship to epidermal growth factor . Nature 257 : 325 - 327 , 1975 32 . Cohen S , Carpenter G : Human epidermal growth factor : Isolation and chemical and biological properties . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 72 : 1317 - 1321 , 1975 33 . Roberts AB , Sporn MB : Transforming growth factors . Cancer Surveys 4 : 683 - 705 , 1985 34 . Derynck R : Transforming growth factor ~ . Cell 54 : 593 - 595 , 1988 35 . Prigent S , Lemoine NR : The type 1 ( EGFR - related ) family of growth factor receptors and their ligands . Progress in Growth Factor Research 4 : 1 - 24 , 1992 36 . Higashiyama S , Lau K , Besner GE , Abraham JA , Klags - brun M : Structure of heparin - binding EGFR - like growth factor . Multiple forms , primary structure , and glycosyla - tion of the mature protein . J Biot Chem 267 : 6205 - 6212 , 1992 37 . Wong ST , Winchell LF , McCune BK , Earp HS , Teixido J , Massagu6 J , Herman B , Lee DC : The TGF - c ~ precursor ex - pressed on the celt surface binds to the EGF - receptor on 268 adjacent cells , leading to signal transduction . Cell 56 : 495 - 506 , 1989 38 . Blasband AJ , Gilligan DM , Winchell LF , Wong ST , Luet - teke NC , Rogers KT , Lee DC : Expression of the TGF ~ in - tegral membrane precursor induces transformation of NRK cells . Oncogene 5 : 1213 - 1221 , 1990 39 . Anklesaria E Teixido J , Laiho M , Pierce JH , Greenberger JS , Massagu6 J : Cell - cell adhesion mediated by binding of membrane - anchored transforming growth factor c ~ to epi - dermal growth factor receptors promotes cell prolifera - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 : 3289 - 3293 , 1990 40 . Fukuyama R , Shimizu N : Expression of EGF and the EGFR in human tissues . J Exp Zoo1258 : 336 - 343 , 1991 41 . Harris RC : Potential physiological roles for EGF in the kidney . Am J Kidney Dis 17 : 627 - 630 , 1991 42 . Fine LG , Hammerman MR , Abboud HE : Evolving role of growth factors in the renal response to acute and chronic disease . J Am Soc Nephrol 2 : 1163 - 1170 , 1992 43 . Fuse H , Sakamoto M , Okumura M , Katayama T : EGF con - tents in seminal plasma as a marker of prostatic functions . Arch Androl 29 : 79 - 85 , 1992 44 . Nishi N , Shimizu C , Okutani T , Kagawa Y , Takasuga H , Su - no M , Wada F : Rat prostatic growth factors : purification and characterization of high and low molecular weight Epi - dermal Growth Factor receptors from rat dorsolateral prostate . Biochim Biophys Acta 1095 : 268 - 275 , 1991 45 . Plata - Salaman CR : Epidermal growth factor and the nerv - ous system . Pepetides 12 : 653 - 663 , 1991 46 . Madtes DK , Raines EW , Sakariassen KS , Assoian RK , Sporn MB , Bell GI , Ross R : Induction of transforming growth factor - a in activated human alveolar macrophages . Cell 53 : 285 - 293 , 1988 47 . Laurence D JR , Gusterson BA : The epidermal growth fac - tor receptor : a review of structural and functional relation - ships in the normal organism and in cancer cells . Tumor Bio111 : 229 - 261 , 1990 48 . Panayotou G , End R Aumailley M , Timpl R , Engel H : Do - mains of laminin with growth factor activity . Cell 56 : 93 - 101 , 1989 49 . Kubota S , Tashiro K , Yamada Y : Signaling site of laminin with mitogenic activity . J Biol Chem 267 : 4285 - 4288 , 1992 50 . Gospodarowicz D : Epidermal and nerve growth factors in mammalian development . Ann Rev Physiol 43 : 251 - 263 , 1981 51 . Dardik A , Schultz RM : Blastocoel expansion in the preim - plantation mouse embryo : stimulatory effect of TGF - et and EGE Development 113 : 919 - 930 , 1991 52 . Rappoll D , Brenner CA , Schultz R , Mark D , Werb Z : De - velopmental expression of PDGF , TGF - a , and TGF - 13 genes in preimplantation mouse embryos . Science 241 : 1823 - 1825 , 1988 53 . Arnholdt H , Diebold J , Kuhlmann B , Lohrs U : Receptor mediated processing of epidermal growth factor in the tro - phoblast of the human placenta . Virchows Arch B Cell Patho161 : 75 - 80 , 1991 54 . Zhang Y , Paria BC , Dey SK , Davis DL : Characterisation of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor in preimplanta - tion pig conceptuses . Dev Bio1151 : 617 - 621 , 1992 55 . Warburton D , Seth R , Shum L , Horcher PG , Hall FL , Werb Z , Slavkin HC : Epigenetic role of epidermal growth factor expression and signalling in embryonic mouse lung mor - phogenesis . Dev Bio1149 : 123 - 133 , 1992 56 . Abbott BD , Pratt RM : Retinoic acid alters epithelial dif - ferentiation during palatogenesis . J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol i1 : 315 - 325 , 1991 57 . Lee D , Han VKM : The expression of growth factors and their receptors in development . In : Sporn MB , Roberts AB ( eds ) Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology . Springer Verlag , Berlin , 1990 , pp 611 - 654 58 . Joh T , Darland T , Samuels M , Wu JX , Adamson ED : Regu - lation of epidermal growth factor receptor gene expression in murine embryonal carcinoma cells . Cell Growth Differ 3 : 315 - 325 , 1992 59 . den Hertog J , de Laat SW , Schlessinger J , Kruijer W : Neu - ronal differentiation in response to epidermal growth fac - tor of transfected P19 embryonal carcinoma cells express - ing human epidermal growth factor receptors . Cell Growth Differ 2 : 155 - 164 , 1991 60 . Reynolds BA , Weiss S : Generation of neurones and astro - cytes from isolated ceils of the adult mammalian central nervous system . Science 255 : 1707 - 1710 , 1992 61 . Simpson DL , Morrison R , de Vellis J , Herschman HR : Epi - dermal growth factor binding and mitogenic activity on pu - rified populations of cells from the central nervous system . J Neurosci Res 8 : 453 - 462 , 1982 62 . Leutz A , Schachner M : Epidermal growth factor stimu - lates DNA - synthesis of astrocytes in primary cerebellar cultures . Cell Tissue Res 220 : 393 - 404 , 1981 63 . Junier M - R Ma YJ , Costa ME , Hoffman G , Hill DE Ojeda SR : Transforming growth factor - a contributes to the mech - anism by which hypothalamic injury induces precocious puberty . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 9743 - 9747 , 1991 64 . Nelson KG , Takahashi T , Bossert NL , Walmer DK , McLa - chlan JA : Epidermal growth factor replaces estrogen in the stimulation of female genital - tract growth and differentia - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci 88 : 21 - 25 , 1991 65 . Ignar - Trowbridge DM , Nelson KG , Bidwell MC , Curtis SW , Washburn TF , McLachlan JA , Korach KS : Coupling of dual signaling pathways : Epidermal growth factor action involves the estrogen receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci 89 : 4658 - 4662 , 1992 66 . Daniel CW , Silberstein GB , Strickland P : Direct action of 17 beta - estradiaol on mouse mammary ducts analyzed by substained release implants and steroid autoradiography . Cancer Res 47 : 6052 - 6057 , 1987 67 . Coleman S , Silberstein GB , Daniel CW : Ductal morphoge - nesis in the mouse mammary gland : evidence supporting a role for Epidermal growth factor . Dev Biol 127 : 304 - 315 , 1988 68 . Daniel CW , Silberstein GB : In : Neville MC , Daniel CW ( eds ) The mammary gland , development , regulation and function . Plenum , New York , 1987 , pp 3 - 36 69 . Lippman ME , Dickson RB , Kasid A , Gelmann E , David - son N , McManaway M , Huff K , Bronzert D , Bates S , Swain S , Knabbe C : Autocrine and paracrine growth regulation of human breast cancer . J Steroid Biochem 24 : 147 - 154 , 1986 70 . Snedeker SM , Brown CF , DiAugustine RP : Expression and functional properties of transforming growth factor - c ~ and epidermal growth factor during mouse mammary gland ductal morphogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 276 - 280 , 1991 71 . Downward J , Yarden Y , Mayes E , Scrace G , Totty N , Stockwell R Ullrich A , Schlessinger J , Waterfield MD : Close similarity of epidermal growth factor receptor and v - erb - B oncogene protein sequences . Nature 307 : 521 - 527 , 1984 72 . Beug H , Kahn R D ] ' derlein G , Hayman MJ , GrafT : Char - acterization of hematopoietic cells transformed in vitro by AEV - H , an erbB containing avian erythroblastosis virus . In : Neth , Gallo , Greaves , Janka ( eds ) Modern Trends in Human Leukemia VI , 29 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin - Heidel - berg , 1985 , pp 290 - 297 73 . Beug H , Hayman M , Vennstrom , B : Mutational analysis of v - erbB oncogene function . In : Graf T , Kahn P ( eds ) Onco - genes and Growth Control . Springer - Verlag , Berlin - Hei - delberg , 1988 74 . Sap J , Munoz A , Datum K , Goldberg Y , Ghysdael J , Leutz A , Beug H , Vennstr ~ m B : The c - erb - A protein is a high af - finity receptor for thyroid hormone . Nature 324 : 635 ~ 540 , 1986 75 . Weinberger C , Thompson CC , Ong ES , Lebo R , Gruol D J , Evans RM : The c - erb - A gene encodes a thyroid hormone receptor . Nature 324 : 641 - 646 , 1986 76 . Schroeder C , Gibson L , Nordstr ) ' m C , Beug H : The estro - gen receptor cooperates with the TGFc ~ receptor ( c - erbB ) in regulation of chicken erythroid progenitor self - renewal . EMBO J 12 : 951 - 960 , 1993 77 . Pain B , Woods CM , Saez J , Flickinger T , Raines M , Peyrol S , Moscovici C , Moscovici MG , Kung H - J , Jurdic R Laza - rides E , Samarut J : EGF - R as a hemopoietic growth factor receptor : the c - erbB product is present in chicken erythro - cytic progenitors and controls their self - renewal . Cell 65 : 37 - 46 , 1991 78 . Pierce JH , Ruggiero M , Fleming TP , DiFiore PR Green - berger JS , Varticovski L , Schlessinger J , Rovera G , Aaron - son SA : Signal transduction through the EGF receptor transfected in IL - 3 dependent hematopoietic cells . Science 239 : 628 - 631 , 1988 79 . Collins M , Downward J , Miyajima A , Maruyama K , Arai KI , Mulligan R : Transfer of functional EGFRs to an IL3 - dependent cell line . J Cell Physiol 137 : 293 - 298 , 1988 80 . Shibuya H , Yoneyama M , Ninomiya - Tsuji J , Matsumoto K , Taniguchi T : IL - 2 and EGF receptors stimulate the he - matopoietic cell cycle via different signalling pathways : demonstration of a novel role for c - myc . Cell 70 : 57 - 67 , 1992 81 . Oval J , Hershberg R , Gansbacher B , Gilboa E , Schlessin - ger J , Taetle R : Expression of functional epidermal growth 269 factor receptors in a human hematopoietic cell line . Cancer Res 51 : 150 - 156 , 1991 82 . Metz T , Graf T , Leutz A : Activation of cMGF expression is a critical step in avian myeloid leukemogenesis . EMBO J 10 : 837 - 844 , 1991 83 . Velu TJ , Beguinot L , Vass WC , Willingham MC , Merlino GT , Pastan I , Lowy DR : Epidermal growth factor - depend - ent transformation by a human EGF - receptor proto - onco - gene . Science 238 : 1408 - 1410 , 1987 84 . DiFiore PR Pierce JH , Fleming TP , Hazan R , Ullrich A , King CR , Schlessinger J , Aaronson SA : Overexpression of the human EGF receptor confers an EGF - dependent transformed phenotype to NIH 3T3 cells . Cell 51 : 1063 - 1070 , 1987 85 . Khazaie K , Panayotou G , Aguzzi A , Samarut J , Gazzolo L , Jurdic P : EGF promotes in vivo sarcomagenic growth of early passage chicken embryo fibroblasts expressing v - myc and enhances in vitro transformation by the v - erbA onco - gene . Oncogene 6 : 21 - 28 , 1991 86 . Sandgren ER Luetteke NC , Palmiter RD , Brinster RL , Lee DC : Overexpression of TGFc ~ in transgenic mice : induc - tion of epithelial hyperplasia , pancreatic metaplasia , and carcinoma of the breast . Cell 61 : 1121 - - 1135 , 1990 87 . Pelley RJ , Moscovici C , Hughes S , Kung H - J : Proviral acti - vated c - erbB is leukemogenic but not sarcomagenic : char - acterization of a replication - competent retrovirus contain - ing the activated c - erbB . J Virol 62 : 1840 - 1844 , 1988 88 . Raines MA , Maihle N J , Moscovici C , Moscovici MG , Kung H - J : Molecular characterisation of three erbB transducing viruses generated during avian leukosis virus - induced erythroleukemia : extensive internal deletion near the ki - nase domain activates the fibrosarcoma - and hemangio - ma - inducing potentials of erbB . J Virol 62 : 2444 - 2452 , 1988 89 . Gamett D , Tracy S , Robinson H : Differences in sequences encoding the carboxy - terminal domain of the epidermal factor receptor correlate with differences in the disease po - tential of viral erbB genes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83 : 6053 - 6057 , 1986 90 . Rosenthal A , Lindquist PB , Bringman TS , Goeddel DV , Derynck R : Expression in rat fibroblasts of a human trans - forming growth factor - ~ cDNA results in transformation . Cell 46 : 301 - 309 , 1986 91 . Stern DF , Hare DL , Cecchini MA , Weinberg RA : Con - struction of a novel oncogene based on synthethic sequenc - es encoding epidermal growth factor . Science 235 : 321 - 324 , 1987 92 . Land H , Parada LF , Weinberg RA : Cellular oncogenes and multistep carcinogenesis . Science 222 : 771 - 778 , 1983 93 . Decker S J , Alexander C , Habib T : Epidermal growth fac - tor - stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation and Epidermal growth factor receptor degradation in cells expressing EGF receptors truncated at residue 973 . J Biol Chem 267 : 11041108 , 1992 94 . Clark S , Dunlop M : Modulation of phospholipase A2 activ - ity by EGF in CHO cells transfected with human EGFR . 270 Role of receptor cytoplasmic subdomain . Biochem J 15 : 715 - 721 , 1991 95 . DiFiore PR Helin K , Kraus MH , Pierce JH , Artrip J , Segat - to J , Bottaro DP : A single amino acid substitution is suffi - cient to modify the mitogenic properties of the epidermal growth factor receptor to resemble that of gp185 erbBk2 . EM - BO J 11 : 3927 - 3933 , 1992 96 . Jhappan C , Stahle C , Harkins RN , Fausto N , Smith GH , Merlino GT : TGFa overexpression in transgenic mice in - duces liver neoplasia and abnormal development of the mammary gland and pancreas . Cell 61 : 1137 - 1146 , 1990 97 . Fuchs E , Vassar R : Trangenic mice provide new insights into the role of TGF - c ~ during epidermal development and differentiation . Genes Dev 5 : 714 - 727 , 1991 98 . Elder JT , Fisher GJ , Lindquist PB , Bennett GL , Pittelkow MR , Coffey RJ Jr , Ellingsworth L , Derynck R , Voorhees J J : Overexpression of TGF - ct in psoriatic epidermis . Sci - ence 243 : 811 - 814 , 1989 99 . Krane JE Gottlieb AB , Carter DM , Krueger JG : The In - sulin growth factor - I receptor is overexpressed in psoriatic epidermis , but is differentially regulated from the epider - mal growth factor receptor . J Exp Med 175 : 1081 - 1090 , 1992 100 . Cook PW , Pittelkow MR , Shipley GD : Growth factor inde - pendent proliferation of normal human keratinocytes : pro - duction of autocrine and paracrine acting mitogenic fac - tors . J Cell Physio1146 : 277 - 289 , 1991 101 . Imamoto A , Beltran LM , DiGiovanni J : Evidence for au - tocrine / paracrine growth stimulation by TGF - c ~ during the process of skin tumor promotion . Mol Carcinog 4 : 52 - 60 , 1991 102 . te - Pas ME van Bergen en Henegouwen PM , Boonstra J , Ponec M : Regulation of EGFR expression in normal and transformed keratinocytes . Arch Dermatol Res 283 : 125 - 130 , 1991 103 . Colburn NH : Genes and membrane signals involved in ne - oplastic transformation . In : Huberman E , Barr SH ( eds ) Carcinogenesis , Vol 10 . Raven Press , New York , 1985 , pp 235 - 248 104 . Ben - Ari ET , Bernstein LR , Colburn NH : Differential c - jun expression in response to tumor promoters in JB6 cells sensitive or resistant to neoplastic transformation . Mol Carcinog 5 : 62 - 74 , 1992 105 . Sun Y , Pommier Y , Colburn NH : Acquisition of a growth - inhibitory response to phorbol ester involves DNA dam - age . Cancer Res 52 : 1907 - 1915 , 1992 106 . Sainsbury JRC , Farndon JR , Needham GK , Malcolm A J , Harris AL : Epidermal growth factor receptor status as pre - dictor of early recurrence of and death from breast cancer . Lancet i : 1398 - 1402 , 1987 107 . Grimaux M , Romain S , Remvikos Y , Martin PM , Magdal - enat H : Prognostic value of EGFR in node - positive breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 14 : 77 - 90 , 1989 108 . Bolufer E Miralles F , Rodriquez A , Vanquez C , Lluch A , Garcia - Conde J , Olmos T : Epidermal growth factor recep - tor in human breast cancer : correlation with cytosolic and nuclear ER receptors and with biological and histological tumor characteristics . Eur J Cancer 26 : 283 - 290 , 1990 109 . Toi M , Osaki A , Yamada H , Toge T : Epidermal growth fac - tor receptor expression as a prognostic indicator in breast cancer . Eur J Cancer 27 : 977 - 980 , 1991 110 . Klijn JG , Berns PM , Schmitz PI , Foekens JA : The clinical significance of EGFR in human breast cancer : a review on 5232 patients . Endocr Rev 13 : 3 - 17 , 1992 111 . Battaglia F , Scambia G , Rossi G , Benedetti R Bellatone R , Pollizi G , Querzoli P , Negrinie R , Jacobelli S , Crucittie F , Mancuso S : Epidermal growth factor receptor in human breast cancer : correlation with steroid hormone receptors and axillary lymph node involvement . Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 24 : 1685 - 1690 , 1988 112 . Cappelletti V , Brivio M , Miodini R Granata G , Coradini D , DiFronzo G : Simultaneous estimation of epidermal growth factor receptors and steroid receptors in a series of 136 resectable primary breast tumors . Tumor Biol 9 : 200 - 211 , 1988 113 . Delarue JC , Friedman S , Mouriesse H , May - Levin E San - cho - Garnier H , Contesso G : Epidermal growth factor re - ceptor in human breast cancer : correlation with estrogen and progesterone receptors . Breast Cancer Res Treat 11 : 173 - 178 , 1988 114 . Foekens JA , Portengen H , Putten WLJ , Trapman AMAC , Reubi J , Alexieva FG , Klijn JGM : Prognostic value of re - ceptors for insulin - like growth factor I , somatostatin , and epidermal growth factor in human breast cancer . Cancer Res 49 : 7002 - 7009 , 1989 115 . Bolla M , Chedin M , Souvignet C , Marron J , Arnould C , Chambaz E : Estimation of epidermal growth factor recep - tor in 177 breast cancers : correlation with prognostic fac - tors . Breast Canc Res Treat 16 : 97 - 102 , 1990 116 . Spyratos F , Delarue D , Andrieu C , Lidereau R , Cham - p6me MH , Hac6ne K , Brunet M : Epidermal growth factor receptors and prognosis in primary breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 17 : 83 - 89 , 1990 117 . Koenders PG , Beex LVAM , Geurts - Moespot A , Heuvel JJTM , Kienhuis CBM , Benraad T J : Epidermal growth fac - tor receptor - negative tumors are predominantly confined to the subgroup of estradiol receptor - positive human pri - mary breast cancers . Cancer Res 51 : 4544 - 4548 , 1991 118 . Bilous M , Milliken J , Mathijs J - M : Immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridisation of Epidermal growth factor recep - tor and relation to prognostic factors in breast cancer . Eur J Cancer 28 : 1033 - 1037 , 1992 119 . Rios MA , Fernandez A , Tormo B , Quintero S , Perez I , Skoog L , Perez R : Heterogenous expression of the EGF - receptor in human breast carcinoma . Anticancer Res 12 : 205 - 208 , 1992 120 . Fernandez - Pol JA : Modulation of EGFR protooncogene expression by growth factors and hormones in human breast carcinoma cells . Critical Reviews in Oncogenesis 2 : 173 - 185 , 1991 121 . van de Vijver MJ , Nusse R : The molecular biology of breast cancer . Biochim Biophys Acta 1072 : 33 - 50 , 1991 122 . Long B , McKibben BM , Lynch M , van den Berg HW : Changes in epidermal growth factor - receptor expression and response to ligand associated with acquired tamoxifen resistance or estrogen independence in the ZR - 75 - 1 human breast cancer cell lines . Br J Cancer 65 : 865 - 869 , 1992 123 . van Agthoven T , van Agthoven TLA , Portengen H , Foe - kens JA , Dorssers LCJ : Ectopic expression of epidermal growth factor receptors induces hormone independence in ZR - 75 - 1 human breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 52 : 5082 - 5088 , 1992 124 . Carlin CR , Simon D , Mattison J , Knowles BB : Expression and biosynthetic variation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in human hepatocellular carcinoma - derived cell lines . Mol Cell Biol 8 : 25 - 34 , 1988 125 . Baskin G , Schenker S , Frosto T , Henderson G : Transform - ing growth factor - 3 1 inhibits EGFR endocytosis and down - regulation in cultured fetal rat hepatocytes . J Biol Chem 266 : 13238 - 13242 , 1991 126 . Meyer DH , Bachem MG , Gressner AM : Bidirectional ef - fects of Kupffer cells on hepatocyte proliferation in vitro . FEBS Lett 283 : 150 - 154 , 1991 127 . Aumfiller G : Benign prostatic hyperplasia and growth fac - tors : mechanisms and hypotheses . Urologe A 31 : 159 - 165 , 1992 128 . Manni A : Somatostatin and growth hormone regulation in cancer . Biotherapy 4 : 31 - 36 , 1992 129 . Atlas I , Mendelsohn J , Baselga J , Fair WR , Masui H , Ku - mar R : Growth regulation of human renal carcinoma cells : role of transforming growth factor - c ~ . Cancer Res 52 : 3335 - 3339 , 1992 130 . Walker C , Everitt J , Freed J J , Knudson AG Jr , Whiteley LO : Altered expression of transforming growth factor - a in hereditary rat renal cell carcinoma . Cancer Res 51 : 2973 - 2978 , 1991 131 . Neal DE , Marsh C , Bennett MK , Abel PD , Hall RR , Sains - bury JRC , Harris A : Epidermal growth factor receptors in human bladder cancer : comparison of invasive and super - ficial tumors . Lancet , Feb 16 : 166 - 368 , 1985 132 . Shirasuna K , Hayashido Y , Sugiyama M , Yoshioka H , Mat - suya 3 " . - Immunohistochemical localization of EGF and EGFR in human mucosa and its malignancy . Virchows - Arch - A - Pathol - Anat - Histopatho1418 : 349 - 353 , 1991 133 . Maurizi M , Scambia G , Benedetti Panici R Ferrandina G , Almadori G , Paludetti G , De Vincenzo R , Distefano M , Brinchi D , Cadoni G , Mancuso S : Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in primary laryngeal cancer : correla - tion with clinico - pathological features and prognostic sig - nificance . Int J Cancer 52 : 862 - 866 , 1992 134 . Ozawa S , Ueda M , Ando N , Abe O , Hirai M , Shimizu N : Stimulation by EGF of the growth of EGF receptor - hyper - producing tumor ceils in athymic mice . Int J Cancer 40 : 706 - 710 , 1987 135 . Mukaida H , Toi M , Hirai T , Yamashita 5 ( , Toge T : Clinical significance of the expression of EGF and its receptor in esophageal cancer . Cancer 68 : 142 - 148 , 1991 136 . Chen S - C , Chou C - K , Wong F - H , Chang C , Hu C - P : Over 271 expression of epidermal growth factor and Insulin growth factor - I receptors and autocrine stimulation in human es - pohageal carcinoma cells . Cancer Res 51 : 1898 - 1903 , 1991 137 . Lemoine NR , Jain S , Sivestre F , Lopes C , Hughes CM , McLealland E , Gullick W J , Filipe MI : Amplification and overexpression of the EGF - receptor and c - erbB - 2 proto - oncogenes in human stomach cancer . Br J Cancer 64 : 79 - 83 , 1991 138 . Gross ME , Zorbas MA , Danels Y J , Garcia R , Gallick GE , Olive M , Brattain MG , Boman BM , Yeoman LC : Cellular growth response to EGF in colon carcinoma cells with an amplified growth factor derived from a familial adenoma - tous polyposis patient . Cancer Res 51 : 1452 - 1459 , 1991 139 . Huang S , Trujillo JM , Chakrabarty S : Proliferation of hu - man colon cancer cells : role of EGF and transforming growth factor - a . Int J Cancer 52 : 978 - 986 , 1992 140 . Scambia G , Benedetti Panici P , Battaglia E Ferrandina G , Baiocchi G , Greggi S , De - Vincenzo R , Manuco S : Signif - icance of EGFR in advanced ovarian cancer . J Clin Oncol 10 : 529 - 535 , 1992 141 . Damstrup L , Rygaard K , Spang - Thomsen M , Poulsen HS : Expression of the EGFR in human small cell lung cancer cell lines . Cancer Res 52 : 3089 - 3093 , 1992 142 . Leung FC , Bohn LR , Dagle GE : Elevated EGFR binding in plutonium - induced lung tumors from dogs . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 196 : 385 - 389 , 1991 143 . Yamazaki H , Yasuhisa F , Ueyama Y , Tamaoli N , Kawamo - to T , Taniguchi S , Shibuya M : Amplification of the structur - ally and functionally altered epidermal growth factor re - ceptor gene ( c - erbB ) in human brain tumors . Mol Cell Biol 8 : 1816 - 1820 , 1988 144 . Libermann TA , Nusbaum HR , Razon N , Kris R , Lax I , Soreq H , Whittle N , Waterfield MD , Ullrich A , Schlessin - ger J : Amplification , enhanced expression and possible re - arrangement of EGF - receptor gene in primary human brain tumours of glial origin . Nature 313 : 144 - 147 , 1985 145 . Tuzi NL , Venter D J , Kumar S , Staddon SL , Lemoine NR , Gullick WJ : Expression of growth factor receptors in hu - man brain tumours . Br J Cancer 63 : 227 - 233 , 1991 146 . Chaffanet M , Chauvin C , Laine M , Berger F , Chedin M , Rost N , Nissou MF , Benabid AL : EGFR amplification and expression in human brain tumors . Eur J Cancer 28 : 11 - 17 , 1992 147 . Humphrey PA , Wong A J , Vogelstein B , Zalutsky MR , Fuller GN , Archer GE , Friedman HS , Kwatra MM , Bigner SH , Bigner DD : Antisynthetic peptide antibody reacting at the fusion junction of deletion - mutant epidermal growth factor receptors in human glioblastoma . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 : 4207 - 4211 , 1990 148 . Hart IR : " Seed and soil " revisited : mechanisms of site spe - cific metastasis . Cancer Met Rev 1 : 5 - 16 , 1982 149 . Nicolson GL : Cell surface molecules and tumor metastasis . Regulation of metastatic phenotype diversity . Exp Cell Res 150 : 3 - 22 , 1984 150 . Schirrmacher V : Cancer metastasis : experimental ap - 272 proaches , theoretical concepts , and impacts for treatment strategies . Adv Cancer Res 43 : 1 - 73 , 1985 151 . Dong X - F , Berthois Y , Martin P - M : Effect of epidermal growth factor on the proliferation of human epithelial can - cer cell lines : correlation with the level of occupied EGF receptor . Anticancer Res 11 : 737 - 744 , 1991 152 . Minke JMHM , Schuuring E , van den Berghe R , Stolwijk JAM , Boonstra J , Cornelisse C , Hilkens J , Misdorp W : Iso - lation of two distinct epithelial cell lines from a single feline mammary carcinoma with different tumorigenic potential in nude mice and expressing different levels of epidermal growth factor - receptors . Cancer Res 51 : 4028 - 4037 , 1991 153 . Lee K , Tanaka M , Hatanaka M , Kuze F : Reciprocal effects of epidermal growth factor receptor and transforming grwoth factor - 13 on the anchorage - dependent and - inde - pendent growth of A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells . Exp Cell Res 173 : 156 - 162 , 1987 154 . Agrilles A , Kraft N , Ootaka T , Hutchinson P , Atkins RC : Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - a stimulate or inhibit proliferation of a human renal adeno - carcinoma cell line depending on cell status : differentiation of the two pathways by G protein involvement . Cancer Res 52 : 4356 - 4360 , 1992 155 . Santon JB , Cronin MT , MacLeod CL , Mendelsohn J , Ma - sui H , Gill GN : Effects of epidermal growth factor receptor concentration on tumorigenicity of A431 cells in nude mice . Cancer Res 46 : 4701 - 4705 , 1986 156 . Filmus J , Trent JM , Pollak MN , Buick RN : Epidermal growth factor receptor gene - amplified MDA - A468 breast cancer cell line and its nonamplified variants . Mol Cell Biol 7 : 251 - 257 , 1987 157 . Inui T , Tsubura A , Morii S : Incidence of precancerous foci of mammary glands and growth rate of transplantable mammary cancers in sialoadenectomized mice . J Natl Can - cer Inst 81 : 1660 - 1663 , 1989 158 . Yoneda T , Alsina MM , Watatani K , Bellot F , Schlessinger J , Mundy GR : Dependence of a human squamous carcino - ma and associated paraneoplastic syndromes on the epi - dermal growth factor receptor pathway in nude mice . Can - cer Res 51 : 2438 - 2443 , 1991 159 . Miiller BM , Romerdahl CA , Trent JM , Reisfeld RA : Sup - pression of spontaneous melanoma metastasis in scid mice with an antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor . Cancer Res 51 : 2193 - 2198 , 1991 160 . Aboud - Pirak E , Hurwitz E , Pirak ME , Bellot E Schless - inger J , Sela M : Efficacy of antibodies to epidermal growth factor receptor against Kb carcinoma in vitro and in nude mice . J Natl Cancer Inst 80 : 1605 - 1611 , 1988 161 . Koenuma M , Yamori T , Tsuruo T : Insulin and insulin - like growth factor I stimulate proliferation of metastatic varia - nts of colon carcinoma 26 . Jpn J Cancer Res 80 : 51 - 58 , 1989 162 . Cavanaugh PG , Nicolson GL : Lung - derived growth factor that stimulates the growth of lung - metastasizing tumor cells : identification as transferrin . J Cell Biochem 47 : 261 - 271 , 1991 163 . Lichtner RB , Gallick GE , Nicolson GL : Pyrimido - pyrimi - dine modulation of EGF growth - promoting activity and p21 ras expression in rat mammary adenocarcinoma ceils . J Cell Physio1137 : 285 - 292 , 1988 164 . Breillout F , Antoine E , Lascaux V , Rolland Y , Poupon M - F : Promotion of micrometastasis proliferation in a rat rhabdomyosarcoma model by EGE J Natl Canc Inst 81 : 702 - 705 , 1989 165 . Lester BR , McCarthy JB : Tumor cell adhesion to the extra - cellular matrix and signal transduction mechanisms impli - cated in tumor cell motility , invasion and metastasis . Can - cer Met Rev 11 : 31 - 44 , 1992 166 . van Roy F , Mareel M : Tumor invasion : effects of cell ad - hesion and motility . Trends in Cell Biol 2 : 163 - 169 , 1992 167 . Briles EB , Kornfeld S : Isolation and metastatic properties of detachment variants of B16 melanoma ceils . J Natl Can - cer Inst 60 : 1217 - 1222 , 1978 168 . Chinkers M , McKanna JA , Cohen S : Rapid induction of morphological changes in human carcinoma cell A431 by EGE J Cell Biol 83 : 260 - 265 , 1979 169 . Rieber M , Gil F , Rieber MS , Urbina C : Substrate - depend - ent effect of epidermal growth factor on intercellular ad - hesion and synthesis of triton - insoluble proteins in human carcinoma A431 cells . Int J Cancer 37 : 411 - 418 , 1986 170 . Lichtner RB , Wiedemuth M , Noeske - Jungblut C , Schirr - macher V : Rapid effects of EGF on cytoskeletal structures and adhesive properties of highly metastatic rat mammary adenocarcinoma cells . Clin Exp Metastasis 11 : 113 - 125 , 1993 171 . Chinkers M , McKanna JA , Cohen S : Rapid rounding of human epidermoid carcinoma cells A431 induced by EGE J Cell Bio188 : 422 - 429 , 1981 172 . Westermark B , Magnusson A , Heldin CH : Effect of epi - dermal growth factor on membrane motility and cell loco - motion in cultures of human clonal glioma cells . Prog Clin Biol Res 118 : 491 - 507 , 1983 173 . Basson MD , Modlin IM , Madri JA : Human enterocyte ( Caco - 2 ) migration is modulated in vitro by extracellular matrix composition and epidermal growth factor . J Clin In - vest 90 : 15 - 23 , 1992 174 . Bellas RE , Bendori R , Farmer SR : Epidermal growth fac - tor activation of Vinculin and l ~ - integrin gene transcrip - tion in quiescent swiss 3T3 cells . J Biol Chem 266 : 12008 - 12014 , 1991 175 . Tamkun JW , DeSimone DW , Fonda D , Patel RS , Buck C , Horwitz AF , Hynes RO : Structure of integrin , a glycopro - tein involved in the transmembrane linkage between fibro - netin and actin . Cell 46 : 271 - 282 , 1986 176 . Kornberg LJ , Earp HS , Turner CE , Prockop C , Juliano RL : Signal transduction by integrins : increased protein tyro - sine phosphorylation caused by clustering of 131 integrins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88 : 8392 - 8396 , 1991 177 . Hirst R , Horwitz A , Buck C , Rohrschneider L : Phosphory - lation of the fibronectin receptor complex in cells trans - formed by oncogenes that encode tyrosine kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83 : 6470 - 6474 , 1986 178 . Freed E , Gailit J , van tier Geer R Ruoslahti E , Hunter T : A novel integrin 13 subunit is associated with the vitronectin receptor c ~ subunit ( c ~ v ) in a human osteosarcoma cell line and is a substrate for protein kinase C . EMBO J 8 : 2955 - 2965 , 1989 179 . Hibbs ML , Jakes S , Stacker SA , Wallace RW , Springer TA : The cytoplasmic domain of the integrin lymphocyte func - tion - associated antigen 1 ~ subunit : sites required for bind - ing to intercellular adhesion molecule 1 and the phorbol ester - stimulated phosphorylation site . J Exp Med 174 : 1227 - 1238 , 1991 180 . Hillery CA , Smyth SS , Parise LV : Phosphorylation of hu - man platelet glycoprotein IIIa ( GPIIIa ) . J Biol Chem 266 : 14663 - 14669 , 1991 181 . Guan JL , Shalloway D : Regulation of focal adhesion - asso - ciated protein tyrosine kinase by both cellular adhesion and oncogenic transformation . Nature 358 : 690 - 692 , 1992 182 . Hanks SK , Calalb MB , Harper MC , Patel SK : Focal adhe - sion protein - tyrosine kinase phosphorylation in response to cell attachment to fibronectin . Proc Natl Acad Sci 89 : 8487 - 8491 , 1992 183 . Hynes RO : Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 : 11 - 25 , 1992 184 . Zachary I , Rozengurt E : Focal adhesion kinase ( p125VAK ) : a point of convergence in the action of neuropeptides , inte - grins , and oncogenes . Cell 71 : 891 - 894 , 1992 185 . Bade EG , Feindler S : Liver epithelial cell migration in - duced by epidermal growth factor or transforming growth factor alpha is associated with changes in the gene expres - sion of secreted proteins . In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 24 : 149 - 154 , 1988 186 . Thorne H J , Jose D J , Zhang HY , Dempsey PJ , Whitehead RH : Epidermal growth factor stimulates the synthesis of cell attachment proteins in the human breast cancer cell line PMC42 . Int J Cancer 40 : 207 - 212 , 1987 187 . Frixen UH , Behrens J , Sachs M , Eberle G , Voss B , Warda A , L ~ chner D , Birchmeier W : E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion prevents invasiveness of human carcinoma cells . J Cell Bio1113 : 173 - 185 , 1991 188 . Behrens J , Frixen U , Schipper J , Weidner M , Birchmeier W : Cell adhesion in invsion and metastasis . Semin Cell Biol 3 : 169 - 178 , 1992 189 . Fukuyama R , Shimizu N : Detection of EGFRs and E - cad - herins in the basolateral membrane of A431 cells by laser scanning fluorescence microscopy . Jpn J Cancer Res 82 : 8 - 11 , 1991 190 . Behrens J , Vakaet L , Friis R , Winterhager E , Van Roy F , Mareel MM , Birchmeier W : Loss of epithelial differentia - tion and gain of invasiveness correlates with tyrosine phos - phorylation of the E - cadherin / ~ - catenin complex in cells transformed witha temperature sensitive v - src gene . J Cell Bio1120 : 757 - 766 , 1993 191 . Reichmann E , Schwarz H , Deiner EM , Leitner I , Eiler M , Berger J , Busslinger M , Beug H : Activation of an inducible c - FosER fusion protein causes loss of epithelial polarity and triggers epithelial - fibroblastoid cell conversion . Cell 71 : 1103 - 1116 , 1992 273 192 . Behrens J , Weidner KM , Frixen UH , Schipper JH , Sachs M , Arakaki N , Daikura Y , Birchmeir W : The role of E - cad - herin and scatter factor in tumor invasion and cell motility . In : Goldberg ID ( ed ) Cell Motility Factors . Birkh ~ iuser Verlag , Basel , 1991 , pp 10 % 127 193 . Schoenenberger CA , Matlin KS : Cell polarity and epithe - lial oncogenesis . Trends in Cell Biology 1 : 87 - 92 , 1991 194 . Lichtner RB , Schirrmacher V : Cellular distribution and bi - ological activity of epidermal growth factor receptors in A431 cells are influenced by cell - cell contact . J Cell Physiol 144 : 303 - 312 , 1990 195 . Roy LM , Gittinger CK , Landreth GE : Characterisation of the Epidermal growth factor receptor associated with cy - toskeletons of A431 cells . J Cell Physio1140 : 295 - 304 , 1989 196 . van Bergen en Henegouwen PMR Defize LHK , de Kroon J , van Damme H , Verkleij A J , Boonstra J : Ligand - induced association of epidermal growth factor receptor to the cy - toskeleton of A431 cells . J Cell Biochem 39 : 455 - 465 , 1989 197 . Akiyama K , Kadowaki T , Nishida E , Kadooka T , Ogawara H , Fukami Y , Sakai H , Takaku F , Kasuga M : Substrate spe - cificities of tyrosine - specific protein kinases toward cytos - keletal proteins in vitro . J Biol Chem 261 : 14797 - 14803 , 1986 198 . Fava RA , Cohen S : Isolation of a calcium - dependent 35 kilodalton substrate for the epidermal growth factor recep - tor kinase from A - 431 celss . J Biol Chem 259 : 2636 - 2645 , 1984 199 . Bretscher A : Rapid phosphorylation and reorganisation of ezrin and spectrin accompany morphological changes in - duced in A431 cells by epidermal growth factor . J Cell Biol 108 : 921 - 930 , 1989 200 . Wiegant FAC , Blok FJ , Defize LKH , Linnemans WAM , Verkleij A J , Boonstra J : Epidermal growth factor recep - tors associated to cytoskeletel elements of epidermoid car - cinoma ( A431 ) cells . J Cell Bio1103 : 87 - 94 , 1986 201 . Ruoslahti E : Control of cell motility and tumor invasion by extracellular matrix interactions . Br J Cancer 66 : 239 - 242 , 1992 202 . Stoker M , Gherardi E : Regulation of cell movement : the motogenic cytokines . Biochim Biophys Acta 1072 : 81 - 102 , 1991 203 . Vallds A , Boyer B , Thiery JP : Adhesion systems in em - bryonic epithelial to mesenchyme tranformations and in cancer invasion and metastasis . In : Goldberg ID ( ed ) Cell Motility Factors . Birkhfiuser Verlag , Basel , 1991 , pp 17 - 34 204 . Blay J , Brown KD : Epidermal growth factor receptor pro - motes the chemotactic migration of cultured rat intestinal epithelial cells . J Cell Physio1124 : 10 % 122 , 1985 205 . Engstr6m W : Differential effects of epidermal growth fac - tor ( EGF ) on cell locomotion and cell proliferation in a cloned human embryonic carcinoma - derived cell line in vitro . J Cell Sci 86 : 47 - 55 , 1986 206 . Barrandon Y , Green H : Cell migration is essential for sus - tained growth of keratinocyte colonies : the roles of trans - forming growth factor - c ~ and epidermal growth factor . Cell 50 : 1131 - 1137 , 1987 274 207 . Koyasu S , Kadowaki T , Nishida E , Tobe K , Abe E , Kasuga M , Sakai H , Yahara I : Alterations in growth , cell morphol - ogy , and cytoskeletal structures of KB cells induced by EGF and transforming growth factor - beta . Exp Cell Res 176 : 107 - 116 , 1988 208 . Lund - Johansen M , Bjerkvig R , Humphrey PA , Bigner SH , Bigner DD , Laerum O - D : Effect of EGF on glioma cell growth , migration , and invasion in vitro . Cancer Res 50 : 6039 - 6044 209 . Nakajima M , Chop AM : Tumor invasion and extracellular matrix degradative enzymes : regulation of activity by or - gan factors . Semin Cancer Biol 2 : 115 - 127 , 1991 210 . Laiho M , Keski - Oja J : Growth factors in the regulation of pericellular proteolysis : a review . Cancer Res 49 : 2533 - 2553 , 1989 211 . Niedbala MJ , Sartorelli AC : Regulation by EGF of human squamous cell carcinoma plasminogen activator mediated proteolysis of extracellular matrix . Cancer Res 40 : 3302 - 3309 , 1989 212 . Keski - Oja J , Blasi F , Leof EB , Moses HL : Regulation of the synthesis and activity of urokinase plaminogen activator in A549 human lung carcinoma cells by transforming growth factor 3 . J Cell Bio1106 : 451 - 459 , 1988 213 . Boyd D : Examination of the effects of epidermal growth factor receptor on the production of urokinase and the ex - pression of plasminogen activator receptor in a human co - lon cancer cell line . Cancer Res 49 : 2427 - 2432 , 1989 214 . Chua CC , Geiman DE , Keller GH , Ladda RL : Induction of collagenase secretion in human fibroblast cultures by growth promoting factors . J Biol Chem 260 : 5213 - 5216 , 1985 215 . Korczak B , Kerbel R , Dennis J : Growth factor dependent regulation of proteinases : expression and secretion in non - metastatic and metastatic mouse mammary andenocarci - noma SP1 cells ( meeting abstract ) . Proc Ann Meet Am As - soc Cancer Res 31 : A438 , 1990 216 . Gavrilovic J , Moens G , Thiery JP , Jouanneau J : Expression of transfected transforming growth factor ~ induces a mo - tile fibroblast - like phenotype with extracellular matrix - de - grading potential in a rat bladder carcinoma cell line . Cell Reg 1 : 1003 - 1014 , 1990 217 . Sundareshan P , Misiorowski RL , Davis JR , Korc M , Hen - drix MJ : Effects of epidermal growth factor on growth re - sponse , morphology , and invasive potential of human en - dometrial carcinoma cell - line RL95 - 2 . Cancer Commun 3 : 149 - 158 , 1991 218 . Mizoguchi H , Komiyama S , Matsui K , Hamanaka R , Ono M , Kiue A , Kobayashi M , 8himizu N , Welgus HG , Kuwano M : The response to epidermal growth factor of human maxillary tumor cells in terms of tumor growth , invasion and expression of proteinase inhibitors . Int J Cancer 49 : 738 - 743 , 1991 Address for offprints : K . Khazaie , Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 , 6900 Heidelberg , Germany