Studying Medium Effects on Children ʼ s Creative Processes Sharon Lynn Chu Yew Yee , Francis Quek , Xiao Lin Center for Human - Computer Interaction , Virginia Tech 2202 Kraft Drive , KWII Building ( 0106 ) Blacksburg , VA 24061 - 0106 { sharilyn , quek , linxiao } @ vt . edu ABSTRACT The Fourth Grade Slump , whereby children’s creativity drops precipitously at around fourth grade , is a developmen - tal phenomenon that begs for research to be done on ways to nurture children’s creativity . We posit that due to its form and formal features , the use of the animated medium for creative activities can positively sustain the child’s creativity throughout the Slump . We present a study that investigated how the animated medium ( animation ) mediates and influ - ences the creative process of children in the third and fourth grade , using the digital print medium ( storybook ) as com - parison . Analysis of the process was done at the structural and production level using mainly the method of discourse analysis . Children were observed to go through different stages and sequences when creating stories using animation as opposed to the storybook medium . The strategies that the children adopted to create differed along six themes : the prevalence of micro - activities , an integrated and activity - driven process of story generation , a focus on qualitative details producing richer stories , a broader imagination in terms of the story world , the occurrence of serendipitous creativity , and a higher degree of convergence and divergence despite a low seeding level of ideas in story generation . While animation was seen to have certain limitations in the act of creating , it had a largely positive impact on the children’s motivation and enthusiasm to engage in the creative activity . Our results have implications for the understanding of the creative proc - ess among elementary school children , a necessary first step for the proper design of systems to nurture and sustain chil - dren’s creativity throughout the Fourth Grade Slump . Author Keywords Creativity , medium effects , fourth grade slump , children ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( HCI ) : Misc General Terms Human factors , Design INTRODUCTION Creativity is of critical importance to us as individuals , as a society , and ultimately as cultures that span multiple genera - tions . Recognized as “the driving force behind our greatest ideas , our most comprehensive solutions , and our most prof - itable enterprises” at the 2010 Creativity World Forum [ 1 ] , this fundamental aspect of human beings stands as the key factor for the formation of a creative class that is becoming a distinguishing mark of global , post - industrial cities [ 2 ] . But it is not only those generally recognized as specially creative for whom this quality is important . Creativity plays a role in everyday life ( what [ 3 ] call small ‘c’ creativity ) – the plumber making - do with an alternate tool , the baker develop - ing a cake - mix , and the technician devising a work - around to solve a technical problem . Indeed it is thought that creativity is needed for all acts of learning [ 4 , 5 ] . Yet , since the 1990s , creativity levels have been steadily declining especially for children [ 6 ] . Many have started to make calls for action to bring back creativity into the current school system [ 6 , 7 ] . The ‘creativity crisis’ however may be conflated by another phenomenon called the Fourth Grade Slump . From the be - ginning of speech , children show increasing creative activity , until about the fourth grade when many of them start to shy away from creative activities and behaviors . The Slump seems to be in effect until the mid - teens ( at about the eight grade ) [ 8 ] when some children are able to “discover them - selves” . Given the importance of creativity , we can ill - afford this loss of ‘practice of creativity’ at this critical turning point of child development . Concurrently with the ‘creativity crisis’ , we also see an in - creasing consumption of media among children . The Kaiser Family Foundation [ 9 ] reports that children of 8 to 10 years old spend an average of 8 hrs consuming media in a typical day , with the most serious increase occurring in total televi - sion consumption as opposed to print consumption that has remained constant over the past five years . In this paper , we present a study to investigate how animated media mediates creative activity in the production of stories , for children in the Fourth Grade Slump . We are interested in the role of the medium in creativity for third and fourth grad - ers . The literature on the subject is rather divided . While some suggest that visual animated media can motivate crea - tive animation , others argue on the other hand that they ab - solve the consumer from imagination , and turn them into passive consumers . Given the increased exposure of chil - dren to media , we believe that creating with digital animated Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . C & C’11 , November 3 – 6 , 2011 , Atlanta , Georgia , USA . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0820 - 5 / 11 / 11 . . . $ 10 . 00 . 3 media may provide a positive means to nurture and sustain creativity throughout the slump among this new generation of digital natives . The contribution of this study is three - fold : firstly , on a spe - cific level , it shows how for children the animated medium positively modulates the creative process . Secondly , on a general level , it provides additional evidence that the type of medium used in creative activities has an effect on how crea - tivity manifests itself . And thirdly , it suggests a way by which the ‘practice of creativity’ may be sustained during the Fourth Grade Slump . In the rest of this paper , we present relevant background about the Slump , literature investigating the effects of media consumption on creativity , and highlight the importance of the type of medium to creativity . We then present the research questions of this study , followed by our study design and findings . RELEVANT BACKGROUND The Fourth Grade Slump A predominant hypothesis of why the Fourth Grade Slump occurs is developmental in nature . As defined by Torrance [ 8 ] , the Fourth Grade Slump is a precipitous “decrement in all creative thinking abilities near the end of third grade or beginning of the fourth grade” , that has been observed through intercultural longitudinal studies in many countries from the United States to Norway , India and Western Samoa . Apart from the more recent decline in creativity levels , this phenomenon has been discovered more than thirty years ago and remains a worrying gap for teachers [ 10 ] . Torrance [ 8 ] provides a three - part rationale for the Slump based on the profound changes that take place in the child’s development during that period : social accommodation , peer approval , and the need for validation as the child comes into greater contact with society and her environment . This de - velopmental social awareness leads a child to be more judg - mental of her own work [ 11 ] and to engage in more critical self - evaluation of competence [ 12 ] . Such self - appraisals with respect to social norms and standards often lead to self - regulation of behavior [ 13 ] . Positive self - appraisals may then lead to greater involvement in creative behavior , and negative self - appraisals may result in self - doubt and possibly a decrease in or withdrawal from creative activity . This is illustrated by Henk & Melnick’s [ 14 ] study on the activity of reading , whereby children who see themselves as poor read - ers “probably have not experienced much in the way of read - ing success” . One approach to addressing the Slump then is to identify an activity in which the child is willing to take part and where her self - evaluation is positive to encourage exercise of fur - ther creativity during that critical period . We hypothesize that animated media authoring ( where the complexities of the technical media creation process such as generation of colors or character path definition are satisfactorily hidden ) may satisfy the criteria of such an activity . Media Effects on Creativity The study of media effects is not new , especially in disci - pline like Communication or Media studies . Research has been carried out on the impact of different types of media on the child’s cognitive processes as early as in the 1950s . The literature is replete with studies of media effects on higher mental functions such as learning , comprehension , recall or memory , and attention . However , the study of media effects on creativity received relatively less attention . Among stud - ies that have been conducted , there has not been a consensus . On one hand , Greenfield et al . [ 15 ] found medium effects in favor of radio over the television ( TV ) , and Watkins & Cou - lombe [ 16 ] found differences between print , radio and TV in terms of inferential elements . Valkenburg & Beentjes [ 17 ] also more recently found that a TV stimulus produced more novel stories for children aged 8 years and older than a radio stimulus . On the other hand , both Runco & Pezdek [ 18 ] and Rubeinstein [ 19 ] did not obtain any effects comparing radio and TV , and print and TV respectively . Despite the contra - dictory results , McLuhan’s proposition that “the medium is the message” maintains that the medium can have an impor - tant impact on the content , processes and the environment . Why Medium Matters Based on neuroscience , Greenfield [ 20 ] highlights a dichot - omy between “people of the book” and “people of the screen” . Other theorists have suggested that there are com - plementary roles for our verbal / symbolic and visual systems . Baddeley [ 21 ] proposed that we have both a visio - spatial sketchpad and phonological loop in working memory . Paivio [ 22 ] advanced a “dual coding theory” by which “memory and cognition [ are ] served by two separate symbolic systems , one specialized for dealing with verbal information and the other for nonverbal information” [ 23 ] . Mayer [ 24 ] thus ar - gues that using both visual and verbal channels improves our creative problem solving abilities . In fact , multimedia learn - ing systems are built based on this very argument . It is worth noting that similarly , the media richness theory proposes that a communication medium is ‘richer’ when it transmits im - mediate feedback and a multiplicity of cues [ 25 ] . Nevertheless , among the various modes of representations Sheppard [ 26 ] claims the primacy of the visual . In the same way that media naturalness theory [ 27 ] adopts an evolution - ary perspective to posit face - to - face communication as the most ‘natural’ medium , spatiality and visual images accord - ing to Sheppard have been “incorporated into our perceptual machinery by eons of evolution in a 3 - dimensional world” . Imagery therefore empowers us to obtain ideas and thoughts that are not “fully preserved by language” [ 23 ] . MEDIA AS TOOLS FOR CREATIVITY We have shown the significance of studying creativity in relation to media , but it is necessary to point out three essen - tial differences between previous media effects studies and the research described in this paper . First , prior studies such as those mentioned earlier consider media as modes of communication . Thus their experiments manipulated the medium in which stories were presented while keeping neutral the medium in which the subjects were assessed . In our study , we adopt the perspective of media as tools provided by culture and enabling mediated activity . In 4 that sense our understanding of media here is closer to Vy - gotsky’s [ 4 ] concept of ‘tools for thinking’ . For Vygotsky , tools have properties that can change behaviors and thoughts . It would not be surprising therefore that as tools of cultural production , media possess the ability to influence the nature of our higher psychological processes , including our creativ - ity , in their use . Secondly , our study looks at how the intrinsic form of the medium mediates creativity . A medium can be said to con - sist of three components : a physical platform or hardware , a set of formal features , and content [ 28 ] . Even though the influence of content on creativity cannot be denied , “medium content is a fickle thing” [ 29 ] and easily enough be con - trolled by the user . We are instead interested in the me - dium’s formal features , or the way that the representation of content using the differing symbolic makeup of verbal lan - guage , icons or visual signs , as well as the rules and conven - tions governing the interaction of the symbols , exercise in - fluence on children’s creative activity . A review of the literature shows few prior studies that ex - actly investigate the effects of media as tools on creativity . One strand of research of greater relevance consists of stud - ies performed during the popularization of personal comput - ers . Cochran - Smith [ 30 ] summarizes work inquiring about the impact of using a word processor on the writing process as opposed to the use of pen and paper . Some of the qualita - tive findings of those studies reported the rise of “speculative thought” , the tendency towards “impermanent writing” , and the positive effect of “discouraging premature closure of divergent ideas” during the writing process . The third point on which our study deviates from the previ - ous studies mentioned is our focus on process rather than outcome . Studies of media effects mostly evaluate creativity in terms of the creative products , that is the stories generated by the children . Creativity has been conventionally studied using four different approaches : by looking at the product created , the process of creating , the person or the creator , or the environment of creation [ 19 ] . The emphasis of our study is on the creative process that takes place as the outcome is being produced . Although the ‘objective’ creativity of the work products is important as the basis for evaluation by others , studying creativity developmentally enables us to tease out the effects of the medium on children’s behavior as a process . Moreover , we look at creativity as ‘situationally induced’ [ 15 ] , that is creativity motivated by current conditions and environmental factors , instead of creativity as an individual trait as measured by standardized tests . However to prove whether practicing situated creativity over an extended pe - riod of time will or can result in better creative individual abilities is out of the scope of this study . In a similar line of thought , we investigate creativity in the average child in an everyday context , as opposed to others who have looked at ‘specialists in creativity’ , such as gifted children or artists who either have developed , stable creative processes or de - fined creative output . Based on the preceding , we asked the following research questions with regards to the animated medium : 1 . How does storytelling with animation qualitatively change children’s creative processes ? 2 . How do children perceive storytelling with animation ? 3 . Do children produce more creative stories with anima - tion ? STUDY DESIGN Pre - Interview Third and fourth graders were recruited from the after - school program of a local elementary school as participants . The main medium of study was the animated medium or anima - tion , but we concurrently studied the digital print medium as well for control and comparison purposes . The print me - dium provides a contrasting mode of mainly textual informa - tion representation with regards to the mostly visual nature of animation . Results from a pre - interview lasting around half an hour conducted with a group of fourteen children at the school also provided us good confidence in the choice of the control medium . The print ( textual ) medium and the ani - mated medium were seen to be a significantly different pair ( p < 0 . 005 ) in a survey of their perceived familiarity with various media including storybooks , cartoons , movies , com - ics and the internet . Familiarity has been described as con - sisting of five main factors : prior experience , repeated expo - sure , level of processing , study duration and forgetting rate [ 31 ] . We based our questions about familiarity with the dif - ferent media on these five factors , and produce a scale with a reliable alpha coefficient of 0 . 77 . Main Study Ten children from third or fourth grade , 5 girls and 5 boys , took part in the main study . Eight of them participated in the pre - interviews and two of them joined in only for the main study . The bulk of the study consisted of asking the children to create stories using the two media . They made use of the Frames software to create the animated stories . Frames [ 32 ] is a digital storytelling software that can be downloaded for free as a fully - featured evaluation version on the web . The children created the textual story with the Microsoft PowerPoint software , presented as a set of storybook slide templates to them ( Figure 1 ) . Frames makes use of a frame - by - frame approach to allow one to create animations ( Figure 1 ) . Stories can be organized as a series of still frames ( like a storyboard with sound ) . Authors can specify the duration that each frame stays active when the animation is played , and so , can create the illusion of motion by varying the placement of objects in consecutive frames . Objects can be obtained either from a library or can be created using drawing tools . They can be manipulated through rotation , flipping or resizing . Frames has been tested with children in several schools [ 32 ] and is easy to use even for younger children . By controlling the frame transi - tions , children can then create the effect of ‘stop - motion - animation’ or a slide - show story . 5 The study was carried out in two sessions over two different days to prevent fatigue of the children from creating two stories in one session . To enable us to study the creative process , they worked in random groups of two or three as social interaction motivates externalization of thoughts into speech . In the first session , two pairs created animated stories and two pairs produced Powerpoint ‘storybooks’ . In the second session , two of the participants were not able to take part in the study , resulting in two groups of three children , one using the animation software and the other the Powerpoint software . Each group worked on a separate computer , and had a voice recorder placed nearby to capture the conversation during the story creation process . The children’s task was to continue and provide an ending to a given stimulus story beginning . Tasks that have been used in previous storytelling creativity studies can be classified as drawings , questions about a story , the use of standardized creativity tests such as the Torrance [ 8 ] tests , and story com - pletions [ 17 ] , which we used . We wrote two stimulus story beginnings that we ensured satisfied three criteria : that they were appropriate for the developmental age of the children , both in terms of language and content , that they were not close to experiences that only some of the children might has gone through before , and that they were more action - oriented than emotionally - driven . The stories had similar themes and were both around half a page in length with standard format - ting , while still being different . The first story beginning related the story of living soap bars who have been placed in the cupboard by a family . One day the protagonist , a blue soap bar , decided to leave the cupboard to see the outside world . His cousin , a green soap bar , wanted to go with him . The second stimulus story introduced a set of Red , Blue , Yellow and Green living colored pencils belonging to a girl named Amy . They live in a box on Amy’s desk . One day , they decided to visit the outer world . The step - by - step pro - cedures of the study were as follows : The children were grouped and each given a sticker with an ID code to paste on their shirt . They were separated into two groups according to the stimulus stories that they had to fol - low . Two researchers read out the stimulus stories to each group . The children were then divided into their working pairs or groups of three . Those creating animations were sent to a different room than those creating the storybooks . Two re - searchers , one in each room , explained how to use the soft - ware ( Powerpoint for the storybook group and Frames for the animation group ) to the children . The children were given a print - out of the stimulus story that they had to fol - low , and asked to continue and end the story . One researcher remained in each room as an observer and took down notes of behaviors . No formal time limit was imposed for the authoring sessions , but the amount of time that the children had to create the stories was determined by the arrival of their parents . Under these circumstances , the children had about 1 . 5hrs for the task . Individual post - interviews were conducted on the next day with each child separately . The children were asked about any problems that they might have had with the soft - ware , and to retell their own story . Study Model Figure 2 illustrates our study model . Demographics and fa - miliarity with media were variables that we collected for the purpose of the pre - study . The possible confounds were con - trolled as described above : content familiarity through the use of the same stimulus stories for all the children , and us - ability of software through the use of a tested , off - the - shelf software . In the post - interviews , all the children also indi - cated that they had no problems using the software and did not find it hard to create the animations . We next describe the lower part of the model : methods used and the data analysis done . Figure 2 . Study model Data Analysis Methods and Metrics As we mentioned above , evaluating outcomes was not a main focus of this study . We wanted to analyze the ‘way in which’ the authoring took place in - situ . A theoretically - driven discourse analysis was used to analyze the data col - lected to identify qualitative trends in the children’s creative process . The coding process was conducted thus : All the audio clips recorded during the story creation ses - sions were transcribed with associated speaker turn numbers , emphasis points and short event descriptions ( e . g . playing the Figure 1 . Screenshots of Powerpoint with storybook tem - plate ( L ) and Frames animation software ( R ) 6 animation ) . A reference chain analysis as described in [ 33 ] was performed by four coders . Each was first allotted a tran - script to analyze according to the following coding scheme of speech at three levels : object , where the reference is to a task - related entity ; meta , which includes references to the talk being carried out ( this includes speech referencing the process of story construction and not the stories being con - structed themselves ) ; and para , which references things and persons in the environment and includes discourse about the individual’s perspective and opinions . The four coders then conferred and resolved any serious discrepancies in the dif - ferent understandings of the coding scheme . We found that an object code in our case could refer either to talk about the Story or the Tool . The transcripts were then redistributed among the coders , and coded again with new understanding of the coding scheme . After the reference chain analysis , an open coding was done on the transcripts to reveal categories and themes . Examples included ‘distribution of roles’ , ‘asking for help’ , ‘setting up next scene’ , or ‘searching the library’ . All the instances of each code and theme were then grouped and analyzed for patterns using Coughlan & Johnson’s [ 34 ] two perspectives of creative interaction as a guide . The first perspective , structural interaction entails the prac - tices and the structuring of the creative process . In this re - spect we looked at the different stages that the children went through to complete the task . The speech acts coded as Para and Meta helped in identifying patterns . The second , pro - ductive interaction is concerned with “low - level interac - tions” , such as the generation , externalization and evaluation of ideas while working towards the final outcome . We thus looked at the different strategies that the children employed to generate ideas for their stories by employing Guilford’s [ 35 ] concept of convergent and divergent thinking but given our interest in the process , we analyzed the concepts in a more qualitative manner . Divergent thinking has been defined as “producing a variety of responses in which the product is not completely deter - mined by the information given to the respondent” [ 36 ] . Several divergent thinking tests have been developed ( e . g . Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking , Guilford’s Alternative Uses Task ) . In our coding process , divergence was taken to be a proposition of a story idea that departs from previously presented material , either in the stimulus story or by other group members . It was however not taken to be equivalent to disagreements . If only a disagreement was manifested without a suggestion for a change , it was not counted as an instance of divergent thinking . Convergent thinking refers to the process of following “a particular set of logical steps to arrive at one solution , which in some cases is the ‘correct’ solution [ 36 ] , and has often been measured using the Mednick’s Remote Associates Test . For our study , an instance of convergence entailed a proposi - tion of a story idea that draws from , builds , follows or draws from what was presented before by the stimulus story or by another child . Apart from divergent and convergent think - ing , we also coded a third element that we labeled as ‘seed - ing’ . The emergence of a story idea was categorized as seed - ing when it consisted of a proposition that did not draw from what has been presented before in any form . It should be noted that all story ideas were considered in the analysis , including ideas that were suggested but did not eventually make it into the final story . Furthermore , no assessment was done as to the originality of the story ideas during the coding process . A convergent idea could be as original or more original than a divergent idea , but if it drew from material presented in the past , it was still coded as convergence . The coding was done mainly in terms of how an idea shaped , directed or influenced the path of the creation of the final story product . A further analysis was carried out for the children’s retelling of their stories in the post - interviews . There were three sto - rybooks and three animations produced . Although the sto - ries were short , each story was first reduced to a ‘narrative digest’ [ 37 ] before being used for analysis so that they all had comparative value . Procedures to create a ‘narrative digest’ included reviewing the story and writing down the main events that happened in the story as a list of sequential story propositions . The retelling of the story by the child was then compared to the story’s ‘narrative digest’ and checked for coverage of the propositions . Finally , we used Amabile’s [ 38 ] consensual assessment technique for the evaluation of the actual stories . Three teachers with experience dealing with children of the 8 to 10 year old age group were asked to be the judges . Teachers were chosen because as pointed out by Boden [ 39 ] , it is not possible for one to “decide whether or not an act is genuinely creative” without being familiar with the conceptual space of the creator . The teachers were asked to judge the stories with the following instructions : they were asked to first go through all the six stories without any judging . They then had to preview each story again one by one and fill in an evaluation form for each . The ratings scale was exactly as Amabile’s and included the dimensions of creativity , nov - elty , coherence , continuation and completion . Following Valkenburg and Beentjes [ 17 ] , we grouped the first two di - mensions into a story Novelty component , and the last three into a story Quality component . The next section of this paper describes our findings from the various analyses con - ducted . FINDINGS Structural Interaction : Stages of Creation The creative process in the storybook and the animation ses - sions differed substantially . The development of the story - book happened in series consisting of four main steps : gen - erating Ideas , Typing it into the Powerpoint storybook , working on Aesthetics , and correcting Language ( Figure 2 ) . Idea generation saw greater argumentation before a story idea was actually materialized in the form of text and typed in , as compared to the animation sessions where story ideas were mostly acted out immediately . Previewing story ( in terms of reading aloud ) and assessment of the story mostly 7 occurred towards the end of the creation process . Work dis - tribution in the storybook session was done by turns . It was typically settled that one child would be the ' typist ' and the other the ' idea generator ' . Throughout the session then , the ' idea generator ' , despite having the logically more important role in the creative process , would often claim their turn to be the ‘typist’ after some intervals . The following extracts illustrate the typical role distribution procedure that took place across the storybook sessions : " How about this Lisa ? I type and you tell me what to type " " So you ( ^ ) make up the text . " " No…Lisa…help meee . You got to tell me what to write . " " Ok can I just type from there from now on ? " In the animation sessions , the creative process took place mainly as alternating sequences of Idea generation , Preview - ing the story ( playing the animation ) , Assessment and Fixing ( using tool functions , e . g . undo , timing , placement ) ( Figure 3 ) . During the process of generating ideas , the children were more inclined to openly state what they were thinking of doing . They seemed to clearly have pre - formed ideas of what was going to happen next in their story , and offered their ‘plans’ both when asked and even without prompting . For example , one of the child saying “on this one ( referring to a frame ) he needs to say ‘Bye’” shows that she already had a picture of the story development in mind while creat - ing the previous frame . Children also started to preview their story much earlier in the process and much more frequently in the animation ses - sions , leading to what we call ‘micro - assessments’ . Rather than a concrete assessment phase at the end of the session , assessment was done more as a step - by - step process of short evaluations for each subtask , e . g . image placement , object appearance , sounds . The micro - assessments created more opportunities to gener - ate consensus throughout the creation process . As compared to the storybook sessions , negotiation of roles in the anima - tion sessions was similarly more integrated in the process . We identified four main strategies that the children adopted to distribute work : by frame ( each child does one frame ) , by task ( e . g . choosing the color , placing the images ) or by skill ( e . g . drawing , making sounds ) . For instance , even though it was not his ‘turn’ to work on the particular frame , a child interjected : " Let me ( ^ ) do it , you’re terrible ( car honking sound ) " This flexibility in role negotiation and work distribution en - abled all of the group members to stay active and interested throughout the sessions . It was also observed that children contested roles much more often than during the storybook sessions . An additional ‘stage’ was seen in the animation sessions in terms of the search for approval . Children were eager to ‘show off’ what they have created , and were clearly confi - dent that they did a good job . They repeatedly asked the researcher , who stayed as an observer and to help with any software - related problems , or other teams to watch their story , as “it’s really good” . Two of the children also asked their parents to see their stories as they were leaving . Production of Interaction : Strategies of Creation Five main themes were uncovered in the analysis of the chil - dren’s creative process using the animated medium through the coding of recurrent instances and patterns . 1 . Micro - activities The animation medium resulted in the story being told using micro - activities of creating different elements , e . g . sounds , objects . Even though they spent longer amounts of time on certain micro - activities ( e . g . one group recorded a character script line four times to get it right in terms of loudness , clar - ity , speed , etc ) , it was clear that the children still had a macro - view of the story as a whole . In contrast , in the story - book sessions the story was generated through the use of prompting questions . Questions such as “What happens next ? ” , “What do they do ? ” , “What are we going to write about ? ” served as breakpoint that constantly appeared throughout the session and that pushed for a series of ideas built around a central topic each time . It seemed that the story was developed by the children in an amorphous manner as they go along , fashioned ’by - the - seat - of - their - pants’ at each breakpoint . 2 . Activity - driven integrated story generation Story creation occurred in terms of specification of actions within the interface and without . They responded to the mul - tiple cues and modes of stimuli enabled by the animation tool Figure 3 . Stages of creative process for Animations Figure 2 . Stages of creative process for Storybooks 8 to make sense of the story , for instance through placement of elements , the choice of objects to include , characters’ speech and sound effects . Object placement : By placing and moving objects in the set - up of each story frame , the children molded the development of the story . For example , to tell the story that the main character is going out while the rest of the family is staying behind , the child verbalized her actions in the following way : " That guy needs to be way up . Those guys need to be right there . " Action - based story creation was hence often accom - panied by extensive gesturing and pointing at the screen . Space and time became a kind of ‘medium’ where the chil - dren’s imagination was materialized . Choice of objects : Searching for material to use in the story was done in two ways : the children either used existing im - ages in the software library or drew their own objects . This search for objects , whether through library browsing or by deciding what to draw , became a focal point that led the children to make decisions on what to include in their story . It can be argued that the provision of ready - made ‘sources of ideas’ in the library is limiting to the child’s imagination . For example , one of the groups saw the categories of items ‘Animals’ while browsing the library and decided to include a dog in their story . Hence , the categories may be said to ‘limit’ the possibilities the children considered . Contrariwise , library materials also served as epistemic prompts to scaffold individual and group creative activity . This is similar to the use of physical objects as inspirational devices to catalyst creative design [ 40 , 41 ] . In the same group of children , we observed a feedback loop whereby the library informed and modulated the creativity of the children . In that one group’s story , the dog was made to save the falling green crayon . Characters’ speech : The auditory mode of representation was found to be a key part of story construction . This , in itself , is unsurprising since it is difficult to carry the symbolic element of any narrative arc in animation alone . What was remarkable is that throughout the story creation process , the children did not explicitly ( in speech ) or directly ( using straightforward words ) discuss the overall arc of the story . In many instances across the animation sessions the children communicated story development through the process of creating sounds , from determining what to record , practicing the speech or sound effect to be recorded , recording the sound , to deciding where to place the sound : " Ok wait , I wanna do a sound to that . He might be saying like “woah this suitcase is so heavy” A : Wait let me practice . ( dog sounds ) Like that ? ( dog sounds ) which one ? B : Big dog voice In this way , the animation storytellers seem to be thinking through the tool . This is different from the storybook chil - dren who wrote ‘on the fly’ ( without an overall narrative sketch ) , but did so in spurts where they formulated what to do next , and then proceeded to encode it by typing into the ‘ storybook’ . The children even acted out sounds made by characters in the storybook sessions , but this remained as part of the idea generation process we identified earlier . The children had no way to include the sounds directly into the storybook , and the fundamental authoring loop of Idea gen - eration – Encoding with tool – Aesthetics – Correction re - mained intact . The extract below of a child explaining to her partner that the story’s main characters heard a singing voice in the storybook session is a clear example : " So they’re hearing this : Do you want to plaaayy " ( singing ) 3 . Qualitative focus Development of the story manifested itself with a focus on precise , qualitative details through the shaping of aesthetics ( e . g . color , speed , size , thickness ) . This motivated the chil - dren to think of how the different objects in their story world look like qualitatively , for instance , discussing whether the book in the story should be rectangular or square , determin - ing book size and color , or the type of dog . Yet , manipulating aesthetic details at times did cause the process to be longer . One group spent a significant amount of time determining what was to be shown on the book cover , even though the book was not a major element in their story . They went from depictions of Jack and Jill , to the Three Little Pigs , with suggestions about the Three Musket - eers and simple scribbles . Nevertheless , comparatively , spending time adjusting aesthetics in the creation of the sto - rybook story was time lost on manipulating the tool ( e . g . font size and spaces ) , whereas adjusting aesthetics in the creation of the animation was meaningful to the story itself , acting as means to induce the children to define or take decisions on certain story details . Moreover , the focus on qualitative details made for much shorter stories with the animated medium , but richer in tex - ture . If the stories were to be converted in text based on the details that the children paid attention to in their creative process using animation , they would be much more vivid stories than the storybook stories they wrote . Skilled adult writers have the necessary fluency ( in the common sense of the term ) to portray a story with expressive imagery using the written language . At fourth grade , children do not pos - sess the sophistication in the written text yet , but the ani - mated medium provides them with a ‘language’ that enables them to create similarly rich stories . 4 . Broader imagination The visual nature of the animation medium seemed to have the capability of serving as a stimulus for retention and to broaden the imagination of the child with respect to the story world . In the interviews conducted after the sessions , there was a large difference in the fidelity with which the children who did the storybooks could retell their story as compared to those who did the animations . The first group could retell their story with an accuracy of 41 . 8 % ( based on the number of propositions covered in the retelling over the total number of propositions in the ‘narrative digest’ of the story ) , whereas the second group did so with an accuracy of 63 . 3 % . In fact , two of the children could not remember any of the proposi - tions at all when asked to recount their storybook stories , 9 while two others recounted their animation stories with a full coverage of all the propositions . 5 . Serendipitous creativity The activity - based nature of the creation process with the animation medium led to idea generation by accident at vari - ous times , a strategy that was not present in the storybook authoring . This finding was also observed by Earles [ 42 ] when she studied the ad hoc creative process of a profes - sional artist using digital software to produce her works of art . In the creative process of the artist , the computer “often introduces unexpected or accidental effects and elements , generally helping to create the compositional problem” . While one group using the animation software was trying to draw a cupboard , they accidentally created a brown shape that they then imagined to be a shelf . The following conver - sation shows this serendipitous creativity : A : Oh . . . how did that ( ^ ) happen ? B : Ooh that’s good actually A . That’s good yea…it’s like a shelf B : Shadow . The shelf on it . A : Yea we’ve got a shadow with the shelf . We can move the suitcase up there so he can be reaching down there 6 . Story generation Using the coding process based on the concepts of diver - gence and convergence as explained above , we found that more seeding ( by 22 . 13 % ) occurred in the storybook ses - sions than in the animation ones , indicating that somewhat more ideas were put forward during the creation of the story - books . However using the animated medium , the degree of both divergence ( by 14 . 8 % ) and convergence ( by 7 . 32 % ) of ideas was greater ( Graph 1 ) . These results may be explained by the five themes that we have described above . For exam - ple , low seeding may have been caused by the constraints imposed by the software , such as the search for objects in the library . The activity - driven property of the creative process may have on the other hand encouraged greater divergence and convergence by providing more discussion and decision points . Attitudes and Perceptions Hennessey [ 43 ] describes motivation as one of the key fac - tors in creative behavior that needs attention . In fact , it is of even greater importance if we are to sustain creativity over an extended period of time throughout the Fourth Grade Slump . Amabile’s [ 44 ] “principle of internal motivation for creativity” states that internal motivation like satisfaction and interest leads to the creative process , but external stimuli such as expectations and the offering of rewards hinder it . We thus need to look at children’s reactions to the use of animation for creative activity . A number of observations provide support for us to posit that story authoring using animation was more motivating for the children . The storybook sessions , which lasted on average 28 minutes ( 153 speaker turns ) , were much shorter than the animation sessions , which took an average of 48 minutes ( 417 speaker turns ) . The children became bored and restless quickly when making the storybooks , as we observed and as illustrated by the extract below from one of the group’s con - versation : “That’s all we have to do . We just have to write a middle and an end . ” “Hurry let’s write the story so we can get outside” Children in the animation sessions conversely showed ex - citement and enthusiasm , gesturing , acting out , and were eager to present their story to others . Two children in fact explicitly remarked to their group during the sessions : A : This is fun B : I know A : Kyra isn’t this fun ? B : Yea… The groups doing the animated stories wanted to keep going even when they were being picked up at the end of their af - ter - school period . Several students requested that the re - searchers return another day to let them finish their stories . Creative Products The average rating given by the three teachers on Novelty ( consisting of the dimensions of creativity and novelty ) was slightly higher for the animated stories ( µ = 3 . 72 ) than for the storybooks ( µ = 3 . 56 ) . For the Quality component ( continu - ity , coherence , completion ) , the teachers rated the storybooks ( µ = 4 . 44 ) higher than the animation stories ( µ = 3 . 96 ) . However , it would be unfair to draw out any conclusions from the lower Quality ratings for the animations given that both groups had the same amount of time to create the stories and the animated medium by nature requires a longer com - mitment of time to create . We reiterate here our point that our focus in this paper was about the process of creativity rather than the outcome . We believe that it is difficult to draw conclusions , although interesting , from mere assess - ments of finished products . CONCLUSION The study of creativity is not new , but with the rapid ad - vancement of technologies , it is important that we pay close attention to how new media affect creativity . In light of the ‘creativity crisis’ that Robinson [ 7 ] warns us about and the Graph 1 . Seeding , divergence and convergence by medium 10 developmental phenomenon of the Fourth Grade Slump , research is needed on ways to nurture children’s creativity . We posit that the use of the animated medium for creative activities is a good candidate to sustain the child’s creativity throughout the critical times of the Fourth Grade Slump . Due to its form and formal features , the animated medium transforms the activity into one that the child is motivated to be involved in , that creates engagement and enthusiasm dur - ing the process , and that results in positive self - confidence in the created product . Media effects have long been studied but little research has been done on the creative processes that take place with media as tools of creative production , espe - cially with children . We presented a study on the effects of medium on the crea - tive storytelling process by third and fourth grade children . We chose our target age group to address the Fourth Grade Slump where creative activity in the child declines precipi - tously . Given the exposure of children to video and other multimedia it is critical to investigate whether authoring in such new media would alter both the creative process as well as the motivation for creative activity . We compared children authoring animated stories using Frames , an animation authoring tool against children creating stories in text using Powerpoint with a ‘storybook’ template . To understand the process of creation , we recorded the children’s discussions as they created their stories in both media . Our results showed that the children adopted significantly different strategies in story construction . Both of the groups seemingly engaged in ‘on - the - fly’ story generation with no apparent overall story - arc design , generating each subse - quent piece of story sequentially . However the storybook students took a more rigid loop of idea generation – encod - ing ( typing ) , – working on aesthetics ( fonts and formats ) – correcting grammar and spelling . The animated story chil - dren took an activity - driven approach using the medium as a thinking tool , constructing each piece while working with the authoring program . Their authoring loop , idea generation – previewing ( playing animation snippets ) , assessment – fixing ( using tool functions ) , were smaller and the children seemed more fluid and interactive in the process . There was greater attention to detail and quality in the animations , and they had better recall of their stories in the post - interviews . We ascribe this recall and ability to picture their stories to having a broader imagination when creating in the medium . The ani - mation tool also provided more opportunity for serendipitous creativity as the children trying to create something realized that their creations could be repurposed . There was no such observation among the storybook children . The animation groups also showed greater evidence of both divergent and convergent thinking , although more seeding of ideas was done in the storybook groups . We also saw evidence that motivation and enthusiasm were far higher in the animation groups . Yet , the creative process is complex . We recognize that other factors such as group dynamics and gender may have had an effect on the processes and strategies during the authoring sessions . It is however out of the scope of this paper to present an analysis of the role of social influences in the mediated creative process . The power of the tool and its constituent symbolic system to change human higher mental functions has been highlighted by influential researchers such as Vygotsky and Leont’ev . Tools can therefore be of help to nurture children’s creativity during the Slump . As we design and develop tools for that purpose , it is necessary that we first gain a full understanding of the influence that the medium of creation exerts on the creative process . In that sense , future work entails the analy - sis of medium effects on creativity in coupling with other important factors such as social relationships and group communication . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research has been partially supported by grants # IIS 0954048 “EAGER : Creative IT : Hyper Drama Storytelling : Engaging and Nurturing Creativity in K - 12 Students” , and CRI - 0551610 " Interacting with the Embodied Mind " . We also thank Sarah Quek who helped greatly in data coding . REFERENCES 1 . Creativity World Forum . State of Creativity . 7th annual creativity world forum . 2010 [ cited 4 / 30 / 11 ] ; From : http : / / stateofcreativity . com / events / cwf / about / . 2 . Florida , R . , The Rise of the Creative Class : And How it’s transforming work , leisure , community and everyday life , 2002 , New York : Perseus Book Group . 3 . Gruber , H . E . and D . B . Wallace , The case study method and evolving systems approach for understanding uniquely creative people at work , in Handbook of creativity , R . J . Sternberg , Editor , 1999 , Cambridge University Press . : New York . p . 93 – 115 . 4 . Vygotsky , L . S . , ed . Thought and Language , ( Edited and translated by E . Hanfmann and G . Vakar ) ed . A . Kozulin , 1987 , MIT Press : Cambridge . 5 . Guilford , J . P . , Creativity . American Psychologist , 1950 . 5 : p . 444 - 454 . 6 . Bronson , P . and A . Merryman . The Creativity Crisis . 2010 [ cited 2011 April 30 ] ; From : < http : / / www . newsweek . com / 2010 / 07 / 10 / the - creativity - crisis . html > . 7 . Robinson , K . Do Schools Kill Creativity ? 2006 ; From : http : / / www . ted . com / index . php / talks / view / id / 66 . 8 . Torrance , E . P . , Understanding te Fourth Grade Slump in Creative Thinking , 1967 . p . 444 . 9 . Roberts , D . F . , U . G . Foehr , and V . Rideout , Generation M : Media in the lives of 8 - 18 year - olds , 2005 , Kaiser Family Foundation Study . 10 . Springen , K . Fourth - Grade Slump . 2007 [ cited 4 / 30 / 11 ] ; From : http : / / www . newsweek . com / 2007 / 02 / 18 / fourth - grade - slump . html . 11 . Kirkpatrick , E . A . , Individual Tests of School Children . Psychological Review , 1900 . 5 ( 7 ) : p . 274 . 12 . Ruble , D . N . , The acquisition of self - knowledge : A self - socialization perspective , in Contemp . topics in developmental psyc . , N . Eisenberg , 1987 , Wiley : NY . 13 . Collins , W . A . , Development During Middle Childhood . The Years from Six to Twelve , 1984 , Washington , DC : National Academy Press . 14 . Henk , W . A . and S . A . Melnick , The Reader Self - Perception Scale ( RSPS ) : A new tool for measuring how children feel 11 about themselves as readers . The Reading Teacher , 1995 . 48 ( 6 Res . Libr . Core ) : p . 470 . 15 . Greenfield , P . , D . Farrar , and J . Beagles - Roos , Is the medium the message ? An experimental comparison of the effects of radio and television on imagination . Jour . of Applied Develop . Psyc . , 1986 . 7 ( 3 ) : p . 201 - 218 . 16 . Watkins , B . and J . Coulombe , Children model the medium : Media forms in written narratives , 1981 , University of Michigan : Ann Arbor . 17 . Valkenburg , P . M . and J . W . J . Beentjes , Children’s Creative Imagination in Response to Radio and Television Stories . Journal of Communication , 1997 . 47 ( 2 ) : p . 21 - 38 . 18 . Runco , M . A . and K . Pezdek , The Effect of Television and Radio on Children ' s Creativity . Human Communication Research , 1984 . 11 ( 1 ) : p . 109 – 120 . 19 . Rubenstein , D . J . , Stimulating Children ' s Crativity and Curiosity : Does Content and Medium Matter ? Journal of Creative Behavior , 2000 . 34 ( 1 ) : p . 1 - 17 . 20 . Greenfield , S . , Creating Creative Brains , in Keynote address presented at CCI ' s Creating Value : Between Commerce and Commons Conference 2008 : Brisbane . 21 . Baddeley , A . D . and G . Hitch , Working Memory , in The Psychology of Learning and Motivation : Advances in Research and Theory , G . H . Bower , Editor . 1974 , Academic Press : New York . p . 47 - - 89 . 22 . Paivio , A . , Mental representations : a dual coding approach . 1986 , Oxford University Press . 23 . Malaga , R . A . , The Effect of Stimulus Modes and Associative Distance in Individual Creativity Support Systems , in Proc . of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . 1999 . 24 . Mayer , R . , Multimedia Learning , 2001 , Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . 25 . Daft , R . L . and R . H . Lengel , Organizational information requirements , media richness and structural design . Management Science , 1986 . 32 ( 5 ) : p . 554 - 571 . 26 . Shepard , R . N . , Externalization of mental images and the act of creation , in Visual learning , thinking , and communication , B . S . Randhava and W . E . Coffman , 1978 , Academic Press : New York . p . 133 - 189 . 27 . Kock , N . , The psychobiological model : Towards a new theory of computer - mediated communication based on Darwinian evolution . Organization Science , 2004 , 15 ( 3 ) : p . 327 - 348 . 28 . Subrahmanyam , K . and P . Greenfield , Media Symbol Systems and Cognitive Processes , in The Handbook of Children , Media , and Development , 2009 , Blackwell Publishing Ltd . p . 166 - 187 . 29 . Brown , L . K . , Fiction for Children : Does the Medium Matter ? Jour . of Aesthetic Edu . , 1988 . 22 ( 1 ) : p . 35 - 44 . 30 . Cochran - Smith , M . , Word Processing and Writing in Elementary Classrooms : A Critical Review of Related Literature . Rev . of Edu . Res . , 1991 . 61 ( 1 ) : p . 107 - 155 . 31 . Zhang , J . and A . A . Ghorbani , Familiarity and Trust : Measuring Familiarity with a Web Site , in Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Privacy , Trust and Security , 2004 . p . 23 - 28 . 32 . Tech4Learning . Frames : Everyone has a story to tell , 2011 [ cited 4 / 30 / 11 ] ; From : http : / / www . tech4learning . com / frames . 33 . McNeill , D . , et al . , MIND - MERGING , in Expressing Oneself / Expressing One ' s Self : Communication , Language , Cognition , and Identity : A Festschrift in honor of Robert M . Krauss ( 11 / 8 / 07 ) , E . Moresella , 2008 , Taylor & Francis Pubs . 34 . Coughlan , T . and P . Johnson , Understanding Productive , Structural and Longitudinal Interactions in the Design of Tools for Creative Activities , in Creativity and Cognition , 2009 . p . 155 - 164 . 35 . Guilford , J . , The Nature of Human Intelligence . 1967 , New York : McGraw - Hill . 36 . Runco , M . A . and S . R . Pritzker , Encyclopedia of Creativity Vol . 1 , 1999 : Elsevier . 37 . Register , L . M . and T . B . Henley , The Phenomenology of Intimacy Journal of Social and Personal Relationships , 1992 . 9 ( 4 ) : p . 467 - 481 38 . Amabile , T . M . , Social Psychology of Creativity : A Consensual Assessment Technique . Jour . of Personality and Social Psychology , 1982 . 43 ( 5 ) : p . 997 - 1013 . 39 . Boden , M . A . , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , 2004 : Routledge . 40 . Heimdal , E . and T . Rosenqvist . Textiles as tangible working materials in participatory design processes : potentials and challenges . in Proc . of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . 2010 . 41 . Jacucci , G . and I . Wagner , Performative roles of materiality for collective creativity , in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition . 2007 , ACM : Washington , DC . p . 73 - 82 . 42 . Eales , J . R . T . , Creativity in Action : Some implications for the design of Creativity Support Systems , in Proc . of 6th ACM SIGCHI New Zealand Chapter ' s CHI : Making CHI Natural , 2005 . p . 9 - 14 . 43 . Hennessey , B . A . , Creativity and Motivation in the Classroom : A Social Psychological and Multi - Cultural Perspective . , in Creativity : A Handbook for Teachers , A . Tan , 2007 , World Scientific : Singapore . p . 27 – 45 . 44 . Amabile , T . , Children’s Artistic Creativity : Detrimental Effects of Competition in a Field Setting . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 1982 . 8 : p . 573 – 578 . 12