i Copyright by Geng Yang 2008 ii The Dissertation Committee for Geng Yang certifies that this is the approved version of the following dissertation : A Test of the Habit Hypothesis in Online Community Participation Committee : Sirkka Jarvenpaa , Supervisor Bin Gu Cynthia Beath Prabhudev Konana Li Gan iii A Test of the Habit Hypothesis in Online Community Participation By Geng Yang , B . A . , M . S . Dissertation Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of The University of Texas at Austin in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy The University of Texas at Austin August 2008 iv Dedication I dedicate the work herein to my beloved parents , Guiyou Yang and Huilan Li . v Acknowledgements I would like to thank my advisor , Dr . Sirkka Jarvenpaa , for her advice and support throughout my entire Ph . D program . I would like to give my special thanks to Dr . Bin Gu , Dr . Cynthia Beath , and Dr . Li Gan . They patiently provided me help through the process of writing this dissertation . This would not have been completed without their invaluable guidance , encouragement and counsel . Finally , I would like to thank my wife , Dong Li , for her love , encouragement and understanding . vi A Test of the Habit Hypothesis in Online Community Participation Publication No . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Geng Yang , Ph . D . The University of Texas at Austin , 2008 Supervisor : Sirkka Jarvenpaa Understanding participation behavior in online communities has become increasingly of interest to IS scholars . A central puzzle related to the existence and development of virtual communities is why community members are willing to share their valuable knowledge with other members for free . In other words , what are the factors influencing members’ decisions to participate in discussions ? This dissertation theoretically articulates how habit will affect individuals’ participation behavior in online communities . In addition , it proposes that a threshold of behavioral repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . A methodology of estimating the threshold is also developed . vii The proposed habit hypothesis is tested empirically using panel data reflecting 130 , 882 postings by 22 , 457 members over a 6 - month time period . The empirical context is a firm - hosted online community , Dell Community . It includes 115 discussion boards . The results show that a threshold does exist for the formation of a participation habit . Once the habit is formed , it has significantly positive impacts on community members’ participation behavior . In larger and more active online communities , community members demonstrate a stronger habit effect . The effects of habit are also stronger among highly - ranked community members than among low - ranked community members . In addition , the results show that posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on current posting decisions . This research extends the existing literature on online communities by considering the effects of a new factor , habit . It also deepens the current understanding of habit formation by articulating the role of a threshold on habit formation . viii Table of Contents Acknowledgements v Abstract vi List of Tables xi List of Figures xii Chapter 1 Introduction 1 Chapter 2 Literature Review 9 2 . 1 Online virtual communities 9 2 . 2 Effects of community size 11 2 . 3 Intrinsic and extrinsic motivators 14 2 . 4 The theory of critical mass 17 2 . 4 . 1 The critical mass theory on collective action 19 2 . 4 . 2 Effects of group heterogeneity and group size 22 Chapter 3 Conceptualization of Habit 30 3 . 1 The concept of habit 31 3 . 1 . 1 A history of repetition 32 3 . 1 . 2 Association with satisfactory results 34 3 . 1 . 3 Goal directness 34 ix 3 . 1 . 4 Online community participation 37 3 . 2 Habit formation and a threshold of repetitions 38 3 . 3 Effects of habit in the economics literature 42 3 . 3 . 1 Impacts of habit on utility function 42 3 . 3 . 2 Rational habit formation theory and myopic models 47 Chapter 4 The Basic Utility Model and Hypothesis 50 4 . 1 Intuition 50 4 . 2 Static utility function 52 4 . 3 Habit effect 57 4 . 3 . 1 Hypotheses 59 Chapter 5 Data Description and Measurements 65 5 . 1 Data description 65 5 . 1 . 1 Discussion boards 65 5 . 1 . 2 Time frame 71 5 . 1 . 3 Data structure 72 5 . 2 . Measurements 72 5 . 2 . 1 The dependent variable 74 5 . 2 . 2 Variables representing members’ unique characteristics 74 5 . 2 . 3 Variables representing characteristics of discussion board 81 x Chapter 6 Empirical Results 87 6 . 1 Test of fixed effect and random effect 87 6 . 1 . 1 Hausman specification test 89 6 . 2 Linear fixed effect model 92 6 . 2 . 1 Linear fixed effect model 92 6 . 2 . 2 Effects of community size 100 6 . 3 Estimation of accumulative effect 104 6 . 4 Estimation of critical mass 108 6 . 4 . 1 Estimation of critical mass 108 6 . 4 . 2 Estimation of confidence intervals 116 Chapter 7 Discussion 119 7 . 1 Discussion of results 119 7 . 2 Limitations 123 7 . 3 Areas for future research 124 74 . Conclusion 125 Appendix A Estimation of Critical Mass 127 Appendix B Results of Estimation of Critical Mass 133 Bibliography 137 Vita 150 xi List of Tables Table 1 Related Research on Habit 36 Table 2 List of Discussion Boards in DellCommunity 67 Table 3 Panel Data Set on Discussion Board Postings 73 Table 4 Sample Data of Postings 77 Table 5 Ranks and Member Distribution 78 Table 6 Number of Initial Postings and Responses 80 Table 7 Distribution of Postings across Different Orders 81 Table 8 Tests of Random Effects 91 Table 9 Descriptive Statistics in Equation ( 19 ) 96 Table 10 Estimation Results 97 Table 11 Estimates of θ in Different Discussion Boards 101 Table 12 Descriptive Statistics in Equation ( 21 ) 112 Table 13 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) 113 Table 14 Descriptive Statistics of Sampling Distribution of Critical Mass 118 Table 15 Summarized Hypothesis Tests 122 Table 16 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) 127 Table 17 Estimates of 1 α and 2 α vs . Threshold 133 Table 18 t - statistic vs . Threshold 135 xii List of Figures Figure 1 Factors influencing participation in online communities 18 Figure 2 Decreasing Marginal Returns to contribution 24 Figure 3 Increasing Marginal Returns to contribution 24 Figure 4 Uniform Marginal Returns to contribution 25 Figure 5 Conditional Probability Distribution of Members’ Postings 52 Figure 6 Member Distribution across Discussion Boards 70 Figure 7 The Relationship between Growth Rate and Initial Board Size 71 Figure 8 Member Distribution by Rank 78 Figure 9 Posting Distribution by Rank 79 Figure 10 Posting Configuration by Rank 80 Figure 11 Significance of Habit Effect vs . Board Size 103 Figure 12 Habit Effects vs . Board Size 103 Figure 13 R - Squared for Various Number of Accumulated Weeks 107 Figure 14 Estimates of θ for Various Number of Accumulated Weeks 107 Figure 15 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) 115 Figure 16 Estimates of 1 α and 2 α 115 Figure 17 t - statistics of 1 α and 2 α 116 Figure 18 Sampling Distribution of the Critical Mass 118 Figure 19 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 8 weeks ) 128 Figure 20 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 9 weeks ) 128 xiii Figure 21 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 10 weeks ) 129 Figure 22 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 11 weeks ) 129 Figure 23 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 12 weeks ) 130 Figure 24 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 13 weeks ) 130 Figure 25 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 14 weeks ) 131 Figure 26 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 15 weeks ) 131 Figure 27 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 16 weeks ) 132 1 Chapter 1 Introduction The rapid development of information and communication technologies has enabled innovations in information sharing and technical support ( Hallowell , 2002 ; Xue and Harker , 2002 ; Keefe , 2003 ) . Online virtual communities are one of these kinds of newly emerging forms of information exchange ( Butler , 2001 ) . An online community is enabled by a web application designed for holding discussions and managing postings generated by community members . Community members can communicate , interact , develop relationships , and collectively and individually seek to obtain information they need in such an IT - supported virtual space ( Lee et al . 2002 ) . Community members include both information receivers and information providers . Various topics , such as technical issues , computer games , music , fashion , religion , and politics , can be the themes of the online communities . Online virtual communities make it possible for community members to generate questions and obtain answers by themselves . For example , members can obtain investing - related information in various virtual investment - related communities ( Gu , Konana , and Chen , 2007 ) . Members can also locate knowledge on product innovation in online communities ( Jeppensen and Frederiksen , 2006 ) . More 2 importantly , online communities provide opportunities for companies to facilitate their technical support via firm - hosted online discussion forums ( Moon and Sproull , 2001 ; Armstrong and Hagel , 1996 ; Jeppessen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; Kraut et al . 1996 ; Rheingold , 1993 ) . Many IT companies have transfered some of their technical support services to their firm - hosted online discussion boards , leaving users to discuss and solve technical difficulties by themselves ( Bin and Jarvenpaa , 2003 ; Moon and Sproull , 2001 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ) . Research has shown that these user - operated communities can make huge contributions to companies’ innovation and customer service ( Asvanund et al . 2004 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ) . In the IS literature , two central puzzles related to the existence and development of online communities are ( 1 ) why community members are willing to share their valuable knowledge to other members for free , and ( 2 ) what factors influence members’ decisions to participate in discussions ( Ma and Agarwal , 2007 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; Wasko and Faraj , 2000 ; Rafaeli and LaRose , 1993 ) . Deep understanding of these questions is critical . After all , the sustainability of online communities depends on community members’ continuous participation ( Butler , 2002 ) . Many insightful findings have been obtained in this area ( Wasko and Faraj , 2000 ; Ma and Agarwal , 2007 ; Asvanund et al . 2004 ; Butlter , 2001 ) . From 3 both economic and social psychological perspectives , researchers have identified several important motivators , including both intrinsic and extrinsic ones that influence community members’ willingness to participate . The main argument is that community members contribute to an online community when the benefits they receive ( or perceive that they receive ) outweigh their costs of posting information . The decisions to post are thus theorized to depend on the trade off between benefits and costs . Online communities that can provide positive net benefits are assumed to be better able to attract and retain members , and hence to survive over the long term . Benefits such as economic rewards , reputation effects , status , peer approval , and establishment of perceived identity verification ( Ma and Agarwal , 2007 ) have all been identified as factors influencing participation . Although prior research has offered tremendous insights , most of it has applied reasoning - based theories to explain community members’ participation behavior and assumes a time separate model ( Wasko and Faraj , 2005 ; Asvannund et al . , 2004 ; Jeppesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ) . In such a model , the implicit assumption is that participation in online communities is rationally chosen . Thus , decisions to post at different time periods are assumed to be independent , meaning that the same set of factors is assumed to have similar effects on decisions to post at different time periods . 4 As Limayem et al . ( 2007 ) and other researchers ( Kim and Malhotra , 2005 ; Gefen , 2003 ) point out , reasoning - based theories are more suitable for explaining the initial adoption of information technologies . Different theories may be needed to understand continued use of information technologies . This dissertation posits that participation in online communities at different time periods is not independent . Past behavior should have significant impact on current and future behavior . In other words , participation in online communities is , in part , the result of habits formed earlier . Habit is defined as “the extent to which people tend to perform behaviors automatically because of learning” ( Limayem et al . 2007 ) . It is known that frequently performed behaviors tend to become habitual ( Ouellette and Wood , 1998 ) . However , simple repetition of the same behavior cannot always make that behavior a habit . Habits are learned sequences of acts that are automatic responses to specific cues , and habits are functional in obtaining certain goals or end - states ( Hull , 1943 ; Triandis , 1977 , 1980 ) . First , for a behavior to become a habit , it needs to generate satisfactory results . Satisfactory results can create positive feedback to people that encourages the continuity of the behavior . Absent satisfactory results , it is less likely for the behavior to become habitual . Second , 5 habitual behaviors are usually responses to situational cues that are associated with goals . When a goal associated with a habit is activated , specific cue - response links become activated and the habitual behavior will be performed . Goal directedness distinguishes habits from other forms of repeated automatic behavior , such as body reflexes . In addition , a threshold of behavioral repetitions is required for a habit to form . Only after a sufficient number of repetitions , a behavior can become a habit . Thus , a behavior is habit forming when it has the potential to generate satisfactory results , to allow a sufficient amount of repetition and to be goal oriented . Participation in an online community has the potential to become a habit . First , most members’ behavior in online communities is goal oriented . Besides finding useful information or getting answers to their questions , members might actively participate in discussions to enhance their reputation , gain approval , or establish social identities they seek to have . Due to these motivations , members may initially join the community and continue to be involved . Second , many habit forming activities involve a learning process or skill improvement process . Participation in online communities is such a process 6 ( Moon , 2001 ) . In a learning process , previous experience helps individuals to improve their skills and their ability to enjoy the activity . They are more likely to receive satisfactory results from the activity . For example , listening to music leads to accumulation of skills of music appreciation . In turn , such skills enable people to enjoy music better . In online communities , when members first join , they are not familiar with the environment and other members of that particular community . They may not be able to understand all the jargon other members are using . They face a lot of uncertainty about the quality of the information posted . The more they participate in discussions , the more likely that they will learn about the community . They can accumulate knowledge about the topic in which they are interested . Over time , they become more familiar with the environment , the members , and the topics have been discussed . The level of uncertainty will be significantly reduced . Having learned , they will enjoy participating in the online community more . In the literature , little attention has been paid to understand the effects of habit on participation in online communities . There is limited understanding about how members’ participation behavior evolves over the relative long period after they initially join a community . This dissertation first theoretically articulates how habit will affect individuals’ participation behavior in online communities . Then the proposed habit 7 hypothesis is empirically tested using panel data comprising 130 , 882 postings by 22 , 457 members in 115 discussion boards over a 6 - month time period in a firm - hosted online community . The analysis shows that habit does have significantly positive impacts on community members’ participation behavior . In larger online communities , community members appear to be more likely to have formed a habit of posting . The effects of habit are stronger among highly - ranked members than among low - ranked members . In addition , in line with theories about habit , the analysis shows that posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on the current posting decision than more recent behavior . This dissertation also proposes that a threshold of behavioral repetitions is necessary for an individual to form a participation habit and develops a methodology to estimate what the level of the threshold is . This research extends the existing literature on online communities by considering the effects of a new factor , habit . It also deepens the current understanding of habit formation by articulating the role of a threshold on habit formation . The rest of this dissertation is organized as follows . Chapter 2 provides a literature review on factors influencing people’s motivations to participate in online communities and the theory of critical mass . The concept of habit is 8 articulated in Chapter 3 . Chapter 4 provides an economic model of how habit formation will influence individuals’ behavior . The resulting participation equation serves as the foundation of the empirical analysis . Chapter 5 describes the data structure . Empirical results are summarized in Chapter 6 . Discussions are presented in Chapter 7 . 9 Chapter 2 Literature Review This section provides a literature review of the factors influencing people’s participation in online communities and the theory of critical mass . The review of critical mass theory is an important component . I propose that a threshold of repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Understanding of the critical mass theory is necessary to develop that argument . 2 . 1 Online virtual communities An online community is enabled by a web application for holding discussions and posting user generated content . Online communities are also commonly referred to as Internet forums , online discussion boards , web forums , and bulletin boards . The terms “forum” and “board” may refer to the entire community or to a specific sub - forum dealing with a distinct topic . Messages within these sub - forums are displayed either in chronological order or as threaded discussions . 10 Various topics can be discussed in online communities . For example , technology , computer games , music , fashion , religion , and politics are all popular areas for forum themes . In online communities , members can share their knowledge with other members to help others solve problems or answer other members’ questions . Members are both the source and recipients of information . Once diversified knowledge and information are pooled and saved in an online community , a knowledge base is created . New members can directly benefit both from the existing knowledge base and from their peer members . From the above description of online communities , we can see that there are two key features of an online community . First , a community is generally self - organizing . It is made up of members who voluntarily choose to participate . Members are free to post their questions or to answer other members’ questions as they so desire . Second , participation is open to anyone interested in the topics and information . New members can read postings right after they register . Anyone can join discussions whenever they want to . The discussions and postings are open to all members even those who do not make any contributions . Because participation is open and voluntary , community members typically do not know each other . Information seekers have no control over who 11 is going to respond their questions or the quality of the responses . Information providers have no assurances that those they are helping will ever return the favor . It is possible that some members will receive information and help from others but will not contribute anything in return . This is very different from traditional face - to - face communication . In face - to - face communication , people typically know each other , and as they interact with each other over time , they can develop expectations of obligation and reciprocity . Because of these unique features of online communities , one central question is why community members exchange knowledge ( Wasko and Faraj , 2000 ; Wasko , Faraj , 2005 ) . Using different theoretical foundations , researchers have identified several factors influencing members’ motivation to participate . 2 . 2 Effects of community size Drawing on the resource - based view , Butler ( 2001 ) argues that size is an important characteristic of an online community . Size implicitly reflects the potential benefits a member can obtain . Online communities are sustainable when they are able to provide benefits that outweigh the costs of membership ( Moreland and Levine , 1982 ) . Therefore , those communities that can provide positive net benefits are better able to attract and retain members , and thus survive over the long term . 12 Underlying an online community’s ability to provide valued benefits is the availability of resources such as knowledge , time , energy , and material resources ( Rice , 1982 ) . The availability of a resource pool is essential . Without resources , it is impossible to provide benefits , and without benefits , it is not possible to attract and retain members . For example , for an online community that focuses on the use of a new technology , the community must have members with sufficient relevant expertise on that topic . For a community that is designed to promote information sharing , is must have members who are willing to share their knowledge . For a community that aims to provide emotional counseling , it must have members who are willing to expend the time and energy to be supportive . Since members are a primary source of resources , the size of an online community is a measure of resource availability . In large online communities , it is more likely that some member will know the needed information , will have the ability to provide support , or will have the time to interact with other members . Because more members are able to benefit from interactions both directly as active participants and indirectly as passive observers , large online communities should be able to provide greater benefits then smaller ones . While increasing size provides access to more resources , size can also have significant negative impact on members’ motivation to participate ( Milgram et al . 1969 ; Slater , 1958 ) . This is because larger online communities are more 13 likely to be subject to free - riding ( Markus and Connolly , 1990 ; Rafaeli and Larose , 1993 ; thorn and Connolly , 1990 ; Golle et al . 2001 ; Krishnan , et al . 2004 ) . When an online community is large , members tend to contribute less time , energy , and resources because they expect that other members will do so to achieve the desired benefits ( Petty et al . 1977 ) . Thus , while larger online communities may have more potential resource providers , it is possible that the amount of contribution per member ( and overall ) may be lower than in smaller online communities ( Marwell and Oliver , 1993 ; Olson , 1965 ; Thorn and Connolly , 1990 ) . If the current members do not provide sufficient resources , then the online community may not be able to provide the benefits necessary to continue to attract and retain members ( Cartwright , 1968 ; Golle et al . 2001 ; Porter and Lawler , 1965 ; Krishnan , et al . 2004 ) . Besides size , a set of motivators have been identified to influence community members’ willingness to contribute to the community . This set of variables includes both intrinsic and extrinsic motivators ( Bock , et al . 2005 ; Kankanhalli et al . 2005 ) . 14 2 . 3 Intrinsic and extrinsic motivators Observing that members who make the most contributions in an online music innovation community are hobbyists rather than professionals , Jeppesen and Frederiksen ( 2006 ) argue that it is intrinsic motivation that really motivates members to make contributions to online communities . Intrinsic motivation comes from positive self - evaluation that is based on competence and perceived social acceptance . To pursue positive self - evaluation , people may engage in activities just for the sake of the activity itself , rather than for extrinsic rewards ( Bandura , 1986 ) . Members may contribute information in an online community because they perceive that simply doing so is interesting and that helping others with challenging problems feels good ( Kollock , 1999 ) . Similarly , asking questions may engender a “feeling of competence and “sense of autonomy” ( Amabile , 1993 ; Ryan and Deci , 2000 ) . Besides members’ individual intrinsic motivations , extrinsic factors are also identified as influencing individuals’ willingness to share knowledge ( Bock et al . 2005 ) . Extrinsic motivators are usually anticipated extrinsic rewards . These rewards include monetary incentives , points toward promotion , and both . It has been shown that explicit rewards are effective in motivating people to share knowledge ( Smelser and Swedberg , 1994 ) . 15 Reputation gains and benefits from signaling are also extrinsic motivators ( Pfeffer , 1990 ; Glazer and Konrad , 1996 ) . In explaining programmers’ innovative efforts and free revealing in open source software communities , Lerner and Tirole ( 2002 ) recognize the importance of “peer recognition . ” They argue that the reputation capital gained is a means of enhancing an information provider’s position in the community . This research will focus on a particular type of online community – a firm - hosted technical support community . The community , Dell Community , is sponsored by Dell Corp . The community serves as a complementary means of Dell’s technical support services . The company can obtain useful information about problems with its products as well as customer feedback in general . In this context , we believe that members will not only be having an opportunity to obtain peer recognition but also to obtain firm recognition . Similar ideas are also pointed out by other researchers . Using a social exchange theory perspective , Wasko and Faraj ( 2005 ) argue that members engage in social interaction based on an expectation that it will lead in some way to social rewards such as approval , status , and respect . One reason that members actively participate in an online community is the perception that participation enhances their personal reputations in the community . Reputation is an important asset that people can leverage to achieve and maintain status within a community ( Jones et al . 1997 ) . Research has shown that building 16 reputation is a strong motivator for active participation ( Donath , 1999 ) . For example , Constant et al . ( 1996 ) argue that the chance to improve one’s reputation provided an important motivation for offering useful advice to others . Members perceive that they gain status by answering frequently and intelligently in the online community ( Lakhani and von Hippel , 2003 ) . Taking a social psychological perspective , Ma and Agarwal ( 2007 ) further point out that perceived identity verification can promote members’ contribution in online communities . This is because establishment of one’s online identity can enhance one’s reputation and self - esteem . Established identity can also amplify the possibility of future reciprocation ( Ma and Agarwal , 200 & ) . Since this factor has influence on both reputation and self - esteem , it is both intrinsic and extrinsic . In addition , collective social effects , the positive effects of being together in a community , can also have influence on members’ behavior . It has been shown that an organization’ culture and climate can influence individuals’ behavior ( Dennison , 1996 ) . Climate refers to “a contextual situation at a point in time and its link to the thoughts , feelings , and behaviors of organizational members . ” Culture refers to “An evolved context within which specific situations are embedded . ” 17 The connections between individuals , or the structural links created through the social interactions between members in a virtual community , are important predictors of collective action ( Wasko and Faraj , 2005 ; Burt , 1992 ) . It is found that the more members are in regular contact with each other , or actively participate in community discussions , the more likely they are to develop a “habit of participation” and act cooperatively with other members ( Marwell and Oliver , 1988 ) . We summarize factors influencing individuals’ participation in online communities in Figure 1 . 2 . 4 The theory of critical mass The theory of critical mass defines and specifies the role of critical mass in the success of collective actions ( Granovetter , 1978 ; Marwell and Oliver , 1993 ) . Critical mass is defined as some threshold of participants or action that has to be crossed before a social movement “explodes” into being ( Oliver , Marwell , and Teixeira , 1985 ) . According to the theory , the accumulation of participation or contribution is necessary for collective actions to occur , and it takes some minimum number of accumulated participations to draw in the participation and contributions of others . Once there is sufficient contribution or participation , that is , once critical mass is attained , collective action becomes self - sustaining . 18 Collaborative efforts may produce striking results , and contributors will feel encouraged by their accomplishments . Figure 1 Factors influencing participation in online communities Intrinsic Motivators Self esteem Feeling of competence Extrinsic Motivators External Rewards Organization recognition Reciprocity Participation in online communities Reputation gain Peer approval Linked Motivations Perceived identity verification Other Facilitating Factors Collective social effects Culture Structure Other mutual contacts 19 2 . 4 . 1 The critical mass theory of collective action The critical mass theory was developed to resolve an obvious inconsistency between empirically observed collective behaviors and the free - rider problem predicted by economic theories ( Marwell and Oliver , 1993 ; Oliver , Marwell , and Teixeira , 1985 ) . Before reviewing the theory , some key concepts should be clarified . Free riders refer to individuals who do not contribute to collective goods but consume them anyway . A collective good is any good in which a group of individuals is interested . An important feature of collective goods is that if they are provided to one member of the group , they cannot be withheld from any other members . For example , a park is a collective good for a group of park - loving people if none of them can be prevented from enjoying it . Collective actions are defined as any or all activities aimed at providing a collective good . An individual providing a collective good is engaged in a collective action . Collective actions , thus , are actions taken by two or more people in pursuit of the same collective good ( Granovetter , 1978 ; Oliver , Marwell , and Teixeira , 1985 ) . Economics theories assume that people are rational and self - interested ( Olson , 1965 ) . According to this assumption , rational and self - interested individuals make isolated , independent decisions about contributing , and 20 therefore , common goals and group interest are less likely to be achieved ( Olson , 1965 ) . The reason is that , when interests are shared , economics theories predict that individuals will prefer to free - ride and let others pay the costs of the collective goods that will benefit everyone : Individuals will not voluntarily contribute to collective goods . As a result , collective goods such as parks will generally not be provided through voluntary contributions because free - riding is the only rational choice of all members of the group ( Frohlich and Oppenheimer , 1970 ; Oliver , 1980 ) . The free - rider problem reflects the conflict between individuals and group interests . However , although free - riding is a real problem , collective goods are provided everywhere . Thus , people do offer voluntary contributions and free - riding does not always prohibit collective actions in large groups . The concept of critical mass provides a theoretical foundation to explain how and why collective benefits can be achieved . There are several assumptions the theory makes . First , the theory still assumes that individuals are rational : That is , maximizing utility is the criterion guiding individuals’ decisions . Given their preferences and perceptions of their situations , people make decisions to maximize their utility . Second , individuals make discrete or binary decisions such as whether to adopt a new technology ( Markus , 1987 ) , or whether to participate in an activity . Third , the costs and benefits to an individual depend in part on how 21 many others make the same decision . Individuals do not act in total isolation , but make decisions interdependently ( Granovetter , 1978 ) . Such interdependence can be observed in many situations . For example , an office worker may consider that her or his contribution to United Way will increase the social pressure on others to contribute . It is known that large groups are more successful in attracting more members and more contributions , while shrinking groups lose members at an accelerating pace . Why do other people’s decisions influence an individual’s decision ? The reason is that the accumulation of collective goods can increase an individual’s and other people’s benefits or reduce their costs . In another words , each individual will be better off with the accumulation of collective goods than without them ( Granovetter , 1978 ) . For example , Marwell and Oliver ( 1993 ) suggest that “for the people of a city , the expenditure of $ 10 , 000 for a park might bring $ 40 , 000 worth of pleasure . ” Since the accumulation of collective goods can increase group members’ benefits or reduce their costs , there must exist a point where an individual’s benefits from participating in a collective action exceed his or her costs . Once the accumulated participation reaches such a point , it will be optimal for all members to participate in the action . This point is called the critical mass . Critical mass is 22 usually measured by the number of participants or the percentage of a group that participates ( Marwell , 1993 ) . 2 . 4 . 2 Effects of group heterogeneity and group size on critical mass In this section , I discuss how the characteristics of a group , such as group size and heterogeneity , influence the emergence and magnitude of critical mass . As discussed above , whether an individual’s benefits from participating in a collective action exceed the costs depends on whether critical mass is reached . Before critical mass has been reached , it will be less beneficial for an individual to contribute to a collective action . Group characteristics include not only the composition of a group but also group members’ interest in participation . Thus , group characteristics determine the level of critical mass in a given group and the probability , extent , and effectiveness of a collective action ( Oliver , Marwell , and Teixeira , 1985 ; Oliver and Marwell , 1988 ) . 2 . 4 . 2 . 1 Production function Group heterogeneity has important implications for the level of critical mass . To understand how group heterogeneity influences critical mass , it is 23 necessary to know the marginal return of group members’ contributions . In other words , what is the production function ? The production function determines how much return a particular member can obtain from making his or her contribution given that other members have already participated in the collective action . Typically , there are three types of production functions . Figures 2 , 3 , and 4 illustrate these . The first type is the one with decreasing marginal returns to contributions . This type of production function is also called a decelerating function . With this function , the first few contributions have the biggest impact on the collective good , and subsequent contributions have progressively less impact ( see Figure 2 ) . The second type has increasing marginal returns . This type of function is also called an accelerating function . With this function , successive contributions generate progressively larger payoffs . As a result , each contribution makes the next one more likely . Initial contributions have only negligible effects on the collective good , and it is only after long start - up costs have been paid that subsequent contributions start to make a difference ( see Figure 3 ) . The third type has uniform marginal returns . In a production with uniform marginal returns , the slope is the same for all contributions . Any additional 24 contribution always produces the same probability of obtaining the collective good ( see Figure 4 ) . Figure 2 Decreasing Marginal Returns to contribution Contribution P r odu c t i on Figure 3 Increasing Marginal Returns to contribution Contribution P r odu c t i on 25 Figure 4 Uniform Marginal Returns to contribution Contribution P r odu c t i on 2 . 4 . 2 . 2 Group heterogeneity In the literature , two types of group heterogeneity have received the most attention . They are interest heterogeneity and resource heterogeneity . Interest heterogeneity refers to differing levels of group members’ willingness to participate in a collective action . In a group , some members have a large interest in participating in a collective action , while others have a relatively small interest . Highly - interested members usually participate in collective actions regardless of the actions of less interested members . A collective action is more likely to occur when more members are highly - interested members . Resource heterogeneity refers to the differing levels of available resources that group members can contribute . Some members , though 26 interested in the collective action , have fewer resources to contribute . Others may have more available resources to contribute but have limited interest in the collective action . The combination of interest and available resources determines each member’s capability to contribute and thus determines the critical mass of the group . ( 1 ) In homogeneous groups In a homogeneous group , every member assigns the same value , v , to the collective action and has the same amount of resources . In the case where the production function has uniform marginal returns , the return on contributions will always be the same . Every contribution produces a constant increase in the probability of the collective action . If the return is larger than v , everyone will contribute at the maximum level that is possible . If the return is less than v , every member will contribute nothing . Thus , a linear production function produces dichotomous collective action in a homogeneous group . If the production function is decelerating in a homogenous group , the initial contributions will significantly increase the possibility of a collective action . If the initial returns are larger than v , members will contribute sequentially until the return is equal to v . Then no member will contribute any more . Thus , in a 27 homogeneous group with a decelerating production function , a subgroup of core members can make a collective action possible . If the production function is accelerating in a homogenous group , initial contributions generate negligible value . Given that the initial value is likely less than v , a collective action is less likely to occur . But since each contribution moves subsequent decisions to a more favorable part of the curve , if sufficient initial contributions can be encouraged by external factors , the collective action can still be achieved . ( 2 ) In heterogeneous groups Different from members in homogeneous groups in which everyone assigns the same value , v , members in heterogeneous groups assign different values , i v , to the collective good . If the production function has decreasing marginal returns , initial contributions are favorable . Each additional contribution will make the next contribution less profitable . In the case of a heterogeneous group , a collective action can be achieved only when the least interested group members contribute first and a “chain effect” occurs . Otherwise , the collective action cannot be achieved . 28 If the production function is accelerating , the dynamics will be different . As discussed above , feasibility is a central problem when the production function is accelerating because a collective action must start at the flattest part of the curve . Therefore , a collective action is difficult to even begin . On the other hand , each contribution makes the next contribution more profitable . Once contributions begin , the collective action trend begins to snowball , involving more and more contributions until the collective action is provided with certainty . 2 . 4 . 2 . 3 Group size Group size is another important factor influencing critical mass . Its impacts on critical mass depend on the costs of collective action and the potential benefits . One argument is that collective action is more difficult to achieve in large groups because the total costs of collective action in large groups are high enough to exceed the benefits ( Olson , 1965 ) . This argument is true when a collective good has zero jointness of supply . In this case , the costs will be proportional to the number of members who enjoy it . Then , group size will have negative effects on collective actions . However , if a collective good has the property of jointness of supply , the costs will be smaller . A collective good with pure jointness of supply costs the 29 same no matter how many people enjoy it . For example , a bridge is a collective good with jointness of supply . A bridge has a fixed cost regardless of how many people use it . In this case , larger groups are much more likely to have a critical mass of people willing to provide the collective good ( Oliver , Marwell , and Teixeira , 1985 ) . If groups are heterogeneous , a large group will have smaller critical mass . That is , when a good has high jointness of supply , it can be provided by fewer people in a large group than in a smaller group . 30 Chapter 3 Conceptualization of Habit Before we proceed to discuss the impacts of habit on community members’ participation behavior , it is necessary to clarify some features of the concept of habit . Previous research findings in the field of social psychology have provided us insights to understand what habit is and what factors affect the formation of habit . In addition , researchers using other theoretical perspectives , such as learning theories and cognitive perspectives , have also helped to identify the nature of habit and its formation . In this section , we integrate findings from these different perspectives to clarify some features of the concept of habit . In addition , in the economics literature , significant amount of efforts have been devoted into the understanding of how habit affects individuals’ choices and how to precisely measure its effects by using large amount of secondary data . This research will also be incorporated into our analysis on estimating the effects of habit on online community participation . 31 3 . 1 The concept of habit The concept of habit has a long history in the social sciences . It can be traced back to James ( 1890 ) , who pointed out the importance of habits in managing our daily lives ( cited in Limayem , Hirt , and Cheung , 2007 ) : There is no more miserable human being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision , and for whom the lighting of every cigar , the drinking of every cup , the time of rising and going to bed every day , and the beginning of every bit of work , are subjects of express volitional deliberation ( p . 122 ) . Habit was also used by early Western thinkers in a relatively broad sense to denote rules of conduct that characterize a civilized society ( Durkheim , 1893 ) . In general , habit is conceptualized as learned sequences of acts that are automatic responses to specific cues , which are functional in obtaining certain goals or end - states ( Hull , 1943 ; Triandis , 1977 , 1980 ) . Habits thus comprise a goal - directed type of automaticity , which may be consciously instigated ( Bargh , 1989 ) , for instance eating candy in response to feeling hungry , or taking the car to go shopping . Goal - directness distinguishes habits from other forms of repeated automatic behavior , such as body reflexes . The requirement of a history 32 of satisfactory repetition of relevant acts distinguishes habits from behavior that is performed without much attention , for example behavior resulting from a state of “mindlessness” ( Langer , 1989 ) . In the IS literature , habit is conceptualized as “the extent to which people tend to perform behaviors ( use IS ) automatically because of learning” ( Limayem et al . 2007 ) . This definition is consistent with the definition above but is particularly relevant to IS use . Several features that are fundamental to the concept of habit are highlighted here ( Verplanken and Orbell , 2003 ) . 3 . 1 . 1 A history of repetition The first feature of habit is that it is formed through a history of repetition . The more frequently people perform a behavior , the more likely that behavior becomes habitual ( Ajzen , 2001 ; Ronis , Yates , and Kirscht , 1989 ; Verplanken and Aarts , 1999 ) . Because repetition is a necessary condition for habit formation , there should be a direct link between past behavior and future behavior . That is , current behavior or decision making will be influenced by past behavior . This implies that once a habit is formed , an individual’s future behavior can be partially predicted by observing his or her past behavior . The role of previous behavior in 33 predicting future behavior has bee demonstrated ( Verplanken and Orbell , 2003 ) . For example , Becker et al . ( Becker , Grossman , and Murphy , 1994 ) show that once people are addicted to smoking , their past level of cigarette consumption significantly influences the current pricing sensitivity of their cigarette consumption . Since the repetition feature is so important to the conceptualization of habit , earlier researchers use the frequency of past behavior as the measure of the strength of habit ( Eagly and Chaiken , 1993 ; Ouellette and Wood , 1998 ; Verplanken and Aarts , 1999 ) . Although there are consistent findings that measures of past behavioral frequency predict the occurrence of future behavior ( Quellette and Wood , 1998 ; Sutton , 1994 ; Durham and Heien , 1991 ; Dynan , 2000 ) , researchers in different fields have also developed other measures of habit strength ( Verplanken and Orbell , 2003 ; Pollak , 1970 ; Heien and Durham , 1991 ) . Repetition is a necessary condition but not a sufficient one for the formation of a habit . Once a behavior has been sufficiently repeated , it might gain habitual quality . But whether it will become a habit and to what degree that behavior has acquired the quality of habit cannot be determined by simply looking at the frequency of past behavior ( Verplanken and Orbell , 2003 ) . In other words repetition alone cannot ensure the development of habit . 34 3 . 1 . 2 Association with satisfactory results The second feature needed for a behavior to become habit is to generate satisfactory results . Satisfactory results can create positive feedback that encourages the continuity of the behavior . Positive feedback can establish a mental representation of an association between a satisfactory result and the behavior . Without satisfactory results , it is less likely that the behavior will be repeated . Habits develop and gain strength by the satisfactory repetition of behavior ( Hull , 1943 ; Triandis , 1977 ) . Thus , it is not just the recurrence of a behavior per se that constitutes a habit . Rather , a habit is created by frequently and satisfactorily pairing the execution of an act in response to a specific cue ( Hull , 1943 ; Tolman , 1932 ) . Thus , repetition and satisfaction are two fundamental conditions for the formation of a habit . 3 . 1 . 3 Goal directness The third feature associated with the formation of habitual behaviors is the presence of situational cues that are goal directed . When a goal associated with a habit is activated , specific cue - response links become more accessible . Encountering such a cue may then trigger the habitual response . While new 35 behavior may also ensue , as a result of conscious decision making , the formation of a habit implies the delegation of some control over the behavior to the cues in the environment ( Bargh and Gollwitzer , 1994 ; Verplanken and Aarts , 1999 ) . To illustrate , suppose that , in our daily life , we discover that taking the 8 : 10 a . m . bus gives us the best connection to our job . Once we have satisfactorily practiced taking this bus and arriving on time , an association is created between a particular cue ( 8 : 00 in the morning ) and a particular behavior ( going to the bus station ) . If the goal of going to work is activated , encountering that cue will automatically trigger the behavior . Little conscious decision making is needed anymore . A habit has thus been formed ( Verplanken and Orbell , 2003 ) . But note that goal activation is an important element . We do not go to the bus stop at 8 : 00 on Sunday mornings . To summarize the understanding of the concept of habit , we listed related research in Table 1 . This table is partially adopted from Limayem , Hirt , and Cheung ( 2007 ) but we added some other research which we believe is more relevant to this paper . 36 Table 1 Related Research on Habit ( Partially adopted from Limayem et al . 2007 ) Research Field Purpose Definition of Habit Aarts and Dijksterhuis ( 2000 ) Social behavior To explore when travel choice behavior is habitual , activation of a travel goal automatically activates a travel mode in memory Habit is defined as goal directed automatic behaviors that are mentally represented . Landis et al . ( 1978 ) Social behavior To assess the relative impact of habit and behavioral intentions in predicting teacher behavior . Habit is defined as the frequency of the act in the behavioral history of the organism . Mittal ( 1988 ) Social behavior To examine the role of habit in the attitude behavior discrepancy related to seat belt usage . Habit is defined as automated response . Verplanken and Aarts ( 1999 ) Social psychology To synthesize past work in support of the argument that habit is a concept worth studying . Habit is defined as learned sequences of acts that have become automatic responses to specific cues , and are functional in obtaining certain goals . Verplanken et al . ( 1997 ) Social behavior To examine the role of habit on information acquisition concerning travel mode choices Habit is defined as a goal directed type of automaticity . Guariglia and Rossi ( 2002 ) Economics To determine how much further one can improve current understanding of consumption decisions in the case of habit formation in an uncertain environment No definition provided Becker and Murphy ( 1988 ) Economics To theoretically model habit formation as a rational process Habit is defined as past and future behavior Becker et al . ( 1994 ) Economics To empirically test the impacts of habit formation on cigarette consumption . Habit is defined as the past behavior Heien and Durham ( 1991 ) Economics To measure the effects of habit formation on the consumption of seventeen goods Habit is defined as the past consumption Pollak ( 1970 ) Economics To theoretically model how habit formation modified individuals ' choices Habit is defined as the past behavior Bergeron et al . ( 1995 ) Information systems To explore various factors related to IS utilization Habit is defined as prior experience of IS use Limayem et al . ( 2003 ) Information systems To develop and test an integrated model of IS adoption and post - adoption Habit is defined as the extent to which using a particular IS has become automatic in response to certain situations . Louis and Sutton ( 1991 ) Cognitive processing To propose a view of cognitive processing that involves automatic and cognitive modes , and moments of movements between modes . Habit is defined as automatic cognitive processing . Ajzen ( 1991 ) Decision process To review research on various aspects of the theory of planned behavior . Habit is defined as past behavior Bargy ( 2002 ) Consumer behavior To examine the role of nonconscious influences in real life in decisions and behavior Habit is defined as automatic and nonconscious influence 37 3 . 1 . 4 Online community participation Participation in an online community has the potential to be habit forming . First , most members’ behavior in online communities is goal oriented . Besides finding useful information or getting answers to their questions , members might actively participate in discussions to obtain reputation , gain approval , or establish social identities they would like to have . Drawn in by these motivations , members may both initially join the community and then continue to be involved . Second , many habit forming activities involve a learning process or skill improvement process . Participation in online communities is such a process ( Moon , 2001 ) . In a learning process , previous experience helps individuals to improve their skills and their ability to enjoy the activity . They are more likely to receive satisfactory results from the activity . For example , listening to music leads to accumulation of skills of music appreciation . In turn , such skills enable people to enjoy music better . In online communities , when members first join , they are not familiar with the environment and other members of that particular community . They may not be able to understand all the jargon other members are using . They face a lot of uncertainty about the quality of the information posted . The more they participate in discussions , the more likely that they will learn about the community . They can accumulate knowledge about the topic in which they are interested . Over time , they become more familiar with the 38 environment , the members , and the topics have been discussed . The level of uncertainty will be significantly reduced . Having learned , they will enjoy participating in the online community more . In general , an initial participation ( for example , posting a question or an answer ) might be triggered by external factors . For example , individuals needing to find answers or information might need to do some research to find an appropriate community . But once they receive satisfactory responses from a particular community , they will be inclined to ask future questions in the same community . A habit of asking questions in this community could be developed . 3 . 2 Habit formation and a threshold of repetitions In the last chapter , we reviewed the theory of critical mass . Although the theory was originally developed to explain collective action , the same idea can be used to explain other social phenomena . This theory has wide application and has been enhanced to explain various social issues such as political issues ( Kaempfer and Lowenberg , 1992 ; Wood and Doan , 2003 ) and crime rates ( LaFree , 1999 ) . Habit formation is also an area in which the theory can be applied ( Feichtinger , 1995 ) . Several assumptions of the critical mass theory are satisfied 39 in the case of habit formation . First , individuals who conduct potentially habitual activities make discrete decisions at each time point . For example , each day , they need to decide whether to participate in an online discussion , or whether to smoke . Second , those decisions are not isolated . Individuals remember when they conduct the activity and how they feel . Past decisions have an impact on decisions at the current time . Third , utility maximization is still the criterion guiding individuals’ decisions . Individuals will not continue the activity if they cannot receive satisfactory results . The critical mass theory is also called the threshold model . I would like to discuss how a threshold of repetitions can play a role in habit formation . As I have discussed , repeated behavior is at the root of forming a habit . Habit is formed through a history of repetition . The more frequently people perform a behavior , the more likely that behavior becomes habitual ( Ajzen , 2001 ; Ronis , Yates , and Kirscht , 1989 ; Verplanken and Aarts , 1999 ) . Thus , repetition is a necessary condition for habit formation . But a habit will only be formed after the same behavior has been repeated a sufficient number of times . Without a sufficient number of repetitions , habit is unlikely to be formed . Ad hoc activities cannot become habitual . 40 The reason is that by repeatedly conducting the same activity , an individual can accumulate experience , knowledge , and skills of conducting the activity . At the same time , through a learning process , the individual can gain capability to enjoy or obtain more benefits from conducting the activity . Over time , it is possible that the individual can receive more benefits and pay less cost . After a certain number of repetitions , there exists a point where the benefits received can exceed the cost . Such a point is called a threshold . For example , smoking is harmful . When an individual starts to smoke , he does not have the skills or capability to receive full happiness of smoking . He can only receive the harmful results . But if he somehow manages to continue to smoke , he can receive more and more happiness . One day , the happiness received will exceed the harmful results of smoking . The role of a threshold of repetitions in habit formation is similar to its role in a homogeneous group with an accelerating production function ( Feichtinger , 1995 ) . First , in the case of habit formation , it is the same individual who repeatedly conducts the activity . It can be assumed that the individual hold the same interest , value and resource over time . The individual himself creates a homogeneous group by repeatedly making decisions on the same activity many times . Second , habit is formed by a sufficient amount of repetitions . The initial repetitions of the behavior have trivial impacts on the formation of a habit . But the impacts of repetitions accelerate . The more the behavior is repeated , the more 41 likely a habit will be formed . In the smoking example , most people can hardly enjoy it at the beginning . But the happiness of smoking accelerates over time . Since each individual himself creates a homogeneous group by repeatedly making decisions on the same activity , individuals can have different levels of threshold to form habit . The threshold varies depend on individuals’ interest , value , and resource . For example , some people form a habit of smoking after fewer times of repetitions while others need more repetitions . An average threshold of habit formation can be estimated by observing people’ behavior . In Chapter 6 , I develop a method to estimate the average level of the threshold . In online community participation , past experience has a positive impact on current decisions to post . Through a learning process , members can accumulate knowledge and experience with interacting in an online community . As they develop skills that enable them to enjoy the community better , their cost to participate is likely to decrease and the benefits of participation are likely to increase . A threshold of repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Only after the knowledge and skills have accumulated 42 sufficiently can the benefits overweigh the costs or the negative effects of participating in online communities . One proxy for the accumulation of knowledge and skills is an individual’s number of postings . Members must contribute a sufficient number of postings before participation becomes a habit . If a member only makes a few contributions to the community , he or she will not develop a participation habit . 3 . 3 Effects of Habit in the economics literature 3 . 3 . 1 Impacts of habit on utility function Studies of hte habit effect on people’s behavior in the economics literature can be traced to the 1960’s ( Gorman , 1967 ; Nerlove , 1958 ; Stone , 1966 ) . Incorporation of the habit component into utility functions has been considered to be a significant improvement to utility maximization theories because it makes it possible to generate dynamic demand and supply functions ( Becker and Murphy , 1988 ) . In economic theory , once a habit is formed for the consumption of a particular product , the price sensitivity of that product will decrease . Thus , identifying whether habitual patterns exist in consumption behavior and measuring their impacts are necessary to precisely understand pricing 43 sensitivities ( Becker , Grossman , and Murphy , 1994 ; Heien and Durham , 1991 ; Dynan , 2000 ) . In general , economic theories argue that the reason a habit is formed is that past behavior increases the marginal utility of current and future repetitions of the same behavior ( Pollak , 1970 ; Becker and Murphy , 1988 ) . Thus , past behavior can stimulate behavior in the current time period . For example , consumption of cigarettes is a type of habit forming behavior . Although cigarettes are harmful , if the marginal utility of current consumption is increased ( by past consumption ) to a greater degree than the marginal harm from consumption , greater past consumption of cigarettes will stimulate current consumption ( Heien and Durham , 1991 ) . Now the question is how habit formation can be reflected in the utility function . And how will the change in the utility function influence people’ behavior ? We use Pollak’s ( 1970 ) consumption model to illustrate the general idea . Without losing generality , suppose that the utility function is defined by : U ( X ) = ∑ = − n k k k k b x a 1 ) log ( k a > 0 , ( k x - k b ) > 0 , ∑ = n k k a 1 = 1 ( 1 ) 44 Where k x denotes the level of consumption of the k th good . The betas can be considered as the necessary collection of goods . This function implies that individuals can only obtain utility when their consumption of the i th good is larger than the necessary level . The budget constraint to this utility function is : ∑ = n k k k x p 1 = µ ( 2 ) Where k p denotes the price of k th good and µ denotes total income . The budget constraint function limits an individual’s choice to his income . By maximizing utility , we can get demand functions as : i d ( P , µ ) = i b - i i p a ∑ = n k k k p b 1 + i i p a µ ( 3 ) This function shows that the demand of i th good ( an individual’s behavior ) is a function of the price of i th good relative to other goods and the individual’s total income . So far , there is no time dimension in the equation and there is no 45 link between the individual’s past consumption behavior and the current behavior . That is , habit is assumed to not exist in this case . To incorporate habit effects , we need to allow past consumption to influence current tastes . A simple way is to link the necessary quantity , i b , of each good to the consumption of that good in the previous period . The assumption is that habit can affect an individual’s need for , or the “necessary quantity” of each good . According the definition of habit , the necessary quantity of that good should be increased by any existing habit . We thus let t k b , = * k b + k β 1 , − t k x ( 4 ) Where t k b , is the value of k b at time t . 1 , − t k x is the value of i x at time t - 1 . k β is referred to as the habit coefficient . k β is generally positive since the general effect of habit is to stimulate individuals to consume more . The coefficient reflects the extent to which consumption in the last period can be transferred to the current period . The larger the coefficient is , the larger the influence from the past , and thus the stronger the habit effects . If all goods are subject to habit formation , the utility function becomes : 46 t U ( t X ) = ∑ = − n k kt kt k b x a 1 ) log ( k a > 0 , ( kt x - kt b ) > 0 , ∑ = n k k a 1 = 1 ( 5 ) Where kt b is defined by equation ( 4 ) . Adding a time dimension , the budget constraint becomes : ∑ = n k kt kt x p 1 = t µ ( 6 ) In time period t the individual is supposed to choose t x 1 , …… , nt x which maximizes equation 5 ) . The resulting demand function is : it d ( P , µ , 1 − t X ) = * i b - i i p a ∑ = n k k k p b 1 * + i i p a µ + i β 1 , − t i x - i i p a ∑ = − n k t k k k x p 1 1 , β ( 7 ) We can see that , similar to equation ( 3 ) , the demand is still a function of the price of the i th good relative to the other goods and individual’s total income . What is added to the demand function is a linear combination of the past consumption of all goods , as any past consumption plays an important role in influencing current consumption . This influence is considered to be due to the effects of habits to consume these goods . 47 3 . 3 . 2 Rational habit formation theory and myopic models In the above section , we illustrate the way habit can influence the utility function . That is , current consumption is a linear function of the consumption in the previous period . This model of habit effect is a typical myopic model ( Georgescu - Roegen , 1954 ; Pollak , 1970 ; Muellbauer , 1988 ) . A key assumption of myopic models is that individuals ignore the future when making decisions at the current time . Anticipated future situations are assumed to have no impact on current decisions . Individuals only choose to maximize their utility in the current period rather than maximize their life time utility . Some researchers argue that individuals optimize their behavior over their life times . This is called the “rational habit formation theory” ( Stigler and Becker , 1977 ; Iannacone , 1986 ; Becker and Murphy , 1988 ) . The rational habit formation theory considers individuals’ habit formation to be a rational process . That is , habit formation is rational and the effects of habit are foresighted . An individual’s problem is to maximize his or her life time utility rather only the utility only at a certain time period . To illustrate this idea , I follow Boyer ( 1978 , 1983 ) to consider a generally formed utility function : 48 U ( t x , 1 − t x , t e ) ( 8 ) Here , t x is the consumption level in period t and 1 − t x is the consumption level in period t - 1 , and t e reflects the impact of unmeasured variables on utility . Individuals are assumed to be infinite - lived and to maximize the sum of lifetime utility discounted at the rate r . Then the individual’s problem is : Max ∑ ∞ = − − 1 1 1 ) , , ( t t t t t e x x U ρ ( 9 ) Where ρ = 1 / ( 1 + r ) . The budget constraint is : ∑ ∞ = − + 1 , 1 ) ( t t t e t t t e p x p ρ = 0 µ ( 10 ) Where t p is the price and 0 µ is the present value of wealth . The resulting demand function is : t x = θ 1 − t x + ∑ ∞ = + 1 * i i t i x θρ + 1 θ t p + 2 θ t e + ∑ ∞ = + 1 i i t e ( 11 ) 49 We can see that under the rational habit formation assumption , current behavior is not only a linear function of past behavior but also a function of future anticipated behavior . In the following analysis on online community participation , I will choose to follow the logic of myopic models . The reason is that when the Dell community members participate in discussions , they have little or no information about the future . Members do not know how the community will evolve and how other members will behave in the future . It is difficult for community members to optimize their participation behavior relative to the future . A myopic model is thus suitable in this situation . 50 Chapter 4 The Basic Utility Model and Hypothesis 4 . 1 Intuition This section theoretically articulates how habit will impact community members’ participation decisions . Adopting the framework of a myopic model , we add a habit component into community members’ utility functions . Each member is assumed to maximize his or her total utility by being involved in a variety of activities , including spending time participating in a particular online community . By maximizing their utility , members find their optimal decision as to whether to participate at a given time point . The resulting supply function serves as the foundation of the empirical analysis in the next Chapter . As I have discussed in previous sections , participation in an online community has the potential to be habitual . Once a habit of participation is formed , it may have significant impacts on community members’ participation behavior . If participation is not habitual , we will expect that each participation decision is a time separable behavior , and that all else being equal , a member’s current decision to participate is not related to their past behavior . Their decisions to participate at time t are solely determined by variables functioning at time t 51 ( Asvanund et al . 2994 ; Jepesen and Frederiksen , 2006 ; Ma and Agarwal , 2007 ; Butler , 2001 ) . Empirically , if no habit has been formed , we would expect an equal conditional probability of participation for each individual member . The probability of posting for time n + 1 given the member has already posted n times should not depend on n . In other words , the member’s posting behavior would not nave any relationship with his or her posting history . Figure 5 shows the conditional probability distribution . The x - axis shows the number of postings and the y - axis shows the probability that a member will post at time n + 1 conditional on having already posted n times . As we can see , the conditional probability is not constant . The increasing trend of conditional probability indicates that members’ posting behavior does depend on their past behavior . In addition , since the conditional probability is increasing as the number of postings increases , past behavior generally has a positive impact on current posting behavior . In the next section , I specify how the habit component can be incorporated into members’ utility function and how that component would influence members’ posting behavior . 52 Figure 5 Conditional Probability Distribution of Members’ Postings 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 > 35 Number of Postings C ond i t i on a l P r ob a b ili t y 4 . 2 Static utility function I start with a static utility function which determines members’ decisions to post in online communities . In a static utility function , time is not a dimension in the function . Since all the variables take the values of current time and variables taking values before current time do not show up in the function , members’ past behavior will not play a role on their current decisions . A static utility function is a good staring point to understand how different factors , including the potential effects of habit , influence members’ decisions . To keep our analysis relevant to 53 habit , we will not specify a particular utility form but instead discuss utility function in a general form . We assume that each community member has various activities to participate at any time point t . Posting questions or answers in an online community is one of them . Participating in online communities can generate positive utility to community members . These benefits include finding information they need ( Asvanund et al . 2004 ; Gu , Konana , Rajagopalan , and Chen , 2007 ) , gaining reputation , obtaining status , and establishing social identities they desire ( Ma and Agarwal , 2007 ) . However , participation in an online community also costs members’ time and energy ( Bulter , 2001 ) . When members choose to actively participate in the online discussions and information sharing , they are explicitly deciding to contribute their time , energy , attention , and knowledge . Members also implicitly contribute resources to an online community when they choose to remain as a member and remain part of the audience that is exposed to the community . In all , simply by being part of an online community , members incur costs and hence receive reduced net benefits . Since each member has limited time and energy , the limited time and energy consist of constraints of community members’ decisions . Under these 54 constraints , participation may not always be an optimal choice to a member at a given time even if participation can generate positive utility . Each member’s task is to decide whether to participate at time t and hte level of participation given the constraints they face . Based on the above discussions , a model with one variable and a set of other variables can be developed . One variable represents the number of postings a member contributes to the online community and another set of variables capturing unmeasured activities that can contribute to the utility function . To maximize the utility , each member needs to balance the level of participation and the level of other activities given the constraints they face . As I will discuss later , how much a member can benefit from a particular online community not only depends on the member’s needs but also depends on the characteristics of the community such as the size , the quality and diversification of the information populated in the community . The characteristics of a community determine how much utility a member can obtain by participating discussions . The utility function can be formulated as : U ( i P , ij e ) ( 12 ) 55 Where i P is the number of postings member i contributes to the online community . ij e is the level of unmeasured activity j conducted by member i . A member’s problem is to decide if and how frequently to post given the situation of the community and his personal characteristics . That is , Max U ( i P , ij e ) ( 13 ) Subject to i P * i C , 1 + ij e * j i C , , 2 < = i µ Where i C represents the opportunity cost of member i and i µ represents the total time and energy available to member i . The solution of this maximization problem relies on several issues . Both the total number of potential activities available to a member ( including the contributions to the utility generated by these activities ) and the characteristics of a particular online community can influence the optimal solution . First , different activities , including participation in the community and unmeasured activities , contribute to the utility function positively but in different magnitude in different situations . Each member needs to balance the level of different activities according to their relative contributions to the utility . Second , the characteristics of a particular community can affect how much benefit a member can potentially 56 obtain and thus indirectly influence the member’s posting decision . Besides these , community members face time constraints . The number of postings is also a function of time available to a member . The more time a member has , the more activities he can conduct . As a result , the total level of activities including the number of postings will increase and the total utility will increase . We adopt findings from previous research ( Pollak , 1970 ; Heien and Durham , 1991 ; Dynan , 2000 ) to specify supply function of postings : i P ( i C , 1 , i µ ) = α - 1 β i C , 1 + 2 β i µ + 3 β S ( 14 ) Where i C , 1 represents the posting cost of member i i µ represents the total available resources to member i S represents the set of variables describing the characteristics of a particular community . According to equation ( 14 ) , the number of postings of a particular member is negatively related with his posing cost but positively related with the resources ( time and energy ) available to him . The number of postings is also determined by the community characteristics which we will discuss in a later section . 57 The opportunity cost , i C , 1 , of member i is not measurable . But it should be correlated with some unique characteristics of each member , such as experience , seniority with the community , and so on . These variables can serve as a proxy of the cost . For example , a member’s status ( brozen , silver , or diamond ) reflects the extent to which the member is familiar with the community . It can be assumed that the more experience a member has with the community , the less cost he or she incurs to post . Total resources , i µ , to each individual member is not measurable . However , omitting this variable will not influence the analysis significantly if this variable is constant over time . I will empirically test this assumption and propose special treatments to deal with this issue in the later chapter . 4 . 3 Habit effect An important implication of habit is that the past behavior can influence current behavior . In this section , I modify the static utility function to allow past posting behavior to influence current utility . To make things simple and focused , I assume that the entire set of unmeasured activities , ij e , are not habit forming . Only posting in an online community has the potential to be habit forming . 58 The utility function thus becomes : U ( t i P , , 1 , − t i P , t j i e , , ) ( 15 ) Where t i P , is the number of postings by member i in period t 1 , − t i P is the number of postings by user i in period t - 1 t j i e , , reflects the impact of member i ’s unmeasured activity , j , on utility in period t . In this setting , the time dimension is incorporated into the posting behavior . t i P , is included into the utility function . Similar to equation ( 14 ) in section 4 . 2 , I can derive the supply function of the number of postings as : t i P , ( t i C , , 1 , t i , µ ) = α + θ 1 , − t i P - 1 β t i C , , 1 + 2 β t i , µ + 3 β t S ( 16 ) Where t i C , , 1 represents the posting cost to the user i in period t 1 , − t i P is the number of postings by user i in period t - 1 . t i , µ represents the total resources available to the user i in period t 59 t S represents the set of variables describing the characteristics of a particular community in period t . This function of the number of postings specifies how the number of postings in the previous period influences the number of postings in the current period . θ is called “habit coefficient” . It reflects the extent to which past posting behavior influences current posting behavior ( it is also called the strength of the habit in some research ) . What I am interested in is if θ is significant and what is the sign and the magnitude of θ . 4 . 3 . 1 Hypotheses According to the definition and nature of habit discussed in earlier sections , the habit formation hypothesis predicts that θ is positive . There is a positive relation between past and current posting behavior . The reason is that members can learn from their past behavior . The improved ability can increase the utility at current time . We thus propose that the sign of θ is positive . 1 , , − ∂ ∂ t i t i P P = θ > 0 60 Hypothesis 1 : There is a significant positive relationship between past and current posting behavior . The more a community member posted in the past , the more likely the member will post at the current time . Now How about the magnitude of θ ? How much impact can be transferred from the past behavior to current behavior . In general , the larger θ is , the stronger the effects of habit formation are . Statistically , the stability condition of equation ( 16 ) requires that θ is less than 1 . That means , 0 < θ < 1 . If θ > 1 , the process of equation 16 ) will not be stable and expand . After a certain number of time periods , 1 , − t i P will dominate the entire process and all other variables will have trivial impacts on t i P , . This is not realistic and is not the focus of this research . When θ < 1 , the influence of past behavior can only partially be transferred to the current time behavior . If θ < 1 , then , although past posting behavior has positive impacts on the posting behavior in current period , the effects are declining over several periods . The posting behavior in the more distant past will have less impact on the current posting behavior . 61 Hypothesis 2 : The posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on the current posting behavior . As I specified in equation ( 16 ) , community characteristics have impacts on members’ decisions to post . Community size is an important characteristic of an online community . Community size can have both positive and negative impacts on community members’ decisions to participate . First , members are a primary source of resources . The size of an online community is a measure of resource availability . In large online communities , it is more likely that there are members who know the needed information , have the ability to provide support , or have the time to interact with other members . Because more members are able to benefit from interactions both directly as active participants and indirectly as passive observers , large online communities should be able to provide greater benefits than smaller ones do . On the other hand , size can also have significant negative impact on members’ motivation to participate ( Milgram et al . 1969 ; Slater , 1958 ) . This is because larger online communities are more likely to be subject to free - riding ( Markus and Connolly , 1990 ; Rafaeli and Larose , 1993 ; thorn and Connolly , 1990 ; 62 Golle et al . 2001 ; Krishnan , et al . 2004 ) . When an online community is large , members tend to contribute less time , energy , and resources because they expect that other members will participate enough to achieve the desired benefits ( Petty et al . 1977 ) . Thus , while larger online communities may have more potential resource providers , it is possible that the amount of contribution per member ( and overall ) may be lower than in smaller online communities ( Marwell and Oliver , 1993 ; Olson , 1965 ; Thorn and Connolly , 1990 ) . I thus propose that there is a curvilear relationship between community sizes and habit effects . Hypothesis 3 : The relationship between community size and habit effect is curvilear . When an online community is relatively small , an increase in community size has positive impacts on habit effect . When an online community is sufficiently large , increase in community size has limited impacts on habit effect . Another variable that is important in equation ( 16 ) is the characteristics of individual members . The only available variable that describes a community member’s characteristics is status . To encourage members to participate , the community assigns ranks to each member based on their total contributions to 63 the community . Members with higher rank enjoy certain benefits . I consider rank as an important variable describing a member’s characteristics . Rank indicates the extent to which each member is familiar with the community . High - ranked members have more skills to utilize the community and are more likely to be satisfied to their experience in the community . Their habits are more likely to be stronger . Hypothesis 4 : Habit effects are stronger among highly - ranked members than among low - ranked members . In Chapter 3 , I propose that a threshold plays an important role on the formation of habit . In online community participation , past experience has a positive impact on current decisions to post . Through a learning process , members can accumulate knowledge and experience with interacting in an online community . As they develop skills that enable them to enjoy the community better , their cost to participate is likely to decrease and the benefits of participation are likely to increase . A threshold of repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Only after the knowledge and skills have accumulated sufficiently can the benefits overweigh the costs or the negative effects of participating in online communities . One measure of the accumulation of 64 knowledge and skills is an individual’s number of postings . Members must contribute a sufficient number of postings before participation becomes a habit . If a member only makes ad hoc contributions to the community , he or she will not develop a participation habit . Hypothesis 5 : A threshold of repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Members whose accumulated postings reach the threshold are more likely to form a participation habit than those whose accumulated postings do not reach the threshold . 65 Chapter 5 Data Description and Measurements 5 . 1 Data description 5 . 1 . 1 Discussion boards Our empirical context is a firm - hosted technical support community , DellCommunity , hosted by Dell Inc . The community is designed by Dell Inc . and enables Dell product users to exchange information about their experiences using Dell products and solve technical problems by themselves . To ensure the quality of the discussions , Dell technical staff also serve as community members . They offer help on issues that cannot be solved by users themselves . We believe that DellCommunity is a typical IT sponsored technical support community . Members’ behavior in this community should be representative of that in similar communities . Dell Community includes two large categories : the technical support forum and the discussion forum . Each forum includes different themes . The technical support forum is designed to facilitate discussions related with the use of Dell products such as software , computers , servers , and printers . Members can exchange information about their experience with each other and resolve 66 technical issues with Dell products . The technical support forum includes themes such as New Users / Non - Technical , Desktops , Notebooks , Software , Peripherals , Servers & Storage , and Network / Internet . The discussion forum focuses on more broad topics related to the use of digital products . Themes include Gaming , Small Business , TV & Home Theater , and Digital Music . Within each theme , several online discussion boards are designed to facilitate postings and discussions . There are , in total , 115 discussion boards . Each discussion board focuses on a specific topic so that members can easily find topics they are interested in . Discussion boards vary significantly in size , ranging from 2 members to 4 , 177 members . This indicates that some discussion boards are more popular than others . By analyzing each discussion board individually , we are able to identify how habit effects change as the size of discussion boards changes . 1 . Size of discussion boards Table 2 shows the list of all discussion boards and the number of members in each board . Figure 6 shows the user distribution of across discussion boards . 67 Table 2 List of Discussion Boards in DellCommunity Categories Themes Discussion Boards # of members at the beginning of the data collection period # of members at the end of the data collection period Growth Rate ( members / week ) A940 248 1127 35 . 16 aximgensw 261 838 23 . 08 aximwireless 144 563 16 . 76 cc _ dpa 131 537 16 . 24 cc _ general 459 1571 44 . 48 cc _ pre _ sales 97 306 8 . 36 New Users / Non - Technical commfb 16 63 1 . 88 dim _ audio 428 1318 35 . 60 dim _ bios 322 1078 30 . 24 dim _ cdrom 746 2496 70 . 00 dim _ harddrive 898 2572 66 . 96 dim _ input 176 482 12 . 24 dim _ monitor 568 1703 45 . 40 dim _ network 340 1026 27 . 44 dim _ other 1540 4177 105 . 48 dim _ printer 255 686 17 . 24 dim _ upghw 830 2294 58 . 56 dim _ video 885 2514 65 . 16 oplex _ audio 30 89 2 . 36 oplex _ bios 73 281 8 . 32 oplex _ cdrom 39 153 4 . 56 oplex _ harddrive 68 229 6 . 44 oplex _ input 26 87 2 . 44 oplex _ modem 7 33 1 . 04 oplex _ network 50 155 4 . 20 oplex _ other 181 526 13 . 80 oplex _ printer 20 69 1 . 96 oplex _ upgrade 75 278 8 . 12 oplex _ video 66 271 8 . 20 insp _ audio 232 698 18 . 64 insp _ bios 240 711 18 . 84 insp _ cdrom 393 1266 34 . 92 insp _ general 1309 3590 91 . 24 insp _ input 295 810 20 . 60 insp _ modem 76 244 6 . 72 insp _ network 473 1475 40 . 08 Support Forums Desktops insp _ periph 238 676 17 . 52 68 insp _ power 453 1408 38 . 20 insp _ upgrade 375 961 23 . 44 insp _ video 889 2402 60 . 52 latit _ audio 40 169 5 . 16 latit _ bios 80 292 8 . 48 latit _ cdrom 94 353 10 . 36 latit _ general 324 956 25 . 28 latit _ harddrive 108 333 9 . 00 latit _ input 99 331 9 . 28 latit _ modem 22 78 2 . 24 latit _ network 161 503 13 . 68 latit _ periph 88 281 7 . 72 latit _ power 106 377 10 . 84 latit _ upgrade 76 317 9 . 64 latit _ video 204 669 18 . 60 pes _ backup 32 137 4 . 20 pes _ bios 42 110 2 . 72 pes _ cdrom 17 30 0 . 52 pes _ hardrive 243 644 16 . 04 pes _ linux 69 200 5 . 24 pes _ network 31 79 1 . 92 pes _ nn 12 38 1 . 04 pes _ oms 106 311 8 . 20 pes _ other 195 508 12 . 52 pes _ othersft 27 77 2 . 00 pes _ rack 28 76 1 . 92 pes _ upgrade 84 208 4 . 96 pes _ win2003 115 291 7 . 04 pes _ win2k 35 95 2 . 40 Notebooks pes _ wnts 16 45 1 . 16 sw _ dellsup 34 124 3 . 60 sw _ linux 81 243 6 . 48 sw _ mediaexp 61 238 7 . 08 sw _ office2000 209 466 10 . 28 sw _ other 464 1005 21 . 64 sw _ win20 61 139 3 . 12 sw _ win98 151 251 4 . 00 sw _ winxp 1225 3179 78 . 16 sw _ xpmedia 106 302 7 . 84 S2500 153 571 16 . 72 si _ audedit 33 47 0 . 56 Software si _ digvideo 122 243 4 . 84 69 si _ hijack 191 1026 33 . 40 si _ hmtheatre 31 86 2 . 20 si _ newusers 203 563 14 . 40 si _ sysperf 289 903 24 . 56 si _ virus 501 1495 39 . 76 si _ wireless 198 548 14 . 00 other _ sp 70 116 1 . 84 pc _ managed 85 241 6 . 24 pc _ unmanaged 10 37 1 . 08 Peripherals dellpda 293 984 27 . 64 pw _ audio 14 36 0 . 88 pw _ backup 6 12 0 . 24 pw _ bios 22 75 2 . 12 pw _ cdrom 11 43 1 . 28 pw _ harddrive 28 76 1 . 92 pw _ input 15 26 0 . 44 pw _ isv 4 8 0 . 16 pw _ modem 2 3 0 . 04 pw _ monitor 12 37 1 . 00 pw _ network 14 31 0 . 68 pw _ other 95 240 5 . 80 pw _ printer 3 9 0 . 24 pw _ raid 12 38 1 . 04 pw _ scsi 11 32 0 . 84 pw _ upgrade 49 122 2 . 92 Servers & Storage pw _ video 37 99 2 . 48 proj _ 2200MP 42 147 4 . 20 pv _ fibchan 36 84 1 . 92 pv _ nas 50 133 3 . 32 pv _ raid 40 105 2 . 60 pv _ tape 79 199 4 . 80 Network / Intern et / Wireless pv _ upgrade 9 21 0 . 48 Gaming game - gen 240 518 11 . 12 TV & Home Theater dce _ W1700LCD 114 429 12 . 60 Discussion Forums Digital Music dce _ djmusic 535 1917 55 . 28 70 Figure 6 Member Distribution across Discussion Boards 0 600 1200 1800 d i m _ o t he r i n s p _ v i deo d i m _ m on i t o r s w _ o t he r i n s p _ c d r o m d i m _ b i o s a x i m gen s w i n s p _ b i o s s w _ o ff i c e2000pe s _ o t he r l a t i t _ ne t w o r k cc _ dpa l a t i t _ ha r dd r i v e l a t i t _ i npu t l a t i t _ pe r i ph l a t i t _ b i o s op l e x _ upg r ade op l e x _ ha r dd r i v e p v _ na s pe s _ b i o s p w _ v i deo s i _ auded i t op l e x _ aud i o op l e x _ i npu t pe s _ c d r o m p w _ ne t w o r k pe s _ nn p v _ upg r ade p w _ p r i n t e r Discussion Boards # o f M e m b e r s We can see that the numbers of members are significantly different among different discussion boards . In some discussion boards , the number of members is less than 10 . We will show that a minimum community size is needed for the habit effect to be significant . 2 . Growth rate of discussion boards Another important feature of a discussion board is the rate at which it grows . Growth rates reflect discussion boards’ capability to attract new members and the speed of expansion . Figure 7 shows the relationship between growth 71 rates and discussion board sizes . It is clear that the larger the discussion board is , the more likely that new members will join the board . Figure 7 The Relationship between Growth Rate and Initial Board Size 0 . 00 20 . 00 40 . 00 60 . 00 80 . 00 100 . 00 120 . 00 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 Initial Board Size G r o w t h R a t e ( M e m b e r s / W eek ) 5 . 1 . 2 Time frame In order to determine if habit effect exists in members’ participation behavior and how strong that effect is , it is necessary to observe community members’ posting behavior for a sufficient long time period . The time window we selected is from Jan 1 , 2005 to June 29 , 2005 . During this period , we recorded every single posting of 236 , 958 distinct members . 72 In all , the information included in this data is thus very rich . It contains not only differences across different members but also differences in each individual member’s behavior at different time periods . Beside posting records , information in this daily data includes message ID , board ID , members’ identification numbers , members’ ranks , the order of each posting , total number of postings for a given message thread , posted date and time of each posting , and registration date of each member . At a given time point , we can find who posts to what message thread and in which discussion board . 5 . 1 . 3 Data structure We create a panel data for our analysis . This panel structure enables us to observe both time variance and cross sectional differences . Table 3 shows the sample of the panel data . 5 . 2 . Measurements Many factors , other than the habit , can directly or indirectly influence community members’ decisions to participate . Controlling the effects of these factors is necessary to precisely identify the effects of habit . Without the control 73 Table 3 Panel Data Set on Discussion Board Postings Observations Week Number Date Member ID Number of Postings Rank Total Number of Postings in the Board Number of New Members Number of Postings by the Firm Total Number of Active Members in the Board 1 1 1 / 2 / 2005 - 1 / 8 / 2005 4681 0 Bronze 883 142 14 479 2 2 1 / 9 / 2005 - 1 / 15 / 2005 4681 4 Bronze 715 121 6 402 3 3 1 / 16 / 2005 - 1 / 22 / 2005 4681 1 Bronze 767 115 1 415 … … … … … … … … … … 23 23 6 / 5 / 2005 - 6 / 11 / 2005 4681 0 Bronze 764 84 9 366 24 24 6 / 12 / 2005 - 6 / 18 / 2005 4681 2 Bronze 741 95 1 365 25 25 6 / 19 / 2005 - 6 / 25 / 2005 4681 0 Bronze 585 73 4 296 26 1 1 / 2 / 2005 - 1 / 8 / 2005 2400 0 Gold 883 142 14 479 27 2 1 / 9 / 2005 - 1 / 15 / 2005 2400 2 Gold 715 121 6 402 28 3 1 / 16 / 2005 - 1 / 22 / 2005 2400 2 Gold 767 115 1 415 … … … … … … … … … … 48 23 6 / 5 / 2005 - 6 / 11 / 2005 2400 3 Gold 764 84 9 366 49 24 6 / 12 / 2005 - 6 / 18 / 2005 2400 3 Gold 741 95 1 365 50 25 6 / 19 / 2005 - 6 / 25 / 2005 2400 1 Gold 585 73 4 296 51 1 1 / 2 / 2005 - 1 / 8 / 2005 3160 16 Diamond 883 142 14 479 52 2 1 / 9 / 2005 - 1 / 15 / 2005 3160 5 Diamond 715 121 6 402 53 3 1 / 16 / 2005 - 1 / 22 / 2005 3160 15 Diamond 767 115 1 415 … … … … … … … … … … 73 23 6 / 5 / 2005 - 6 / 11 / 2005 3160 3 Diamond 764 84 9 366 74 24 6 / 12 / 2005 - 6 / 18 / 2005 3160 1 Diamond 741 95 1 365 75 25 6 / 19 / 2005 - 6 / 25 / 2005 3160 2 Diamond 585 73 4 296 … … … … … … … … … … of those variables , estimates of the habit effect will be biased , especially when the habit variable is correlated with those uncontrolled effects . In addition , we argued that status may moderate the effects of habit . Identifying this moderating effect is also important to understand the habit effects . In this section , I present how dependent and independent variables are measured . The independent variables can be categorized into two sets . One set of variables represents the characteristics and behavior of each individual member and the other set reflects the characteristics of the discussion boards at different time points . 74 5 . 2 . 1 The dependent variable The total number of postings of each member in a given week is the dependent variable . To better reflect the habitual behavior , the daily data is converted to weekly data . That is , I count the total number of postings by each member in each week . There are 25 weeks in total . 5 . 2 . 2 Variables representing members’ unique characteristics 1 . Number of postings The total number of postings in each week is the dependent variable . In addition , the lag one of this variable is an important variable to test the habit effect . Besides the habit effect , community members may decide to participate due to other influences such as reciprocity . To capture and control the effects of reciprocity , I create several variables to reflect members’ posting behavior in more detail . ( 1 ) Number of initial postings . The number of initial postings is counted for each member . I assume that the majority of initial postings are questions . 75 Community members initiate postings to ask for help or generate discussions . If a member initiates a large number of postings , that behavior may indicate that he or she relies on the community to find help . ( 2 ) Number of responses received . After a member initiates a message , he or she expects active responses . The total number of responses received reflects whether other members are willing to respond and how much help can be received . I assume that if a member receives a large number of responses to his or her initial message , the member will be willing to respond to other members’ message . ( 3 ) Number of follow - ups . After a member initiates a message and others respond , the member may follow up to post again to the same initial message . Usually , members follow up their initial messages to offer “thanks” to members who respond or to generate further discussions . I assume that the number of follow - ups represents the level of satisfaction the member has to the responses . ( 4 ) Number of responses provided . Beside initial postings , many community members respond to other members’ postings . I count the total number of postings that are responses to others’ messages . If the majority of a member’ postings are to respond to other members’ postings , this may indicate that the member is willing to help and discuss with others . 76 The relationship among these variables is as follows . Total number of postings in a week = Number of initial postings in the week + Number of follow - up postings in the week + Number of responses provided in the week Table 4 shows the sample data of these variables . Using the first member as an example , we can see that the first member totally posted 4 postings in week 1 . The member initiated one message , followed up one posting to that message , and provided two responses to postings of others . The initiated message received nine responses . 2 . Rank The data does not include members’ demographic variables . The only variable that describes a community member’s characteristics is a status . To encourage members to participate , the community assigns a rank to each member based on their total contributions to the community . Members with higher rank enjoy certain benefits . We consider rank as an important moderator variable . Rank indicates the extent to which each member is familiar with the 77 community . As discussed in section 4 , I believe that the strength of habit effect varies by members’ status . Table 4 Sample Data of Postings Week Number Member ID Total Number of Postings Number of Initial Postings Number of Follow Ups Number of Responses Provided Number of Responses Received 1 4681 4 1 1 2 9 2 4681 5 0 0 5 0 3 4681 0 0 0 0 0 … … … … … … … 23 4681 0 0 0 0 0 24 4681 4 1 3 0 7 25 4681 0 0 0 0 0 1 2400 3 2 0 1 10 2 2400 0 0 0 0 0 3 2400 1 0 0 1 0 … … … … … … … 23 2400 1 1 0 0 4 24 2400 0 0 0 0 0 25 2400 1 1 0 0 0 1 3160 2 1 1 0 1 2 3160 0 0 0 0 0 3 3160 2 2 0 0 8 … … … … … … … 23 3160 0 0 0 0 0 24 3160 6 1 0 5 3 25 3160 0 0 0 0 0 … … … … … … … High - ranked members have more skills to utilize the community and are more likely to be satisfied to their experience in the community . Their habits are 78 more likely to be stronger . Table 5 and Figure 8 show the list of all possible ranks and member distribution by rank . Table 5 Ranks and Member Distribution Rank Number of Postings Number of Members Bronze 53819 13068 Silver 18333 309 Gold 20965 81 Platinum 17491 17 Diamond 20274 9 Figure 8 Member Distribution by Rank - 5 , 000 10 , 000 15 , 000 Bronze Silver Gold Platinum Diamond Ranks N u m b e r o f M e m b e r s 79 Figure 9 Posting Distribution by Rank - 20 , 000 40 , 000 60 , 000 Bronze Silver Gold Platinum Diamond Ranks N u m b e r o f P o s t i ng s Figure 8 shows that members ranked “Bronze” ( the lowest rank ) dominate the entire pool of members . They account for about 97 % of total members . But they only contribute 41 % of total postings . A significant number of postings are provided by high - ranked members . Since there are only 17 “Platinum” members and 9 “Diamond” members , I will combine all the members whose ranks are above ‘Silver” in the following analysis . In more detail , I show in Table 6 , Table 7 and Figure 10 how the distribution of postings changes across different rankings . 80 Table 6 Number of Initial Postings and Responses Number of Postings Number of Members Number of Postings Number of Members Bronze 18436 10187 35383 9429 Silver 1049 194 17284 297 Gold 488 56 20477 81 Platinum 149 14 17342 17 Diamond 21 4 20253 9 Initial Postings Non - Initial Postings Rank Figure 10 Posting Configuration by Rank 0 10000 20000 30000 40000 Bronze Silver Gold Platinum Diamond Ranks N u m b e r o f P o s t i ng s Initial Postings Non - Initial Postings 81 Table 7 Distribution of Postings across Different Orders First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Tenth Bronze 18436 6697 9800 4995 4567 2953 2404 1689 1306 972 Silver 1049 6486 2775 2679 1528 1320 861 704 541 390 Gold 488 7505 2808 3341 1767 1652 1101 1003 682 618 Platinum 149 7594 2137 2926 1345 1283 733 595 407 322 Diamond 21 10540 1963 3379 1281 1271 664 550 341 264 Rank Place of the Posting in the Message Besides common community members , there is another set of members ( moderators ) in the community . They are Dell staffs who aim to solve technical problems which cannot be solved by other members . Since our purpose is to understand the effects of habit on community members’ participation behavior , we exclude moderators from our analysis . 5 . 2 . 3 Variables representing characteristics of discussion board 1 . Size of an online community In an online community , members are a primary source of resources . The size of a community is a measure of resource availability . Members are more likely to find the information they need in larger virtual communities . It is thus more likely for a member to have satisfactory experience with the community . Membership size is also a measure of the level of audience resources . A large base of audience is an indicator that more members can access the information 82 posted in virtual communities and more members can receive the benefits . Thus larger virtual communities are more able to provide valuable benefits to members ( Haveman , 1993 ; McPherson , 1983 ; Rafaeli and LaRose , 1993 ) . When the size of a community is too small , the sources of information are limited . Members usually cannot find information they need and thus cannot stay in the community longer . Plenty of data shows that although the number of virtual communities has grown significantly in the past few years , the majority of them are not active . For example , MSN has more than 300 , 00 communities and Google Groups hosts more than 54 , 000 forums . But about 91 . 2 % of communities on MSN have fewer than 25 members and the communities averaged between 1 and 20 posts ( Farmham , 2002 ) . In DellCommunity , some discussion boards have only 2 or 4 members . But the effects of community size have two sides . Increasing size provides members access to more resources . But size can also have negative impacts on the benefit provision process by affecting members’ perceptions and attitudes ( Milgram et al . 1969 ; Slater , 1958 ) . Larger virtual communities are more likely to be subject to free - riding problems ( Markus and Connolly , 1990 ; Rafaeli and Larose , 1993 ; thorn and Connolly , 1990 ; Golle et al . 2001 ; Krishnan , et al . 2004 ) . When the size of virtual community is large , members tend to contribute 83 less time , energy , and resources because they expect that other members will provide enough to achieve the desired benefits ( Petty et al . 1977 ) . While larger virtual communities may have more potential resource providers , it is possible that the amount of contributions per person ( and overall ) may be lower than that in smaller virtual communities ( Marwell and Oliver , 1993 ; Olson , 1965 ; Thorn and Connolly , 1990 ) . If the current members cannot provide sufficient resources , then the virtual community will not be able to provide the benefits necessary to continue to attract and retain members even the size of the community is large ( Cartwright , 1968 ; Golle et al . 2001 ) . Based on the above discussions , I consider two variables to measure community size : the number of members and the number of posting at a given time point . The reason I consider the number of postings is that the volume of communication activity reflects the amount of information being actually provided . The processes by which online communities provide benefits are based on communication activity . No matter how many members are available within an online community , without communication activity , no benefits will be provided to members . At the extreme , an online community in which there is no communication at all cannot provide any benefits to its members . More 84 communication activity is expected to enable more information sharing and development of strong relationships among members – all of which correspond to the provision of more benefits for individual members . 2 . Initial posting vs . response posting The number of postings in a week only reflects the total number of postings community members contribute . There are two ways for members to participate discussions in online community . One is to initiate new messages or new topics and the other is to respond to other members’ messages . These two different ways represent different behavior . As discussed in section 5 . 2 . 2 , different members tend to provide different postings . High - ranked members are more likely to provide responses to other members’ postings than to initiate new messages , while low - ranked members are more likely to initiate new messages than to respond to other members’ postings . Besides the total number of postings , we are also interested in whether the total number of initial postings or the total number of responses posted has any impacts on members’ participation . 3 . Firm Contributions In Dell Community , there is a set of members who are Dell staffs . Their responsibilities are to solve technical problems which cannot be solved by other 85 members . Their contributions to the community are complementary to those provided by common members . We would like to examine if the large amount of contributions made by them will have any impacts on common members’ participation behavior . We will count total number of postings by them at any given time period . 4 . Time Online communities are web applications designed for holding discussions and posting member generated contents . People join into an online community to find answers or information they need . They can also offer help or provide information to others . When all diversified messages are pooled and saved in the community , members ( including both existing members and new members ) can benefit directly from the existing knowledge base by simply searching and reading postings . Large online communities with large diversified knowledge base include rich information . Any online community needs to go through a process from initial establishment to a large one . Time can play a role on influencing members’ incentive to post . The longer an online community exists , the more likely the knowledge is more diversified and the board is larger . 86 The effects of time on members’ incentives to post can be on two sides . On one hand , a richer community can encourage members to post more . According to the theory of public goods , existing knowledge base is a kind of public good . When members benefit from this public good , they are willing to contribute more ( Bernheim , 1986 ; Andreoni , 1989 ; Gu and Jarvenpaa , 2003 ) . But on the other hand , a richer community may make users believe that posting information is not necessary because the existing knowledge base is already large enough to include everything . In addition , it is possible that once some members find the information they need from the existing knowledge base , they may stop interacting with other members . Another effect variable “time” can capture is the effect of general growth of an online community . People may not be familiar with it and cannot accept it as a reliable source of information at the beginning . They may not have a strong expectation that other people will respond to their requests . But over time , as online communities become more and more common , people will accept them and believe that they represent a good way of information sharing . As a result , they may rely on online communities as important sources of information and be more active to participate in various online discussion boards . 87 Chapter 6 Empirical Results 6 . 1 Test of fixed effect and random effect Equation ( 17 ) represents the general posting equation : t i P , = α + θ 1 , − t i P - 1 β t i C , , 1 + 2 β t i , µ + 3 β t S ( 17 ) Our goal is to estimate if θ , the habit effect coefficient , is significantly positive . If it is , what is the magnitude ? Due to the limitation of the secondary data set , many control variables such as members’ demographic variables are not available . Thus it is difficult to control the effects of these unobservable variables . If I simply run OLS over equation ( 17 ) , the regression suffers from omitted variable problems . If the omitted variables are correlated with the explanatory variables , the estimates will not be consistent . 88 To ensure the estimates are unbiased , this issue needs to be resolved . The focus of this section is on analyzing those unobserved variables and how to eliminate their impacts on the estimates of other variables . In general , unobserved variables can be divided into two types : those that are constant over time , such as gender , race , and education level , and those that vary over time , such as age and experience . If the unobservable variables are constant over time , the resulting estimation model is called a fixed effect model . Otherwise , the resulting model is a random effects model . We will empirically determine which model , fixed effects or random effects , is more suitable to estimate equation ( 17 ) . By taking into account the effects of unobserved factors , the participation equation should be re - written as : Bti P , ( t i C , , 1 , t i , µ ) = α + θ Bti P 1 , − - 1 β t i C , , 1 + 2 β t i , µ + 3 β t S + i a + t i , ε ( 18 ) Where i a captures all unobserved , time - constant or time - varying factors that affect Bti P , . 89 I propose a statistic to determine if unobservable variables are time - constant or time - varying in the next section . 6 . 1 . 1 Hausman specification test Before we estimate equation ( 17 ) , we first need to decide whether a fixed effect model or a random effect model will be more appropriate . To do so , we choose to use Hausman specification test ( Hausman , 1978 ) . The purpose of Hausman test is to test if models are mis - specified . In other words , what is tested is the null hypothesis 0 H : the model is correctly specified against the alternative that the model is mis - specified . The logic of Hausman test is this . Suppose there are two different estimators , 0 β ) and 1 β ) , for a given parameter β . β is a vector of all coefficients of the participation equation ( 17 ) . Suppose that there exists a set of conditions ( the Null hypothesis ) , both S , under which both estimators are consistent and n ( 0 β ) - β ) is globally efficient but n ( 1 β ) - β ) is less efficient . Suppose as well there is another set of conditions , 1 S ( the alternative hypothesis ) , under which 1 β ) is consistent but 0 β ) is not . Then the Hausman test 90 is a test of the null hypothesis that the event both S occurs , against the alternative that 1 S occurs . Since 0 β ) is inconsistent under 1 S while 1 β ) is consistent , δ = 1 β ) - 0 β ) must be non - zero under 1 S . By contrast , under both S , δ = 0 . Then the goal is to test whether the deviation δ ) differs from zero in a statistically significant way . The challenge then becomes how to estimate the variance of δ . Hausman proved the result that when the null hypothesis holds – i . e . when both S occurs and 0 β ) is globally efficient – the variance of differences equals the difference of variances . According to Hausman , under the null of correct specification , the statistic H = n δ ′ ) [ ] 1 ) ( − δ ) Var δ ) will have a 2 k χ distribution , Where k is the number of coefficients δ ) = 1 β ) - 0 β ) 91 To determine if a fixed effect model or a random effect model is more appropriate to our data , we examine heterogeneity in the intercepts i α . If this heterogeneity is uncorrelated with all the independent variables , and if the idiosyncratic residual is iid , then we know that random effects are both consistent and efficient . I conduct the test in each of the largest 10 discussion boards . Table 8 shows the results . We can see that all the Pr > m are less than 0 . 0001 . Random effect models are rejected . We will employ a fixed effect model to estimate the effects of habit . Table 8 Tests of Random Effects Number of Cross Sections Time Series Length m Value Pr > m 1540 25 348 . 38 < 0 . 0001 830 25 187 . 38 < 0 . 0001 1225 25 279 . 17 < 0 . 0001 1309 25 295 . 93 < 0 . 0001 898 25 202 . 91 < 0 . 0001 746 25 166 . 86 < 0 . 0001 885 25 200 . 15 < 0 . 0001 501 25 114 . 49 < 0 . 0001 889 25 196 . 25 < 0 . 0001 535 25 120 . 11 < 0 . 0001 Hausman Test for Random Effects 92 6 . 2 Linear fixed effect model 6 . 2 . 1 Linear fixed effect model To empirically estimate equation ( 17 ) it , there are two considerations that need to be highlighted . First , the effects of reciprocity need to be controlled . One reason that a particular member may decide to participate at time t could be that the member received satisfactory responses from other unknown members in previous periods . In return , he might want to offer the information he knows to the community . To control for this effect , I incorporate the posting behavior in the last period to see how much impact that past behavior has on current decisions . Specifically , I generate following variables . ( 1 ) the total number of postings a member initiated in the last period . This variable indicates the extent to which the member needed to get help and was willing to ask for that help from the community . It is possible that past initiated postings can influence a member’s current decisions . ( 2 ) Total number of responses to the postings initiated by a member . If a member received many responses to his or her postings in the last period , he or she might feel satisfied and be encouraged to participate in the future . ( 3 ) Number of followed up postings . When other members’ responses are interesting or encouraging , it is possible that the member would follow up his own 93 original postings . Thus , the number of follow ups in the last period might have impacts on decisions in the current period . Second , effects of postings with value “zero” need to be removed . In the data , not all the members post every day or every week . There are many observations with value “zero’ . These observations can increase the significance of θ , generating biased estimate of the habit effect , especially when lagged variables are used . To overcome this problem , a variable , t i zero dummy , _ , is created to absorb the effects of these observations . t i zero dummy , _ = ⎩⎨⎧ = − Otherwise P if t i 0 0 1 1 , With all the considerations above , the fixed effect model becomes : t i P , = α + θ 1 , − t i P + 1 β 1 , − t i init + 2 β 1 , − t i follow + 3 β 1 , _ − t i rspns recd + 4 β t pst tot Ln ) _ ( + 5 β t inipst tot Ln ) _ ( + 6 β t contri frm Ln ) _ ( + 7 β t mem tot Ln ) _ ( + 8 β t newmem Ln ) ( + 9 β t i zero dummy , _ + 10 β 1 , * − t i pst drank + 11 β i t ( 19 ) 94 Where 1 , − t i P represents the total number of postings by member i in period t 1 , − t i init represents the number of initial postings posted by member i in period t - 1 1 , − t i follow represents the number of follow up postings by member i to his or her original postings in period t - 1 1 , _ − t i rspns recd represents the number of responses received by member i to his or her initial posting in period t - 1 t pst tot Ln ) _ ( represents the natural log of total postings by all members in the board at time t t inipst tot Ln ) _ ( represents the natural log of total initial postings by all members in the board at time t t contri frm Ln ) _ ( represents the natural log of the total postings by staff of Dell at time t t mem tot Ln ) _ ( represents the natural log of the total active members in the board at time t t newmem Ln ) ( represents the natural log of the number of new members in the board at time t t i zero dummy , _ is a dummy variable indicating if 1 , − t i P is valued zero 95 1 , * − t i pst drank is the intersection between 1 , − t i P and i rank dummy _ , which is a dummy variable indicating if a member is a high - ranked member . A low - ranked member is a “bronze” member and a high - ranked member is a member ranked “silver” or above i t represents the number of the week The descriptive statistics are shown in Table 9 ( Based on top 5 largest discussion boards ) . The estimation results are shown in Table 10 . To test whether high - ranked members have strong habit effects , a dummy variable is created to indicate each member’s rank . i ranks high of dummy _ _ _ = ⎩⎨⎧ Otherwise above or Silver is rank if 0 _ _ _ _ 1 Three models are presented . The basic model includes the lagged effect of number of postings , the interaction between the number of postings and the rank variable , dummy of zero postings , and t . In the second model , variables reflecting the characteristics of discussion boards are added . In the third model , the control of reciprocity is added . 96 Table 9 Descriptive Statistics in Equation ( 19 ) Variables n Min Max Mean std number of postings 116525 0 259 0 . 3752 3 . 8630 Lag ( number of postings ) 116525 0 259 0 . 3654 3 . 7853 Lag ( number of provided responses ) 116525 0 226 0 . 2433 2 . 1750 Lag ( number of initial postings ) 116525 0 8 0 . 0076 0 . 0970 Lag ( number of follow up postings ) 116525 0 16 0 . 0057 0 . 1176 Lag ( number of received responses ) 116525 0 38 0 . 0225 0 . 3380 Ln ( total postings in the board ) 116525 5 . 81 6 . 38 6 . 0780 0 . 1609 Ln ( number of new members ) 116525 3 . 78 4 . 65 4 . 1581 0 . 2495 Ln ( number of initial postings in the board ) 116525 4 . 34 4 . 93 4 . 6094 0 . 1743 Ln ( number of non - initial postings in the board ) 116525 5 . 54 6 . 13 5 . 8150 0 . 1647 Ln ( number of firm contributions ) 116525 0 2 . 64 0 . 7490 0 . 8732 Ln ( number of active members in the board ) 116525 5 . 04 5 . 60 5 . 3267 0 . 1519 Lag ( number of postings ) * dummy of high ranks 116525 0 259 0 . 2299 3 . 7220 Bronze 116525 0 1 0 . 9324 0 . 2510 Silver 116525 0 1 0 . 0478 0 . 2134 Gold 116525 0 1 0 . 0146 0 . 1199 Diamond 116525 0 1 0 . 0015 0 . 0387 Platinum 116525 0 1 0 . 0036 0 . 0603 dummy of zero posting 116525 0 1 0 . 9179 0 . 2745 t 116525 1 25 13 . 0000 7 . 2111 97 Table 10 Estimation Results Variable Base Model With Control of Board Characteristics With Control of Reciprocity 0 . 1312 * 0 . 1314 * 0 . 1347 * ( 0 . 0095 ) ( 0 . 0095 ) ( 0 . 0097 ) 0 . 2093 * * ( 0 . 0830 ) 0 . 0839 ( 0 . 0720 ) 0 . 1168 * ( 0 . 0342 ) 0 . 0918 0 . 0909 ( 0 . 0990 ) ( 0 . 0990 ) 0 . 2803 * * 0 . 281 * ( 0 . 0826 ) ( 0 . 0826 ) 0 . 0069 0 . 0068 ( 0 . 0119 ) ( 0 . 0119 ) 0 . 2729 * * 0 . 2749 * * ( 0 . 1107 ) ( 0 . 1107 ) 0 . 0106 0 . 0105 ( 0 . 0671 ) ( 0 . 0670 ) 0 . 2860 * 0 . 2816 * 0 . 2829 * ( 0 . 0098 ) ( 0 . 0097 ) ( 0 . 0099 ) 0 . 0799 * * 0 . 0617 * * 0 . 063 * * ( 0 . 0038 ) ( 0 . 0265 ) ( 0 . 0265 ) 0 . 0064 * 0 . 0066 * 0 . 0066 * ( 0 . 0007 ) ( 0 . 0010 ) ( 0 . 0010 ) Number of Obervations 116525 116525 116525 R - squared 0 . 7704 0 . 7706 0 . 7709 Ln ( total postings in the board ) Ln ( number of initial postings in the board ) Lag ( number of postings ) Lag ( number of initial postings ) Lag ( number of follow up postings ) Ln ( number of firm contributions ) Lag ( number of received responses ) Lag ( number of postings ) * dummy of high ranks dummy of zero posting t Ln ( number of active members in the board ) Ln ( number of new members ) The Significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks : ' * * * ' , ' * * ' , and ' * ' correspond to a 1 % , 5 % , and 10 % confidence levels , respectively . From the above results , we can see that the habit coefficient , θ , is significantly positive in all models . This result shows that there are habit effects among community members . Past posting behavior can positively influence members’ current decisions to post . On average , 13 . 47 % of a community 98 member’s prior postings can be transferred to the current time period . Hypothesis ( 1 ) is thus supported . The second finding is that the estimated θ < 1 . This implies that the number of postings in distant past will have trivial impacts ( although positive ) on the number of postings at current time period . Hypothesis ( 2 ) is supported . Third , I found that the interactions between number of postings and the rank dummy variable have significantly positive effects on the number of postings . This indicates that high - ranked members do have stronger habit effects than low - ranked members ( members ranked as “Bronze” ) . Hypothesis ( 4 ) is thus supported . Among all the variables reflecting characteristics of discussion boards , two variables have significant effects on the number of postings . They are number of initial postings in the board ( with positive effects ) and number of active members in the board ( with negative effects ) . The number of initial postings in the board reflects the total number of postings initiated by all the members in the board . A large value of this variable may indicate that more members have questions and need help from other members . A positive coefficient means that more initial postings can stimulate community members to provide more responses . That is , 99 when more questions are asked in the community , more members are willing to respond . The number of active members in the board in a given week is the total number of members who post in the week . The variable represents how many members show up by posting messages in a given week . The negative coefficient of this variable indicates that more members respond to the questions posted has negative effects on other members’ willingness to post . In other words , when more members respond , others may think it is not necessary to repeat . As to the effects of reciprocity , I found that the lagged number of initial postings and the lagged number of received responses have significant effects on the dependent variable . The coefficient of the first one is positive and the coefficient of the second one is negative . The positive effect of the first variable indicates that members who initiate messages are more likely to do so repeatedly . In other words , there might be subgroups of members who repeatedly initiate questions . The fact that the coefficient of the number of received responses is negative shows that once the questions posted in the last period were answered , members will not ask questions again . 100 6 . 2 . 2 Effects of community size In this section , we examine if a minimum community size is needed for members to form habits . There are , in total , 115 discussion boards ( see Table 2 ) . I repeatedly estimate θ in equation ( 19 ) in each of top 100 discussion boards . I then compare the estimates of θ , the habit effect coefficient . Table 11 shows the results . Figure 11 plots the significance of the habit effects and number of members in each discussion board . I found that it does require a minimum member size for habit to form . As we can see in Table 11 and Figure 11 , when the community size is large enough , the effects of habit is strongly significant . As the community size decreases , the significance of θ decreases . When community size is small , there are more cases where θ is not significant . This indicates that as the size decreases , the effects of habit formation become weaker . When the community size is less than 100 , θ becomes completely insignificant . Thus , when an online community is too small , members do not participate actively . As a result , it is impossible for any members to form a habit of participation in the community . 101 Table 11 Estimates of θ in Different Discussion Boards No t P Value Board Name Number of Members 1 0 . 131569 13 . 70 0 . 0000 dim _ other 1540 2 0 . 183249 13 . 74 0 . 0000 dim _ upghw 830 3 0 . 08671 7 . 84 0 . 0000 sw _ winxp 1225 4 0 . 16671 16 . 12 0 . 0000 insp _ general 1309 5 0 . 076231 6 . 14 0 . 0000 dim _ harddrive 898 6 0 . 134401 9 . 96 0 . 0000 dim _ cdrom 746 7 0 . 172434 13 . 40 0 . 0000 dim _ video 885 8 0 . 18653 10 . 82 0 . 0000 si _ virus 501 9 0 . 120779 9 . 71 0 . 0000 insp _ video 889 10 0 . 164527 10 . 92 0 . 0000 dce _ djmusic 535 11 0 . 146066 8 . 03 0 . 0000 cc _ general 459 12 0 . 114593 6 . 63 0 . 0000 insp _ network 473 13 0 . 114593 6 . 63 0 . 0000 si _ hijack 191 14 0 . 099598 5 . 04 0 . 0000 sw _ other 464 15 0 . 10898 5 . 36 0 . 0000 insp _ upgrade 375 16 0 . 157197 10 . 18 0 . 0000 dim _ monitor 568 17 0 . 120233 5 . 88 0 . 0000 dim _ network 340 18 0 . 102693 4 . 77 0 . 0000 dim _ bios 322 19 0 . 126023 6 . 86 0 . 0000 dim _ audio 428 20 0 . 150582 8 . 01 0 . 0000 insp _ cdrom 393 21 0 . 083877 3 . 23 0 . 0013 insp _ bios 240 22 0 . 121942 5 . 82 0 . 0000 latit _ general 324 23 0 . 089784 3 . 82 0 . 0001 si _ sysperf 289 24 0 . 095645 5 . 54 0 . 0000 insp _ power 453 25 0 . 065536 2 . 11 0 . 0346 si _ newusers 203 26 0 . 155993 6 . 82 0 . 0000 A940 248 27 0 . 063897 2 . 23 0 . 0261 si _ wireless 198 28 0 . 078311 3 . 09 0 . 0020 dim _ printer 255 29 0 . 099261 3 . 43 0 . 0006 sw _ office2000 209 30 0 . 157506 6 . 15 0 . 0000 insp _ audio 232 31 0 . 122804 4 . 26 0 . 0000 oplex _ other 181 32 0 . 148981 3 . 22 0 . 0013 oplex _ upgrade 75 33 0 . 11887 4 . 65 0 . 0000 insp _ periph 238 34 0 . 155822 7 . 46 0 . 0000 dellpda 293 35 0 . 2528 7 . 80 0 . 0000 cc _ dpa 131 36 0 . 082262 3 . 75 0 . 0002 aximgensw 261 37 0 . 102628 4 . 72 0 . 0000 insp _ input 295 38 0 . 052776 1 . 91 0 . 0564 latit _ video 204 39 0 . 163589 4 . 28 0 . 0000 latit _ harddrive 108 40 0 . 180173 5 . 06 0 . 0000 sw _ win98 151 41 0 . 135766 6 . 00 0 . 0000 pes _ hardrive 243 42 0 . 109525 2 . 51 0 . 0121 cc _ pre _ sales 97 43 0 . 064326 2 . 51 0 . 0120 pes _ other 195 44 0 . 094418 3 . 14 0 . 0017 latit _ network 161 45 0 . 095211 1 . 88 0 . 0599 latit _ bios 80 46 0 . 138918 3 . 63 0 . 0003 si _ digvideo 122 47 0 . 117886 4 . 15 0 . 0000 S2500 153 48 0 . 138689 2 . 76 0 . 0058 latit _ upgrade 76 49 0 . 068479 0 . 73 0 . 4635 other _ sp 70 50 0 . 105379 3 . 65 0 . 0003 dim _ input 176 θ 102 No t P Value Board Name Number of Members 51 0 . 178386 5 . 23 0 . 0000 dce _ W1700LCD 114 52 0 . 118797 2 . 68 0 . 0074 insp _ modem 76 53 0 . 130058 2 . 70 0 . 0070 oplex _ harddrive 68 54 0 . 106904 2 . 60 0 . 0094 latit _ cdrom 94 55 0 . 009444 0 . 25 0 . 7992 latit _ power 106 56 0 . 029167 0 . 65 0 . 5128 oplex _ bios 73 57 0 . 098945 2 . 05 0 . 0404 oplex _ video 66 58 0 . 041091 1 . 39 0 . 1648 aximwireless 144 59 0 . 060121 1 . 70 0 . 0897 sw _ xpmedia 106 60 0 . 163172 4 . 25 0 . 0000 pw _ other 95 61 0 . 100673 2 . 98 0 . 0029 pes _ win2003 115 62 0 . 147797 4 . 44 0 . 0000 pes _ oms 106 63 0 . 070565 1 . 83 0 . 0672 latit _ input 99 64 0 . 097789 2 . 30 0 . 0217 latit _ periph 88 65 0 . 075073 1 . 83 0 . 0672 pes _ upgrade 84 66 0 . 159912 3 . 91 0 . 0001 sw _ linux 81 67 0 . 159673 4 . 27 0 . 0000 pc _ managed 85 68 0 . 181546 3 . 07 0 . 0022 sw _ win20 61 69 0 . 135384 3 . 41 0 . 0007 pv _ tape 79 70 - 0 . 032656 - 0 . 59 0 . 5520 oplex _ network 50 71 - 0 . 079105 - 1 . 18 0 . 2401 oplex _ cdrom 39 72 0 . 114387 2 . 09 0 . 0366 pw _ upgrade 49 73 0 . 056278 0 . 96 0 . 3349 pv _ raid 40 74 0 . 144492 2 . 25 0 . 0250 pw _ video 37 75 0 . 143604 2 . 46 0 . 0142 pv _ fibchan 36 76 - 0 . 032902 - 0 . 79 0 . 4310 pes _ linux 69 77 0 . 111405 2 . 21 0 . 0274 pv _ nas 50 78 0 . 051157 0 . 91 0 . 3621 proj _ 2200MP 42 79 0 . 108035 2 . 30 0 . 0215 sw _ mediaexp 61 80 - 0 . 054173 - 0 . 75 0 . 4543 latit _ audio 40 81 0 . 040493 0 . 51 0 . 6068 oplex _ audio 30 82 0 . 040493 0 . 51 0 . 6068 sw _ dellsup 34 83 0 . 040493 0 . 51 0 . 6068 pw _ harddrive 28 84 - 0 . 08033 - 1 . 36 0 . 1754 pes _ bios 42 85 0 . 059549 0 . 88 0 . 3767 pes _ backup 32 86 0 . 059549 0 . 88 0 . 3767 oplex _ printer 20 87 - 0 . 004902 - 0 . 08 0 . 9362 pes _ win2k 35 88 - 0 . 004902 - 0 . 08 0 . 9362 si _ audedit 33 89 - 0 . 018886 - 0 . 20 0 . 8383 pw _ bios 22 90 - 0 . 047945 - 0 . 66 0 . 5094 pes _ othersft 27 91 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pes _ network 31 92 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pes _ rack 28 93 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pw _ raid 12 94 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 oplex _ input 26 95 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 latit _ modem 22 96 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 commfb 16 97 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 si _ hmtheatre 31 98 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pw _ scsi 11 99 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pes _ wnts 16 100 - 0 . 098891 - 1 . 44 0 . 1502 pw _ audio 14 θ 103 Figure 11 Significance of Habit Effect vs . Board Size - 2 . 00 2 . 00 6 . 00 10 . 00 14 . 00 18 . 00 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Number of Members t S t a t i s t i c Figure 12 Habit Effects vs . Board Size - 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Number of Members H a b i t E ff ec t s 104 Another important finding is that the relationship between habit effect and community size is not linear . Once community size is large enough , the significance of habit effect becomes flatting . Community size itself will not promote the formation of habit . It is each member’s activities that determine the formation of habit . 6 . 3 Estimation of Cumulative effect One important feature of habit is that it is the accumulated effect of repeated behavior that determines the formation of habit . For a habit to be formed , the same activity has to be repeated sufficient times . Over time , when the activity has been repeated many time , the accumulated effects will cause the formation of habit . Thus , if online community participation is habitual by nature , the accumulated number of postings over a relatively long time period ( for example , 8 weeks ) should have better predicative power than the number of postings in a single week . This is because the larger the accumulated number of postings is , the more likely habit will have been formed . Once a member’s habit of participation is formed , his future participation behavior could be relatively stable and thus easier to forecast . 105 To test this effect , we estimate the following model : t i q , = α + θ 1 , − t i q + 1 β 1 , − t i qinit + 2 β 1 , − t i qfollow + 3 β 1 , _ − t i rspns qrecd + 10 β 1 , * − t i q drank + 11 β i t ( 20 ) Where t i q , = ∑ − = − 1 0 , n j j t i P , n = 4 , 5 , …… , 18 ; t = 5 , 6 , …… , 25 1 , − t i q = ∑ = − n j j t i P 1 , , n = 4 , 5 , …… , 18 ; t = 5 , 6 , …… , 25 1 , − t i qinit = ∑ = − n j j t i init 1 , , n = 4 , 5 , …… , 18 ; t = 5 , 6 , …… , 25 1 , − t i qfollow = ∑ = − n j j t i follow 1 , , n = 4 , 5 , …… , 18 ; t = 5 , …… , 25 1 , _ − t i rspns qrecd = ∑ = − n j j t i rspns recd 1 , _ , n = 4 , 5 , …… , 18 ; t = 5 , 6 , …… , 25 t i P , represents the total number of postings by member i in period t t i init , represents the number of initial postings posted by member i in period t 106 t i follow , represents the number of follow up postings by member i to his or her original postings in period t t i rspns recd , _ represents the number of responses received by member i to his or her initial posting in period t 1 , * − t i q drank is the intersection between 1 , − t i q and dummy variable of ranks i t represents the number of weeks The number of accumulated weeks used in equation ( 20 ) ranges from 4 weeks to 18 weeks . The results are shown is Figure 13 and 14 . Figure 13 shows the R - squared obtained by using different number of accumulated weeks . Figure 14 shows the estimates of θ . These results show that as the number of accumulated weeks increases , the predictive power of the model increases . Accumulation of postings over a longer time period does have better forecasting power than the number of postings in a single week . 107 Figure 13 R - Squared for Various Numbers of Accumulated Weeks 0 . 82 0 . 84 0 . 86 0 . 88 0 . 9 0 . 92 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Number of Accumulated Weeks R - S qu a r e d Figure 14 Estimates of θ for Various Number of Accumulated Weeks 0 . 6000 0 . 7000 0 . 8000 0 . 9000 1 . 0000 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Number of Accumulated Weeks C o e ff i c i e n t s 108 6 . 4 Estimation of the threshold 6 . 4 . 1 Estimation of the threshold In section 6 . 2 , I have shown that in general the past participation behavior has positive effects on the posting decisions at the current time . But for a habit to form , community members have to accumulate sufficient posting experience . That is , there must be a threshold of repetitions for a habit to form . In this section , I discuss the methodology to estimate the threshold . The logic is that if there is a threshold of repetitions for habit to be formed , then members who have already accumulated sufficient postings ( the accumulated number of postings has reached the threshold ) will behave differently from those whose postings have not reached the threshold . I divide the entire time frame ( 6 month ) into the first half and the second half . In each period , I calculate the numbers of accumulated postings by each member . If a member’ accumulated postings reach the threshold in the first period , his posting behavior in the second half should be stable ( e . g . continuing to post since the habit of posting is formed ) . If a member’s accumulated postings do not reach the threshold in the first period , his behavior in the second half will be more random . The goal is to find the threshold which can explain such posting behavior the best . 109 I estimate the following model . after i P , = α + 1 α prior i P , I [ prior i P , < threshold P ] + 2 α prior i P , I [ prior i P , > threshold P ] + 1 β prior i init , + 2 β prior i follow , + 3 β prior i rspns recd , _ + 9 β i rank dummy _ ( 21 ) Where I [ prior i P , < threshold P ] = ⎩⎨⎧ < Otherwise P P if threshold prior i 0 1 , I [ prior i P , > threshold P ] = ⎩⎨⎧ > Otherwise P P if threshold prior i 0 1 , after i P , represents the total postings by member i after the accumulating period prior i P , represents the total postings by member i before the accumulating period threshold P is the threshold prior i init , represents the number of initial postings posted by member i before the accumulating period 110 prior i follow , represents the number of follow up postings by member i to his or her original postings before the accumulating period prior i rspns recd , _ represents the number of responses received by member i to his or her initial posting before the accumulating period i rank dummy _ , which is a dummy variable indicating if a member is a high - ranked member . A low - ranked member is a “bronze” member and a high - ranked member is a member ranked “silver” or above threshold P represents the threshold . The correct value of threshold P should generate the highest R - squared because the correct value of threshold P explains the data the best . Before estimating threshold P , I need to decide how long should the first half period be and how long should be the second half be . There are two considerations . First , members have different speeds of posting . Some members contribute many postings in a shorter period while others need more time to provide the same number of postings . As a result , it takes a shorter time for some members to reach the threshold while it takes a longer time for others to 111 reach the threshold . The length of the first half period should be long enough so that a sufficient number of members can reach the threshold . Second , the second half period should be long enough so that there is sufficient time to observe members’ behavior . To find the optimal cut off point which can balance these two considerations , I estimate equation ( 21 ) by setting the first half period ranging from 8 weeks to 16 weeks . The results are shown in Appendix 1 . Table 15 shows the R - squared estimated using various threshold values and various numbers of accumulated weeks ( for the first half period ) . Figure 20 - 27 plot the R - squared against different values of threshold . We can see that when the number of accumulated weeks for the first half is less than 12 , the findings are not stable . This is because there are no sufficient members whose postings can reach the threshold . When the number of accumulated weeks is larger than 13 , the findings are stable . We choose to set the length of the first half period of 16 weeks . The descriptive statistics are shown in Table 12 . 112 Table 12 Descriptive Statistics in Equation ( 21 ) Variables n Min Max Mean Std number of postings in the first 16 weeks 116525 0 555 4 . 69 25 . 17 number of follow up postings in the first 16 weeks 116525 0 10 0 . 44 1 . 02 number of provided responses in the first 16 weeks 116525 0 555 3 . 59 25 . 13 number of initial postings in the first 16 weeks 116525 0 11 0 . 74 0 . 94 number of resceived responses in the first 16 weeks 116525 0 40 2 . 05 3 . 12 number of postings after the first 16 weeks 116525 0 464 2 . 21 16 . 05 number of follow up postings after the first 16 weeks 116525 0 7 0 . 19 0 . 70 number of provided responses after the first 16 weeks 116525 0 464 1 . 78 15 . 98 number of initial postings after the first 16 weeks 116525 0 7 0 . 27 0 . 64 number of resceived responses after the first 16 weeks 116525 0 24 0 . 80 2 . 15 Bronze 116525 0 1 0 . 91 0 . 29 Silver 116525 0 1 0 . 06 0 . 24 Gold 116525 0 1 0 . 02 0 . 15 Diamond 116525 0 1 0 . 00 0 . 06 Platinum 116525 0 1 0 . 01 0 . 08 To estimate equation ( 21 ) , various values of threshold P have been tried . The values of threshold P that have been tried range from 1 to 400 . Table 13 and Figure 15 show the estimated R - squared . Figure 16 shows the estimates of 1 α and 2 α . Figure 17 shows the t - statistics of estimates of 1 α and 2 α . Detailed values of estimates of 1 α and 2 α are shown in Appendix 2 . From Table 13 and Figure 15 , we can see that R - squared reaches the highest point when threshold P equals about 150 , indicating that the threshold is about 150 . 113 Table 13 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared 1 0 . 7274 51 0 . 7332 101 0 . 7357 151 0 . 7571 2 0 . 7274 52 0 . 7336 102 0 . 7358 152 0 . 7506 3 0 . 7274 53 0 . 7336 103 0 . 7358 153 0 . 7506 4 0 . 7275 54 0 . 7324 104 0 . 7358 154 0 . 7506 5 0 . 7275 55 0 . 7324 105 0 . 7358 155 0 . 7506 6 0 . 7275 56 0 . 7324 106 0 . 7358 156 0 . 7506 7 0 . 7275 57 0 . 7324 107 0 . 7358 157 0 . 7506 8 0 . 7277 58 0 . 7329 108 0 . 7365 158 0 . 7506 9 0 . 7277 59 0 . 7329 109 0 . 7365 159 0 . 7506 10 0 . 7283 60 0 . 7334 110 0 . 7386 160 0 . 7506 11 0 . 7283 61 0 . 7334 111 0 . 7386 161 0 . 7506 12 0 . 7286 62 0 . 7324 112 0 . 7399 162 0 . 7506 13 0 . 7286 63 0 . 7324 113 0 . 7399 163 0 . 7506 14 0 . 7291 64 0 . 7324 114 0 . 7399 164 0 . 7506 15 0 . 7291 65 0 . 7324 115 0 . 7399 165 0 . 7506 16 0 . 7295 66 0 . 7343 116 0 . 7399 166 0 . 7506 17 0 . 7295 67 0 . 7343 117 0 . 7399 167 0 . 7506 18 0 . 7304 68 0 . 7343 118 0 . 7404 168 0 . 7506 19 0 . 7304 69 0 . 7343 119 0 . 7404 169 0 . 7506 20 0 . 73 70 0 . 7343 120 0 . 7404 170 0 . 7506 21 0 . 73 71 0 . 7343 121 0 . 7404 171 0 . 7506 22 0 . 7303 72 0 . 7346 122 0 . 7404 172 0 . 7506 23 0 . 7303 73 0 . 7346 123 0 . 7404 173 0 . 7506 24 0 . 7308 74 0 . 7346 124 0 . 7404 174 0 . 7506 25 0 . 7308 75 0 . 7346 125 0 . 7404 175 0 . 7506 26 0 . 7314 76 0 . 7357 126 0 . 7404 176 0 . 7506 27 0 . 7314 77 0 . 7357 127 0 . 7404 177 0 . 7506 28 0 . 7315 78 0 . 7357 128 0 . 7404 178 0 . 7506 29 0 . 7315 79 0 . 7357 129 0 . 7404 179 0 . 7506 30 0 . 7315 80 0 . 7357 130 0 . 7404 180 0 . 7506 31 0 . 7315 81 0 . 7357 131 0 . 7404 181 0 . 7506 32 0 . 7319 82 0 . 7357 132 0 . 7404 182 0 . 7506 33 0 . 7319 83 0 . 7357 133 0 . 7404 183 0 . 7506 34 0 . 7319 84 0 . 7357 134 0 . 7434 184 0 . 7517 35 0 . 7319 85 0 . 7357 135 0 . 7434 185 0 . 7517 36 0 . 7322 86 0 . 7357 136 0 . 7467 186 0 . 7517 37 0 . 7322 87 0 . 7357 137 0 . 7467 187 0 . 7517 38 0 . 7327 88 0 . 7357 138 0 . 7467 188 0 . 7517 39 0 . 7327 89 0 . 7357 139 0 . 7467 189 0 . 7517 40 0 . 733 90 0 . 7357 140 0 . 7497 190 0 . 7517 41 0 . 733 91 0 . 7357 141 0 . 7497 191 0 . 7517 42 0 . 733 92 0 . 7357 142 0 . 7534 192 0 . 7517 43 0 . 733 93 0 . 7357 143 0 . 7534 193 0 . 7517 44 0 . 7324 94 0 . 7357 144 0 . 7571 194 0 . 7517 45 0 . 7324 95 0 . 7357 145 0 . 7571 195 0 . 7517 46 0 . 7324 96 0 . 7357 146 0 . 7571 196 0 . 7517 47 0 . 7324 97 0 . 7357 147 0 . 7571 197 0 . 7517 48 0 . 7324 98 0 . 7357 148 0 . 7571 198 0 . 7517 49 0 . 7324 99 0 . 7357 149 0 . 7571 199 0 . 7517 50 0 . 7332 100 0 . 7357 150 0 . 7571 200 0 . 7517 114 Table 13 ( continued ) Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared Threshold R - Squared 201 0 . 7517 251 0 . 7464 301 0 . 7424 351 0 . 7424 202 0 . 743 252 0 . 7464 302 0 . 7424 352 0 . 7424 203 0 . 743 253 0 . 7464 303 0 . 7424 353 0 . 7424 204 0 . 743 254 0 . 7464 304 0 . 7424 354 0 . 7424 205 0 . 743 255 0 . 7464 305 0 . 7424 355 0 . 7424 206 0 . 7464 256 0 . 7464 306 0 . 7424 356 0 . 7424 207 0 . 7464 257 0 . 7464 307 0 . 7424 357 0 . 7424 208 0 . 7464 258 0 . 7464 308 0 . 7424 358 0 . 7424 209 0 . 7464 259 0 . 7464 309 0 . 7424 359 0 . 7424 210 0 . 7464 260 0 . 7464 310 0 . 7424 360 0 . 7320 211 0 . 7464 261 0 . 7464 311 0 . 7424 361 0 . 7320 212 0 . 7464 262 0 . 7464 312 0 . 7424 362 0 . 7300 213 0 . 7464 263 0 . 7464 313 0 . 7424 363 0 . 7300 214 0 . 7464 264 0 . 7464 314 0 . 7424 364 0 . 7300 215 0 . 7464 265 0 . 7464 315 0 . 7424 365 0 . 7386 216 0 . 7464 266 0 . 7464 316 0 . 7424 366 0 . 7386 217 0 . 7464 267 0 . 7464 317 0 . 7424 367 0 . 7386 218 0 . 7464 268 0 . 7464 318 0 . 7424 368 0 . 7386 219 0 . 7464 269 0 . 7464 319 0 . 7424 369 0 . 7386 220 0 . 7464 270 0 . 7345 320 0 . 7424 370 0 . 7386 221 0 . 7464 271 0 . 7345 321 0 . 7424 371 0 . 7386 222 0 . 7464 272 0 . 7345 322 0 . 7424 372 0 . 7386 223 0 . 7464 273 0 . 7345 323 0 . 7424 373 0 . 7386 224 0 . 7464 274 0 . 7368 324 0 . 7424 374 0 . 7386 225 0 . 7464 275 0 . 7368 325 0 . 7424 375 0 . 7386 226 0 . 7464 276 0 . 7368 326 0 . 7424 376 0 . 7386 227 0 . 7464 277 0 . 7368 327 0 . 7424 377 0 . 7386 228 0 . 7464 278 0 . 7368 328 0 . 7424 378 0 . 7386 229 0 . 7464 279 0 . 7368 329 0 . 7424 379 0 . 7386 230 0 . 7464 280 0 . 7425 330 0 . 7424 380 0 . 7386 231 0 . 7464 281 0 . 7425 331 0 . 7424 381 0 . 7386 232 0 . 7464 282 0 . 7425 332 0 . 7424 382 0 . 7386 233 0 . 7464 283 0 . 7425 333 0 . 7424 383 0 . 7386 234 0 . 7464 284 0 . 7425 334 0 . 7424 384 0 . 7386 235 0 . 7464 285 0 . 7425 335 0 . 7424 385 0 . 7386 236 0 . 7464 286 0 . 7424 336 0 . 7424 386 0 . 7386 237 0 . 7464 287 0 . 7424 337 0 . 7424 387 0 . 7386 238 0 . 7464 288 0 . 7424 338 0 . 7424 388 0 . 7386 239 0 . 7464 289 0 . 7424 339 0 . 7424 389 0 . 7386 240 0 . 7464 290 0 . 7424 340 0 . 7424 390 0 . 7386 241 0 . 7464 291 0 . 7424 341 0 . 7424 391 0 . 7386 242 0 . 7464 292 0 . 7424 342 0 . 7424 392 0 . 7386 243 0 . 7464 293 0 . 7424 343 0 . 7424 393 0 . 7386 244 0 . 7464 294 0 . 7424 344 0 . 7424 394 0 . 7386 245 0 . 7464 295 0 . 7424 345 0 . 7424 395 0 . 7386 246 0 . 7464 296 0 . 7424 346 0 . 7424 396 0 . 7386 247 0 . 7464 297 0 . 7424 347 0 . 7424 397 0 . 7386 248 0 . 7464 298 0 . 7424 348 0 . 7424 398 0 . 7386 249 0 . 7464 299 0 . 7424 349 0 . 7424 399 0 . 7386 250 0 . 7464 300 0 . 7424 350 0 . 7424 400 0 . 7386 115 Figure 15 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 0 . 76 1 20 39 58 77 96 115 134 153 172 191 210 229 248 267 286 305 324 343 362 381 400 Threshold R - S qu a r e d Figure 16 Estimates of 1 α and 2 α 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 1 20 39 58 77 96 115 134 153 172 191 210 229 248 267 286 305 324 343 362 381 400 Threshold C o e ff i c i e n t s a2 a1 116 Figure 17 t - statistics of 1 α and 2 α 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 1 20 39 58 77 96 115 134 153 172 191 210 229 248 267 286 305 324 343 362 381 400 Threshold t - s t a t i s t i c a2 a1 6 . 4 . 2 Estimation of confidence intervals In the above section , I find that R - squared reaches the highest value when threshold P has value of about 150 . This indicates that the value of the threshold is about 150 . But a point estimate of the threshold is not enough . We need to understand how reasonable the estimate is . That is , we need to know the variance of the estimate . We adopt the bootstrap procedure to estimate the confidence interval of the threshold . 117 The method of bootstrapping was developed to empirically estimate the distribution of a statistic when its theoretical distribution is not available ( Efron , 1979 , 1994 ) . The basic idea is that the approach assumes the data we observed are a random sample of the population . The bootstrap then generates many samples of the same size by repeatedly taking samples ( with replacement ) from the data . The new generated samples can be used to estimate the variance of the sample mean . I repeatedly draw 500 samples from the original data and estimate equation ( 21 ) 500 times to find values of threshold P that provides the highest R - square . In this way , I find the sampling distribution of the threshold which is shown in Figure 18 . The descriptive statistics are shown in Table 14 . We can see that the sampling mean is 149 . 7 and the standard deviation is 4 . 74 . Based on this information , the 95 % confidence interval of the threshold can be calculated as 149 . 7 ± 4 . 74 = ( 141 , 158 ) . 118 Figure 18 Sampling Distribution of the Threshold Table 14 Descriptive Statistics of Sampling Distribution of the Threshold n Min 1stQ Median Mean 3rdQ Max Std . Dev 3712 134 147 149 149 . 7 152 167 4 . 74 119 Chapter 7 Discussion 7 . 1 Discussion of results The primary objective of this dissertation is to examine the effect of habit on online community participation . I propose that online community participation is habitual . Past participation behavior can positively influence community members’ current participation decisions . Once the participation habit is formed , community members are more likely to participate . In addition , I argue that a sufficient number of repetitions—or a threshold—is required for the participation habit to be formed . In this section , I will discuss in detail each hypothesis and the empirical results . Table 15 summarizes all the hypotheses and empirical results . Hypothesis 1 proposes that there is a significant positive relationship between past and current posting behavior . The more a community member posted in the past , the more likely the member will post at the current time . I test this hypothesis by estimating equation ( 17 ) , the posting equation . It is derived from the utility function incorporating a habit component . I aim to test if θ is significantly positive . In equation ( 17 ) , the effects of several factors are 120 controlled . The estimated value of θ is 0 . 1314 with a significance level of 10 percent . Thus , I conclude that Hypothesis 1 is supported . Hypothesis 2 is related to Hypothesis 1 . It proposes that posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on current posting behavior . To test this hypothesis , I examine whether θ < 1 . When θ < 1 , the influence of past behavior will be declining over several periods . Since the estimated value of θ is 0 . 1314 , Hypothesis 2 is supported . Hypothesis 3 is about the relationship between community size and the habit effect . It proposes that when an online community is relatively small , an increase in community size has significant positive impacts on habit effects ; when an online community is sufficiently large , an increase in community size has limited impacts on habit effects . To test this hypothesis , we estimate equation ( 17 ) for each individual discussion board and compare the estimated value of θ to community size . From Table 11 and Figure 12 , we can clearly find a curvilear relationship between these two variables . Thus , Hypothesis 3 is supported . Hypothesis 4 examines whether habit effects vary among different community members . It proposes that habit effects are stronger among high - ranked members than among low - ranked members . To test this hypothesis , I 121 include an interaction term , rank * 1 , − t i P , into equation ( 17 ) and examine whether the coefficient of this interaction is significantly positive . The estimated coefficient is 0 . 2829 . That means the high - ranked members do have stronger habit effects than low - ranked members . Thus , Hypothesis 5 is supported . Besides examining the effect of habit , the dissertation also explores the conditions necessary for a habit to form . Hypothesis 5 proposes that a threshold of repetition is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Members whose accumulated postings reach the threshold are more likely to form a participation habit than those whose accumulated postings do not reach the threshold . I estimate equation ( 21 ) to find the threshold . Based on the bootstrapping approach , I am able to estimate the sampling distribution of threshold . Table 14 shows that the threshold is significantly greater than zero , supporting Hypothesis 5 . 122 Table 15 Summarized Hypothesis Tests Hypothesis Equation and Table Empirical Result Significance Level Conclusion Hypothesis 1 : There is a significant positive relationship between past and current posting behavior . The more a community member posted in the past , the more likely the member will post at the currrent time . Equation ( 17 ) Significantly positive 10 % Hypothesis is supported Hypothesis 2 : The posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on the current posting behavior . Equation ( 17 ) 10 % Hypothesis is supported Hypothesis 3 : The relationship between community size and habit effect is curvilear . When an online community is relatively small , an increase in community size has positive impacts on the habit effect . When an online community is sufficiently large , an increase in community size has limited impacts on the habit effect . Table ( 11 ) Curvilinear relationship between and community size N / A Hypothesis is supported Hypothesis 4 : Habit effects are stronger among highly - ranked members than among low - ranked members Equation ( 17 ) Significantly positive 10 % Hypothesis is supported Hypothesis 5 : A threshold of repetitions is required for individuals to develop a participation habit . Members whose accumulated postings reach the threshold are more likely to form a participation habit than those whose accumulated postings do not reach the threshold . Equation ( 21 ) and Table ( 14 ) Sampling mean of threshold is 150 5 % Hypothesis is supported 1314 . 0 = θ 1 1314 . 0 0 < = < θ 2829 . 0 10 = β 123 7 . 2 Limitations Although this dissertation identifies the effects of habit on online community participation and articulates the importance of a threshold of repetitions for the formation of a habit , there are several limitations that limit the generalization of the findings . First , community members’ demographic variables are not available in the data set . Some demographic variables , such as age and education level , have been proven to affect community members’ willingness to participate . Without this information , the effects of these variables cannot be controlled . The only demographic variable available is each community member’s status , but just controlling for status may not be sufficient . Second , the detailed text content of each posting is not available in the data set . Only the number of postings and the order of those postings in a message string were recorded , not the content of those postings . Reciprocity is an important factor influencing members’ incentives to participate , and without the detailed text content , it is impossible to precisely control for the effect of reciprocity . Thus , I made assumptions to control for reciprocity . For example , I assumed that the first posting of each message string is always a question and subsequent postings are answers . 124 Third , competition from similar communities should be considered . As information technology has developed , online communities with similar functions have become common . As a result , individuals have options to switch from one community to another . Thus , competition for members can significantly influence the stability of an online community , and this factor should be taken into account . This study assumes that there is no competing community . Fourth , the empirical context of this research is an online community hosted by an IT company . Thus , my findings can only be applied to similar communities . Generalization of findings to other type of online community may be questionable . 7 . 3 Areas for future research There are some potential areas for future research . In this research , I estimated a threshold of repetitions necessary for a participation habit to form . However , the threshold may be different for different members : some members may have lower thresholds while others have higher thresholds . Thus , the estimated value of threshold in this dissertation can be considered to be an average . It would be very interesting to develop a method to estimate a specific threshold for each member in a community . 125 I used a purely empirical method to estimate the threshold : searching many possibilities to find the one that fit the data the best . If a theoretical model could be developed to predict a theoretical value of the threshold , the finding would be more robust . In addition , as I have discussed in the limitation section , competition among similar online communities can be an important factor influencing members’ participation incentives . For future research , a comparison of multiple communities would add significant value to the current findings . 7 . 4 Conclusion Understanding participation behavior in online communities has become increasingly of interest to IS scholars . A central puzzle related to the existence and development of virtual communities is why community members are willing to share their valuable knowledge with other members for free . In other words , what are the factors influencing members’ decisions to participate in discussions ? By analyzing the participation behavior in a firm - hosted online community , the Dell Community , and using panel data reflecting 130 , 882 postings by 22 , 457 members over a six - month time period , this dissertation articulates how habit affects individuals’ participation behavior in online communities . In addition , I 126 propose the existence of a threshold for individuals to develop a participation habit , and empirically estimate the threshold . I found that a threshold does play a role in the formation of a participation habit . In the Dell Community , the threshold is about 150 messages . Once community members form a habit , it has significantly positive impacts on their participation behavior . In larger and active online communities , community members demonstrate a stronger habit effect . The effects of habit are also stronger among highly - ranked community members than among low - ranked community members . In addition , the results show that posting behavior in the more distant past has less impact on current posting decisions . This research extends the existing literature on online communities by considering the effects of a new factor , habit . It also deepens the current understanding of habit formation by articulating the role of a threshold on habit formation . 127 Appendix A Estimation of the Threshold Table 16 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 10 0 . 7382 0 . 7355 0 . 7072 0 . 7101 0 . 7124 0 . 7201 0 . 7179 0 . 7305 0 . 7283 30 0 . 7376 0 . 7364 0 . 7085 0 . 7122 0 . 7147 0 . 7229 0 . 7214 0 . 7342 0 . 7315 50 0 . 7427 0 . 7377 0 . 7081 0 . 7106 0 . 7174 0 . 7246 0 . 7212 0 . 7361 0 . 7332 70 0 . 7448 0 . 7394 0 . 7096 0 . 7123 0 . 7139 0 . 7286 0 . 7252 0 . 7379 0 . 7343 90 0 . 7398 0 . 7409 0 . 7096 0 . 7141 0 . 7154 0 . 7292 0 . 7261 0 . 739 0 . 7357 110 0 . 7437 0 . 7389 0 . 7172 0 . 7187 0 . 7163 0 . 7258 0 . 7299 0 . 7431 0 . 7386 130 0 . 7372 0 . 7446 0 . 7136 0 . 7132 0 . 7256 0 . 7265 0 . 7219 0 . 7448 0 . 7404 150 0 . 741 0 . 7498 0 . 7172 0 . 7197 0 . 7214 0 . 7401 0 . 734 0 . 7532 0 . 7571 170 0 . 7421 0 . 7344 0 . 7148 0 . 7197 0 . 7214 0 . 7277 0 . 734 0 . 7532 0 . 7506 190 0 . 7498 0 . 7344 0 . 7035 0 . 7176 0 . 7211 0 . 7247 0 . 7232 0 . 7458 0 . 7517 210 0 . 7498 0 . 7401 0 . 7035 0 . 7176 0 . 7197 0 . 7271 0 . 7239 0 . 7372 0 . 7464 230 0 . 7498 0 . 7401 0 . 7035 0 . 7176 0 . 7197 0 . 7271 0 . 7241 0 . 7372 0 . 7464 250 0 . 7533 0 . 7401 0 . 7092 0 . 7277 0 . 7197 0 . 7271 0 . 7241 0 . 7372 0 . 7464 270 0 . 7533 0 . 7446 0 . 7092 0 . 7277 0 . 7294 0 . 7296 0 . 7267 0 . 7432 0 . 7345 290 0 . 7533 0 . 7446 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7294 0 . 7316 0 . 7267 0 . 7432 0 . 7424 310 0 . 7533 0 . 7446 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7182 0 . 7316 0 . 7267 0 . 7432 0 . 7424 330 0 . 7641 0 . 7446 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7182 0 . 7316 0 . 7267 0 . 7432 0 . 7424 350 0 . 7641 0 . 7503 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7182 0 . 725 0 . 7267 0 . 7415 0 . 7424 370 0 . 7641 0 . 7503 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7182 0 . 725 0 . 7267 0 . 7415 0 . 7386 390 0 . 7641 0 . 7503 0 . 7133 0 . 7167 0 . 7182 0 . 725 0 . 7224 0 . 7415 0 . 7386 410 0 . 7641 0 . 7503 0 . 7133 0 . 7235 0 . 724 0 . 725 0 . 7224 0 . 7415 0 . 7386 Threshold Number of Accumulated weeks 128 Figure 19 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 8 weeks ) 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 0 . 76 0 . 77 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d Figure 20 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 9 weeks ) 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 0 . 76 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d 129 Figure 21 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 10 weeks ) 0 . 69 0 . 7 0 . 71 0 . 72 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d Figure 22 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 11 weeks ) 0 . 7 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d 130 Figure 23 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 12 weeks ) 0 . 7 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d Figure 24 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 13 weeks ) 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d 131 Figure 25 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 14 weeks ) 0 . 7 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d Figure 26 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 15 weeks ) 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 0 . 76 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d 132 Figure 27 R - Squared Estimated in Equation ( 21 ) ( accumulated 16 weeks ) 0 . 71 0 . 72 0 . 73 0 . 74 0 . 75 0 . 76 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 310 330 350 370 390 410 Threshold R - S qu a r e d 133 Appendix B Results of Estimation of the Threshold Table 17 Estimates of 1 α and 2 α vs . Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold 1 0 . 2980 0 . 5040 51 0 . 0959 0 . 5103 101 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 151 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 2 0 . 2980 0 . 5042 52 0 . 0886 0 . 5108 102 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 152 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 3 0 . 2980 0 . 5042 53 0 . 0886 0 . 5108 103 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 153 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 4 0 . 2980 0 . 5034 54 0 . 1483 0 . 5108 104 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 154 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 5 0 . 2980 0 . 5034 55 0 . 1483 0 . 5108 105 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 155 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 6 0 . 3614 0 . 5036 56 0 . 1483 0 . 5108 106 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 156 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 7 0 . 3614 0 . 5036 57 0 . 1483 0 . 5108 107 0 . 1393 0 . 5158 157 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 8 0 . 2732 0 . 5035 58 0 . 1388 0 . 5116 108 0 . 1419 0 . 5173 158 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 9 0 . 2732 0 . 5035 59 0 . 1388 0 . 5116 109 0 . 1419 0 . 5173 159 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 10 0 . 1443 0 . 5032 60 0 . 1285 0 . 5123 110 0 . 1192 0 . 5205 160 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 11 0 . 1443 0 . 5032 61 0 . 1285 0 . 5123 111 0 . 1192 0 . 5205 161 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 12 0 . 1446 0 . 5032 62 0 . 1690 0 . 5117 112 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 162 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 13 0 . 1446 0 . 5032 63 0 . 1690 0 . 5117 113 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 163 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 14 0 . 1027 0 . 5034 64 0 . 1690 0 . 5117 114 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 164 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 15 0 . 1027 0 . 5034 65 0 . 1690 0 . 5117 115 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 165 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 16 0 . 0808 0 . 5038 66 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 116 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 166 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 17 0 . 0808 0 . 5038 67 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 117 0 . 1150 0 . 5226 167 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 18 0 . 0315 0 . 5037 68 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 118 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 168 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 19 0 . 0315 0 . 5037 69 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 119 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 169 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 20 0 . 0781 0 . 5041 70 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 120 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 170 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 21 0 . 0781 0 . 5041 71 0 . 1407 0 . 5127 121 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 171 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 22 0 . 0704 0 . 5043 72 0 . 1395 0 . 5135 122 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 172 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 23 0 . 0704 0 . 5043 73 0 . 1395 0 . 5135 123 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 173 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 24 0 . 0486 0 . 5047 74 0 . 1395 0 . 5135 124 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 174 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 25 0 . 0486 0 . 5047 75 0 . 1395 0 . 5135 125 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 175 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 26 0 . 0408 0 . 5055 76 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 126 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 176 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 27 0 . 0408 0 . 5055 77 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 127 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 177 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 28 0 . 0374 0 . 5057 78 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 128 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 178 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 29 0 . 0374 0 . 5057 79 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 129 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 179 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 30 0 . 0475 0 . 5058 80 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 130 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 180 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 31 0 . 0475 0 . 5058 81 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 131 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 181 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 32 0 . 0451 0 . 5064 82 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 132 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 182 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 33 0 . 0451 0 . 5064 83 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 133 0 . 1224 0 . 5244 183 0 . 1235 0 . 5392 34 0 . 0472 0 . 5066 84 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 134 0 . 1067 0 . 5295 184 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 35 0 . 0472 0 . 5066 85 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 135 0 . 1067 0 . 5295 185 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 36 0 . 0510 0 . 5071 86 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 136 0 . 0869 0 . 5342 186 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 37 0 . 0510 0 . 5071 87 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 137 0 . 0869 0 . 5342 187 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 38 0 . 0553 0 . 5082 88 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 138 0 . 0869 0 . 5342 188 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 39 0 . 0553 0 . 5082 89 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 139 0 . 0869 0 . 5342 189 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 40 0 . 0508 0 . 5086 90 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 140 0 . 0761 0 . 5340 190 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 41 0 . 0508 0 . 5086 91 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 141 0 . 0761 0 . 5340 191 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 42 0 . 0508 0 . 5086 92 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 142 0 . 0639 0 . 5397 192 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 43 0 . 0508 0 . 5086 93 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 143 0 . 0639 0 . 5397 193 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 44 0 . 0909 0 . 5086 94 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 144 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 194 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 45 0 . 0909 0 . 5086 95 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 145 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 195 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 46 0 . 1052 0 . 5093 96 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 146 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 196 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 47 0 . 1052 0 . 5093 97 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 147 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 197 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 48 0 . 1052 0 . 5093 98 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 148 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 198 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 49 0 . 1052 0 . 5093 99 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 149 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 199 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 50 0 . 0959 0 . 5103 100 0 . 1236 0 . 5149 150 0 . 0585 0 . 5459 200 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 1 α 2 α 1 α 1 α 1 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 134 Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold 201 0 . 1367 0 . 5446 251 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 301 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 351 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 202 0 . 2235 0 . 5363 252 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 302 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 352 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 203 0 . 2235 0 . 5363 253 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 303 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 353 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 204 0 . 2235 0 . 5363 254 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 304 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 354 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 205 0 . 2235 0 . 5363 255 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 305 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 355 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 206 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 256 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 306 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 356 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 207 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 257 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 307 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 357 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 208 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 258 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 308 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 358 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 209 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 259 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 309 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 359 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 210 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 260 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 310 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 360 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 211 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 261 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 311 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 361 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 212 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 262 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 312 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 362 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 213 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 263 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 313 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 363 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 214 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 264 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 314 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 364 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 215 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 265 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 315 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 365 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 216 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 266 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 316 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 366 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 217 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 267 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 317 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 367 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 218 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 268 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 318 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 368 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 219 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 269 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 319 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 369 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 220 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 270 0 . 3421 0 . 5191 320 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 370 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 221 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 271 0 . 3421 0 . 5191 321 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 371 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 222 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 272 0 . 3421 0 . 5191 322 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 372 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 223 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 273 0 . 3421 0 . 5191 323 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 373 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 224 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 274 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 324 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 374 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 225 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 275 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 325 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 375 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 226 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 276 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 326 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 376 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 227 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 277 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 327 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 377 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 228 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 278 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 328 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 378 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 229 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 279 0 . 3353 0 . 5271 329 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 379 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 230 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 280 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 330 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 380 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 231 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 281 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 331 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 381 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 232 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 282 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 332 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 382 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 233 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 283 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 333 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 383 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 234 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 284 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 334 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 384 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 235 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 285 0 . 2941 0 . 5222 335 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 385 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 236 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 286 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 336 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 386 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 237 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 287 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 337 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 387 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 238 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 288 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 338 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 388 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 239 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 289 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 339 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 389 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 240 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 290 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 340 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 390 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 241 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 291 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 341 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 391 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 242 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 292 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 342 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 392 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 243 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 293 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 343 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 393 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 244 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 294 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 344 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 394 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 245 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 295 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 345 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 395 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 246 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 296 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 346 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 396 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 247 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 297 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 347 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 397 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 248 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 298 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 348 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 398 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 249 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 299 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 349 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 399 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 250 0 . 2193 0 . 5450 300 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 350 0 . 3064 0 . 5255 400 0 . 2985 0 . 5450 1 α 1 α 1 α 1 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 135 Table 18 t - statistic vs . Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold 1 1 . 23 20 . 57 51 1 . 33 21 . 35 101 2 . 19 21 . 74 151 1 . 69 25 . 03 2 1 . 23 20 . 42 52 1 . 25 21 . 41 102 2 . 59 21 . 76 152 3 . 63 24 . 03 3 1 . 23 20 . 42 53 1 . 25 21 . 41 103 2 . 59 21 . 76 153 3 . 63 24 . 03 4 1 . 04 20 . 43 54 2 . 18 21 . 26 104 2 . 59 21 . 76 154 3 . 63 24 . 03 5 1 . 04 20 . 43 55 2 . 18 21 . 26 105 2 . 59 21 . 76 155 3 . 63 24 . 03 6 1 . 68 20 . 48 56 2 . 18 21 . 26 106 2 . 59 21 . 76 156 3 . 63 24 . 03 7 1 . 68 20 . 48 57 2 . 18 21 . 26 107 2 . 59 21 . 76 157 3 . 63 24 . 03 8 1 . 50 20 . 52 58 2 . 09 21 . 34 108 2 . 76 21 . 87 158 3 . 63 24 . 03 9 1 . 50 20 . 52 59 2 . 09 21 . 34 109 2 . 76 21 . 87 159 3 . 63 24 . 03 10 0 . 90 20 . 55 60 1 . 97 21 . 42 110 2 . 43 22 . 19 160 3 . 63 24 . 03 11 0 . 90 20 . 55 61 1 . 97 21 . 42 111 2 . 43 22 . 19 161 3 . 63 24 . 03 12 1 . 03 20 . 57 62 2 . 64 21 . 28 112 2 . 44 22 . 38 162 3 . 63 24 . 03 13 1 . 03 20 . 57 63 2 . 64 21 . 28 113 2 . 44 22 . 38 163 3 . 63 24 . 03 14 0 . 78 20 . 63 64 2 . 64 21 . 28 114 2 . 44 22 . 38 164 3 . 63 24 . 03 15 0 . 78 20 . 63 65 2 . 64 21 . 28 115 2 . 44 22 . 38 165 3 . 63 24 . 03 16 0 . 65 20 . 70 66 2 . 38 21 . 52 116 2 . 44 22 . 38 166 3 . 63 24 . 03 17 0 . 65 20 . 70 67 2 . 38 21 . 52 117 2 . 44 22 . 38 167 3 . 63 24 . 03 18 0 . 27 20 . 76 68 2 . 38 21 . 52 118 2 . 70 22 . 46 168 3 . 63 24 . 03 19 0 . 27 20 . 76 69 2 . 38 21 . 52 119 2 . 70 22 . 46 169 3 . 63 24 . 03 20 0 . 70 20 . 76 70 2 . 38 21 . 52 120 2 . 70 22 . 46 170 3 . 63 24 . 03 21 0 . 70 20 . 76 71 2 . 38 21 . 52 121 2 . 70 22 . 46 171 3 . 63 24 . 03 22 0 . 65 20 . 80 72 2 . 41 21 . 58 122 2 . 70 22 . 46 172 3 . 63 24 . 03 23 0 . 65 20 . 80 73 2 . 41 21 . 58 123 2 . 70 22 . 46 173 3 . 63 24 . 03 24 0 . 47 20 . 87 74 2 . 41 21 . 58 124 2 . 70 22 . 46 174 3 . 63 24 . 03 25 0 . 47 20 . 87 75 2 . 41 21 . 58 125 2 . 70 22 . 46 175 3 . 63 24 . 03 26 0 . 42 20 . 97 76 2 . 19 21 . 74 126 2 . 70 22 . 46 176 3 . 63 24 . 03 27 0 . 42 20 . 97 77 2 . 19 21 . 74 127 2 . 70 22 . 46 177 3 . 63 24 . 03 28 0 . 38 20 . 99 78 2 . 19 21 . 74 128 2 . 70 22 . 46 178 3 . 63 24 . 03 29 0 . 38 20 . 99 79 2 . 19 21 . 74 129 2 . 70 22 . 46 179 3 . 63 24 . 03 30 0 . 50 21 . 00 80 2 . 19 21 . 74 130 2 . 70 22 . 46 180 3 . 63 24 . 03 31 0 . 50 21 . 00 81 2 . 19 21 . 74 131 2 . 70 22 . 46 181 3 . 63 24 . 03 32 0 . 49 21 . 06 82 2 . 19 21 . 74 132 2 . 70 22 . 46 182 3 . 63 24 . 03 33 0 . 49 21 . 06 83 2 . 19 21 . 74 133 2 . 70 22 . 46 183 3 . 63 24 . 03 34 0 . 52 21 . 08 84 2 . 19 21 . 74 134 2 . 52 22 . 93 184 4 . 24 24 . 22 35 0 . 52 21 . 08 85 2 . 19 21 . 74 135 2 . 52 22 . 93 185 4 . 24 24 . 22 36 0 . 58 21 . 12 86 2 . 19 21 . 74 136 2 . 15 23 . 42 186 4 . 24 24 . 22 37 0 . 58 21 . 12 87 2 . 19 21 . 74 137 2 . 15 23 . 42 187 4 . 24 24 . 22 38 0 . 67 21 . 22 88 2 . 19 21 . 74 138 2 . 15 23 . 42 188 4 . 24 24 . 22 39 0 . 67 21 . 22 89 2 . 19 21 . 74 139 2 . 15 23 . 42 189 4 . 24 24 . 22 40 0 . 62 21 . 26 90 2 . 19 21 . 74 140 1 . 97 23 . 83 190 4 . 24 24 . 22 41 0 . 62 21 . 26 91 2 . 19 21 . 74 141 1 . 97 23 . 83 191 4 . 24 24 . 22 42 0 . 62 21 . 26 92 2 . 19 21 . 74 142 1 . 75 24 . 42 192 4 . 24 24 . 22 43 0 . 62 21 . 26 93 2 . 19 21 . 74 143 1 . 75 24 . 42 193 4 . 24 24 . 22 44 1 . 16 21 . 21 94 2 . 19 21 . 74 144 1 . 69 25 . 03 194 4 . 24 24 . 22 45 1 . 16 21 . 21 95 2 . 19 21 . 74 145 1 . 69 25 . 03 195 4 . 24 24 . 22 46 1 . 39 21 . 23 96 2 . 19 21 . 74 146 1 . 69 25 . 03 196 4 . 24 24 . 22 47 1 . 39 21 . 23 97 2 . 19 21 . 74 147 1 . 69 25 . 03 197 4 . 24 24 . 22 48 1 . 39 21 . 23 98 2 . 19 21 . 74 148 1 . 69 25 . 03 198 4 . 24 24 . 22 49 1 . 39 21 . 23 99 2 . 19 21 . 74 149 1 . 69 25 . 03 199 4 . 24 24 . 22 50 1 . 33 21 . 35 100 2 . 19 21 . 74 150 1 . 69 25 . 03 200 4 . 24 24 . 22 1 α 2 α 1 α 1 α 1 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 136 Threshold Threshold Threshold Threshold 201 4 . 24 24 . 22 251 7 . 52 23 . 32 301 12 . 69 22 . 75 351 12 . 69 22 . 75 202 7 . 10 22 . 83 252 7 . 52 23 . 32 302 12 . 69 22 . 75 352 12 . 69 22 . 75 203 7 . 10 22 . 83 253 7 . 52 23 . 32 303 12 . 69 22 . 75 353 12 . 69 22 . 75 204 7 . 10 22 . 83 254 7 . 52 23 . 32 304 12 . 69 22 . 75 354 12 . 69 22 . 75 205 7 . 10 22 . 83 255 7 . 52 23 . 32 305 12 . 69 22 . 75 355 12 . 69 22 . 75 206 7 . 52 23 . 32 256 7 . 52 23 . 32 306 12 . 69 22 . 75 356 12 . 69 22 . 75 207 7 . 52 23 . 32 257 7 . 52 23 . 32 307 12 . 69 22 . 75 357 12 . 69 22 . 75 208 7 . 52 23 . 32 258 7 . 52 23 . 32 308 12 . 69 22 . 75 358 12 . 69 22 . 75 209 7 . 52 23 . 32 259 7 . 52 23 . 32 309 12 . 69 22 . 75 359 12 . 69 22 . 75 210 7 . 52 23 . 32 260 7 . 52 23 . 32 310 12 . 69 22 . 75 360 12 . 69 22 . 75 211 7 . 52 23 . 32 261 7 . 52 23 . 32 311 12 . 69 22 . 75 361 12 . 69 22 . 75 212 7 . 52 23 . 32 262 7 . 52 23 . 32 312 12 . 69 22 . 75 362 14 . 05 22 . 10 213 7 . 52 23 . 32 263 7 . 52 23 . 32 313 12 . 69 22 . 75 363 14 . 05 22 . 10 214 7 . 52 23 . 32 264 7 . 52 23 . 32 314 12 . 69 22 . 75 364 14 . 05 22 . 10 215 7 . 52 23 . 32 265 7 . 52 23 . 32 315 12 . 69 22 . 75 365 14 . 05 22 . 10 216 7 . 52 23 . 32 266 7 . 52 23 . 32 316 12 . 69 22 . 75 366 14 . 05 22 . 10 217 7 . 52 23 . 32 267 7 . 52 23 . 32 317 12 . 69 22 . 75 367 14 . 05 22 . 10 218 7 . 52 23 . 32 268 7 . 52 23 . 32 318 12 . 69 22 . 75 368 14 . 05 22 . 10 219 7 . 52 23 . 32 269 7 . 52 23 . 32 319 12 . 69 22 . 75 369 14 . 05 22 . 10 220 7 . 52 23 . 32 270 12 . 18 21 . 57 320 12 . 69 22 . 75 370 14 . 05 22 . 10 221 7 . 52 23 . 32 271 12 . 18 21 . 57 321 12 . 69 22 . 75 371 14 . 05 22 . 10 222 7 . 52 23 . 32 272 12 . 18 21 . 57 322 12 . 69 22 . 75 372 14 . 05 22 . 10 223 7 . 52 23 . 32 273 12 . 18 21 . 57 323 12 . 69 22 . 75 373 14 . 05 22 . 10 224 7 . 52 23 . 32 274 12 . 94 21 . 82 324 12 . 69 22 . 75 374 14 . 05 22 . 10 225 7 . 52 23 . 32 275 12 . 94 21 . 82 325 12 . 69 22 . 75 375 14 . 05 22 . 10 226 7 . 52 23 . 32 276 12 . 94 21 . 82 326 12 . 69 22 . 75 376 14 . 05 22 . 10 227 7 . 52 23 . 32 277 12 . 94 21 . 82 327 12 . 69 22 . 75 377 14 . 05 22 . 10 228 7 . 52 23 . 32 278 12 . 94 21 . 82 328 12 . 69 22 . 75 378 14 . 05 22 . 10 229 7 . 52 23 . 32 279 12 . 94 21 . 82 329 12 . 69 22 . 75 379 14 . 05 22 . 10 230 7 . 52 23 . 32 280 11 . 64 22 . 69 330 12 . 69 22 . 75 380 14 . 05 22 . 10 231 7 . 52 23 . 32 281 11 . 64 22 . 69 331 12 . 69 22 . 75 381 14 . 05 22 . 10 232 7 . 52 23 . 32 282 11 . 64 22 . 69 332 12 . 69 22 . 75 382 14 . 05 22 . 10 233 7 . 52 23 . 32 283 11 . 64 22 . 69 333 12 . 69 22 . 75 383 14 . 05 22 . 10 234 7 . 52 23 . 32 284 11 . 64 22 . 69 334 12 . 69 22 . 75 384 14 . 05 22 . 10 235 7 . 52 23 . 32 285 11 . 64 22 . 69 335 12 . 69 22 . 75 385 14 . 05 22 . 10 236 7 . 52 23 . 32 286 12 . 69 22 . 75 336 12 . 69 22 . 75 386 14 . 05 22 . 10 237 7 . 52 23 . 32 287 12 . 69 22 . 75 337 12 . 69 22 . 75 387 14 . 05 22 . 10 238 7 . 52 23 . 32 288 12 . 69 22 . 75 338 12 . 69 22 . 75 388 14 . 05 22 . 10 239 7 . 52 23 . 32 289 12 . 69 22 . 75 339 12 . 69 22 . 75 389 14 . 05 22 . 10 240 7 . 52 23 . 32 290 12 . 69 22 . 75 340 12 . 69 22 . 75 390 14 . 05 22 . 10 241 7 . 52 23 . 32 291 12 . 69 22 . 75 341 12 . 69 22 . 75 391 14 . 05 22 . 10 242 7 . 52 23 . 32 292 12 . 69 22 . 75 342 12 . 69 22 . 75 392 14 . 05 22 . 10 243 7 . 52 23 . 32 293 12 . 69 22 . 75 343 12 . 69 22 . 75 393 14 . 05 22 . 10 244 7 . 52 23 . 32 294 12 . 69 22 . 75 344 12 . 69 22 . 75 394 14 . 05 22 . 10 245 7 . 52 23 . 32 295 12 . 69 22 . 75 345 12 . 69 22 . 75 395 14 . 05 22 . 10 246 7 . 52 23 . 32 296 12 . 69 22 . 75 346 12 . 69 22 . 75 396 14 . 05 22 . 10 247 7 . 52 23 . 32 297 12 . 69 22 . 75 347 12 . 69 22 . 75 397 14 . 05 22 . 10 248 7 . 52 23 . 32 298 12 . 69 22 . 75 348 12 . 69 22 . 75 398 14 . 05 22 . 10 249 7 . 52 23 . 32 299 12 . 69 22 . 75 349 12 . 69 22 . 75 399 14 . 05 22 . 10 250 7 . 52 23 . 32 300 12 . 69 22 . 75 350 12 . 69 22 . 75 400 14 . 05 22 . 10 1 α 1 α 1 α 1 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 2 α 137 Bibliography Aarts , H . and A . Dijksterhuis , “Habits as Knowledge Structures : Automaticity in Goal - Directed Behavior” , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Vol . 78 , pp . 53 - 63 , 2000 . Ajzen , I . , “Nature and Operation of Attitudes” , Annual Review of Psychology , Vol . 52 , pp . 27 - 58 , 2001 . Amabile , T . , “Motivatial Synergy : Toward New Conceptualizations of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation in the Workplace” , Human Resource Management Review , Vol . 3 , No . 3 , pp . 185 - 201 , 1993 . Andreoni , J . “Giving with Impure Altruism : Applications to charity and Ricardian Equivalence” , Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 97 , No . 6 , pp . 1447 - 1458 , 1989 . Armstrong , A . and J . Hagel , “The Real Value of Online Communities” , Harvard Business Review , Vol . 73 , No . 3 , pp . 92 - 98 , 1996 . Asvanund , Atip , Karen Clay , Ramayya Krishnan , and Michael D . Smith , “An Empirical Analysis of Network Externalities in Peer - to - Peer Music - Sharing Networks” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 15 , No . 2 , pp . 155 - 174 , 2004 . Bandura , A . , Social Foundations of thought and Action , Prentice - Hall , Englewood - Cliffs , NJ , 1986 . 138 Bargh , J . A . , “The Four Horsemen of Automaticity : Awareness , Intention , Efficiency , and Control in Social Cognition” , in R . S . Wyer and T . K . Srull ( Eds ) , Handbook of Social Cognition , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum , 1994 . Bargh , J . A . , “Automaticity in Social Psychology” , in E . T . Higgins and A . W . Kruglanski ( Eds ) , Social Psychology : Handbook of Basic Principles , New York , NY : Guilford , 1996 . Becker , Gary S . , Michael Grossman , and Kevin M . Murphy , “An Empirical Analysis of Cigarette Addiction” , American Economic Review , Vol . 84 , No . 3 , pp . 396 - 418 , 1994 Becker , Gary S . and Kevin M . Murphy , “A Theory of Rational Addiction” , Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 96 , No . 4 , pp . 675 - 700 , 1988 . Bentler , P . M . and G . Speckart , “Models of Attitude - Behavior Relations” , Psychological Review , Vol . 86 , pp . 452 - 464 , 1979 . Bernheim , B . D . , “On the Voluntary and Involuntary Provision of Public Goods” , American Economic Review , Vol . 76 , No . 4 , pp . 789 - 793 , 1986 . Bock , G . W . , R . W . Zmud , Y . G . Kim , and J . N . Lee , “Behavioral Intention Formation in Knowledge Sharing : Examining the roles of Extrinsic Motivators , Social - Psychological Forces , and Organizational Climate” , MIS Quarterly , Vol . 29 , No . 1 , pp . 87 - 111 , 2005 . 139 Butler , Brian S . , “Membership Size , Communication Activity , and Sustainability : A Resource - Based Model of Online Social Structures” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 12 , No . 4 , pp . 346 - 362 , 2001 . Constant , David , Sara Kiesler , and Lee Sproull , “What’s Mine is Ours , or Is It ? A Study of Attitudes about Information Sharing” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 5 , pp400 - 421 , 1994 Donath , J . S . , “Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community” , in Communities in Cyberspace , M . A . Smith and P . Kollock ( Eds ) , Routledge , New York , pp . 29 - 59 , 1999 . Durham , Cathy and Dale Heien , “A Test of the Habit Formation Hypothesis Using Household Data” , Review of Economics and Statistics , Vol . 73 , No . 2 , pp . 189 - 199 , 1991 Durkheim , E . , The Division of Labor in Society , Translated by G . Simpson , New York : Free Press , 1893 . Dynan , Karen E . , “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences : Evidence from Panel Data” , American Economic Review , Vol . 90 , No . 3 , pp . 391 - 406 , 2000 . Eagly , A . H . and S . Chaiken , The Psychology of Attitudes , Fort Worth , TX : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , 1993 . Efron , Bradley , “Bootstrap Methods : Another Look at the Jackknife” , Annals of Statistics , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , pp . 1 - 26 , 1979 . 140 Efron , Bradley , An Introduction to the Bootstrap , Chapman and Hall / CRC , 1994 . Feichtinger , G . , A . Prskawetz , W . Herold and P . Zinner , “Habit Formation with Threshold Adjustment : Addiction May Imply Complex Dynamics” , Journal of Evolutionary Economics , Vol . 5 , pp . 157 - 172 , 1995 . Frohlich , N . and J . Oppenheimer , “I Get by with a Little Help from My Friends” , World Politics , Vol . 23 , pp . 104 - 120 , 1970 . Gefen , David , “TAM or Just Plain Habit : A Look at Experienced Online Shoppers” , Journal of End User Computing , Vol . 15 , No . 3 , pp . 1 - 13 , 2003 . Georgescu - Roegen , N . , “Choice , Expectations , and Measurement” , Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol . 68 , No . 3 , pp . 503 - 544 , 1954 . Glazer , A . and K . A . Konrad , “A Signaling Explanation for Charity” , American Economics Review , Vol . 86 , No . 4 , pp . 1019 - 1028 , 1996 . Golle , P . , K . Leyton _ Brown , I . Mironov , and M . Lillibridge , “Incentives for Sharing in Peer - to - Peer Networks” , Working Paper , Stanford University , 2001 . Gorman , W . M . , “Tastes , Habits and Choices” , International Economics Review , Vol . 8 , No . 2 , pp . 218 - 222 , 1967 . Granovetter , M . , “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior” , American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 83 , No . 6 , pp . 1420 - 1443 , 1978 . Granovetter , M . and R . Soong , “Threshold Models of Interpersonal Effects in Consumer Demand” , Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , Vol . 7 , pp . 83 - 99 , 1986 . 141 Gu , Bin and Sirkka Jarvenpaa , “Are Contributions to P2P Technical Forums Private or Public Goods ? – An Empirical Investigation” , working paper , 2003 . Gu , Bin , Prabhudev C . Konana , B . Rajagopalan , and M . Chen , “Competition Among Virtual Communities and User Valuation : The Case of Investor Communities” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 18 , pp68 - 85 , 2007 . Gu , Bin , Prabhudev Konana , Balaji Rajagopalan , Hsuan - Wei Michelle Chen , “Competition Among Virtual Communities and User Valuation : The Case of Investing - Related Communities” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 18 , No . 1 , pp . 68 - 85 , 2007 . Hallowell , R . , “Service on the Internet : The Effects of Physical Service on Scalability” , Harvard Business School Note , Vol . 9 , 2002 . Hausman , J . , “Specification Tests in Econometrics” , Econometirca , Vol . 46 , No . 6 , pp . 1251 - 71 , 1978 . Haveman , H . A . , “Organizational Size and Change : Diversification in the Savings and Loan Industry after Deregulation” , Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 38 , No . 1 , pp20 - 47 , 1993 . Heckhausen , H . and J . Beckmann , “Intention Action and Action Slips” , Psychological Review , Vol . 97 , pp . 36 - 48 , 1990 . Henkel , J . and E . von Hippel , “Welfare Implications of User Innovation” , Journal of Technology Transfer , Vol . 30 , pp . 73 - 87 , 2005 . 142 Hull , C . L . , Principles of Behavior : An Introduction to Behavior Theory , New York , NY : Appleton - Century - Crofts , 1943 . Iannacone , L . R . , “Addiction and Satiation” , Economics Letters , Vol . 21 , No . 1 , pp . 95 - 99 , 1986 . James , W . , The Principles of Psychology , Henry Holt & Co . , New York , 1890 . Jeppesen , L . B . and M . J . Molin , “Consumers as Co - Developers : Learning and Innovation outside the Firm” , Technology Analysis and Strategic Management , Vol . 15 , No . 3 , pp363 - 384 , 2003 . Jeppesen , Lars Bo and Lars Frederiksen , “Why Do Users Contribute to Firm - Hosted User Communities ? The Case of Computer = Controlled Music Instruments” , Organization Science , Vol . 17 , pp . 45 - 63 , 2006 Jones , C . . W . S . Hesterly , and S . P . Borgatti , “A General Theory of Network Governance : Exchange Conditions and Social Mechanisms” , Academy of Management Review , Vol . 22 , No . 4 , pp . 911 - 945 , 1997 . Kaempfer , W . H . and A . D . Lowenberg , “Using Threshold Models to Explain International Relations , “ Public Choice , Vol . 73 , pp . 419 - 443 , 1992 . Kankanhalli , A . , B . Tan , and K . K . Wei , “Contributing Knowledge to Electronic Knowledge Repositories : An Empirical Investigation” , MIS Quarterly , Vol . 29 , No . 1 , pp . 113 - 143 , 2005 . Keefe , B . , “Dell Tackling Demand for Tech Help” , Austin American Statesman , 2003 . 143 Kim , Sung S . and Naresh K . Malhotra , “A Longitudinal Model of Continued IS Use : An Integrative View of Four Mechanisms Underlying Postadoption Phenomna” , Management Science , Vol . 51 , No . 5 , pp . 741 - 755 , 2005 . Kollock , P . , “The Economies of Online Cooperation : Gifts and Public Goods in Cyberspace” , in Communities in Cyberspace , M . A . Smith and P . Kollock ( Eds ) , routledge , New York , pp . 220 - 239 , 1999 . Kraut , R . E . , W . Scherlis , T . Mukhopadhyay , J . Manning , S . Kiesler , “The HomeNet Field trial of residential Internet Services” , Communication ACM , Vol . 39 , No . 12 , pp55 - 63 , 1996 . Krishnan , R . , M . D . Smith , Z . Tang , and R . Telang , “The Virtual Commons : Why Free - Riding can be Tolerated in File Sharing Networks” , Working Paper , Canegie Mellon University , 2004 . Kuran , T . , ”Chameleon Voters and Public Choice” , Public Choice , Vol . 53 , No . 1 , pp . 53 - 78 , 1987 . LaFree , G . , “Declining Violent Crime Rates in the 1990 ' s : Predicting Crime Booms and Busts“ , Annual Review of Sociology , Vol . 25 , pp . 145 - 68 , 1999 . Lakhani , K . and E . von Hippel , “How Open Source Software Works : ‘Free’ User - to - User Assistance” , Research Policy , Vol . 32 , No . 6 , pp . 923 - 943 , 2003 . Langer , E . , “Minding Matters : the Consequences of Mindlessness - Mindfulness” , Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Vol . 22 , pp . 137 - 173 , 1989 . 144 Lee , Fion S . L . , Douglas Vogel , and Moez Limayem , “Virtual Community Informatics : What We Know and What We need to Know” , 35 th Hawaii International Conference on System Science , IEEE , Big Island , HI , 2863 - 2872 , 2002 . Limayem , Moez , Sabine Gabriele Hirt , and Christy M . K . Cheung , “How Habit Limits the Predictive Power of Intention : The Case of Information Systems Continuance” , MIS Quarterly , Vol . 31 , No . 4 , pp . 705 - 737 , 2007 Ma , Meng and Ritu Agarwal , “Through a Glass Darkly : Information Technology Design , Identity Verification , and Knowledge Contribution in Online Communities” , Information Systems Research , Vol . 18 , No . 1 , pp . 42 - 67 , 2007 . Macy , M . W . , “Chains of Cooperation : Threshold Effects in Collective Action” , American Sociological Review , Vol . 56 , No . 6 , pp . 730 - 747 , 1991 . Macy , M . W . , “Learning Theory and the Logic of Critical Mass” , American Sociological Review , Vol . 55 , No . 6 , pp . 809 - 826 , 1990 . Markus , M . L . , “Toward a Critical Mass Theory of Interactive Media : Universal Access , Interdependence and Diffusion” , Communication Research , Vol . 14 , pp . 491 - 511 , 1987 . Markus , M . L . and T . Connolly , “Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools” , Conference of Computer Supported Work , Association for Computer Machinery , New York , pp . 371 - 380 , 1990 . 145 Marwell , G . and P . Oliver , The Critical Mass in Collective Action : A Micro - Social Theory , Cambridge university press , New York , 1993 . McPherson , M . , “The Size of Voluntary Organizations” , Social forces , Vol . 61 , No . 4 , pp . 1045 - 1064 , 1983 . Milgram , S . , L . Bickman , and L . Berkowitz , “Note on the Drawing Power of Crowds of Different Sizes” , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Vol . 13 , pp . 79 - 82 , 1969 . Moon , J . Y . and L . Sproull , “Turning Love into Money : How Some Firms may Profit from Voluntary Electronic Customer Communities” , Working Paper , 2001 . Moreland , R . L . , and J . M . Levine , “Socialization in Small Groups : Temporal Changes in Individual - Group Interactions” , L . Berkowitz , ed . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Academic Press , New York , Vol . 15 , pp . 137 - 192 , 1982 . Morris , M . and C . Ogan , “The Internet as Mass Medium” , Journal of Communication , Vol . 46 , No . 1 , 1996 . Muellbauer , J . , “Habits , Rationality and Myopia in the Life Cycle Consumption Function” , Annales D’Economie et de Statistique , Vol . 0 , No . 9 , pp47 - 70 , 1988 . Nerlove , M . , “Distributed Lags and Demand Analysis for Agricultural and Other Commodities” , Agriculture Handbook , No . 141 , U . S . Department of Agriculture , 1958 . 146 Oliver , P . , “Rewards and Punishments as Selective Incentives for Collective Action : Theoretical Investigations’ , American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 85 , pp . 1356 - 1375 , 1980 . Oliver , P . and G . Marwell , “The Paradox of Group Size in Collective Action : A Theory of the Critical Mass II” , American Sociological Review , Vol . 53 , No . 1 , pp . 1 - 8 , 1988 . Oliver , P . , G . Marwell , and R . Teixeira , “A Theory of the Critical Mass I . Interdependence , Group Heterogeneity , and the Production of Collective Action” , American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 91 , No . 3 , pp . 522 - 556 , 1985 . Olson , M . , The Logic of Collective Action : Public Goods and the Theory of Groups , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1965 . Ouellette , J . A . and W . Wood , “Habit and Intention in Everyday Life : The Multiple Processes by Which Past Behavior Predicts Future Behavior” , Psychological Bulletin , Vol . 124 , No . 1 , pp . 54 - 74 , 1998 . Petty , R . E . , S . G . Harkins , K . D . Williams , and B . Latane , “The Effects of Group Size on Cognitive Effort and Evaluation” , Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , Vol . 3 , pp . 579 - 582 , 1977 . Pfeffer , J . , “Incentives in Organizations” , O . Williamson ed . Organization Theory , Oxford University Press , New York , 1990 . Pollak , Robert A . , “Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions” , Journal of Political Economy , Vol . 78 , No . 4 , pp745 - 763 , 1970 147 Rafaeli , Sheizaf and Robert J . LaRose , “Electronic Bulletin Boards and ‘Public Goods’ Explanations of Collaborative Mass Media” , Communication Research , Vol . 20 , No . 2 , pp . 277 - 297 , 1993 . Rheingold , H . , The Virtual Community , Addison - Wesley , MA . , 1993 . Rice , R . E . , “Communication Networking in Computer - Conferencing Systems : A Longitudinal Study of Group Roles and System Structure” , M . Burgoon , Ed . Communication Yearbook , Vol . 6 , Sage , Beverly Hills , CA . pp925 - 944 , 1982 . Ronis , D . L . , J . F . Yates , and J . P . Kirscht , “Attitudes , Decisions , and Habits as Determinants of Repeated Behavior” , in A . R . Pratkanis , S . J . Breckler , and A . G . Greenwald ( Eds ) , Attitude Structure and Function , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum , 1989 . Ryan , R . M . and E . L . Deci , “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations : Classic Definitions and New Directions” , Contemporary Educational Psychology , Vol . 25 , No . 1 , pp . 54 - 67 , 2000 . Simon , H . A . , “Bandwagon and Underdog Effects and the Possibility of Election Predictions” , Public Opinion Quarterly , Vol . 18 , No . 3 , pp . 245 - 253 , 1954 . Slater , P . E . , “Contrasting Correlates of Group Size” , Sociometry , Vol . 21 , pp . 129 - 139 , 1958 . Stigler , G . J . and G . S . Becker , “De gustibus non est disputandum” , American Economic review , Vol . 67 , No . 2 , pp . 76 - 90 , 1977 . 148 Stone , Richard , “The Changing Pattern of Consumption” , in Mathematics in the Social Sciences and Other Essays , Cambridge , MIT Press , 1966 . Thorn , Brian K . and Terry Connolly , “Discretionary Data Bases : A Theory and Some Experimental Findings” , Communication Research , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , pp . 512 - 528 , 1987 . Thorn , Brian K . and Terry Connolly , “Discretionary Data Bases” , J . Fulk , and C . Steinfield , Eds . Organizations and Communication Technology , Sage , Newbury Park , CA , 1990 . Triandis , H . C . , Interpersonal Behavior , Monterey , CA : Brooks / Cole , 1977 . Triandis , H . C . , “Values , Attitudes , and Interpersonal Behavior” , in H . E . Howe , Jr . and M . M . Page ( Eds ) , Nebraska Symposium on Motivation , 1979 , Lincoln , NE : University of Nebraska Press , 1980 . Verplanken , Bas and H . Aarts , “Habit , Attitude , and Planned Behavior : Is Habit an Empty Construct or an Interesting Case of Automaticity ? ” European Review of Social Psychology , Vol . 10 , pp . 101 - 134 , 1999 . Verplanken , Bas and Sheina Orbell , “Reflections on Past Behavior : A Self - Report Index of Habit Strength” , Journal of Applied Social Psychology , Vol . 33 , No . 6 , pp . 1313 - 1330 , 2003 . Wasko , M . McLure and S . Faraj , “It Is What One Does” : Why People Participate and Help Others in Electronic Communities of Practice” , Journal of Strategic Information Systems , Vol . 9 , pp . 155 - 173 , 2000 . 149 Wasko , Molly McLure and Samer Faraj , “Why Should I Share ? Examining Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice” , MIS Quarterly , Vol . 29 , Nol . 1 , pp . 35 - 57 , 2005 . Williams , R . L . and J . Cothrel , “Four Smart Ways to Run Online Communities” , Solan Management Review , Vol . 41 , No . 4 , pp . 81 - 91 , 2000 . Woittiez , Isolde and Arie Kapteyn , “Social Interactions and Habit Formation in a Model of Femal Labor Supply” , Journal of Public Economics , Vol . 70 , pp . 185 - 205 , 1998 . Wood , B . D . and A . Doan , “The Politics of Problem Definition : Applying and Testing Threshold Models , ” American Journal of Political Science , Vol . 46 , No . 4 , pp . 640 - 653 , 2003 . Wooldridge , J . M . Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2002 . Xue , M . and P . T . Harker , “Customer Efficiency : Concept and Its Impact on E - Business Management” , Journal of Service Research , Vol . 4 , No . 4 , pp . 253 - 267 , 2002 . 150 Vita Geng Yang was born on September 29 , 1971 in Ningxia Province , P . R . China , the son of Guiyou Yang and Huilan Li . He graduated from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology in 1993 with a B . S . in Mechanical Engineering . In 2001 , he received his M . S . in Statistics from the University of Texas at Austin . In 2003 , he received his M . A . in Economics from the University of Texas at Austin . Permanent address : 4508 Grandfather’s Lane , Charlotte , NC 28226 This dissertation was typed by Geng Yang