1981 ; 321 ; 225 - 257 J . Physiol . C Nicholson and J M Phillips cerebellum . in the extracellular microenvironment of the rat Ion diffusion modified by tortuosity and volume fraction This information is current as of April 12 , 2008 This is the final published version of this article ; it is available JournalsRights @ oxon . blackwellpublishing . com may be reproduced without the permission of Blackwell Publishing : articles are free 12 months after publication . No part of this article The Journal of Physiology Online . http : / / jp . physoc . org / subscriptions / go to : The Journal of Physiology Online To subscribe to 1878 . Physiological Society . It has been published continuously since is the official journal of The The Journal of Physiology Online at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from access . website for 12 months after publication unless article is open This version of the article may not be posted on a public http : / / jp . physoc . org / cgi / content / abstract / 321 / 1 / 225 at : JournalsRights @ oxon . blackwellpublishing . com may be reproduced without the permission of Blackwell Publishing : articles are free 12 months after publication . No part of this article The Journal of Physiology Online . http : / / jp . physoc . org / subscriptions / go to : The Journal of Physiology Online To subscribe to 1878 . Physiological Society . It has been published continuously since is the official journal of The The Journal of Physiology Online at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from J . Phyoiol . ( 1981 ) , 321 , pp . 225 - 257 225 With 11 text - JIgure8 Printed in Great Britain ION DIFFUSION MODIFIED BY TORTUOSITY AND VOLUME FRACTION IN THE EXTRACELLULAR MICROENVIRONMENT OF THE RAT CEREBELLUM BY C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS From the Department of Physiology and Biophysics , New York University Medical Center , 550 First Avenue , New York , NY 10016 , U . S . A . ( Received 10 February 1981 ) SUMMARY 1 . The validity of the macroscopic laws of ion diffusion was critically examined within the microenvironment of the extracellular space in the rat cerebellum using ion - selective micropipettes and ionophoretic point sources . 2 . The concepts of volume averaging , volume fraction ( a ) and tortuosity ( A ) were defined and shown to be theoretically appropriate for quantifying diffusion in a complex medium such as the brain . 3 . Diffusion studies were made with the cations tetramethylammonium and tetraethylammonium and the anions a - naphthalene sulphonate and hexafluoro - arsenate , all of which remained essentially extracellular during the measurements . Diffusion parameters were measured for a period of 50 s and over distances of the order of 0 - 1 mm . 4 . Measurements ofthe diffusion coefficients of the ions in agar gel gave values that were very close to those derivable from the literature , thus confirming the validity of the method . 5 . Measurements in the cerebellum did not reveal any systematic influences of ionophoretic current strength , electrode separation , anisotropy , inhomogeneity , charge discrimination or uptake , within the limits tested . 6 . The pooled data from measurements with all the ions gave a = 0 - 21 + 002 ( mean + s . E . of mean ) and A = 1 - 55 + 0 - 05 ( mean + S . E . of mean ) . 7 . These results show that the extracellular space occupies about 20 % of the rat cerebellum and that the diffusion coefficient for small monovalent extracellular ions is reduced by a factor of 2 - 4 ( i . e . A2 ) without regard to charge sign . The over - all effect of this is to increase the apparent strength of any ionic source in the cerebellum by a factor of A2 / a , about 12 - fold in the present case , and to modify the time course of diffusion . 8 . These conclusions confirm that the laws of macroscopic diffusion are closely obeyed in the cerebellum for small ions in the extracellular space , provided that volume fraction and tortuosity are explicitly taken into account . It is likely that these conclusions are generally applicable to other brain regions and other diffusing substances . PHY 321 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS INTRODUCTION The diffusion characteristics of the brain cell microenvironment are of fundamental importance in analysing the physiology of neuronal populations . The extracellular milieu of a neurone contains ions , metabolic substrates and neuroactive compounds that can profoundly affect short term and long term neuronal activity . Diffusion is an inescapable factor in the distribution of these extracellular substances and places certain constraints on the time course for the interaction of cells with their microenvironment and for the possible transmission of information between cells through modulation ofthe extracellular concentrations ofsubstances . Small , inorganic ions are the most basic chemical moieties of the microenvironment and their study has gained considerable impetus since the use of ion - selective micropipettes demon - strated significant changes , during neuronal activity , in the concentrations of such extracellular ions ( for reviews , see Somjen , 1979 ; Nicholson , 1979 , 1980 ) . The extracellular space of the brain is a highly complex medium . Geometrically it has a structure that can be likened to the liquid phase of a foam , the interstices of which are of the order of a few hundred A in width . Thus diffusing ions encounter the dual constraints of a diminished volume fraction and an increased tortuosity , with respect to a free , aqueous medium . Additionally the membranes of cells are endowed with long - chain glycomolecules that can carry a polyanionic charge and extend into the intercellular domain ( Schmitt & Samson , 1969 ; Margolis & Margolis , 1977 ; Nicholson , 1980 ) . The cells themselves , as well as the brain capillaries , may show passive and active uptake of extracellular ions . For these reasons it is not obvious that diffusion will admit of a simple quantitative description , such as that embodied in Fick ' s Laws . There have been many studies of ion diffusion in brain tissue , most of them utilizing radio tracers . These methods were in turn derived from the techniques used in muscles ( e . g . Harris & Burn , 1949 ; Keynes , 1954 ; McLennan , 1956a , b , 1957 ) which do not permit accurate spatio - temporal resolution and , in fact , have most frequently been directed to specific issues such as the volume of the extracellular space or the determination of compartmentalization within the tissue . Thus Fickian diffusion has often been an implicit assumption , rather than a postulate to be tested . Ion - selective micropipettes permit the monitoring of ionic concentration in real time at a specific point in a tissue , and therefore enable an accurate test of the laws of diffusion . To date most diffusion studies with ion - selective micropipettes have examined the diffusion of K + , but have given conflicting results . The major dispersal mechanism for locally elevated [ K + ] o was determined to be simple diffusion by several investigators ( Lux & Neher , 1973 ; Fisher , Pedley & Prince , 1976 ; Pedley , Fisher & Prince , 1976 ) . Others found that simple diffusion could not account for all their findings ( Krnjevic & Morris , 1974 ; Vern , Schuette & Thibault , 1977 ; Cordingly & Somjen , 1978 ; Nicholson , Phillips & Garder - Medwin , 1979 ) . These latter conclusions also concur with earlier radio tracer studies ( McLennan , 1957 ; Pape & Katzman , 1972 ) as well as recent work of Gardner - Medwin ( 1977 , 1978 , 1980 ) . As a consequence of the inherent lack of resolution of the earlier work and the paradoxes of the more recent , we undertook this study to clarify the issues involved in ionic diffusion within the brain cell microenvironment . A preliminary account of some of this work has been presented as a short communication ( Nicholson et al , 1979 ) and an abstract ( Nicholson & Phillips , 1979 ) . 226 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN THEORY This section is intended to sketch briefly pivotal aspects of the theory of diffusion in a complex medium . Several points are amplified in the Appendix . Diffusion in a complex medium . The most fundamental example of diffusion in the brain cell microenvironment is that of an ion which moves in the interstitial clefts between cells or capillaries . In a free , aqueous medium , so long as the ion is present at low concentration , it moves in accord with the laws of Fickian diffusion which reflect , at a macroscopic level , the microscopic Brownian motion of the ions . This motion is the aggregate of the random walks of the ions consequent upon collisions with the solvent molecules . In a complex medium several factors can impose constraints on the diffusion process . The primary constraints are inescapable consequences of the geometrical structure of the medium . In addition , secondary constraints may be imposed , such as binding , uptake or changes in structure with time due to specialized features of a particular medium . In the development that follows we shall draw on recent formal developments in the theory of transport in porous media . After suitable interpretation , this body of work seems appropriate for the present study . The definition of a complex medium demands the notion of scale . At the most microscopic level we have the diffusion of ions within the interstices between cells , a space of dimensions , perhaps 0 01 - 0 * 04 jm . On this level we may have free diffusion , ifthe influence ofglycomolecules is neglected , but highly diverse boundary conditions , so that the actual concentration of an ion may fluctuate significantly over a scale of this dimension . This dimension can be denoted by d , as used in work with porous media ( Whitaker , 1969 ) , and we may write d < 0 04 # m . At the other end of the scale we encounter the macroscopic dimension of the system . In the present case this would be the dimension of a cerebellar folium . which we may conservatively estimate at 1000 # jm or more . This corresponds to the L described for porous media ( Whitaker , 1969 ) , so that L > 1000lom . There remains a third parameter , namely the dimension I defined ( Whitaker , 1969 ) such that : L > I > d . The dimension I defines a volume over which averaged variables of the system are well behaved . This means that by averaging concentration , as well as other variables , over a volume with dimension of order 1 , the spatial variation of the concentration over distances of order d ( imposed by the granularity of the tissue ) can be ignored . Note that I must be much less than L for the averaged concentration to be associated with only a small fraction of the tissue and thus to represent a relatively local value of the concentration . At the same time I must be much greater than d to smooth out microscopic fluctuations in concentration . Given the dimensions of d and L , I should be - / V ( 0 04 x 1000 ) , i . e . about 6 jsm . This is about the effective size of the tip of an ion - selective micropipette , allowing for a small zone of damage around the electrode . Fick ' s laws , averaging , volume fraction and tortuosity The extracellular concentration , Co , of a solute over a dimension of size d represents the interstitial , or microscopic concentration . If a concentration gradient , VC0 , exists , 8 - 2 227 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 228 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS then it is related to the microscopic flux , J ( the bar notation signifies a vector quantity ) , by Fick ' s First Law : ( 1 ) where D is the diffusion coefficient for the solute in water . Unfortunately the local boundary conditions will be so complex that both Co and J will vary irregularly over a dimension of the order of d . To remove this problem , and to have well behaved variables to work with , the volume average has been introduced ( e . g . Whitaker , 1969 ) . A volume V of the tissue with dimension I is considered . Within this volume there is an extracellular phase of volume V0 . The volume fraction of the tissue , a , is simply defined as : a ( 2 ) The volume V is always constant and , in the work presented here , V0 and a are also constants of the tissue . Note , however , that in a more general situation where the volume of the extracellular space may change together with concentration , V0 and a can be functions of space and time while V continues to be a fixed parameter . The volume average of any variable , V / r , associated with the extracellular phase ( i . e . Vf = 0 in the non - extracellular phase ) is defined as : Vtd3x ( 3 ) where d3x means an integral over all three spatial co - ordinates . This average is associated with the centroid of V and local co - ordinates may be defined in V with respect to this point . Note that the centroid of V can lie in either the extra - or non - extracellular phase and consequently < j > is continuous over the whole medium . Averaging transforms the original problem in the discontinuous variables into a problem where continuity can be assumed . The variables of eq . ( 1 ) may be averaged , using appropriate theorems ( Appendix ) to arrive at the macroscopic form of Fick ' s Law < J > = - D * V < Co > ( 4 ) where for a homogeneous and isotropic medium D * = D / A2 , ( 5 ) where A is the tortuosity and is related to the increase in path length of a diffusing particle in a complex medium compared to that in a simple one . In many cases we require a volume average with respect to the extracellular phase alone ; this is relevant to the concentration actually measured by an ion - selective micropipette , for example . Such an average is simply : ' * 0° = X Vtd3x . ( 6 ) Obviously from eqns . ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) and ( 6 ) we have < vf > = a < vt > o . ( 7 ) at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN This enables us to restate eqn . ( 4 ) as : < X > = - a D * V < C0 > 0 , ( 8 ) where < C0 > 0 is the quantity sensed by an ion - selection miropipette . Using the Equation of Continuity ( Appendix ) and other theorems appropriate to volume averaging leads finally to Fick ' s Second Law : D * V 2 < C0 > 0 + < q > / a = a TO > W ( 9 ) where < q > is the volume average of the source density in the medium . In an experimental situation some combination of < J > , < C0 > or < C0 > 0 will be measured and interpreted according to Fick ' s Laws . As first pointed out by Gardner - Medwin ( 1980 ) this can lead to determination of either D * or aD * and care must be exercised in clarifying which diffusion parameter is being considered . Note that in the discussion of Gardner - Medwin ( 1980 ; p . 222 ) , his quantity C corresponds to the volume averaged quantity < C0 > 0 of our present derivation and Gardner - Med - win ' s J corresponds to our . < J > . The local cleft concentration obeys eqn . ( 1 ) but it cannot be measured with any presently available methods . The quantity < C0 > 0 can be treated like a new variable C in a simple medium , but the presence of < q > , the average of q , is inconvenient since it does not make eqn . ( 9 ) completely analogous to a simple diffusion equation . In the Appendix , however , we show that the solution to ( 9 ) usually can be estimated from the solution to the simple diffusion equation * V2C q ac DV + ±a at ' ( 10 ) where C is a new concentration variable , by the expression < To > o * . 6D * at t ( 1 where a = 1 / 2 . It is interesting that the factor a2 / 6D * in eqn . ( 11 ) is just the mean time for a particle to diffuse a distance a in a three - dimensional medium with diffusion coefficient D * . Obviously as a becomes small , < C0 > 0 and C tend to equality and we shall show in the Appendix that under our experimental conditions these two quantities are virtually identical . We now consider the solution of eqn . ( 10 ) for the actual experimental situation . Ionophoresis from a point source In the experiments to be analysed here , the ion source is an ionophoretic electrode which approximates a point source and eqn . ( 10 ) may be written in spherical polar co - ordinates with radial co - ordinate r , as : ( D ) a2 ( rC ) + QH ( t ) a ( r ) = aC ( 2 where ar i heDra elafuciondH ( ) sth eaiidteuntonh ( 12 ) where 8 ( r ) is the Dirac delta function and H ( t ) is the Heaviside step function . The 229 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 230 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS Heaviside step function H ( 8 ) = 1 for s > 0 and H ( 8 ) = 0 for 8 < 0 for any variable s . The Dirac delta function can be defined as the derivative of H with respect to S . When integrated over all values of 8 , a ( a ) is zero everywhere except at 8 = 0 where the function is unity ( see Jack , Noble & Tsien , 1975 ; pp . 437 - 439 ) . Q is the source strength in mol . s - 1 . When an ionophoretic electrode constitutes the source then : Q = In / F , ( 13 ) where I is . the current , n the transport number of the electrode and F is Faraday ' s electrochemical equivalent . The solution to equations of the type described by ( 12 ) is well known and has the form ( Crank , 1975 ; p . 32 , expression 3 - 5b with q - . Q / a and D - . D / A2 ) C ( r , t ) = 4nDcrerfc ( 14 ) Qnar \ 2 V ( Dt ) ( 4 where erfc is the complementary error function and we have substituted for D * ( eqn . ( 5 ) ) . In a free medium , such as dilute agar gel a = 1 = A . It is also useful to note that in the limit C ( r , oc ) = QA2 / 4nrDar . Two other points need mentioning . First the falling phase of the concentration curve , following the switching off of the source , is simply derived from eqn . ( 14 ) by adding the result for a sink of equal magnitude ( - Q ) activated at the termination of the pulse ; this is an example of superposition and a specific expression for a similar problem is derived by Jaeger ( 1965 ; p . 108 , expression 9 ) . The second point is that it is an experimental requirement that the ionophoretic step be imposed on a pre - existing concentration level established by the bias current ( see Methods ) . If the bias current is allowed to operate for a long period prior to imposing an ionophoretic current step , then it is readily shown by superposition that the basic solution ( 14 ) to the diffusion equation applies so long as C is replaced by AC , the increment in concentration relative to the base line and Q is replaced by AQ , the increment in the source relative to the bias source value . METHODS Choice of ions In choosing extrinsic ions for probing the diffusion properties ofthe brain cell microenvironment , four major criteria had to be satisfied . These criteria were : ( a ) there must exist a liquid ion exchanger , suitable for use in micropipettes , with a high selectivity for the probe ion over all ions intrinsic to the brain , ( b ) the ion must be stable and soluble in physiological saline , ( c ) the ion must be substantially impermeant to brain cells and the blood - brain barrier over periods of a few minutes , ( d ) the ion should be without significant neurophysiological effect at the concentrations used . For cations a logical choice of sensor is a liquid membrane incorporating tetraphenylborate , since this compound is highly selective for tetraalkylammonium ions ( Scholer & Simon , 1972 ; Baum , 1972 ; Neher & Lux , 1973 ; Dionne , 1976 ) . This sensor is available from Corning , designated as a potassium ion exchanger . Amongst the tetraalkylammonium ions , tetramethylammonium ( TMA ) and tetraethylammonium ( TEA ) are particularly appropriate since they are approximately spherical and are known to closely obey the Einstein - Stokes law in free solution ( Robinson & Stokes , 1959 ) . Both ions are soluble and stable in saline . The rate of absorption of the ions into cells and across the blood - brain barrier is not known , but preliminary studies of the related compounds choline and trimethyl tris ( hydroxymethyl ) methyl ammonium ( N - Tris ) ( Hansen & Olsen , 1980 ) indicate that the latter only enters cells slowly and that several hours are needed for the intracellular at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN concentrations to reach the applied extracellular level . Our own studies of the steady - state uptake ( Results ) also indicated a low rate of removal by such processes . Finally , tests for neurophysiological effects did not suggest rapid absorption into neuronal elements . This is evident in Fig . 1 where it is seen that both pre - and post - synaptic components of the superficial cerebellar field potentials ( Eccles , Llinrs & Sasaki , 1966 ) remain after 30 min of superfusion with either TMA or TEA . Some change in the post - synaptic potential is evident but this is normal when recording for such an extended period just below the pial surface . Note that although TEA blocks the potassium - mediated Control Control A 5 mM - TMA A 5 mM - a - NS I2 mV Control 5 + Control A 5 mM - TEA A 5 mM - AsF6 Fig . 1 . Lack of effect of probe ions on cerebellar field potentials . The upper record of each pair is the control taken with normal physiological saline superfusing the cerebellum . The lower records of each pair are taken after a minimum of 30 min superfusion with a saline to which 5 mM of the probe ion has been added . Each record is taken about 50 , um below the surface and shows the response to local surface stimulation ( arrow ) with a bipolar electrode . The responses consist of an initial fast positive - negative component , representing the presynaptic parallel fibre volley , followed by a slower negative wave indicative of post - synaptic depolarization ofPurkinje cell dendrites . None of the probe ions significantly affected either the pre - or post - synaptic components of the response . Same time and voltage calibrations for all records . Two responses superimposed in each case . component of the normal action potential when applied intracellularly in the squid axon ( Armstrong & Binstock , 1965 ) and in vitro Purkinje cell ( Llinas & Sugimori , 1980 ) this seems to require much higher intracellular concentrations than are likely to be attained in the present experiments . For the anion sensor we chose either Aliquat 336 ( see below ) or Crystal Violet ( Coetzee & Freiser , 1969 ; Ishibashi , Kohara & Horinouchi , 1973 ; Senkyr & Petr , 1978 ; Phillips & Nicholson , 1979 , 1981 ) . We made initial diffusion measurements with SCN , PF6 , AsF6 , SbF6 , salicylate and a - naphthalene sulphonate ( a - NS ) . From these studies we selected AsF , and a - NS because both these ions can be sensed with a high selectivity over Cl . AsF6 is stable in saline over long periods but a - NS may decompose after several days in solution so that this was made up freshly for each experiment . No information is available on the uptake of AsF6 or a - NS , but we found the steady - state uptake to be very small ( see Results ) . This is consistent with the tendency for anions to be excluded from 231 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS cells having a normal negative resting potential . Superfusion of the brain with 5 mm concentrations of z - NS and AsF6 ( Fig . 1 ) for 30 min or more did not reveal any significant effects on the field potentials . Electrode fabrication , preparation of exchangers and calibration Ion - selective micropipettes were fabricated from theta - capillary glass with a thick septum ( R and D Optical Systems Inc . , New Windsor , Maryland ) with a an o . d . of 2 - 3 mm . Prior to pulling the electrodes , the glass was cleaned with a mixture of equal parts of 30 % H202 and concentrated H2SO4 ( Vyskocil & K " ii , 1972 ) and thoroughly washed . Micropipette tips were broken to an o . d . of 2 - 4 # m under a compound microscope and silanized with 4 % trimethylchlorosilane ( Tridom / TABLE 1 . Measured parameters for ion - selective micropipettes used in experiments Slope ( m ) Interference ( K ) No . of Ion ( mV ) ( mM ) electrodes TMA 61 - 4 + 0i 2 0086 + 0i046 7 TEA 600 + 07 0 - 048 + 0 - 015 7 Lx - NS 57 - 7 + 08 0 - 258 + 00055 7 AsF6 605 + 07 0 - 004 + 0003 5 Measurements made at 37 ' C . Means + S . E . of means . Fluka ) in CCI4 according to the method of Lux ( 1974 ) . In all cases the reference barrel contained 150 mM - NaCl . The ion - sensing barrel contained either 150 mm of the ion being sensed or a lesser amount together with NaCl to make the concentration up to 150 mm . We believe that the inclusion of the ion being sensed ( Dionne & Stevens , 1975 ; Dionne , 1976 ) prevented the non - Nernstian electrode responses seen with tetraalkylammonium ions by Neher & Lux ( 1973 ) . The tetraalkylammonium ion sensorwasCorning ion exchanger477317 . Thisexchanger apparently consists of p - chloro - tetraphenylborate dissolved in 3 - nitro - o - xylene ( Oehme & Simon , 1976 ) . Anions were detected with one of two different exchangers ( Phillips & Nicholson , 1979 , 1981 ) ; both exchangers had a very similar performance in all respects . The first exchanger consisted of 0 1 - 0 5 % v / v tricaprylylmethylammonium chloride ( Aliquat 336 , Tridom / Fluka ) in 3 - nitro - o - xylene . This is similar to an exchanger described for macroelectrodes ( Coetzee & Freiser , 1969 ) , except that selectivity for probe anions over chloride was enhanced by substituting nitroxylene for decanol . The second exchanger contained 10mM - Crystal Violet dye ( J . T . Baker Chemicals ) dissolved in 3 - nitro - o - xylene and has been studied in macro - electrodes also ( senkyr & Petr , 1978 ) . Both exchangers were prepared for use by repeated equilibrations with 0 - 1 - 0 - 5 M solutions of the sodium salt of the anion ( Coetzee & Freiser , 1969 ) . Most of the anion experiments reported in this paper were carried out with the Crystal Violet exchanger . The slope and selectivity of an electrode / exchanger combination was determined by adding amounts of the ion to be sensed to the standard saline solution used in the experiments ( see below ) and measuring the resulting electrode potentials against an agar / KCl bridge electrode ( 1 M - KCl in 4 % agar with an AgCl / Ag wire ) . This gave a ' constant interference ' measurement of selectivity , the interfering ions being either the cations or anions of the saline . The resulting potential versus concentration data were fitted to the Nikolsky equation ( Eisenman , 1961 ) using least squares linear regression with a succession of trial interference values performed on a programmable calculator ( TI 58 or 59 , Texas Instruments ) . We typically used five solutions and obtained a coefficient of determination of 0 - 98 or better . From these determinations the electrode slope and selectivity against the other ions present in the saline were determined ( Table 1 ) . Similar calibration procedures are described and typical curves illustrated in several recent studies ( Oakley & Green , 1976 ; Oakley , Miller & Steinberg , 1978 ; Dietzel , Heinemann , Hofmeier & Lux , 1980 ; Hansen & Olsen , 1980 ) . Totally bootstrapped amplifiers ( Kootsey & Johnston , 1973 ) using a Philbrick 1429 FET input stage were used for measuring the potential on the ion - sensing side of the ion - selective micropipette and a conventionally neutralized FET amplifier was used for the reference barrel . Reference signals were substracted with differential instrumentation amplifiers ( Analog Devices 520 ) and recorded on a Gould 2400 chart recorder . In most experiments the data on each channel were filtered with a two - pole Butterworth active low - pass filter with a cut - off at 2 Hz . Routine electrode calibrations 232 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN and long - term electrode stability measurements that were not made during experiments were carried out with a varactor bridge electrometer ( Burr - Brown 3431 ) . Ionophore8is Electrodes for ionophoresis were made from theta - capillary tubing because this glass did not bend as easily as ordinary tubing . Micropipettes that were destined to deliver the probe ion were pulled and bent at the shank through a small angle with a hot wire . This facilitated positioning the source lonophoresis Ion - selective micropipette M | X @ s bes ; ' 5 > ; ; a / 4 Fig . 2 . Experimental arrangement . Paired ionophoretic and ion - selective micro - electrodes are glued together and inserted in the brain . The ionophoretic electrode is driven by a constant current source . The ion - selective micropipette consists of two barrels , one containing the ion - exchanger and the other serving as a reference . The signals from these barrels are buffered and the reference signal subtracted to yield the logarithmic ion signal . The electrodes are inserted through a cup that sits on the pia and either contains warmed flowing physiological saline or agar gel for control diffusion measurements . Separate indifferent electrodes are used for the two systems . Further details in text . electrode parallel to the ion - selective micropipette . Tips were broken to an o . d . of about 1 / sm . Both barrels ofthe source electrode were filled with 150 mm ofthe salt ofa probe ion , connected in parallel , and glued with dental cement or ' 5 minute ' epoxy resin to an appropriate ion - selective micropipette so that the tips were 40 - 200 , um apart . A small bead of glue was used to join the electrode shanks about 700 / tm from the tip to further stabilize the array spacing . Ionophoretic currents were applied 233 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS with a battery powered , isolated constant current source ( Fig . 2 ) designed after that described by Lux , Loracher & Neher ( 1970 ) and Globus ( 1973 ) . Current was measured with a battery - powered isolated digital nanoammeter ( Sinclair , model PDM35 ) . Current was either passed from the source electrode to an agar - KCl bridge indifferent electrode or to a second barrel on the source electrode . No significant differences were found between the two procedures and the former was preferred since total electrode resistance was reduced and the possibility of re - absorption of ions in the return current barrel was eliminated . In early experiments we observed that deviations from the diffusion equation prediction occurred with ionophoresis and found that this was caused by initial changes in source transport number , immediately after the ionophoresis was commenced ( Dionne , 1976 ; Purves , 1979 ) . This was corrected by applying a small bias current ( 20 - 40 nA ) at all times , so that the test ion was continually ejected and the source was not depleted of ions due to ingress of saline from the interstitial space . This also had the advantage of raising the background concentration of the probe ions to a finite level , thereby diminishing any interference from intrinsic ions of the brain . When a step of current ( 50 - 200 nA ) was then applied to the source electrode , the response ofthe ion - selective micropipette was correctly characterized by the appropriate solution of the diffusion equation ( see Theoretical Section ) . It is worth noting that ionophoresis after application of a backing or holding current suffers severely from an initial , variable transport number and consequently is very difficult to interpret quantitatively ; this type of effect was also noted by Lux & Neher ( 1973 ) . Ionophoresis was made in the brain for a period of 50 S and the signal recorded with the ion - selective micropipette . After a sequence of such measurements had been made , a 0 3 % solution of agar in saline was poured over the brain and allowed to gel . The array was withdrawn into the agar and measurements repeated . The spacing between source and tip of the micropipette was measured before and after the experiment with compound and stereo microscopes equipped with reticles . From these data the electrode transport number , the diffusion coefficient , the tortuosity and the volume fraction were calculated ( see Analysis section ) . Agar gel was used as a reference medium because this prevented the convection which hampered measurements in a free solution ( Lux & Neher , 1973 ) . It has been shown that the obstruction effect and charge on the agar gel have an insignificant influence on diffusion ( Krnjevi6 & Mitchell , 1960 ; Lauffer , 1961 ; Schantz & Lauffer , 1962 ; Winn , Smith , Campbell & Huf , 1964 ; Slade , Cremers & Thomas , 1966 ) . Analysis procedures At the conclusion of the experiment , the electrode slope , m , interference , K , and system constant , R . were determined from electrode calibration in 8itu , as described above . These quantities are defined by eqn . ( 16 ) below . This enabled the base - line values for ion levels plus interferences , i . e . CB + K , just prior to each diffusion curve , to be determined ( see below ) . The diffusion curve was then analysed as follows . A bias current , IB ' was applied at all times and resulted in a base - line level ofthe ion , CB . At time t = 0 the current was stepped up to a new level , I , and the concentration at a distance r away then rose to C ( r , 1 ) . From eqns . ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) AC ( r , t ) = AC ( r , ao ) erfc ( , 8 / / 2 / t ) , where AC ( r , t ) = C ( r , t ) - CB AC ( r , oo ) = ( I - IB ) nA2 / ( 4iTFDra ) ( 15 ) and , l = rA / V ' D . For agar A = a = 1 . Now the actual signal recorded was not C , but a voltage E that obeyed the Nikolsky equation : E = mlog ( C + K ) + R ( 16 ) and the following expressions can be derived immediately from eqn . ( 16 ) EB = mlog ( CB + K ) + R so , defining AE = E - EB , AE0 = Ec0 - EB we find AC = ( CB + K ) ( IO ( AE / m ) - 1 ) ( 17 ) and CB + K = lO ( EB - R ) / m 234 ( 18 ) at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN so using ( 15 ) and ( 17 ) 1O ( AE / m ) - 1 - ( lO ( AEOO / m ) - 1 ) erfc ( , f / 2N / t ) ( 19 ) From these expressions , the diffusion curves could be calibrated without estimating K , so long as m and R are known . In order to determine D , n , a and A eqn . ( 19 ) was used , with the expression ( 20 ) given below . First note that during the 50s ionophoresis AC . was usually not approached so this had to be estimated by curve fitting , as had also the value ft . The period of 50s was chosen as a compromise . A longer ionophoresis might have been expected to approach the asymptotic value , AC , sufficiently closely to directly estimate this quantity , but as explained later ( see Fig . 11 and Appendix ) , AC would never be accurately approached because of the increasing influence of uptake at long times . In principle , significantly shorter periods could be used for the analysis but then only the fast rising phase of the curve would be seen and we preferred to see a greater part of the curve to assure ourselves that the characteristic shape was being generated , since detailed numerical analysis was only made after completion of the experiment . Ten points were chosen on the diffusion curve during the time of current application . A trial value of f was selected and a linear regression of 10 ( AE / m ) - 1 versus erfc ( ft / 2V / t ) performed and the goodness of fit noted . Further values of f were then chosen so as to bring the intercept value of the regression to zero , since eqn . ( 19 ) has zero intercept . When the intercept value was zero , to within acceptable numerical accuracy , the iterative process was terminated and the final goodness of fit recorded ( the coefficient of determination ) . If the diffusion equation was accurately obeyed , the goodness of fit would be very high at this time . Typically the absolute value ofthe coefficient of determination was 0 990 or more . At the termination of this procedure values of ft and ( 0O ( AEoo / m ) - 1 ) ( the slope of the regression ) were available . From the latter AC . was calculated as AC . , = ( CB + K ) ( lO ( 1Eoo / m ) - 1 ) . After a set of curves for brain and agar had been analysed , the mean values of flb , ta ACaob , ACca were calculated , where the subscripts indicate brain or agar . Then the parameters of interest were derived from the following relations by rearranging the expressions in ( 15 ) , setting A = 1 = a to obtain values related to agar ( subscript a ) . D = ( r / fa ) 2A n = 47TFA / CO arD / AI ( 20 ) A = ftb / fa OC = ( ACOO a / ACcs b ) A2 After this procedure had been carried out for every experiment using a particular ion , mean values , over the whole experimental series , for the parameters expressed in eqn . ( 20 ) were available . In most cases these were close to the values for the individual experiments : deviations in particular cases were most likely due to small variations in the spacing of the electrode array between brain and agar . This source of error could be detected , to some extent , by computing the quantity : 6 = a / A3 ( 21 ) for each experiment , since this variable is independent of spacing error . This may be shown by noting that if ra is the spacing in the agar and rb the spacing in the brain , substituting these values for r in eqn . ( 20 ) , and using A = 1 = a for the agar case cx = ACa Atb 2 ( rb 3 fbra \ ACoo , b ( a ) ra A rb Where 6 values differed significantly from the mean it suggested that other sources of error were present . Finally the individual diffusion parameters for each experiment were used to compute the whole diffusion curve , including the falling phase and this curve compared to the calibrated data . The falling phase provided a particularly good test because the data were not used in estimating parameters and because it involved the difference of two error functions which tended to amplify small errors . All calculations were performed on programmable calculators ( TI 58 or TI 59 , Texas Instruments ) after the data had been measured from the original chart recordings . 235 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS Preparation Female Sprague - Dawley rats ( 200 - 400 g ) were anaesthetized with either urethane ( 160 mg / kg ) or pentobarbitone sodium ( 60 mg / kg ) . The results were similar with either anaesthetic and urethane was used in most experiments . A tracheostomy was performed and the animals were allowed to breathe spontaneously . The head of the animal was held with ear bars and snout clamp ( David Kopf ) and the body was enclosed in a heat - exchanger through which warm water flowed , to maintain the body temperature which was monitored with a rectal thermoprobe . The posterior cerebellum was exposed , the dura removed and a pool formed above the exposed region with cotton wool impregnated with 4 % agar in saline . The pool was irrigated with warmed , flowing saline of the following composition : 159 9 mM - Na + ; 3 0 mM - K + ; 1 - 3 mM - Ca2 + ; 0 . 5 mM - Mg2 + ; 145 mM - Cl ; 20 - 9 mM - HCO ; 0 - 5 mM - HPO04 ; 2 - 2 mM - urea and 3 - 4 mM - glucose and bubbled with 95 % 0 , and 5 % CO ( modified from Feldberg & Fleischhaur , 1960 ) . In superfusion experiments the test ion was added as either the Na or Cl salt to the superfusing saline solution . The electrocardiogram and locally evoked cerebellar field potentials were monitored throughout the experiment . RESULTS We first present diffusion curves for the cerebellum and experiments which examined several factors that might undermine , or complicate , our quantitative analyses . Such factors are ; ionophoretic current strength , anisotropy , inhomogeneity , charge discrimination and uptake . We found that none of these factors had any significant influence on our determination of A and a . We were able , therefore , to combine our entire data , both for the control measurements in agar and for the brain , to arrive at mean values of the parameters that characterize diffusion in this part of the brain . Diffusion in the cerebellar cortex Examples of diffusion curves for each of our probe ions are shown in Fig . 3 - 6 . The left sides of the figures consist of a set of records taken directely from the chart recorder and consequently representing the logarithm of the concentration as a function of time . The graphs on the right show the actual concentrations , derived by using the appropriate calibration data , at selected times on the rising and falling phases of the curves , as indicated by the appropriate symbols . The continuous lines are the theoretical curves derived from the appropriate analyses of the rising phases of the diffusion curves in both cerebellum and agar for that particular preparation . The current was varied to correspond to that applied in each case but otherwise all theoretical curves in Figs 3 - 6 were calculated with identical parameter values ( see Figure legends ) for each family of curves . Generally the fits to the rising phases of the theoretical and experimental curves were good and the falling phases were also adequately predicted in most cases . The variations seen here were typical of those encountered between successive ionophoretic measurements and were most likely caused by small movements of the brain due to breathing and circulatory activities of the animal . These artifacts also account for the noise that is seen on some of the chart records , particularly in Figs 5 and 6 . At the beginning and end of the ionophoretic current there was usually a brief electrical artifact visible in the ion records . This was again quite variable and only affected the first few seconds of the records . 236 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN 237 6 Brain 114m 38 Experiment 2 / * 180 nA - - - Theory 2 - 140nA AC ) - 1OO nA 4 Agar 20s 7 " 6 0 - 6 0 2 o180 nA 0 Time ( s ) 100 Fig . 3 . Ionophoresis of TMA using different currents . The upper records on the left show the chart records of the output potential of the ion - selective micropipette during ionophoresis for approximately 50s at the currents indicated . The records are logarithmic in amplitude and calibrated in mm . The lowest record on the left shows a control agar record from this series . The records on the right show plots with a linear amplitude axis for the data shown on the left . The continuous lines represent the theoretical curves based on the mean parameters from several records in this experiment . Each curve here was computed with the specific mean parameters : D = 1 30 x 10 - 5 cm2 . s - , n = 040 and r = 114 / am . In addition the curves corresponding to the records taken in the brain were computed with A = 1 - 49 and a = 0 15 . Only the current strengths are varied , corresponding to those used for generating the experimental data . The theoretical curves originate at the origin but the initial portions of the curves are not drawn in . At such early times the experimental data were usually contaminated with a transient electrical switching artifact and were not used for analysis . 3 Brain 2r - m 85 pim 24 | Experiment 3 0 1 0 X > F 4 \ 90 - Theory o60 nA / C P 2 6 ( mM ) / ' 0 A30 nA Il L - Agar20 \ . A o 90 nA 0 Time ( s ) 100 Fig . 4 . Ionophoresis of TEA using different currents . The form of the Figure is similar to that of Fig . 3 . The parameters used for the theoretical curves were : D = 1 - 06 x 10 - 5 cm2 . s - 1 , n = 0 - 27 , r = 85 Jim , A = 1 - 37 and a = 0 - 1 3 . at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 238 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS As expected from diffusion theory there was an apparent lag between the ionophoretic current step and the rise or fall in concentration . This was particularly clear in the logarithmic chart records in Figs 3 and 5 . 1 - 5 Brain 108 , um 1 - 0 019 Bi @ 180 nA 1 A \ a Experiment L 2 | - . - Theory 0 - 7 o140n 04E - ACA 1 . 0 ( mM ) 0 [ ' 100 nA 0 . 5 E - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 * 7 _ _ = 165OnAa = 0 0 0 - 3 20 s - , Eprm . 60 nA / lTer mM / 5 oM . 0 013 k e - - p7a - . i - - - - - - - - - 0 Tim e ( s ) 100 Fig . 5 . lonophoresis of a - NS using different currents . The form of this Figure is similar to that of Fig . 3 , except that four curves are shown for the brain here . The parameters used for the theoretical curves were : D 0 . 79x 10 - cm2 . s1 , n = 0 II , r = 18m A 5 = , A = 1o75 and a = 0030 . 2r 0 - v Brain 96tom 1a0 3 15 - - l or Experiment * 6A nA t Theory ii3 F 0 o4O nA AC 0 ( mm ) . mmA2 - - - " - - - AI A 20 nA Ti20s C 0 - 25 F Agar \ As S ~ o6o nA 0 Time ( s ) 100 Fig . 6 . Jonophoresis of AsF . using different currents . The form of this Figure is similar to that of Fig . 3 . The parameters used for the theoretical curves were : D = 1 - 38 x I - 105cm2 . s - ' , n = 0 - 35 , r = 96 # sm , A = 1 - 52 , a = 0 - 21 . The values of A and ax determined for the four sets of data shown in Figs 3 - 6 indicate the typical range of variation encountered . Thus A and ax range from 1 - 37 and 0 - 13 respectively in the TEA data ( Fig . 4 ) to 1 - 75 and 0 - 30 for the ax - NS ( Fig . 5 ) ; the data for the other two ions lie between these extremes . As will be seen , when the data for all our experiments were considered together , there was actually no significant difference between the A and ax values obtained with each ion . A very striking feature of the records shown in Figs 3 - 6 is the great difference in the amplitudes of the records in the brain and agar . This is particularly obvious in at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN the linear graphs . In each case the ionophoretic current used for the agar corresponded to the highest current used in the brain . The difference between these two curves is partly a direct manifestation of the factor A2 / L that appears in eqn . ( 14 ) . There is also a difference in shape between the brain and agar records due to the factor A ill the time - dependent part of the expression i . e . the argument of the complementary error function , but this is not easily seen unless a comparison ofthe normalized curves ( AC / AC . ) is made . Effect of ionophoretic current strength on diffusion The experiments shown in Figs 3 - 6 also provide a direct test of whether the diffusion is influenced by the ionophoretic current . In fact it has been estimated ( Norman , 1975 ; Lux & Neher , 1973 ) that this electric field is too small to significantly modify ion migration , except in the immediate vicinity of the tip of the ionophoretic electrode . A contrary view has been expressed , however ( Trubatch & Van Harreveld , 1972 ) . In each case considered here , the theoretical fit at each current strength is obtained by increasing the current , as described by eqn . ( 14 ) , which simply changes the magnitude of the diffusion curve . There is no evidence that the shape is altered . These data also show that the transport number of the ionophoretic electrode is not affected by changing the current density through it . This confirms that the transport number is likely to remain constant during an experiment . Effect of array spacing on diffusion in the brain The spacing between the ionophoretic micropipette and the ion - selective micro - pipette might have influenced the measurements in several ways . If the two electrodes were very close , the electric field discussed in the last section might have begun to influence ion movement and , additionally , at some point the sphere of damage around each electrode tip might start to dominate the diffusion characteristics of the medium . The concentrations of ions in the immediate vicinity of the source will be high and this may cause local effects too . A further problem with a small spacing is that errors in electrode position become more significant so that if each electrode tip deviates by , say , 5 jm from its measured position , as the array penetrates into the brain , then a 25 % error in spacing can occur with a nominal 40 am electrode separation . For these reasons there is obviously some minimim spacing below which measurements are impractical . With large spacings all of the above sources of error are reduced , but the signal - to - noise ratio goes down until a point is reached where the diffusion transient can no longer be reliably detected . We did not vary electrode spacing systematically , since we always worked with a fixed array separation in any one experiment . Taking our data as a whole , however , we have results from a range of different spacings with each ion . A selection from these data , drawn from twelve separate experiments is shown in Fig . 7 . The logarithmic records illustrate the slowing of the rising and falling phases of the diffusion curves with distance . The graph shows a plot of , = rA / V / D against r for the twelve records shown . For there to be agreement with theory , the data points should fall on straight lines . The slopes of these lines will be the value of A / V / D corresponding to each ion : the dotted lines show the mean A / A / D values for all our 239 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 240 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS experiments . The upper line is for both TEA and a - NS , the middle for TMA and the lower for AsF6 . The points from the experiments do fall on straight lines and do not indicate any deviation from theory over this range of array spacings ( 49 - 135 , tm ) . mM TMA mM AsF6 1 - 01 5 iMm 3 - 0 JiM 8 _ 0 - 2 - - - - - - 0 - 5 - TMA o 3 - 0 - 4 PM PMm TE i 0 . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 TEA - , 05 [ < = ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 041 p | , , , 10 _ _ m l3u 0 - 6 120m ( Xs ) l ' ° ' ' 1 - 3 - - - - - - t - em u4 < tm ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ , / ' , ^ ' AsF6 ^ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ AF 02 t 113Mm 078mkS r ( pm ) 160 1 - 5 6 PM ~ ~ 2 - 0 JA Fig . 7 . Relation between array spacing and diffusion . Records taken from twelve experiments , three with each ion probe , using a variety of spacings . The fi values for each record are plotted against r on the graph . Each of them lie close to the appropriate theoretical line . The upper dashed line is for both TEA and a - NS , the middle line is for TMA and the lower line for AsF , , . Each line is computed from the mean data in Table 3 . Effects of anisotropy and inhomoqeneity in diffusion The histological structure of the cerebellum endows the molecular layer with a distinct anisotropy . This has been detected in conductivity measurements in the cat ( Yedlin , Kwan , Murphy , Nguyen - Huu & Wong , 1974 ) and in amphibia ( Nicholson & r Freeman , 1975 ) . We carried out several experiments to look for signs of anisotropy in diffusion . If anisotropy exists it will be reflected in the diffusion coefficient which will become a tensor of order two ( Crank , 1975 ) . In the present instance this will be manifested by differences in A . In particular three principal values of A should be evident . In the Appendix we derive the solution to the point - source equations for this case and show that , if a value is assumed for ax , all three components of A can be computed from measurements in only two orthogonal axes . The volume fraction itself will not be subject to anisotropy since it is an inherently scalar quantity . We made measurements in a plane parallel to the cerebellar surface by having one ion - selective micropipette and two sources ; one axis from source to micropipette was aligned with the parallel fibre beam ( denoted by subscript / / ) and the other was perpendicular to this direction ( subscript I ) . We made anisotropy measurements both with cations ( TMA ) and anions ( cx - NS ) . Representative records are shown in Fig . 8 . The graph of A \ Ci / ACa , 0 i against erfc { Afri / 2V ( Dt ) } , where i takes the values I and / / , confirmed that the records fit the solution to the diffusion equation and implied that Al and A / / were similar for all these experiments . at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN 241 A detailed analysis of experiments in three animals using TMA gave values for ( A / / , Al and A , ) that were ( 1P43 + 005 , 1V58 + 006 and 1P52 + 0±11 ) while three separate experiments with aNS gave values of ( 1I55 + 007 , 153 + 0 - 15 and 1 - 57 + 0 - 13 ) respectively . The calculations are described in the Appendix . The differences between any of these values for A were not statistically significant . These results do not provide mm TMA mM a - NS 11 4 / 0 . 8 0 / / b AC Ao O2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0 * 010 mM mM5 . , 2 0 - 5 ~ ~ ~ ~ 1 ACI A - 2 . [ - - 0 - U 0 0 - 7 20 s ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ erfc ( 2yi ( D ) ) Fig . 8 . Test for anisotropy in diffusion . Two sources and an ion - selective micropipette were located in a plane parallel to and about 2OOum below the cerebellar surface to test for anisotropy ( see text and Appendix ) . Symbols / / and l refer to orientation of the axis from source to micropipette with respect to the parallel fibres . Suffix b indicates brain and a , agar gel . Two separate experiments are shown , one using TMA and the other using a - NS . Points corresponding to instants on the rising phases ofthe records are plotted in the graph on the right for both brain and agar ( lower data points ) . The data from / / and l orientation are similar ( same A value used for each orientation ) and do not suggest anisotropy ; more detailed analysis confirms this ( see text ) . any evidence for anisotropy in the diffusion coefficient in the molecular layer ; the granule cell layer is histologically isotropic . Another possible influence of spatial relations on A and ax is through the effect of inhomogeneity . The cerebellar cortex is a laminar structure with distinctly different cytoarchitectonic features associated with the molecular , Purkinje and granular layers . This inhomogeneity in the direction normal to the surface could be reflected in different diffusion properties . A systematic study of diffusion properties would necessitate the positioning of the electrode array at several successive depths ; the movement of the array through the tissue might tend to change the spacing and make it difficult to resolve small effects . We have not been able to make a detailed examination ofthis issue , therefore , but we have made some determinations . One such experiment is illustrated in Fig . 9 . Diffusion was examined at six different depths . The records appear very similar and this is confirmed by plotting the concentration change against the complementary error function for a set of points on the rising phases of the curves ( Fig . 9 ) . It is seen that all the time courses are quite similar and do not exhibit systematic variation with depth . In other experiments ( not illustrated ) this pattern was also seen , however in some measurements near to the surface ( - ~ 50 , tm ) values of A and a were derived that were closer to unity than the average , i . e . approached the free diffusion values . This suggests that the contributions of the pial - glial interface , as a diffusion barrier , is quite variable between animals . This is at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 242 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS also evident in other studies using superfusion ( see below ) . Our evidence indicates , however , that for depths of 1001tm or more , no significant effects of inhomogeneity were seen despite obvious cytoarchitectonic variation . This lack of evidence for anisotropy and inhomogeneity will be taken up again in the Discussion . TEA 0 * 50 A 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 50 mm - 0 . 12 1 - - 6 A 50g - m mM ~ A A100 Pm a 0 , X 200pm . ' m 4 0 ' AC 0 , I ° 400 m AC - , 0 e , / @ 500 m 2 * 600 m * 0 0 . 2 04 06 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - X 20 s erfc ( , 2 ( Dt ) Fig . 9 . Test for inhomogeneity in diffusion . Records on the left show diffusion curves taken at different depths during one experiment . Graph on the right shows that there is little difference in the diffusion curves at the different depths . Upper dashed line corresponds to regression line for most superficial records ( 50 , um ) , lower line associated with data points is for record at deepest location ( 600flm ) . Each symbol corresponds to a time on the rising phase ofthe ionophoretic curve . Lowest dashed line , adjacent to abscissa shows mean agar regression for this experiment . Charge discrimination A major reason for using both cations and anions as probes ofthe microenvironment was to investigate the possibility of effects due to charge discrimination . Since it is known ( see Nicholson , 1980 ) that long - chain molecules with fixed negative charges are found in the extracellular space , there might be an asymmetric influence on the migration of ions of dissimilar sign . The major weight of evidence against charge discrimination comes from the comparison of all our experiments on cations and anions ( see below ) . In a few experiments we also tried to compare directly the diffusion properties of cations and anions in a way that eliminated possible error due to electrode spacing . We did this by using an array consisting of a TEA - sensing electrode with the reference barrel filled with AsF6 and an AsF6 - sensing electrode the reference barrel of which contained TEA . During the experiment , the reference barrels were alternately used as normal references or ionophoretic sources . Such cross - ionophoresis eliminated the possibility of spacing error . Results from two such experiments are shown in Fig . 10 . The spacings used in these two experiments covered the range of our experiments . The graph shows normalized concentrations and indicates the faster diffusion of AsF6 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN 243 relative to TEA . The inset shows , for the array with smallest spacings , the responses of the two ion - selective micropipettes to a simultaneous step increase in the concen - trations of the two ions . Both electrodes responded rapidly and accurately ; our experiments also confirm that this method of cross - ionophoresis does not damage the micropipettes . The lack of influence of the intrinsic charge of the cerebellum is confirmed by the continuous lines in the graphs of Fig . 10 which are computed with identical values of A for the anion and cation in each case . Thus for the experiment with the 126 , um spacing , A was 1 - 45 and for the 491tm spacing A was 155 . mM - 0 - = AsF6 09 AC 1 - 5 * ~ ~ TEA AQ - 126pum 0 ( s ) 100 mM 20 10E AX F 05 o ~ ~ ~ sF6 TE ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ As6 49jum 0 Time ( s ) 100 Fig . 10 . Test of charge discrimination using double ionophoresis . Arrays were made with pairs of ion - selective micropipettes , the reference barrel of each of which contained the ion that could be sensed by the other one ; in this way the reference barrels could be used for ionophoresis and direct comparison of cationic and anionic diffusion could be made without any spacing error . Two such experiments are shown , using AsFi and TEA at 126 , zm and 49flam . The graph on the right shows that the experimental data points closely fit the theoretical curves ; the curves were calculated with the same A for cations and anions . For the upper data A = 1 - 45 ; for the lower data A = 1 - 55 . The inset shows the responses of the ion - selective micropipettes to pulses of calibrating solutions in the cup above the brain . We did not use the cross - ionophoresis routinely because one must have excellent current - passing capabilities in both reference barrels and rapidly responding ion - sensing capabilities in the other channels . These qualities must be retained throughout the experiment ; inevitably many arrays and experiments must be rejected before such criteria are met . Uptake Some uptake of probe ions is inevitable . The ions will enter cells and cross the blood - brain barrier . Since no probe ions are present initially , the uptake will be essentially irreversible . The point - source diffusion equation and its solution are stated in the Appendix . In order to characterize the uptake process , an uptake constant Ic must be determined . Since the ionophoretic results are so well fitted by curves that at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS do not incorporate 1c , such curves are not an accurate way to determine this constant . Instead we adopted a different approach that relied on superfusing the cerebellum with a fixed concentration of the probe ion until a standing gradient of the ion concentration was achieved . At this point the concentration is simply described by : C ( z ) = C . exp ( - zV ( k ' / D * ) ) , ( 22 ) where C8 is the superfusing concentration and z is the depth ( see Appendix ) . We found that the gradients were effectively constant down to 600 / , m depth after 30 min of A Superfusion B lonophoresis 6 - Normal - - - Uptake 4 50 " m mm 0 - 5 * AsF6 Liot - NS 2 - c TMA 100gum * TEA 0 - 3 0 0 300 600 1 102 104 Depth ( gm ) Time ( s ) Fig . 11 . A shows quasi - steady - state normalized concentration profiles as a function of depth for the four probe ions ( four separate experiments ) . Note the logarithmic ordinate . The discontinuities in slope in the superficial regions suggest a barrier . From curves such as these , the parameter k ' can be calculated . The largest value of k ' is for TMA and this is used to generate the theoretical curves for ionophoresis with and without uptake ( B ) , with a logarithmic time scale ( see Appendix ) . It is seen that uptake of this magnitude has virtually no effect on ionophoresis over a period of 50 s . superfusion and that a logarithmic relation between normalized concentration , 0 ( z ) = 0 ( z ) / C8 , and depth was apparent ( Fig . 11 A ) for each of the ions . The k ' values for the cations were an order of magnitude higher than those for anions . We therefore carried out several experiments with TMA and derived a value for k ' of ( 8 - 6 + 1 - 7 ) x 10 - 4 . s - 1 ( mean + S . E . of mean ) based on twenty - three depth profiles in three different animals . In many experiments some evidence for a surface barrier was seen ( Fig . 11 ) but it can be shown that this has no influence on the derivation of k ' for the region below the barrier . Using the above value of k ' and eqn . ( A14 ) ( Appendix ) we computed the theoretical ionophoretic diffusion curves for TMA and compared them with the curves without uptake for a spacing of 100 , sm . The results are seen in Fig . 11 B and show that over periods of 50 s there is no difference in the curves with and without uptake and even at 100 s the effect is very small . This confirms that uptake can be neglected in the analysis of the diffusion curves , over periods of 50 s or less . 244 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN Quantitative summary of the data All the experiments described above confirm that the parameters A and a are unaffected by any of the factors considered and thus one should be justified in averaging over all the experiments that were performed with each ion species . We first present the values of D and n obtained in the agar at the end of each experiment and then the values for A and a in the brain . TABLE 2 . Diffusion coefficients and electrode transport numbers measured in agar gel Diffusion coefficient ( D x 105 ) Transport number ( n ) No . of Measured Literature deter - Ion cm2 . s cm2 . s8 - Measured Calculated minations TMA 1 . 11 + 0 - 10 1 . 141 0 - 32 + 0 - 03 037 30 TEA 0 - 79 + 010 0 - 751 0 - 29 + 0 - 11 0 - 30 59 a - NS 0 - 76 + 012 0 . 782 0 - 057 + 0 - 013 0 - 36 37 AsF6 140±0 - 04 1413 0 - 29 + 0 - 06 050 41 ' Hertz , Lindman & Siepe ( 1969 ) ; 2Randel & Parai - Koshits ( 1965 ) ; calculated from conduc - tivity data for PF6 ( Robinson , Stokes & Stokes , 1961 ) and bond length ratio for PF , to AsF . ( Dean , 1979 ) . Calculated transport numbers derived from formula n = Ac + / ( Ac + + Ac W ) where Ac is ionic conductivity data from Dean ( 1979 ) . Ac for a - NS was based on data for a - naphthalene acetate . All measurements at 37 IC ; literature and calculated values corrected to this temperature . Measured values are mean + S . E . of mean . TABLE 3 . Tortuosity and volume fraction in the cerebellum 0 = a Tortuosity Volume fraction A3 No . of Ion A a 0 determinations TMA 1 - 49 + 0 - 05 0 - 18 + 0 - 02 0 - 056 + 0 - 017 42 TEA 1 - 48 + 0 - 05 0 - 21 + 0 - 05 0 - 061±0 - 019 57 a - NS 1P54 + 0 - 07 0 - 18 + 0 - 03 0 - 050±0 - 006 51 AsF6 1 - 68 + 0 - 10 0 - 26 + 0 - 04 0 - 054 + 0 - 008 50 All ions 1 55 + 0 - 05 0 - 21 + 0 - 02 0 - 055 + 0±002 200 Using analysis of variance for each parameter ( A , a and 0 ) , the mean values obtained with different ions do not differ significantly from the mean obtained by pooling data for all ions ( P > 0 - 2 for each parameter ) . All determinations at 37 IC . Data are mean + s . E . of mean . Examples of records taken in agar are shown in Figs 3 - 6 and 8 . The data derived from such measurements are summarized in Table 2 , together with values of D and n derived from data in the literature . The values of D determined by our ionophoretic method agree closely with those determined by other means . The transport numbers for cations are also close to those that would be predicted from theory , but the experimental values for anions are lower than the theoretical values , especially in the case of a - NS . It is also clear that , although several different electrodes were used for each ion , the standard errors of the means are small , indicating that the transport numbers are a characteristic of the ion - micropipette system rather than a feature of particular electrode tip geometries . The data for the brain are summarized in Table 3 . For each ion , mean values of 245 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS A and a have been determined . These values are based on more than forty separate analyses of diffusion taken with at least five different electrode arrays and five separate animals for each ion . The major finding is that the mean values of A for all four ions were not statistically different and the average of these means was 1X55 + 0X05 . Similarly the mean values for a were not statistically different and average 0X21 + 0X02 . A further demonstration of the generality of these numbers was provided by the estimates of 0 , the quantity ac / A3 , that is independent of electrode spacing error ( eqn ( 21 ) . Once again , differences between mean values for each experiment did not differ statistically and the average value was 0 - 055 + 0 - 002 . DISCUSSION Theory of diffusion in complex media Our theoretical basis is derived from that developed for transport in porous media . Using this theory , two essential parameters are identified that typify complex media : the volume fraction a , and the tortuosity A . Volume fraction is an intuitively simple concept being just the volume of extracellular space relative to that of the whole tissue . Tortuosity , on the other hand , is not easily characterized . It relates to the increase in path length of a diffusing particle , in a complex medium , in contrast to that in a free medium . Here we have relied on a derivation by Lehner ( 1979 ) that introduces tortuosity as a transformation between two vectorial functions of the concentration distribution ( eqn . ( A3 ) Appendix ) . Volume fraction and tortuosity , of course , have long been recognized as parameters associated with diffusion in cellular ensembles ( Harris & Burn , 1949 ; McLennan , 1956b , 1957 ; Krnjevic & Mitchell , 1960 ; Herz , Zieglginsberger & Farber , 1969 ; Levin , Fenstermacher & Patlak , 1970 ; Fenstermacher & Patlack , 1975 ; Safford & Bassingthwaighte , 1977 ) but the inherent nature ofthe parameters and their indepen - dence has frequently been obscure . A particular instance of this , discussed elsewhere ( Nicholson et al . 1979 ; Gardner - Medwin , 1980 ) , is the failure to incorporate A and a as separate factors into expressions for ionophoresis from a point source ( Curtis , Perrin & Watkins , 1960 ; Herz et al . 1969 ; Lux & Neher , 1973 ) . The parameters A and a have also been identified in studies of biological impedance , for example in muscles , the parameter o - used by Adrian , Chandler & Hodgkin ( 1969 ) corresponds to the r used by Mathias , Eisenberg & Valdiosera ( 1977 ) and these parameters would be related to A - ' in this study . Impedance methods have been used to estimate the volume fraction , usually treating the brain as a dilute suspension of spheres and employing Maxwell ' s formula ( Horstmann & Meves , 1959 ; Fenstermacher , Li & Levin , 1970 ; Van Harreveld , 1966 ) . For a volume fraction of 0 - 21 Maxwell ' s formula ( Crank , 1975 ) would predict a tortuosity of 1 - 18 which is not in close agreement with the results present here , indicating that the use of this formula does not provide an accurate model for the cerebellum . In addition to defining the parameters A and a , the theory described here provides the framework for dealing with spatial and temporal variation in the brain - cell microenvironment . Such dynamic properties ( Nicholson , 1980 ) are encountered during epileptic seizure ( Dietzel et al . , 1980 ) and in spreading depression and anoxia ( Van Harreveld , 1966 ; Phillips & Nicholson , 1979 ; Hansen & Olsen , 1980 ; Nicholson & Kraig , 1981 ) . 246 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN Diffusion in agar and brain Our measurements of the diffusion coefficient for the four ions used agrees well with independent estimates based on thee literature ( Table 2 ) . Electrode transport numbers for TMA and TEA are close to the theoretical values but those for AsF6 and a - NS are distinctly lower than theory predicts . The reduction in anion transport numbers has been surmised before ( Agin , 1969 ; Hill - Smith & Purves , 1978 ) and may reflect the influence of charged groups associated with the glass of the micropipette . When our techniques are applied to the brain , the most striking finding is the constancy of A and ax . Within the ranges tested , these parameters appear to be independent of electrode spacing , ionophoretic current , location and orientation of the array and the ionic species . This last point is noteworthy since we found no statistical difference between cation and anion migration , despite the presumed presence of fixed negative charges in the extracellular space ( Schmitt & Samson , 1969 ; Margolis & Margolis , 1977 ; Nicholson , 1980 ) and despite potentially different uptake properties for the different ions . It seems that these factors are too small to perturb ion migration significantly over the distances and times examined . In fact the ionic concentration level produced by the bias current does not reach the theoretical value , presumably because the small steady - state uptake processes , revealed by superfusion ( Appendix ) become significant over extended periods ( see Fig . 11 ) . The lack of effect of spacing and current strength indicates that the relatively high concentration gradient created by the point ionophoretic source does not influence the measure - ments , nor does any local damage around either the ionophoretic electrode or ion - selective micropipette . The lack of signs of anisotropy or inhomogeneity in our measurements deserves comment . Our experiments were not ideally suited to such determinations , and more elaborate studies might reveal some effects , but the indications are that anisotropy and inhomogeneity have little influence on diffusion , whereas these features clearly affect impedance measurements in the cerebellum ( Yedlin et al . , 1974 ; Nicholson & Freeman , 1975 ) , assuming that the species differences are not significant . An explanation may be that our diffusion experiments have employed ions that migrate within the extracellular space , and the constancy of A and a suggests that the ' granularity ' of the extracellular space is sufficiently high for variations in cell structure to be averaged out . This is plausible because it is likely that the averaging volume is a few micrometers , sufficient to encompass a great many cellular elements ( glial processes , dendrites , axons , somata ) . Although the cytoarchitectonic pattern will vary with direction ( anistotropy ) and location ( inhomogeneity ) , the mean granularity would seem to be little altered . When a current is applied , as is the case during impedance measurements , a very different situation exists . This type of experiment has been studied in detail by Gardner - Medwin and collaborators ( Gardner - Medwin , 1980 ) . Briefly , when current is passed through the brain it has access to both the extracellular and intracellular space ; the amount of current that traverses the intracellular space of a group of cells is determined by the cells ' electrical geometry , i . e . their electrical length constant and spatial orientation ( Ranck , 1963 ; Havstad , 1976 ; Gardner - Medwin , 1980 ) . Now an alignment of cellular elements in a particular direction will permit more current to flow with that orientation and this will be reflected in the determinations of anisotropy and inhomogeneity . In fact the degree 247 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS of anisotropy measured using electrical techniques can be influenced by the dimensions over which the measurements are made relative to the space constants of the intrinsic core conductors , and thus this approach does not provide a true estimate of ' local ' anisotropy ( Gardner - Medwin , 1980 ) . An important corollary of this is that the anomalous nature of K + migration ( Gardner - Medwin , 1977 , 1980 ; Nicholson et al . 1979 ) can now be understood . K + is not an ion that remains in the extracellular space but is in fact the major current carrier across cell membranes . This fact can entirely account for some of the earlier paradoxes associated with the diffusion of K + in the brain ( see Gardner - Medwin , Gibson & Willshaw , 1979 ; Gardner - Medwin , 1980 for discussion of this problem ) . No values of A or a have been reported for the cerebellum . Estimates have been made for A , using radiotracer methods , in several other tissues . Levin et at . ( 1970 ) reported that A was 1 - 4 for the cerebral cortex , using radiolabelled sucrose and inulin as probes . Later Patlak & Fenstermacher ( 1975 ) reported a value of 1 - 5 for the caudate nucleus in the dog and in a more extensive sequence of experiments , values ranging from 1 - 4 to 2 - 3 for various species and regions of the C . N . S . Many estimates of volume fraction have been made over the years , based on a variety of techniques including the analysis of electron micrographs , impedance measurements and radio - tracer studies . An early impedance study by Horstmann & Meves ( 1959 ) , together with electron micrographic evidence , suggested that the volume fraction was about 0 04 . This estimate was contested in several papers by Van Harreveld and co - workers ( Van Harreveld , Crowell & Malhotra , 1965 ; Van Harreveld & Malhotra , 1967 ; Van Harreveld , 1972 ) who claimed that the anatomical evidence was based on a misleading occlusion of extracellular spaces during the processing of the tissue and that the actual extracellular volume fractions were 0 - 18 - 0 25 . In recent years several lines of evidence have supported Van Harreveld ; for example , Levin et al . ( 1970 ) estimated that a was 0417 - 020 for the cerebral cortex and reviewed earlier studies . A later analysis of five species and several regions gave values between 0 - 12 and 0 - 25 ( Fenstermacher & Patlack , 1975 ) . Cragg ( 1979 ) returned to electron microscopy and concluded that the adult mammalian brain had an a value of 0 - 17 - 20 . The evidence presented here further substantiates the idea that about one fifth of the brain is extracellular space . It is worth noting that the methods used in this study permit the simultaneous measurement of A and a in a very small volume of living tissue in a period of less than one minute . Older techniques frequently required prolonged or post - mortem analysis and large tissue volumes . In fact the technique presented here can be used to follow variations in A and a during changes in brain state . An important aspect of tortuosity and volume fraction is the combination of these variables in the form A2 / a to increase the effective strength of a given source relative to a free medium . This is particularly evident in Figs . 3 - 6 . The factor A2 / a approaches 12 and is likely to be quite significant for endogenous ionic sources ( e . g . action and synaptic currents ) in the brain . The time course of the diffusion is also modified by the tortuosity , but this is less evident than the magnitude effect in the type of experiment presented here . We conclude that , despite the complexity of the brain cell microenvironment , the macroscopic laws of diffusion , when generalized to include A and a , accurately describe those aspects of ionic dispersion that are attributable to movement in the extracellular space . 248 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN APPENDIX Equations for diffusion in a complex medium This section outlines the development of the diffusion equations for a complex medium and derives certain specific results for point - source ionophoresis and ion - selective micropipettes . General equations Fick ' s Law for the interstitial space was stated in the Theory section as : J = - DVCo . ( 1 ) Using the definition of the volume average stated in the Theory section eqn ( 3 ) we obtain : < J > = - D < VCO > ( A 1 ) assuming D to be spatially independent . The average of the gradient may be expanded using a form of the so - called averaging theorem ( e . g . Gray & Lee , 1977 , p . 338 , eqn . ( 15 ) ) that states : < VCo > = V < Co > + 4JCoid2x , ( A 2 ) where the area integral is over the interfaces , A , between the extracellular and intracellular phases and the unit normal vector ff is directed outward from the extracellular space . This surface integral has no simple interpretation , but Lehner ( 1979 ) has shown that HA COfd2x = ( K - I ) V < Co > , ( A3 ) where K is a second order tensor and I the identity . In the case of a free medium A is zero and K = I . In a complex medium K generally differs from I . Consequently by combining eqns . ( 1 ) and ( A 1 - A 3 ) we obtain Fick ' s Law for a complex medium : < J > = - D * V < Co > ( 4 ) where D * = DK is the apparent diffusion coefficient of the tissue . Note that K does not depend on concentration ( Lehner , 1979 , p . 823 , eqns . ( 22 ) and ( 23 ) ) . From now on we shall consider that K is a scalar . This is equivalent to the assumption that the medium is isotropic with regard to diffusion . This assumption will be discussed later . As a scalar , K can be identified with the quantity 1 / A2 where A is the tortuosity factor that has been introduced frequently into the biological diffusion literature ( Harris & Burn , 1949 ; McLennan , 1956b , 1957 ; Fenstermacher & Patlak , 1975 ; Safford & Bassingthwaite , 1977 ; Nicholson et al . 1979 ; Nicholson , 1980 ) . This is intuitively thought of as the increase in path length of a diffusing particle in a tortuous medium . Such a factor should therefore be related to the geometry of the medium . In the general case , however , this relationship has not been derived . We note a potential source of confusion . In the porosity literature , tortuosity is sometimes defined as the surface integral in eqn . ( A 2 ) . Such a definition implies that the tortuosity is concentration - dependent . The quantity that we denote by A is 249 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 250 C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS dimensionless and is directly related to K ; this latter quantity has been called the ' intrinsic conductivity ' ( Lehner , 1979 ) . The quantity A2 would thus be an ' intrinsic resistivity ' ; we shall continue in this paper , however , to refer to A as the tortuosity of the medium to conform to common usage in the biological field . D * is then defined by eqn . ( 4 ) . Conservation of material within the interstitial space leads to the relation : V . J + at = q , ( A4 ) where q is the source density . Taking the volume average of this equation , we obtain : ( VJ + aCo ) < V - + = < q > . ( A 5 ) Again , use of the averaging theorem leads to : < V . J > = V . < J > + + V XJ . nd2x . In the ideal case the material of interest remains wholly confined to the extracellular compartment ; then , on A , . n = 0 . ( A6 ) Where the interfaces have a finite permeability , we may frequently write , for A : J . ir = k ( CO - Cj ) ( A7 ) where k is the mass transfer coefficient and Cj is the local non - extracellular concentration at any point on A . For the rest of this development we shall assume that condition ( A 6 ) holds , since our experiments support this assumption over the brief times associated with ionophoresis . The case of uptake will be analysed later . Without uptake we simply have < V . J > = V . < J > . The averaged time derivative in eqn . ( A 5 ) can be related to the time derivative by using a second averaging theorem ( Gray & Lee , 1977 , p . 340 , equation 33 ) that takes into account the velocities of the surfaces A . Since we are assuming a static medium here it can be immediately shown that < aCo / at > = a < C0 > / at . These consider - ations enable us to write eqn . ( A 5 ) as : . < > + a < ' Co > = q > . ( A 8 ) Combining eqns . ( 4 ) and ( A8 ) together with eqn . ( 7 ) we obtain Fick ' s Second Law , as stated in the Theory section : D * V2 < Co > o + < q > / a = aT > ( 9 ) Note that if Q is the total amount of material added to the tissue per unit time , for example the quantity of ions leaving an ionophoretic electrode , then J < q > d3x = Q = Jqd3x where U represents the entire space volume . at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN 251 In eqn . ( 9 ) the complicated boundary conditions associated with the intercellular clefts have been replaced by the parameters A and a through the introduction of averaged variables . Equation ( 9 ) is formally analogous to an equation in a new , non - averaged , concentration C ' in a simple medium with diffusion coefficient D * and source < q > / a ; this equation would be D * V2C ' + < q > = 8C ' ( A 9 ) By solving eqn . ( A 9 ) , the boundary conditions of which are generally simple , < CO > O = C ' can be obtained . In practice the presence of the quantity < q > is often undesirable because even when q is completely defined , as in the present case , < q > must be derived and this depends on a specification of the averaging volume V . For example if q is a point source , then the averaging process converts this into an extended source occupying a volume V . The concept of superposition , or application of the principle of reciprocity ( Purves , 1977 ) , allows us to solve a new equation : D * V2C + q aC ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ( 10 ) a at in the variable C for a non - averaged source , and then to average the solution in order to arrive at C ' and consequently < CO > 0 . So we can write < CO > O = C ' = < C > , ( A 10 ) where C is the solution to eqn ( 10 ) in a simple medium ( < C > = < C > 0 for a simple medium ) . This still involves an averaging process , over C instead of q , now , but this too can be eliminated by expanding < C > in a Taylor series ( e . g . Whitaker , 1969 ) . < C0 > 0 cannot be expanded in this way because CO is not sufficiently well behaved mathematically in the complex medium , but the new variable C is well behaved since it is associated with the simple medium . < C > = 4 Xfcx + ) d3 e V v where e are co - ordinates relative to the centroid of V , then aCC 1 a2CC < C > = C ( X ) Jd36 + ei d36 + 2 es e d36 + . . where repeated indices imply summation . By virtue of the coordinate e being defined with respect to the centroid of V , this expansion reduces to a2 < C > = C + - V2C + terms in a3 and higher powers 6 assuming that V is symmetrical about the centroid with dimension 1 = 2a . Using the fact that away from the source V2C = ( 1 / D * ) aC / at we can write , for sufficiently small a , using eqn . ( A 10 ) , a a ( using ~ ~ ~ ~ < C > C + a2C 6D * at ( 1 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS Size of error in using C as an estimate of < C > We can define error as E = ( < C > - C ) / C ( r , co ) hence from eqn . ( 11 ) E a2 1 ac . 6D * C ( r , ) at . ( All ) For a point source C is given by eqn . ( 14 ) and the time derivative is at ( 47TD * t ) 3 / 2a P { 4D * t } ( A 12 ) where ( A 12 ) is simply the instantaneous point solution to the diffusion equation . This has a maximum value at t = r2 / 6D * and this will place an upper bound on E . Using this value and the appropriate expression for C ( r , cc ) we can evaluate eqn . ( A 11 ) as E = 0 - 154 ( a / r ) 2 . For a = 5 # m and r = 50Qum this gives a value for E of 0 - 154 % , i . e . for all points on the concentration curve that have values of , say , 1 - 5 % or more of the asymptotic value the error will be negligible . Most errors will in fact be less than this , since the value of E is the maximum attainable . In practice this means that , apart from very early times , < C > and C are virtually identical . This indicates that it is unnecessary to average solutions to arrive at accurate results in the context of the experiments described here . First - order irreversible uptake If uptake is not negligible , then eqn . ( A7 ) may be used . This expression has the same form as that discussed by Lehner ( 1979 , p . 824 , eqn . ( 26 ) ) except that Lehner considered the second concentration term to be a local surface equilibrium concen - tration , such as might be appropriate for problems of adsorption , rather than an intracellular concentration as used here . From the viewpoint of the extracellular medium , adsorption and uptake are indistinguishable if both obey similar kinetics . Lehner ( 1979 ) has shown that the derivation of K , and hence the tortuosity , is unchanged by the addition of a term of the form given in eqn ( A 7 ) . Comparison of Lehner ' s eqns . ( 10 ) and ( 38 ) ( Lehner , 1979 , pp . 822 and 824 ) with the aid of his eqns . ( 26 ) and ( 36 ) shows that T k ( Co - Cz ) d2x = k ' ( < Co > o - C ) ( A 13 ) in our notation , where k ' = aok and oa is the ratio of the total surfaces A , within V , to the extracellular volume V0 . Note that the sign in front of the mass transfer term in eqn . ( 38 ) of Lehner should be negative . To make the above identification correctly it is necessary to assume that Ci is constant . Since we are dealing with uptake into a non - extracellular space that initially contains no probe ion we can assume that Ci = 0 and that all flux will be unidirectional , initially . Since the non - extracellular volume is much larger than the extracellular , if uptake is slow , Ci will continue to be small for an appreciable time and eqn . ( A 13 ) , with C1 = 0 , provides a useful 252 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN 253 approximation . Following arguments similar to those developed in the Theory section , the point - source equation now becomes D _ _ a2 QH ( t ) 6 ( r ) - k0 ( r ) ar2 ( rC ) - car2 kC at The solution to this is : C ( r , t ) = ( Q / 8irD * ar ) { exp ( rA / ( k ' / D * ) ) erfc ( r / 2A / ( D * t ) + N / ( k ' t ) ) + exp ( - rV / ( k ' / D * ) ) erfc ( r / 2V / ( D * t ) - V ( k ' t ) ) } . ( A 14 ) This can be derived from a formally analogous problem in cable theory ( Jack et al . 1975 , p . 95 , eqn . 5 . 36 ) . In the limit as t - + o0 C ( r , oc ) = 4D Q exp ( - r - / ( k ' D * ) ) indicating that for long current passage , the asymptotic value will be diminished by an exponential factor . It is this factor that probably accounts for the low base - line values with the bias current . Equation ( A 14 ) is used to compute the curves in Fig . 1iB . The equation for superfusion follows from the simple one - dimensional analysis in rectangular coordinates and has the form : D * a2Ck0C = ac with the boundary conditions 0 ( 0 , t ) = C0 where C8 is a fixed surface concentration . For a standing gradient aC / at = 0 and this leads to eqn . ( 22 ) given in the text . Diffusion from a point source in an anisotropic medium In order to test for anisotropy , eqn . ( 10 ) is modified for the case of three distinct components of A associated with a principal axis system coincident with the intrinsic rectangular geometry of the cerebellum ( c . f . Nicholson , 1973 ; Nicholson & Freeman , 1975 ) . The intrinsic rectangular co - ordinate system of the cerebellum implies that three distinct components of the diffusion coefficient tensor may exist , D * = D / A , D - = D / A , D * = D / A2 . We obtain an equation of the form : Y Y ~ ~ z z D * 8aXC2 D * + D + D * a ac . ( A 15 ) X a2 Y ay2 ZaZ2 a We define a new co - ordinate system ( Carslaw & Jaeger , 1959 , Section 1 18 ; Crank , 1975 , Section 1 - 4 ) such that 6 = xV1 ( P / D * ) , y = yV / ( P / D * ) , C = z / ( P / D * ) where P is an arbitrary constant with the dimensionality of D . The source q = Q ( t ) d ( x ) = Q ( t ) d ( x ) d ( y ) d ( z ) . This transforms to ( q = Q ( t ) { Pt / IV ( D * D * D * ) } & ( f ) & ( y ) 8 ( C ) and one obtains a new version of eqn . ( 10 ) : QM Q ) ac where a ' = a - / ( D * DZ * D * ) / Pi . This equation is formally identical to the equation for an isotropic medium and at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS may be further transformed to spherical polar co - ordinates leading to the solution : C ( Y , t ) = LLQ - erfc ( A16 ) 47 % - xzR 2V % / ( Et ) ' A6 where R = ( DD * X2 + D * D * y2 + D * D * Z2 ) , E = D * DZD * ' . Measurements were actually made at the points ( x , 0 , 0 ) and ( 0 , y , 0 ) for which eqn . ( A 16 ) simplifies to C QAA ic ( A XAX Ct ) = 4nrcDx ~ 2 - / ( Dt1 ) i A } ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ( A 17 ) C ( y , t ) 4 = fcy erfc ( J Analysis ofthe time course ofthe diffusion curves yields Ax and Ay ( A / / and A1 ) while the asymptotic estimates give Ay Azl / o and AzAxl / c . We have derived an estimate of a by assuming homogeneity for an experiment ; then we used this to estimate AZ . Since two values of Az can be calculated we quote the mean values in the text . We are grateful to Dr A . R . Gardner - Medwin for many valuable discussions . The work was supported by United States Public Health Service Grant NS - 13742 . REFERENCES ADRIAN , R . H . , CHANDLER , W . K . & HODGKIN , A . L . ( 1969 ) . The kinetics of mechanical activation in frog muscle . J . Physiol . 204 , 207 - 230 . AGIN , D . P . ( 1969 ) . Electrochemical properties of glass microelectrodes . In Glass Microelectrodes , ed . LAVALLEE , M . , SCHANNE , 0 . F . & HERBERT , N . C . , pp . 62 - 75 . New York : Wiley . ARMSTRONG , C . M . & BINSTOCK , L . ( 1965 ) . Anomalous rectification in the squid giant axon injected with tetraethylammonium chloride . J . gen . Physiol . 48 , 859 - 872 . BAUM , G . ( 1972 ) . The influence of hydrophobic interactions on the electrochemical selectivity ratios of liquid membrane responsive to organic ions . J . phys . Chem . 76 , 1872 - 1875 . CARSLAW , H . S . & JAEGER , J . C . ( 1959 ) . Conduction of Heat in Solids , 2nd edn . Oxford : Clarendon Press . COETZEE , C . J . & FREISER , H . ( 1969 ) . Liquid - liquid membrane electrodes based on ion association extraction systems . Analyt . Chem . 41 , 1128 - 1130 . CORDINGLY , G . E . & SOMJEN , G . G . ( 1978 ) . The clearing of excess potassium from extracellular space in spinal cord and cerebral cortex . Brain Res . 151 , 291 - 306 . CRAGG , B . ( 1979 ) . Brain extracellular space fixed for electron microscopy . Neurosci Lett . 15 , 301 - 306 . CRANK , J . ( 1975 ) . The Mathematics of Diffusion , 2nd edn . Oxford : Clarendon Press . CURTIS , D . R . , PERRIN , D . D . & WATKINS , J . C . ( 1960 ) . The excitation of spinal rneurones by the ionophoretic application of agents which chelate calcium . J . Neurochem . 6 , 1 - 20 . DEAN , J . A . ( 1978 ) . Lange ' s Handbook of Chemistry , 12th edn . New York : McGraw - Hill . DIETZEL , I . , HEINEMANN , U . , HOFMEIER , G . & Lux , H . D . ( 1980 ) . Transient changes in the size of the extracellular space in the sensorimotor cortex of cats in relation to stimulus induced changes in potassium concentrations . Exp . Brain Res . 40 , 432 - 439 . DIONNE , V . E . ( 1976 ) . Characterization of drug iontophoresis with a fast microassay technique . Biophys . J . 16 , 705 - 717 . DIONNE , V . E . & STEVENS , C . F . ( 1975 ) . Voltage dependence of agonist effectiveness at the frog neuromuscular junction : resolution of a paradox . J . Physiol . 251 , 245 - 270 . 254 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN ECCLES , J . C . , LLINAS , R . & SASAKI , K . ( 1966 ) . Parallel fiber stimulation and the responses induced thereby in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum . Exp . Brain Res . 1 , 17 - 39 . EISENMAN , G . ( 1961 ) . Cation selective glass electrodes and their mode of operation . Biophy8 . J . 2 ( part 2 ) , 259 - 323 . FELDBERG , W . & FLEISCHHAUER , K . ( 1960 ) . Penetration of bromophenol blue from the perfused cerebral ventricles into brain tissue . J . Phy8iol . 150 , 451 - 462 . FENSTERMACHER , J . D . , Li , C . - L . & LEVIN , V . A . ( 1970 ) . Extracellular space of the cerebral cortex of normothermic and hypothermic cats . Expl Neurol . 27 , 101 - 114 . FENSTERMACHER , J . D . & PATLAK , C . S . ( 1975 ) . The exchange of material between cerebrospinal fluid and brain . In Fluid Environment of the Brain , ed . CSERR , H . F . , FENSTERMACHER , J . D . & FENCL , V . , pp . 201 - 214 . New York : Academic . FISHER , R . S . , PEDLEY , T . A . & PRINCE , D . A . ( 1976 ) . Kinetics of potassium movement in normal cortex . Brain Re8 . 101 , 223 - 237 . GARDNER - MEDWIN , A . R . ( 1977 ) . The migration of potassium produced by electric current through brain tissue . J . Physiol . 269 , 32 - 33P . GARDNER - MEDWIN , A . R . ( 1978 ) . The amplitude and time course of extracellular potassium concentration changes during potassium flux through brain tissue . J . Physiol . 284 , 38 - 39P . GARDNER - MEDWIN , A . R . ( 1980 ) . Membrane transport and solute migration affecting the brain cell microenvironment . Neurosci . Res . Progr . Bull . 18 , 208 - 226 . GARDNER - MEDWIN , A . R . , GIBSON , J . L . & WILLSHAW , D . J . ( 1979 ) . The mechanism of potassium dispersal in brain tissue . J . Physiol . 293 , 37 - 38P . GLOBUS , A . ( 1973 ) . Iontophoretic injection techniques . In Bioelectric Recording Techniques , vol . 1 A , ed . THOMPSON , R . F . & PATTERSON , M . M . pp . 23 - 38 . New York : Academic . GRAY , W . G . & LEE , P . C . Y . ( 1977 ) . On the theorems for local volume averaging of multiphase systems . Int . J . Multipha8e Flow 3 , 333 - 340 . HANSEN , A . J . & OLSEN , C . E . ( 1980 ) . Brain extracellular space during spreading depression and ischemia . Acta physiol . scand . 108 , 355 - 365 . HARRIS , E . J . & BURN , G . P . ( 1949 ) . The transfer of sodium and potassium ions between muscle and the surrounding medium . Trans . Faraday Soc . 45 , 508 - 528 . HAVSTAD , J . W . ( 1976 ) . Electrical impedance of cerebral cortex : An experimental and theoretical investigation . Dissertation ( Ph . D ) . Stanford University . HERZ , A . , ZEIGLGANSBERGER , W . & FARBER , G . ( 1969 ) . Microelectrophoretic studies concerning the spread of glutamic acid and GABA in brain tissue . Exp . Brain Res . 9 , 221 - 235 . HERTZ , H . G . , LINDMAN , B . & SIEPE , V . ( 1969 ) . Translational motion and hydration of the symmetrical tetraalkylammonium ions in aqueous solution . Deutsche Bun8engesellschaft f . Physical . Chem . 73 , 542 - 549 . HILL - SMITH , I . & PuIRVES , R . D . ( 1978 ) . Synaptic delay in the heart : an iontophoretic study . J . Physiol . 279 , 31 - 54 . HORSTMANN , E . & MEVES , H . ( 1959 ) . Die Feinstruktur des molekularen Rindengraues und ihre physiolgische Bedeutung . Z . Zellfor8ch . mikrolk . Anat . 49 , 569 - 604 . ISHIBASHI , N . , KOHARA , H . & HORINOUCHI , K . ( 1973 ) . Aromatic sulfonate ion selective electrode membrane with Crystal Violet as ion exchange site . Talanta 20 , 867 - 874 . JACK , J . J . B . , NOBLE , D . & TSIEN , R . W . ( 1975 ) . Electric Current Flow in Excitable Cells . Oxford : Clarendon Press . JAEGER , J . C . ( 1965 ) . Diffusion from constrictions . In Studies in Physiology , ed . CUIRTIS , D . R . & MCINTYRE , A . K . , pp . 106 - 117 . New York : Springer - Verlag . KEYNES , R . D . ( 1954 ) . The ionic fluxes in frog muscle . Proc . R . Soc . B . 142 , 359 - 382 . KOOTSEY , J . M . & JOHNSON , E . A . ( 1973 ) . Buffer amplifier with femtofarad input capacity using operational amplifiers . IEEE Trans . bio - med . Eng . 20 , 389 - 391 . KRNJEVI6 , K . & MITCHELL , J . F . ( 1960 ) . Diffusion of acetylcholine in agar gels and in the isolated rat diaphragm . J . Physiol . 153 , 562 - 572 . KRNJEVI6 , K . & MORRIS , M . E . ( 1974 ) . Extracellular accumulation of K + evoked by activity of primary afferent fibers in the cuneate nucleus and dorsal horn of cats . Can . J . Physiol . Pharmac . 52 , 852 - 871 . LAUFFER , M . A . ( 1961 ) . Theory of diffusion in gels . Biophys . J . 1 , 205 - 213 . LEHNER , F . K . ( 1979 ) . On the validity of Fick ' s Law for transient diffusion through a porous medium . Chem . Engng Sci . 34 , 821 - 825 . 255 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from C . NICHOLSON AND J . M . PHILLIPS LEvIN , V . A . , FENSTERMACHER , J . D . & PATLAK , C . S . ( 1970 ) . Sucrose and inulin space measure - ments of cerebral cortex in four mammalian species . Am . J . Phyeiol . 219 , 1528 - 1533 . LLINAS , R . & SUGIMORI , M . ( 1980 ) . Electrophysiological properties of in vitro Purkinje cell somata in mammalian cerebellar slices . J . Phyaiol . 305 , 171 - 195 . Lux , H . D . ( 1974 ) . Fast recording ion specific microelectrodes : their use in pharmacological studies in the CNS . Neuropharmacology 13 , 509 - 517 . Lux , H . D . , LORACHER , C . & NEHER , E . ( 1970 ) . The action ofammonium on postsynaptic inhibition of cat spinal motoneurons . Exp . Brain Re8 . 11 , 431 - 447 . Lux , H . D . & NEHER , E . ( 1973 ) . The equilibration time course of [ K + ] o in cat cortex . Exp . Brain Res . 17 , 190 - 205 . MCLENNAN , H . ( 1956a ) . The diffusion of potassium , inulin and thiocyanate in the extracellular spaces of mammalian muscle . Biochim . biophys . Acta 21 , 472 - 481 . MCLENNAN , H . ( 1956b ) . Physical and chemical factors affecting potassium movements in mam - malian muscle . Biochim . biophys . Acta 22 , 30 - 37 . MCLENNAN , H . ( 1957 ) . The diffusion of potassium , sodium , sucrose and inulin in the extracellular spaces of mammalian tissues . Biochim . biophys . Acta 24 , 1 - 8 . MARGOLIS , R . U . & MARGOLIS , R . K . ( 1977 ) . Metabolism and function of glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans in nervous tissue . Int . J . Biochem . 8 , 85 - 91 . MATHIAS , R . T . , EISENBERG , R . S . & VALDIOSERA , R . ( 1977 ) . Electrical properties of frog skeletal muscle fibers interpreted with a mesh model of the tubular system . Biophys . J . 17 , 57 - 93 . NEHER , E . & Lux , H . D . ( 1973 ) . Rapid changes of potassium concentration at the outer surface of exposed single neurons during membrane current flow . J . gen . Phyeiol . 61 , 385 - 399 . NICHOLSON , C . ( 1973 ) . Theoretical analysis of field potentials in anisotropic ensembles of neuronal elements . IEEE Trans . bio - med . Eng . 20 , 278 - 288 . NICHOLSON , C . ( 1979 ) . Brain cell microenvironment as a communication channel . In The Neuro - sciences Fourth Study Program , ed . SCHMITT , F . 0 . & WARDEN , F . G . , pp . 457 - 476 . Cambridge : Massachusetts Institute of Technology . NICHOLSON , C . ( 1980 ) . Dynamics of the brain cell microenvironment . Neurosci . Res . Progr . Bull . 18 , 183 - J22 . NICHOLSON , C . & FREEMAN , J . A . ( 1975 ) . Theory of current source - density analysis and deter - mination of conductivity tensor for anuran cerebellum . J . Neurophysiol . 38 , 356 - 368 . NICHOLSON , C . & KRAIG , R . P . ( 1981 ) . The behavior of extracellular ions during spreading depression . In The Application of Ion - selective Microelectrodes , ed . ZEUTHEN , T . , pp . 217 - 238 . Amsterdam : Elsevier / North - Holland . NICHOLSON , C . & PHILLIPS , J . M . ( 1979 ) . Diffusion of anions and cations in the extracellular microenvironment of the brain . J . Physiol . 269 , 66P . NICHOLSON , C . , PHILLIPS , J . M . & GARDNER - MEDWIN , A . R . ( 1979 ) . Diffusion from an iontophoretic point source in the brain : role of tortuosity and volume fraction . Brain Re8 . 169 , 580 - 584 . NORMAN , R . S . ( 1975 ) . Diffusional spread of iontophoretically injected ions . J . theor . Biol . 52 , 159 - 162 . OAKLEY , B . , II . & GREEN , D . E . ( 1976 ) . Correlation of light - induced changes in retinal extracellular potassium concentration with c - wave of the electroretinogram . J . Neurophysiol . 39 , 1117 - 1133 . OAKLEY , B . , II . , MILLER , S . S . & STEINBERG , R . H . ( 1978 ) . Effect of intracellular potassium upon the electrogenic pump of frog retinal pigment epithelium . J . Membrane Biol . 44 , 281 - 307 . OEHME , M . & SIMON , W . ( 1976 ) . Microelectrode for K + based on a neutral carrier and comparison of its characteristics with a cation exchanger sensor . Analytica chim . Acta 86 , 21 - 25 . PAPE , L . G . & KATZMAN , R . ( 1972 ) . K42 distribution in brain during simultaneous ventriculocisternal and subarachnoid perfusion . Brain Re8 . 38 , 49 - 69 . PATLAK , C . S . & FENSTERMACHER , J . D . ( 1975 ) . Measurements of dog blood - brain transfer constants by ventriculocisternal perfusion . Am . J . Physiol . 229 , 877 - 884 . PEDLEY , T . A . , FISHER , R . S . & PRINCE , D . A . ( 1976 ) . Focal gliosis and potassium movement in mammalian cortex . Expl Neurol . 50 , 346 - 361 . PHILLIPS , J . M . & NICHOLSON , C . ( 1979 ) . Anion permeability in spreading depression investigated with ion sensitive microelectrodes . Brain Re8 . 173 , 567 - 571 . PHILLIPS , J . M . & NICHOLSON , C . ( 1981 ) . Microelectrodes for novel anions and their application to some neurophysiological problems . In Progress in Enzyme and Ion - selective Electrodes , ed : LUBBERS , P . W . , ACKER , H . , BUCK , R . P . , EISENMAN , G . , KESSLER , M . & SIMON , W . , pp . 15 - 20 . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . 256 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from DIFFUSION OF IONS IN THE BRAIN PURVES , R . D . ( 1977 ) . The time course of cellular responses to iontophoretically applied drugs . J . theor . Biol . 65 , 327 - 344 . PURVES , R . D . ( 1979 ) . The physics of iontophoretic pipettes . J . Neurosci . Methods 1 , 165 - 178 . RANCK , J . B . JR . ( 1963 ) . Analysis of specific impedance of rabbit cerebral cortex . Expl Neurol . 7 , 153 - 174 . RANDEL , A . A . & PARAI - KOSHITS , A . B . ( 1965 ) . Diffusion coefficients of some organic material in H20 and organic solvents . J . apple . Chem . USSR 38 , 198 - 199 . ROBINSON , R . A . & STOKES , R . H . ( 1959 ) . Electrolyte Solutions . London : Butterworths . ROBINSON , R . A . , STOKES , J . M . & STOKES , R . H . ( 1961 ) . Potassium hexafluorophosphate - an associated electrolyte . J . Phys . Chem . 65 , 542 - 546 . SAFFORD , R . E . & BASSINGTHWAIGHTE , J . B . ( 1977 ) . Calcium diffusion in transient and steady states in muscle . Biophys . J . 20 , 113 - 136 . SCHANTZ , E . J . & LAUFFER , M . A . ( 1962 ) . Diffusion measurements in agar gel . Biochemistry , N . Y . 1 , 658 - 663 . SCHOLER , VON R . , & SIMON , W . ( 1972 ) . Membranelektrode zur selektiven , potentiometrischen Erfassung organischer Kationen . Helv . chim Acta 55 , 1801 - 1809 . SCHMITT , F . 0 . & SAMSON , F . E . , JR . ( 1969 ) . Brain cell microenvironment . Neurosci . Res . Progr . Bull . 7 , 277 - 417 . SENKYA , J . & PETR , J . ( 1978 ) . Liquid ion - selective electrodes based on basic dyes . In Ion Selective Electrodes , ed . PUNGOR , E . , pp . 559 - 565 . New York : Elsevier . SLADE , A . L . , CREMERS , A . E . & THOMAS , H . C . ( 1966 ) . The obstruction effect in the self - diffusion coefficients of sodium and cesium in agar gels . J . phys . Chem . 70 , 2840 - 2844 . SOMJEN , G . G . ( 1979 ) . Extracellular potassium in the mammalian central nervous system . A . Rev . Physiol . 41 , 159 - 177 . TRUBATCH , J . & VAN HARREVELD , A . ( 1972 ) . Spread of iontophoretically injected ions in a tissue . J . theor . Biol . 36 , 355 - 366 . VAN HARREVELD , A . ( 1966 ) . Brain Tissue Electrolytes . London : Butterworths . VAN HARREVELD , A . ( 1972 ) . The extracellular space in the vertebrate central nervous system . In The Structure and Function of Nervous Tissue . ed . BOURNE , G . H . , Vol . IV , pp . 447 - 51 1 . New York : Academic . VAN HARREVELD , A . , CROWELL , J . & MALHOTRA , S . K . ( 1965 ) . A study of extracellular space in central nervous tissue by freeze substitution . J . cell Biol . 25 , 117 - 137 . VAN HARREVELD , A . & MALHOTRA , S . K . ( 1967 ) . Extracellular space in the cerebral cortex of the mouse . J . Anat . 101 , 197 - 207 . VERN , B . A . , SCHUETTE , W . H . & THIBAULT , L . E . ( 1977 ) . [ K + ] o clearance in cortex : a new analytical model . J . Neurophysiol . 40 , 1015 - 1023 . VYSKOIL , F . & KRft , N . ( 1972 ) . Modifications of single and double - barrel potassium specific microelectrodes for physiological experiments . Pfluigers Arch . 337 , 265 - 276 . WHITAKER , S . ( 1969 ) . Fluid motion in porous media . Ind . Engng Chem . 61 , 14 - 28 . WINN , P . M . , SMITH , T . E . , CAMPBELL , A . D . & HUF , E . E . ( 1964 ) . Sodium diffusion in epidermis and corium of frog skin and in Rirnger - agar gel . J . cell . comp . Physiol . 64 , 371 - 388 . YEDLIN , M . , KWAN , H . , MURPHY , J . T . , NGUYEN - HUU , H . & WONG , Y . C . ( 1974 ) . Electrical conductivity in cat cerebellar cortex . Expl Neurol . 43 , 555 - 569 . PHY 321 257 9 at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from 1981 ; 321 ; 225 - 257 J . Physiol . C Nicholson and J M Phillips cerebellum . in the extracellular microenvironment of the rat Ion diffusion modified by tortuosity and volume fraction This information is current as of April 12 , 2008 & Services Updated Information http : / / jp . physoc . org can be found at : including high - resolution figures , Permissions & Licensing ns . shtml http : / / jp . physoc . org / misc / Permissio its entirety can be found online at : in article in parts ( figures , tables ) or Information about reproducing this Reprints htmlhttp : / / jp . physoc . org / misc / reprints . s can be found online : Information about ordering reprints at PENN STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 jp . physoc . org Downloaded from