Rare cell variability and drug - induced reprogramming as a mode of cancer drug resistance Sydney M . Shaffer 1 , 4 , Margaret C . Dunagin 1 , Stefan R . Torborg 1 , 2 , Eduardo A . Torre 1 , 4 , Benjamin Emert 4 , 8 , Clemens Krepler 3 , Marilda Beqiri 3 , Katrin Sproesser 3 , Patricia A . Brafford 3 , Min Xiao 3 , Elliott Eggan 4 , Ioannis N . Anastopoulos 4 , Cesar A . Vargas - Garcia 6 , Abhyudai Singh 5 , 6 , Katherine L . Nathanson 4 , Meenhard Herlyn 3 , and Arjun Raj 1 , 7 1 Department of Bioengineering , University of Pennsylvania , Melanoma Research Center , Philadelphia , PA 2 Department of Biochemistry , University of Pennsylvania , Melanoma Research Center , Philadelphia , PA 3 The Wistar Institute , Molecular and Cellular Oncogenesis Program , Melanoma Research Center , Philadelphia , PA 4 Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Newark , DE , USA 5 Biomedical Engineering , University of Delaware , Newark , DE , USA 6 Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Delaware , Newark , DE , USA 7 Department of Genetics , University of Pennsylvania , University of Pennsylvania 8 Genomics and Computational Biology Group , University of Pennsylvania Abstract Therapies targeting signaling molecules mutated in cancers can often have striking short - term effects , but the emergence of resistant cancer cells is a major barrier to full cures 1 , 2 . Resistance can result from a secondary mutations 3 , 4 , but other times there is no clear genetic cause , raising the possibility of non - genetic rare cell variability 5 – 11 . Here , we show that melanoma cells can display profound transcriptional variability at the single cell level that predicts which cells will ultimately resist drug treatment . This variability involves infrequent , semi - coordinated transcription of a number of resistance markers at high levels in a very small percentage of cells . The addition of Users may view , print , copy , and download text and data - mine the content in such documents , for the purposes of academic research , subject always to the full Conditions of use : http : / / www . nature . com / authors / editorial _ policies / license . html # terms Author contributions : SMS , AR designed the study . SMS performed all experiments and analysis except : MD , ST assisted with fluctuation analysis and RNA - sequencing ; EAT , BE performed NGFR and AXL sort experiments ; CK , MB , KS performed PDX experiments ; PB , MH provided cell lines ; MX performed WM989 - A6 characterization ; EE developed iterative RNA FISH protocol ; INA , KN performed DNA sequencing . MH provided guidance . SMS , AR wrote the paper . Author information : AR receives consulting income and AR and SMS receive royalties related to Stellaris™ RNA FISH probes . Data Availability Statement : RNA - sequencing data is deposited in GEO ( accession GSE97682 ) , and DNA sequences are available at SRA with accession number SRP103406 . All RNA FISH data , including processed data and scripts , is available at https : / / www . dropbox . com / sh / g9c84n2torx7nuk / AABZei _ vVpcfTUNL7buAp8z - a ? dl = 0 . HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . Published in final edited form as : Nature . 2017 June 15 ; 546 ( 7658 ) : 431 – 435 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature22794 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t drug then induces epigenetic reprogramming in these cells , converting the transient transcriptional state to a stably resistant state . This reprogramming begins with a loss of SOX10 - mediated differentiation followed by activation of new signaling pathways , partially mediated by activity of Jun - AP - 1 and TEAD . Our work reveals the multistage nature of the acquisition of drug resistance and provides a framework for understanding resistance dynamics in single cells . We find that other cell types also exhibit sporadic expression of many of these same marker genes , suggesting the existence of a general rare - cell expression program . Melanoma is a paradigmatic example of resistance to cancer therapy , often resulting from mutations to the BRAF protein . The drug vemurafenib , which inhibits the mutated V600E BRAF protein , nearly eradicates tumors , but a small subset of cancer cells develop drug resistance 1 – 3 . To understand resistance at the single cell level , we turned to cultured patient - derived melanoma cells . Cells isolated from two patients ( WM989 , WM983B ) grown under normal conditions proliferated readily . A fractional killing dose of vemurafenib ( 1μM , Extended Data Fig . 1a – d ) stopped most cells’ growth , but sporadic proliferative colonies of resistant cells formed . ( These surviving cells’ transcriptomes resembled that of drug - resistant cells in patients ; Extended Data Fig . 2d . ) Long - term time - lapse imaging capturing the onset of resistance revealed that drug - resistant colonies can arise from single cells proliferating normally before drug addition ( Supplementary video 1 ; Extended Data Fig . 1f ) , showing these cells are not in a dormant “persister” state . We considered two models for resistance in single cells : a genetic “mutation” model and a transient , non - heritable model ( Fig . 1a ) . In the strongly heritable “mutation” model , a cell in the resistant state cannot revert . In the transient model cells transition between pre - resistant and non - resistant states , with pre - resistant cells defined as those that give rise to resistant colonies upon addition of drug ( Fig . 1a ) . We tested these hypotheses using Luria and Delbrück’s “fluctuation analysis” 12 . First , we isolated a single cell from the parental cell line to minimize any existing genetic heterogeneity . We expanded this cell for 7 – 8 divisions , derived several single cell cultures ( ~ 1 million cells ) , then added drug and counted resistant colonies ( Fig . 1a ) . If resistance were heritable , then occasional early transitions to resistance would propagate during expansion , leading to large numbers of resistant colonies . If , however , the pre - resistant state is transient , then all cells in any culture are equally likely to form a resistant colony , making large numbers of resistant colonies unlikely . The lack of outliers in the distributions of number of resistant colonies was incompatible with a heritable pre - resistant phenotype . Simulations confirmed statistical significance with p - values of 0 . 0005 and 0 . 0012 in WM989 - A6 cells ( Fig 1b ; replicates with 43 and 29 cultures ) and 0 . 0395 for WM983B - E9 cells ( WM983B - E9 data and analysis in Extended Data Fig . 3 ) . Targeted DNA sequencing of 119 cancer - related genes revealed no new mutations in two resistant subclones ( Extended Data Fig . 1e ) . We then wondered whether single - cell gene expression differences marked pre - resistant cells . We first identified the transcriptional program associated with stable drug resistance in WM989 - A6 and WM983B - E9 cells ( clonal isolates of WM989 , WM983B , respectively ) and Shaffer et al . Page 2 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t stably resistant subclones ( Fig . 1d ; Extended Data Fig . 2a ) via population - based RNA - sequencing , revealing marker genes ( 1456 and 1316 genes , respectively ) whose expression increased in resistant cells but not upon drug administration ( Extended Data Fig . 2b ) . We recovered well - known markers of drug resistance , including WNT5A 13 , AXL 14 , EGFR 15 , PDGFR β 3 , and JUN 16 . The low average marker expression in untreated cells may mask rare individual cells with high expression . We used high - throughput single molecule RNA FISH to count mRNA of selected resistance genes in thousands of cells before drug treatment . We found a population of rare cells ( frequencies of 1 : 50 to 1 : 500 ) expressing resistance genes at high levels before drug exposure ( Fig . 1c and Extended Data Fig . 4a , c ; outliers remained after GAPDH normalization 17 ) . After 4 weeks of treatment with vemurafenib , resistant colonies expressed these markers at more uniformly high levels ( Fig . 1e ) . To see if sporadic marker gene expression marked cells that ultimately become resistant , we stained live WM989 - A6 melanoma cells with antibodies targeting one of the sporadic markers ( EGFR ) and performed fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) , isolating the top 0 . 02 – 0 . 2 % EGFR - stained cells . We then applied vemurafenib for 3 weeks ( Fig . 1f ) , finding that EGFR - high cells produced 7 . 9±0 . 92 ( standard deviation ) fold more resistant colonies ( on average 2 . 4 fold larger ) than EGFR - mixed cells ( Fig . 1f , Extended Data Fig . 5a ) . ( RNA FISH confirmed higher resistance gene expression in EGFR - High cells ( Extended Data Fig . 5b – d ) 13 – 15 . ) Thus , rare cells with high levels of EGFR within the untreated population are far more likely to become resistant once drug is applied . We confirmed the transient model by allowing EGFR - high subpopulations to grow in culture without drug to see if resistance reverted . The ratio of colonies in the EGFR high to the EGFR mixed population dropped from 13 . 4±10 . 6 to 1 . 17±0 . 47 after 1 week of growth before drug treatment , demonstrating that pre - resistance is not heritable on this timescale ( Fig . 1g ) . ( Incomplete reversion at the longest time point in culture was possibly due to differences in paracrine signaling between cultures . ) We wondered how widespread sporadic expression was . We performed RNA FISH for a panel of 19 genes on up to 40 , 000 single cells , including resistance markers , housekeeping genes , and master melanocyte regulators by developing a method for iterative RNA FISH using multiple cycles of hybridization ( Fig . 2a ; Extended Data Fig . 6a ) 18 . We quantified sporadic , “jackpot” type of heterogeneity seen for AXL , EGFR and NGFR with the Gini coefficient 19 : 0 means all cells have the same number of mRNA molecules , while 1 means one cell expresses all the mRNA molecules while others express none ( Fig . 2b ) . Of 23 genes ( 19 genes in our panel plus 4 additional control genes ) in WM989 - A6 cells , 13 genes had Gini coefficients greater than 0 . 5 , indicating a large degree of inequality . Housekeeping genes had Gini coefficients below 0 . 5 , and the cell cycle marker CCNA2 and slow - cycling marker KDM5B 20 had Gini coefficients slightly above 0 . 5 ( Fig . 2b , Extended Data Fig . 7 ) . This phenomenon extended to three other melanoma cell lines , primary melanocytes , and 4 other cancer types ( Fig . 2b ) . Each cell line had genes with very high Gini coefficients , showing that sporadic expression is neither unique to cancer nor melanoma . Furthermore , Shaffer et al . Page 3 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t rare - cell expression manifested in patient - derived xenografts ( LOXL2 , CYR61 , NGFR , AXL , NRG1 ; Extended Data Fig . 8 ) , and patient single cell RNA - sequencing data 21 ( Extended Data Fig . 7a , b ) . Sorting for NGFR or AXL also enriched for pre - resistant cells in WM989 - A6 . ( Extended Data Fig . 9 ) . NGFR sorting enriched for pre - resistance in two of three melanoma lines tested ( WM989 - A6 , SK - MEL - 28 ; not WM983B - E9 ) . Since many resistance markers individually showed rare expression patterns , we wondered if sporadic expression events were coordinated between genes . Quantifying pairwise relationships in high and low expression states , yielded odds ratios between resistance genes ranging from 4 to 142 , indicating high degrees of co - expression ( Fig . 3a , b ) . We found two groups of genes : housekeeping / melanocyte differentiation factors and resistance marker genes ( Fig . 3b ; Extended Data Fig . 4d ) , confirmed by principal components analysis ( Extended Data Figs . 6b , c ) . We hypothesized that cells expressing multiple resistance markers were even more likely to be pre - resistant . We stained live WM989 - A6 cells with both NGFR and EGFR antibodies and isolated four cell populations : double negative , EGFR positive only , NGFR positive only , and EGFR / NGFR positive ( validated by RNA FISH ; Extended Data Fig . 5e ) . We then applied vemurafenib for 2 weeks . While both EGFR only and NGFR only cells formed more resistant colonies than negative cells ( 11 and 12 versus 2 ) , double positive cells formed the most resistant colonies ( 36 ) ( Fig . 3c ) . We also found higher order correlations for these markers . Many cells expressed high levels of multiple markers , with 13 of 8672 expressing 6 markers simultaneously and 2 expressing 8 ( Fig . 3d ) . The frequency of multi - expressing cells approached that of resistance itself ( Extended Data Fig . 6d ) . Expression did not “cluster” , though the correlation structure revealed potential network structure ( Extended Data Fig . 7d , e ) . These results show that sporadic cells occupy a transient state characterized by high levels of resistance marker transcription . Yet , once fully resistant , drug “holidays” did not affect either the transcriptome ( Extended Data Fig . 2b ) nor the resistant phenotype ( Extended Data Fig . 5f ) , showing that the resistant phenotype is stable . We therefore hypothesized that resistance occurs in two phases : first , rare cells become transiently pre - resistant , then adding drug initiates cellular reprogramming , “burning in” the stable resistant phenotype . To determine whether adding drug led to reprogramming of pre - resistant cells , we isolated pre - resistant cells ( by sorting for high EGFR levels ) before adding drug as well as 1 week and 4 weeks after adding drug ( Fig . 4a ; Extended Data Fig . 10a ) . We found that pre - resistant cells express only a very small fraction ( 72 of 1456 ) of resistance markers ( Fig . 1c ) at near the level of activation in resistance ( Fig . 4a ) . After adding drug , however , the percentage of resistance genes expressed increased ; by 1 week in drug , 600 of 1456 total resistance genes were activated to > 80 % , increasing to 966 at week 4 , demonstrating a progressive transformation of the transcriptome as cells became stably resistant ( gene ontology analysis in Supplementary Data 1 ) . Shaffer et al . Page 4 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t An important caveat is that selection processes can create apparent changes in expression patterns of EGFR - High cells . We confirmed reprogramming by analyzing APCDD1 , a marker of resistance but not pre - resistance ( Extended Data Fig . 6e ) . APCDD1 was not expressed in any cell in the untreated population , but had high expression in stably resistant cells , demonstrating that the expression profile of the pre - resistant cells changed upon becoming stably resistant . Furthermore , for many resistance marker genes ( EGFR , PDGFR β , and NRG1 ) , the rare high expressing cells had less expression than resistant cells , indicating transcriptional reprogramming ( Extended Data Fig . 4b ) . Coupled with the phenotypic changes upon becoming stably resistant ( Fig . 1g vs . Extended Data . Fig . 5f ) , these results demonstrate that these cells reprogram to achieve stable resistance , irrespective of potential selection effects . To determine what gene regulatory changes underpinned this reprogramming , we used a genome - wide assay for transposase - accessible chromatin ( ATAC - seq ) 22 to identify putative transcription factor binding sites ( Fig . 4b ; Extended Data Fig . 10a ) . Comparing non - resistant and pre - resistant cells revealed only 33 total differentially accessible sites , consistent with the hypothesis that the transient , pre - drug , pre - resistant state is a shallow deviation from the non - resistant state . ATAC - seq revealed large changes in the pattern of transcription factor occupancy after adding drug , however . We categorized these changes into gains and losses of accessible sites , corresponding to changes in transcription factor occupancy . Between untreated cells and those in drug for 4 weeks , the cells lost 1787 and gained 9143 accessible sites ( Fig . 4b ) , demonstrating broad cellular reprogramming . The predominant change during the first week was loss of accessible sites , followed by a gain of new sites from 1 to 4 weeks ( gene ontology analysis in Supplementary Data 2 ) . Much of the initial peak loss resulted from loss of SOX10 binding , whereas the subsequent gain of peaks resulted from activation of TEAD and Jun / AP - 1 and other signaling pathways ( Fig . 4c ) . SOX10 regulates neural crest development in melanocytes , and TEADs regulate invasion in melanoma 23 , suggesting that the post - drug transition to stable resistance consists of dedifferentiation followed by activation of new signaling pathways . Confirming this , we found that EGFR 15 , 23 inhibition during reprogramming affected resistance , while inhibition during pre - resistance did not ( Extended Data Fig . 9 ) . Here , we document a rare , transient state that leads to drug - resistance . Our findings are conceptually similar to those of Sharma et al . 6 , and may extend beyond melanoma ; many of these genes show rare - cell expression in unrelated cancer cell types 10 ( including primary , non - cancerous melanocytes ) , suggesting the existence of a rare - cell expression program co - opted in resistance and potentially phenotype switching 24 . Further elucidation of both plasticity and reprogramming may open new avenues for for therapeutic targeting , including lipid peroxidase pathways 25 . Also , transient and genetic 1 causes of resistance are not mutually exclusive 9 , 26 . Transient effects may provide initial resistance , allowing a small subpopulation of tumor cells to survive until some acquire secondary mutations that drive the progression to relapse . In that case , brief application of drug may prevent the completion of the burn - in reprogramming Shaffer et al . Page 5 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t process , leaving cells free to revert to a drug - sensitive state 27 . Our findings may inform such interval dosing strategies 28 , 29 . Methods Cell culture , drugs , and fixation We grew melanoma cell lines ( WM989 - A6 , WM983B - E9 , and 1205Lu , SK - MEL - 28 ) from the lab of Meenhard Herlyn , validated in the Herlyn lab by short tandem repeat profiling using AmpFlSTR® Identifiler® PCR Amplification Kit ( Life Technologies ) , in Tu2 % media containing 78 % MCDB , 20 % Leibovitz’s L - 15 media , 2 % FBS , and 1 . 68mM CaCl2 and primary melanocytes isolated from human neonatal foreskin ( Fom217 - 1 from the lab of Meenhard ) in Medium 254CF ( Life Technologies , M254500 ) supplemented with Human Melanocyte Growth Supplement ( Life Technologies , S0025 ) . WM989 - A6 and WM983B - E9 are specific single - cell - derived subclone of WM989 and WM983B , respectively , that we used for all experiments to minimize genetic heterogeneity , and was chosen because its resistance properties were similar to the parental WM989 and WM983B cell lines . We also grew HeLa cells and MDA - MB - 231 cells in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , PC - 9 cells in RPMI supplemented with 10 % FBS , and SH - SY5Y cells in DMEM / F12 with 10 % FBS . All cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma . We made stocks of 4mM vemurafenib ( Selleckchem , S1267 ) and 4mM lapatinib ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , 202205B ) in DMSO , and diluted in media to a final concentration of 1μM in all drug treatment experiments . For all RNA FISH experiments , we grew cells on two - well Lab - Tek chambered coverglasses . We fixed and permeabilized cells for RNA FISH according to 30 . Time - lapse imaging We imaged the cells on a Nikon Ti - E enclosed in plexiglass incubation chamber heated to 37 ℃ with 5 % CO2 . We seeded WM989 - A6 cells into a two - well Lab - Tek chambered coverglasses and took brightfield images every 2 hours for 28 days . At each time point , we acquired a total of 702 images over a 39×18 grid of images at 10× magnification to capture the entire culture dish . We stitched each of tiles into one composite image for each time point and then compiled movies from the images using MATLAB . Luria Delbruck fluctuation analysis To minimize pre - existing genetic heterogeneity in the cell line , we isolated a single - cell clones from WM989 - A6 and WM983B - E9 melanoma cell lines . We expanded these clones up to 100 – 200 cells total and then isolated single cells to derive the subclones for the Luria Delbruck fluctuation analysis . We then allowed the subclones to grow in culture through ~ 20 doublings for WM989 - A6 and ~ 22 doublings for WM983B - E9 to give approximately 1 million cells and 4 million cells , respectively . After expansion , we trypsinized each subclone , counted the number of cells in the culture using a hemocytometer , and then seeded 600 , 000 cells into 2 12 - well plates ( yielding 25 , 000 cells per well ) . We had a total of 43 and 29 subclones with the WM989 - A6 cell line ( biological replicates ) and 20 subclones for WM983B - E9 . One day after seeding into 12 - well plates , we applied 1μM vemurafenib . Throughout the experiment , we changed the media and drug and counted the number of resistant colonies twice per week . We ended the experiment when the plates stopped Shaffer et al . Page 6 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t developing new resistant colonies or when all the resistant colonies appeared to be daughter colonies from larger ones . Note that upon re - plating the cultures before administration of drug , we observed varying degrees of growth and plating efficiency , all of which served to increase the variance , as we found that cultures with larger numbers of cells following replating had generally higher numbers of resistant cells . Thus , by not taking this into account , our observed variance is likely higher than the actual variance , biasing against the transient pre - resistance hypothesis . To show that our resulting counts of resistant colonies were likely not the result of a strongly heritable transition to a pre - resistant state , we simulated the strongly heritable Luria - Delbruck process ( code available at https : / / www . dropbox . com / sh / g9c84n2torx7nuk / AABZei _ vVpcfTUNL7buAp8z - a ? dl = 0 ) . Briefly , the parameters are the initial culture size ( set to one in our case ) , the ultimate sizes of the cultures ( we used the largest multiple of two lower than the actual measured culture sizes , thus biasing against ourselves ) , and the mutation rate , which we varied as part of our simulations . For each mutation rate , we ran the simulations 10 , 000 times , and noted both the Fano factor ( variance divided by the mean ) and coefficient of variation across the simulated cultures for each iteration . We then computed a p - value for each mutation rate by determining how often the simulated Fano factor or coefficient of variation ( separate p - values for each statistic ) exceeded our actual measurements ( Extended Data Fig . 3 ) . The p - value we report is based on the most conservative estimate based on both the statistics we computed . Iterative RNA FISH We designed oligonucleotide probe sets using the Stellaris probe designer ( Biosearch Technologies ) and ordered them with an amine group on the 3 ′ end ( sequences available in Supplementary Data 3 ) . We pooled the oligonucleotides for each probe set and coupled them to either Cy3 ( GE Healthcare ) , Alexa 594 ( Life Technologies ) , Atto647N or Atto 700 ( Atto - Tec ) . We performed RNA FISH as previously described 30 for each of the cycles of hybridization . We first fixed cells with formaldehyde and permeabilized with 70 % ethanol . We next washed once with wash buffer ( containing 10 % formamide and 2X SSC ) and then applied hybridization buffer ( containing 10 % formamide , 10 % dextran sulfate , and 2X SSC ) with the specified pool of RNA FISH probes . We hybridized for 6 – 12 hours and then washed 2 times for 30 minutes with wash buffer . After imaging , we applied 60 % formamide with 2X SSC for 15 minutes on a heat plate kept at 37 ℃ . We then washed the sample 3 times with 1X PBS for 15 minutes also at 37 ℃ to remove residual formamide , which we have found can inhibit further hybridizations . Lastly , we washed once with wash buffer to remove residual 1X PBS and prepare the samples for another RNA FISH hybridization . RNA FISH on patient derived xenografts We fixed tissue sections by treating with 4 % formaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes and then permeabilized and stored them in 70 % ethanol at 4 ℃ . We performed one cycle of RNA FISH as described above . We mounted the samples for imaging in 2X SSC . We performed Shaffer et al . Page 7 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t these experiments with two biological replicates from different mice and different tissue donors . RNA FISH imaging We imaged each sample on a Nikon Ti - E with a 60X Plan - Apo objective and filter sets for DAPI , Cy3 , Atto647N , Alexa594 , and Atto700 . We used Metamorph imaging software ( Scan Slide application ) to acquire a tiled grid of images ( 40 by 40 for the data sets shown in Fig . 2a ) covering a 8 . 9mm by 8 . 9mm area of the sample . We used the Nikon Perfect Focus System to ensure that the images remained in focus over the imaging area . Image analysis We developed a custom MATLAB pipeline for counting RNA FISH spots in tiled images . First , this software segments the nuclei of individual cells using the DAPI images . Next , the software identifies regional maxima in each tiled image as potential RNA FISH spots and assigns them to the nearest nucleus . Through a MATLAB GUI , the user selects a global threshold for each RNA FISH channel to identify the individual spots . We then visually inspected all cells that were above the jackpot threshold and used GUI editing tools to remove any autofluorescent debris or artifacts from subsequent analysis . Lastly , we extracted the position of every cell in the scan and the number of RNA molecules for each fluorescent channel . We also developed software to match cells across subsequent hybridizations , which poses a challenge because of slight warping in the tiled image in each acquisition . Our algorithm attempts to match cells locally by shifting cells in the first hybridization to all potential candidates in the subsequent hybridization , choosing the best match as the one that minimizes total distance for nearby cells . We then smooth out this shift and apply it across the entire tiled image field . We then matched cells by proximity , discarding cells that did not match uniquely to a nearby cell in subsequent hybridizations ; our yield was typically > 90 % of cells in the initial hybridization matching in subsequent hybridizations . We decided whether or not a cell was deemed a “high” expressing cell for a particular gene by determining whether the number of mRNA molecules in the cell exceeded a threshold . To avoid bias , our default was to set a threshold that captured the top 2 % of cells . If this percentage did not yield a reasonable threshold , we manually set a more appropriate threshold based on the distribution . Occasionally , autofluorescent debris in the images would be spuriously identified as cells , often with high numbers of false spots in them . Thus , we manually removed such regions , starting with cells with the highest number of identified RNA counts and continuing until we reached a relatively low level of mRNA below which manually evaluating the data was no longer feasible . This procedure ensured that we manually inspected all jackpot cells to verify their expression levels . For genes that did not exhibit sporadic expression patterns ( including GAPDH , SOX10 , CCNA2 ) , we set thresholds by plotting the distribution and selecting a threshold that captures the tail . We performed all iterative RNA FISH experiments in duplicate with biological replicates . We calculated Gini coefficients on the distributions of RNA FISH counts for each gene using the “ineq” package in R . The code for this image analysis pipeline and the data files including Shaffer et al . Page 8 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t replicates ( with a minimum of two independent biological replicates per dataset ) are available at https : / / www . dropbox . com / sh / g9c84n2torx7nuk / AABZei _ vVpcfTUNL7buAp8z - a ? dl = 0 . RNA sequencing and analysis We sequenced messenger RNA from WM989 - A6 and WM983B - E9 melanoma cells . For WM989 - A6 , we sequenced the RNA from 8 untreated samples , 8 samples treated with 1 μM vemurafenib for 48 hours , 10 resistant samples in 1 μM vemurafenib , 4 resistant samples with drug removed for 48 hours , and 4 resistant samples with drug removed for 1 week . For WM983B - E9 , we sequenced RNA from 20 untreated samples , 20 samples treated with 1 μM vemurafenib for 48 hours , 37 resistant samples in 1 μM vemurafenib , 2 resistant samples with drug removed for 48 hours , and 2 resistant samples with drug removed for 1 week . Each sample is a biological replicate . We used the NEBNext Poly ( A ) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module and NEBNext Ultra RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina to extract polyadenylated RNA and prepare barcoded RNA sequencing libraries . We sequenced each sample at a depth of approximately 20 million reads on a HiSeq 2000 ( 50 base pair length ) or NextSeq ( 75 base pair length ) . We aligned our reads to hg19 using STAR and quantified reads per gene using HTseq . We then used R to perform differential expression analysis with DESeq2 ( code available at https : / / bitbucket . org / arjunrajlaboratory / rajlabseqtools ) to identify resistance marker genes . We defined resistance marker genes using DESeq2 p - value < 10 −5 and log 2 fold change > 0 . 5 . Generation of patient derived xenografts We collected tumor biopsies from melanoma patients as previously described by 4 . Fresh biopsies were processed under sterile conditions within 24 hours . For processing , we used a cross blade technique to finely mince the tissue , then briefly digested the tissue in collagenase IV for 20 minutes at 37 ℃ . The tumor tissue was then implanted s . c . with matrigel ( Corning Life Sciences ) into NSG mice ( 6 – 8 weeks , male or female ) . Tumor grafts were harvested at maximum tumor size and serially transplanted for expansion . Low passage PDX tumors were mounted in OCT immediately after sacrifice . For RNA FISH analysis , we sectioned the tumors into 7μm slices and then proceeded with RNA FISH as described above . All sample collection and animal experiments were approved by Wistar IRB and Wistar IACUC , respectively . We analyzed samples from four different patients : the first of which ( WM4335 ) had a BRAF - V600E mutation and was sensitive to combination BRAF / MEK inhibition , the second ( WM4299 ) had a NRAS - Q61L mutation and was not sensitive to MEK inhibition , the third ( WM4266 ) had a unknown mutational status and the patient’s cancer progressed on immunotherapy , and the fourth ( WM3909 ) had BRAF - V600E mutation and a PIK3R1 mutation ( The data from PDX experiments are in Fig . 2d and Extended Data Fig . 8 ) . EGFR and NGFR fluorescence assisted cell sorting We stained WM989 - A6 melanoma cells for fluorescence assisted cell sorting using an antibody for EGFR . First , we trypsinized the cells , washed once with 0 . 1 % BSA in 1X PBS , and incubated for 1 hour at 4 ℃ with 1 : 200 mouse anti - EGFR antibody , clone 225 ( Millipore , MABF120 ) in 0 . 1 % BSA PBS . Next , we washed with 0 . 1 % BSA PBS and then Shaffer et al . Page 9 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t incubated for 30 minutes at 4 ℃ with 1 : 500 donkey anti - mouse IgG antibody labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 ( Jackson Laboratories , 715 - 545 - 150 ) . We washed the samples again with 0 . 1 % BSA PBS and resuspended in 1 % BSA PBS with 2mM EDTA and DAPI for fluorescence assisted cell sorting . We used a MoFlo Astrios ( Beckman Coulter ) to collect the top 0 . 02 – 0 . 2 % of cells stained for EGFR . We used the DAPI stain to exclude dead cells and used cells that were not incubated with the primary antibody as a negative control . To stain WM989 - A6 , WM983B - E9 , and SK - MEL - 28 cells for NGFR , we used anti - NGFR clone ME20 . 4 fluorescently labeled with PE / Cy7 ( Biolegend , 345110 ) . We incubated the cells with 5uL of antibody for 10 minutes at 4 ℃ . We then washed the samples and proceeded with sorting ( as described above ) . For our negative control , we used a PE / Cy7 mouse IgG1 ( Biolegend , 400126 ) . When sorting either EGFR - high or NGFR - high subpopulations , we also collected a EGFR - mixed or NGFR - mixed population control by using the same gating for live cells , but without gating on the EGFR or NGFR stain . When staining for both EGFR and NGFR , we performed the EGFR staining first then stained with the NGFR antibody . When sorting for EGFR and NGFR together , we collected all 4 possible populations : cells negative for both stains , cells positive for EGFR only , cells positive for NGFR only , and cells positive for both EGFR and NGFR . ATAC sequencing and analysis We performed ATAC sequencing on WM989 - A6 melanoma cells according to 22 . Briefly , we lysed the cells and set up the transposition reaction with the Tn5 Transposes ( Illumina Catalog # FC121 - 1030 ) at 37 ℃ for 30 minutes . We cleaned the reaction with a Qiagen MinElute Kit and then amplified the libraries using the custom Nextera PCR primers described in 22 . We sequenced our libraries on a NextSeq with 75 base pair reads at a depth of approximately 40 – 70 million reads per sample . We aligned our reads to hg19 with bowtie2 and then used the HOMER package for peak calling , differential peak calling , motif analysis , and gene ontology analysis ( code available at https : / / bitbucket . org / arjunrajlaboratory / rajlabseqtools ) . Peaks called as lost or gained if we could identify the peak in one of the conditions and saw a change in read count in the peak of 4 fold or higher across both replicates . MTS Cell Proliferation Assay The cell viability was estimated by using CellTiter 96 Aqueous MTS Cell Proliferation Assay ( MTS Cat # PR - G1111 ) . Briefly , WM989 - A6 cells were seeded in 96 - well plates with 2000 cells / well . 24 hours incubation later , cells were cultured in the presence of vemurafenib at serial 3 - fold dilution concentration . After 6 days treatment , 20ul / well MTS reagent were added and incubated for 4 hours . Then read plate at 490nm wavelength to estimate cell proliferation . Apoptosis Assay After treatment with vemurafenib at 1uM , 3uM for 3 days , WM989 - A6 cells were harvested with trypsin - EDTA , centrifuged into a pellet including all floating cells , and rinsed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Then , the cells were re - suspended in Annexin V binding buffer containing Annexin V APC ( Biolegend Cat # 640920 ) and propidium iodide ( Sigma Shaffer et al . Page 10 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Cat # P4864 ) . The cells were incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes and were analyzed using the FACSCalibur flow cytometry . Western Blot WM989 - A6 cells were cultured in 1uM , 3uM vemurafenib medium for 3 days . The cells were collected with or without floating cells and were lysed with TNE buffer with protease inhibitors . 30ug protein extracts were electrophoresed on 12 % SDS - Page gels and transferred on the Nitrocellulose membranes in Bio - rad Trans - Blot Turbo transfer system . The membranes were blocked with ODYSSEY Blocking Buffer ( LI - COR # 927 - 40000 ) for 1hr at room temperature and incubated at 4°C overnight with the following primary antibodies : pMek ( Cell signal # 9121s ) , pErk ( Cell signal # 4370s ) , pS6 ( Cell signal # 9121s ) , caspase3 ( Cell signal # 9662 ) , parp ( Cell signal # 9542s ) , b - actin ( Sigma # A5441 ) . After 2 nd antibodies incubation , membranes were visualized by LI - COR Odyssey infrared imaging system . Targeted DNA sequencing We sequenced WM9 - A6 ( main WM9 subclone ) , intermediate subclone A6 - B1 , and two resistant subclones , A6 - B1 - A2 and A6 - B1 - A3 . We obtained resistant subclones by isolating cell clusters and expanding in the presence of drug . For each cell line , 500 ng of genomic DNA was sheared randomly into 200 bp fragments with the Covaris™ S200 UltraSonicator ( Covaris® ) . Sheared DNA was A - tailed and ligated with adaptor - embedded indexes using the NEBNext ® Ultra™ DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina ® ( New England BioLabs , Inc . ) . DNA quality , fragment size , and concentration of library preps were measured using Agilent’s DNA 1000 chips in conjunction with the 2100 Bioanalyzer ( Agilent Technologies ) . Samples were equimolarly pooled and sequenced with a 2 . 318Mbp SureSelect XT Custom Target Enrichment Kit ( Agilent Technologies ) targeting 119 genes ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) . Paired - end sequencing ( 2×125bp ) was carried out on the HiSeq™ 2500 sequencing system ( Illumina ) at the next Generation Sequencing Core Facility . Mean target coverage of 346X was achieved . Short - sequenced reads were aligned to the GRCh37 human reference genome using the Burrows - Wheeler Aligner ( BWA ) tool ( Li and Durbin , 2009 ) . Duplicate reads were removed , as well as reads that map to more than one location , off - target reads , and variants annotated with the incorrect transcript . Somatic SNVs / indels were detected using the MuTect ( 14 ) , Scalpel scalpel . sourceforge . net ) , VarDict ( github . com / AstraZeneca - NGS / VarDict ) , and Freebayes ( 15 ) algorithms . Ensembl calling was done as in the bcbio - nextgen pipeline ( github . com / chapmanb / bcbio - nextgen ) . Variants were annotated with ANNOVAR . Annotated variants with a read depth less than 20 , as well as all synonymous variants , and / or variants present in the germline samples , were excluded . Furthermore , variants were removed if the minor allele frequency ( MAF ) was greater than or equal to 0 . 1 % in the population databases ExAC ( http : / / exac . broadinstitute . org / ) and / or 1000 Genomes ( 1000 Genomes Project Consortium et al . , 2012 ) . Shaffer et al . Page 11 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Extended Data Fig . 1 . Treatment of WM989 cells with vemurafenib induces cell death initially , but after weeks of treatment , colonies of resistant cells develop a . Percent viability of WM989 - A6 cells treated with vemurafenib for 6 days ( MTS assay ) . b . Annexin - V staining in WM989 - A6 cells after 3 days of treatment with vemurafenib measured by flow cytometry . The percentage of cells that are positive for annexin - v is labeled on the plots . c . Western blot for pMEK , pERK , and pS6 after 3 days of treatment with vemurafenib . d . Western blot for caspase - 3 and PARP after 3 days treatment with Shaffer et al . Page 12 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t vemurafenib . This demonstrates that WM989 - A6 cells are highly responsive to BRAF inhibitor treatment with inhibition of signaling downstream of BRAF and apoptosis of sensitive cells . e . We performed targeted DNA - sequencing on a panel of 119 cancer and melanoma - related genes . We performed sequencing on the parental WM989 - A6 subclone used throughout this work , along with WM989 - A6 - B1 subclone . From the WM989 - A6 - B1 subclone , we isolated two resistant subclones , WM989 - A6 - B1 - A2 and WM989 - A6 - B1 - A3 . All of these cell lines had the same mutational profile . Thus , we can say that none of the clinically documented mutational profiles ( such as in KRAS ) appeared as genetic resistance mechanisms in our experiments . This does not in and of itself preclude , however , mutations to other genes or non - coding mutations to regulatory regions . f . Twenty - eight day time - lapse images of WM989 - A6 cells before and then after application of cytostatic dose of vemurafenib . Sister cells are labeled in the images . There were approximately 18 , 000 cells at the time that we applied drug , and a total of 9 resistant colonies formed on the culture dish . We observed instances in which two sister cells exhibited divergent phenotypes , for instance , one would respond to drug while the other would continue growing , eventually forming a resistant colony . These results suggested the possibility of a non - genetic resistance mechanism , although do not constitute proof . Shaffer et al . Page 13 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 2 . RNA - sequencing identifies genes whose expression is specific to resistance a . Schematic of transcriptional profiling experiments . We harvested cells for analysis before drug , 48 hours after drug application and then on stably resistant cultures . b . Heatmaps depicting expression changes across all differentially expressed genes . Each row represents a separate RNA - sequencing experiment taken from a different Luria - Delbruck subclone . Resistant cultures obtained from subculturing resistant colonies . All genes shown have a greater than 1 . 4 fold change and adjusted p - value less than 10 −5 in at least one experimental condition . Color represents log2 of fold change across the conditions . c . Fold changes in Shaffer et al . Page 14 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t expression in drug response ( blue ; fold change of 48 hours in drug vs . no drug ) and resistance ( red ; fold change of resistant cells vs . no drug ) for WM989 - A6 cell line . Bolded gene names are the genes that were selected for analysis by RNA FISH in WM989 - A6 cells ( Fig . 2a ) . P - values for differential expression of the drug response or resistance are indicated by asterisks next to each bar and cutoffs are labeled below the plots . d . RNA sequencing of patient tumors pre - treatment and post - treatment from Sun et al . Nature 2014 shows changes in gene expression for many of the same resistance marker genes found in WM989 - A6 cells . Heatmap depicts the log2 fold change for each gene . Samples are normalized by patient . The genes displayed here are the same panel of genes used for RNA FISH in WM989 - A6 cells in Fig . 2a . This analysis demonstrates that there is significant overlap between the transcriptional signature of resistance in WM989 - A6 cells and resistant patient samples . e . We wondered whether the set of pre - resistance associated markers was a privileged subset of the genes upregulated upon the cell becoming drug - resistant . We performed our analysis on WM989 - A6 cells , comparing untreated cells , cells treated with vemurafenib for 48 hours , and resistant cells to identify marker genes that are upregulated uniquely during drug - resistance ( n = 1 , 456 ) and EGFR - high to EGFR - mix for pre - resistance markers ( n = 212 ) ( significance defined as log2 fold change of 0 . 5 , p = 0 . 00001 ) . We found that there was a strong overlap of 41 genes , but there were also clearly genes specific to both drug - resistance and pre - resistance , suggesting that they are not the same biological process per se . Shaffer et al . Page 15 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 3 . Luria - Delbrück fluctuation analysis demonstrates that WM989 - A6 and WM983B - E9 cells develop drug resistance through a non - heritable mechanism a . We simulated the strongly heritable hypothesis for a range of different mutation rates . At each mutation rate , we ran the simulation 10 , 000 times . We used the parameters specific to this experiment for the WM983B - E9 cell line , including the total number of divisions and subsampling of the cultures prior to drug treatment . Each column of plots assumes a different mutation rate which is labeled above . The first row contains histograms of the median number of colonies from each simulation , the second row contains histograms of the Fano factor from each simulation , and the third row contains histograms of the coefficient of Shaffer et al . Page 16 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t variation ( CV ) from each simulation . In each plot , the value corresponding to our experimental findings are labeled by the vertical line . The p - value to reject the strongly heritable hypothesis based upon the Fano factor or CV at each mutation rate is below the plot . b . Histogram of the number of resistant colonies from the Luria Delbruck fluctuation analysis in WM983B - E9 with a total of 20 clones . c , d . We performed the Luria - Delbrück fluctuation analysis twice with the WM989 - A6 cell line . As described for a , we simulated the strongly heritable hypothesis for a range of different mutation rates . The plots in panels c and d are from separate biological replicates with a total of 43 and 29 clones . The super - Poisson distribution we observed may potentially be due to variation in plating efficiency or proliferation rates between clones ; the pre - resistant state may also be heritable over small numbers of divisions . Shaffer et al . Page 17 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 4 . RNA FISH on thousands of melanoma cells reveals rare cells that express high levels of resistance marker genes a . Histograms of transcript abundance for resistance marker genes ( top ) and nonresistance markers ( bottom ) . The vertical lines represent the threshold for designating cells as either “high” or “low” expressing for a particular gene . The cells labeled by the red carpet below the histogram are high expressing , and the cells labeled by the gray carpet are low expressing . The data set shown contains a total of 8672 cells and is one of two biological replicates . b . In an untreated population of cells , rare cells express resistance marker genes at much higher levels than the population average , sometimes at levels similar to the drug Shaffer et al . Page 18 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t resistant state . Boxplots showing the distribution of mRNA counts per cell for untreated WM989 - A6 cells and resistant WM989 - A6 cells . The untreated data set is the same data as shown in a . For the resistant WM989 - A6 cells , we performed iterative RNA FISH with the same panel of genes . The untreated data set contains a total of 8672 cells and the resistant data set contains a total of 4082 cells ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates are shown for each dataset ) . Asterisks next to the gene names indicates that the max expression of the untreated sample is greater than or equal to the median of the resistant sample , demonstrating that for these 7 of 9 genes , the “high” cells have expression levels potentially equivalent to resistant cells . However , we also point out that given that the sampling of high expressing cells in the untreated samples is low , it is difficult to explicitly compare the distributions to say that the expression in the rare high - expressing cells is equivalent to that in stably resistant cells . c . Rare cells expressing sporadic but high levels of resistance markers are still present when each gene is normalized by GAPDH mRNA counts . Each histogram shows the distribution of GAPDH normalized counts for a particular jackpot gene . The counts for each gene in each cells has been divided by the GAPDH counts in that same cell . This accounts for any volume - dependent differences between cells . Cells that had GAPDH counts less than 50 were dropped from this analysis ( these cells were infrequent and gave abnormally high numbers after normalization , thus were dropped ) . With these cells removed , the data set contains a total of 8477 cells . d . Heatmap shows the odds ratio for co - expression between all pairs of genes in WM989 - A6 cells ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . Dark gray boxes label pairs where there were zero cells with counts high expression threshold for both genes . The heatmap in the middle has the same thresholds for designating cells as “high” or “low” as used in Fig . 3b . Meanwhile , the heatmap on the left shows the same analysis with the thresholds set to 1⁄2 of the their value in 3b and the heatmap on the right shows this analysis with thresholds set to twice their value in Fig . 3b . When the thresholds are at 1⁄2 , the result is very similar to that in Fig . 3b . However , increasing the threshold by 2X leads to many gene pairs that do not have any cells that are “high” for both genes ( indicated by the dark gray boxes ) . e . Heatmap showing odds ratios for WM989 - A6 data after 4 weeks in drug ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . Shaffer et al . Page 19 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 5 . Sorting for EGFR - high cells enriches for pre - resistant cells and removing drug from resistant cells does not appear to reverse the resistant phenotype a . Quantification of 3 biological replicates of the experiment depicted in Fig . 1f . b , c . Histograms showing the transcript abundance measured by RNA FISH in untreated and FACS sorted EGFR - high and mixed cell populations ( n = 1 ) . The green histograms are from the EGFR - high population and the gray histograms are the mixed population . The percentage of high - expressing cells are labeled on each plot . Panel b shows resistance marker genes EGFR , WNT5A , SERPINE1 , and PDGFR β , and panel c shows melanocyte Shaffer et al . Page 20 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t development genes , SOX10 and MITF , and a housekeeping gene , GAPDH . d . Histograms of percentage of cells that have high expression of a particular number of genes simultaneously . The left histogram is from the FACS sorted EGFR - high cells , and the right histogram is from the mixed population . e . Boxplots summarize the single - cell RNA FISH counts for EGFR and NGFR in flow sorted populations shown in Fig . 3c . These results show that sorting the high populations indeed enriched for EGFR and NGFR mRNA , thus validating the sort procedure ( n = 1 ) . Furthermore , it shows that the double sorting does not further enrich for either EGFR or NGFR mRNA alone , showing that the effects of the double sort do not arise from a further enrichment of either EGFR or NGFR - high cells per se , but rather the combination of both in the same cell . f . Isolated resistant subclones are stably resistant to vemurafenib . We established stably resistant subclones of WM989 - A6 cells grown in vemurafenib by culturing genetically homogeneous WM989 - A6 subclones , adding drug , then isolating small resistant colonies and expanding them in the presence of drug into large populations . For three such resistant subclones , we removed drug for a period of three weeks ( drug “holiday” ) , then added drug back for a week and looked for response . Generally , the cells looked fairly similar to the pre - holiday state and continued to proliferate , indicating that they remained insensitive to drug despite the prolonged holiday from drug exposure . The bottom panel is a control experiment consisting of a non - resistant parental line exposed to drug , showing the morphological changes associated with drug response . Shaffer et al . Page 21 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 6 . Iterative RNA FISH enables quantification of genes that are expressed in rare cells and control genes that are expressed throughout a population a . RNA counts are consistent whether a gene is probed on the first cycle of iterative RNA FISH or subsequent cycles . Boxplots summarizing RNA FISH mRNA counts for each gene in the 19 gene panel ( shown in Fig . 2a ) . We probed each gene from the panel in resistant WM989 - A6 cells without performing iterative hybridizations ( n = 1 with further validation performed on a 5 gene panel ; note that we used resistant cells because the generally higher expression levels allowed for more robust comparisons ) . We then performed iterative RNA Shaffer et al . Page 22 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t FISH with all the probes and compared the total mRNA counts . We took image z - stacks of each sample and captured a total 15 – 25 cells per sample . Expression levels were similar between the first round of hybridization and all subsequent hybridization cycles . The color of the boxplot indicates the hybridization cycle during which we used each probe . The p - value for differences in RNA counts between the cycles are labeled above each plot . Some variability may be due to sampling with genes that have low and / or highly variable expression , and in these instances , we expect some differences in the two count distributions . There is some loss for some genes in later cycles , but we do not believe that affects our qualitative findings of rare , high - expressing cells . b . Housekeeping genes correlate more with each other than with resistance markers and vice - versa . We performed RNA FISH on 8672 non - drugged cells with probes targeting LOXL2 and AXL ( both of which exhibit rare - cell expression ) and LMNA and GAPDH , both of which are control genes not associated with resistance ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . We then performed principal component analysis to determine which genes covary with which other genes . We transformed the vector representing the expression levels of each cell into the space spanned by the first two principal components . Arrows represent transformations of unit vectors of the specified gene into this same space . We observed two rough axes of variability , one corresponding to the GAPDH and LMNA and the other to AXL and LOXL2 . Thus , these results show that there is substantial covariation in housekeeping genes and in resistance markers , but that these two axes of variation separate . c . Same plot as in panel b , but with the RNA FISH data shown for WM989 - A6 in Figure 2b . d . There are subpopulations of cells that have high expression of multiple resistance marker genes . Histogram of number / fraction of cells that have high expression for a particular number of genes simultaneously , both before , immediately after and then 4 weeks after application of drug ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . We found that immediately after adding drug , there was a large general decrease in the amount of high - expressing cells , but a few cells remained that expressed several marker genes at once . This suggests , but certainly does not prove , that these multi - expressing cells may be the pre - resistant cells . At best , it establishes that such a correspondence is plausible . e . We used RNA FISH analysis to look ( in WM989 - A6 cells ) at the expression of APCDD1 cells , which was identified as a potential marker of drug - induced reprogramming ( as opposed to pre - re - sistance ) . We measured APCDD1 expression in a total of 61 , 770 ( 20 , 030 in replicate 1 and 41 , 740 in replicate 2 ) cells before adding drug and 11 , 452 ( 7 , 138 in replicate 1 and 4 , 314 cells in replicate 2 ) cells after cells became stably resistant ( n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . Given the number of cells analyzed , we expected that roughly 30 cells in the untreated population would be pre - resistant ( assuming conservatively that the frequency of pre - resistance is 1 : 2000 ) , but despite that , we found essentially no cells with APCDD1 expression levels approaching those of even the median resistant cell . Thus , expression of this gene must have changed upon the pre - resistant cell becoming stably resistant in the presence of drug , as opposed to a selection effect in which high levels of expression in pre - resistance cells become prevalent due to those cells surviving rather than reprogramming . Shaffer et al . Page 23 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 7 . Gini analysis on other single cell expression data sets and network structure for rare high expressing cells a . Rare cells expressing high levels of resistance genes are suggested by single cell sequencing data from Tirosh , Izar , et al . Science 2016 . Histograms of normalized single - cell expression data for 9 marker genes , including all malignant cells from this data set . b . Study of Gini coefficients based on single cell RNA - sequencing data ( looking at patient 79 with 469 cells ; results similar for other patients ) . As per GiniClust ( Jiang et al . Genome Biology 2016 ) , we first plotted the Gini coefficient vs . the maximum expression level out of all cells examined ( results similar if one uses the mean instead of max ) . As they did , we found a strong anti - correlation , which presumably results from the large number of artifactual zeros Shaffer et al . Page 24 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t in the datasets that inflate Gini coefficients in general for lowly expressed genes . As a positive control , we examined 405 genes that we know to be jackpot genes ( high fold change in EGFR - High vs . EGFR - mix ) , and we found that they were essentially randomly scattered throughout the distribution . We then plotted genes we performed RNA FISH on . We found again that they were squarely in the middle of the distribution and not towards the top right of the region , which is where one would expect to find abnormally high Gini coefficient genes . There are two possible interpretations of our data . One is that the Gini coefficients of the genes we selected are not especially different from those of similarly expression matched cells , and so the genes we selected do not comprise a deviant subset of all genes . Another is that single cell RNA - sequencing data has a number of known and unknown artifacts that make Gini analysis difficult . We favor the latter based on our experience with RNA FISH and the results of Battich and Stoeger et al . Cell 2015 , but our current analysis leaves us unable to resolve this for now . We do , however , note that Tirosh et al . do report low frequency AXL positive cells via immunofluorescence , which is directly comparable and consistent with our RNA FISH results . c . Gini analysis of 26 references genes from Padovan - Merhar et al . Molecular Cell 2015 . Padovan - Merhar et al . performed RNA FISH to obtain single cell RNA FISH counts for a panel of 26 genes across a range of expression values and degrees of variability . We calculated the Gini coefficient for each gene . We found that 24 out of the 26 genes had low Gini coefficients ( less than 0 . 5 ) , while two had Gini coefficients slightly higher than 0 . 5 . None were as high as the highest amongst our panel of pre - resistance markers . These results suggest that our panel of resistance markers have higher degrees of rare - cell expression behavior than average , although a more unbiased RNA FISH analysis with a more complete set of genes would make such a conclusion more definitive . d . Phixer analysis reveals the network structure of rare - cell expression ( see Supplementary Discussion 1 ) . Histogram of the φ - mixing coefficient ( edge strength ) for all edges in the inferred network for melanoma undrugged cancer cells . To illustrate the network we select the 34 most strongest edges ( non - shaded portion ) , and this corresponds to selecting edges with φ ≥ 0 . 18 . e . Gene interactions obtained using the phixer algorithm applied to the single - cell RNA FISH data from cancer cells . Each directed edge and its corresponding strength ( φ - mixing coefficient ) quantifies the effect of an upstream gene on the probability of rare - cell expression of a downstream gene . Shaffer et al . Page 25 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 8 . Analysis of multiple patient - derived xenografts reveals cells that sporadically express high levels of some resistance markers a . Table summarizing results of our patient - derived xenograft experiments , including the 4 different models and all the genes tested with each . b . Histograms show full distribution of mRNA expression for genes for which we saw convincing signal . Note that for some expressing genes , there were sporadic noise spots in the analysis , leading to some cells with , say , transcript counts of 1 – 2 that are probably spurious . c . Image panel of marker gene expression in the patient - derived xenografts . d . Computational representation of CYR61 Shaffer et al . Page 26 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mRNA expression in patient - derived xenografts . Each cell is represented by a dot on this plot and the color of the dot represents the number of RNA in that particular cell as indicated by the color scale bar . e . Histograms show full distribution of mRNA expression for CYR61 and LOXL2 in WM4335 . Extended Data Fig . 9 . Analysis of resistance after sorting by NGFR or AXL a . We sorted three cell lines ( WM989 - A6 , WM983B - E9 , and SK - MEL - 28 ) by NGFR antibody staining and applied vemurafenib for three weeks to look for differences in Shaffer et al . Page 27 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t resistance . In WM989 cells and SK - MEL - 28 cells , we observed an increased amount of resistant cells after NGFR sorting ( 2 biological replicates shown ) . In WM983B cells , we did not observe an enrichment in resistant cells , suggesting that NGFR is not resistance marker in this cell line ( 2 biological replicates shown ) . b . We performed analysis of RNA - sequencing transcript abundance levels in a number of independent subclones of WM983B - E9 both before drug addition , after 48 hours of drug addition , and after isolating stably resistant subclones . We found that NGFR was strongly associated with resistance in 3 of 10 clones , whereas in WM983B - E9 , just 2 of 37 showed upregulation of NGFR . c . We sorted WM989 - A6 cells by AXL antibody staining and applied vemurafenib to look for differences in resistance . Three biological replicates shown here . For each replicate , we recovered a different number of cells from the sort causing each experiment to have a different number of cells at the start of drug treatment . These numbers are shown in parenthesis above each image . After sorting , biological replicates 1 and 2 were in drug for 28 days before imaging and biological replicate 3 was in drug for 17 days before imaging . d . Example of plots from fluorescence assisted cell sorting plots showing the existence of a population of dead cells that we excluded . e . Validation of the AXL sorting by RNA FISH analysis post - sort . f . EGFR signaling affects the burn - in phase of resistance . Pre - treatment with lapatinib and vemurafenib and corresponding quantification of number of resistant colonies . g . Co - treatment of lapatinib and vemurafenib ( also vemurafenib , lapatinib and vehicle only ) . No growth inhibition for lapatinib and vehicle only . ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates ) . h . Schematic of resistance model . Shaffer et al . Page 28 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Extended Data Fig . 10 . RNA - sequencing on FACS sorted EGFR high cells shows that sporadically expressing genes are more highly expressed in EGFR - high cells than the mixed population a . We sorted EGFR - high cells at different time points in vemurafenib treatment ( untreated n = 3 , 1 week n = 2 , and 4 weeks n = 2 ) and performed RNA sequencing and ATAC sequencing on the sorted populations . Bar plots showing percentage of the resistance transcriptome that has become activated at different levels in each of the samples . Activation index is defined as log 2 of the fold change divided by the total log 2 fold change for the gene between the bulk non - resistant and bulk stably resistant populations . We then performed ATAC - seq analysis to Shaffer et al . Page 29 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t identify differentially accessible sites between the sorted cell populations ; example tracks shown displaying accessible site loss and gain from one of two replicates . b . Dot plot comparing the gene expression differences between EGFR - high and the mixed cell population . The y - axis shows the log2 fold change between the EGFR - high and mix cells , and the x - axis shows the different time points in drug ( untreated , 1 week , and 4 weeks ) . Dots that fall above the zero line represent samples that have higher expression in the EGFR - high cells and dots that fall below the zero line represent samples that have lower expression in the EGFR - high cells . The genes summarized here are the same panel of genes used for multiplex RNA FISH in Fig . 2a . Each dot represents a separate biological replicate . There are 3 biological replicates for the untreated condition , 2 biological replicates for week 1 , and 2 biological replicates for week 4 . We found that 8 of the 10 genes that exhibited rare expression behavior also exhibited increased expression in the EGFR - high cells ( EGFR , AXL , NGFR , WNT5A , SERPINE1 , JUN , LOXL2 and PDGFRB ) . c . Control genes do not show as much enrichment in the EGFR - high subpopulation as the pre - resistance marker genes . We sorted by EGFR antibody to isolate the EGFR - high subpopulation of cells and then performed RNA sequencing on these populations as well as an EGFR - mixed population . Dot plots show the log2 fold change in gene expression for a set of control genes and a set of resistance marker genes . Each dot represents a separate biological replicate ( paired EGFR - high / EGFR - mixed ) . The horizontal line at y = 0 represents no change in the EGFR - high samples relative to the EGFR - mix . For the resistance marker genes ( EGFR , AXL , and NGFR ) , there is significantly more expression in the EGFR - high sample , while the control genes do not show large differences , showing that they do not correlate with the expression of the resistance markers . d . EGFR - high cells are proliferating based upon expression of cell cycle markers . Barplot showing the fraction of max expression for cell cycle genes ( CCNA2 and CCND1 ) across EGFR - high , EGFR - mixed , and EGFR - negative populations at each time point . e . EGFR - high cells do not express markers of slow - cycling subpopulations . Barplot showing the fraction of max expression for KDM5A and KDM5B , which are both markers of slow - cycling subpopulations in melanoma ( Roesch et al . 2010 ; Sharma et al . 2010 ) , across EGFR - high , EGFR - mixed , and EGFR - negative populations at each time point . Note that we only collected an EGFR - negative sample at 4 weeks because this was the only time point where the EGFR - high cells represented a significant portion of the total mixed population ( > 1 % ) . Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Acknowledgments We thank Gautham Nair for suggesting Luria - Delbrück experiments , Matt MacLean for image software ; Hyun Youk , Ashani Weeraratna , and Julia Rood for feedback on the manuscript , and Raj Lab members for comments . AR acknowledges NIH New Innovator Award DP2 OD008514 , NIH / NCI PSOC award number U54 CA193417 , NSF CAREER 1350601 , NIH R33 EB019767 , P30 CA016520 . SMS acknowledges NIH F30 AI114475 . AS acknowledges National Science Foundation Grant DMS - 1312926 . MH acknowledges P01 CA114046 , R01 CA047159 , SPORE P50 CA174523 , Melanoma Research Foundation , Dr . Miriam and Sheldon G . Adelson Medical Research Foundation . KN acknowledges Melanoma Research Alliance , P50 CA174523 , P01 CA114046 . Shaffer et al . Page 30 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t References 1 . Trunzer K , et al . Pharmacodynamic effects and mechanisms of resistance to vemurafenib in patients with metastatic melanoma . J Clin Oncol . 2013 ; 31 : 1767 – 1774 . [ PubMed : 23569304 ] 2 . Garraway LA , Jänne PA . Circumventing cancer drug resistance in the era of personalized medicine . Cancer Discov . 2012 ; 2 : 214 – 226 . [ PubMed : 22585993 ] 3 . Nazarian R , et al . Melanomas acquire resistance to B - RAF ( V600E ) inhibition by RTK or N - RAS upregulation . Nature . 2010 ; 468 : 973 – 977 . [ PubMed : 21107323 ] 4 . Krepler C , et al . Personalized pre - clinical trials in BRAF inhibitor resistant patient derived xenograft models identify second line combination therapies . Clin Cancer Res . 2015 ; doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 15 - 1762 5 . Spencer SL , Gaudet S , Albeck JG , Burke JM , Sorger PK . Non - genetic origins of cell - to - cell variability in TRAIL - induced apoptosis . Nature . 2009 ; 459 : 428 – 432 . [ PubMed : 19363473 ] 6 . Sharma SV , et al . A chromatin - mediated reversible drug - tolerant state in cancer cell subpopulations . Cell . 2010 ; 141 : 69 – 80 . [ PubMed : 20371346 ] 7 . Gupta PB , et al . Stochastic state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in populations of cancer cells . Cell . 2011 ; 146 : 633 – 644 . [ PubMed : 21854987 ] 8 . Pisco AO , Huang S . Non - genetic cancer cell plasticity and therapy - induced stemness in tumour relapse : ‘What does not kill me strengthens me’ . Br J Cancer . 2015 ; 112 : 1725 – 1732 . [ PubMed : 25965164 ] 9 . Ramirez M , et al . Diverse drug - resistance mechanisms can emerge from drug - tolerant cancer persister cells . Nat Commun . 2016 ; 7 : 10690 . [ PubMed : 26891683 ] 10 . Nguyen A , Yoshida M , Goodarzi H , Tavazoie SF . Highly variable cancer subpopulations that exhibit enhanced transcriptome variability and metastatic fitness . Nat Commun . 2016 ; 7 : 11246 . [ PubMed : 27138336 ] 11 . Symmons O , Raj A . What’s Luck Got to Do with It : Single Cells , Multiple Fates , and Biological Nondeterminism . Mol Cell . 2016 ; 62 : 788 – 802 . [ PubMed : 27259209 ] 12 . Luria SE , Delbrück M . Mutations of Bacteria from Virus Sensitivity to Virus Resistance . Genetics . 1943 ; 28 : 491 – 511 . [ PubMed : 17247100 ] 13 . Webster MR , Weeraratna AT . A Wnt - er migration : the confusing role of β - catenin in melanoma metastasis . Sci Signal . 2013 ; 6 : e11 . 14 . Müller J , et al . Low MITF / AXL ratio predicts early resistance to multiple targeted drugs in melanoma . Nat Commun . 2014 ; 5 : 5712 . [ PubMed : 25502142 ] 15 . Sun C , et al . Reversible and adaptive resistance to BRAF ( V600E ) inhibition in melanoma . Nature . 2014 ; 508 : 118 – 122 . [ PubMed : 24670642 ] 16 . Ramsdale R , et al . The transcription cofactor c - JUN mediates phenotype switching and BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma . Sci Signal . 2015 ; 8 : ra82 . [ PubMed : 26286024 ] 17 . Padovan - Merhar O , et al . Single mammalian cells compensate for differences in cellular volume and DNA copy number through independent global transcriptional mechanisms . Mol Cell . 2015 ; 58 : 339 – 352 . [ PubMed : 25866248 ] 18 . Lubeck E , Coskun AF , Zhiyentayev T , Ahmad M , Cai L . Single - cell in situ RNA profiling by sequential hybridization . Nat Methods . 2014 ; 11 : 360 – 361 . [ PubMed : 24681720 ] 19 . Jiang L , Chen H , Pinello L , Yuan GC . GiniClust : detecting rare cell types from single - cell gene expression data with Gini index . Genome Biol . 2016 ; 17 : 144 . [ PubMed : 27368803 ] 20 . Roesch A , et al . Overcoming intrinsic multidrug resistance in melanoma by blocking the mitochondrial respiratory chain of slow - cycling JARID1B ( high ) cells . Cancer Cell . 2013 ; 23 : 811 – 825 . [ PubMed : 23764003 ] 21 . Tirosh I , et al . Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single - cell RNA - seq . Science . 2016 ; 352 : 189 – 196 . [ PubMed : 27124452 ] 22 . Buenrostro JD , Giresi PG , Zaba LC , Chang HY , Greenleaf WJ . Transposition of native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin , DNA - binding proteins and nucleosome position . Nat Methods . 2013 ; 10 : 1213 – 1218 . [ PubMed : 24097267 ] Shaffer et al . Page 31 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 23 . Verfaillie A , et al . Decoding the regulatory landscape of melanoma reveals TEADS as regulators of the invasive cell state . Nat Commun . 2015 ; 6 : 6683 . [ PubMed : 25865119 ] 24 . O’Connell MP , et al . Hypoxia induces phenotypic plasticity and therapy resistance in melanoma via the tyrosine kinase receptors ROR1 and ROR2 . Cancer Discov . 2013 ; 3 : 1378 – 1393 . [ PubMed : 24104062 ] 25 . Viswanathan VS , Schreiber S . Dependency of a therapy - resistant high - mesenchymal state of cancer cells on a lipid peroxidase pathway . Nature . 26 . Hata AN , et al . Tumor cells can follow distinct evolutionary paths to become resistant to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition . Nat Med . 2016 ; 22 : 262 – 269 . [ PubMed : 26828195 ] 27 . Liao D , Estévez - Salmerón L , Tlsty TD . Conceptualizing a tool to optimize therapy based on dynamic heterogeneityThe authors dedicate this paper to Dr Barton Kamen who inspired its initiation and enthusiastically supported its pursuit . Phys Biol . 2012 ; 9 : 065005 . [ PubMed : 23197078 ] 28 . Das Thakur M , et al . Modelling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma reveals a strategy to forestall drug resistance . Nature . 2013 ; 494 : 251 – 255 . [ PubMed : 23302800 ] 29 . Seghers AC , Wilgenhof S , Lebbé C , Neyns B . Successful rechallenge in two patients with BRAF - V600 - mutant melanoma who experienced previous progression during treatment with a selective BRAF inhibitor . Melanoma Res . 2012 ; 22 : 466 – 472 . [ PubMed : 22584957 ] 30 . Raj A , van den Bogaard P , Rifkin SA , van Oudenaarden A , Tyagi S . Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat Methods . 2008 ; 5 : 877 – 879 . [ PubMed : 18806792 ] Shaffer et al . Page 32 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . Resistance to vemurafenib is not heritable , and pre - existing pre - resistant cells are marked by very high expression of resistance genes a . Alternative models for heritability of the resistant phenotype and simulated outcomes of each model . b . Distributions of resistant colonies in WM989 - A6 ( n = 2 biological replicates of 43 and 29 clones ; WM983B - E9 in Extended Data Fig . 3 ) . c . Transcriptome analysis before drug , 48 hours after drug and stably resistant cultures ( see Extended Data Fig . 2 ) . Heatmap depicts “marker genes” whose expression increased in resistant cells relative to untreated . d . Computational representation of single - cell RNA FISH ( 8672 untreated cells ) for AXL , NGFR , and EGFR mRNA ; each dot is a cell colored by number of mRNA ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates ) . e . Single - cell AXL RNA FISH ( 1966 cells ) after 4 weeks treatment with 1μM vemurafenib ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates ) . f . FACS of cells with an EGFR antibody ; isolated an EGFR - high and mixed cell population , then applied vemurafenib . Two - well chamber of populations after 3 weeks vemurafenib ( 1 of n = 3 biological replicates , Extended Data Fig . 5a ) . g . Ratio of number of colonies in EGFR - high vs . mixed wells after cells grew without drug for varying periods before vemurafenib application . Error bars represent standard error of the mean ( 3 biological replicates ) . Shaffer et al . Page 33 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . Multiplex single cell RNA FISH reveals rare cells with high , sporadic expression of resistance markers across multiple cell lines a . High - throughput imaging and reiterative hybridization scheme . b . Gini coefficients of single - cell RNA FISH data for 4 melanoma cell lines , primary melanocytes , and 4 other cancer cell lines ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates shown ) . Shaffer et al . Page 34 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 3 . Rare cell expression of resistance marker genes is coordinated between genes , leading to cells expressing multiple markers a . AXL vs . VEGFC mRNA in individual WM989 - A6 melanoma cells . Dotted lines represent thresholds for high / low . Inset tabulates cells . b . Odds ratio for co - expression . Dark gray boxes indicate zero double - positive cells ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates ) . c . Co - stain and sort for EGFR and NGFR into 4 populations : double negative and positive , and EGFR / NGFR positive only , followed by 1μM vemurafenib ( 2 weeks ) . Resistant colonies circled in the images ( 1 of n = 2 biological replicates ) . d . Two cells across multiple rounds of hybridization . RNA FISH signal in white ; cell nuclei in blue . Shaffer et al . Page 35 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 4 . Vemurafenib induces stepwise reprogramming of pre - resistant cells into a stably - resistant state a . EGFR - high cells isolated at different time points in vemurafenib treatment ( untreated , 1 week , 4 weeks ) ; RNA sequencing on sorted populations ( 3 biological replicates for untreated ; 2 biological replicates at 1 week , 4 weeks , Extended Data Fig . 10 ) . Percentage activation for resistance genes ; activation index is log 2 ( fold change ) compared to EGFR - mix baseline divided by total log 2 fold change between bulk non - resistant and bulk stably resistant populations . Bars show percentage of resistance genes at varying degrees of activation . b . ATAC - seq identified differentially accessible sites ; tracks from one of two replicates . c . Peaks called as lost or gained if we could identify the peak in one of the conditions and saw a change in read count in the peak of 4 fold or higher across both replicates . Motifs and transcription factors identified using HOMER differential peak calling and de novo motif tools . Shaffer et al . Page 36 Nature . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 December 07 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t