HYPOTHESIS ANDTHEORY ARTICLE published : 11 April 2012 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2012 . 00095 The role of words in cognitive tasks : what , when , and how ? Christopher W . Robinson , Catherine A . Best , Wei ( Sophia ) Deng and Vladimir M . Sloutsky * Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Science , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH , USA Edited by : Larissa Samuelson , University of Iowa , USA Reviewed by : Sarah Creel , University of California at San Diego , USA Moritz Daum , Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences , Germany * Correspondence : Vladimir M . Sloutsky , Department of Psychology , Center for Cognitive Science , The Ohio State University , 208C Ohio Stadium East , 1961Tuttle Park Place , Columbus , OH 43210 , USA . e - mail : sloutsky . 1 @ osu . edu The current review focuses on how exposure to linguistic input , and count nouns in partic - ular , affect performance on various cognitive tasks , including individuation , categorization and category learning , and inductive inference . We review two theoretical accounts of effects of words . Proponents of one account argue that words have top - down effects on cognitive tasks , and , as such , function as supervisory signals . Proponents of the other account suggest that early in development , words , just like any other perceptual feature , are ﬁrst and foremost part of the stimulus input and inﬂuence cognitive tasks in a bottom - up , non - supervisory fashion . We then review evidence supporting each account . We conclude that , although much research is needed , there is a large body of evidence indicating that words start out like other perceptual features and become supervisory signals in the course of development . Keywords : cognitive development , word learning , categorization , attention Word learning is a critically important task in early develop - ment and is a necessary step in language acquisition . Further - more , it is often argued that language affects cognition . The reported effects range from imposing category boundaries on sensory continua to affecting the range of concepts that peo - ple acquire ( Whorf , 1956 ; Gentner and Goldin - Meadow , 2003 ; Gleitman and Papafragou , 2005 ) . For example , exposure to words may affect the way people track individual objects ( Xu , 2002 ) , learn and use categories ( Yamauchi and Markman , 1998 , 2000 ; Sloutsky and Fisher , 2004 ; Fulkerson and Waxman , 2007 ; Lupyan et al . , 2007 ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ; Ferry et al . , 2010 ) , and make inductive inferences ( Gelman and Markman , 1986 ; Gra - ham et al . , 2004 ; Sloutsky and Fisher , 2004 ; Keates and Graham , 2008 ) . The current review begins by focusing on several theoretical considerations of how word learning , and exposure to linguistic input more speciﬁcally , may affect performance on various cog - nitive tasks . While many of the reviewed ﬁndings may generalize to different word classes ( e . g . , verbs , adjectives , etc . ) , the current paper primarily focuses on how count nouns and non - linguistic sounds affect performance on a variety of tasks . We then discuss empirical ﬁndings examining the necessary components under - lying word learning ( i . e . , processing of arbitrary auditory – visual pairings ) and explain how these low - level cross - modal interac - tions can account for some of the effects of words on a variety of cognitive tasks including categorization , individuation , and induction . THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENTS : THE ROLE OF WORDS IN EARLY COGNITION Although there is little disagreement as to whether words affect cognition , the nature of these effects , their developmental time course , and underlying mechanisms remain unknown . Some researchers believe that from early in development , words are names of objects and categories , and words act as invitations to form categories ( Balaban and Waxman , 1997 ; Xu , 2002 ; Waxman and Booth , 2003 ) . At the computational level ( Marr , 1982 ) , this account assumes that words function as supervisory signals that direct and guide learning . Thus , if two discriminable items share the same count noun ( e . g . , both are called “a dax” ) , the word serves as a top - down signal to the infant or child that these items are equivalent in some way ( cf . Gliga et al . , 2010 ) . A second possibility is that early in development , words , just like any other perceptual feature , are ﬁrst and foremost part of the stimulus input , and they inﬂuence cognition in a bottom - up , non - supervisory fashion ( Sloutsky and Lo , 1999 ; Sloutsky and Fisher , 2004 ; Colunga and Smith , 2005 ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ) . The account that words are perceptual features affecting processing of visual input has yielded research ﬁndings where under some con - ditions , linguistic input facilitates learning ( Samuelson and Smith , 1999 ; Colunga and Smith , 2005 ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ) ; whereas , under other conditions it hinders learning ( Robinson and Slout - sky , 2007a ; Best et al . , 2011a , b ) . When reviewing the bottom - up account , we primarily focus on situations when auditory input hinders learning . As we explain elsewhere ( Sloutsky and Fisher , 2005 ) , this“auditory dominance”is a consequence of words being features . A third account posits that words begin as part of the stimulus input , but eventually become supervisory signals ( Casasola and Bhagwat , 2007 ; Casasola , 2008 ; Sloutsky , 2010 ; Plunkett , 2011 ) . As children develop they may learn that count nouns have high predictive power in determining a category , and as a result , words may become supervisory signals . While there is little disagreement among theorists that words eventually become top - down super - visory signals ( cf . Yamauchi and Markman , 1998 ; Casasola and Bhagwat , 2007 ; Lupyan et al . , 2007 ; Casasola , 2008 ; Sloutsky , 2010 ; Plunkett , 2011 ) , the precise developmental time course remains unknown . www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 1 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks Distinguishing among these notions of how words might inﬂu - ence cognition is of critical importance for understanding cogni - tive development . If early in development count nouns function as supervisory signals , then top - down effects may play a signiﬁcant role in early cognitive development . Perhaps the most important implication is that at both the cognitive and the neural levels , lower - level processes ( such as discrimination and generalization ) may be subject to top - down control . Also , given that supervision ( i . e . , guided learning or feedback ) results in the ability to learn substantially more complex categories than unsupervised learning ( Rumelhart , 1989 ) , if words are supervisory signals for infants and young children , our construal of what infants can and cannot learn early in development will be subject to substantial revision . Alter - natively , if words become supervisory signals during the course of development , then top - down control need not exhibit an early onset and such control could be itself the product of develop - ment . Understanding how the role of words changes in the course of development has been a focus of research in our lab . EMPIRICAL SUPPORT FOR WORDS AS FEATURES Preliminary evidence suggesting that effects of words may stem from low - level effects , as opposed to supervisory signals , comes fromstudiesexaminingchildren’ssimilarityjudgmentsandinduc - tive generalizations ( Sloutsky and Lo , 1999 ; Sloutsky et al . , 2001 ; Sloutsky and Fisher , 2004 ) . In these tasks , participants were pre - sented with a target item and two test items . In the similarity judgment tasks , participants selected the test item they deemed more perceptually similar to the target item . In the induction tasks , participants were told an unobservable property about the target , and they had to choose which test item also shared the same unob - servable property . Furthermore , in no label conditions , items were labeled with generic phrases ( e . g . , “Look at this one . This one has yellow blood inside of its body . ” ) , and in label conditions , items were labeled with count nouns ( e . g . , “This is a Guga . This Guga has yellow blood inside of its body . ” ) . Several ﬁndings from Sloutsky and colleagues’ similarity judg - ment tasks are relevant for exploring whether words are supervi - sory signals or features . First , Sloutsky and Lo ( 1999 ) demon - strated that words inﬂuenced the perceived similarity in 5 - to 7 - year - olds and in 7 - to 9 - year - olds but not in 9 - to 11 - year - olds ( i . e . , young children reported that two items looked more simi - lar to each other if they shared a common label ) . These results suggest that some of the effects of words on higher - order tasks may stem from words increasing the perceptual similarity of com - pared items , as opposed to words being top - down supervisory signals . Second , consistent with this claim , words had compara - ble effects on similarity judgment and induction tasks at 4 – 5 years of age ; whereas , words affected only inductive generalization ( but not similarity judgment ) in 11 - to 12 - year - olds ( Sloutsky et al . , 2001 ) . This ﬁnding suggests that words were playing a different role for younger and older children . Finally , while words affected induction in a qualitative manner in older participants ( i . e . , older childrenreliedalmostexclusivelyonthewordwhenmakinginduc - tive inferences ) , young children took into account both words and appearance information , with words having greater attentional weight than the visual information . These results present evidence that the role of words changes with development , but they raise a number of important questions . Why do words often have greater attentionalweightsthanvisualinformation , andwhydowordsand other types of auditory input have different effects on cognitive tasks early in development ? MECHANISM UNDERLYING ATTENTION TO WORDS : AUDITORY DOMINANCE When words ( or other auditory stimuli ) accompany visual stimuli , one has to process information presented cross - modally . In some situations , cross - modal presentation of information can facili - tate processing . For example , when the same information can be expressed in multiple sensory modalities ( e . g . , rhythm , tempo ) , 5 - month - old infants are more likely to learn this information when it is presented cross - modally than when the same infor - mation is presented unimodally ( Bahrick and Lickliter , 2000 ; see Bahrick et al . , 2004 for a review ) . At the same time , words and their corresponding referents are arbitrarily paired together within the world , and there are many situations when cross - modal presenta - tion hinders processing of arbitrary , auditory – visual pairings . For example , studies examining auditory dominance in infants and young children show that infants and children often have difﬁ - culty discriminating visual stimuli when these are paired with an auditory stimulus ( Sloutsky and Napolitano , 2003 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2004 , 2007b , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . This ﬁnding is noteworthy because these participants ably discrimi - nate the same visual stimuli presented in silence ( Sloutsky and Napolitano , 2003 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2004 , 2007b , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . Furthermore , cross - modal presen - tation does not appear to attenuate auditory processing ( Sloutsky and Napolitano , 2003 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2010a ) . We refer to this asymmetric cost ( i . e . , cross - modal presentation attenuates visual but not auditory processing ) as auditory dominance . We believe that auditory dominance underlies many of the effects of words on cognitive tasks . But what is the mechanism of auditory dominance ? In an attempt to elucidate the mechanism underlying auditory dominance , we have formulated a set of theoretical considerations pertaining to the allocation of attention in the course of cross - modal processing ( for a more extensive review see Robinson and Sloutsky , 2010b ) . The overall idea is that attentional resources are ﬁnite , which results in modalities competing for attention . When multisensory stimuli are presented simultaneously , the stimulus that is faster to engage attention wins the competition . During the later stages of processing , infants and children begin processing the details of the stimuli ; however , due to the selective nature of sustained attention ( see Berg and Richards , 1997 ; Richards , 2001 , 2005 , for reviews ) , it is likely that processing of stimuli in the“win - ning” modality will be enhanced whereas processing of stimuli in the “losing” modality will be attenuated . At some point in the course of processing , the winning modality will release attention , thus , allowing for more attentional resources to be deployed to the losing modality . Given these assumptions : ( a ) auditory dominance effects should be more pronounced early in the course of process - ing because the auditory modality has not had a chance to release attention ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2008 ) , ( b ) auditory dominance should be more pronounced in younger populations due to slower overall processing speeds ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2004 ) , and ( c ) Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 2 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks auditory stimuli that are slow to release attention ( e . g . , complex or novel ) should exert stronger interference than auditory stimuli that are fast to release attention ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007b , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . Several factors may also give auditory input a“leg - up”on visual input . First , auditory stimuli are often transient ; whereas , visual stimuli are often presented for longer durations . Thus , it may be adaptive to ﬁrst allocate attention to stimuli that will quickly dis - appear . Second , almost all naturally occurring auditory stimuli are dynamic in nature as they change in pitch and amplitude across time . While some visual stimuli can also be dynamic , many visual stimuli are static for extended periods of time . Third , auditory stimuli are often processed faster than visual stimuli in adults ( Green and von Gierke , 1984 ) , and due to early maturation of the auditory system , this difference may be even more pronounced early in development . EMPIRICAL SUPPORT FOR AUDITORY DOMINANCE Initial evidence for auditory dominance comes from a series of experiments examining change detection in 4 - year - olds and adults ( Sloutsky and Napolitano , 2003 ) . For example , partici - pants in some of the reported experiments were presented with an auditory – visual target item ( AUD Target VIS Target ) followed by a test item . Participants had to respond same if the two com - pound stimuli had the same auditory and visual components as the target and respond different if either the auditory and / or visual component changed at test in any of three combinations ( e . g . , AUD Target VIS New , AUD New VIS Target , AUD New VIS New ) . The audi - tory components consisted of unfamiliar non - linguistic sounds and the visual components consisted of unfamiliar images ( e . g . , landscapes ) . If participants encoded both auditory and visual stimuli , then they should correctly accept target items as the same , while correctly rejecting items that had either new visual or new auditory components as different . Adults were accurate across all three test trial types , suggesting they encoded both the auditory and visual components . In contrast , children failed to report a difference when only the visual input changed at test ( AUD Target VIS New ) . At the same time , children ably discriminated the visual stimuli when presented unimodally in a separate exper - iment ; therefore , it was concluded that the auditory input over - shadowed the corresponding visual input in children . This ﬁnding has been replicated using a variety of tasks , including familiariza - tion and habitation procedures in infants ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2004 , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF WORDS AND SOUNDS ON VISUAL PROCESSING These interference effects can be mediated by the type and famil - iarity of the auditory stimulus ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007b , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . In fact , Napolitano and Sloutsky ( 2004 ) demonstrated that it is even possible to reverse dominance effects ( i . e . , achieve visual dominance ) in 4 - year - olds by using familiar visual stimuli and unfamiliar auditory stimuli . While such a reversal was not found in infants ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2010a ) , there are reasons to believe that it is possible to attenuate modality dominance effects . Recall that the underly - ing idea of auditory dominance is that auditory stimuli are often faster to engage attention than visual stimuli , and processing of the details of a visual stimulus does not begin until the audi - tory modality releases attention . Thus , auditory stimuli that are processed quickly and are fast to release attention ( e . g . , simple and / or familiar ) should exert less cross - modal interference than auditory stimuli that are slow to release attention ( e . g . , complex and / or novel ) . This hypothesis was tested in several experiments by ( 1 ) manip - ulating the type of auditory stimulus or ( 2 ) by pre - familiarizing 8 - to 16 - month - old infants to the auditory stimulus before pairing it with a corresponding visual stimulus ( Robinson and Slout - sky , 2007b , 2010a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . In the pre - familiarization conditions , infants were ﬁrst exposed to the audi - tory stimuli ( presented unimodally ) , then given a short break , and then they were tested in the experiment proper where we measured discrimination of the auditory and / or visual input . Discrimina - tion of the visual stimuli in the different auditory conditions ( e . g . , unfamiliar sounds or pre - familiarized sounds ) was compared to discrimination of the same visual stimuli in a silent baseline . The results from these studies demonstrate that words and sounds have different effects on visual processing ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007b ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . For example , using a continuous familiarization procedure ( cf . , Fantz , 1964 ; Roder et al . , 2000 ) , 14 - month - old infants required less familiar - ization to reliably discriminate visual images when the images were paired with words ( i . e . , “Look at the dax” ) than when the same images were paired with unfamiliar sounds ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007b ) . However , comparisons to a unimodal visual baseline showed that this effect resulted from unfamiliar sounds attenuating visual processing , as opposed to words facilitating visual processing . Furthermore , pre - familiarization experiments corroborate this ﬁnding : when infants were pre - familiarized to the unfamiliar non - speech sounds prior to the experiment proper , interferenceeffectsdisappearedandwordsandnon - speechsounds had comparable effects on visual processing ( Robinson and Slout - sky , 2007b ) . Theseﬁndingsareconsistentwiththeproposedmech - anism underlying auditory dominance , and they have direct impli - cations on a variety of higher - order tasks that rely on processing of auditory and visual information . EFFECTS OF WORDS ON COGNITIVE TASKS : INDIVIDUATION , CATEGORIZATION , AND INDUCTION Effects of words have been found in many cognitive tasks ; however , we only focus on individuation , categorization , and induction . In whatfollowsweconsiderthedirectionof theseeffects ( i . e . , whether the target task is facilitated or hindered by the presence of words ) and their robustness ( i . e . , whether effects of words exceed those of non - speech sounds and those of the silent baseline ) . INDIVIDUATION There have been a number of reports suggesting that infants are more likely to track individual objects across time and space when these individuals are associated with unique words . For example , in Xu ( 2002 ) , 8 - month - old infants were familiarized to a duck and a ball appearing and disappearing from behind an occluder . At test , the occluder dropped revealing either one object ( unex - pected event ) or two objects ( expected event ) . When each object www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 3 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks was accompanied by a unique word ( i . e . , “a duck” and “a ball” ) , infants expected two objects to be behind the occluder . However , when the duck and ball were paired with two unfamiliar sounds or one word , infants did not appear to make this assumption . To determine if hearing unique words facilitated individua - tion , Robinson and Sloutsky ( 2008 ) conducted two experiments that familiarized 8 - and 14 - month - old infants to either : ( a ) a duck and ball appearing and disappearing from behind an occluder or ( b ) two novel creatures appearing and disappearing in a bas - ket . The visual stimuli were either paired with two unique words ( e . g . , “a duck” and “a ball” ) , two unique non - linguistic sounds , or the images were presented in silence . Across both reported experiments , hearing non - linguistic sounds attenuated learning compared to the silent condition . When infants were given ample time to process the images , words had no effect compared to the silent condition ( Experiment 1 ) ; however , under shortened stim - ulus presentations , both words and sounds attenuated learning compared to the silent condition ( Experiment 2 ) . These ﬁnd - ings are consistent with auditory dominance and further suggest that differential effects of words and sounds stem from unfamiliar sounds attenuating visual processing more than count nouns , as opposed to count nouns serving as a top - down supervisory signal which facilitates learning . CATEGORIZATION Categorization is a fundamental skill for learning , so it is not unex - pected that categorization abilities emerge early in infancy with 3 - month - old infants forming perceptual categories ( e . g . , Quinn et al . , 1993 ) . Yet , as infants learn to organize their visual world , they are also learning words that map onto objects within their surroundings . Given the importance of words in everyday speech by adults to convey category meaning , it is not without reason to assume there is a relation between word learning and category learning . The nature of this relation between words and cate - gories is not without dispute , however . According to one account , even very young infants have some understanding that words ( but not other types of auditory input ) denote categories , with words facilitating categorization by highlighting common features ( Ferry et al . , 2010 ) . According to other accounts , words are part of the input ( i . e . , features ) , which either facilitate or interfere with learning ( Samuelson and Smith , 1999 ; Colunga and Smith , 2005 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ; Best et al . , 2010 , 2011b ) . There have been reports that words ( speciﬁcally count nouns ) facilitate infants’categorization . However , similar to individuation research , mostof thestudiespointingtofacilitativeeffectsof words on categorization did not include a silent baseline . Instead , these studies compared infants’ and children’s performance in a word conditionwiththatinanon - linguisticsoundornolabelcondition . For example , to estimate effects of words on category learning , Waxman and colleagues ( e . g . , Balaban and Waxman , 1997 ; Fulk - erson and Waxman , 2007 ; Ferry et al . , 2010 ) compared 3 - , 6 - , and 9 - month - old infants’ learning of a category in a word condition where the same word ( e . g . , “a rabbit”or“do you see the toma” ) was associated with members of the to - be - learned category to infants’ learning of a category in a sound condition where the same non - linguistic sound was associated with category members ( but see Best et al . , 2010 and Waxman and Braun , 2005 , where effects of common words were also compared to unique words ) . As in audi - tory dominance research , words and sounds often had different effects , with only infants in the word conditions learning the cate - gories ( Balaban andWaxman , 1997 ; Fulkerson andWaxman , 2007 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a ) . However , using the non - linguistic sound ( or unique label ) con - dition as a control makes sense only if it is established that sounds or unique words facilitate category responding , and it is impor - tant to determine if effects of words exceed the general facilitative effects of sounds . While work by Roberts and Jacob ( 1991 ) is often cited as evidence of general auditory facilitation effects , Roberts ( 1995 ) demonstratedthatsoundsandlabelsfacilitatelearningonly whenthepresentationof auditoryinputwascontingentoninfants’ looking ( e . g . , infants did not hear words or sounds when look - ing away from visual stimuli ) . This suggests that the contingency rather than the presence of the auditory stimulus may be driving the facilitative effect . Furthermore , auditory dominance research demonstrates that both sounds and words can interfere with visual processing ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007b ; Sloutsky and Robin - son , 2008 ) . Therefore , without a unimodal visual baseline , it is unclearwhetherdifferencesbetweentwoauditoryconditions ( e . g . , words vs . sounds ) , if found , stem from words facilitating catego - rization , fromsoundsinterferingwithcategorization , orfromboth ( see Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a for additional discussion ) . The studies that have directly compared effects of words on categorization to a silent condition have yielded mixed results ( Roberts and Jacob , 1991 ; Roberts , 1995 ; Waxman and Markow , 1995 ; Fulkerson and Haaf , 2003 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ) . In Fulkerson and Haaf ( 2003 ) and Waxman and Markow ( 1995 ) , effects of words did not exceed the silent condition when 9 - , 12 - , and 15 - month - olds infants were trained and tested on basic - level categories ; however , effects of words did appear to facilitate categorization above the silent condition when the categories were more abstract . Both words and sounds can facilitate categorization at 15 months when the presentation of auditory input is contingent on infants’ looking ; however , neither wordsnorsoundsfacilitatecategorizationwhenthiscontingencyisbroken ( Roberts and Cuff , 1989 ; Roberts and Jacob , 1991 ; Roberts , 1995 ) . While Plunkett et al . ( 2008 ) did not ﬁnd facilitative effects of words per se , their study demonstrated that words can affect the structure of the learned category : when presented with the same visual stimuli , 10 - month - old infants who heard one word ( e . g . , “Look , dax” ) formed one category ; whereas , infants who heard two words ( “Look , dax” and “Look , rif” ) formed two categories . Research from our lab demonstrates that words either have no effect on categorization or they interfere with categorization . For example , inRobinsonandSloutsky ( 2007a ) , 8 - and12 - month - olds were familiarized to different exemplars from the same category , and each member of the category was either associated with the same word ( e . g . , “a cat” ) , the same non - linguistic sound , or no auditory input was provided ( i . e . , a silent condition ) . After famil - iarization , infants were simultaneously presented with a novel stimulus from the familiarized category and a novel stimulus from a novel category . Categorization was inferred from increased looking to the novel category items compared to the familiarized category items . At both 8 and 12 months of age , infants were more Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 4 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks likely to form categories in the silent condition than in the word or sound conditions . While 12 - month - olds were more likely to learncategorieswhenitemswereaccompaniedbywordsthannon - linguistic sounds , this effect was driven by non - linguistic sounds hindering categorization more than words . These ﬁndings are consistent with previous research examining auditory dominance ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a ; Sloutsky and Robinson , 2008 ) . The hindering effects of words on categorization did not com - pletely disappear with age . We presented 4 - year - old children with a category learning task where they had to learn two types of ﬂow - ers , and we tested categorization at various points in the course of training ( Best et al . , 2011a ) . The experiment had a between - subjects design , with participants randomly assigned to one of two experimental conditions ( i . e . , word or silent ) . In the word condition , the two types of ﬂowers were labeled during training [ e . g . , “These ﬂowers are called zibblers ( blickets ) ” ] . At test we pre - sented novel ﬂowers and children had to determine if the ﬂowers were zibblers or blickets . In the silent condition , we presented ﬂowers in silence and children had to associate the two types of ﬂowers with two creatures ( i . e . , creature 1 ate one type of ﬂower and creature 2 ate a different type of ﬂower ) . At test we presented novel ﬂowers and children had to determine which creature ate that type of ﬂower . The most interesting ﬁnding from this study was that effects of hearing words during training hindered cate - gory learning compared to when objects were presented in silence , with only children in the silent condition reliably categorizing the novelﬂowers . Thisstudy , inconjunctionwithRobinsonandSlout - sky ( 2007a ) , casts doubt on the claim that words are supervisory signals that facilitate category learning . However , the above mentioned studies only focused on the outcome of learning , not on the process of learning . Thus , one limitation of previous research is that the mechanisms underlying the effects of words on categorization are often inferred by exam - ining infants’novelty preference at test , rather than directly testing how words affect attention in the course of category learning . We have recently addressed this issue by using an eye tracker to exam - ine infants’ ﬁxations to category - relevant and irrelevant features in the course of learning ( Best et al . , 2011b ) . Six - to 8 - month - old infants in this study were familiarized to novel images , which were either presented in silence or paired with the same word ( e . g . , “Look at the feps . Do you see the feps ? ” ) . At test , we simultaneously presented a novel item from the familiar category and a novel item from a new category , and categorization was assessed by increased looking to the novel category . If words facilitate categorization by directing infant’s attention to category - relevant features then infants who hear the same word paired with different category members should show an increase in looking to category deﬁning features ( in terms of ﬁrst look or overall looking times ) . However , infants who heard the same word paired with different exemplars during familiarization did not increase looking to category - relevant features across train - ing , nor did they accumulate more looking to relevant features than infants in a silent condition . In fact , the pattern was in the opposite direction , with infants who heard words during train - ing reliably looking to category - irrelevant features . Furthermore , whereas infants in the silent condition exhibited a reliable nov - elty preference between 0 and 2000 ms within test trials , infants’ looking at test in the word condition never differed from chance performance . These ﬁndings demonstrate that words hindered category learning at 6 – 8 months of age and cast doubt on the claim that facilitative effects of words stem from words directing infants’ attention to category - relevant features . In summary , while it is well documented that words and sounds can have different effects on category learning , most of the pub - lished ﬁndings do not include a silent condition to serve as a control . Thus , it is often unclear if common words are facilitating categorization or if non - linguistic sounds , unique words , or no label phrases are disrupting categorization . We have also demon - strated that words and sounds can have different effects on indi - viduation and category learning ( Robinson and Sloutsky , 2007a , 2008 ) ; however , consistent with auditory dominance research , this effect stems from non - linguistic sounds hindering categorization more than words . Furthermore , eye tracking data provide no support for the claim that words facilitate categorization by high - lighting common features ( Best et al . , 2011b ) . While there are reasons to believe that words eventually become supervisory sig - nals that facilitate categorization , the reported studies question whether such as mechanism is at play early in development . INDUCTION The studies reviewed so far have indirectly tested whether words are supervisory signals or features by focusing on facilitation and interference effects . However , there are tasks developed for addressing this issue more directly . For example , in Yamauchi and Markman’s ( 2000 ) work , adults were presented with two tasks . In the classiﬁcation task , adults were presented with bugs comprised of multiple features , and they had to determine whether the bug belonged to category 1 or category 2 . Thus , participants had to use thefeaturestopredictthecategorylabel . Intheinductiontask , par - ticipants were presented with bugs and corresponding words , and they had to use the words and features to infer a missing feature . If words are simply features , then there should be no difference in performance between the two tasks because participants are mak - ing inferences based on the same number of features . However , if words are category markers ( i . e . , a supervisory signal ) , then per - formance in the two tasks should differ because they can rely on the category marker in the induction task but not in the classiﬁca - tion task . They found that adults relied almost exclusively on the words in the induction task , suggesting that words are more than features for adults . Using a similar approach , Deng and Sloutsky ( 2012 ) tested whether words are features or category markers in 4 - to 5 - year - olds and adults . However , in the current experiment we also pitted the words ( e . g . , “This is a ﬂurp” ) against a feature that was more salient than the words . This manipulation was critically impor - tant because if words are more than features , then salience of the competing feature should not matter – participants should rely on words when performing induction . However , if words are features , then participants should rely on highly salient features when they are pitted against words . The results indicate that young children exhibited overwhelm - ing reliance on a highly salient feature and not on the category label , whether the label was novel ( Experiment 1 ) or familiar ( Experiment 2 ) . Thus , in contrast to adults in Yamauchi and www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 5 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks Markman ( 1998 ) , children responded similarly across both tasks , suggesting that words are features for young children . The results are more complicated in adults : some adults exhibited consistent reliance on the salient feature and some relied on the label . Taken together these results indicate that for young children ( and for some adults ) category labels may function as features , as little reliance on category label was observed when it was pitted against the highly salient feature . At the same time , for some adults labels may be category markers . These results cast doubt on the view that labels start out as supervisory signals , suggesting instead that early in development labels are features , but they may become supervisory signals in the course of development . The notion that words are features also predicts that , like other perceptual features , the phonological similarity of the word should affect children’s inductions . To test this hypothesis , Slout - sky and Fisher ( 2012 ) presented 5 - year - olds and adults with lexical extension and property induction tasks , and they systematically manipulated the phonological similarity of the word . In the lexical extension task , a computer presented a target object and corre - sponding word ( e . g . , “ gama ” ) and participants had to determine which of four test items would be called a guma . Children but not adults extended the phonologically similar word to a perceptually similar object . In the induction task , participants were presented with a target object and two test objects and they had to determine which test item shared an unobservable property with the target . Consistent with previous ﬁndings , words contributed in a quanti - tative manner for young children . Children were more likely to rely on the word to make inductions when the target and one of the test itemssharedtheexactsameword ( e . g . , gama and gama ) thanwhen the target and test items were labeled with phonologically similar words ( e . g . , gama and guma ) . More importantly , children were also more likely to rely on phonologically similar ( yet highly dis - criminable ) words than on phonologically dissimilar words ( e . g . , satu and kipa ) . Thus , similar to other perceptual features , words and effects of words on induction are also inﬂuenced by the per - ceptual similarity of the word . While these ﬁndings are consistent with the “words as features” account , they pose a challenge for the idea that words are top - down supervisory signals that denote category membership . FUTURE DIRECTIONS The studies reviewed in this paper point to clear developmental differences in the role of words in a variety of cognitive tasks and in the processing of arbitrary auditory – visual pairings more gen - erally . For example , there is a gradual decrease in relying on words in similarity judgment tasks between 4 and 12 years of age and an increase in relying on words in induction and categorization tasks ( Sloutsky and Lo , 1999 ; Sloutsky et al . , 2001 ) . Five - year - olds and adults use words differently when making inductive general - izations and lexical extensions ( Deng and Sloutsky , 2012 ; Sloutsky and Fisher , 2012 ) , and there are considerable differences in 4 - year - olds’ and adults’ processing of arbitrary auditory – visual pairings ( Sloutsky and Napolitano , 2003 ; Robinson and Sloutsky , 2004 ) . However , drawing strong conclusions about the developmental trajectory early in development is difﬁcult . This difﬁculty stems primarily from using different methodologies within infant and child populations . Given the ﬁndings by Deng and Sloutsky ( 2012 ) and Sloutsky and Fisher ( 2012 ) , it seems reasonable to posit that young infants are also treating words as features ; however , to fully capture the developmental trajectory , future research will need to test infants and children using identical procedures . While the current review primarily focused on research within our lab , it will be important to reconcile the current infant ﬁnd - ings with previous research . When effects of words are assessed by comparing performance in a word condition ( e . g . , the same word denotes all members of the category ) to non - linguistic sounds , varying labels , and no labels , it is typically found that words have a different effect than other types of input ( Balaban and Waxman , 1997 ; Xu , 2002 ; Fulkerson and Waxman , 2007 ; Ferry et al . , 2010 ) . However , when effects of words are assessed by mak - ing comparisons to a unimodal visual baseline , the ﬁndings are mixed with some evidence suggesting that words interfere with learning ( Roberts and Jacob , 1991 ; Roberts , 1995 ; Waxman and Markow , 1995 ; Fulkerson and Haaf , 2003 ; Robinson and Slout - sky , 2007a ; Plunkett et al . , 2008 ) . While the former comparisons clearly demonstrate that different types of auditory input have dif - ferent effects , it is difﬁcult to determine what is driving this effect without a silent baseline ( e . g . , are non - linguistic sounds interfer - ing with learning or are words facilitating learning ? ) . If words act as top - down supervisory signals that facilitate categorization by directing attention to the category - relevant features , then this should be evident in eye tracking data with infants who hear words accumulatingmorelookingtotherelevantfeaturesandmorelikelytolearncategoriescomparedtoinfantswhodonothearwords . While this hypothesis requires further consideration , our prelimi - nary eye tracking study found no support for the claim that labels facilitate categorization ( Best et al . , 2011b ) . Finally , while additional research is needed to examine the developmental trajectory , it will be important to determine what mechanisms best account for the developmental pattern . Accord - ing to Sloutsky ( 2010 ) , several components may underlie chil - dren’s abilities to use labels as top - down supervisory signals . First , because many words are presented auditorily and many objects are presented visually , children need to be efﬁcient at processing arbitrary auditory – visual pairings . Second , because many causal or central features that deﬁne a category are implicit in nature and not directly observable in the input ( e . g . , essences , causal rela - tions , etc . ) , children have to learn how to ignore the perceptual details of a stimulus and attend to these less obvious features . It seems reasonable to posit that this ability requires top - down selective attention and the development of the prefrontal cortex ( Diamond and Goldman - Rakic , 1989 ; Bunge and Zelazo , 2006 ; Davidson et al . , 2006 ) , and therefore may not be present early in development . CONCLUSION In summary , associating words with objects and more abstract categories is a necessary step in language acquisition , and it is well established that words affect performance on a variety of cogni - tive tasks . The research in our lab suggests that words function as features , and effects of words on cognitive tasks are initially grounded in the dynamics of cross - modal processing . This pro - posal suggests that words functioning as features may either hinder task performance ( i . e . , when the task requires processing of details Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 6 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks of visual input , such as when items are presented sequentially ) or facilitate performance ( i . e . , when reliance primarily on words may be sufﬁcient for performing the task , such as in match - to - sample and other tasks where stimuli are presented simultaneously ) . We reviewed a substantial body of evidence , supporting this proposal , indicating that words start out as features affecting infants’ and children’s performance on cognitive tasks in a bottom - up man - ner , but they may become supervisory signals in the process of development . Much additional research is needed to understand why , how , and when this transformation takes place . ACKNOWLEDGMENT Writing of this manuscript is supported by National Science Foun - dation Grant BCS - 0720135 Institute of Education Sciences , US Department of Education Grant R305H050125 , and by National Institutes of Health Grant R01HD056105 toVladimir M . Sloutsky . REFERENCES Bahrick , L . E . , and Lickliter , R . ( 2000 ) . Intersensory redundancy guides attentional selectivity and perceptual learning in infancy . Dev . Psychol . 36 , 190 – 201 . Bahrick , L . E . , Lickliter , R . , and Flom , R . ( 2004 ) . Intersensory redundancy guides the development of selective attention , perception , and cognition in infancy . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 13 , 99 – 102 . Balaban , M . T . , and Waxman , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Do words facilitate objectcategorizationin9 - monthold infants ? J . Exp . Child . Psychol . 64 , 3 – 26 . Berg , W . K . , and Richards , J . E . ( 1997 ) . “Attention across time in infant development , ” in Attention and Orienting : Sensory and Motiva - tional Processes , eds P . J . Lang , R . F . Simons , and M . T . Balaban ( Mah - wah : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . ) , 347 – 368 . Best , C . A . , Robinson , C . W . , and Slout - sky , V . M . ( 2010 ) . “Theeffectoflabels on visual attention : an eye track - ing study , ”in Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , eds S . Ohlsson and R . Catrambone ( Austin : Cognitive Science Society ) , 1846 – 1851 . Best , C . A . , Robinson , C . W . , and Slout - sky , V . M . ( 2011a ) . “The effect of labels on children’s category learn - ing , ” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cogni - tive Science Society , eds L . Carl - son , C . Hölscher , and T . Shipley ( Austin : Cognitive Science Society ) , 3332 – 3336 . Best , C . A . , Robinson , C . W . , and Slout - sky , V . M . ( 2011b ) . “The effect of labels on categorization : is attention to relevant features a good index of infants’ category learning ? ” in Pro - ceedings of the 33rd Annual Confer - ence of the Cognitive Science Society , eds L . Carlson , C . Hölscher , and T . Shipley ( Austin : Cognitive Science Society ) , 2751 – 2755 . Bunge , S . A . , and Zelazo , P . D . ( 2006 ) . A brain - based account of the devel - opment of rule use in child - hood . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 15 , 118 – 121 . Casasola , M . ( 2008 ) . The development of infants’ spatial categories . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 17 , 21 – 25 . Casasola , M . , and Bhagwat , J . ( 2007 ) . Does a novel word facilitate 18 - month - olds’ categorization of a spatial relation ? Child Dev . 78 , 1818 – 1829 . Colunga , E . , and Smith , L . B . ( 2005 ) . From the lexicon to expectations about kinds : a role for associative learning . Psychol . Rev . 112 , 347 – 382 . Davidson , M . C . , Amso , D . , Ander - son , L . C . , and Diamond , A . ( 2006 ) . Development of cognitive control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years : evidence from manipu - lations of memory , inhibition , and task switching . Neuropsychologia 44 , 2037 – 2078 . Deng , W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2012 ) . Carrot - eaters and moving heads : salient features provide greater sup - port for inductive inference than category labels . Psychol . Sci . 23 , 178 – 186 . Diamond , A . , and Goldman - Rakic , P . S . ( 1989 ) . Comparison of human infants and rhesus monkeys on Piaget’sABtask : evidencefordepen - denceondorsolateralprefrontalcor - tex . Exp . Brain Res . 74 , 24 – 40 . Fantz , R . L . ( 1964 ) . Visual experience in infants : decreasedattentiontofamil - iar patterns relative to novel ones . Science 46 , 668 – 670 . Ferry , A . , Hespos , S . , and Waxman , S . ( 2010 ) . Categorization in 3 - and 4 - month - old infants : an advantage of words over tones . Child Dev . 81 , 472 – 479 . Fulkerson , A . L . , and Haaf , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Theinﬂuenceof labels , non - labeling sounds , andsourceofauditoryinput on 9 - and 15 - month - olds’ object categorization . Infancy 4 , 349 – 369 . Fulkerson , A . L . , and Waxman , S . R . ( 2007 ) . Words ( but not tones ) facil - itate object categorization : evidence from 6 - and 12 - month - olds . Cogni - tion 105 , 218 – 228 . Gelman , S . A . , andMarkman , E . ( 1986 ) . Categories and induction in young children . Cognition 23 , 183 – 209 . Gentner , D . , and Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2003 ) . Language in Mind : Advances in the Study of Language and Thought . Cambridge : MIT Press . Gleitman , L . , andPapafragou , A . ( 2005 ) . “Language and thought , ” in Cam - bridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning , eds K . Holyoak and R . Morrison ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) , 633 – 661 . Gliga , T . , Volein , A . , and Csibra , G . ( 2010 ) . Verbal labels modulate perceptual object processing in one - year - old infants . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 22 , 2781 – 2789 . Graham , S . A . , Kilbreath , C . S . , and Welder , A . N . ( 2004 ) . Thirteen - month - olds rely on shared labels and shape similarity for inductive inferences . Child Dev . 75 , 409 – 427 . Green , D . M . , and von Gierke , S . M . ( 1984 ) . Visual and auditory choice reaction times . Acta Psychologica 55 , 231 – 247 . Keates , J . , and Graham , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Categorylabelsorattributes : whydo labels guide infants’ inductive infer - ences ? Psychol . Sci . 19 , 1287 – 1293 . Lupyan , G . , Rakison , D . H . , andMcClel - land , J . L . ( 2007 ) . Language is not justfortalking : labelsfacilitatelearn - ing of novel categories . Psychol . Sci . 18 , 1077 – 1083 . Marr , D . ( 1982 ) , Vision : A Computa - tional Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information . NewYork : W . H . Freeman . Napolitano , A . C . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . Isapictureworthathousand words ? Theﬂexiblenatureofmodal - ity dominance in young children . Child Dev . 75 , 1850 – 1870 . Plunkett , K . ( 2011 ) . “The role of audi - tory stimuli in infant categoriza - tion , ” in Infant Perception and Cog - nition : Recent Advances , Emerging Theories , and Future Directions , eds L . Oakes , C . Cashon , M . Casasola , and D . Rakison ( New York : Oxford University Press ) , 203 – 221 . Plunkett , K . , Hu , J . F . , and Cohen , L . B . ( 2008 ) . Labels can override per - ceptual categories in early infancy . Cognition 106 , 665 – 681 . Quinn , P . C . , Eimas , P . D . , and Rosenkrantz , S . L . ( 1993 ) . Evi - dence for representations of per - ceptually similar natural categories by 3 - month - old and 4 - month - old infants . Perception 22 , 463 – 475 . Richards , J . E . ( 2001 ) . “Attention in young infants : a developmental psychophysiological perspective , ” in Handbook of Developmental Cogni - tive Neuroscience , eds C . A . Nelson and M . Luciana ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) , 321 – 338 . Richards , J . E . ( 2005 ) . “Development of covert orienting in young infants , ” in Neurobiology of Attention , Chap . 14 , eds L . Itti , G . Rees , and J . Tsotsos ( Burlington : Academic Press / Elsevier ) , 82 – 88 . Roberts , K . ( 1995 ) . Categorical responding in 15 - month - olds : inﬂuence of the noun - category bias and the covariation between visual ﬁxation and auditory input . Cogn . Dev . 10 , 21 – 41 . Roberts , K . , and Cuff , M . D . ( 1989 ) . Categorization studies of 9 - to 15 - month - old infants : evidence for superordinate categorization ? Infant Behav . Dev . 12 , 265 – 288 . Roberts , K . , and Jacob , M . ( 1991 ) . Lin - guistic versus attentional inﬂuences on nonlinguistic categorization in 15 - month - old infants . Cogn . Dev . 6 , 355 – 375 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2004 ) . Auditory dominance and its change in the course of develop - ment . Child Dev . 75 , 1387 – 1401 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2007a ) . Linguistic labels and cate - gorizationininfancy : dolabelsfacil - itate or hinder ? Infancy 11 , 233 – 253 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2007b ) . Visual processing speed : effects of auditory input on visual processing . Dev . Sci . 10 , 734 – 740 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2008 ) . Effects of auditory input in individuation tasks . Dev . Sci . 11 , 869 – 881 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2010a ) . Effects of multimodal pre - sentation and stimulus familiarity on auditory and visual process - ing . J . Exp . Child . Psychol . 107 , 351 – 358 . Robinson , C . W . , and Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2010b ) . Development of cross - modal processing . Wiley Interdiscip . Rev . Cogn . Sci . 1 , 135 – 141 . www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 7 Robinson et al . Words and cognitive tasks Roder , B . J . , Bushnell , E . W . , and Sas - seville , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Infants’ pref - erences for familiarity and novelty during the course of visual process - ing . Infancy 1 , 491 – 507 . Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1989 ) . “The archi - tecture of mind : a connectionist approach , ” in Foundations of Cognitive Science , ed . M . I . Pos - ner ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) , 133 – 160 . Samuelson , L . K . , and Smith , L . B . ( 1999 ) . Early noun vocabularies : do ontology , category organization and syntax correspond ? Cognition 73 , 1 – 33 . Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2010 ) . From percep - tual categories to concepts : what develops ? Cogn . Sci . 34 , 1244 – 1286 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Fisher , A . V . ( 2004 ) . Induction and categoriza - tion in young children : a similarity - based model . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 133 , 166 – 188 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Fisher , A . V . ( 2005 ) . Similarity , induction , nam - ing , and categorization ( SINC ) : generalization or verbal inductive reasoning ? Response to Heit and Hayes . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 134 , 606 – 611 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Fisher , A . V . ( 2012 ) . Linguistic labels : conceptual mark - ers or object features ? . J . Exp . Child . Psychol . 111 , 65 – 86 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Lo , Y . ( 1999 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar ? Part 1 : linguis - tic labels and the development of similarity judgment . Dev . Psychol . 6 , 1478 – 1492 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Lo , Y . , and Fisher , A . V . ( 2001 ) . How much does a shared name make things sim - ilar ? Linguistic labels , similarity , and the development of induc - tive inference . Child Dev . 72 , 1695 – 1709 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Napolitano , A . C . ( 2003 ) . Is a picture worth a thou - sand words ? Preference for auditory modality in young children . Child Dev . 74 , 822 – 833 . Sloutsky , V . M . , and Robinson , C . W . ( 2008 ) . The role of words and sounds in visual processing : from overshadowing to attentional tun - ing . Cogn . Sci . 32 , 342 – 365 . Waxman , S . R . , and Booth , A . E . ( 2003 ) . The origins and evolution of links between word learning and con - ceptual organization : new evidence from 11 - month - olds . Dev . Sci . 6 , 130 – 137 . Waxman , S . R . , and Braun , I . ( 2005 ) . Consistent ( but not variable ) names as invitations to form object categories : new evidence from 12 - month - old infants . Cognition 95 , B59 – B68 . Waxman , S . R . , and Markow , D . B . ( 1995 ) . Words as invitations to form categories : evidence from 12 - month - old infants . Cogn . Psychol . 29 , 257 – 302 . Whorf , B . L . ( 1956 ) . Language , Thought and Reality . Cambridge : MIT Press . Xu , F . ( 2002 ) . The role of lan - guage in acquiring object kind concepts in infancy . Cognition 85 , 223 – 250 . Yamauchi , T . , and Markman , A . B . ( 1998 ) . Category learning by infer - enceandclassiﬁcation . J . Mem . Lang . 39 , 124 – 148 . Yamauchi , T . , and Markman , A . B . ( 2000 ) . Inference using categories . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 26 , 776 – 795 . Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Received : 14December2011 ; accepted : 13 March 2012 ; published online : 11 April 2012 . Citation : Robinson CW , Best CA , Deng ( W ) and Sloutsky VM ( 2012 ) The role of words in cognitive tasks : what , when , and how ? Front . Psychology 3 : 95 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2012 . 00095 This article was submitted to Frontiers in Developmental Psychology , a specialty of Frontiers in Psychology . Copyright © 2012 Robinson , Best , Deng and Sloutsky . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial License , which permits non - commercial use , distribution , and repro - duction in other forums , provided the original authors and source are credited . Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 95 | 8