REVIEW Using Gene Expression Noise to Understand Gene Regulation Brian Munsky , 1 * Gregor Neuert , 2 * Alexander van Oudenaarden 2 , 3 Phenotypic variation is ubiquitous in biology and is often traceable to underlying genetic and environmental variation . However , even genetically identical cells in identical environments display variable phenotypes . Stochastic gene expression , or gene expression “ noise , ” has been suggested as a major source of this variability , and its physiological consequences have been topics of intense research for the last decade . Several recent studies have measured variability in protein and messenger RNA levels , and they have discovered strong connections between noise and gene regulation mechanisms . When integrated with discrete stochastic models , measurements of cell - to - cell variability provide a sensitive “ fingerprint ” with which to explore fundamental questions of gene regulation . In this review , we highlight several studies that used gene expression variability to develop a quantitative understanding of the mechanisms and dynamics of gene regulation . I dentical genotype and environmental expo - sure are not sufficient to guarantee a unique phenotype . Consider a single mother cell di - viding into two daughter cells of equal volume . During the division process , all the molecules in the mother cell are in Brownian motion accord - ing to the laws of statistical mechanics . The prob - ability that each daughter cell inherits the same number of molecules is infinitesimally small . Even in the event that the two daughter cells re - ceive exactly one copy of a particular transcrip - tion factor , each transcription factor will perform a Brownian random walk through its cellular volume before finding its target promoter and activating gene expression . Because Brownian motion is uncorrelated in the two daughter cells , it is statistically impossible for both genes to be - come activated at the exact same time , further amplifying the phenotypic difference between the two daughter cells . These are just two exam - ples of the many sources of gene expression var - iability that arise in isogenic cells exposed to the same environment . The origins and consequences of stochastic gene expression , or gene expression “ noise , ” have been studied extensively during the last dec - ade and have recently been reviewed in detail ( 1 – 6 ) . Here we focus on recent works that in - tegrate experimental and computational analy - ses of gene expression noise to systematically test and refine our understanding of regulation in dif - ferent genes , regulatory pathways , and organisms . We discuss how combining single - cell measure - ments and stochastic analyses can reveal qualita - tive and quantitative features of gene regulation that are hidden by bulk assays or deterministic analyses . In the first part of this review , we discuss how the cell - to - cell variability in gene expression of a particular transcript or protein has been used to develop a quantitative understand - ing of the underlying gene regulation . In the second part , we cover how statistical correlations in the fluctuations of different transcripts and / or proteins can be used to infer gene regulatory interactions . Inferring Models of Gene Regulation from Variability in Gene Expression Poisson expression statistics . In the simplest possible model of constitutive gene expression ( Fig . 1A ) , atranscriptisproducedataconstantrate k R and destroyed in a first - order reaction with rate constant g R . If the total number of a particular tran - script m is large , the kinetics can be approximated bythefollowingdeterministicdifferentialequation : dm dt ¼ k R − g R m ð 1 Þ This approximation breaks down in cells when the copy numbers of transcripts are small . For ex - ample , the average transcript copy numbers of the constitutive housekeeping genes MDN1 , KAP104 , and DOA1 in budding yeast are 6 . 1 , 4 . 9 , and 2 . 6 , respectively ( 7 ) . These low copy numbers suggest a probabilistic reformulation of Eq . 1 . In the con - stitutive expression model , transcript births and deaths occur as uncorrelated events , such that in any short time interval , dt , the probability of one transcript production is k R dt , and the probabil - ity of one transcript degradation is g R m dt . For equilibrium to be possible , the probability of having m transcripts , Prob [ m ] , and producing an - other must be equal to the probability of hav - ing ( m + 1 ) transcripts , Prob [ m + 1 ] and having one degrade . That is , k R Prob [ m ] = g R ( m + 1 ) Prob [ m + 1 ] for any m , which is only possible if the copy - number distribution follows a Poisson distribution ( 8 ) . It is possible to quantify the variability in transcriptional regulation at the mRNA level using single - molecule fluorescent in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) ( 9 , 10 ) . In this technique , endogenous mRNA transcripts are labeled with a large num - ber of fluorescently modified DNA oligonucleo - tides . As a result , a fluorescence microscope can detect the precise location of each individual mRNA molecule as a diffraction - limited spot . Zenklusen et al . ( 7 ) used smFISH to count specific mRNA molecules in intact fixed yeast cells and found that the constitutive gene expres - sion model offers surprisingly good quantitative matches to transcriptional behaviors for the house - keeping genes MDN1 , KAP104 , and DOA1 in budding yeast . The measured numbers of mRNA transcripts per cell were well described by Poisson distributions for all three genes . By measuring the number of partially formed nascent mRNA in each nucleus , Zenklusen et al . also determined that subsequent transcript production events were uncorrelated ( 7 ) , again consistent with the con - stitutive expression model . Two - state model of gene regulation . Although the constitutive gene expression model captures the fluctuations of several housekeeping genes in budding yeast ( 7 ) , it does not perform as well when gene expression is regulated . Because deviations 1 CenterforNonlinearStudies , theInformationSciencesGroup , andtheNationalFlowCytometryResource , LosAlamosNation - al Laboratory , Los Alamos , NM 87545 , USA . 2 Departments of PhysicsandBiology , MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology , Cam - bridge , MA 02139 , USA . 3 Hubrecht Institute , Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical Center Utrecht , Uppsalalaan 8 , 3584 CT , Utrecht , Netherlands . * These authors contributed equally to this work . To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : munsky @ lanl . gov ( B . M ) ; gneuert @ mit . edu ( G . N . ) A B Constitutive gene expression k R γ R 0 k R k On k Off γ R 0 Regulated gene expression Fig . 1 . Constitutive versus regulated gene expression . ( A ) Schematic of a constitutive gene expression model with transcription rate k R and mRNA degradation rate constant g R . ( B ) Schematic of a two - state ( On , Off ) model with transition rates k On and k Off . 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 336 13 APRIL 2012 183 SPECIAL SECTION on A p r il 13 , 2 012 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m from Poisson behavior indicate regulation , can quantifying these deviations reveal the mech - anism of regulation ? A key parameter to quantify the deviation from Poisson statistics is the Fano factor , which is the ratio between the variance , s 2 , and the mean , m , of the mRNA copy - number distribution , s 2 = m ( 8 ) . For a Poisson distribution , the Fano factor equals 1 . Golding et al . ( 11 ) determined a Fano factor of 4 . 1 for a synthetic transcript driven by the P LAC / ARA promoter in Escherichia coli , indicating that the transcript distribution was significantly wider than a Poisson distribution . A two - state model of gene expres - sion ( 12 – 16 ) can fit these data much better . This model considers two promoter states : an Off state , in which no transcription occurs , and an On state , which has transcription rate k R . The constants k On and k Off define the transition rates between the two states , and g R is a first - order rate constant for transcript degradation ( Fig . 1B ) . The Off state is usually associated with a closed chromatin state in which the binding sites for transcription factors are inaccessible , whereas the On state is asso - ciated with the open active chromatin state ( 14 ) . According to the two - state model , the aver - age fraction of cells in the On state is f On = k On / ( k On + k Off ) , and the average number of mRNA molecules in each cell is m ¼ f On k R = g R . The expression for the Fano factor in steady state can be written as ( 12 ) : s 2 m ¼ 1 þ ð 1 − f On Þ k R ð k On þ k Off þ g R Þ ð 2 Þ Figure 2A usesaheatmaptoillustratetheFano factor ’ s dependence upon k Off and k On for a fixed transcription rate k R . To compare the variability at equal expression levels , the three dashed lines denote parameter combinations that produce an averageof2 , 25 , and75mRNAspercell . Although the average expression level is constant along these lines , the Fano factor varies significantly , as does the qualitative shape of the mRNA distribution . For example , Fig . 2B shows the distributions cor - respondingtothefilledsquareson the m ¼ 25 line in Fig . 2A . Although each parameter set yields an average of 25 molecules per cell , they exhibit three distinctly different behaviors for the varia - bility of m between cells . On the basis of differ - ences in the mean , Fano factor , and qualitative shapes of distributions , we can dissect the param - eter space into three different “ phenotype ” classes ( 14 , 17 ) . In class I , both k On and k Off are slow , and cells separate into distinct On and Off pop - ulations , yielding a bimodal mRNA distribution ( Fig . 2B , left ) and resulting in a large Fano fac - tor . In class II , k On is slow and k Off is fast , and therefore most cells are Off . In this case , the low value of f On contributes to low means and Fano factors , but occasional mRNA bursts give rise to long exponential tails in the mRNA distribution ( Fig . 2B , middle ) . Finally , in class III , k On is fastin comparison to either g R or k Off , and the system spends very short periods in the Off state . The dynamics of this special case collapses down to that of the constitutive expression model , with an effective transcription rate k eff R ¼ k R f On and a Poisson - like mRNA distribution ( Fig . 2B , right ) . A cell can increase the average mRNA copy number m from 2 ( indicated by the blue star in Fig . 2A ) to 25 by either decreasing k Off ( purple arrow in Fig . 2A ) or increasing k On ( red arrow in Fig . 2A ) . Increasing k On converts a class II phe - notype intoa class III phenotype , resultingin more Poisson - like expression . Conversely , decreasing k Off shifts the system to class I , corresponding to bimodal expression . Thus , although both modu - lation mechanisms yield the same change in av - erage mRNA levels , their single - cell statistics are quantitatively and qualitatively different . Below we highlight several studies that exploit these differences to learn more about the gene regu - latory control mechanisms . As in studies of constitutive expression , single - cell responses of regulated genes have been ex - amined at the mRNA level . Raj et al . ( 15 ) used smFISH to study gene expression variability in mammalian cells . They integrated an inducible tetO promoter into the genome and quantified mRNA numbers and locations . The measured mRNA distributions had long exponential tails that closely matched those of the class II pheno - type , corresponding to bursts of mRNA that were short , infrequent , and intense . Furthermore , Raj et al . observed that On cells exhibited extra - bright clusters of nascent transcripts and elevated levels of nuclear mRNA , whereas Off cells lacked these transcription site spots and had far fewer nuclear mRNAs . In this context , spatial variabil - ity provided quantitative insight into transcrip - tional dynamics . More recent smFISH studies have also discovered mRNA distributions from B P r ob a b ili t y mRNA copy number 10 3 10 3 10 _ 2 10 _ 2 10 _ 1 10 _ 1 10 0 10 0 10 1 10 1 10 2 10 2 0 50 100 150 200 0 . 01 0 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 200 m = 2 m = 25 m = 75 k Off / R γ k On / R γ A 2 / m 4 1 16 64 Fig . 2 . Effects of transcriptional control on mRNA distributions . ( A ) Heat map of the cell - to - cell variability ( Fano factor , s 2 / m ) , versus normalized gene activation rate k On / g R and normalized deactivation rate k Off / g R with fixed production and degradation rates ( k R = 100 , g R = 1 ) . Lines of equal average mRNA expression are shown for 2 , 25 , and 75 molecules . The parameter space is separated into three classes ( I , II , III ) that exhibit different types of cell - to - cell variability . ( B ) Representative distributions from each class : Class I corresponds to systems with long Off and On periods , giving rise to bimodal distributions with clearly delineated On / Off populations . Class II corresponds to populations with short On and long Off periods , giving rise to occasional mRNA bursts and long distribution tails . Class III includes systems with short Off periods , giving rise to continuous production and more graded unimodal distributions . All three distributions have the same average of 25 mRNAs and correspond to the squares in ( A ) . Distributions were computed with the finite state projection approach ( 34 ) . 13 APRIL 2012 VOL 336 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 184 on A p r il 13 , 2 012 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m all three classes for a myriad of other genes in several model organisms , including bimodal dis - tributions of class I in cell - cycle and inducible genes in yeast ( 18 ) ; long exponential distribution tails corresponding to class II in E . coli ( 19 ) , ribosomal RNA ( 20 ) , and coding and long non - coding RNA ( 21 ) transcription in yeast ; and uni - modal Poisson - like distributions of class III in yeast ( 7 ) . Single - molecule FISH has also been used to explore how transcriptional regulation changes between conditions ( 15 , 19 ) . Raj etal . ( 15 ) showed that an increase in the transcriptional activator tTA or in the number of activator binding sites increased the transcriptional activity of the tetO promoter in mammalian cells . Quantitative com - parisons of measured mRNA distributions with the two - state model revealed that activation was consistent with either k Off modulation ( purple ar - row in Fig . 2A ) or k R modulation . In a recent study , So et al . also integrated experimental and computational analyses to find that k Off modula - tion is a common motif , which regulates mRNA expression in 20 independent E . coli genes , whose mRNA expressions span four orders of magnitude ( 19 ) . Using smFISH ( 10 ) , they measured mRNA distributions in 150 different combinations of genes and growth conditions that modulate those genes . After correcting for different gene copy numbers and mRNA lifetimes , the mRNA mean and Fano factor were computed and plotted for every gene and experimental condition , and the resulting scatter plot was closely fit by Eq . 2 , where k On and k R were constant , and k Off was selected to match the mean expression . Although the former studies explored gene regulation at the mRNA level ( 7 , 15 , 18 – 21 ) , similar conclusions have been reached through single - cell analyses at the protein level . Raser and O ’ Shea ( 14 ) used single - cell measurements of fluorescent protein concentrations to show that induction of the PHO5 promoter in budding yeast increases the expression level while reduc - ing the cell - to - cell variability . This trend was explained as the system starting in class II and increasing k On to switch toward class III ( red arrow in Fig . 2A ) . Similarly , Octavio et al . ( 22 ) explored the regulation of the FLO11 gene in yeast . Using inducible promoters to control the regulatory proteins Flo8 , Sfl1 , Tec1 , Ste12 , Phd1 , Msn1 , and Mss1 , they pushed the system into each of the three phenotypes . Then , by elucidat - ing how each transcription factor altered the variability in gene expression , they determined the mechanisms by which each factor modu - lated transitions between an Off state , an inter - mediate “ competent ” state , and the fully active On state . Inferring Gene Regulatory Interaction from Correlations Between Fluctuating Genes The examples above illustrate how the expres - sion distribution of a particular transcript or flu - orescent protein reporter can be used to quantify the transitions between active and inactive tran - scription states and to determine the mechanism by which regulators modulate this process . In many of these studies , the analysis of regulatory behavior required the application of an external input or a change in environmental conditions . It is not always easy to introduce such a perturba - tion , but what if they already existed in nature ? As discussed above , most cellular proteins under - go stochastic fluctuations , which can activate or repress downstream processes and thereby intro - duce valuable perturbations . As a result , when multiple transcript or protein species are moni - tored in the same cell , important additional infor - mationcanbeextractedbyanalyzinghowdifferentspeciescorrelatewithoneanother . This correla - tion analysis was used in experiments focused on synthetic gene networks in E . coli , where expres - sion levels of several genes were monitored in the same cell with fluorescent reporters . By analyz - ing the pairwise correlation between the differ - ent fluorescent reporters , the major fluctuation sources could be determined ( 23 , 24 ) . In a recent study , Stewart - Ornstein et al . ( 25 ) used fluorescent proteins to examine the pairwise correlations of hundreds of different yeast genes , whose expression levels varied over three orders of magnitude . Even without using exogenous per - turbations , single - cell steady - state measurements could reveal clear groups of genes whose stochas - tic fluctuations were strongly coordinated . These collections of genes , which they labeled “ noise regulons , ” corresponded to functional groups re - lated to stress response , mitochondrial regula - tion , and amino acid biosynthesis . Furthermore , Stewart - Ornstein et al . showed that steady - state correlations were strongly predictive of the pro - teins ’ dynamic response to heat shock . Using a two - color RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization assay , Gandhi et al . ( 18 ) measured pairwise correlations between RNA species regu - lated by the same promoter or by two different promoters . The Gal4 - regulated genes GAL1 , GAL7 , and GAL10 were induced with 2 % galactose , and their distributions were measured at steady state . Asexpected , single - cellcorrelationanalysesshowed strong correlations between GAL1 and GAL7 , as well as between GAL1 and GAL10 . mRNA cor - relations were also found in other regulatory genes . Transcripts of the genes SWI5 and CLB2 , which are expressed in the G 2 / M stages of the cell cycle , were strongly correlated with each other , but weakly anticorrelated with NDD1 , which domi - natesduring the S phase . By contrast , constitutive genessuchas MDN1 ( ribosomebiogenesis ) , PRP8 ( pre - mRNA splicing ) , and KAP104 ( nucleocyto - plasmictransport ) exhibitedmuchlesscoordination . Although correlations at a single time point can reveal static relationships among different mRNA and protein species , this view lacks in - formation about the system ’ s history and causal relationships . If two proteins X and Y are cor - related , the questions remain : Does X activate Y ; does Y activate X ; or does a third protein W control them both ? To illustrate this situation , Fig . 3A shows simple motifs by which proteins W , X , and Y could relate to one another , and Fig . 3B shows typical scatter plots of the single - cell expression for proteins X and Y for these motifs . When static correlations cannot discriminate be - tweenthesemotifs , dynamiccorrelationsinsingle - cell fluctuations may help ( 26 ) . Such analyses make use of the cross - correlation function ( 26 ) , R XY ð t Þ ¼ 〈 X ð t þ t Þ Y ð t Þ 〉 = s X s Y , which mea - sures how fluctuations in Yat time t relate to those in X at time t + t . Here , 〈 : : : 〉 denotes the covariance of two variables , and s X and s Y are the standard deviations of X and Y , respectively . The magni - tude of R XY ð t Þ reveals positive or negative regu - lation , and the timing of peaks in R XY ð t Þ reveals causality in this regulation . As examples , Fig . 3C plots the cross - correlation functions between pro - teins X and Y for each of the motifs in Fig . 3A . For the first motif , where X activates Y , the blue line in Fig . 3C ( left ) shows that R XY ð t Þ has a maximum , and because X is upstream of Y , this peak occurs at a negative delay time . Conversely , when protein Y is a repressor of X , R XY ð t Þ has a minimum at a positive t ( Fig . 3C , second col - umn , red line ) . If both X and Y were controlled by W , the maximum or minimum would occur at t = 0 , and its sign would be positive or neg - ative depending upon whether W has the same or different effects on X and Y ( Fig . 3C , right two columns ) . Dunlop et al . ( 26 ) tested this dynamic cor - relation approach in live cells by inserting three fluorescent protein reporters of different colors into the E . coli genome . Yellow fluorescent pro - tein ( YFP ) was fused to the l CI repressor , which controlled expression of red fluorescent protein ( RFP ) . Cyan fluorescent protein ( CFP ) was placed on a separate constitutive promoter . With the use of fluorescence time - lapse microscopy , all three colors could be monitored simultaneously over several hours . Dynamics of the YFP - RFP pair were anticorrelatedwitha delayof about120 min , clearly revealing that CI - YFP repressed RFP ( sim - ilar to Fig . 3C , second column , blue line ) . Con - versely , the unregulated YFP - CFP pair exhibited a delay - free correlation characteristic of common upstream regulators ( extrinsic noise ) that affect both YFP and CFP in a similar fashion ( similar to Fig . 3C , third column ) . Thus , the causal relation - ships of all three reporters were uniquely deter - mined . Extending and applying this approach to the CRP - GalS - GalE feed - forward loop in E . coli , they analyzed how the relationship between GalS and GalE varies under different fucose concen - trations and under the influence of GalR ( 26 ) . Although correlations at either mRNA or pro - tein levels can reveal gene regulatory relation - ships , the two do not always perform equally well . To illustrate this scenario , Fig . 3 , D and E , show scatter plots and cross - correlations between 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 336 13 APRIL 2012 185 SPECIAL SECTION on A p r il 13 , 2 012 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m C B A X Y X X Y Y W X Y W Delay ( ) (cid:1) Delay ( ) (cid:1) mRNA X m RNA Y P r o t e i n Y R m x m y ( ) (cid:1) R p x p y ( ) (cid:1) Protein X Delay ( ) (cid:1) Delay ( ) (cid:1) mRNA X Protein X Delay ( ) (cid:1) Delay ( ) (cid:1) mRNA X Protein X Delay ( ) (cid:1) Delay ( ) (cid:1) mRNA X Protein X 0 0 - 1 1 0 - 1 1 0 0 0 D E 0 0 0 0 Fig . 3 . Different regulatory motifs yield different steady - state correla - tions . ( A ) Schematics of four possible regulator motifs : X activates Y ; X represses Y ; W activates both X and Y ; and W activates X but represses Y . For each motif , mRNA is produced according to the constitutive model ; protein is translated from mRNA as a first - order reaction ; and both mRNA and protein degrade as a first - order reaction . Regulation changes to the transcription rate are defined as k R ( X ) = a X 4 / ( M 4 + X 4 ) for activation and k R ( X ) = a M 4 / ( M 4 + X 4 ) for repression . ( B ) Scatter plots of the pop - ulations of protein X and protein Y at steady state . ( C ) Dynamic cross - correlation functions of protein X and protein Y , versus the correlation time delay . The magnitude of R XY ( t ) indicates how strongly X ( t + t ) is correlated ( positive ) or anticorrelated ( negative ) with Y ( t ) . For causal events , where X activates ( or represses ) Y , peaks ( or dips ) appear in R XY ( t ) at negative values of t . Blue lines correspond to the motif in ( A ) , and red lines correspond to the same motif in which X and Y have been interchanged . ( D ) Scatter plots for mRNA X and mRNA Y populations . ( E ) Dynamic cross - correlation for mRNA X and mRNA Y . Simulations were conducted with the stochastic simulation algorithm ( 35 ) . 13 APRIL 2012 VOL 336 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 186 on A p r il 13 , 2 012 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m the mRNA X and mRNA Y corresponding to protein X and protein Y , respectively . Although protein X and protein Y are coordinated for all four motifs in Fig . 3 , this is not the case for their mRNA levels . This can be explained by the dis - parate time scales of mRNA and protein . Fast - degrading mRNA may exhibit fluctuations with a broad frequency bandwidth . Conversely , slow degradation of proteins filters out fast fluctua - tions but keeps slow fluctuations . Constitutively expressed mRNA X has both fast and slow fluc - tuations , but protein X only transmits the slow fluctuations downstream . The result is that the dynamics of mRNA X and mRNA Y are dom - inated by uncorrelated fast fluctuations , which overshadow their correlated slow fluctuations . On the other hand , protein X and protein Y only contain the better - correlated slow fluctuations . That is , two mRNA species can be mostly un - correlated with one another , yet produce protein in a coordinated fashion . Gandhi et al . ( 18 ) ob - served such a circumstance in budding yeast , when they found very little correlation between pairs of transcripts that encode coordinated pro - teins of the same protein complex , including pro - teasome and RNA polymerase II subunits . They even found correlation lacking in two alleles of the same gene . In a related study , Taniguchi et al . ( 27 ) analyzed more than 1000 genes in E . coli and measured both mRNA and protein copy numbers in single cells . They found that for most genes , even the numbers of mRNA and protein molecules were uncorrelated . These studies sug - gest that understanding of regulatory phenomena requires one to consider regulation at both the mRNA and the protein level . From these studies , it is now clear that var - iability in single - cell measurements contains a wealth of information that can reveal new in - sights into the regulatory phenomena of specific genes and the dynamic interplay of entire gene networks . As modern imaging techniques begin to beat the diffraction limitations of light ( 28 ) and flow cytometers become affordable for nearly any laboratory bench ( 29 ) , we find ourselves in the midst of an explosion in single - cell research . With the advent of single - cell sequencing ( 30 , 31 ) , it might be possible to determine the full tran - scriptome of many single cells in the near future and to determine the full expression distributions and correlations for all genes in the genome . We expect that the approaches described in this re - view , which have been pioneered with the model microbial systems , will be readily applied to mam - malian cells and tissues ( 32 , 33 ) . References and Notes 1 . G . - W . Li , X . S . Xie , Nature 475 , 308 ( 2011 ) . 2 . A . Raj , A . van Oudenaarden , Cell 135 , 216 ( 2008 ) . 3 . G . Balázsi , A . van Oudenaarden , J . J . Collins , Cell 144 , 910 ( 2011 ) . 4 . A . Eldar , M . B . Elowitz , Nature 467 , 167 ( 2010 ) . 5 . M . E . Lidstrom , M . C . Konopka , Nat . Chem . Biol . 6 , 705 ( 2010 ) . 6 . B . Snijder , L . Pelkmans , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 119 ( 2011 ) . 7 . D . Zenklusen , D . R . Larson , R . H . Singer , Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1263 ( 2008 ) . 8 . M . Thattai , A . van Oudenaarden , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 8614 ( 2001 ) . 9 . A . M . Femino , F . S . Fay , K . Fogarty , R . H . Singer , Science 280 , 585 ( 1998 ) . 10 . A . Raj , P . vandenBogaard , S . A . Rifkin , A . vanOudenaarden , S . Tyagi , Nat . Methods 5 , 877 ( 2008 ) . 11 . I . Golding , J . Paulsson , S . M . Zawilski , E . C . Cox , Cell 123 , 1025 ( 2005 ) . 12 . J . Peccoud , B . Ycart , Theor . Popul . Biol . 48 , 222 ( 1995 ) . 13 . T . B . Kepler , T . C . Elston , Biophys . J . 81 , 3116 ( 2001 ) . 14 . J . M . Raser , E . K . O ’ Shea , Science 304 , 1811 ( 2004 ) . 15 . A . Raj , C . S . Peskin , D . Tranchina , D . Y . Vargas , S . Tyagi , PLoS Biol . 4 , e309 ( 2006 ) . 16 . V . Shahrezaei , P . S . Swain , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 17256 ( 2008 ) . 17 . S . Iyer - Biswas , F . Hayot , C . Jayaprakash , Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 79 , 031911 ( 2009 ) . 18 . S . J . Gandhi , D . Zenklusen , T . Lionnet , R . H . Singer , Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 27 ( 2011 ) . 19 . L . - H . So et al . , Nat . Genet . 43 , 554 ( 2011 ) . 20 . R . Z . Tan , A . van Oudenaarden , Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 358 ( 2010 ) . 21 . S . L . Bumgarner et al . , Mol . Cell 45 , 470 ( 2012 ) . 22 . L . M . Octavio , K . Gedeon , N . Maheshri , PLoS Genet . 5 , e1000673 ( 2009 ) . 23 . J . M . Pedraza , A . van Oudenaarden , Science 307 , 1965 ( 2005 ) . 24 . N . Rosenfeld , J . W . Young , U . Alon , P . S . Swain , M . B . Elowitz , Science 307 , 1962 ( 2005 ) . 25 . J . Stewart - Ornstein , J . S . Weissman , H . El - Samad , Mol . Cell 45 , 483 ( 2012 ) . 26 . M . J . Dunlop , R . S . Cox III , J . H . Levine , R . M . Murray , M . B . Elowitz , Nat . Genet . 40 , 1493 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Y . Taniguchi et al . , Science 329 , 533 ( 2010 ) . 28 . B . Huang , M . Bates , X . Zhuang , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 993 ( 2009 ) . 29 . L . Bonetta , Nat . Methods 2 , 785 ( 2005 ) . 30 . T . Kalisky , P . Blainey , S . R . Quake , Annu . Rev . Genet . 45 , 431 ( 2011 ) . 31 . F . Tang et al . , Nat . Methods 6 , 377 ( 2009 ) . 32 . S . Itzkovitz et al . , Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 106 ( 2012 ) . 33 . P . Dalerba et al . , Nat . Biotechnol . 29 , 1120 ( 2011 ) . 34 . B . Munsky , M . Khammash , J . Chem . Phys . 124 , 044104 ( 2006 ) . 35 . D . T . Gillespie , J . Phys . Chem . 81 , 2340 ( 1977 ) . Acknowledgments : This work was funded by the National Science Foundation ( ECCS - 0835623 ) and a NIH Pioneer award ( 1DP1OD003936 ) . 10 . 1126 / science . 1216379 REVIEW Computational Approaches to Developmental Patterning Luis G . Morelli , 1 , 2 , 3 Koichiro Uriu , 1 , 4 Saúl Ares , 2 , 5 , 6 Andrew C . Oates 1 * Computational approaches are breaking new ground in understanding how embryos form . Here , we discuss recent studies that couple precise measurements in the embryo with appropriately matched modeling and computational methods to investigate classic embryonic patterning strategies . We include signaling gradients , activator - inhibitor systems , and coupled oscillators , as well as emerging paradigms such as tissue deformation . Parallel progress in theory and experiment will play an increasingly central role in deciphering developmental patterning . A nimal and plant patterns amaze and per - plex scientists and lay people alike . But how are the dynamic and beautiful pat - terns of developing embryos generated ? Used appropriately , theoretical techniques can assist in the understanding of developmental processes ( 1 – 5 ) . There is considerable art in this , and the key to success is an open dialogue between exper - imentalist and theorist . The first step in this dia - logue is to formulate a theoretical description of the process of interest that captures the properties and interactions of the most relevant variables of the system at a level of detail that is both use - ful and tractable . Once formulated , the second step is to analyze the theoretical model . If the model is sufficiently tractable , it may be possible to understand its behavior with “ pencil - and - paper ” analysis and compare this analytical solu - tion directly with experimental data . Very often , however , the number of variables and the com - plexity of their interactions preclude this ap - proach , andthebehaviorofmodelsmustbesolved or simulated by using computers in order to be understood and compared with data . This com - bined approach , which we refer to as computa - tional biology , has become popular recently with the availability of powerful computers and in - creasingly sophisticated numerical algorithms . 1 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Pfotenhauerstrasse 108 , 01307 Dresden , Germany . 2 Max PlanckInstituteforthePhysicsofComplexSystems , Nöthnitzer Strasse 38 , 01187 Dresden , Germany . 3 Consejo Nacional de InvestigacionesCientíficas y Técnicas , Departamento de Física , Universidad de Buenos Aires , Ciudad Universitaria , 1428 BuenosAires , Argentina . 4 TheoreticalBiologyLaboratory , RIKEN AdvancedScienceInstitute , Saitama351 - 0198 , Japan . 5 Logicof GenomicSystemsLaboratory , CentroNacionaldeBiotecnología – Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas ( CSIC ) , Calle Darwin 3 , 28049 Madrid , Spain . 6 Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos ( GISC ) , Spain . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : oates @ mpi - cbg . de 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 336 13 APRIL 2012 187 SPECIAL SECTION on A p r il 13 , 2 012 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m