A computational account of conceptual blending in basic mathematics Action editor : Cleotilde Gonzalez Markus Guhe a , ⇑ , Alison Pease a , Alan Smaill a , Maricarmen Martinez b , c , Martin Schmidt b , Helmar Gust b , Kai - Uwe Ku¨hnberger b , Ulf Krumnack b a University of Edinburgh , School of Informatics , Informatics Forum , 10 Crichton Street , Edinburgh EH8 9AB , Scotland , United Kingdom b University of Osnabru¨ck , Institute of Cognitive Science , Albrechtstr . 28 , 49076 Osnabru¨ck , Germany c Universidad de los Andes , Department of Mathematics , Cra 1a 18A - 10 , Bogota´ , Colombia Received 2 May 2010 ; accepted 16 September 2010 Available online 3 February 2011 Abstract We present an account of a process by which diﬀerent conceptualisations of number can be blended together to form new concep - tualisations via recognition of common features , and judicious combination of their distinctive features . The accounts of number are based on Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s cognitively - based grounding metaphors for arithmetic . The approach incorporates elements of analogical inference into a generalised framework of conceptual blending , using some ideas from the work of Goguen . The ideas are worked out using Heuristic - Driven Theory Projection ( HDTP , a method based on higher - order anti - uniﬁcation ) . HDTP provides generalisations between domains , giving a crucial step in the process of ﬁnding commonalities between theories . In addition to generalisations , HDTP can also transfer concepts from one domain to another , allowing the construction of new conceptual blends . Alongside the methods by which conceptual blends may be constructed , we provide heuristics to guide this process . (cid:2) 2011 Published by Elsevier B . V . Keywords : Mathematical cognition ; Metaphor ; Mathematical reasoning ; Analogy ; Anti - uniﬁcation ; Conceptual blending ; HDTP 1 . Introduction Conceptual blending plays a central role in the develop - ment of mathematical ideas and in the discovery of new mathematical concepts . For us , this is particularly relevant , because one aim of our research is to include cognitive pro - cessing principles in the automated discovery of mathemat - ical ideas . In this paper , we look at an example which involves the grounding of mathematical notions in basic cognitive capacities , as well as the relationships between these capacities and more abstract arithmetic conceptualisations . Before we go into the details of these issues , however , we will ﬁrst present some of the context of this work from the viewpoints of the philosophy of mathematics and of the role that analogy and metaphor play in mathematical cog - nition . A new focus in the history and philosophy of math - ematics on mathematical practice has led to interest in the relationships that appear when mathematical concepts , def - initions , theories and techniques are evolving . Lakatos’s ( 1976 ) inﬂuential work already emphasised the dialectical nature of concept change and the interaction between con - cepts , conjectures , counterexamples and proof in the devel - opment of each . More recently , in his work on the philosophy of mathematical practice , Mancosu ( 2008 ) identiﬁes the development of mathematical concepts as one of eight topics with which philosophers of mathematics should concern themselves . Tappenden ( 2008 , p . 257 ) argues that ‘the discovery of a proper deﬁnition is rightly regarded in practice as a signiﬁcant contribution to mathe - matical knowledge’ and quotes Harris : ‘The progress of 1389 - 0417 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2011 Published by Elsevier B . V . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogsys . 2011 . 01 . 004 ⇑ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : m . guhe @ ed . ac . uk ( M . Guhe ) , a . pease @ ed . ac . uk ( A . Pease ) , a . smaill @ ed . ac . uk ( A . Smaill ) , mmartine @ uos . de ( M . Martinez ) , martisch @ uos . de ( M . Schmidt ) , hgust @ uos . de ( H . Gust ) , kkuehn be @ uos . de ( K . - U . Ku¨hnberger ) , krumnack @ uos . de ( U . Krumnack ) . www . elsevier . com / locate / cogsys Available online at www . sciencedirect . com Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 algebraic geometry is reﬂected as much in its deﬁnitions as in its theorems’ ( Harris , 1992 , p . 99 , quoted in Tappenden , 2008 , p . 256 ) . Tappenden also urges applying to mathematics the principle by Arnauld and Nicole ( 1683 ) that ‘nothing is more important in science than classifying and deﬁning well’ . As these quotations suggest , mathemat - ical concepts are not born in ready - to - use Platonic fashion , they evolve over time according to need , application , sim - plicity , beauty and a host of other diﬃcult - to - identify criteria . Corﬁeld ( 2003 , p . 21 ) holds that ‘No mathematical con - cept has reached deﬁnitive form – everything is open to reinterpretation’ , thus advocating a historical approach to analysing concept formation . In the history of mathe - matics much work traces the historical development of par - ticular mathematical concepts , such as ZERO ( Kaplan , 2000 ) , SYMMETRY ( Stewart , 2007 ) and PRIME NUMBERS ( Gray , 1992 ) . Some of these historical developments are candidates for analysis in terms of conceptual blending ; indeed Alexander ( 2009 ) provides insight into how these events can be seen in such terms . At the centre of the cognitive account of how people make mathematical discoveries are processes such as anal - ogy , metaphor and conceptual blending . This view is some - what diﬀerent from the traditional view that deduction is the main means of mathematical reasoning , or even from much more recent ( and controversial ) views that scientiﬁc induction 1 ( Polya , 1962 ) and abductive reasoning ( Arzarello , Andriano , Olivero , & Robutti , 1998 ) play an important role . While deductive reasoning plays an integral part in formulating a mathematical argument , in particular presenting a proof in a mathematical paper , analogical rea - soning and other cognitive processes like conceptual blend - ing can ( along with scientiﬁc induction and abduction ) help to shed light on how mathematicians create mathematical concepts , conjectures and initial proof attempts . This is worth pointing out , because while the role of analogy , for example , is more or less uncontroversial in cognitive sci - ence , many mathematicians ﬁnd it hard to acknowledge the central role of non - formal means in the progress of mathematics . A reason for this may be that mathematics is often attributed a special status – physicists , for example , seem less reluctant to take this view , e . g . Maxwell explicitly pointed out the role that analogical reasoning played in his discoveries ( Nersessian , 2008 ) . It should be noted , however , that Polya ( 1954 , p . 17 ) observed that ‘analogy seems to have a share in all mathematical discoveries , but in some it has the lion’s share’ . He provides historical examples , where analogy played a key role , such as the discovery by Euler of the conjectured solution to the Basel problem P 1 n 2 ( the problem of ﬁnding the sum of the reciprocals of the squares of the natural numbers ) as p 2 6 ( although Euler later used deductive methods to prove his conjecture ) . When scientists attempt to account for a newly observed phenomenon , they often construct analogies to existing sci - entiﬁc theories . A famous example is attributed to Ruther - ford , namely the analogy between the structure of the solar system and the structure of the atom . 2 Cognitive accounts of analogy are often given in the form of structure mapping theory , proposed by Gentner ( 1983 ) ; see also ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) : creating an analogy between two knowledge representations ( domains ) consists in ﬁnding structural correspondences between the domains . For example , in a simpliﬁed version of the solar system – atom analogy , the SUN is mapped onto the NUCLEUS and a relation like REVOLVES - AROUND ( which holds between PLANET and SUN ) is mapped onto REVOLVES - AROUND in the atom domain . Structure mapping emphasises that to create an analogy , correspondences between ( higher - level ) relations have to be established , e . g . between the two REVOLVES - AROUND relations , or the fact that the SUN / NUCLEUS is in an ATTRACTS relation with the PLANET / ELECTRON . For the following , we will assume that the general cog - nitive mechanism for establishing metaphors is essentially the same as the one for establishing analogies ( Gentner , Bowdle , Wolﬀ , & Boronat , 2001 ) . In particular , we follow the tradition originating with Lakoﬀ and Johnson ( 1980 ) and take a metaphor to be a mapping between conceptual spaces ( also often called mental spaces , cf . Fauconnier & Turner , 2002 ) , which has conceptually strong similarities to analogy making in the tradition of the structure map - ping approach . The conceptual spaces we will start from in this paper are taken from the four basic metaphors of arithmetic pro - posed by Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez ( 2000 ) . These basic metaphors are OBJECT COLLECTION , OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , MEASURING STICK and MOTION ALONG A PATH . According to Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez , these four metaphors play a role in grounding the human conception of arithmetic in everyday experiences . For example , according to the OBJECT COLLECTION meta - phor , our understanding of addition is supported ( among other things ) by our understanding of facts such as that if we add a collection of two objects to a collection of three objects , we get a collection of ﬁve objects . A central prob - lem of this overall approach , which is often neglected ( and we will not elaborate on either ) , is the question of how a domain or a conceptual space is established . We will assume that knowledge about the solar system is diﬀerent enough from knowledge about the atomic structure or that time is suﬃciently diﬀerent from space that there is no dan - ger of confusing or mixing them . In Guhe et al . ( 2010 ) we have already shown how new mathematical knowledge can be generated from the men - tioned basic domains by a process of generalisation with Heuristic - Driven Theory Projection ( HDTP ) , an algorith - 1 Scientiﬁc induction is contrasted with mathematical induction , which is deductive . 2 Versions of the atom reminiscent of the solar system existed before Rutherford’s and colleagues’ experimental results in 1911 , concepts like inertia and forces of attraction being at the centre of the analogy . 250 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 mic system that computes generalisations of given source and target domains ( Schwering , Krumnack , Ku¨hnberger , & Gust , 2009 ) . HDTP is based on anti - uniﬁcation ( Plotkin , 1970 ) and allows a mapping between source and target via the computed generalisation . However , metaphorical map - pings between conceptual spaces are a special case of con - ceptual blending ( Fauconnier & Turner , 2002 ) . In this paper we argue that metaphorical mappings alone are not suﬃcient to account for how mathematical concepts are created . Instead , the more comprehensive account of conceptual blending is required . Like the basic conception of metaphors , conceptual blends are based on interrelated conceptual spaces . How - ever , conceptual blends go beyond metaphorical mappings in that they create new conceptual spaces ( blend spaces ) that combine the original conceptual spaces in novel ways and that also make it possible to create new concepts by conceptual combination . For example , in the well - docu - mented TIME IS SPACE metaphor ( Fauconnier & Turner , 2002 , 2008 ) a standard mapping consists in mapping the progression of time to moving through space . However , only a conceptual blend provides the necessary representa - tion for a conceptualisation visible in an expression like time passes , which requires one to conceptualise the OBSER - VER to be static and TIME as MOVING past him / her . In other words , only by having created a new conceptual space – the blend space – has it become possible to recombine concepts from both source domains ( TIME and SPACE ) in this novel way . In Fauconnier and Turner’s account , a mapping between conceptual spaces is maintained once it has been established . This means that all conceptual spaces will be updated when a change occurs in one space . While it is unclear whether this claim is tenable in a cognitive account ( because it is computationally potentially very costly ) , we will make this assumption here too . The rationale underly - ing the assumption that multiple conceptual spaces exist simultaneously instead of being merged into one big space is that despite the additional knowledge gained from , for example , the blend TIME IS SPACE , the knowledge about SPACE will remain ( mutatis mutantis ) the same . That is , even if additional knowledge about TIMEISSPACE is available , this knowledge is usually not needed or considered by a ( cogni - tive ) system when using spatial knowledge . In this paper , we do not make behavioural predictions or suggest particular empirical studies , but we acknowledge their importance for understanding conceptual blending in mathematical thinking . Here we are instead concerned with ( 1 ) giving a formal , computational account of conceptual blending and ( 2 ) exploring its role in the structures required for conceptualisations used in mathematical thinking . The main reason for not considering empirical data is the diﬃ - culty in obtaining such data for creative scientiﬁc thinking , see , for example , the discussions in Nersessian ( 2008 ) . In what sense , then , is our model cognitive ? We do not con - sider cognitive models to be constrained to models that replicate a particular experimental result but rather see us in the tradition of Alan Newell’s proposal to create uniﬁed theories of cognition ( Newell , 1990 ) . The theories we are unifying here are analogical thinking in the form of struc - ture mapping , generalisation in the form of anti - uniﬁcation and conceptual blending in the form of the theory of Insti - tutions . All three theories model high - level cognitive pro - cesses central to complex cognition . By integrating them , we better understand the role of these mechanisms for abstract ( mathematical ) thinking and the interplay between them . Furthermore , as the mathematical structures that our model creates are the result of human thinking , we con - sider our model to be a suitable ﬁrst account of these pro - cesses in complex cognition . It should also be noted that we are not suggesting that humans apply exactly those blending strategies described in the following rather than alternative ones . Our main purpose here is to demonstrate that conceptual blending is a vital aspect of mathematical creativity and to provide a proof of concept for a computational model of this cog - nitive process . 2 . Three steps of mathematical discovery via conceptual blending Our computational approach portrays the process of mathematical discovery via blending as consisting of three steps : exploration , recognition / goal formulation , and dis - covery , which we will outline in this section . Our running example will take as input formalisations of the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , MEASURING STICK and MOTION ALONG A PATH grounding domains for arithmetic . The formalisations ( ﬁrst order theories ) do not necessarily stand for the grounding domains themselves but for understandings of them , ‘naive precursors’ of the abstract number domains . For instance , in the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION domain any object consisting of three unit parts is a precursor of the abstract number three . 3 Our running example illustrates how a system can compute , out of the basic domains , a new notion of num - ber ( here a new theory ) that approximates our notion of rational numbers . In particular , the created domain will have three properties : 1 . There is exactly one precursor of each natural number . On many occasions we will refer to the precursor of a number as if it were a number itself . 2 . The elements of the domain are linearly ordered . The domain captures the idea of numbers being locations ( points ) in a linear path . 3 . The domain includes precursors of rational numbers , which can be described in the domain as being fractions of other objects . Fractions that should be equivalent 3 Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s stance is anti - Platonist . We do not take any philosophical position on the ontological status of numbers here , but as our example is based on Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s ideas , we made an eﬀort to choose terminology that does not suggest the existence of a Platonic realm of numbers . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 251 according to abstract arithmetic are indeed the same object in this domain . For example , there is only one object that is one half of 1 and this is the same unique object that also is two fourths of 1 in the domain . Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s choice of their four metaphors as the basic ones for grounding arithmetic , is based on an analysis of linguistic expressions . Thus , expressions such as adding onions to the soup ( physically placing an object into a con - tainer ) or take a book out of the box ( physically removing an object or substance from a container ) suggest that inter - actions with objects and collections of objects in the phys - ical world are used to construct basic arithmetical concepts and operations and is reﬂected in the way they are described linguistically . Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez capture this idea in their ARITHMETIC IS OBJECT COLLECTION metaphor . Besides object collections , they also propose the domains of OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , MEASURING STICK and MOTION ALONG A PATH as grounding domains for arithmetic . The last three domains are the ones we will use in our working example . We will explain the metaphors in more detail in Section 4 , but intuitively they consist in grounding arithmetic in the following domains : (cid:2) constructed objects like a tower of toy blocks , where the constructed objects correspond to numbers and addition corresponds to building a new constructed object out of two given constructed objects ; (cid:2) using a MEASURING STICK to mark out diﬀerent lengths , where the constructed lengths correspond to numbers and addition corresponds to placing two such lengths one after another ; (cid:2) motion along a path , where numbers correspond to cer - tain point locations on a path and addition corresponds to moving further away from the origin of the path . Fractions are a concept mainly motivated by the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION domain , where 5 / 2 in arithmetic corresponds to a constructed object built by splitting sev - eral unit objects into pairs of half - sized objects and gath - ering 5 of the smaller objects into a collection . Rational numbers , on the other hand , are mainly motivated by an enriched version of the MOTION ALONG A PATH domain , where they correspond to point locations in between or at those point locations on a path that are multiples of a unit length . The notion of a unit length is taken from the MEASURING STICK domain . 2 . 1 . Step 1 – exploration The ﬁrst step towards making a mathematical discovery is to explore relationships between the available conceptual spaces – the grounding domains in our case . This is done by the analogy making engine Heuristic - Driven Theory Projection ( HDTP ) . The results are mappings between the representations of OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , MEASURING STICK and MOTION ALONG A PATH . Some of the mappings contain , for example , a correspondence between objects ( from OBJECT CONSTRUCTION ) , distances ( from MEASURING STICK ) , and point locations on a path ( from MOTION ALONG A PATH ) . There is also a mapping of the smallest elements of the ﬁrst two domains . Two aspects of these mappings can be used for creating new knowledge : (cid:2) Not all knowledge of the two domains is mapped : parts will be ‘left over’ . (cid:2) There are entities that cannot be mapped in spite of sharing similar properties . For example , as described in Section 4 . 2 , the smallest element of the OBJECT CONSTRUC - TION domain cannot be mapped to the smallest element of the MOTION ALONG A PATH domain because the former ele - ment behaves as the 1 of arithmetic in that adding it to another object yields a strictly larger constructed object , while the smallest element of the MOTION ALONG A PATH behaves as the zero of arithmetic , being an identity for the ‘addition’ operation of the domain . 2 . 2 . Step 2 – recognition and goal formulation The mappings of step 1 result in recognising , among other things , that multiple fractions in the OBJECT CON - STRUCTION domain , e . g . 1 / 2 and 2 / 4 , map onto the same point on a path , namely the point half - way in between the origin and the unit location . As already mentioned , when we talk , for example , about the fraction 1 / 4 in the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION domain we are not referring to the abstract number but to any object that is a fourth part of a unit size object . Based on this observation , the system can formulate a goal to discover whether there is a regular - ity with which these fractions are related , for example the goal can be to try to ﬁnd out how the existing deﬁnition of equality in OBJECT CONSTRUCTION ( two fractions a / b and c / d are equal if a = c and b = d ) must be changed to accom - modate this ﬁnding . Another conjecture based on the mappings of step 1 uses the observation that two of the domains have smallest ele - ments . Based on this mapping , the system can formulate various goals , including : 1 . Transfer 0 from MOTION ALONG A PATH to MEASURING STICK or to OBJECT CONSTRUCTION because it is a ‘new’ number . 2 . Hypothesise that the UNIT DISTANCE from the MEASURING STICK , and the ORIGIN from MOTION ALONG A PATH are equal and formulate a goal to show that this is indeed the case . 3 . Make a conjecture that the SMALLEST OBJECTS from OBJECT CONSTRUCTION and ORIGIN from MOTION ALONG A PATH are equal and formulate a goal to show that this is indeed the case . 4 . Hypothesise that the UNIT DISTANCE from MEASURING STICK and ORIGIN from MOTION ALONG A PATH are equal and formulate a goal to show that this is indeed the case . 252 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 5 . Since there is a mapping between MOTION ALONG A PATH and MEASURINGSTICK , try to create a domain that is more abstract than the two grounding ones in that objects of the new domain have the properties of distances and of points in a path . 2 . 3 . Step 3 – discoveries Discoveries that can arise from the previous goals and conjectures include a revised notion of equality for frac - tions ( 1 / 2 = 2 / 4 ) or the addition of a new object that behaves as zero ( and that we will call 0 ) to domains that lacked such an element . 1 . Because multiple fractions can map onto the same point , they can be considered to be the same ( rational ) number . If the system can work out the regularity , i . e . that such fractions are related in a principled manner ( by having a common multiplier / divisor for counter and denomina - tor ) , it discovers a new deﬁnition of equality between fractions . 2 . After 0 has been transferred from MOTION ALONG A PATH to OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , the system will note that the smallest entities of the two domains are not the same entity . It will also note the limited applicability of the new concept ( ZERO ) for fractions , because ZERO cannot be used as denominator . This can , for example , be done by observing that there is no rational number that cor - responds to such fractions . It is important to note that the plausibility of formulat - ing one goal or another depends on the order in which the various mappings and discoveries are made . The status of some of the goals and discoveries listed in this section may vary depending on the particular development : what is a discovery in one history may be directly recognised out of the analogical mappings in another or be formulated as a goal . In Section 4 , we will illustrate one way in which such of history of ﬁnding mappings , conjecturing and dis - covery may develop . Our example unfolds in a way such that at some point goal 5 above is formulated . Note that among the ones we mentioned , goal 5 is the one that most explicitly asks for the creation of a conceptual blend . 2 . 4 . Computational realisation In Section 4 we describe progress in carrying out this programme . The exploration step is carried out automati - cally using the HDTP engine . For the subsequent steps , the results have been derived by hand . Throughout , various heuristics are employed to make these ideas tractable : HDTP already has associated heuristics , cf . Section 3 . 3 . Heuristics for the subsequent steps are described later in this paper . We are currently working on a full implementa - tion of the proposed extension of HDTP for conceptual blending . 3 . Conceptual blending and HDTP A number of systems has been developed for performing automated concept formation in mathematics , including ( Colton , 2002 ; Epstein , 1988 ; Fajtlowicz , 1988 ; Lenat , 1976 ; Sims & Bresina , 1989 ) . Usually , they explore a domain empirically and construct concepts which describe subsets of the domain they are working in . The techniques they use can be contrasted with those used in concept for - mation in machine learning , in which a set of positive and negative examples are given in order to automatically con - struct a concept to cover exactly the positive examples . Currently , no automated concept formation system in mathematics that we know of uses conceptual blending as a technique ; the closest may be Colton’s ( 2002 ) HR pro - gram , which uses a production rule compose . This produc - tion rule takes two concepts , a primary and a secondary concept , as input . It then ‘overlaps’ the rows of the primary concept with those of the secondary concept in a way which has been speciﬁed by taking a value from a range which has been speciﬁed by the user at the beginning of a run . The rule was motivated by the composition of two functions ; for instance , given functions f ( x ) and g ( x ) , it was designed to construct the function f ( g ( x ) ) . In this section , we will look at mechanisms for concep - tual blending and how they relate to notions of analogical inference . We will also describe the HDTP system , and some other work that has been done on mechanisms for mathematical concept formation and discovery . 3 . 1 . Conceptual blending and analogy In the literature , there are various approaches to analog - ical matching , analogical inference and transfer , for exam - ple , Gentner’s structure mapping ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) , Hofstadter’s Copycat work ( Hofstadter & Mitchell , 1994 ) or Keane’s Incremental Analogy Machine ( Keane , 1990 ) . Typically , these approaches regard analogy between two ( conceptual ) spaces as an asymmetrical relationship between a source and a target . In the structure mapping approach , for example , this is formally reﬂected by the use of a ( partial ) mapping in the mathematical sense : structural features in the source domain are mapped to uniquely corresponding features in the target . An alterna - tive , chosen by HDTP , is to allow more general relational correspondences between the given spaces in terms of mappings from a generic space to both of the given ones . Features which are the image of the same common feature in the generic space are then considered to be in structural correspondence . At this level , the formal description is now symmetrical between the spaces , and a feature in the ‘source’ may correspond to more than one feature in the ‘target’ . The notion of a conceptual blend extends this story . A standard example , which is discussed by Goguen ( 2006 ) , is that of the possible conceptual blends of the concepts HOUSE and BOAT into both BOATHOUSE and HOUSEBOAT . Parts M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 253 of the conceptual spaces of HOUSE and BOAT can be aligned ( e . g . a RESIDENT LIVES - IN a HOUSE ; a PASSENGER RIDES - ON a BOAT ) . Conceptual blends are created by combining fea - tures from the two spaces , while respecting the constructed alignments between them . For our purposes , in this case we note the following : (cid:2) The blend spaces coexist with the original spaces . Here we agree with Fauconnier and Turner ( 2008 , chap . 2 ) that in this sort of case we keep in mind the diﬀerent spaces , and the relationships between them , rather than throwing away one space in favour of the blend . We still want the concepts of HOUSE and BOAT , even as we are aware that a BOATHOUSE has some relation to both HOUSE and BOAT . (cid:2) The blend space is not the result of extending one of the given spaces with new features or properties , i . e . it is not a simple enrichment of either of the input spaces . In the mathematical case , where we care about the con - sistency of the conceptualisations , this means that con - ceptual blending gives us a way to understand how theories that would simply be inconsistent if crudely combined , can nevertheless be blended by taking appro - priately chosen parts of the theories , while respecting common features . Fauconnier and Turner ( 2002 , pp . 242 – 245 ) remark on this issue when blending notions of number which are discrete in one case and dense in another . 3 . 2 . Our approach In the following sections we will develop our ideas in a formal way . Our modelling will be based on Heuristic - Driven Theory Projection ( HDTP ) , a framework for ana - logical reasoning ( Schwering et al . , 2009 ) . HDTP seems especially suitable for our task , as it provides an explicit generalisation of two domains as a by - product of establish - ing an analogy . Such a generalisation can be a base for con - cept creation by abstraction . HDTP creates an analogy in two phases : in the mapping phase , the source and target domains are compared to ﬁnd structural commonalities , and in this process , a generalised description is created , which subsumes the matching parts of both domains . In the transfer phase , unmatched knowledge in the source domain can be mapped to the target domain to establish new hypotheses , cf . Fig . 1 . For our current purposes , we have to extend this frame - work to include conceptual blending . Goguen has provided a mathematical framework in which the notion of a conceptual blend is given a more precise yet ﬂexible charac - terisation ( Goguen , 2006 ) . In this approach , domains 4 can have both syntactic and semantic components , and map - pings from one such domain to another , preserving the conceptual structure , serve as morphisms in a mathemati - cal category . A blend of two given domains I 1 and I 2 is then given by an identiﬁcation of some shared aspects of I 1 and I 2 and a new domain B , which reﬂects the shared aspects of I 1 and I 2 while allowing other aspects of I 1 and I 2 to be inherited as well . Operations like analogical transfer and mapping back can also be understood as forming a concep - tual blend between two domains . However , in addition to this , the general notion of conceptual blending allows the formation of blends , where the result is not an extension of either given domain but rather takes and rejects selected aspects from both domains . Goguen’s ideas are useful in understanding the compu - tation of blends as developed in this paper . We re - interpret Goguen’s theory of conceptual blending as a process of information integration of two domains I 1 and I 2 over a shared domain G , as depicted in Goguen’s blending dia - gram , cf . Fig . 2 . Based on a blend B a ‘cross space map - ping’ m : I 1 ! I 2 can be constructed as a reﬂection of the identiﬁcations that are made in B , which reﬂect identiﬁca - tions inherited from G . The generic space G contains sort ( type ) information and thereby indicates which individuals should be identiﬁed . This analysis of blending ﬁts HDTP’s model of analogy making , although there are some diﬀerences : First , the sta - tus of the input domains in analogy making is usually not symmetric . Instead , analogies are directed from a ( well - known ) source domain S towards a ( little - known ) target domain T . This is not a fundamental diﬀerence , but rather indicates properties of the typical examples considered , and the uses made of the analogy or blending , respectively . Sec - ond , in HDTP , the generic space G is computed as a gen - eralisation of source and target . Third , the principles for introducing concepts into the target domain by analogical transfer seem to be more restricted than for blending . Fig . 1 . HDTP’s overall approach to creating analogies . 4 We use the term domain to refer to the source and target . Goguen developed his theory for conceptual spaces . Fig . 2 . HDTP’s view of conceptual blending compared to Goguen ( 2006 ) . In the HDTP diagram , the top arrows are substitutions resulting from the computation of the analogical relation m . The dashed arrows symbolise the heuristic - driven construction of the conceptual blend . In Goguen’s diagram , the arrows depict morphisms in an appropriate category and the dotted arrow m stands for a cross - domain mapping I 1 ! I 2 . 254 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 Despite these diﬀerences , the general framework of HDTP can be adapted to these ideas of conceptual blending . The main point , where conceptual blending diﬀers from analogical reasoning is the second phase – the analog - ical transfer of knowledge from S to T . To turn HDTP into a blending framework , we replace this transfer by a process that results in the creation of new domain , as follows : 1 . Compute a common generalisation of the domains S and T , thus setting up relationships between the source and target domains . 2 . Create the conceptual blend B by merging knowledge from S and T based on this mapping : in the ideal case , B respects the shared features of S and T ( those with common generalisations ) , and inherits independently the other features of S and T . In analogical transfer , the operations for modifying the target domain are usually considered to be quite restricted : all that can be done is to enrich the target domain T by knowledge transferred from S , as long as no inconsistencies are introduced . In conceptual blending , however , both domains are merged in a way that common parts are identi - ﬁed . Unmatched parts of the domains will be imported into the blend . Of course , this process may introduce inconsisten - cies , and there are diﬀerent ways to deal with them . The two strategies here are to either exclude parts of the inconsistent knowledge from the blend , or to reduce the coverage of the generalisation and thereby the amount of knowledge that is identiﬁed in the conceptual blend . We will discuss both strategies in more detail in the worked example . 3 . 3 . Syntactic principles of HDTP In this section , we provide a short overview of the basic mechanisms of HDTP . A more detailed presentation of these mechanisms can be found in Schwering et al . ( 2009 ) . HDTP is designed to compute analogical relations and inferences for domains that are represented in a many - sorted ﬁrst - order logic language . Both , the source and the target domain are given by axiomatisations , i . e . they are represented by ﬁnite sets of ﬁrst - order formulae . The basic idea is to associate ( align ) pairs of formulae from the two domains in a system - atic way , namely by performing anti - uniﬁcation ( Plotkin , 1970 ) . By computing the anti - uniﬁer of two formulae , these formulae are compared and the least general generalisation that subsumes both formulae is identiﬁed . Fig . 3 depicts some examples of the anti - uniﬁcation of terms . The anti - instance ( generalisation ) of two terms is computed by replacing diﬀerent constants or function sym - bols by a variable . In example ( i ) a simple application of ﬁrst - order anti - uniﬁcation is suﬃcient to yield the general - isation f ( X ) . However , the terms in example ( ii ) diﬀer in the function symbols , i . e . ﬁrst - order anti - uniﬁcation fails to detect structural commonalities . To obtain the structural commonality between the two terms , higher - order anti - uniﬁcation can be used to generalise function symbols to a variable . It is even possible to generalise terms in which common parts are embedded structurally in a diﬀerent way , as shown in ( iii ) . 5 Substitutions accompanying the generalised terms are created , which can be used to reconstruct the original terms . Classical anti - uniﬁcation of terms is not suﬃcient to compute commonalities of domains that are represented by ﬁrst - order logical theories . Therefore , HDTP extends this classical form of anti - uniﬁcation of terms to formulae and logical theories by iteratively picking pairs of formulae to be generalised from the domains . This process is driven by heuristics . Coherent mappings are preferred over inco - herent mappings , i . e . mappings in which substitutions can be reused are considered to be better candidates to induce the analogical relation than mappings with many isolated substitutions . The generalised theory together with its substitutions speciﬁes the analogical relation between source and target . Additional information about the source domain , i . e . formulae of the source domain with no correspondence in the target domain , can be ‘analogically’ transferred to the target by transformation using the already established substitutions . The generalisation consists of formulae for which there exist instantiations in the source and the target domain . These instantiations are said to be ( directly ) covered by the generalisation . A domain formula is indirectly covered , if it can be inferred from covered formulae . There may also exist formulae which are uncovered . Such formulae have no correspondence in the other domain and therefore are candidates for transfer in the process of analogical reason - ing . In the context of conceptual blending , they contribute domain - speciﬁc knowledge to the blend . 4 . Worked example In the following example , we show how a conceptualisa - tion of rational numbers of the form n / 2 k ( with n ; k 2 N ) , close to the one , where rational numbers are points on the real line , can be achieved from some basic grounding domains ( in the spirit of Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez ) by establishing metaphorical mappings and blending constructions . Our point of departure are formalised versions of three out of the four basic grounding domains of Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez : the MEASURING STICK domain , the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION domain , and the MOTION ALONG A PATH domain . We use ﬁrst Fig . 3 . Anti - uniﬁcation of terms . 5 HDTP uses a restricted form of higher - order anti - uniﬁcation , that allows us to expand terms by introducing arguments and nested structures as described in Krumnack , Schwering , Gust , and Ku¨hnberger ( 2007 ) . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 255 order logic with sorts , which adheres closely to the way the domains are presented in Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s original account . We do not present all of the embodied , pseudo - arithmetical properties of each domain but only those that are relevant for our purposes here . We have chosen to formalise the theories we compare within ﬁrst - order predicate calculus , and we have explicit use of the existential quantiﬁer . The tractability of reason - ing over such theories depends on the logical complexity of the theories concerned . We have not aimed for the simplest possible theories here , since our concern is primarily with the interrelationships between theories . It is an interesting question to what extent simpler theories are psychologi - cally more plausible . Mathematicians express preferences between theories for similar reasons : e . g . Tarski ( 1959 ) pre - fers a theory ( E 2 ) over alternatives since ‘ [ the conception ] embodied in E 2 distinguishes itself by the simplicity and clarity of its metamathematical implications . ’ Our example shows in a detailed , algorithmically oriented manner how to form abstract conceptual domains out of more concrete ones . We make no claims about the cognitive adequacy of our particular choice of these theories . 6 4 . 1 . Basic domains The MEASURING STICK domain ( MS ) refers to acts of con - structing linear segments by repeatedly using a linear mea - suring object . In the version of MS by Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez ( 2000 ) , these acts involve using physical segments , which embody distances in real objects such as a wooden stick and which can be used to construct other physical seg - ments , for example when drawing on the ground the limits of a house to be built . The objects of interest are linear seg - ments ( straight distances ) . These are the objects of our for - malisation of this domain , cf . Fig . 4 . The second domain of interest is MOTION ALONG A PATH ( MAP ) , in particular motion along a straight path . The basic grounding metaphor maps points on the paths to numbers in arithmetic , just as distances ( segments ) are mapped to numbers in the MS case . Accordingly , the main objects in our formalisation of the MOTION ALONG A PATH domain are points . MAP is the only one of the four basic grounding domains that includes a natural correspondent to the number zero , namely the ORIGIN . In the formalisa - tion , cf . Fig . 5 , the interpretation of farther ( P 1 , P 2 ) is that point P 1 is farther from the origin than P 2 . Following Lak - oﬀ and Nu´n˜ez , in the basic version of MAP , motion only extends in one direction from the ORIGIN but not in the opposite direction , see law p 4 . The interpretation of moveAway ( P 1 , P 2 , P 3 ) is that if you are at point P 1 on the path and you move away from the origin ‘cloning’ the path from the origin to P 2 , then you end up at point P 3 . The inter - pretations for closer and moveCloser are similar ( see Fig . 5 ) . The third domain is Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez’s OBJECT CON - STRUCTION domain , including a simpliﬁed version of the fraction extension that only contains an operation of split - ting objects into halves ( see Fig . 6 ) . This will show our point fully while allowing a simple formalisation . The physical setting in mind is one , where objects can be constructed from simpler ones and where some of the objects are classi - ﬁed as WHOLEOBJECT s , meaning that their constituent atomic objects are of a standard size . One can think , for example , of coloured paper - strip constructions made by cutting pieces of paper or sticking them together . Objects that con - sist of one of several complete sheets of paper stuck together are considered to be WHOLEOBJECT s . A special case of cutting is singled out , which consists of the act of dividing one ( con - structed ) strip of paper into two halves . In the formalisation , wholeOb ( O ) means that O can be constructed by sticking together whole objects only and com - bine ( O 1 , O 2 , O 3 ) indicates that the constructed object O 3 is formed by combining objects O 1 and O 2 . Two objects match when they can be exactly superposed ; that is , they are of equal size . The meaning of half ( O 1 , O 2 ) is simply that O 1 is one half of O 2 . The vertical dots at the end of the list of laws indicate that we have laws similar to / 8 a and / 8 b for combine , wholeOb , etc . It is important to note that , in OCF , the SMALLEST WHOLE OBJECT s play a role similar to that of the UNIT SEGMENT in the MS domain , but while in MS there is a unique such object ( the particular one used as a ruler ) , there are many SMALLEST WHOLE OBJECT s in OCF . An extended version of OCF , one where all the simple fractions of the form 1 / n are included ( at least up to a certain ﬁxed n ) can be obtained by presupposing the ability to count up to n . Although we will not work with this extension ( let’s call it OCF + ) , it may look like this . 7 First , we need an extra sort num that stands for N þ ( or an initial segment of it ) , the initial numerals 1 , 2 , 3 , etc . as entities of sort num , a func - tion symbol next that yields the next natural number in the counting sequence and , instead of the predicate symbol half , we use two ternary predicates frac and mult . The intuition is to use frac ( O 1 , n , O 2 ) to formalise the idea that O 1 is a 1 / n th of O 2 , while mult ( O 1 , n , O 2 ) says that constructing an object out of n objects that match O 1 yields an object that matches O 2 . The laws concerning half in our OCF are replaced by ﬁve laws , the ﬁrst three ones being similar to the / 6 laws : 8ð O 1 ; O 2 : obj Þ ; ð n : nat Þ : frac ð O 1 ; n ; O 2 Þ $ mult ð O 2 ; n ; O 1 Þ 8ð O 1 : obj ; n : nat Þ9ð O 2 : obj Þ : frac ð O 2 ; n ; O 1 Þ 8ð O 1 ; O 2 : obj Þ ; ð n : nat Þ : ð frac ð O 2 ; n ; O 1 Þ ^ smallestWhOb ð O 1 Þ ! : wholeOb ð O 2 ÞÞ 6 On the basis of developmental , historical or educational evidence we would expect that a complete story about how we get to our understand - ing of rational numbers would start from diﬀerent formalisations of the domains , include a larger number of blending steps , and involve also other operations such as induction . 7 In our opinion , both our versions of OCF are already blends . However , in this paper , we do not concern ourselves with the issue of studying how such a blend is obtained . 256 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 The other two laws spell out the meaning of mult : 8ð O 1 : obj Þ : mult ð O 1 ; 1 ; O 1 Þ 8ð O 1 ; O 2 ; O 3 : obj Þð n : nat Þ ð mult ð O 1 ; n ; O 2 Þ ^ combine ð O 2 ; O 1 ; O 3 ÞÞ $ mult ð O 1 ; next ð n Þ ; O 3 Þ To this we need to add the facts about the initial sequence of natural numbers : next ( 1 ) = 2 , next ( 2 ) = 3 , . . . The point is that , conceptually , the ideas we will use in our examples with OCF scale up to OCF + . From a computational perspective , however , the set of OCF + laws is harder to work with . 4 . 2 . Conceptual blend 1 – Steps on a path The original intuition behind the MAP domain ( as moti - vated by Lakoﬀ and Nu ´ n˜ez ) is that of an entity moving along a straight path . There is no element involving dis - creteness in such a scenario . By blending the MS and MAP domains we obtain a conception of natural numbers similar to the one used in math classes , in which they are viewed as particular locations on a line . In this section we describe the process leading towards the construction of the conceptual blend , which is partially supported by the HDTP framework . 4 . 2 . 1 . Exploration HDTP ﬁnds analogical mappings between the two domains , as a byproduct of calculating a generalising domain G . See Fig . 7 for a depiction of the result produced by HDTP when we take MS as the source . In the general case , several diﬀerent sets of analogical mappings might be found . ( This also depends on which one of the domains we use as target and which one as source . ) In the particular case of MS and MAP , HDTP will Fig . 4 . MEASURING STICK domain ( MS ) . Fig . 5 . MOTION ALONG A PATH domain ( MAP ) . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 257 ﬁnd that laws l 1 to l 4 of MS correspond to p 1 – p 4 of MAP , regardless of which of the two domains is taken as the source . 4 . 2 . 2 . Goal formulation and discoveries The most immediate goal after establishing an analogi - cal mapping is to try to transfer properties from the source domain to the target . However , in our example , l 5 cannot be transferred to MAP because we can derive a contradic - tion from the formula obtained from l 5 by renaming according to the alignments and p 5 b . Going in the other direction , we could try to transfer the p 5 laws to MS . In the case of p 5 a this is possible , but the transferred formula is already implied by l 5 , so the transfer does not yield any - thing new . On the other hand , p 5 b cannot be transferred because this also creates a contradiction . A second way to take advantage of the analogical map - ping is to try to create a conceptual blend . Intuitively , such a blend may be based on the observation that there is a good structural match between the domains , but that transfers fail Fig . 6 . OBJECT CONSTRUCTION with fractions ( OCF ) . Fig . 7 . Generalisation produced by HDTP from the MS and MAP domains . 258 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 because a certain object exists in MAP that does not exist in MS . This may trigger the conjecture that MAP could be a more general domain than MS . Thus , a goal can be formu - lated to create a conceptual blend in which MS is embedded in MAP . In such a blend , the objects would have a dual nat - ure and could be thought of as distances or points , and there would be a subdomain of the global one that would have the discrete nature of the MS objects . Such a conceptual blend does exist . Once we have made the conjecture that the notion of points on a line is more general than the notion of dis - tances built out of a unit measure , one can construct the blend as follows , with an eye on detecting possible inconsis - tencies as new laws are added to it . 4 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Sorts . The conceptual blend uses only one sort , the same one that is used in the domain that seems to be ‘lar - ger’ ( in this case MAP ) . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Signature . The signature of the conceptual blend is given by the ‘union’ of the signatures of MS and MAP , which is created simply by putting both signatures together and changing the occurrences of seg in the signature deﬁnitions to point . Furthermore , we add a new monadic predicate sym - bol nat . The intuition is that nat ( P ) corresponds ( via the blending mappings ) to a point constructed in an MS - like way . At an even more intuitive level , the objects P satisfying nat ( P ) would be points that can be constructed by iterating steps of a unit size . These points are like the locations of nat - ural numbers on the real line . Note that the introduction of nat can be seen as a special case of predicate introduction in blend signatures as described in Section 4 . 3 . 4 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Laws . Here we include : 1 . All laws of MAP , as they should hold in the larger universe . 2 . All alignments between predicate symbols found by HDTP , in the form of equivalences . 3 . For each entity symbol in the ‘smaller’ domain ( MS in this case ) , a law stating that each such entity belongs to the subdomain of the conceptual blend . That is , we add nat ( unitSeg ) to the theory of the blend . 4 . For each law l i of MS , add a relativised version l 0 i of it to the blend . For example , the relativised versions of l 1 , l 4 , and l 5 are : l 0 1 : 8 S 1 ; S 2 : ð nat ð S 1 Þ ^ nat ð S 2 ÞÞ ! ð shorter ð S 1 ; S 2 Þ $ longer ð S 2 ; S 1 ÞÞ l 0 4 : 8 S : nat ð S Þ ! : longer ð unitSeg ; S Þ l 0 5 : 8 S 1 ; S 2 ; S 3 : ð nat ð S 1 Þ ^ nat ð S 2 Þ ^ nat ð S 3 Þ ^ extend ð S 1 ; S 2 ; S 3 Þ ! longer ð S 3 ; S 2 Þ ^ longer ð S 3 ; S 1 ÞÞ 4 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Reﬁne the laws . Several of the relativised laws can actually be dropped from the theory or changed to unre - lativised versions . For example , it is clear that l 0 1 is simply a special case of p 1 , so the law can be changed to l 1 ( unre - lativised ) or dropped . On the other hand , l 0 4 is an impor - tant addition to the blend that cannot be derived from the other laws added so far . We think of the resulting blend , depicted in Fig . 8 , as one whose resulting domain is that of DISCRETE MOTION ALONG A PATH ( DMAP ; discrete meaning stepped here ) . A more concise version of the blend can be given by mapping correlated predicates to an identical predicate in the blend ( here , for example , longer and farther ) . The choice of terminology does not matter in Goguen’s formu - lation of blending , as long as the mappings between con - ceptualisations match up correctly ; we expect cognitive factors to play a role here however , and so permit both inherited predicates into the blend . In this example , the process ends felicitously , because no inconsistencies appeared as new laws were added while forming the blend . If at some point an inconsistency would have been detected , the conjecture that initially triggered the blend formation process would not have been sup - ported . Nevertheless , at the step previous to the inclusion of a problematic law we would still have a blend , even if not the expected one . 4 . 2 . 3 . Testing and discovery Once the theory of the blend domain is assembled , one can try to improve it or use it to make discoveries ( which may involve emergent structure in the blend ) . A ﬁrst strat - egy for exploration in this example is the question of whether the symbols of constants that were collapsed in the generalisation domain can also be collapsed in the con - ceptual blend . However , adding unitSeg = origin to DMAP creates a contradiction . Looking at the arithmetical coun - terpart of this , the conceptual blend entails a version of the arithmetical fact that 0 – 1 . This ﬁnding leads to a revi - sion of the generalisation and substitution functions , so that the identiﬁcation between unitSeg and origin is dropped ( Fig . 8 does not include this revision ) . In this conceptual blend it is also a fact that there are points strictly between 0 and 1 , which one can still think of and talk about as segments or distances ( from the origin to the point ) , just that their exact distance from the origin is not measurable by using unit steps and the available operations . 4 . 3 . Searching for conceptual blends The ideas used in the previous example can be generalised . The way to do this leads to an explosion of possibilities that could be tried , and , consequently , to the need to ﬁnd good heuristics to choose which possibilities to try ﬁrst . For exam - ple , we can start with two domains described by theories Th 1 , Th 2 , which are given in signatures R 1 , R 2 , respectively . Sup - pose that an analogical mapping has been found between both domains , with the property that for all function sym - bols , if f 1 is mapped to f 2 , then f 1 and f 2 have the same arity , and suppose that a similar property holds for analogical M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 259 mappings between relation symbols . This is a way to say that an analogical mapping was found , where the substitutions are of the simplest kind ( renaming and ﬁxations ) . Then one can attempt to create blend Th 3 as follows : 4 . 3 . 1 . Sorts Independently of the number of sorts in the input domains , we create a conceptual blend with only one sort , which we call univ . Of course , for all intents and purposes this is the same as using a non - sorted language . The reason for this choice will become clear when we explain how to construct the next components of the theory blend . 4 . 3 . 2 . Signature The signature of the conceptual blend is given by the ‘union’ of the signatures of MS and MAP , which is now achieved by putting both signatures together and changing all sorts in the signature deﬁnitions to univ . To this , we add a new monadic predicate symbol sort for each sort used in R 1 [ R 2 ( without loss of generality we assume that R 1 \ R 2 = ; ) . What we are doing here is moving the sorts of the original domains to the language of the conceptual blend . 4 . 3 . 3 . Core blend laws 1 . For each formula in theories Th 1 and Th 2 that is covered by the analogy , add its relativised form to the blend . That is , for each such formula we recursively change for - mulas " x : Sort ( / ) to " x ( sort ( x ) ! / ) . Similarly , we change $ x : Sort ( / ) to $ x ( sort ( x ) ^ / ) . Then we add the result to the conceptual blend . 2 . For each entity symbol e of sort Sort in any of the input domains , if the symbol was covered by the analogy , then add a fact sort ( e ) to the blend . 3 . For each function symbol f : Sort 1 (cid:3) . . . (cid:3) Sort n ! Sort in any of the input domains , if the symbol was covered by the analogy , then add the following formula to the conceptual blend : 8 x 1 ; . . . x n ðð sort 1 ð x 1 Þ ^ . . . ^ sort n ð x n ÞÞ ! sort ð f ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n ÞÞÞ Fig . 8 . First conceptual blend on the basis of the generalisation shown in Fig . 7 . 260 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 4 . 3 . 4 . Preferred conjectures In addition to the previous core of laws , the following ones can be added , testing at each step for possible incon - sistencies of the resulting theory : 1 . If two entities e 1 and e 2 have been identiﬁed by the anal - ogy , add e 1 = e 2 to the conceptual blend . 2 . If the function f has been identiﬁed via the analogy with the function g , then add 8 x 1 ; . . . x n ð f ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n Þ ¼ g ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n ÞÞ : 3 . If the relation R has been identiﬁed via the analogy with the relation Q , then add 8 x 1 ; . . . x n ð R ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n Þ $ Q ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n ÞÞ : 4 . Add a theory about desirable containment or overlap - ping relations about sorts ( including the universal one ) , that is , add a number of statements of the form " x ( sort 1 ( x ) ! sort 2 ( x ) ) , $ x ( sort 1 ( x ) ^ sort 2 ( x ) ) or " x ( sort 1 ( x ) ) . 4 . 3 . 5 . Extra conjectures A consistent conceptual blend found in the previous step can be enriched with core blend laws and preferred conjec - tures in any following ways : 1 . If a law that involves only symbols covered by the anal - ogy is not part of the generalisation , try to add it ( in relativised form ) to the conceptual blend . 2 . If a symbol in the signature in one of the input domains is not covered by the analogy , try to add it to the con - ceptual blend ( plus at least one of the laws related to the symbol , in relativised form ) . Nothing prevents a formulation of the previous process that works directly with multi - sorted languages so that the resulting blend would be a theory in such a language . No sort predicates would be introduced , and our preferred con - jecture 4 would turn into a formal inquiry about the hierar - chy of sorts . In our example , nat would be introduced as a new sort . The implementation of HDTP’s capabilities at reasoning with ﬁrst order logic enriched with hierarchies of sorts is on the way but at an initial stage yet . It is clear that , in general , given an analogical mapping , the number of conjectured blends may be huge . This means that good heuristics are of prime importance . Our example with MS and MAP makes use of one such heuristic : conjec - ture that one of the domains is a subdomain of another one if both domains seem identical , except if one of them has elements of a new type ( satisfying formulas that no element of the other domain can satisfy ) . Concretely , in the exam - ple , the conjecture is made that there is a blend in which the objects x satisfying nat ( x ) also satisfy point ( x ) , and that point corresponds to the universal sort . This last part of the conjecture allows us to use a simpler notation in the exam - ple , by using point as the main sort rather than as a monad - ic predicate in the signature . In general , for a simple example like ours , where we have two domains , each with only one sort , the blend domain will include two predicates representing sorts . In total , there are ten possible overlapping conﬁgurations for these sorts : the two imported sorts may be disjoint , may be the same , one may be strictly contained in the other ( two possibilities here ) , or they may have a nonempty inter - section without one sort being contained in the other . For each one of these ﬁve possibilities it may be that the union of the sorts is the whole universe of the blend , or it may be Fig . 9 . Speciﬁcation of the DISCRETE MOTION ALONG A PATH domain . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 261 that it is not . A theory about these containment relations may be one that actually does not determine exactly one of the ten possibilities . 4 . 4 . Conceptual blend 2 – a subset of the rational numbers Coming back to our example , we may now try to get a conceptual blend of DMAP and OCF . In fact , we are inter - ested in how to get to a blend that corresponds to the idea of rational numbers ( in our case a subset of them ) as points on the line . As always , the ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd an analogical mapping between the two domains . The DMAP domain is fully spelled out in Fig . 9 . According to the HDTP algorithm for analogy making , taking OCF as source and DMAP as target , it is possible to ﬁnd the following alignment between the signature symbols of both domains : OCF DMAP smallestWhOb k x . ( x = unitSeg ) wholeOb nat larger longer smaller shorter combine extend split chop matches = Of special interest in this table is the ﬁrst row , which actually stands for an alignment between the monadic rela - tion smallestWhOb in OCF and the monadic relation x = unitSeg in DMAP . Conceptually , the overall eﬀect of this alignment is that all the smallest whole objects in OCF are at once identiﬁed with the unit object of DMAP . At the implementation level , HDTP goes through some key steps . First , there is a ‘normalisation’ process by which the axiom l 0 4 of DMAP is rewritten to the equivalent 8 S : ð x ¼ unitSeg ^ nat ð S ÞÞ ! : longer ð x ; S Þ : This re - represented axiom matches in structure with / 4 from OCF , which allows HDTP to notice that x = unitSeg and smallestWhOb ( x ) play similar roles . The generalisation theory obtained by HDTP consists of formulas each one of which generalises one of the following pairs of laws : OCF DMAP / 1 l 1 / 2 l 2 / 3 a l 3 a / 3 b l 3 b / 4 l 00 4 where l 00 4 is the re - representation of l 4 described above 8 . The alignment between the binary predicate matches in OCF and true equality in DMAP ( also reﬂected by the cor - respondence between the laws / 4 and l 0 4 ) suggests a heuris - tic for creating a blend that essentially is the mathematical idea of exploring whether matches is a congruence with respect to the operations of the domain . If this is the case , then a quotient - like construction can be performed with the eﬀect that operations in the source domain for which matches works as a congruence may be tried to be imported into the target domain . A conceptual blend in this case may be created as follows : 1 . The conjecture is made that matches works really as an equality . To start testing this , add to OCF the laws say - ing that matches is an equivalence relation . If the theory is consistent then call this theory Th 1 . 2 . For each n - ary relation symbol R in OFC that is covered by the analogical mapping , test to see if Th 1 together with 8 x 1 ; y 1 ; x 2 ; y 2 ; . . . ; x n ; y n ðð matches ð x 1 ; y 1 Þ ^ . . . ^ matches ð x n ; y n ÞÞ ! ð R ð x 1 ; . . . ; x n Þ ! R ð y 1 ; . . . ; y n ÞÞÞ is still consistent . If it is , then add to the blend the natural equivalence induced by the analogical mapping between R and its counterpart in DMAP . For instance , in our exam - ple , the law / 8 b plus the fact that smaller was analogically mapped to shorter says that we can add the law 8 x ; y ð smaller ð x ; y Þ $ shorter ð x ; y ÞÞ to the conceptual blend . Similarly , if it is consistent then we can include in the blend the equivalences for all the alignments of the ﬁrst table . In particular , the natural equivalence that corresponds to the ﬁrst such alignment is 8 x ð smallestWhOb ð x Þ $ x ¼ unitSeg Þ : 3 . Add to the blend all the DMAP versions of all the laws in the second table ( the laws covered by the analogy ) that include only predicates that are part of the signa - ture of the blend introduced in the last step . 4 . Try to import more predicates and laws from DMAP , while maintaining the goal to preserve consistency . Sim - ilarly , try to import laws from OCF , writing ‘ = ’ instead of matches in the case , where matches behaves as a con - gruence with respect to any new signature symbol involved . In particular , assuming that the laws of OFC include ( or are enough to deduce ) that 8 The axiom / 4 includes the subformula smallestWhOb ( x ) , while l 00 4 includes the subformula x = unitSeg ( something of the form P ( x , c ) , where P is equality and the constant c is unitSeg ) . One of the higher - order anti - uniﬁcation legal forms of substitution allows to anti - unify P ( x , c ) and smallestWhOb ( x ) into something of the form Q ( x ) , which is what appears in the generalisation theory that is created together with the alignments . 262 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 8 O 1 ; O 0 1 ; O 2 ; O 0 2 ðð matches ð O 1 ; O 0 1 Þ ^ matches ð O 2 ; O 0 2 ÞÞ ! ð half ð O 1 ; O 2 Þ $ half ð O 0 1 ; O 0 2 ÞÞÞ ; try to include half in the signature of the blend , together with laws / 6 . At the level of its theory , the resulting conceptual blend in this case turns out to be an expansion of DMAP with the equivalences induced by the alignments of the ﬁrst table above , and all the laws of OCF that did not have an ana - logical counterpart according to the second table . All in all , this example can also be seen as a case of a rich analog - ical transfer from DMAP to OCF . However , the strategy described here can be generalised straightforwardly to a general setting , where not necessarily all laws of the source and input domains may be imported to the conceptual blend . In the process of construction of this second conceptual blend we can ( see before ) distinguish a stage of exploration ( given by the ﬁnding of analogical mappings ) , the formula - tion of a goal ( here based on the conjecture that matches is some kind of equality ) , the working towards fulﬁlling the goal , and a last stage of discovery in the conceptual blend . In particular , it is true in this blend ( in the domain of paths ) that certain distances exist , namely all those whose construction can be described by a quantiﬁer free , closed formula in the theory of the blend . 9 Those points are pre - cisely the ones corresponding to the rational numbers of the form n / 2 k for some n ; k 2 N . 4 . 5 . Some comments We have given an account , supported by a partial imple - mentation , of how diﬀerent underlying concepts of number may be blended . Some comments are needed on how this HDTP presentation relates to Goguen’s characterisation , and also on the comparison with re - representation ideas from the structure mapping community . Our presentation is an instantiation of Goguen’s account of conceptual blending in the following way . The computed generic spaces are mapped to input spaces via substitutions , which correspond to signature morphisms in Goguen’s approach ( here , working in the category of sorted ﬁrst - order logic ) with slight extensions , where re - representation in the sense of Yan , Forbus , and Gentner ( 2003 ) allows logically equivalent forms to be employed to reveal the structural similarity . At any event , these maps preserve inference patterns from one space to another . The blend spaces in HDTP introduce explicit equiva - lences between syntax that has been aligned via the generic space . Goguen’s approach , where the diagram commutes , enforces a choice between the syntax of the given spaces ; the approach here is simply a deﬁnitional extension of Goguen’s characterisation , where the syntaxes are inter - changeable . Cognitively , there may be reason to prefer one syntax or indeed invent some new term . For given generic spaces and mappings to input spaces , Goguen suggests that the conceptual blend should be a push - out in category theoretic terms . This is the most gen - eral space that can be obtained from combining the given spaces , while respecting the shared generic properties . ( This is a version of the ‘maximal structurally consistent’ combi - nation of Yan et al . ( 2003 ) ) . At various points , the description above calls for assur - ances that some posited space is logically consistent . We are aware that this is undecidable in general , so what does this assurance call for ? On the one hand , in simple cases , proofs of inconsistency can be found relatively easily . On the other hand , another aspect of our approach which we do not have space to elaborate on here , involves not only considering syntactic structure , but also relating operations over syntax to semantic characterisations of the situations described by these theories . In the case at hand , we can model the OBJECT CONSTRUCTION space ( for example ) via appropriate data - types and eﬀective functions . Then an assurance of consistency may come from the existence of a model , in these terms , for a given conjectured theory . For general accounts of this semantic counterpart to the work described above see Goguen ( 2006 ) and Krumnack , Gust , Schwering , and Ku¨hnberger ( 2010 ) . Finally , we have described methods for constructing conceptual blends and heuristics for constraining the search for these blends . There is a family resemblance with the methods and heuristics of Yan et al . ( 2003 ) . The blend - ing operations here give a principled way to investigate sit - uations , where a variety of blend spaces can be brought into play alongside and related to the initial spaces . 5 . Conclusions Although there already exist a number of computational systems for discovering mathematical concepts , none of these systems takes into account cognitive aspects involved in mathematical discoveries . We started from the basic con - ceptions of Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez ( 2000 ) , who lay out how ele - mentary arithmetic is grounded in concrete , physical domains , and of Fauconnier and Turner ( 2002 ) , who describe a general framework of conceptual blending . Both conceptions are presented in a non - computational manner , and Fauconnier and Turner ( 2008 , p . 59 ) even state explic - itly that ‘blending is not algorithmic’ . We , however , think that the overall framework of conceptual blending is indeed suited for a computational account . This account is similar to Goguen’s ( 2006 ) approach , but we used the analogy engine HDTP as our point of departure . We used HDTP to compute a generalisation of a source and a target domain and extended HDTP in such a way that a conceptual blend can be computed based on the ana - 9 When we talk here about existence of the points or distances , we have in mind an idea of existence of numbers close ( but not identical ) to that used by early Greeks ( e . g . Pythagoreans ) , who required the existence of a construction based on certain geometrical rules in order to accept a distance as a number . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 263 logical relation between a source and a target domain that goes beyond simple structural alignment . The examples that we discussed are three of the four basic metaphors for arithmetic by Lakoﬀ and Nu´n˜ez ( 2000 ) that ground ele - mentary arithmetic in concrete , physical domains : OBJECT CONSTRUCTION , MEASURING STICK and MOTION ALONG A PATH . A main point of this paper is that conceptual blending is an important means for making new discoveries in mathe - matics , cf . also Alexander ( 2009 ) . Creating analogies and making analogical transfers is insuﬃcient for this purpose . A motivating , non - mathematical case is the conceptual blending of the concepts HOUSE and BOAT into HOUSEBOAT and BOATHOUSE , where it is highly implausible to abandon the original conceptual spaces for HOUSE and BOAT once the more complex concepts have been created via blending . And for mathematics , Fauconnier and Turner ( 2002 ) make this point for blending notions of number which are dis - crete in one case and dense in another . In the case we dis - cussed in this paper , it seems quite sensible that notions of equality ( equivalence ) of fractions should exists side by side that say that 1 / 2 and 2 / 4 are diﬀerent ( because they are constructed from diﬀerent numbers ) as well as the same ( because they correspond to the same rational number ) . This , however , can only be done if the two notions exist in diﬀerent conceptual spaces , because , otherwise , the rep - resentation would be inconsistent . Future work will now include continuing to implement the conception we laid out in this paper , which in particular will involve applying our approach to a larger number of case studies and identifying which of the mentioned heuris - tics will be the most fruitful for mathematical discovery . Acknowledgments We would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for the comments and suggestions we received . Markus Guhe , Alison Pease and Alan Smaill were were supported by EPSRC Grant EP / F035594 / 1 for the Wheel - barrow project . References Alexander , J . ( 2009 ) . Mathematical blending . Working Paper . Case Western Reserve University . Arnauld , A . , & Nicole , P . ( 1683 ) . La logique , ou l’art de penser . Paris : G . Desprez . Arzarello , F . , Andriano , V . , Olivero , F . , & Robutti , O . ( 1998 ) . Abduction and conjecturing in mathematics . Philosophica , 61 . Colton , S . ( 2002 ) . Automated theory formation in pure mathematics . Springer - Verlag . Corﬁeld , D . ( 2003 ) . Towards a philosophy of real mathematics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Epstein , S . L . ( 1988 ) . Learning and discovery : One system’s search for mathematical knowledge . Computational Intelligence , 4 , 42 – 53 . Fajtlowicz , S . ( 1988 ) . On conjectures of graﬃti . Discrete Mathematics , 72 , 113 – 118 . Fauconnier , G . , & Turner , M . ( 2002 ) . The way we think : Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complexities . New York : Basic Books . Fauconnier , G . , & Turner , M . ( 2008 ) . Rethinking metaphor . In R . Gibbs ( Ed . ) , Cambridge handbook of metaphor and thought ( pp . 53 – 66 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , Bowdle , B . F . , Wolﬀ , P . , & Boronat , C . ( 2001 ) . Metaphor is like analogy . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 199 – 253 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Goguen , J . ( 2006 ) . Mathematical models of cognitive space and time . In D . Andler , Y . Ogawa , M . Okada , & S . Watanabe ( Eds . ) , Reasoning and cognition : Proceedings of the interdisciplinary conference on reasoning and cognition ( pp . 125 – 128 ) . Keio University Press . Gray , J . ( 1992 ) . The nineteenth century revolution in mathematical ontology . In D . Gillies ( Ed . ) , Revolutions in mathematics ( pp . 226 – 248 ) . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Guhe , M . , Pease , A . , Smaill , A . , Schmidt , M . , Gust , H . , Ku¨hnberger , K . - U . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Mathematical reasoning with higher - order anti - unifcation . In Proceedings of the 32st annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Harris , J . ( 1992 ) . Developments in algebraic geometry . In Proceedings of the AMC centennial symposium . Providence : A . M . S . Publications . Hofstadter , D . R . , & Mitchell , M . ( 1994 ) . The copycat project : A model of mental ﬂuidity and analogy - making . In K . Holyoak & J . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Analogical connections . Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory ( Vol . 2 , pp . 31 – 112 ) . Ablex Publishing Corporation . Kaplan , R . ( 2000 ) . The nothing that is : A natural history of zero . USA : Oxford University Press . Keane , M . ( 1990 ) . Incremental analogizing : Theory and model . In K . J . Gilhooly , M . G . T . Keane , R . H . Logie , & G . E . Erdos ( Eds . ) , Lines of thinking : Reﬂections on the psychology of thought : Representation , reasoning , analogy and decision making ( pp . 221 – 235 ) . Chichester , UK : John Wiley and Sons . Krumnack , U . , Gust , H . , Schwering , A . , & Ku¨hnberger , K . - U . ( 2010 ) . Remarks on the meaning of analogical relations . In M . Hutter , E . Baum , & E . Kitzelmann ( Eds . ) , Artiﬁcial General Intelligence , 3rd international conference AGI . Atlantis Press . Krumnack , U . , Schwering , A . , Gust , H . , & Ku¨hnberger , K . - U . ( 2007 ) . Restricted higher - order anti - uniﬁcation for analogy making . In AI 2007 : Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Lecture notes in artiﬁcial intelligence ( Vol . 4830 , pp . 273 – 282 ) . Berlin : Springer . Lakatos , I . ( 1976 ) . Proofs and refutations . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Lakoﬀ , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Lakoﬀ , G . , & Nu´n˜ez , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Where mathematics comes from : How the embodied mind brings mathematics into being . New York : Basic Books . Lenat , D . ( 1976 ) . AM : An artiﬁcial intelligence approach to discovery in mathematics . Ph . D . thesis , Stanford University . Mancosu , P . ( 2008 ) . The philosophy of mathematical practice . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Nersessian , N . J . ( 2008 ) . Creating scientiﬁc concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Newell , A . ( 1990 ) . Uniﬁed theories of cognition : The William James lectures , 1987 . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Plotkin , G . D . ( 1970 ) . A note on inductive generalization . Machine Intelligence , 5 , 153 – 163 . Polya , G . ( 1954 ) . Mathematics and plausible reasoning . Induction and analogy in mathematics ( Vol . 1 ) . Princeton University Press . Polya , G . ( 1962 ) . Mathematical discovery . New York : John Wiley and Sons . Schwering , A . , Krumnack , U . , Ku¨hnberger , K . - U . , & Gust , H . ( 2009 ) . Syntactic principles of heuristic - driven theory projection . Journal of Cognitive Systems Research , 10 , 251 – 269 . 264 M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 Sims , M . , & Bresina , J . ( 1989 ) . Discovering mathematical operator deﬁnitions . In Proceedings of the sixth international workshop on machine learning . S . F . , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . Stewart , I . ( 2007 ) . Why beauty is truth : The history of symmetry . NY , USA : Basic Books . Tappenden , J . ( 2008 ) . Mathematical concepts and deﬁnitions . In P . Mancosu ( Ed . ) , The philosophy of mathematical practice ( pp . 256 – 275 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Tarski , A . ( 1959 ) . What is elementary geometry ? In L . Henkin , P . Suppes , & A . Tarski ( Eds . ) , The axiomatic method , with special reference to geometry and physics ( pp . 16 – 29 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland Pub - lishing Company . Yan , J . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . A theory of representation in analogical mapping . In Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society . Lawrence Erlsbaum . M . Guhe et al . / Cognitive Systems Research 12 ( 2011 ) 249 – 265 265