1 Transfer of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective , pages 1 – 51 Copyright © 2005 by Information Age Publishing All rights of reproduction in any form reserved . EFFICIENCY AND INNOVATION IN TRANSFER Daniel L . Schwartz Stanford University John D . Bransford University of Washington David Sears Stanford University ABSTRACT The transfer literature includes a variety of seemingly conﬂicting perspec - tives . Some argue that transfer is rare ; others argue that transfer is ubiqui - tous ; still others worry that transfer is an unworkable concept . Is the transfer literature ﬁlled with inherently contradictory claims , or is there a framework that can help illuminate how and why the varied positions on transfer are each pieces of the truth that can be reconciled through a broader theoretical foundation ? We argue for the latter . To develop our ideas , we divide the chapter into four sections that : ( a ) Rethink the classic deﬁnition of transfer and show how it tends to misdiagnose important forms of knowing . ( b ) Dif - CHAPTER 1 IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 1 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 2 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS ferentiate “transferring in” to situations from “transferring out” of them . ( c ) Discuss studies that show that new ways to think about transferring “in” and “out” can reveal advantages of interactive instructional techniques that remain hidden from more traditional measures . ( d ) Propose a tentative learning and performance space that differentiates two dimensions of trans - fer—innovation and efﬁciency—and provide an example of what research on optimal trajectories through this space might look like . We end with some potential next steps , including new thoughts about assessments that comple - ment but go beyond many standardized tests . INTRODUCTION As cognitive scientists who design and evaluate instructional interventions , we are often asked whether our classroom work has taught us anything that informs our basic understanding of cognition . One answer to this question is that classroom research has led us to question prevailing methodological and theoretical approaches to transfer ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . For example , in a recent meeting with several school superintendents , we asked what , if anything , they wished we could help their children learn . The surprisingly unanimous answer ( they were surprised as well ) was that they wanted us to help students make their own choices in the future . They wanted the students to be able to “learn for themselves” and make informed decisions . They believed that well - designed school experiences could transfer to help children continue to learn once they left school . Ideally , strategies for achieving these goals would be clariﬁed by intro - ducing the superintendents to the research literature on learning and transfer . But this literature is ﬁlled with a variety of seemingly conﬂicting perspectives . Some argue that it is very difﬁcult to ﬁnd evidence for trans - fer ( e . g . , Detterman , 1993 ) . Others argue that transfer is ubiquitous , if we know where to look for it ( e . g . , Dyson , 1999 ) . Still others worry that trans - fer is an unworkable concept ( e . g . , Hammer , Elby , Scherr , & Redish , Chapter 3 , this volume ) . Carraher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) , for example , argue that the beneﬁts of improving the concept of transfer are too small to outweigh its metaphorical baggage . Pessimism about transfer has led many educators to attempt to avoid transfer problems by instructing peo - ple in the particular situations where the target skills and knowledge will be utilized , and by building cues for transfer into the environment . Dun - bar ( 1997 ) , for example , found that biologists have databases for retriev - ing near analogies that serve as transfer candidates to explain novel ﬁndings . So , support for analogical transfer has been “built into” these people’s worlds . Is the transfer literature ﬁlled with inherently contradictory claims , or is there a framework that can help illuminate how and why the varied posi - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 2 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 3 tions on transfer are each pieces of the truth that can be reconciled through a broader theoretical foundation ? We argue for the latter and use an analogy involving well - known proverbs . Consider “Many hands make light work” versus “Too many cooks spoil the broth” ; “Look before you leap” versus “He who hesitates is lost” ; “Absence makes the heart grow fonder” versus “Out of sight , out of mind . ” On the surface they contradict one another ( Bransford & Stein , 1993 ) . But if we look below the surface we can begin to see that each seems applicable in certain contexts ( e . g . , “Many hands make light work” is appropriate when tasks are well deﬁned and can be modularized so that the pursuit of each can proceed independently ) . Our goal is to provide a framework that helps reconcile seemingly conﬂict - ing views about transfer . To develop our ideas , we divide the chapter into ﬁve sections that : 1 . Rethink the classic deﬁnition of transfer and show how it tends to produce assessments that make people “look dumb” rather than “look smart” ( Norman , 1993 ) . 2 . Differentiate “transferring in” to situations from “transferring out” of them . 3 . Discuss studies that show that new ways to think about transferring “in” and “out” can reveal advantages of a variety of interactive instructional techniques that remain hidden when we use more tra - ditional measures . 4 . Propose a tentative learning and performance space that differenti - ates two dimensions of transfer—innovation and efﬁciency—and provide an example of what research might look like that explores optimal trajectories of learning and development through the inno - vation - efﬁciency space . 5 . Summarize our arguments and suggest some possible future direc - tions , including new ways to create learning and assessment environ - ments that complement but go beyond many frequently used assessments tests . CLASSIC DEFINITIONS AND MEASURES OF TRANSFER AND HOW THEY MAKE US “LOOK DUMB” The book Transfer on Trial ( Detterman & Sternberg , 1993 ) provided a timely and important focus on transfer as a major issue in need of clariﬁca - tion . In the introductory chapter , Detterman writes the following : “most studies fail to ﬁnd transfer … and those studies claiming transfer can only be said to have found transfer by the most generous of criteria and would not meet the classical deﬁnition of transfer” ( p . 15 ) . He describes the clas - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 3 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 4 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS sic deﬁnition of transfer as “the degree to which a behavior will be repeated in a new situation” ( p . 4 ) . If transfer is as difﬁcult to demonstrate as Detterman describes , it raises serious questions about how we frame our educational goals . We believe that the classic deﬁnition of transfer is too narrow . Accepting it results in many cases that appear to show “failed transfer , ” because peo - ple do not apply the identical procedures they learned previously when in a new transfer context . Lave ( 1988 ) , for example , found that educated adults did not apply school - based algorithms to make shopping compari - sons . Based on this evidence , she argued that transfer does not occur across cultural settings ( e . g . , from school to everyday life ) . Given the classic deﬁnition of transfer , Lave’s arguments make great sense . Moving beyond the classic “stimulus generalization” view of transfer ( where an old response is performed in a new context ) provides some new ways to think about transfer . For example , imagine helping people learn about different pairs of scissors like those illustrated in Figure 1 . 1 . One group simply memorizes letter names for each pair of scissors . A second is helped to explore carefully how the structure of each pair of scissors is designed to support particular kinds of functions ( e . g . , the ﬂat bottom blade of A allows dressmakers to rest the blade on the table when cutting ; the long handle of E creates extra leverage for cutting hard substances ) . For a transfer assessment , the two groups might receive a new task where they need to use a pair of scissors , and receive a large set of options from which to choose . When appropriate , we assume that the group that was helped to focus on structure – function relations would be more likely to choose a new pair of better - adapted scissors rather than merely repeat an Figure 1 . 1 . Noticing function – structure relations in scissors ( Bransford & McCar - rel , 1974 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 4 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 5 old choice . It seems to us that we want to include these kinds of “modiﬁed responses in new contexts” as instances of transfer . If we apply this line of thinking to Lave’s ﬁndings about the mathematical practices of shoppers , we might argue that the shoppers’ experiences with school - taught mathematics may have helped them invent or more quickly learn new techniques that were suited to a shopping context . Data exist sug - gesting that this line of thinking has merit ( e . g . , Beach , 1999 ) . Schleimann and Acioly ( 1989 ) , for example , compared Brazilian bookies with different levels of schooling . Although all of them used similar procedures for rou - tine bets , the bookies with more schooling were more ﬂexible and could generate methods for handling novel problems . These are correlational studies , of course . However , a number of experimentally controlled studies also suggest that the degree of ﬂexible adaptation to new settings is related to the degree to which concepts , procedures , and tool designs are under - stood by learners rather than simply learned by rote ( e . g . , Adams et al . , 1988 ; Bransford et al . , 2000 ; Judd , 1908 ; Wertheimer , 1959 ) . Even expanding the classic deﬁnition of transfer to include “ﬂexible adaptation of old responses to new settings” is , in our view , still too restric - tive a framework for exploring issues of transfer . The reason is that most studies of transfer also include an unnecessary constraint that stems from measuring people’s abilities to directly apply what they have learned previ - ously in new settings ( see Hammer et al . , Chapter 3 , this volume , for a dif - ferent perspective on this theme ) . Tests of the “direct application” view typically place people in sequestered environments where they have no access to “contaminating” information sources other than what they have learned previously , and where they receive no chances to learn by trying out an idea and revising as necessary . An alternative to the “direct applica - tion” view of transfer and its associated “sequestered problem - solving” ( SPS ) assessments is one that expands the deﬁnition of transfer to include “preparation for future learning” ( PFL ) ( see Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . As we argue below , this is a very simple change in the deﬁnition of transfer but its implications for designing effective learning experiences and mea - suring their effects are actually quite major . We want to reiterate a point made in our earlier writings on transfer ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) , namely , that we are by no means claiming that we are inventing the idea of PFL transfer . Exceptions to the use of the “sequestered problem - solving” paradigm have been around for a long time . They occur primarily in the skill acquisition literature , where it makes no sense to expect people to transfer without opportunities for more learning ( e . g . , to transfer from word processing program A to pro - gram B ) . When people’s abilities to learn new skills are assessed , one often ﬁnds negative transfer initially , with positive transfer showing up after a number of learning trials ( e . g . , Sander & Richard , 1997 ; Singley & Ander - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 5 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 6 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS son , 1989 ) . However , in most studies that involve conceptual transfer , par - ticipants receive a single trial to solve a problem and receive neither feedback nor opportunities to revise . In our earlier article , we noted that we found ourselves slipping between these different views of transfer ( SPS vs . PFL ) without noticing it , and that making the differences explicit had a major , generative effect on our thinking about educational issues . Our con - jecture was that we were not the only ones in the ﬁeld who were switching between SPS and PFL thinking without realizing it . So , one of the goals of our original article was to make this distinction clear . One of the implications of a switch from SPS to PFL thinking links to Norman’s ( 1993 ) work on designs that “make us look smart” versus “make us look dumb . ” Many SPS assessments of learning ( based on “direct appli - cation” views of transfer ) make people look much “dumber” ( or “less edu - cated” ) than is actually the case . Wineburg ( 2004 ) discusses how the use of psychometric principles for test construction can provide information about learning that makes outcomes look disappointing . In the discussion below , we provide additional examples of ways that SPS assessments can make people “look dumb . ” Burgess’s Original Eagle Challenge The idea that SPS measures of transfer can make people “look dumb” is nicely illustrated by an experiment designed and conducted by Kay Bur - gess that was discussed in our earlier article on rethinking transfer ( Brans - ford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . In the discussion below , we remind the reader of the original study and discuss a recent extension . Burgess gave groups of ﬁfth - graders and college students the problem of developing a statewide recovery plan to increase the bald eagles in their state . None of the students had studied eagle recovery plans before . The study was meant to see if the college students’ general educational experi - ences would transfer to solve this problem . The ﬁrst part of the transfer task involved sequestered problem solving ; people were asked to directly apply anything they knew from the past to solve this problem . The college students and the ﬁfth - graders gave answers to this problem that were totally unworkable . Eagle recovery is a difﬁcult problem , so it is not surprising that they did poorly . Still , it would have been comforting to see that the college students did a better job than the ﬁfth - graders . The college students’ plans were written with better sentence structure and punctuation , but they were still so far from the expert model that their answers had to be counted as almost totally wrong . For the second part of her experiment , Burgess moved from a test of sequestered problem solving to a test that provided at least an initial indi - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 6 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 7 cation of how well people were prepared for subsequent learning . Here , she asked the students to generate questions that they would like to have answered to help them learn more about eagle recovery plans . Under these conditions , major differences between the ﬁfth - graders and college stu - dents were revealed . The ﬁfth - graders’ questions focused on isolated eagle traits ( What do they like to eat ? What size are they ? What kinds of trees do they live in ? ) . The college students asked system - level questions about the relation between eagles and their habitat ( What kinds of ecosystems support eagles ? Do other animals need to be recovered to repopulate eagles ? What caused problems for the eagles in the ﬁrst place ? ) . The questions generated by the college students were much more sophisticated and should ultimately provide better guides for future learn - ing than the questions asked by the ﬁfth - graders . Nevertheless , even the ﬁfth - graders’ questions revealed that they knew more about survival than “nothing” ( which is what they scored on the ﬁrst test of SPS transfer ) . Even this simple shift toward question generation provided a picture of peoples’ competencies that , in Norman’s words ( 1993 ) , can move us from “dumb” to “competent . ” An Extension of the Eagle Challenge Burgess’s Eagle Challenge was recently used in workshops with several groups of K – 12 principals who were ﬁrst asked to generate possible solu - tions based on their existing knowledge . Except for one person who had been a biology teacher , the principals were unable to generate workable recovery plans . Example solutions that they generated included ﬁnding adult eagles from more populous areas and bringing them to the state , rais - ing baby eagles in zoo - like environments and then releasing them , and so forth . These solutions reveal transfer in the sense that the responses rely on previous knowledge about repopulating animals ( e . g . , moving wolves or bears to new areas in the wild ) . These analogies are faulty , however , because they do not take into account a host of important considerations that apply to eagles ( e . g . , eagles imprint on their territory and on humans ) . According to the transfer literature , the use of these analogies would count as instances of “negative transfer . ” So again , the SPS assess - ment made people “look dumb . ” Despite their dismal failure on the SPS assessment , the second part of the exercise demonstrated a number of strengths of the principals . Instead of asking the principals what questions they would like answered , as in the ﬁrst study , they were asked to say what they would do to learn to solve the problem . A very important ﬁnding was that the principals were cautious IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 7 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 8 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS about their analogies and did not presume their prior knowledge was sufﬁ - cient to solve the problem . This “resistance to premature assimilation” is an extremely important aspect of transfer that is often overlooked in the literature . High conﬁdence coupled with low “competence” is a dangerous combination for the prospect of future learning . The principals’ tentative conﬁdence ( a better term is probably “high cautiousness” ) was a deﬁnite strength . It motivated them to continue to learn rather than to go with their existing ideas . For example , they spontaneously started to use the wireless network that was available to them to ﬁnd relevant information , and they were making headway to a solution as the workshop ended . The principals also generated questions and made suggestions that went considerably beyond those suggested by the college students . Examples included concerns about how to get the community to support and sustain the eagle recovery efforts , plus thoughts about social networks of people whom they knew to have relevant knowledge and skills . These seem to be clear examples of transfer based on the principals’ experiences of working with the community to implement and sustain changes . Most college stu - dents have not had these kinds of experiences and very few students men - tioned points like this . Overall , everyone who participated in the Eagle Challenge ( ﬁfth - grad - ers , college students , principals ) looked a lot “smarter” on the PFL mea - sures than on the SPS measures that are typically used in conjunction with the “direct application” view of transfer . It is noteworthy that most high - stakes achievement tests are also SPS measures , and they too may be under - estimating our students’ abilities to continue to learn throughout their life - time . We return to this issue at the end of the chapter . For now , however , our goal is not to claim that PFL measures show that education is better than we thought and hence we can rest on our laurels . Instead , our goal is to use new ways of thinking about and measuring transfer to explore the effectiveness of teaching , learning , and assessment strategies that may look poor from an SPS perspective , yet , in reality , have the potential to greatly improve people’s motivations and abilities to learn throughout life . TRANSFERRING IN TO VERSUS TRANSFERRING OUT OF LEARNING SITUATIONS Broudy’s Three Kinds of Knowing In our earlier writing , we referred to Broudy ( 1977 ) , who discusses three kinds of knowing . With concerns similar to the superintendents discussed at the beginning of this chapter , Broudy has attempted to understand the IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 8 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 9 kinds of educational experiences that prepare students for life rather than simply for test taking : Ever since formal schooling was established , it has been assumed that knowl - edge acquired in school would be used to enhance the quality of human life . The investment in schools was supposed to yield a return in the form of greater adequacy in occupational , civic , and personal development . ( p . 2 ) Broudy ( 1977 ) discusses the “replicative , ” “applicative , ” and “interpre - tive” aspects of knowing and notes that most assessments have focused almost exclusively on the ﬁrst two . For example , he argues that students rapidly forget the facts that they learn in school , hence they do poorly as measured by tests of “replicative” knowing . He also argues that most stu - dents have difﬁculty applying previously acquired knowledge to solve new ( transfer ) problems ; hence they do poorly in what he calls “applicative knowing . ” In fact , Broudy emphasizes that a sole reliance on replicative and applicative tests of knowing lead to the conclusion that schooling has very disappointing effects on lifelong learning . Replicative and applicative tests make school “look dumb , ” and there is pressure to provide more memorization and procedural training so students do better on those types of tests . However , Broudy proposes a third aspect of knowing called the “interpretive , ” which he considers an important but neglected outcome of schooling . For many new situations , people do not have sufﬁcient memories , sche - mas , or procedures to solve a problem , but they do have interpretations that shape how they begin to make sense of the situation . We know from a number of literatures—including the perceptual learning literature , the expertise literature , the problem - solving literature , and the cognitive ther - apy literature—that what one notices about new situations and how one frames problems has major effects on subsequent thinking and cognitive processing ( e . g . , Bassok & Holyoak , 1989 ; Bransford & Stein , 1993 ; Chi , Feltovich , & Glaser , 1981 ; deGroot , 1965 ; Gibson & Gibson , 1955 ; Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ; Marton & Booth , 1997 ; National Research Council [ NRC ] , 2000 ; Schuyler , 2003 ) . This ( we believe ) is a major part of what Broudy meant by the interpretive . Broudy also argued that an increase in the sophistication of one’s interpretations by no means guarantees that one can immediately come up with concrete applications of the ideas that underlie these more sophisticated interpretations . For example , knowing about imprinting is probably insufﬁcient for resolving the eagle challenge , but this information can provide important guidelines for learning to solve the challenge . Moreover , people are often unable to articulate explicitly the particular ideas that changed their interpretations ; hence Broudy’s emphasis on “knowing with” information even if they cannot remember IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 9 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 10 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS acquiring speciﬁc facts ( “knowing that” ) or remember how to carry out a particular set of actions ( “knowing how” ) . How Traditional Transfer Assessments Miss Interpretive Knowing Broudy’s analysis is important for several reasons . One is that it high - lights that traditional answers to the “what gets transferred” question have been restricted by an emphasis on replicative and applicative measures . These two “direct application” measures typically identify discrete memo - ries and mature concepts or skills . Broudy’s emphasis on interpretive know - ing points to other forms of knowing that are involved in transfer but that are unlikely to reveal themselves in SPS assessments . Broudy argues that evaluating interpretive knowing can demonstrate positive beneﬁts of school practices for most people . The eagle challenge results that were discussed earlier can help clarify Broudy’s arguments . When the ﬁfth - graders , college students , and princi - pals solved the eagle challenge in an SPS paradigm , they were far from a correct solution . They had not explicitly studied this topic before , so they had no way to use replicative knowing . Ideally , the rich educational and real - world experiences of the college students and principals would have had some degree of measurable impact on their ability to apply previously acquired knowledge to solve the challenge ( applicative knowing ) . Peo - ple’s responses indicated that there were indeed strong inﬂuences of pre - viously acquired knowledge . They all looked like an instance of “negative transfer” rather than “positive transfer . ” So , things looked bleak . But when Burgess began to explore how people interpreted the eagle challenge , as revealed by the kinds of questions they asked and strategies for new learn - ing , she found important differences in interpretive knowing . Unlike SPS measures of transfer , PFL measures allow us to see people’s initial inter - pretations . The college students and principals brought more sophisti - cated questions , plus knowledge of how to use technology and social networks of expertise . We also found that the instances of negative trans - fer ( e . g . , treating the eagle problem like a “repopulate the wolves” prob - lem ) were lightly held conjectures . The principals did not interpret the analogies they suggested to be perfect applications ; they were cautious and continued to check their assumptions . This willingness to question and even “let go” of initial assumptions is an extremely important aspect of “adaptive expertise” ( e . g . , Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ; Wineburg , 1998 ) that we discuss in more detail later on . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 10 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 11 The Signiﬁcance of Interpretive Knowing for “Transferring In” A second important aspect of Broudy’s interpretive knowing is that it focuses on analyzing “seeds for new learning” rather than on direct appli - cation . When people do not have full - blown skills that they can apply directly to solve a problem , they need to learn , and their interpretations play a large role . For example , in the eagle challenge , Burgess’s assump - tion was that the adults’ superior interpretive knowing ( as revealed by their questions ) would put them on a path that would make it more likely that they would learn to solve the eagle challenge ( given further opportunities to interact and to access additional resources ) . Burgess did not have the time to actually allow people to learn and track their progress , so the enhanced potential for learning is only an inference from this study . As we show below , however , other studies are beginning to show that enhanced learning does indeed occur when people have an opportunity to develop the interpretive knowledge that prepares them to learn . An emphasis on interpretive knowing and the need for further learning suggests the need for different research paradigms for studying transfer . The traditional view of transfer ( see , e . g . , Detterman , 1993 ; Hammer et al . , Chapter 3 , this volume ) has treated transfer as something that happens after a particular type of learning experience . We refer to this as an empha - sis on “transferring out” of situations . From this perspective , the paradigm for studying transfer is illustrated in Figure 1 . 2 . People not only “transfer out” of situations to solve problems , they “transfer in” to situations to learn ( Schwartz & Nasir , 2003 ) . The ways and interpretations that people transfer in can have major effects on their learning and subsequent abilities to “transfer out” from that learning . Whenever we assert that new learning builds on previous learning , we are assuming that some sort of transfer is involved ( see , e . g . , NRC , 2000 ) . Figure 1 . 2 . The standard “transfer out” methodology ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 11 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 12 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS In the basic research literature , issues of “transfer in” are often handled by attempting to control for them . For example , Ebbinghaus ( 1913 ) knew that prior knowledge affected subsequent learning so he invented non - sense syllables to control for this potential confound . Bartlett ( 1932 ) argued that people spontaneously tried to make sense of the nonsense syl - lables , hence using them to study learning and memory simply increased the variance of interpretations ( compared to using stimuli like high fre - quency words where particular normative properties tended to hold for most people ) . In educational settings , researchers need to focus on learning aca - demic content ; hence , it becomes crucial to ask what learners bring to a situation as they begin their learning ( Lobato , 2003 ; NRC , 2000 ) . Research on preconceptions provides an example of paying attention to what people transfer in because it will profoundly affect what they learn ( see , e . g . , Clement , 1993 ; Mestre , 1994 ; Mestre , Thaden - Koch , Dufresne , & Gerace , in press ; Minstrell , 1989 ; Redish , in press ) . Similarly , research on peoples’ interactions with computers and media suggest that they bring many assumptions about the nature of human interactions to their interpretations and interactions ( e . g . , Biswas , Schwartz , Bransford , & TAGV , 2001 ; Reeves & Nass , 1996 ) . Different views about the frequency of transfer ( we noted earlier that some say it is ubiquitous while others say it is rare ) seem correlated with the degree to which researchers are focusing on the processes involved in transferring “in” to a learning situation versus transferring “out” for subse - quent problem solving . For example , the preconception literature noted above focuses on “transfer in . ” In a lovely example with young children , Vosniadou and Brewer ( 1992 ) show how children combine their percep - tual experiences of a ﬂat world to make creatively erroneous , though understandable , mental models of the claim that the world is round . Simi - larly , Dyson ( 1999 ) provides compelling examples of how children regu - larly transfer knowledge of popular culture into school tasks when thinking about social and literary issues . In contrast , many who lament the large number of transfer failures ( e . g . , Detterman , 1993 ) focus primarily on “transfer out” where people fail to apply acquired knowledge to solve a new problem with different surface features . A major challenge for educators is exploring how to make both transfer in and transfer out productive . When we change from a traditional SPS to PFL view of transfer , we change at least two major factors simultaneously . One is to include an emphasis on Broudy’s ( 1977 ) “interpretive” aspects of knowing , and the second involves considering both the “transfer out” of situations and the “transfer in . ” Merging Broudy’s emphasis on the interpretive aspects of knowing with the idea of “transferring in” helps differentiate the “prepara - tion for future learning” view of transfer from the “learning to learn” litera - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 12 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 13 ture ( e . g . , Weinstein , 1978 ) . The learning to learn literature is important , but it tends to stress content - independent strategies for learning informa - tion presented by others ( e . g . , mnemonic techniques , knowledge organiza - tion techniques ) , and it underemphasizes the important role of content knowledge for shaping people’s interpretations of new situations . Broudy provides an example of the importance of knowledge for interpreting new problems : The concept of bacterial infection as learned in biology can operate even if only a skeletal notion of the theory and the facts supporting it can be recalled . Yet , we are told of cultures in which such a concept would not be part of the interpretive schemata . ( p . 12 ) The absence of an idea of bacterial infection should have a strong effect on the nature of the hypotheses that people entertain to explain various ill - nesses . Hence , it would affect their abilities to learn more about causes of illness through further research and study , and the strategies they would use to solve new problems ( e . g . , reading a biblical text versus looking for vectors of communicability ) . Having accessible knowledge of imprinting in eagles—both with respect to establishing their partners ( other eagles vs . humans ) and their territories—would presumably have similar , beneﬁcial effects on the initial thoughts ( interpretations ) people would have about Burgess’s eagle challenge . In addition , being aware of the “assumptive nature of knowing” and holding one’s ideas “tentatively” pending further investigation is an extremely important part of people’s interpretations of new situations . It is noteworthy that these aspects of knowing are rarely revealed when our assessments focus only on SPS measures of “transferring out” directly applicable knowledge . EXPLORING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF DIFFERENT INSTRUCTIONAL EXPERIENCES In the work discussed above , there was not a precise control of the instruc - tional conditions experienced by the participants . The studies discussed in this section give this kind of control and allow us to explore whether differ - ent measures of transfer can inﬂuence assumptions about the value of par - ticular kinds of educational experiences . Our goal is not simply to suggest that we need new measures of transfer , but also to suggest that we need to rethink the impact of different educational experiences for preparing peo - ple to learn . Our discussion in this section focuses primarily on ways that people “transfer in” to situations , which in turn affects how they learn . We ﬁrst consider how “transfer in” can be inﬂuenced by the replicative , appli - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 13 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 14 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS cative , and interpretive aspects of knowing discussed by Broudy ( 1977 ) . Then we examine how educational experiences that foster “transfer in” for learning can also lead to subsequent beneﬁts on traditional measures of “transfer out” for problem solving . Replicative Support for New Learning Savings in relearning is an example of enhanced learning based on rep - licative aspects of “transfer in . ” For example , some students may learn a topic ( e . g . , algebra , a foreign language ) faster than other students because they had learned it once before . Even if they have consciously forgotten most of it , they will often show faster learning compared to those who never studied the topic at all ( e . g . , MacLeod , 1988 ) . Interestingly , opportu - nities to relearn something are closer to PFL measures of transfer than they are to SPS measures that simply ask people to apply what they know . The importance of thinking about relearning is illustrated by a brilliant 4 - minute comedy routine by Father Guido Sarduci ( Novello , 1980 ) of Sat - urday Night Live . Father Sarduci begins by looking at the knowledge and skills that the average college graduate remembers 5 years after he or she graduates . He accepts these 5 - year - later memory performances as his stan - dard and proposes a new kind of university that will have the same out - comes . His innovation is “the Five - Minute University , ” which will cost only $ 20 . 00 . Father Sarduci notes that $ 20 might seem like a lot for only 5 min - utes , but it includes tuition , books , snacks for the 20 - second spring break , cap and gown rental , and a graduation picture . Father Sarduci provides examples of the things students remember after 5 years . If they took 2 years of college Spanish , for example , he argues that 5 years post - graduation the average student will remember only “¿Como esta usted ? ” and “Muy bien , gracias . ” So that’s all his Five - Minute University teaches . His economics course teaches only “supply and demand , ” his busi - ness course teaches “You buy something and sell it for more , ” and so forth . A video of Father Sarduci’s performance demonstrates how strongly the audience resonates to his theme of the heavy emphasis on memorization in college courses , and the subsequent high forgetting rates . Father Sarduci’s analysis of the shortcomings of many approaches to teaching hit so close to home that they should not be ignored . On the other hand , if one used a relearning test 5 years after students graduated ( as opposed to tests of replicative knowing ) , it seems probable that the advantages of a full - blown course in Spanish , economics , or other topic would provide higher savings scores ( savings in the number of trials needed to master something ) than the very brief courses offered by the Five - Minute University . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 14 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 15 Applicative Support for New Learning At other times people can be helped to “transfer in” to a task through applicative knowing . For example , Bransford and Johnson ( 1972 ) pro - vided students with a passage that included a paragraph that began : “The procedure is simple . First you divide things into groups depending on their makeup . Then you… . ” The passage was very difﬁcult to learn and remem - ber unless people were helped to access a previously acquired schema ( washing clothes ) that they could map directly into the target passage . ( Additional examples are provided by Anderson , Osborn , & Tierney , 1984 ; Dooling & Lachman , 1971 . ) Helping people “activate previously acquired schemas” is a common practice discussed in the educational literature ( see , e . g . , Anderson et al . , 1984 ) . It is noteworthy that the fact that relevant examples and schemas have been learned previously does not guarantee that they will be spontaneously applied in new settings . Work by Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) provide excellent examples of this type of phenomenon . Interpretive Support for New Learning “Transferring in” cannot always rely on access to previously acquired knowledge schemas , skill sets , or replicative facts that can easily be brought to bear on a new learning situation . To deal with this phenomenon , effec - tive teachers often help students assemble new “platforms for subsequent learning . ” Excellent examples come from Egan’s Teaching as Story Telling ( 1988 ) . Egan recently provided an example of a “count the soldiers” tale ( provided below ) that can support students’ eventual understanding of place value and bases in arithmetic . It is unlikely that students have already acquired a “count the soldiers” schema that works for the kind of learning Egan envisions . But , Egan’s story ( personal communication , March 7 , 2003 ) helps them transfer into the instruction by building on a set of con - cepts that are now integrated into a new , imaginable whole . A king wanted to count his army . He had ﬁve clueless counselors and one ingenious counselor . Each of the clueless ﬁve tried to work out a way of counting the soldiers , but came up with methods that were hopeless . One , for example , tried using tally sticks to make a count , but the soldiers kept moving around , and the count was confused . The ingenious counselor told the king to have the clueless counselors pick up 10 pebbles each . He then had them stand behind a table that was set up where the army was to march past . In front of each clueless counselor a bowl was placed . The army then began to march past the end of the table . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 15 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 16 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS As each soldier went by , the ﬁrst counselor put one pebble into his bowl . Once he had put all 10 pebbles into the bowl , he scooped them up and then continued to put one pebble down for each soldier marching by the table . He had a very busy afternoon , putting down his pebbles one by one and then scooping them up when all were in the bowl . Each time he scooped up the 10 pebbles , the clueless counselor to his left put one pebble into her bowl [ gen - der equity ] . When her ten pebbles were in her bowl , she too scooped them out again , and continued to put one back into the bowl each time the clue - less counselor to her right picked his up . The clueless counselor to her left had to watch her through the afternoon , and he put one pebble into his bowl each time she picked hers up . And so on for the remaining counselors . At the end of the afternoon , the counselor on the far left had only one pebble in his bowl , the next counselor had two , the next had seven , the next had six , and the counselor at the other end of the table , where the soldiers had marched by , had three pebbles in his bowl . So we know that the army had 12 , 763 soldiers . The king was delighted that his ingenious counselor had counted the whole army with just 50 pebbles . It is noteworthy that Egan does not assume that his “count the soldiers” story teaches place value and bases ; instead , it helps set the stage for subse - quent learning . Egan encourages teachers to follow up by having the stu - dents count the class or some other , more numerous objects using this method and eventually to change the place values from base 10 to other bases . Other educators also argue for the value of designing “meaningful” lessons that help students go beyond what is already schematized to build some kind of conceptual platform that allows them to think . The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt’s ( CTGV , 1997 ) Adventures of Jasper Woodbury provides an example . The visual narratives in the series help stu - dents “transfer in” complex real - world knowledge to motivate and anchor the ways they think about new mathematical content . But the videos by themselves are far from being “the instruction . ” They simply set the stage so that intensive , interactive problem - ﬁnding and problem - solving activities can be orchestrated by teachers and students ( see , e . g . , Barron , 2003 ; Crews et al . , 1995 ) . As we argue below , however , stories and videos are only a small subset of what may be needed to help students “transfer in . ” Assessing Transfer In with Measures of Transfer Out Evaluations of the quality of an educational experience for “transferring in” can be strongly affected by one’s measures of “transferring out . ” For example , educators are often convinced that providing opportunities for students to actively explore situations is important for learning . Terms like “discovery learning , ” “hands - on learning , ” and “experiential learning”— IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 16 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 17 although typically only loosely deﬁned—represent examples of these kinds of beliefs . From our perspective , the use of SPS measures of transfer out make it difﬁcult to ﬁnd evidence that these kinds of activities are better than just telling students what they need to learn or letting them practice a set of desired skills . But what if certain kinds of “hands - on” or “discovery” activities prepare people to transfer into new learning settings in ways that eventually produce superior learning and “transfer out” in the long run ? Tests of this conjecture require a PFL approach to assessing learning and transfer where opportunities for learning are integral components of the transfer assessment . The following sections provide examples of this approach . Do Data Analysis Activities Support Theory Learning ? In the ﬁrst example , we remind readers of an earlier study ( Schwartz & Bransford , 1998 ) that shows how developing students’ interpretive know - ing “transfers in” to help students learn from an explicit lecture , which in turn leads to better applicative knowing for a subsequent transfer task . The research arose in the context of teaching cognitive theories of memory . We had developed a model of instruction that we thought would help students “transfer in” to allow them to learn more effectively . We wanted to help undergraduates learn about various memory theories and the types of memory performances they predicted . We realized that standard textbook descriptions of experiments ( e . g . , studies of memory and schema theory ) rarely allowed students to explore raw data . To us as researchers , this kind of experience is important for understanding theories and their predic - tions . For example , whenever we read about recent psychological theories and their empirical tests , we compare them to our knowledge of data from a variety of studies we have conducted to see if there are matches and mis - matches , and whether the ﬁndings are plausible . But students who have never seen data cannot do this . Without this level of detail , we feared that students understood only superﬁcially . As an approach to solving this problem , we asked students to analyze and graph simpliﬁed data sets from classic memory experiments to ﬁnd the “interesting” patterns . Table 1 . 1 provides a sample of the data sets the students analyzed . Afterward , we asked them questions about what they had studied and compared their performance to other students who had not seen the data but had read summaries of the studies . For example , given the true – false question , “Do people tend to remember the ﬁrst thing they read ? ” , students who had graphed the data did not do well compared to students who had written a summary of a chapter on memory . Thus , by a standard ( replicative ) assessment of knowledge , our method of instruction fared poorly . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 17 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 18 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS Nevertheless , we had reasons to believe that our model of instruction would be more effective in the long run ; it would prepare students to learn from subsequent direct instruction . In particular , we thought that analyz - ing the data sets would help the students develop more differentiated knowledge that would guide their subsequent interpretation and learning from a lecture . The perceptual learning literature shows that contrasting cases , like two wines side - by - side , can help learners discern features that make the cases distinctive ( e . g . , Gibson & Gibson , 1955 ) . By analogy , we asked students to analyze sets of simpliﬁed data sets from two different experimental conditions . Combined with actively trying to graph what they found , we assumed that these activities would help prepare the students to recognize the signiﬁcance of the precise deﬁnitions , examples , and expla - nations that would appear in a formal lesson that they and the non – data analysis students would receive . To test this hypothesis , students in one condition analyzed the contrast - ing cases of data . In another condition , students read a modiﬁed book chapter that described the same studies and results ( in words and graphs ) , and provided their theoretical signiﬁcance . This latter group’s task was to write a one - to two - page summary of the important ideas in the chapter . A few days after students completed these tasks , both groups heard a com - mon lecture that explained the experiments , the results , and the theories that were designed to accommodate the results . The question was whether both groups of students had been equally prepared to learn from the lec - ture . We also included a third group that did not hear the lecture . This group also completed the data analysis activity , but instead of hearing the Table 1 . 1 . An Example of a Task for Students in the Data Analysis Condition In experiment 1 , researchers asked six people to recall a list of words learned at 1 second apiece . Here are the words in the order they were studied : car , sky , apple , book , cup , lock , coat , light , bush , iron , water , house , tape , ﬁle , glass , dog , cloud , hand , chair , bag Here are the words the subjects recalled in the order they recalled them : Sbj 1 : bag , hand , chair , cloud , sky , light Sbj 2 : bag , chair , hand , car , sky , book , house , bush Sbj 3 : hand , bag , chair , cloud , car , lock , dog Sbj 4 : bag , hand , chair , dog , car , apple , sky , water , glass Sbj 5 : bag , chair , car , iron , apple , cup , water , light Make a visual representation of the interesting patterns in the data . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 18 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 19 lecture , they analyzed the data a second time looking for any patterns they may have missed . All told , there were three conditions : Data Analysis + Lec - ture , Summarize Chapter + Lecture , Double Data Analysis . To assess whether the students learned from the lecture , we employed two assessments about a week later as part of a class exercise . The ﬁrst assessment measured transfer by asking students to read the description of a novel experiment . The students’ task was to predict as many of the out - comes from the experiment as possible . Eight possible predictions were covered in the previous lessons ( e . g . , primacy ) . The second assessment used a recognition test that included factual assertions from the lecture . For example , “When people understand something they have read , they tend to remember it verbatim . True or false ? ” On the recognition ( true – false ) test , the Double Data Analysis condition did poorly , as we had found before . However , given the chance to hear the lecture , the Data Analysis + Lecture group performed as well as the Sum - marize + Lecture group . More importantly , the prediction task showed the hidden beneﬁt of the data analysis activity . Figure 1 . 3 shows that the Dou - ble Data Analysis students again performed badly . However , the Summa - rize + Lecture students performed equally badly . The Data Analysis + Lecture students did quite well , producing over twice as many correct pre - dictions as students in the other conditions . By this result , data analysis was Figure 1 . 3 . Performance on transfer task of predicting results of a novel experiment . Data analysis activities prepared students to learn from a subsequent lecture and then transfer to a novel problem compared to summarizing a chapter and hearing a lecture or analyzing data for two sessions without a lecture ( Schwartz & Brans - ford , 1998 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 19 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 20 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS very important for learning from the lecture and transferring this learning to the prediction task . We know the data analysis students learned from the lecture because the Double Data Analysis group that did not hear the lec - ture performed badly . A variety of control conditions over several studies showed that the effect was not simply due to attention or time on task and that the effects held when the lecture was replaced by a relevant reading . One lesson from this study is that lectures can be a very effective method of instruction if people are prepared to understand the signiﬁcance of what the lecture has to offer . Providing students an opportunity to notice distinc - tions within a set of contrasting cases is a powerful way to prepare people to learn and transfer , at least compared to the common activity of abstracting the key points of a reading into a summary . A second lesson is that transfer assessments that include opportunities for learning can reveal important dif - ferences in instruction and ways of knowing . Without opportunities for learning , the data analysis method of instruction appeared ineffective and the students’ knowledge was too poorly developed to answer simple factual questions . However , when it was evaluated by how well it prepared students to learn from a lecture and transfer that learning out , it looked very effective . Is There a Hidden Efﬁcacy to Original Student Invention ? Another study explores issues of “transferring in” and “transferring out” even more fully ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . It formalizes what we might label the “double transfer” design that was implicit in the preceding study . Figure 1 . 4 schematizes the double transfer design . People receive instruc - tional treatment A or B . Afterward , people from both conditions receive Figure 1 . 4 . Double transfer methodology that includes “transfer in” and “transfer out” phases . This research design compares how two instructional treatments pre - pare students to “transfer in” to learn from a resource and then “transfer out” from the resource to solve a problem ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 20 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 21 equivalent resources for learning key ideas . Then they receive a transfer problem where those ideas apply . In this study , we directly compared the standard transfer design we men - tioned earlier and the double transfer design , head - to - head . Figure 1 . 5 shows the factorial design . Students learned either with an invention method or a tell - and - practice method . Per the standard transfer design , Figure 1 . 5 . Experimental design to compare the standard and double transfer designs . Participants had to learn to compare scores from two different distribu - tions ( e . g . , grading on a curve ) and transfer this learning to solve a transfer prob - lem ( e . g . , comparing athletes from different periods in history ) ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 21 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 22 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS half of the students in each instructional condition directly tried to solve the transfer problem . Per the double transfer design , the other half of the students received a common learning resource and then completed the transfer problem . In this study , we were also interested in spontaneous transfer at both transfer in and transfer out ( e . g . see Bransford , Franks , Vye , & Sherwood , 1989 , for reviews of spontaneous vs . prompted transfer ) . In the earlier study on learning memory concepts , the students did not have to transfer in their knowledge spontaneously to learn from the lecture . It had been made clear to them that the lecture was relevant to the activities they had previously completed , so the study tested the value of preparing students for intentional learning . However , learners often will need to transfer knowledge spontaneously into new situations of learning ( e . g . , Branford et al . , 1989 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . People always “transfer in” some knowl - edge to make sense of a new situation . The challenge is whether we can prepare them so they spontaneously transfer the “right” knowledge . The research , which involved 15 classes of ninth - grade students , com - pared the value of asking students to invent statistical methods versus imi - tate and practice shown methods . Students in both conditions completed identical activities for the ﬁrst two weeks . The comparison of the standard and double transfer designs began with the ﬁnal day of instruction and ﬁn - ished with the posttest . During the ﬁnal day of instruction , all the students received two scenarios in which they had to compare high scores from two distributions ; for example , who broke the world record by a more impres - sive amount , John in the high jump or Mike in the javelin throw ? They had to decide which score was higher , even though the two distributions had different means and variances . The appropriate solution to this type of problem is to use some form of standardized score . In lay terms , they had to “grade on a curve” and compare where each high score appeared on its respective curve . Students were divided into two conditions for about 30 minutes . Stu - dents from both conditions received the same raw data and histograms . In the invention condition , the students had to invent their own solution to the problem of comparing high scores from different distributions . Nobody succeeded in making a general solution , so by many accounts , this would seem inefﬁcient—why not just tell them the method and correct any mistakes as quickly as possible ( e . g . , Anderson , Conrad , & Corbett , 1989 ; Lovett & Greenhouse , 2000 ; but see Vollmeyer , Burns , & Holyoak , 1996 , and Mathan & Koedinger , 2003 , on the beneﬁts of well - placed delayed feedback ) . This is what we did for the tell - and - practice condition . Students were shown how to solve the problem graphically by ﬁrst marking deviation regions on a histogram and then comparing the normalized values of the high scores . For this condition , students practiced the method with the IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 22 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 23 data and histograms , and the teachers answered questions or corrected errors when they were found . The question was whether the students from each condition would be equally prepared to transfer this activity to learn during the posttest . Students completed a posttest that included many statistics problems . Embedded within these problems were two key items that completed the experiment . A worked example item only appeared in half the tests . The worked example constituted the resource from which students could learn . The students who received the resource completed the double - transfer design , whereas the students who did not receive the resource completed the standard transfer design . The embedded resource provided a worked example for how to compute and compare standardized scores ( e . g . , Is Betty better at assists or steals ? ) . Students followed the steps to complete an analogous problem at the bottom of the page . Nearly all the students who received the worked example followed it correctly , so we know the students were paying attention . Near the end of the test there was a target “transfer out” problem . The problem included descriptive statistics giving the averages , deviations , and scores of an individual in each of two groups ( e . g . , Which of two students , who were in different biology classes and took different tests , did better on their respective test ? ) . The target transfer problem differed from the instructional activities because it only provided summary measures rather than raw data . This is where the embedded worked - example became important . It showed how to ﬁnd standardized scores given summary mea - sures . The question was whether students from both instructional condi - tions would simply interpret the worked example as a “plug and chug” problem on a test , or whether they would transfer in their prior instruc - tional activities to learn what this example was teaching about standardized scores and then apply it to solve the target transfer problem . Figure 1 . 6 shows the percent of students who gave correct solutions to the target transfer problem . Students in the invention condition who received the worked example in the test doubled the performance of the other three groups . The invention students must have learned from the worked example , because invention students who did not receive the example performed poorly . In contrast , the tell - and - practice students per - formed the same whether or not they received the worked example . We believe that there are several important lessons to this study . As before , activities that appear inefﬁcient for direct problem solving ( appli - cative knowing ) can still shape people’s interpretive knowing and yield measurable beneﬁts for learning . And as before , PFL assessments that examine people’s abilities to learn at test can reveal important levels of knowing missed by standard assessments . The results of this experiment also suggest the value of further research into designing assessments that IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 23 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 24 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS evaluate how well students have been prepared to learn . Besides measuring something that we should care about , it could change the idea of what it means to “teach to the test . ” For example , if teachers knew that a standard - ized test required learning during the test , they would have to prepare stu - dents to learn from the resources . This seems like a worthwhile use of time , at least compared to teaching speciﬁc techniques for solving the narrow classes of problems that are likely to be sampled by a test . Are There Differences between Coaching , Teaching , and Tutoring for Student Learning ? The preceding studies examined relatively short - term effects of prepar - ing students to learn—within a week or so after initial instruction . The cur - rent study examined whether some forms of instruction can help students learn months later , given complex resources . As in the preceding studies , the use of PFL measures of transfer were crucial for uncovering the poten - tial value of particular strategies for helping students learn . Figure 1 . 6 . Rate of “transfer out” as a function of instructional method and inclu - sion of a learning resource ( a worked example ) embedded in a test . Without the opportunity to transfer in to learn at test , the inventing condition did not reveal its value ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 24 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 25 Biswas and colleagues ( 2004 ) worked with ﬁfth - graders in life science using the teachable agent paradigm ( Biswas et al . , 2001 ) . With teachable agents , children teach a computer agent using visual representations that help organize their knowledge . The teachable agent then performs based on this instruction . Students can remediate the agent’s knowledge ( and their own ) based on these performances . For the study , Biswas and col - leagues used a teachable agent named Betty . Students teach Betty by creat - ing concept maps . In these maps , students specify links that determine whether an increase to one node ( e . g . , algae ) causes an increase or decrease to another ( e . g . , oxygen ) , and whether one node is a subclass of another node ( e . g . , algae is a type of plant and inherits the properties of plants ) . Figure 1 . 7 shows an example of Betty’s interface after she had been taught . Once taught , Betty can answer questions and shows her rea - soning by graphically tracing the links and explaining her steps in text and voice . In the current study , Betty could also take quizzes , and students had to teach her so she would pass the quiz . The study on teachable agents conducted by Leelawong employed three conditions ( see Biswas et al . , 2004 ) . In each condition , which lasted about 6 hours , the children had to create the oxygen cycle for a pond ecology . Figure 1 . 7 . A teachable agent . Students teach the agent , Betty , by creating con - cept maps . Betty answers questions based on how well she has been taught . Betty shows her reasoning by chaining through the links in the concept map . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 25 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 26 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS The children did not already know the oxygen cycle , so the software included a number of resources to help the children learn ( e . g . , Web pages ) . In the Teach condition , the children taught Betty . They could com - pose questions to see how Betty answered them ( based on their teaching ) , and they could ask Betty to take a quiz . They revised her when she did poorly on the quiz , and there was an “expert agent” who helped them to interpret the incorrect answers . The Tutor condition was similar to the Teach condition , except that students did not operate under the guise of teaching Betty . So , instead of asking Betty a question directly , they could ask the tutor questions , and the tutor would explain , “Based on what you have done , the answer would be… . ” The intelligent tutor also showed stu - dents the right answer when Betty made a mistake on a quiz question . In the Teach + Coach condition , students taught Betty , but the software also included a coach from whom students could solicit advice . The coach did not directly tell students what to do and provided suggestions only when the students asked for them . These suggestions were not about the oxygen cycle , but rather , they were about ways to teach and evaluate Betty’s knowl - edge and how to learn from resources . Initially , the students in the Teach and Teach + Coach conditions had more difﬁculty getting Betty to pass the quiz , but eventually they caught up to the Tutor condition . The question was what would happen at transfer . At transfer , about 2 months later , all the students had to create a con - cept map about the nitrogen cycle . The students had not studied the nitro - gen cycle , but they had resources from which they could learn during this transfer test . They did not have a tutor or coach and had to learn on their own . Figure 1 . 8 shows the number of nodes and causal links that students included in their nitrogen cycles that corresponded to the expert solution ( which the students never saw ) . The Teach condition did better than the Tutor condition . They had been in a teaching role earlier ( rather than a “being tutored” role ) , and hence , they had developed some important competencies ( plus conﬁdence ) to learn independently . Figure 1 . 8 also shows that the Teach + Coach condition did the best at transfer . When learning about the oxygen cycle , these students had received some guid - ance in how to use resources productively and how to think about the qual - ity of their map . This guidance transferred to learning about the nitrogen cycle . On the transfer test , the Teach + Coach students were even more pre - pared than the Teach students to use the resources to produce their con - cept map and improve their learning . Our interpretation of the Biswas and colleagues study is not that tutor - ing is bad for students and learning by teaching with the help of a coach is always superior . There is a wealth of information showing the positive ben - eﬁts of sophisticated tutoring programs , including the use of real tutors ( e . g . , Bloom , 1984 ) and computer tutors ( e . g . , Koedinger , Anderson , IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 26 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 27 Hadley , & Mark , 1997 ) . Our main point is that a switch from SPS assess - ments to PFL assessments suggests that some kinds of skills and knowledge may be shortchanged if students’ total set of educational experiences involve only “sitting at the feet” of a mentor or tutor . INNOVATION AND EFFICIENCY The preceding examples emphasized initial instructional activities that developed students’ interpretive knowledge so they could learn subse - quently . That discussion could easily be interpreted to suggest that we place little value on the replicative and applicative aspects of knowing and , instead , mainly encourage the interpretive . However , this is not what we intend to convey . Instead , we believe that educators need to combine the replicative , applicative , and interpretive to realize the kinds of outcomes that most educators and parents want students to achieve . Recently , we have begun to think through the tradeoffs and beneﬁts of combining instruction for replicative , applicative , and interpretive knowing . In doing so we realized that we , and perhaps others in the ﬁeld , had been conﬂat - ing two dimensions of learning in instruction and assessment . Figure 1 . 9 shows Figure 1 . 8 . Student performance on a delayed PFL assessment . During initial instruction , the students created a concept map of the oxygen cycle in one of the three conditions . The question the graph answers is which initial instruction condi - tion best prepared students to learn about the nitrogen cycle several weeks later without any help . During the initial instruction , the Tutor condition told students if what they entered was right or wrong . In the Teach condition , students asked Betty to answer questions and received feedback on the quality of those answers . In the Teach + Coach condition , there was an intelligent coach that provided suggestions for how to use resources and evaluate Betty’s knowledge . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 27 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 28 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS these two dimensions . One dimension emphasizes efﬁciency , the other inno - vation . Sometimes these two dimensions are characterized as mutually exclu - sive ends of a continuum ( e . g . , high and low road transfer ; Salomon & Perkins , 1989 ) and as we describe below , they can indeed conﬂict and this is something that needs to be understood . However , because there are differ - ent processes involved , they are not necessarily exclusive of one another . Adaptive experts , for example , are presumably high on both dimensions ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1997 ; Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ) . Efﬁciency The horizontal dimension is efﬁciency . People who are high on efﬁ - ciency can rapidly retrieve and accurately apply appropriate knowledge and skills to solve a problem or understand an explanation . Examples include experts who have a great deal of experience with certain types of problems ; for example , doctors who have seen many instances of diseases in many different people or who have frequently performed a particular type of surgery . They can diagnose and treat a new patient quickly and effectively . When choosing a surgeon for a particular procedure , many potential patients wisely ask , “How many of these have you successfully per - formed previously ? ” Efﬁciency seems to be important in all domains . It includes a high degree of consistency ( lack of variability ) that maximizes success and mini - mizes failure . Business programs like Six Sigma provide a good example of how efﬁciency is relevant to organizations as well as to individuals ( e . g . , Pande , Neuman , & Cavanagh , 2000 ) . Six Sigma consultants attempt to help businesses reduce variability in production processes as much as possi - ble while keeping the mean at a level of “high standards . ” Figure 1 . 9 . Two dimensions of learning and transfer : innovation and efﬁciency . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 28 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 29 We believe that most of the research in education and training has been focused primarily on efﬁciency outcomes . This is especially true in the United States . Piagetian theorists have often expressed amusement when asked what they call the “American question” of “how do we get kids to progress through the developmental stages more rapidly ? ” This is an efﬁciency question that ﬁts the American emphasis on pragmatism and “do it now . ” Researchers who study both people and organizations have learned a great deal about promoting efﬁciency . At a general level , probably the best way to be efﬁcient is to practice at tasks and gain experiences with impor - tant classes and components of problems so that they become “routine” and easy to solve later . The best way to ensure transfer is to “teach for it” so that the problems people encounter on a test or in an everyday environ - ment can be solved with high frequency because they are quite close to what has been learned previously . Transfer problems essentially disappear if we teach in contexts where people need to perform , and if we arrange experiences and environments so that the correct behaviors are driven by the environment . There are ways to practice solving problems that are excellent from an efﬁ - ciency perspective . Appropriate kinds of practice help people turn nonrou - tine , difﬁcult - to - solve problems into routine problems that can be solved quickly and easily . Phrased another way , efﬁciency - oriented practice is often about “problem elimination” rather than about in - depth , sustained problem solving . A problem is typically deﬁned as a gap or barrier between a goal state and one’s present state ( e . g . , Bransford & Stein , 1993 ; Hayes , 1989 ; Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . By preparing people so that the problems they will face in life are essentially routine problems—or at worst very “near transfer” problems— the gap between goal states and present states is either eliminated or made to be very small . This allows people to perform quite effectively . All of this works well provided the environments for which we are prepar - ing people are “good environments” ( e . g . , based on strong human values and ideal working conditions ) that are stable and do not need improving . As people like Fullan ( 2001 ) and Vaill ( 1991 ) argue , however , we are living in a “whitewater world” where change is the norm and not the exception . Because efﬁciency is so emphasized in our time - limited society , it tends to take over as a prime way to assess progress . But , there are also potential downsides of an overemphasis on efﬁciency . This is where an emphasis on innovation comes into play . Innovation Experimental studies show that efﬁciency can often produce “function - ally ﬁxed” behaviors ( e . g . , Luchins , 1942 ) . Similarly , Hatano and Inagaki IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 29 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 30 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS ( 1986 ; see also Hatano & Oura , 2003 ) discuss “routine experts” who become very good at solving particular sets of problems but do not con - tinue to learn throughout their lifetimes ( except in the sense of becoming even more efﬁcient at their old routines ) . These potential downsides of an overemphasis on efﬁciency ( especially in the face of change ) make it espe - cially important to attempt to reconceptualize learning and transfer as something more than the ability to apply previously acquired skills and schemas efﬁciently for routine problem solving . Our argument is not to eliminate efﬁciency but to complement it so that people can adapt optimally . In short , we assume that efﬁciency does not have to be the enemy of innovation and creativity ( e . g . , Bransford & Stein , 1993 ) . For example , it is well known that efﬁciency in some processes ( e . g . , learning to drive a car , learning to decode written words and sentences ) frees attentional capacity to do other things ( e . g . , talking while driving , reading for meaning , Atkinson & Schiffrin , 1968 ; LaBerge & Samuels , 1974 ) . Similarly , if people confronted with a new , complex problem , have solved aspects of it before , this helps make these subproblems routine and easy to solve . This frees attentional bandwidth and enables people to con - centrate on other aspects of the new situation that may require nonroutine adaptation . A major theoretical challenge is to understand how efﬁciency and adaptability can coexist most effectively . An important step in meeting this challenge is to better understand the dimension of innovation . People who are optimally adaptive can rearrange their environments and their thinking to handle new types of problems or information ( e . g . , Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ; Hatano & Oura , 2003 ; Spiro , Feltovich , Jacobson , & Coulson , 1991 ) . As others have argued , innovation and adaptability “favor the prepared mind . ” From our perspective this means that people need to acquire the kinds of well - organized , ﬂuently accessible sets of skills and knowledge that are represented on the efﬁciency dimension . However , we think it is especially important to note that innovation often requires a movement away from what is momentarily most efﬁcient for the individual or the organization . Wineburg ( 1998 ) provides a powerful example of resistance to “efﬁ - cient overassimilation” in a study involving history experts and college stu - dents . He asked historians who had expertise in a particular domain ( e . g . , Asian history ) to solve history problems that , for them , were nonroutine because they came from an unfamiliar domain of American history . The problems involved interpreting some complex decisions made by Abra - ham Lincoln . The history experts were much more likely than college stu - dents to resist making assumptions that readily came to mind based on knowledge of their current culture . The experts realized that these assumptions were indeed coming from their current cultural context rather from the context at the time of Lincoln . They therefore took the IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 30 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 31 time to research these issues to learn what they needed to know to solve the problem . In contrast , the college students went merrily on their way building conﬁdently on a set of very ﬂawed assumptions that came from their current knowledge of the world . Above , we discussed Burgess’s eagle challenge and noted that a group of principals thought about a number of possible “wrong” analogies that might help solve the eagle challenge ( e . g . , analogies to releasing wolves into the wild ) . However , they considered these ideas to be conjectures only , and they realized the need to learn more about the subject by asking rele - vant questions and searching for information ( either through technology or their social networks or both ) . Lin’s ( 2001 ) study of a Chinese teacher who carefully and thoughtfully changed her teaching practices to accom - modate to a new teaching artifact is also an excellent example of a move - ment away from efﬁciency toward adaptation . The importance of resisting one’s initial ideas about a problem or chal - lenge was discussed by Land , the inventor of the Polaroid Land camera . With tongue in cheek , he described the processes of innovation ( and the insights that precede it ) as involving “the sudden cessation of stupidity” ( quoted from Nierenberg , 1986 , p . 17 ) . The stupidity comes from one’s initial framing of problems—framings that contain assumptions that “put people in a box , ” or more technically , constrained the problem spaces within which they work ( e . g . , Bransford & Stein , 1993 ; Hayes , 1989 ; Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . As an illustration , consider an example discussed by Adams ( 1979 ) . He notes that , many years ago , a group of engineers tried to design a mechani - cal tomato picker that was less likely to bruise tomatoes . They did a lot of tinkering but did not make great breakthroughs . Later , a group of bota - nists entered the picture and helped them reframe the problem . Instead of designing a mechanical picker that was less likely to bruise tomatoes , a bet - ter strategy might be to design a tomato that was less likely to be bruised . This reframing opened up a number of new possibilities for thinking , and the group eventually engineered a new type of tomato with a thicker , less easily bruised skin . The importance of inhibiting “off the top of the head” processes is also illustrated by Brown and Kane’s ( 1988 ) study where they taught young chil - dren to look for analogies between instances . Children saw pairs of analog - ical situations and were guided to notice the analogy so they could use it to solve a subsequent problem ( e . g . , stack objects on top of each other to be able to reach higher ) . Rather than simply relying on high - frequency , “top - of - the - head” reactions to instance pairs , such as temporal associations and obvious causal relations , the children were helped to add a simple “learn - ing by analogy” routine to their cognitive repertoire that allowed them to think about pairs of new instances in a new ( for them ) manner . To learn to IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 31 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 32 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS think analogically in this setting , the students had to “move away” from their maximally efﬁcient processing—they had to inhibit saying the ﬁrst thing that came to mind , and instead look for more abstract analogies between sets of familiar items that they saw . Feuerstein ( 1979 ) notes that many people have difﬁculty questioning the ﬁrst thoughts that come to mind and hence are less likely than others to experience the “sense of dise - quilibrium” ( Piaget , 1952 , 1970 ) that provides an impetus for questioning current assumptions and “letting go” when necessary . Overcoming the “pull” of efﬁcient access to current knowledge and assumptions is not an easy task , and an overemphasis on efﬁciency can be damaging in the long run . For example , the present authors have encoun - tered doctoral students who rushed through their graduate careers . Their quest for efﬁciency ( e . g . , “Just tell me what to do for a thesis and I’ll do it” ) interfered with their chances for developing novel knowledge for the ﬁeld and ended up hurting their abilities to generate studies and help their own doctoral students once they became professors . Similarly , business execu - tives who have worked with efﬁciency programs like Six Sigma have remarked to us that it can hurt the level of innovation in a company if it is applied unthinkingly across the board . A college football coach had the following to say to incoming freshman players : “We have to make you worse before we can make you better . ” Musician friends of ours have talked about their frequent need to break free of well - learned routines so that they can move to a new level of playing ability . As noted earlier , innovation is often preceded by a sense of disequilibrium that signals that certain processes or ways of thinking ( e . g . , previously learned routines ) are not quite working properly . At other times , new ideas may simply emerge from interactions with tools and people without a prior sense that something was wrong or needed to be ﬁxed . Balancing Efﬁciency and Innovation From the perspective of learning theorists interested in education , Fig - ure 1 . 9 becomes especially useful when we ask how we can move people along both of its dimensions . Movement along one dimension alone is unlikely to support the kinds of “preparation for future learning” ( PFL ) transfer that we and others envision . As already discussed , training dedi - cated to high efﬁciency can restrict transfer to highly similar situations . On the other hand , opportunities to engage in general , content - free skills of critical thinking or problem solving appear to provide a set of ﬂexible “weak methods” ( Newell & Simon , 1972 ) that are too inefﬁcient for the large problem spaces found in many real - world tasks . If we ask ourselves about the overall effects of K – 16 curricula , our reading of the literature IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 32 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 33 suggests that it will not work to give students a set of efﬁciency oriented , content - ﬁlled tasks that follow the horizontal axis of Figure 1 . 9 , and a sepa - rate set of strategy - training tasks that fall along the vertical axis . It is not enough to expose students to content courses and separate thinking courses and then help students integrate them in a “capstone” course at the end of some educational program . This could be somewhat helpful , of course , but the conjecture is that it is far from ideal . In their writings on adaptive expertise , Hatano and colleagues ( Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ) sug - gest that the long - term processes by which one is helped to develop expertise are critical for the desired outcome . We also believe that many people ( ourselves included ) who have attempted to teach thinking and problem solving have fallen into the efﬁ - ciency trap of teaching routines for thinking and problem solving . There are a host of useful and sophisticated problem - solving routines ( e . g . , using fractionation to break away from old habits , using mind maps , etc . ) . Never - theless , they still are often taught as script - like , mechanical routines—often because this is the only way to show effects when they are assessed through the efﬁciency - oriented lenses of applicative ( SPS ) problem solving . As noted earlier , efﬁciency and applicative problem solving are good things , so there is nothing wrong with thinking skills courses that attempt to help people apply sets of high - level routines efﬁciently to solve various prob - lems . But this is often accompanied by an underemphasis on the innova - tion dimension and what it might mean to help people learn to break free of old routines and discover new ideas on their own . Assessments of the sorts of “learning innovation” we have in mind differ from “content - lite” tests of creativity or insight problem solving . We assume that innovations relevant to learning arise from useful content knowledge ( plus dispositions ) that people can transfer in , and therefore PFL assess - ments of innovation are highly relevant . For example , Schwartz and Martin ( 2004 ) asked high school students to innovate their own ways to measure the consistency of different phenomena ( e . g . , determine the reliability of a baseball - pitching machine ) . Afterward , students received a lecture on a standard , efﬁcient method for computing variability . Of particular interest was whether these learning experiences , which took a few hours , would prepare students to innovate solutions to highly novel problems . To ﬁnd out , a subsequent test included a problem that required working with bivariate data . During instruction , students had only learned about work - ing with univariate data , so determining covariance would require innova - tion . At posttest , 34 % of the students invented a way to innovate a measure of covariance . Though this is far below 100 % innovation ( it is a difﬁcult task ) , it is a high level compared to the performance of “top - 20” university students who had recently completed a full semester of statistics . Only 12 % of the college students created a workable solution . The point here is that IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 33 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 34 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS it seems unlikely that the high school students had more sophisticated , content - free techniques for innovation than the college students did . Instead , the high school students had developed an understanding and stance toward the topic of variability that prepared them to be innovative . We suppose that an important way to foster innovation is to provide stu - dents with opportunities to be innovative and interactive within a domain . We say “suppose” because many of the educational efforts at cultivating innovation and inquiry have used efﬁciency , SPS measures to assess out - comes , so it is difﬁcult to know whether these innovative experiences work . In the studies above on teaching psychology and statistics , students explored data and innovated their own representations , but by themselves , these activities did not provide evidence of learning using SPS assessments . It was only the PFL assessments that included opportunities for subsequent learning that revealed the value of the instruction . Innovative interactions are different from interactions dedicated to efﬁ - ciency , where one repeats a behavior to tune speed and accuracy . Innovative interactions involve reaching beyond the immediately known . People often do not know what the ﬁnal goal state will look like at the outset . Interacting with other people , and with artifacts , is a powerful way to accelerate the development of innovation . For example , Bransford and Stein ( 1993 ) note how a number of everyday inventions have evolved as people used them and saw what needed to be changed . If the inventors had never tried to use the initial inventions in their target contexts , the information necessary for new thinking would have been less likely to arise . This , of course , is not to say that innovation cannot also occur in moments of quiet reﬂection . But even in these cases , there are usually prior experiences that fostered a disequilib - rium or curiosity that only got worked out later . Designing environments for innovation requires providing an opportunity for people to test out ideas and let go when necessary , and for providing interactions that can reveal new information and orient learners to notice it . Innovation , Efﬁciency , and Adaptive Expertise As noted earlier , we believe that it is important to balance efﬁciency and innovation in instruction . The possibility of achieving this balance is high - lighted by Hatano and colleagues’ work on adaptive versus routine exper - tise . Our educational conjecture is that people will beneﬁt most from learning opportunities that balance the two dimensions . For example , chil - dren who receive nothing but efﬁciency - oriented computation training in mathematics may well become efﬁcient , but this kind of experience will lead to limited capabilities in the face of new problems . Balanced instruc - tion would include opportunities to learn with understanding and develop IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 34 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 35 their own mathematical conjectures as well as become efﬁcient at computa - tion . Instruction that balances efﬁciency and innovation should also include opportunities to experiment with ideas and , in the process , experi - ence the need to change them . We believe that these kinds of experiences often require opportunities to interact actively with artifacts and people . As Vygotsky ( 1987 ) pointed out , some forms of knowledge arise only through interaction . However , balancing innovation and efﬁciency requires special kinds of interactions—not just any kind . We have found it helpful to disentangle innovation and efﬁciency to make headway on thinking about their combination . For example , the in situ literature has been particularly interested in interaction , both social and physical . Gutierrez and Rogoff ( 2003 ) discuss how in situ theorists think about learning : A central and most distinguishing thesis in this approach is that the structure and development of human psychological processes emerge through partici - pation in culturally mediated , historically developing , practical activity involv - ing cultural practices and tools . ( p . 21 ) When in situ theorists have applied this vantage to the topic of transfer , we have found that they are sometimes discussing interactions that facili - tate efﬁciency and at other times interactions that result in innovation— but often these two different dimensions are not as differentiated as they should be . For example , we noted earlier that one argument has been that it is more efﬁcient to build resources into the environment than to expect people to transfer abstract ideas across contextual boundaries . This is an argument that focuses on efﬁciency . We recall a discussion with a scientist who had worked with the military and concluded that it was cheaper to engineer simpler tasks compared to the expense of training millions of enlistees for complex tasks . Similarly , work on distributed cognition emphasizes how speciﬁc environments permit people to ofﬂoad their cog - nitive burden to the environment ( Kirsch & Maglio , 1994 ) . Work on apprenticeship points to the value of instruction built into the ultimate activity structure . Many cognitive theorists also emphasize efﬁciency . For example , Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ; Chapter 8 , this volume ) point to six dimensions of similarity that increase the efﬁciency with which people will transfer across contexts , and Anderson , Reder , and Simon ( 1997 ) argue for the value of developing component skills that are likely to resemble the skills needed in the ultimate application context . A second argument from in situ theorists has concerned innovation , particularly in situations of intellectual repair ( e . g . , Hutchins , 1995 ; Wino - grad & Flores , 1984 ) . Suchman ( 1987 ) , for example , argued that no amount of planning or preexisting knowledge can anticipate the break - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 35 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 36 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS downs that always arise during interactions , and therefore , it is important to understand how people construct new meanings in situations of break - down . Similarly , Carraher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) argue that children are able to learn new concepts that could not have arisen from the direct appli - cation of prior knowledge . These are compelling counterarguments against an “efﬁciency - only , ” direct application approach . However , being counterarguments , they have not typically considered arguments for how to prepare people to learn through innovation . We concur that efﬁciency , in the form of knowledge that can be readily and repeatedly applied , is insufﬁcient for innovation , but it is nevertheless an important ingredient . A world of constant change—with no invariant procedures , norms , or routines that can be directly applied to living and problem solving—is probably a world in which no humans could survive . Ball and Cohen ( 1999 ) make a valuable innovation argument in their discussions of teaching : “This perspective views teachers’ capacity not as a ﬁxed storehouse of facts and ideas but as a source and creator of knowledge and skills needed for instruction” ( p . 6 ) . Similarly , Sawyer ( 2003 ) distin - guishes “scripted teaching” from teaching as “disciplined improvisation . ” In both of these accounts of teaching , there is implicit acknowledgment that being appropriately innovative requires the development of automatized schemas and routines that provide enough background efﬁciency to keep teachers from becoming overwhelmed and losing site of important goals . However , if teachers have simply learned these automatized routines “by rote” ( e . g . , in a scripted manner ) they will not be prepared to be the kinds of adaptive experts who will continue to meet the needs of students and learn and improve over time ( e . g . , CTGV , 2000 ; Judd , 1908 ) . Thelen and Smith ( 1994 ) , in their advocacy of viewing child development within a dynamic systems framework , make a strong case for innovation : Remember that the premier developmental question is how organic form is created—the emergence of novelty and complexity in structure and function . Invoking any prior plan within the organism leads to an inﬁnite regress . ( p . xv ) We too believe that prior plans , whether learned or built into the system , are insufﬁcient to account for innovation or novel learning . People need to interact with resources for learning and innovation , even if that innovation occurs later in a quiet moment of reﬂection . At the same time , efﬁcient prior knowledge ( regardless of the speciﬁc theoretical formalism used to charac - terize it ) is important for seeding the sparks of innovation . We believe that a major challenge for the ﬁeld is to balance our accounts of learning and transfer by considering both efﬁcient and innovative processes . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 36 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 37 A study by Martin and Schwartz ( in press ) provides an illustration of the need to focus on balance . They asked 9 - to 10 - year - old children to solve fraction equivalence problems . For example , children had to indicate one - fourth of 8 pieces . In one condition , the children saw pictures of pieces , and they had to circle the correct number of pieces to show the answer . In this condition , children typically transferred in a whole quantity interpreta - tion instead of a ratio interpretation ; for example , they circled one piece to indicate one - fourth . The children applied the interpretation that had been highly efﬁcient for their many prior experiences of counting , adding , and so forth . But in this case , it was maladaptive . In the interactive condition , the same children received pieces that they physically manipulated . In this condition , the children managed to reinterpret the pieces . By collecting the pieces into piles and pushing them around , they began to see the pieces as groups that could be counted in their own right . For example , they came to reinterpret two pieces as one group , which enabled them to eventually count out four groups and solve the problem of ﬁnding 1 / 4 . When the children moved pieces physically , they were correct nearly three times as often as when they could not , regardless of condition order . Inter - estingly , when the pieces were pregrouped for the children ( e . g . , four groups of two pieces ) , they still did better when they could move the pieces around compared to just looking at them . The interactive experience of moving the pieces seemed to help the children let go of old efﬁcient interpretations and see new structures . But , it would be a mistake to assume they did not also apply other efﬁcient sche - mas to help discover the new structures . When the children moved the pieces around , their schemas enabled them to repeatedly count pieces and groups , and to interpret groups of equivalent size as better than groups of different sizes ( which led them to make four groups of equal size ) . A Hypothetical Optimal Adaptability Corridor The preceding discussion leads us to believe that the modiﬁed illustra - tion in Figure 1 . 10 may be helpful for thinking about the kinds of educa - tional experiences that ﬁt the goals of the superintendents discussed at the beginning of this chapter . This ﬁgure shows a hypothetical optimal adapt - ability corridor , or OAC , for the development of adaptive expertise . Its function is to help ensure that innovation and efﬁciency develop together . For example , in the preceding studies on teaching psychology and statis - tics , the most successful combinations included both opportunities for innovation ( e . g . , inventing statistics to solve problems ) and opportunities for learning efﬁcient solutions invented by experts . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 37 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 38 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS The presumed outcomes of keeping educational experiences within the OAC involves what Hatano and Inagaki ( 1986 ) called “adaptive expertise . ” Within their base domains , both routine experts ( who at the extreme would be trained only along the efﬁciency dimension ) and adaptive experts ( whose experiences would tend to ﬁt within the corridor ) are highly efﬁcient at solving a number of problems that have become routine for them . However , given a highly novel problem within their domain , or a problem within a new domain , only the adaptive experts can utilize their existing knowledge and practices to learn with the resources at hand . We noted earlier that Wineburg’s ( 1998 ) studies of historians who were asked to solve problems about areas of history where they were not experts pro - vides an excellent illustration of this kind of performance . Notably , Wineb - urg used what we call PFL assessments because he provided the historians with resources for new learning . This kind of assessment was necessary to reveal their adaptive expertise . If we think of the OAC as extending developmentally over a range of ages , young children will typically fall at the low / low end of the vertical and horizontal dimension ( we do not , however , assume that young learners are “blank slates” ; see NRC , 2000 ) . If we assume that both efﬁciency and inno - Figure 1 . 10 . Balancing efﬁciency and innovation in learning . Is the development of adaptive expertise cultivated by instruction that stays within the optimal adapt - ability corridor ( OAC ) ? IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 38 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 39 vation are important , the question is how to balance the two . A study by Martin and Schwartz ( in press ) provides an example of research that looks at different trajectories through the corridor and their effects on transfer . In this study , children learned to manipulate pieces to help solve fraction addition problems over three days . One group of children learned with pie pieces ( half pieces in pink , quarter pieces in yellow , and so on ) . The other group learned with simple tiles of equal size . Both groups received feed - back and models of solutions when needed . Overall the children in each condition learned at the same rate . However , Martin and Schwartz thought the pie pieces might have some detrimental effects for subsequent learn - ing . When looking at pie wedges put together , it is easy to interpret them as part of a whole ( e . g . , as in a pizza missing one slice ) . The interpretation of “wholeness” is built into the environment , given people’s natural percep - tual proclivities . In contrast , when looking at several tiles , it is harder to interpret them as part of a whole . To learn to work with the tiles , children had to innovate new interpretations of the pieces so they were no longer just units ; they were also parts of a whole . Thus , the tile students would have a leg - up on the innovation dimension , whereas the pie students would have a leg - up on the efﬁciency dimension . To determine whether these different initial experiences had an effect on their learning trajectory at transfer , students in each condition solved problems using new materials at the end of each day . For example , they had to solve problems with beans , which are analogs of tiles . And they had to solve problems with bars , which are analogs of pies ( they come in differ - ent lengths colored to indicate whether they are one - fourth , one - half , and so on ) . The problems the children had to solve were of the same type they had successfully solved earlier in the day when working with the tiles or pies . Thus , the study made sure that the transfer problems were types the students had already learned to solve with their base materials . Figure 1 . 11 schematizes the resulting trajectories through the innova - tion by efﬁciency space . For each transfer problem , there were two types of correct performance . One performance was whether children gave the correct verbal answer to a problem . This is an efﬁcient response , because it is the right answer . The other correct performance occurred when chil - dren created a correct physical arrangement of the pieces . This is an inno - vative response , because the children were adapting the physical environment in new ways to help solve the problem . Children could give an efﬁcient verbal response without arranging the pieces correctly , and they could arrange the pieces correctly without knowing how to interpret them verbally . The ﬁgure schematizes the changing proportions of correct innovative and efﬁcient responses over the 3 days . One may see that the tile students accelerated along the innovation dimension at ﬁrst and then increased in efﬁciency . The pie students accelerated along the efﬁciency IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 39 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 40 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS dimension at ﬁrst . Thus , the manipulation of asking the students to learn with tiles or pies affected movement through the space . The important ﬁnding was that the pie students who exhibited more efﬁciency at ﬁrst were actually on a much less stable trajectory . They often got stuck in the space and did not progress , and even when they made progress , they often regressed on the next day . For example , over 50 % of the time a pie child reached the upper - right quadrant of “adaptive exper - tise , ” he or she regressed on the next day making both incorrect physical arrangements and incorrect verbal answers . In contrast , the tile students demonstrated a very stable trajectory . They rarely got stuck and tended to do better on each successive day . Moreover , they did not regress . For exam - ple , when students reached the upper - right quadrant , less than 15 % regressed by making an error the next day . Based on this initial study , it Figure 1 . 11 . Trajectories of learning at transfer for students who initially learned fraction addition using pie wedges or tile pieces . At transfer , students had to solve fraction problems using new materials ( e . g . , beans or bars ) . Correct innovative responses adapted the new materials into useful conﬁgurations . Correct efﬁcient responses gave the right verbal answer . Over time , the students who initially learned with tiles exhibited a better ability to adapt the novel materials , showed more stable progress , and ultimately became more efﬁcient than students who ini - tially learned with pies and were more efﬁcient at ﬁrst ( Martin & Schwartz , 2004 ) . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 40 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 41 appears that early innovation yields better adaptability in the short run and better efﬁciency in the long run in transfer situations . Needless to say , there is much more research to do on the concept of the OAC . SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS We began this chapter by describing a common goal among several super - intendents . They want graduates from their schools to be in a position to learn and make their own decisions . Having some expertise in the topic of transfer , it was disappointing to us that the transfer literature could not be more helpful in explaining whether this is possible or how to encourage it . The problem is not simply that there is a shortage of experimental research on transfer , or even a shortage of ﬁeld research that examines transitions from school to work and life . Multiple researchers have looked at the effects of schooling on transfer to everyday situations , often with gloomy results . The problem is that transfer research has not developed a set of constructs or methods suited to addressing the superintendents’ con - cerns . Most of the research on transfer has examined sequestered problem solving in contexts that require the ability to directly apply old knowledge to solve new instances of problems . This is very different from asking if people have been prepared to learn to solve novel problems and engage in other kinds of productive activities . Thus , most transfer - inspired methodol - ogies cannot detect whether school prepares people to learn more effec - tively than if they had not had school experiences , and hence cannot address the concern of the superintendents . To develop our ideas , we divided the chapter into four sections that focused on the following goals : 1 . Rethink the classic deﬁnition of transfer and show how it tends to produce assessments that make people “look dumb” rather than “look smart” ( e . g . , Norman , 1993 ) . We used Burgess’s eagle challenge to illustrate how ﬁfth - graders , college students , and experienced prin - cipals appeared to have very different sets of competencies when we began to move from SPS assessments to those that approached PFL . 2 . Differentiate “transferring in” to situations from “transferring out” of them . Failure to clearly differentiate these two examples of transfer can help clarify why some people think that transfer is ubiquitous ( their focus is on “transfer in” for learning ) , whereas others ﬁnd it to be rare ( their focus is on “transfer out” to SPS problem solving ) . We also noted that Broudy’s analysis of three kinds of knowing ( replica - tive , applicative , and interpretive ) have important implications for thinking about the kinds of “transfer in” that can affect “transfer out . ” IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 41 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 42 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS 3 . Discuss studies that show that new ways to think about transferring “in” to and “out” can reveal advantages of a variety of interactive instructional techniques that remain hidden when we use more tra - ditional measures . We discussed three different studies where we were able to control the kinds of learning experiences available to participants . Measures of PFL transfer were critical for revealing the impact of these experiences . 4 . Propose a tentative learning and performance “space” that differen - tiates two dimensions of transfer—innovation and efﬁciency—and argue for the possibility of an OAC ( optimal adapatibility corridor ) that balances innovation and efﬁciency and produces trajectories toward the kinds of adaptive expertise that have been discussed by Hatano and Inagaki ( 1986 ) . We also provided an example of what research might look like that explores optimal trajectories of learn - ing and development through the innovation - efﬁciency space . And we noted that the concept of OAC has just begun to be explored . We believe that it will be especially useful for the ﬁeld to explore the sep - aration between activities that support efﬁcient problem solving versus those that support novel learning and innovation . Most of the transfer research has examined efﬁciency , or how quickly and accurately people can remember and apply appropriate knowledge in a new context . We acknowledged that this is a very important dimension of learning and transfer . At the same time , efﬁciency is not the only thing that the superin - tendents were after . They wanted their students to adapt to new situations , learn , and make reasoned decisions . We pointed to the literature on adap - tive expertise as an example of instances where people are both efﬁcient and innovative . This literature distinguishes ( a ) experts who can solve rou - tine tasks efﬁciently , often using specialized tools , and ( b ) experts who can adapt to novel situations and learn . This ability to adapt has a number of features that separate it from efﬁciency . For example , it often requires “let - ting go” or “holding lightly” solutions and interpretations that are efﬁcient in other contexts . And , it often involves actively interacting with people , tools , and environments to discover gaps and misalignments in one’s knowledge that need to be reconciled , as well as gaining access to new structures , interpretations , and forms of interaction . However , adaptive expertise involves efﬁciency too . We proposed an OAC that combines innovation and efﬁciency . We doubt that instruction that emphasizes one or the other will be optimal , and we doubt that separate courses of instruction in each will work well either . Instead , we hypothesized that it is important to interleave activities that promote innovation and efﬁciency . We further offered the tentative claim that for early learners ( novices ) , innovative experiences may be par - IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 42 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 43 ticularly important . Among other things , they help learners develop new interpretations instead of assimilating new experiences to old ways of thinking . We provided some initial evidence showing that trajectories that favor early innovation lead to superior transfer and ultimate efﬁciency when working with new situations . We suspect there are many mechanisms that come into play during innovative , interactive experiences that can prepare people to learn . For example , some forms of information , like joint attention to new situations , only arise in interaction ( e . g . , Barron , 2003 ) , and therefore cannot be ade - quately experienced without interactions . The choice of people with whom one interacts to solve problems ( e . g . , people with diverse sets of ideas and experiences vs . s “like - minded” individuals ) will also affect opportunities for innovation . Similarly , collaborative tasks that emphasize design and inven - tion may pull for the sharing of ideas compared to “right answer” tasks that lead to a partitioning of labor . We are not in a position to enumerate or empirically defend the many possibilities . Rather , we suggest the potential value of thinking about a corridor that combines innovation and efﬁciency during learning . We also believe that distinctions between innovation and efﬁciency might help clarify many confusing debates in the literature . For example , some arguments between in situ theorists and “standard” cogni - tive theorists focus primarily on efﬁciency . This includes arguments that teaching in context is good because it removes the need for transfer . Other arguments between in situ theorists and “standard” cognitive theorists involve the nature of knowing and how new ideas are discovered in the context of interactions with tools , data , and others . By separating efﬁciency arguments from innovation arguments , these two ﬁelds might make better progress in exploring their similarities and differences in understanding how people learn—including how we can help people become better pre - pared for future learning . We end by discussing an issue that seems particularly important for fur - ther investigation and builds on our repeated observation that standard methods of assessment miss important forms of knowing and transfer that educators should care about . The issue stems from the fact that most high - stakes assessments of student learning are sequestered problem - solving assessments that tap the replicative and applicative aspects of knowing . We have argued that these assessments can be valid indicators of certain kinds of efﬁciencies , for example , basic reading and literacy abilities . But , they may vastly underestimate the abilities that people may have to learn about new areas of inquiry or to innovate . Elsewhere ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) , we discuss Feuerstein ( 1979 ) and colleagues’ work on dynamic assessments ( a form of PFL assessments ) and note that one can get very dif - ferent pictures of people’s competencies given dynamic rather than static assessments . New technologies make it possible to conduct large - scale IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 43 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 44 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS assessments of people’s abilities to learn to solve new problems ( dynamic assessments ) rather than simply assess what they can do given SPS tests . To help start a discussion of PFL “high - stakes” assessments , we have been working toward models of dynamic assessment that can serve both formative and summative goals , that can tap both efﬁciency and innova - tion , and that can work on either small or large scales . We call them “work - ing smart” assessments . Students learn about the general goal of efﬁciently solving a future set of recurrent problems . In preparation for meeting this goal , they are encouraged to innovate “smart tools” that can help . Graphs , charts , spreadsheets , computer simulations , social networks , norms for dis - tributed expertise , and a host of other resources are candidates for “work - ing smart” ( e . g . , Pea , 1993 ) . Working smart assessments combine the dimensions of innovation and efﬁciency shown in Figure 1 . 9 . The original impetus for having learners create tools for working smart arose in the context of an implementation study in which schools from nine different states were using the Jasper Adventure Series ( e . g . , CTGV , 1997 ) . Jasper Adventures are video - based narratives that create a story con - text for anchoring sustained mathematical problem solving . Although it is hard for us to believe in retrospect , the Internet was not in public con - sciousness at this time . Therefore , we used video satellite connections to create a “Challenge Series” where classes and schools from different states would try to solve problems posed over the television . The problems were “what if” analogs that varied speciﬁc quantities and constraints of the origi - nal Jasper problems they had solved . The Jasper Challenges were exciting for students , teachers , parents , and community members , but we kept running into a nagging problem . The goal of the Jasper series was to encourage deep and innovative thinking ( there is lots of room for innovation under constraint when solving Jasper problems ) . However , our satellite challenges were time limited and required fast , efﬁcient thinking . This was a mismatch that bothered us for some time . Eventually we came up with the idea of Working Smart Jasper . For this to work , we modiﬁed the task context surrounding the Jasper Adventures . For example , in one Adventure called Rescue at Boone’s Meadow ( CTGV , 1997 ) , students had to help Emily rescue a wounded eagle by working out ﬂying time , weight , and gas consumption for an ultra - light plane . We mod - iﬁed the task context to help students learn to “work smart . ” Students had to help Emily run a rescue and delivery service that involved three ultra - light planes that could carry different payloads , ﬂew at different speeds , and had different degrees of fuel consumption . The students had to help clients of Emily’s company ﬁgure out travel times to and from speciﬁc regions , costs , and so on . In the context of their imaginary job , students confronted sets of what we call “quasi - repetitive activity structures” IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 44 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 45 ( QRACS ) . In the case of Emily’s company , the QRACS involved answering sets of distance / rate / time and fuel consumption problems that recurred frequently . Solving each problem anew ( even with a calculator ) is inefﬁ - cient and error - prone . Ultimately , students learned to develop tools such as graphs and spreadsheets that allowed them to work smart and perform much better at answering “clients’ questions” than groups who stuck only with their calculators . Examples are discussed in much more detail else - where ( e . g . , Bransford et al . , 1996 , 2000 ; Vye et al . , 1998 ; Zech et al . , 1998 ) . As we wrote this chapter , we became aware that “working smart” assess - ments represented an excellent way to keep instruction within the OAC and combine emphases on both innovation and efﬁciency . With the Inter - net , working smart assessments could become a new model for broad - scale standardized testing , where the goal is to foster students’ abilities to inno - vate and learn to solve signiﬁcant challenges delivered online . For exam - ple , individuals , classes , or even random samples from a region could receive a challenge online , have several days to prepare , confront the chal - lenge , revise as needed , complete the challenge again , and so on , with the number of cycles to proﬁciency being one measure of interest . Addition - ally , each cycle could use increasingly difﬁcult challenges to gauge student gains throughout the year . Currently , most high - stakes assessments are almost totally efﬁciency ori - ented , and we believe that this gives only a partial and often misleading pic - ture of students’ capabilities and the value of particular kinds of educational experiences . There is , of course , a great deal of work that needs to be conducted to make working smart and other PFL assessments work effectively . For example , we have focused mostly on the validity of our knowledge assessments , and high - stakes testing raises many issues concern - ing reliability . Nevertheless , we believe that new ways of thinking about transfer suggest new ways of thinking about assessment , and that working smart assessments are one example of a different paradigm that could have major effects on education and accountability . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are deeply indebted to Giyoo Hatano and Harry Broudy’s seminal ideas , and Jose Mestre’s excellent leadership . Order of authorship was determined by whose turn it was . This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant Nos . REC - 0231946 , BCS - 0214548 , REC - 0196238 , REC - 0231771 , and EEC - 9876363 . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 45 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 46 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS REFERENCES Adams , J . L . ( 1979 ) . Conceptual blockbusting : A guide to better ideas . New York : Norton . Adams , L . , Kasserman , J . , Yearwood , A . , Perfetto , G . , Bransford , J . , & Franks , J . ( 1988 ) . The effects of facts versus problem - oriented acquisition . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 167 – 175 . Anderson , J . R . , Conrad , F . G . , & Corbett , A . T . ( 1989 ) . Skill acquisition and the LISP tutor . Cognitive Science , 13 , 467 – 505 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1997 ) . Situated learning and educa - tion . Educational Researcher , 26 , 18 – 21 . Anderson , R . C . , Osborn , J . , & Tierney , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1984 ) . Learning to read in Ameri - can schools : Basal readers and content texts . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Atkinson , R . C . , & Schiffrin , R . M . ( 1968 ) . Human memory : A proposed system and its control processes . In K . W . Spence & J . T . Spence ( Eds . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation , Vol . 2 ( pp . 89 – 195 ) . New York : Academic Press . Ball , D . L . , & Cohen , D . K . ( 1999 ) . Developing practice , developing practitioners : Toward a practice - based theory of professional education . In G . Sykes & L . Darling - Hammond ( Eds . ) , Teaching as the learning profession : Handbook of policy and practice ( pp . 3 – 32 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . Barron , B . J . ( 2003 ) . When smart groups fail . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 12 , 307 – 359 . Bartlett , F . C . ( 1932 ) . Remembering : A study in experimental and social psychology . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bassok , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Interdomain transfer between isomorphic top - ics in algebra and physics . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 15 , 153 – 166 . Beach , K . ( 1999 ) . Consequential transitions : A socio - cultural expedition beyond transfer in education . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 101 – 139 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Biswas , G . , Leelawong , K . , Beylynne , K . , Viswanath , K . , Vye , N . , Schwartz , D . L . , & Davis , J . ( 2004 ) . Incorporating self regulated techniques into learning by teaching envi - ronments . Manuscript submitted for publication . Biswas , G . , Schwartz , D . , Bransford , J . , & TAGV . ( 2001 ) . Technology support for complex problem solving : From SAD environments to AI . In K . D . Forbus & P . J . Feltovich ( Eds ) , Smart machines in education : The coming revolution in educa - tional technology ( pp . 71 – 97 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bloom , B . S . ( 1984 ) . The 2 - sigma problem : The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one - to - one tutoring . Educational Researcher , 13 , 4 – 16 . Bransford , J . D . , Franks , J . J . , Vye , N . J . , & Sherwood , R . D . ( 1989 ) . New approaches to instruction : Because wisdom can ' t be told . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 470 – 497 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bransford , J . D . , & Johnson , M . K . ( 1972 ) . Contextual prerequisites for understand - ing : Some investigations of comprehension and recall . Journal of Verbal Learn - ing and Verbal Behavior , 11 , 717 – 726 . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 46 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 47 Bransford , J . D . , & McCarrel , N . S . ( 1974 ) . A sketch of a cognitive approach to com - prehension . In W . Weimer & D . S . Palermo ( Eds . ) , Cognition and the symbolic processes ( pp . 299 – 303 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 100 ) . Washington , DC : American Educa - tional Research Association . Bransford , J . D . , & Stein , B . S . ( 1993 ) . The ideal problem solver ( 2nd ed ) . New York : Freeman . Bransford , J . D . , Zech , L . , Schwartz , D . L . , Barron , B . , Vye , N . , & CTGV . ( 1996 ) . Fos - tering mathematical thinking in middle school students : Lessons from research . In R . J . Sternberg & T . Ben - Zeev ( Eds . ) , The nature of mathematical thinking ( pp . 203 – 250 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Bransford , J . D . , Zech , L . , Schwartz , D . L . , Barron , B . J . , Vye , N . , & CTGV . ( 2000 ) . Design environments that invite and sustain mathematical thinking . In P . Cobb ( Ed . ) , Symbolizing and communicating in mathematics classrooms ( pp . 275 – 324 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Broudy , H . S . ( 1977 ) . Types of knowledge and purposes of education . In R . C . Anderson , R . J . Spiro , & W . E . Montague ( Eds . ) , Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge ( pp . 1 – 17 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learn - ing to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 – 523 . Carraher , D . W . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representa - tion of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1241 – 1257 . Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt ( CTGV ) . ( 1997 ) . The Jasper Project : Lessons in curriculum , instruction , assessment , and professional development . Mah - wah , NJ : Erlbaum . Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt ( CTGV ) . ( 2000 ) . Adventures in anchored instruction : Lessons from beyond the ivory tower . In R . Glaser ( Ed . ) , Advances in instructional psychology : Educational design and cognitive science ( pp . 35 – 100 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Crews , T . , Biswas , G . , Nathan , M . , Varma , S . , Goldman , S . , & Bransford , J . ( 1995 ) . AdventurePlayer : Macrocontext plus microworlds . In J . Greer ( Ed . ) , Interna - tional Conference on AI in Education , AI - ED’95 ( pp . 381 – 388 ) . Washington , DC : AAAI Press . DeGroot , A . D . ( 1965 ) . Thought and choice in chess . The Hague , Netherlands : Mouton . Detterman , D . K . ( 1993 ) . The case for the prosecution : Transfer as epiphenome - non . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Detterman , D . K . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1993 ) . Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cog - nition , and instruction . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 47 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 48 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS Dooling , D . J . , & Lachman , R . ( 1971 ) . Effects of comprehension on retention of prose . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 88 , 216 – 222 . Dunbar , K . ( 1997 ) . How scientists think : On - line creativity and conceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Conceptual structures and processes : Emergence , discovery , and change ( pp . 461 – 493 ) . Washington , DC : Amer - ican Psychological Association Press . Dyson , A . H . ( 1999 ) . Transforming transfer : Unruly children , contrary texts , and the persistence of the pedagogical order . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 141 – 171 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Ebbinghaus , H . ( 1913 ) . Memory : A contribution to experimental psychology ( H . A . Ruger & C . E . Bussenues , Trans . ) . New York : Teachers College , Columbia University . ( Original work published 1885 ) Egan , K . ( 1988 ) . Teaching as story telling : An alternative approach to teaching and the cur - riculum . London : Routledge . Feuerstein , R . ( 1979 ) . The dynamic assessment of retarded performers : The learning potential assessment device , theory , instruments , and techniques . Baltimore : University Park Press . Fullan , M . ( 2001 ) . Leading in a culture of change . San Francisco : Wiley . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . W . , Markman , A . B . , Levidow , B . B . , Wolff , P . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1997 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual change : A case study of Johannes Kepler . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 6 ( 1 ) , 3 – 40 . Gibson , J . J . , & Gibson , E . J . ( 1955 ) . Perceptual learning : Differentiation or enrich - ment . Psychological Review , 62 , 32 – 51 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cog - nitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transfer of situated learning . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Gutierrez , K . D . , & Rogoff , B . ( 2003 ) . Cultural ways of learning : Individual traits or repertoires of practice . Educational Researchers , 32 ( 5 ) , 19 – 25 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Two courses of expertise . In H . Stevenson , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds . ) , Child development and education in Japan ( pp . 262 – 272 ) . New York : Freeman . Hatano , G . , & Oura , Y . ( 2003 ) . Commentary : Reconceptualizing school learning using insight from expertise research . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 26 – 29 . Hayes , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The complete problem solver ( 2nd ed . ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) . Cognition in the wild . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Judd , C . H . ( 1908 ) . The relation of special training to general intelligence . Educa - tional Review , 36 , 28 – 42 . Kirsh , D . , & Maglio , P . ( 1994 ) . On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic action . Cognitive Science , 18 , 513 – 549 . Koedinger , K . R . , Anderson , J . R . , Hadley , W . H . , & Mark , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the big city . International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education , 8 , 30 – 43 . LaBerge , D . , & Samuels , S . J . ( 1974 ) . Toward a theory of automatic information processing in reading . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 293 – 323 . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 48 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 49 Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lin , X . D . ( 2001 ) . Reﬂective adaptation of a technology artifact : A case study of classroom change . Cognition and Instruction , 19 , 395 – 440 . Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer and vice versa . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 1 ) , 17 – 20 . Lovett , M . C . , & Greenhouse , J . B . ( 2000 ) . Applying cognitive theory to statistics instruction . The American Statistician , 54 , 1 – 11 . Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanization in problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 54 ( 6 , Whole No . 248 ) . MacLeod , C . M . ( 1988 ) . Forgotten but not gone : Savings for pictures and words in long - term memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cog - nition , 14 , 195 – 212 . Martin , T . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( in press ) . Physically distributed learning : Adapting and reinterpreting physical environments in the development of fraction con - cepts . Cognitive Science . Marton , F . , & Booth , S . ( 1997 ) . Learning and awareness . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Mathan , S . , & Koedinger , K . R . ( 2003 ) . Recasting the debate : Beneﬁts of tutoring error detection and correction skills . In U . Hoppe , F . Verdejo , & J . Kay ( Eds . ) , Artiﬁcial intelligence in education : Shaping the future of learning through intelligent tech - nologies , Proceedings of AI - ED 2003 ( Vol . 97 , pp . 13 – 18 ) . Amsterdam : IOS Press . Mestre , J . P . ( 1994 , February ) . Cognitive aspects of learning and teaching science . In S . J . Fitzsimmons & L . C . Kerpelman ( Eds . ) , Teacher enhancement for elemen - tary and secondary science and mathematics : Status , issues and problems ( pp . 31 – 53 ) . Washington , DC : National Science Foundation ( NSF 94 - 80 ) . Mestre , J . P . , Thaden - Koch , T . C . , Dufresne , R . J . , & Gerace , W . J . ( in press ) . The dependence of knowledge deployment on context among physics novices . In E . Redish & M . Vicentini ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the international school of physics “Enrico Fermi” : Course CLVI . Amsterdam : ISO Press / Italian Physical Society . Minstrell , J . ( 1989 ) . Teaching science for understanding . In L . Resnick & L . Klopfer ( Eds . ) , Toward the thinking curriculum : Current cognitive research . 1989 Yearbook of the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development ( pp . 129 – 149 ) . Washington , DC : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . National Research Council ( NRC ) . ( 2000 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school ( Expanded ed . ) ( J . D . Bransford , A . L . Brown , & R . R . Cocking , Eds . ) . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Pren - tice - Hall . Nierenberg , G . ( 1986 ) . The art of creative thinking . New York : Simon & Schuster . Norman , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Things that make us smart : Defending human attributes in the age of the machine . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Novello , D . ( 1980 ) . The ﬁve - minute university . In M . Nichols & J . Fortenberry ( Directors ) , Gilda Live [ Television series ] . UK : Anchor Bay Entertainment Pande , P . S . , Neuman , R . P . , & Cavanagh , R . R . ( 2000 ) . The Six Sigma way : How GE , Motorola , and other top companies are honing their performance . New York : McGraw - Hill . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 49 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM 50 D . L . SCHWARTZ , J . D . BRANSFORD , & D . SEARS Pea , R . D . ( 1993 ) . Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education . In G . Salomon ( Ed . ) , Distributed cognitions ( pp . 47 – 87 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The origins of intelligence in children ( M . Cook , Trans . ) . New York : International Universities Press . Piaget , J . ( 1970 ) . Genetic epistemology . New York : Columbia University Press . Redish , E . F . ( in press ) . A theoretical framework for physics education research : Modeling student thinking . In E . Redish & M . Vicentini ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the international school of physics “Enrico Fermi” : Course CLVI . Amsterdam : ISO Press / Italian Physical Society . Reeves , B . , & Nass , C . ( 1996 ) . The media equation : How people treat computers , television and new media like real people and places . New York : Cambridge University Press . Salomon , G . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mecha - nisms of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 113 – 142 . Sander , E . , & Richard , J . ( 1997 ) . Analogical transfer as guided by an abstraction process : The case of learning by doing in text editing . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 23 , 1459 – 1483 . Sawyer , R . K . ( 2003 ) . Creative teaching : Collaborative discussion as disciplined improvisation . Educational Researcher , 33 ( 2 ) , 12 – 20 . Schliemann , A . D . , & Acioly , N . M . ( 1989 ) . Mathematical knowledge developed at work : The contribution of practice versus the contribution of schooling . Cogni - tion and Instruction , 6 , 185 – 221 . Schuyler , D . ( 2003 ) . Cognitive therapy : A practical guide . New York : Norton . Schwartz , D . L . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 1998 ) . A time for telling . Cognition & Instruc - tion , 16 , 475 – 522 . Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for learning : The hidden efﬁciency of original student production in statistics instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 129 – 184 . Schwartz , D . L . , & Nasir , N . ( 2003 ) . Transfer of learning . In W . Guthrie ( Ed . ) , Ency - clopedia of education ( 2nd ed . , pp . 1449 – 1452 ) . New York : Macmillan . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . The transfer of cognitive skill . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Spiro , R . J . , Feltovich , P . J . , Jacobson , M . J . , & Coulson , R . L . ( 1991 , May ) . Cognitive ﬂexibility , constructivism , and hypertext : Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill - structured domains . Educational Technol - ogy , pp . 24 – 33 . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Plans and situated actions : The problem of human machine commu - nication . New York : Cambridge University Press . Thelen , E . , & Smith , L . B . ( 1994 ) . A dynamic systems approach to the development of cog - nition and action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Vaill , P . R . ( 1991 ) . Managing as a performing art : New ideas for a world of chaotic change . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass Wiley . Vollmeyer , R . , Burns , B . D . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . The impact of goal speciﬁcity on strategy use and the acquisition of problem structure . Cognitive Science , 20 , 75 – 100 . Vosniadou , S . , & Brewer , W . F . ( 1992 ) . Mental models of the earth : A study of con - ceptual change in childhood . Cognitive Psychology , 24 , 535 – 85 . IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 50 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM Efﬁciency and Innovation in Transfer 51 Vye , N . J . , Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , Barron , B . J . , Zech , L . , & Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt . ( 1998 ) . SMART environments that support monitoring , reﬂection , and revision . In D . Hacker , J . Dunlosky , & A . Graesser ( Eds . ) , Metacognition in educational theory and practice ( pp . 305 – 346 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1987 ) . The collected works of L . S . Vygotsky ( R . Rieber & A . Carton , Eds . ) . New York : Plenum Press . Weinstein , C . E . ( 1978 ) . Elaboration skills as a learning strategy . In H . F . O’Neil , Jr . ( Ed . ) , Learning strategies ( pp . 31 – 55 ) . New York : Academic Press . Wertheimer M . ( 1959 ) . Productive thinking . New York : Harper and Row . Wineburg , S . ( 1998 ) . Reading Abraham Lincoln : An expert / expert study in the interpretation of historical texts . Cognitive Science , 22 , 319 – 346 . Wineburg , S . ( 2004 ) . Crazy for history . Journal of American History , 90 ( 4 ) , 1 – 14 . Winograd , T . , & Flores , F . ( 1984 ) . Understanding computers and cognition : A new foun - dation for design . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Zech , L . , Vye , N . J . , Bransford , J . D . , Goldman , S . R . , Barron , B . J . , Schwartz , D . L . , Kisst - Hackett , R . , Mayﬁeld - Stewart , C . , & Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt . ( 1998 ) . An introduction to geometry through anchored instruc - tion . In R . Lehrer & D . Chazan ( Eds . ) , New directions for teaching and learning in geometry ( pp . 439 – 463 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . CH01—51 IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 51 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM IA259 - Royer ( 3 ) . book Page 52 Wednesday , March 9 , 2005 9 : 06 PM