1 The Social Organization of Distributed Cognition How social arrangements affect the cognitive properties of groups ( which can be different from the cognitive properties of the individuals in the group ) . Computational Architecture • Computational architecture describes how the pieces of a computational system are connected . • What information goes where , when , in what form ? • What are the pieces ? – Central processor – Memory stores – Input , output , buffers , etc . • How can information move ? – Processor retrieves an operation from program memory , data from another memory , and writes a result back into the data memory . A foundational metaphor • Computer – metal , silicon – hardware – software – programming – Data – memory • RAM • Disk – Formal Systems • Mind / Brain – meat , – nervous tissue – mindware – learning – knowledge – memory • short term • long term – Formal Systems Functional equivalence , not identity Symbol system states Brain states Symbol system States Two Physical Symbol Systems ? • Computer – metal , silicon – hardware – software – programming – Data – memory • RAM • Disk – Formal Systems • Mind / Brain – meat – nervous system tissue – mindware – learning – knowledge – memory • episodic • semantic – Formal Systems Two Physical Symbol Systems ? • Computer – metal , silicon – hardware – software – programming – Data – memory • RAM • Disk – Formal Systems • Navigation department – meat , metal , paper – people and stuff – procedures – learning ( 3 timescales ) – measurements – memory • notes , marks , words • charts , documents – Formal Systems Social organization as computational architecture • Social organizations take the form they do for many reasons • No matter what form a social organization takes , it will have cognitive consequences . • Because social organization determines what jobs get done , where , by whom . • It shapes what information goes where , when , and in what form . 2 Distribution of cognitive labor • Distribution of knowledge – Specialization of knowledge . • Coordinating the distributed parts , interactions among specialists • Producing and reproducing expertise Society as a distributed memory ( Roberts , 1964 ) • Native American groups have different kinds of social organization , and these give rise to different memory properties . • Factors that affect memory retrieval – Group size – Distribution of knowledge among individuals – Patterns of interaction among individuals – Changes in patterns of interaction through time Coordinating the distributed parts • There are many ways to do this , social organization of distributed cognition • Stigmergy : reacting to structure left by others , ( e . g . , ants ) • Aggregation : voting schemes , juries , markets , Wisdom of crowds . • Society of agent specialists , distribution of knowledge and distribution of responsibility . • Hierarchies , and chain of command • Distributed AI , Chandrasekeran , natural and social system metaphors . Bridge Layout Plotter B - Timer Deck Log Fathometer STBD Bearing Taker Port Bearing Taker The Fix Cycle Activity Score 3 Sequential control of action / production systems • A production = a condition / action pair • Agents waiting for conditions that trigger actions . • With the right distribution of productions , a complex procedure can be accomplished without any agent knowing the plan . Cognitive properties of the navigation team are twice removed from the cognitive properties of the members of the team . • Cognitive properties of individuals are transformed by the functional systems they form when they interact with technology • Social organization of distributed cognition produces effects at the group level that are simply not those of the individual level . Features of SODC • Distribution of access to information ( sensing , direct and vicarious experience , horizon of observation ; notice how this is shaped by the interactions of social and physical space ) • Propagation of representational state across multiple media • Redundant memory ( episodic memory ) • Distribution of knowledge ( semantic memory ) ( specialization and sharing of knowledge ) More features • Distribution of expectations and anticipation • Distribution of attention . The management of attention . How attention is organized by the flow of activity . ( Who attends to what when and from what perspective ? ) • Structure of communication ( who talks to whom about what , when , in what language ? ) More features of SODC • Coordinating the parts via… – stigmergy , aggregation , Daemons and production systems , buffers , command hierarchy , goal hierarchy and relations of goal hierarchy to social hierarchy • Recipient design in communication and switching modalities to meet the needs of the listener • Filtering effects in information hierarchies More features • Redundant readback for error detection • Distribution of cognitive task performance ( multiple people working simultaneously on related task elements ) • The production and re - production of expertise • Precomputation ( the amortization of complexity ) 4 Advantages of distributed architectures • Decomposition to control complexity ( modularity ) , limiting complexity of input encountered by any individual • Also enables parallel activity for efficiency • Filtering reduces processing costs • Organizing activity on the basis of social relations rather than domain content . – “ Take care of syntax and semantics will take care of itself . ” – “ Take care of social relations , and syntax will take care of itself ! ” Coordinating Goal Structure and Social Structure Advantage of distribution : Graceful degradation • Robust adaptation or gradual reduction in capacity rather than catastrophic failure . – Redundant knowledge and skills – Intersubjectively shared understanding of the task and filling in for other agents . Costs of distributing cognition • Filtering effects ( hard to diagnose causes of failures , premature commitment ) • The need for coordination • Design of coordination can be difficult ( see beam bearings analysis in Ch 4 of CitW ) How to get the best cognitive performance out of groups 5 How should we aggregate knowledge in a group to get the right answer to a question ? • Vote / poll • Deliberation • Market • Blog / wiki Just ask a lot of people and take the average of their answers • Galton and the weight of the bull . How many jelly beans are in this picture ? Majority Rule • If we have a yes / no question , rather than averaging , we can take the majority opinion . The Condorcet Jury Theorem • Assumptions : – Independence of information : people are not affected by the votes of others – Each person is more likely than not to be correct . – Majority rule . • The probability of a correct answer by the majority of the group increases toward 100 % as the size of the group increases . – Groups are more accurate than individuals . – Big groups are more accurate than little groups . A justification for democracy ? • If all of the voters are more likely to be right than wrong , then majority rule will work . • Even if only most of the voters are more likely to be right than wrong , it will still work . – E . g . if 55 % of the people are 65 % likely to be right and the other 45 % of the people are only 40 % likely to be right . – Who wants to be a millionaire ? Ask the audience or your expert ? • And if those who don’t know the answer respond randomly , then the outcome will be determined by those who do know . 6 The dark side • If each member of a group is more likely to be wrong than right , then the likelihood that the majority ’ s decision will be correct falls to zero as the size of the group increases ! • So voters or jurors must be enlightened . They must not be misled . What can affect the likelihood that a person will make the right choice ? • Anchors . I am asking 500 people how many jelly beans there are in this picture . How many do you think there are ? Framing • Of the people who have this procedure , 90 % will be alive 5 years from now . • Of the people who have this procedure , 10 % will be dead 5 years from now . Think of our congress • “ A very numerous assembly cannot be composed of very enlightened men . It is even probable that those comprising this assembly will on many matters combine great ignorance with many prejudices . Thus there will be a great number of questions on which the probability of the truth of each voter will be below ½ . It follows that the more numerous the assembly , the more it will be exposed to the risk of making false decisions . ” When should we expect aggregation to work ? • When most people asked are more likely than not to be right . – Company president asks advisors about a business decision – University dean asks faculty about hiring a certain job candidate – Government agency consults a group of scientists about a climate problem When will it not work ? • When most people are not more likely than not to be right . – Ask the entire nation • If the US should sign the Rio Kyoto Copenhagen Panama Protocol on Climate Change • Whether genetic engineering poses serious risks • Whether an increase in the minimum wage would increase unemployment . 7 Deliberation • Rather than aggregating initial opinions , what if we allow people to talk it over ? • Deliberation can help under some conditions General effects of deliberation Views will be more extreme after deliberation than they were before deliberation Consensus will be higher after deliberation = less diversity of opinion People will have more confidence in their opinions after deliberation Are they more likely to be right ? If the question has an answer that is difficult to find , but is obviously correct once found , then yes . BUT in general NO ! Why deliberation sometimes fails to integrate the available information • Eagerness to conform and be accepted may lead to holding back dissenting opinions • Fear of punishment may lead to holding back dissent The internal morality of deliberation • Rational discourse is supposed to be public and inclusive , to grant equal communication rights for participants , to require sincerity and to diffuse any kind of force other than the forceless force of the better argument . This communicative structure is expected to create a deliberative space for the mobilization of the best available contributions for the most relevant topics . ( J . Habermas ) • Explore / exploit and the fundamental tradeoff in cognitive ecology Different institutions capture different aspects of this ideal • Religious cults • Courtroom trials • Airline cockpits • Government agencies • Democratic society • Science • This means that the character of the institutions we have , determines the effectiveness of our use of “ many minds to produce knowledge ”