1 Tuning levels of low - complexity domain interactions to modulate endogenous oncogenic transcription Authors : Shasha Chong 1 , 2 , 5 , Thomas G . W . Graham 1 , Claire Dugast - Darzacq 1 , 4 , Gina M . Dailey 1 , Xavier Darzacq 1 , 4 , Robert Tjian 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 * Affiliations : 1 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA . 2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA . 3 Li Ka Shing Center for Biomedical & Health Sciences , University of California , Berkeley , CA , USA . 4 CIRM Center of Excellence , University of California , Berkeley , CA . 5 Present address : Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA , USA * Correspondence to : jmlim @ berkeley . edu Abstract : Gene activation by mammalian transcription factors ( TFs ) requires dynamic , multivalent , and selective interactions of their intrinsically disordered low - complexity domains ( LCDs ) , but how such interactions mediate transcription remains unclear . It has been proposed that extensive LCD - LCD interactions culminating in liquid - liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) of TFs is the dominant mechanism underlying transactivation . Here , we investigated how tuning the amount and localization of LCD - LCD interactions in vivo affects transcription of endogenous human genes . Quantitative single - cell and single - molecule imaging reveals that the oncogenic TF EWS / FLI1 requires a finely tuned range of LCD - LCD interactions to efficiently activate target genes . Modest or more dramatic increases in LCD - LCD interactions toward putative LLPS repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription in patient cells . Likewise , ectopically creating LCD - LCD interactions to sequester EWS / FLI1 into a bona fide LLPS compartment , the nucleolus , inhibits EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription and oncogenic transformation . Our findings reveal fundamental principles underlying LCD - mediated transcription and suggest mislocalizing specific LCD - LCD interactions as a novel therapeutic strategy for targeting disease - causing TFs . Main Text : Transcription control is a front - line mechanism underlying differential gene expression that drives animal development and disease . As critical regulators of mammalian gene expression , transcription factors ( TFs ) contain sequence - specific DNA - binding and transactivation domains that participate in specific protein - protein interactions to direct gene transcription . DNA - binding domains usually have well - defined protein structures and recognize specific DNA sequences in a “lock - and - key” manner with precise stoichiometries ( 1 , 2 ) . In contrast , transactivation domains typically contain low - complexity sequence domains ( LCDs ) that are intrinsically disordered and not amenable to conventional structure - function analysis . Recent advances in quantitative live - cell imaging revealed that dynamic , multivalent , and selective interactions occur between various TF LCDs and other intrinsically disordered regions found in the RNA Polymerase II ( Pol II ) 2 transcription machinery and associated cofactors ( 3 - 7 ) . These multivalent interactions help enrich TFs and other transcription regulators at specific genomic loci to form dynamic protein assemblies that we and others referred to as LCD - mediated “hubs” ( 8 - 11 ) . Under certain conditions , LCD overexpression can induce normally small transient hubs to develop properties resembling those of droplets formed via liquid - liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) ( 8 ) . In recent years , phase - separated membraneless compartments , often called “condensates” or “droplets” , have been invoked as an essential mechanism empowering many biological processes , including transcriptional regulation . Most studies thus far deploy in vitro experiments in test tubes to observe the formation of condensates and characterize their properties , yet the in vivo biophysical characteristics of condensates and their functional impact under physiological conditions remains poorly understood ( 12 ) . While it is clear that dynamic multivalent LCD - LCD interactions underlying both hub formation and LLPS could play a role in transactivation ( 3 - 7 , 13 - 15 ) , a causal link between LLPS and transactivation has remained elusive . Studies of how the transcriptional output changes upon manipulation of LCD - LCD interactions are just emerging and have raised new questions . On the one hand , recent reports suggest that light - induced LLPS of TF LCDs increases global cellular transcription as well as transcription of a reporter gene within a transiently transfected plasmid ( 16 , 17 ) . On the other hand , transcription of a synthetic gene array increased with local TF concentration driven by multivalent interactions of TF LCDs , but LLPS of the LCDs did not further enhance expression of the same synthetic gene array ( 18 ) . These intriguing but conflicting findings necessitate new approaches to further investigate the functional impact of tuning LCD - LCD interactions and inducing LLPS on transcription in a physiological context . One as yet unmet challenge is to measure how transcription of specific endogenous genes is affected by manipulation of local LCD - LCD interactions to induce the formation of LLPS - like condensates at target loci . Here , we addressed this critical issue and revealed new principles underlying LCD - interaction - mediated transactivation of natural endogenous genes with quantitative single - cell and single - molecule imaging . Enhanced levels of EWS LCD self - interactions repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription We focused on the oncogenic TF EWS / FLI1 , a potent driver of the oncogenic transcription program in Ewing’s sarcoma cells . EWS / FLI1 is a fusion TF consisting of a transactivating LCD from EWSR1 ( EWS LCD ) and a DNA - binding domain from FLI1 that specifically recognizes the GGAA sequence . Recent studies showed that EWS / FLI1 forms local high - concentration hubs at GGAA microsatellites , highly repetitive GGAA - containing elements in the genome , via both EWS / FLI1 - DNA interactions and multivalent EWS LCD self - interactions ( 8 , 21 , 22 ) . The weak and transient multivalent interactions are required for EWS / FLI1 to activate transcription of GGAA - microsatellite - associated genes and to drive oncogenic transformation ( 8 , 22 , 23 ) . While abolishing or weakening EWS LCD self - interactions by mutations is known to disrupt EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription ( 8 , 22 ) , it is unknown how increasing such interactions might impact gene transcription . We tackled this question in patient - derived cells by expressing an exogenous LCD that specifically interacts with endogenous EWS LCD , which is locally concentrated at endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs . This strategy should lead to an increase in local LCD accumulation at 3 EWS / FLI1 hubs and therefore GGAA - microsatellite - associated genes via multivalent LCD - LCD interactions . Specifically , we exploited a knock - in Ewing’s sarcoma cell line A673 that we recently generated by CRISPR - mediated genome editing . The endogenously expressed EWS / FLI1 is fused to a HaloTag , which can covalently bind to a fluorescent ligand and enable imaging of EWS / FLI1 at native expression levels ( 8 ) . We transiently expressed EWS LCD tagged with mNeonGreen ( mNG ) and simultaneously imaged EWS / FLI1 - Halo and mNG - EWS in live cells with Airyscan confocal super - resolution microscopy ( Fig . 1A ) . We observed that mNG - EWS evenly distributes throughout the cell nucleus with some minor heterogeneity but no detectable formation of larger discrete and droplet - like nuclear puncta often attributed to LLPS ( Fig . 1A ) . As expected , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo is distributed as numerous small local high - concentration hubs in the cell nucleus ( Fig . 1A ) . This is consistent with our previous observation ( 8 ) and suggests that the presence of exogenous EWS LCD does not noticeably disrupt or otherwise alter the prototypical intranuclear distribution of EWS / FLI1 . We detected enrichment of exogenous EWS LCD at many individual EWS / FLI1 hubs ( Fig . 1A ) and clearly demonstrated such enrichment by averaging the images of > 500 hubs ( Fig . 1B ) . By plotting the averaged radial intensity profiles of both EWS / FLI1 and EWS LCD surrounding the center of EWS / FLI1 hubs , we confirmed that the maximum concentration of exogenous EWS LCD locates at the hub center ( Fig . 1B ) . These results suggest an increase of total local EWS LCD concentrations and EWS LCD self - interactions at GGAA - microsatellite - associated genes where endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs are formed . To examine the effect of increasing EWS LCD self - interactions on EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription , we performed simultaneous confocal imaging of transiently expressed mNG - EWS , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo , and intron RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) targeting genes adjacent to GGAA microsatellites activated by EWS / FLI1 , including ABHD6 and CAV1 ( 24 , 25 ) ( Fig . 1C ) . Intron RNA FISH labels RNA at gene loci that are being actively transcribed , and the fluorescence intensity of a FISH punctum is proportional to the number of nascent transcripts produced from the gene locus . We took advantage of the highly variable expression levels of transiently expressed mNG - EWS to examine how transcription of GGAA - affiliated genes correlates with mNG - EWS levels within individual cells . Specifically , we quantified the RNA FISH intensity of each gene locus and categorized all the loci based on the corresponding nuclear mNG - EWS intensity . Although within each category , RNA FISH intensities are highly variable due to the intrinsic stochasticity of gene expression ( 26 ) , box plots of the categories showed that transcription of ABHD6 and CAV1 significantly decreased with an increase in EWS LCD expression ( Fig . 1D - E ) . As a control , no decrease of endogenous gene transcription was seen upon expression of mNG alone ( Fig . S1 ) . Moreover , transcription of GAPDH , a control gene not regulated by EWS / FLI1 , remained unaltered regardless of EWS LCD expression ( Fig . 1F ) . To further demonstrate the relationship between EWS LCD expression and transcription of GGAA - affiliated genes , we ranked all ABHD6 gene loci based on their RNA FISH intensities , sorted them into four percentile - based categories , and averaged the fluorescence intensities of both RNA FISH and mNG - EWS of all the loci within each category . Across decreasing quartiles of ABHD6 RNA FISH intensity , the average mNG - EWS intensity significantly increased ( Fig . 1G ) , confirming that transcription of ABHD6 decreases with increasing local EWS LCD concentration . We observed a similar inverse correlation between EWS LCD expression and transcription of another GGAA - affiliated gene 4 CAV1 , but not the control gene GAPDH ( Fig . S2 ) . Together , these results suggest that increased expression of EWS LCD leading to enhanced EWS LCD self - interactions at GGAA - affiliated genes specifically represses endogenous EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . Combining this finding with previous reports that EWS LCD self - interactions are required for EWS / FLI1 to activate transcription ( 8 , 22 ) , we conclude that high transactivation activity requires a tightly regulated “just right” amount of EWS LCD self - interactions at endogenous target genes whereby either ablation , weakening , or increasing the interactions compromises transcriptional output . The small , transient endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs we observed previously under native conditions achieved an optimal amount of productive LCD - LCD interactions . Here we have shown that unbalancing the system beyond this sweet spot reduces target gene expression , shedding light on the fragile stoichiometry of the system . Alternatively , however , it could be that we failed to achieve enhanced transcription because we never reached levels of LCD - LCD interactions that promoted LLPS condensate formation as has been proposed by recent reports ( 16 , 17 ) . TAF15 LCD binding to EWS / FLI1 hubs induces large LLPS - like puncta and severely represses EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription We next investigated how a more potently phase - separating LCD from TAF15 , which efficiently interacts with EWS LCD ( 8 ) , might impact the LLPS behaviors of EWS / FLI1 and EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . TAF15 LCD is known to function as a potent transactivation domain , as it multivalently interacts with intrinsically disordered regions in essential components of the transcription machinery , e . g . Pol II ( 5 , 8 , 16 ) . Moreover , TAF15 LCD was recently reported to amplify transcription in cells upon LLPS ( 16 ) . We simultaneously imaged transiently expressed TAF15 LCD tagged with EGFP and endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo in the knock - in A673 cells ( Fig . 2A ) . Whereas EGFP - TAF15 distributes throughout the cell nucleus at low expression levels , it forms discrete and very prominent droplet - like nuclear puncta at high expression levels , consistent with occurrence of what is typically classified as LLPS ( 12 ) . While endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo still forms numerous small nuclear hubs in the presence of low levels of EGFP - TAF15 , its nuclear distribution changes significantly upon apparent LLPS and becomes strongly enriched in the droplet - like puncta of TAF15 LCD , leaving the much smaller endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs depleted ( Fig . 2A ) . This result is consistent with our previous study showing heterotypic but selective interactions between TAF15 LCD and EWS LCD . We also detected such interactions at EWS / FLI1 hubs when EGFP - TAF15 is expressed at low levels by averaging the images of > 1300 hubs ( Fig . 2B ) . We found TAF15 LCD is more enriched at the periphery instead of the center of EWS / FLI1 hubs as was observed with EWS LCD , potentially due to differences in the affinity of heterotypic TAF15 - EWS LCD interactions compared with that of EWS LCD self - interactions , which we also observed in other contexts ( 8 ) . Nevertheless , this result confirms that at low expression levels , TAF15 LCD still binds to endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs at GGAA - affiliated genes via heterotypic TAF15 - EWS LCD interactions , increasing local LCD concentrations and therefore multivalent LCD - LCD interactions at the genes . ( 8 ) We next examined the spatial relationship between droplet - like TAF15 LCD puncta and GGAA - affiliated genes in cells with putative LLPS by simultaneously imaging highly expressed EGFP - TAF15 and 3D DNA FISH targeting two GGAA - affiliated genes ( ABHD6 or CAV1 ) . We found 29 . 7 % of all the detected ABHD6 loci and 28 . 2 % of all the detected CAV1 loci colocalize with droplet - like TAF15 LCD puncta ( Fig . 2C ) . ABHD6 or CAV1 gene - associated TAF15 LCD 5 puncta are often slightly off - center from the gene loci , consistent with our findings in low - TAF15 cells ( Fig . 2B ) . Our observation that not all detected GGAA target gene loci are associated with TAF15 LCD puncta naturally results from the fact that there are at most a few hundred of TAF15 LCD puncta per cell nucleus , which is orders of magnitude fewer than the ~ 6000 EWS / FLI1 - bound GGAA microsatellites across the human genome ( 28 ) . Such number mismatch results in a dramatically unbalanced distribution of TAF15 LCD puncta as well as puncta - binding , endogenously expressed transcription regulators , e . g . , EWS / FLI1 , among all GGAA - affiliated gene loci in a cell . Whereas some of the loci are associated with puncta , having increased LCD - LCD interactions and enriching endogenous EWS / FLI1 , the remaining loci are starved of TAF15 LCD as well as EWS / FLI1 that would otherwise form hubs more efficiently at the loci under native conditions . We next examined how accumulation of TAF15 LCD at GGAA - affiliated genes and TAF15 - induced LLPS affects EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription with intron RNA FISH as described above for EWS LCD ( Fig . 2D ) . Box plots showed that transcription of ABHD6 and CAV1 markedly decreased when TAF15 LCD expression increased . The occurrence of apparent LLPS did not reverse this trend . In fact , maximal inhibition of transactivation coincided with concentrations of exogenous TAF15 LCD required to form the prominent droplet - like puncta ( Fig . 2E - F ) . As controls , expression of EGFP alone in these cells at comparable levels had no effect on transcription of ABHD6 ( Fig . S3 ) and transcription of a control gene GAPDH also did not track with TAF15 LCD expression ( Fig . 2G ) , suggesting the effect of TAF15 LCD expression on endogenous transcription is specific to GGAA - affiliated EWS / FLI1 target genes . Taken together , these results suggest that allowing exogenous TAF15 LCD to accumulate at endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs at GGAA - affiliated genes represses EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription even after occurrence of TAF15 - induced LLPS . Similar to increasing homotypic EWS LCD self - interactions , increasing heterotypic TAF15 - EWS LCD interactions at endogenous EWS / FLI1 target genes also unbalances the sweet spot of LCD - LCD interactions needed to drive transactivation ( 8 , 22 ) . Notably , our results are not consistent with the model where transactivation depends on the formation of LLPS condensates at target genes ( 6 , 7 , 13 , 15 - 17 ) . Whereas the mechanism by which forced LLPS inhibits transcription of specific endogenous genes remains unclear , one possibility is that when droplet - like TAF15 LCD puncta are formed at locations other than these gene loci , the relatively stable and transcriptionally nonproductive puncta trap EWS / FLI1 , thus effectively reducing the “functional pool” of EWS / FLI1 molecules that can freely access the target genes and trigger transactivation . However , because there is still a significant probability that particular GGAA - affiliated gene loci are associated with TAF15 LCD puncta ( ~ 30 % for ABHD6 and CAV1 ) , it is not feasible to prove the “trapping” mechanism in this experimental setup . Besides lacking control of puncta formation locations , here we also lacked rigorous quantitative evidence for LLPS of TAF15 LCD and only determined apparent LLPS based on droplet - like behaviors ( 12 ) , further complicating LLPS - related conclusions . Thus , we next tested this “trapping” hypothesis and the role of LLPS in a series of experiments employing targeted mislocalization of TFs to a bona fide LLPS subcellular compartment . Ectopic nucleolar EWS LCD self - interactions sequester endogenous EWS / FLI1 to the nucleolus and repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription and oncogenic transformation 6 Nucleoli are membraneless organelles lacking Pol II transcription and one of the best characterized examples of a condensate formed by LLPS ( 19 , 20 ) . Here , we mislocalized LCD - LCD interactions to the nucleolus and hypothesized this might lead to the recruitment of a specific TF into the nucleolus , mimicking the above described scenario where TAF15 - induced LLPS condensates formed outside the genes in question and thereby trap endogenous EWS / FLI1 . This experimental setup would allow us to directly test how such trapping behavior affects transcription driven by the targeted TF . To implement such a mislocalization strategy , we fused mNG - tagged EWS LCD to a nucleolar protein , NPM1 ( 29 , 30 ) , transiently expressed the artificial fusion protein in the knock - in A673 cells , and simultaneously imaged EWS / FLI1 - Halo and mNG - EWS - NPM1 in live cells ( Fig . 3A ) . We found mNG - EWS - NPM1 mostly localizes to the nucleolus , as expected . Interestingly , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo that normally localizes to the nucleoplasm is now recruited to the nucleolus . The nucleolar enrichment of EWS / FLI1 - Halo calculated as the ratio of its nucleolar to nucleoplasmic concentration ( [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleolus / [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleoplasm ) increases with the expression level of mNG - EWS - NPM1 ( Fig . S4 ) . In contrast , EWS / FLI1 - Halo remains in the nucleoplasm in cells that express a control mNG - tagged NPM1 alone ( Fig . 3A , S4 ) . These results suggest that the observed nucleolar recruitment of EWS / FLI1 by EWS - NPM1 is driven by EWS LCD self - interactions in the nucleolus . Whereas multivalent LCD - LCD interactions were thought to be weak based on the finding that they are transient ( 8 ) and lack the sort of well - defined structural characteristic of stoichiometric interactions , the affinity of LCD - LCD interactions was never directly compared with stoichiometric interactions in previous reports . Our results here provide a comparison between these two types of interactions in vivo and suggest that LCD - LCD interactions can be strong enough to outcompete stochiometric cognate TF - DNA binding interactions and trap a TF away from nucleoplasmic chromatin where it normally binds . We next tested how nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 influences its transactivation of endogenous target genes and associated oncogenic transformation functions . First , we used intron RNA FISH to measure EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription at the single - cell level . Specifically , we performed simultaneous confocal imaging of transiently expressed mNG - EWS - NPM1 , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo , and intron RNA FISH targeting GGAA - affiliated genes , ABHD6 or CAV1 ( Fig . 3B ) . We quantified the RNA FISH intensity of each detected gene locus , categorized all the loci based on nucleolar mNG - EWS - NPM1 intensity or nucleolar EWS / FLI1 - Halo enrichment and then generated box plots of individual categories . The box plots showed that transcription of ABHD6 and CAV1 significantly decreased with increasing EWS - NPM1 expression ( Fig . S5 , A , B , and D ) and concomitant enrichment of nucleolar EWS / FLI1 ( Fig . 3C - D ) . The decrease of endogenous gene transcription is not due to overexpression of NPM1 , as expressing mNG - NPM1 did not affect transcription of ABHD6 ( Fig . S5C ) . Moreover , transcription of control GAPDH gene does not change with EWS - NPM1 expression ( Fig . S5E ) or nucleolar EWS / FLI1 enrichment ( Fig . 3E ) , suggesting the effect of nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 on endogenous transcription is specific to GGAA - affiliated EWS / FLI1 target genes . EWS - NPM1 could potentially be recruited to endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs via EWS LCD self - interactions and cause repression of EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . We averaged the images of > 800 endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs to test this “reverse recruitment” possibility , but barely detected any enrichment of EWS - NPM1 at the hubs ( Fig . S6 ) . This is likely due to the low availability of both EWS / FLI1 and EWS - NPM1 in the nucleoplasm . This finding is quite distinct from the scenario we observed above ( Fig . 1B ) of exogenous EWS LCD accumulating at EWS / FLI1 7 hubs . The lack of EWS - NPM1 accumulation at EWS / FLI1 hubs suggests that our detected repression of EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription is caused by nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 , which effectively lowers the available concentration of EWS / FLI1 in the nucleoplasm and reduces its binding to and activation of target genes . This “repression by ectopic sequestration” represents a distinct mechanism for modulating target gene transcription from “repression via over production and LLPS induction” we observed with TAF15 - induced LLPS condensates formed at target genes . We next used a series of ensemble assays to investigate how nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 affects its function in driving the oncogenic transcription program in Ewing’s sarcoma cells . To this end , we engineered the knock - in A673 cells to make a clonal cell line that expresses high levels of mNG - EWS - NPM1 upon doxycycline induction ( [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleolus / [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleoplasm ~ 1 . 85 ± 0 . 53 ( standard deviation ) , measured in 164 randomly chosen cells ) . As a control , we made a knock - in clonal cell line with inducible expression of mNG - NPM1 at levels similar to mNG - EWS - NPM1 as described above ( Fig . S7 ) . Comparing these two cell lines provides a useful way to reveal more global functional impacts of nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 . First , to examine how nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 affects its transactivation function , we performed reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction ( RT - qPCR ) to measure mRNA levels of 22 GGAA - affiliated EWS / FLI1 target genes and 4 control genes not regulated by EWS / FLI1 ( 8 , 22 ) in both cell lines before and after doxycycline induction . Whereas the control genes are expressed at constant levels regardless of the presence of exogenous EWS - NPM1 or NPM1 ( Fig . S8 ) , most GGAA - affiliated genes have transcription levels differentially affected by EWS - NPM1 versus NPM1 ( Fig . 3F ) . Out of the 22 GGAA - affiliated genes , 45 . 5 % are expressed significantly lower upon induction of EWS - NPM1 than upon induction of NPM1 , 18 . 2 % are expressed significantly higher upon induction of EWS - NPM1 than upon induction of NPM1 , and 36 . 4 % are equally affected by EWS - NPM1 and control NPM1 . Our result suggests that many more GGAA - affiliated genes have transcription repressed rather than enhanced by nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 , confirming the overall repressive effect of the nucleolar trapping on EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . Next , we examined how nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 affects cell proliferation by monitoring cell growth over time with the xCELLigence real - time cell analysis system ( 31 ) . We found that whereas the knock - in A673 cells proliferate after induction of NPM1 , they completely stop proliferating 48 hours after induction of EWS - NPM1 ( Fig . S9 ) . More importantly , using soft agar colony formation assay ( 32 ) , we found EWS - NPM1 induction in the knock - in A673 cells abolished their malignant transformation phenotype , i . e . , growth in soft agar . In stark contrast , cells after NPM1 induction continue forming colonies in soft agar , albeit with lower efficiency than uninduced cells ( Fig . 3G - H ) . These results together suggest that nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 represses the oncogenic transcription program driven by EWS / FLI1 and strongly inhibits proliferation and malignant transformation of Ewing’s sarcoma cells . Notably , the ability to tune the subcellular localization of LCD - LCD interactions thereby sequestering EWS / FLI1 and disrupting its oncogenic functions suggests a potential new therapeutic strategy for Ewing’s sarcoma , a devastating cancer still lacking effective molecular therapy . EWS / FLI1 diffuses more slowly in the nucleolus than in the nucleoplasm 8 We further investigated how nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 changes its dynamic behavior . Since the nucleolus is well characterized as a LLPS condensate ( 19 , 20 ) , measuring dynamics of EWS / FLI1 in this context provides a unique opportunity to probe how LLPS affects the dynamic behavior of a protein that localizes within condensates . We first measured the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) dynamics of EWS / FLI1 in the nucleolus and in the nucleoplasm , respectively . We found that FRAP dynamics of nucleolar EWS / FLI1 are significantly different from nucleoplasmic EWS / FLI1 ( Fig . 4A ) . This suggests the two EWS / FLI1 populations differ in overall dynamics contributed by diffusion and molecular interactions ( 33 ) . Next , to directly quantify the diffusion dynamics of nucleolar and nucleoplasmic EWS / FLI1 in live cells , we visualized and tracked both immobile and freely diffusing molecules using stroboscopic photo - activatable single particle tracking ( spaSPT ) ( 34 - 36 ) ( Fig . 4B ) . We expressed mNG - EWS - NPM1 in the knock - in A673 cells and performed spaSPT on endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo labeled with photo - activatable Janelia Fluor 646 ( PA - JF646 ) HaloTag ligand ( 37 ) . Single - molecule trajectories were classified as either nucleoplasmic or nucleolar based on binary masks generated using images of mNG - EWS - NPM1 ( Fig . 4C ) . Nucleolar and nucleoplasmic trajectories were then separately analyzed using the Spot - On algorithm ( 36 ) , which fits histograms of single - particle displacements to a two - state model , where EWS / FLI1 can either be freely diffusing ( ‘free’ ) , or immobile and presumably bound to protein or DNA partners ( ‘bound’ ) ( Fig . 4D ) . Spot - On analysis yields estimates of the fraction of ‘bound’ and ‘free’ molecules as well as the apparent diffusion coefficient for each sub - population ( 36 ) . Interestingly , the fitted diffusion coefficient of the free subpopulation was 1 . 97 ± 0 . 20 µ m 2 / s ( 95 % bootstrap confidence interval ) outside of the nucleoli but only 0 . 82 ± 0 . 26 µ m 2 / s inside the nucleoli , indicating that EWS / FLI1 diffuses significantly more slowly in the nucleolus than in the nucleoplasm ( Fig . 4E ) . This difference in free diffusion coefficient was much greater than that observed when trajectories were classified using mock nucleolar masks at randomized positions ( Fig . 4E , Fig . S10 ) , indicating that it does not result merely from geometric biases in trajectory classification . The other fit parameters from Spot - On did not differ significantly from randomized mask controls ( Fig . S11 ) . Taken together , our results are consistent with the model that the nucleolus is a true LLPS compartment displaying properties distinct from the rest of the nucleus , i . e . higher viscosity ( 20 , 38 ) . As with endogenous nucleolar proteins ( 39 ) , diffusion of “guest” EWS / FLI1 molecules is reduced when they are recruited to this high - viscosity compartment by EWS - NPM1 . Discussion Sequence - specific DNA - binding TFs have been established as key regulators of eukaryotic transcription since the early 1980s ( 40 ) , but how their intrinsically disordered activation domains interact with specific protein partners to direct gene activation has remained mysterious . This long - standing enigma is now starting to be unraveled with the help of recent advances in live cell single molecule imaging technologies and the discoveries of TF dynamics mediated via weak , multivalent , but selective interactions between LCDs . These emerging studies reveal that LCDs drive the formation of highly transient , small , local high - concentration TF hubs at target genomic loci that play an essential role in transactivation . Our previous data also suggest that such small transient hubs ( typically containing < 100 molecules with protein - binding dwell times of ~ 1 - 2 min ) are quite distinct from bona fide LLPS condensates ( 8 ) . Excessive multivalent LCD - LCD interactions can induce the formation of LLPS - like puncta , which is usually observed under non - 9 physiological conditions , e . g . artificial LCD over - production and / or light - induced oligomerization ( 41 - 43 ) . Originating from well - defined behaviors of polymers in solution discovered in the 19 th century ( 44 , 45 ) , LLPS and condensate formation have recently reanimated excitement in biology and been proposed to underlie many cellular functions , including TF hub formation and transactivation ( 46 - 50 ) . However , studies that directly link manipulation of LCD - LCD interactions and transcriptional output are scarce ( 16 - 18 ) and the few existing studies have generated contradictory findings that stimulate important new questions . How would excessive LCD - LCD interactions and LLPS impact transactivation of endogenous genes in a physiological setting ? The fact that rigorous characterization of LLPS in vivo has been challenging and often assumed or overlooked rather than experimentally confirmed ( 12 ) adds to the confusion of recent findings . More importantly , none of the existing studies measured transcription of specific endogenous genes upon manipulation of LCD - LCD interactions , which is essential for understanding LCD - interaction - mediated transcription in vivo under physiologically relevant contexts . To address these knowledge gaps and to further probe mechanisms of LCD - interaction - mediated transcription , we measured transcription of endogenous target genes of the oncogenic TF EWS / FLI1 upon tuning the amount and localization of its LCD - LCD interactions in patient - derived cells . Endogenous EWS / FLI1 is known to activate genes by forming transient , small local high - concentration hubs at target gene loci via weak , multivalent EWS LCD self - interactions ( 8 ) . In the first part of this work , we employed quantitative single - cell imaging to study how increasing either homotypic or heterotypic LCD - LCD interactions at EWS / FLI1 target genes affects transcription output . Our findings indicate that the transactivation activity of EWS / FLI1 does not monotonically increase with the amount of local LCD - LCD interactions at genes and instead reaches a fairly narrow optimum with the endogenous amount of interactions and that further increases in LCD - LCD interactions leads to repression of transcription ( Fig . 5A ) . This “Goldilocks principle” underlying EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription – where “just the right” amount of LCD - LCD interactions is required for efficient gene activation – may be general to mammalian transcription systems and applicable to many other TFs , though the optimal amount of LCD - LCD interactions will likely vary with specific TFs and target genes . Intriguingly , we observed potent transcriptional repression of endogenous cognate genes upon apparent LLPS driven by TAF15 LCD , in contrast to previously reported increase in overall cellular transcription upon light - induced TAF15 LLPS ( 16 ) . We do not yet have sufficient data to provide any firm mechanistic explanation for this apparent disparity , but one possibility is related to the ability of LLPS to redistribute TFs and transcription machinery among genes via heterotypic LCD - LCD interactions ( Fig . 2A , 5B ) . Whereas LLPS unbalances the “Goldilocks optimum” for one set of genes , it may simultaneously tune the local concentrations of transcription regulators toward the optimum for other genes . Thus , it may not be entirely unexpected to find that overall transcription is increased while specific target genes are repressed upon LLPS . Clearly , much remains to be unraveled before we can fully understand the competing functional influences of LLPS in the context of select endogenous genes in live cells . Another key endeavor will be to decipher the molecular basis for the repressive effects of excessive LCD - LCD interactions on transcription even in the absence of LLPS . The quantitative single - cell imaging methods we developed to investigate EWS / FLI1 could pave the path to test the Goldilocks principle for other TFs in future studies . 10 In the second part of this work , we demonstrated that multivalent EWS LCD self - interactions artificially created in the nucleolus are strong enough to relocate EWS / FLI1 from chromatin to the nucleolus , repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription , and inhibit malignant transformation of Ewing’s sarcoma cells ( Fig . 5B ) . Our findings reveal an important property of EWS LCD self - interactions , i . e . , when recruited into the nucleolus , they can overcome EWS / FLI1 - DNA binding interactions and effectively sequester TFs in a non - productive compartment . We expect similar strategies may allow trapping of EWS / FLI1 in other ectopic subcellular locations as well . The ability of subcellular mislocalization of LCD - LCD interactions to disrupt EWS / FLI1 - chromatin binding and transactivation suggests a potentially novel therapeutic strategy for Ewing’s sarcoma . If the EWS - NPM1 protein we used could be replaced by smaller and more deliverable drug - like molecules that specifically interact with the EWS LCD , one could imagine using drug - induced mislocalization or sequestration of the target protein to an ectopic subcellular structure to disrupt its function . Moreover , similar approaches can potentially be used to target many other disease - causing TFs , which are notoriously difficult targets for the development of molecular therapies . Our work on nucleolar targeting additionally sheds light on methods to more rigorously diagnose LLPS in vivo . Differential molecular diffusion dynamics provides a rigorous but seldom applied criterion for defining LLPS in vivo . In previous studies where molecular diffusion was measured by spaSPT , the lack of differences in diffusion dynamics inside versus outside a presumed LLPS compartment revealed that the compartment was actually not formed by LLPS ( 51 , 52 ) . Here , by measuring diffusion of EWS / FLI1 in the nucleolus versus the nucleoplasm , we found that it diffuses much more slowly in the nucleolus , as expected of this well - studied , bone fide LLPS compartment . This observation provides a proof of concept that spaSPT measurements of protein diffusion rates can serve as an effective means of detecting LLPS based on differential viscosities within live cells . However , there remain clear limitations in our current method for single - molecule diffusion measurements , especially within submicron - sized puncta . Indeed , we were unable to precisely quantify diffusion rates within TAF15 LCD puncta that are significantly smaller than nucleoli and that often fall in the submicron range . Thus , here we observed apparent LLPS of TAF15 LCD based on the prominent droplet - like behaviors of TAF15 LCD puncta , but refrain from concluding that the puncta are true LLPS condensates . It seems clear , however , that TAF15 LCD puncta colocalize with EWS / FLI1 and markedly repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . Besides causing a redistribution of EWS / FLI1 and transcription machinery as discussed above ( Fig . 5B ) , another functionally relevant consequence of apparent LLPS might be that droplet - like TAF15 LCD puncta confine diffusion of transcription regulators and change their diffusion rates within the puncta . It remains unknown how such changes of protein dynamics at genes affect transactivation , and future studies are required to reveal potential functional consequences . While we have studied effects on specific endogenous target genes of EWS / FLI1 , it will be important in the future to investigate how tuning the level of LCD - LCD interactions to form larger hubs and LLPS affects the global transcriptome of a cell . References : 11 1 . J . T . Kadonaga , A . J . Courey , J . Ladika , R . Tjian , Distinct regions of Sp1 modulate DNA binding and transcriptional activation . Science . 242 , 1566 - 1570 ( 1988 ) . 2 . S . Oka et al . , NMR structure of transcription factor Sp1 DNA binding domain . Biochemistry . 43 , 16027 - 16035 ( 2004 ) . 3 . Y . E . Guo et al . , Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates . Nature . 572 , 543 - 548 ( 2019 ) . 4 . M . Boehning et al . , RNA polymerase II clustering through carboxy - terminal domain phase separation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 25 , 833 - 840 ( 2018 ) . 5 . I . Kwon et al . , Phosphorylation - regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of low - complexity domains . Cell . 155 , 1049 - 1060 ( 2013 ) . 6 . B . R . Sabari et al . , Coactivator condensation at super - enhancers links phase separation and gene control . Science . 361 , 10 . 1126 / science . aar3958 . Epub 2018 Jun 21 ( 2018 ) . 7 . W . K . Cho et al . , Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcription - dependent condensates . Science . 361 , 412 - 415 ( 2018 ) . 8 . S . Chong et al . , Imaging dynamic and selective low - complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription . Science . 361 , 10 . 1126 / science . aar2555 . Epub 2018 Jun 21 ( 2018 ) . 9 . M . Mir et al . , Dynamic multifactor hubs interact transiently with sites of active transcription in Drosophila embryos . Elife . 7 , 10 . 7554 / eLife . 40497 ( 2018 ) . 10 . M . Mir et al . , Dense Bicoid hubs accentuate binding along the morphogen gradient . Genes Dev . 31 , 1784 - 1794 ( 2017 ) . 11 . J . Dufourt et al . , Temporal control of gene expression by the pioneer factor Zelda through transient interactions in hubs . Nat . Commun . 9 , 5194 - z ( 2018 ) . 12 . D . T . McSwiggen , M . Mir , X . Darzacq , R . Tjian , Evaluating phase separation in live cells : diagnosis , caveats , and functional consequences . Genes Dev . 33 , 1619 - 1634 ( 2019 ) . 13 . D . Hnisz , K . Shrinivas , R . A . Young , A . K . Chakraborty , P . A . Sharp , A Phase Separation Model for Transcriptional Control . Cell . 169 , 13 - 23 ( 2017 ) . 14 . J . E . Henninger et al . , RNA - Mediated Feedback Control of Transcriptional Condensates . Cell . 184 , 207 - 225 . e24 ( 2021 ) . 15 . A . Boija et al . , Transcription Factors Activate Genes through the Phase - Separation Capacity of Their Activation Domains . Cell . 175 , 1842 - 1855 . e16 ( 2018 ) . 16 . M . T . Wei et al . , Nucleated transcriptional condensates amplify gene expression . Nat . Cell Biol . 22 , 1187 - 1196 ( 2020 ) . 17 . N . Schneider et al . , Liquid - liquid phase separation of light - inducible transcription factors increases transcription activation in mammalian cells and mice . Sci . Adv . 7 , 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abd3568 . Print 2021 Jan ( 2021 ) . 18 . J . Trojanowski , L . Frank , A . Rademacher , P . Grigaitis , K . Rippe , Transcription activation is enhanced by multivalent interactions independent of phase separation . bioRxiv . , 2021 . 01 . 27 . 428421 ( 2021 ) . 19 . J . A . Riback et al . , Composition - dependent thermodynamics of intracellular phase separation . Nature . 581 , 209 - 214 ( 2020 ) . 20 . C . P . Brangwynne , T . J . Mitchison , A . A . Hyman , Active liquid - like behavior of nucleoli determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4334 - 4339 ( 2011 ) . 21 . K . M . Johnson et al . , Role for the EWS domain of EWS / FLI in binding GGAA - microsatellites required for Ewing sarcoma anchorage independent growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 9870 - 9875 ( 2017 ) . 12 22 . G . Boulay et al . , Cancer - Specific Retargeting of BAF Complexes by a Prion - like Domain . Cell . 171 , 163 - 178 . e19 ( 2017 ) . 23 . L . Zuo et al . , Loci - specific phase separation of FET fusion oncoproteins promotes gene transcription . Nat . Commun . 12 , 1491 - 7 ( 2021 ) . 24 . N . Guillon et al . , The oncogenic EWS - FLI1 protein binds in vivo GGAA microsatellite sequences with potential transcriptional activation function . PLoS One . 4 , e4932 ( 2009 ) . 25 . K . Gangwal et al . , Microsatellites as EWS / FLI response elements in Ewing ' s sarcoma . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 10149 - 10154 ( 2008 ) . 26 . T . L . Lenstra , J . Rodriguez , H . Chen , D . R . Larson , Transcription Dynamics in Living Cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 45 , 25 - 47 ( 2016 ) . 27 . M . Altmeyer et al . , Liquid demixing of intrinsically disordered proteins is seeded by poly ( ADP - ribose ) . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8088 ( 2015 ) . 28 . K . M . Johnson , C . Taslim , R . S . Saund , S . L . Lessnick , Identification of two types of GGAA - microsatellites and their roles in EWS / FLI binding and gene regulation in Ewing sarcoma . PLoS One . 12 , e0186275 ( 2017 ) . 29 . D . M . Mitrea et al . , Nucleophosmin integrates within the nucleolus via multi - modal interactions with proteins displaying R - rich linear motifs and rRNA . Elife . 5 , 10 . 7554 / eLife . 13571 ( 2016 ) . 30 . D . M . Mitrea et al . , Self - interaction of NPM1 modulates multiple mechanisms of liquid - liquid phase separation . Nat . Commun . 9 , 842 - 3 ( 2018 ) . 31 . F . Witzel , R . Fritsche - Guenther , N . Lehmann , A . Sieber , N . Bluthgen , Analysis of impedance - based cellular growth assays . Bioinformatics . 31 , 2705 - 2712 ( 2015 ) . 32 . S . L . Lessnick , C . S . Dacwag , T . R . Golub , The Ewing ' s sarcoma oncoprotein EWS / FLI induces a p53 - dependent growth arrest in primary human fibroblasts . Cancer . Cell . 1 , 393 - 401 ( 2002 ) . 33 . B . L . Sprague , R . L . Pego , D . A . Stavreva , J . G . McNally , Analysis of binding reactions by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching . Biophys . J . 86 , 3473 - 3495 ( 2004 ) . 34 . A . S . Hansen , I . Pustova , C . Cattoglio , R . Tjian , X . Darzacq , CTCF and cohesin regulate chromatin loop stability with distinct dynamics . Elife . 6 , 10 . 7554 / eLife . 25776 ( 2017 ) . 35 . J . Elf , G . W . Li , X . S . Xie , Probing transcription factor dynamics at the single - molecule level in a living cell . Science . 316 , 1191 - 1194 ( 2007 ) . 36 . A . S . Hansen et al . , Robust model - based analysis of single - particle tracking experiments with Spot - On . Elife . 7 , 10 . 7554 / eLife . 33125 ( 2018 ) . 37 . J . B . Grimm et al . , Bright photoactivatable fluorophores for single - molecule imaging . Nat . Methods . 13 , 985 - 988 ( 2016 ) . 38 . L . Xiang , K . Chen , R . Yan , W . Li , K . Xu , Single - molecule displacement mapping unveils nanoscale heterogeneities in intracellular diffusivity . Nat . Methods . 17 , 524 - 530 ( 2020 ) . 39 . A . Heckert , L . Dahal , R . Tjian , X . Darzacq , Recovering mixtures of fast diffusing states from short single particle trajectories . bioRxiv . , 2021 . 05 . 03 . 442482 ( 2021 ) . 40 . W . S . Dynan , R . Tjian , The promoter - specific transcription factor Sp1 binds to upstream sequences in the SV40 early promoter . Cell . 35 , 79 - 87 ( 1983 ) . 41 . Y . Shin et al . , Liquid Nuclear Condensates Mechanically Sense and Restructure the Genome . Cell . 176 , 1518 ( 2019 ) . 42 . Y . Shin et al . , Spatiotemporal Control of Intracellular Phase Transitions Using Light - Activated optoDroplets . Cell . 168 , 159 - 171 . e14 ( 2017 ) . 13 43 . D . Bracha et al . , Mapping Local and Global Liquid Phase Behavior in Living Cells Using Photo - Oligomerizable Seeds . Cell . 176 , 407 ( 2019 ) . 44 . J . W . Gibbs , On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances ( Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences . 1876 ) , pp . 108 – 248 . 45 . Thomas Graham , X . Liquid diffusion applied to analysis . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society . 151 , 183 - 224 ( 1861 ) . 46 . S . Chong , M . Mir , Towards Decoding the Sequence - Based Grammar Governing the Functions of Intrinsically Disordered Protein Regions . J . Mol . Biol . 433 , 166724 ( 2021 ) . 47 . G . J . Narlikar et al . , Is transcriptional regulation just going through a phase ? Mol . Cell . 81 , 1579 - 1585 ( 2021 ) . 48 . S . Boeynaems et al . , Protein Phase Separation : A New Phase in Cell Biology . Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 420 - 435 ( 2018 ) . 49 . Y . Shin , C . P . Brangwynne , Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease . Science . 357 , 10 . 1126 / science . aaf4382 ( 2017 ) . 50 . S . F . Banani , H . O . Lee , A . A . Hyman , M . K . Rosen , Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 285 - 298 ( 2017 ) . 51 . S . Collombet et al . , RNA polymerase II depletion from the inactive X chromosome territory is not mediated by physical compartmentalization . bioRxiv . , 2021 . 03 . 26 . 437188 ( 2021 ) . 52 . D . T . McSwiggen et al . , Evidence for DNA - mediated nuclear compartmentalization distinct from phase separation . Elife . 8 , 10 . 7554 / eLife . 47098 ( 2019 ) . 14 Acknowledgments : We thank L . Lavis for providing fluorescent HaloTag ligands ; Q . Zhu for help with molecular cloning ; K . Adiga for help optimizing conditions of doxycycline induction ; the CRL Flow Cytometry Facility and Molecular Imaging Center ; A . Hansen , S . Teves , and members of Tjian / Darzacq labs for critical reading of the manuscript . Funding : This work was supported by the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research ( to TGWG ) , California Institute of Regenerative Medicine grant LA1 - 08013 ( to XD ) , NIH grants UO1 - EB021236 and U54 - DK107980 ( to XD ) , and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( to RT ) . Author contributions : Conceptualization : RT , SC Funding acquisition : RT , XD , CDD Investigation : SC , TGWG , CDD , GMD , RT Software : SC , TGWG Visualization : SC , TGWG , CDD Supervision : RT Project administration : RT , SC Writing – original draft : SC , RT , TGWG , CDD Writing – review & editing : SC , RT , TGWG , CDD , XD Competing interests : RT and XD are co - founders of Eikon Therapeutics . 15 16 Fig . 1 . Overexpressed EWS LCD accumulates at endogenous EWS / FLI1 hubs and represses EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . ( A ) Airyscan confocal super - resolution images of endogenously expressed EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JF646 labeled , magenta ) and transiently expressed mNeonGreen - EWS ( mNG - EWS , green ) in a knock - in A673 cell . The region surrounding one particular EWS / FLI1 hub is zoomed in . mNG - EWS enrichment at the hub is visible but buried in high background . ( B ) ( Upper ) Averaged mNG - EWS image at 539 EWS / FLI1 hubs from 3 cells . ( Lower ) Radial intensity profiles of mNG - EWS ( blue ) and EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( orange ) surrounding the center of EWS / FLI1 hubs on the averaged image . ( C ) Confocal fluorescence images of transiently expressed mNG - EWS ( green ) , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JFX549 labeled , magenta ) , intron RNA FISH targeting ABHD6 gene ( Quasar 670 labeled , yellow ) , and DNA ( Hoechst labeled , blue ) in the knock - in A673 cells . The two cells zoomed in show that the level of ABHD6 transcription negatively correlates with the level of mNG - EWS expression . ( D - F ) Box plots of intron RNA FISH intensities of ABHD6 ( D ) , CAV1 ( E ) , or GAPDH ( F ) gene after all the gene loci are categorized based on the corresponding nuclear mNG - EWS intensity . The x axis lists the order of magnitude of mNG intensities in each category . Individual gene loci are plotted in gray . * : statistically significant decrease in the RNA FISH intensity of specific mNG - positive categories compared with the mNG - negative category ( p < 0 . 05 , two - sample t - test ) . NS : non - significant difference between two categories . ( G ) ( Upper ) Averaged fluorescence intensities of intron RNA FISH ( blue ) and mNG - EWS ( orange ) at the ABHD6 gene loci within each category . * : statistically significant increase in the mNG intensities of low - percentile ABHD6 gene loci based on the RNA FISH intensity compared with high - percentile loci ( p < 0 . 05 , two - sample t - test ) . Error bars represent bootstrapped standard deviation . ( Bottom ) Averaged intron RNA FISH images of ABHD6 gene loci in four categories based on the percentile rank of intron RNA FISH intensity . Each image is averaged from 211 gene loci . 17 18 Fig . 2 . TAF15 LCD overexpression and phase separation repress EWS / FLI1 - driven transcription . ( A ) Airyscan confocal super - resolution images of endogenously expressed EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JF646 labeled , magenta ) and transiently expressed EGFP - TAF15 ( green ) in two knock - in A673 cells with different levels of EGFP - TAF15 . ( B ) ( Upper ) Averaged EGFP - TAF15 image at 1377 EWS / FLI1 hubs from 9 cells without apparent LLPS of TAF15 . ( Lower ) Radial intensity profiles of EGFP - TAF15 ( blue ) and EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( orange ) surrounding the center of EWS / FLI1 hubs on the averaged image . ( C ) Airyscan confocal super - resolution images of 3D DNA FISH targeting ABHD6 or CAV1 gene ( enhanced Cy5 labeled , magenta ) , DNA ( Hoechst labeled , blue ) , and droplet - like puncta of EGFP - TAF15 ( green ) in two knock - in A673 cells . The region surrounding one particular gene locus in each cell is zoomed in . Colocalization of TAF15 puncta at the loci is clearly visible . ( D ) Confocal fluorescence images of transiently expressed EGFP - TAF15 ( green ) , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JFX549 labeled , magenta ) , intron RNA FISH targeting ABHD6 gene ( Quasar 670 labeled , yellow ) , and DNA ( Hoechst labeled , blue ) in the knock - in A673 cells . The two cells zoomed in show that the level of ABHD6 transcription negatively correlates with the level of EGFP - TAF15 expression . ( E - G ) Box plots of intron RNA FISH intensities of ABHD6 ( E ) , CAV1 ( F ) , or GAPDH ( G ) gene after all the gene loci are categorized based on the corresponding nuclear EGFP - TAF15 intensity . The x axis lists the order of magnitude of EGFP intensities in each category . The category with apparent LLPS of TAF15 is pointed with a red arrow on each plot . Individual gene loci are plotted in gray . * : statistically significant decrease in the RNA FISH intensity of specific EGFP - positive categories compared with the EGFP - negative category ( p < 0 . 05 , two - sample t - test ) . NS : non - significant difference between two categories . 19 20 Fig . 3 . Nucleolar trapping of EWS / FLI1 represses its transcriptional activation and oncogenic transformation functions ( A ) ( Left ) Airyscan confocal super - resolution images of DNA ( Hoechst labeled , blue ) , transiently expressed mNG - EWS - NPM1 or mNG - NPM1 ( green ) , and endogenously expressed EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JF646 labeled , magenta ) in the knock - in A673 cells . ( Right ) Schematics for protein - protein interactions within the nucleolus . ( B ) Confocal fluorescence images of transiently expressed mNG - EWS - NPM1 ( green ) , endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo ( JFX549 labeled , magenta ) , intron RNA FISH targeting ABHD6 gene ( Quasar 670 labeled , yellow ) , and DNA ( Hoechst labeled , blue ) in the knock - in A673 cells . The two cells zoomed in show that the level of ABHD6 transcription negatively correlates with the level of mNG - EWS - NPM1 expression . ( C - E ) Box plots of intron RNA FISH intensities of ABHD6 ( C ) , CAV1 ( D ) , or GAPDH ( E ) gene after all the gene loci are categorized based on the nucleolar enrichment of EWS / FLI1 in corresponding cells . The x axis lists the range of [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleolus / [ EWS / FLI1 ] nucleoplasm ratios for each category . Individual gene loci are plotted in gray . * : statistically significant decrease in the RNA FISH intensity of cells with nucleolar enrichment of EWS / FLI1 compared with cells without nucleolar enrichment of EWS / FLI1 ( p < 0 . 05 , two - sample t - test ) . NS : non - significant difference between two categories . ( F ) mRNA fold changes of 22 GGAA - affiliated EWS / FLI1 target genes by induction of mNG - EWS - NPM1 ( y coordinates ) versus induction of mNG - NPM1 ( x coordinate ) as measured by RT - qPCR . For each target gene , the mRNA level in induced cells was first normalized using the average of 4 invariant genes ( Fig . S8 ) and then calculated as a fold change relative to the normalized mRNA level in uninduced cells . On the 2D graph , genes expressed lower upon induction of EWS - NPM1 than upon induction of NPM1 and vice versa are separated by the function plot y = x . Genes having y < x with statistical significance are plotted in blue , genes having y > x with statistical significance are plotted in orange , and genes without statistically significant difference between y and x values are plotted in gray ( p < 0 . 05 , two - sample t - test ) . ( G ) Soft agar colony formation assays for the knock - in A673 cells with inducible expression of mNG - EWS - NPM1 or mNG - NPM1 . ( H ) Fold change of the number of colonies ( diameter > 220 µm ) in soft agar by induction of mNG - EWS - NPM1 or mNG - NPM1 , quantified from ( G ) . Error bars represent standard errors . 21 Fig . 4 . FRAP and single - molecule imaging reveal changes in the dynamic behaviors of EWS / FLI1 when it is recruited to the nucleolus ( A ) Averaged FRAP curve of endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo in the nucleoplasm ( blue ) or nucleolus ( magenta ) . Error bars represent standard deviations . ( B ) Schematic of stroboscopic photo - activatable single particle tracking ( spaSPT ) . Living knock - in A673 cells with endogenous EWS / FLI1 - Halo expression are stained with photo - activatable HaloTag ligand PA - JF646 . Short pulses of 405 nm laser and 633 nm laser are used respectively 22 to activate and excite PA - JF646 dye to achieve ms temporal resolution and differentiate “free” molecules and “bound” molecules . ( C ) Classification of nucleoplasmic and nucleolar single - particle trajectories acquired in a spaSPT experiment . ( Left ) Image of mNG - EWS - NPM1 used for segmentation . Pixel intensities are displayed on a logarithmic scale between 3 and 30 , 000 counts . ( Middle ) Binary mask showing segmentation of nucleoplasm ( blue ) and nucleoli ( magenta ) . ( Right ) Overlay of classified single - particle trajectories ( thinner lines ) and mask boundaries ( thicker lines ) . Nucleoplasmic trajectories are in blue and nucleolar trajectories are in magenta . Inset : Zoom - in of a 2 . 6 µ m square region at the boundary of a nucleolus . ( D ) Distribution histograms of displacements in a single 7 . 5 ms time step for trajectories in the nucleoplasm ( upper , blue ) and nucleolus ( lower , magenta ) . Each histogram is fit with a two - state model . Inset shows depiction of the two - state model where EWS / FLI1 can either be freely diffusing or bound to protein or DNA partners . ( E ) Fitted diffusion coefficient of freely diffusing molecules in the nucleoplasm ( blue ) and nucleolus ( magenta ) . Left 2 columns : Fits for trajectories classified using actual nucleolar masks . Violin plots show the distribution of 200 bootstrap replicates resampled by cell with replacement . Right 2 columns : Fits for trajectories classified using 200 distinct sets of randomized nucleolar masks ( see Supplemental Methods ) . 23 Fig . 5 . Models for LCD - interaction - mediated transcription ( A ) Goldilocks principle of transcriptional activation : effective gene activation requires an optimal amount of multivalent LCD - LCD interactions . Overly high amounts of LCD - LCD interactions and LLPS at target genes repress transcription . ( B ) LLPS compartments formed away from EWS / FLI1 target genes ( nucleoli containing EWS - NPM1 or droplet - like TAF15 LCD puncta ) trap endogenous EWS / FLI1 within the compartments via homotypic or heterotypic LCD - LCD interactions , causing repression of EWS / FLI1 - driven oncogenic transcription .