Georgia Southern University Digital Commons @ Georgia Southern SoTL Commons Conference SoTL Commons Conference Mar 12th , 11 : 00 AM - 11 : 45 AM Visual Analogies for Enhancing the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Susan Spezzini University of Alabama at Birmingham , spezzini @ uab . edu Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . georgiasouthern . edu / sotlcommons Part of the Curriculum and Instruction Commons , Educational Assessment , Evaluation , and Research Commons , Educational Methods Commons , Higher Education Commons , and the Social and Philosophical Foundations of Education Commons This presentation ( open access ) is brought to you for free and open access by the Conferences & Events at Digital Commons @ Georgia Southern . It has been accepted for inclusion in SoTL Commons Conference by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Georgia Southern . For more information , please contact digitalcommons @ georgiasouthern . edu . Recommended Citation Spezzini , Susan , " Visual Analogies for Enhancing the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning " ( 2009 ) . SoTL Commons Conference . 51 . https : / / digitalcommons . georgiasouthern . edu / sotlcommons / SoTL / 2009 / 51 1 Visual Analogies for Enhancing the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning Susan Spezzini , Ph . D . University of Alabama at Birmingham spezzini @ uab . edu 2 nd SoTL Commons : March 12 , 2009 2 Today’s Presentation Objectives : a ) Validate the use of visual analogies in college courses b ) Encourage participants to incorporate visual analogies within their own SoTL context . Learning Outcomes : 1 . Provide reasons for using common symbols , familiar images , and everyday language as tools when teaching new ideas and technical terminology ; 2 . Explain how to incorporate concrete symbols and visual images when teaching abstract , and often complex , concepts ; and , 3 . Identify visual analogies to use when teaching difficult concepts and / or complex ideas . 3 Overview = > Brief Summary of Research = > Development of Fun - Analogy Train = > Pilot Study on Learner Outcomes = > Tips for Creating Analogies 4 Studies about Visual Analogies College students were helped in overcoming writing blocks ( Feild & Graves , 1981 ) . Learning improved significantly - - - when designed properly , used with text , and matched with high structural similarity between base domain / familiar ( analog ) and target domain ( Issing , 1990 ) . Students were aided in understanding math & science – through new representations on computers ( Perkins & Unger , 1994 ) . Greatest gains were experienced by low achievers ( Lin , Shiau , & Lawrenz , 1996 ) . 5 Other Studies Visual Analogies were most useful in lieu of non - existent visual aids ( Siqueira , Remiao & Azevedo , 1988 ) . A beginning chemistry teacher’s instructional practices changed before and after web treatment with visual analogies ( Lin & Chiu , 2000 ) . Science knowledge and attitudes of pre - service teachers improved , especially with elaborate analogies - - text for explaining similarities ( Paris & Glynn , 2004 ) . Visual Analogy Guide to Human Anatomy . ( Krieger , 2005 ) . 6 Benefits from using Visual Analogies Harvey Brightman ( 2006 ) , UAB Master Teacher seminar Concrete symbols - help both instructors and students - bridge gap between the known and unknown Instructors are able to … - communicate in everyday language - explain complexity simply - improve teaching ( especially from student perspective ) Students are able to … - use familiar image to better understand new idea . - make effective connections to critical thinking , meaningful - integrated learning , increased retention , and long - term learning 7 The logo for the conference is the chambered nautilus shell . The self - propelling nautilus grows chamber by chamber , each one larger than the previous one , in an unfolding spiral as it develops steadily over time . The shell ' s elegant trajectory opens outward and its dynamic design is like the persevering , quiet movement of SoTL through the currents of teaching and learning . The SoTL Commons Conference aspires to be a growing , spiraling , lively catalyst for the international momentum of SoTL , encouraging the opening up and opening out of teaching and how students best learn into public conversations and collaborations . The spiraling pattern of the nautilus is found throughout nature . The conference is simply , but importantly , one swirl in the overall SoTL spiraling transformation of the nature of teaching and academic culture The SoTL Commons Logo : The Nautilus Example of a visual analogy with its explanation of the structural similarities between object / Nautilus and idea / Commons ( same words are color - coded ) : http : / / academics . georgiasouthern . edu / ijsotl / conference / 2009 / index . htm 8 IJ - SoTL The bamboo plant is the symbol for IJ - SoTL . It grows around the world , it grows rapidly , its sections are as steps in the process of growth and awareness , and it always has green shoots and leaves as signs of its vitality . Bamboo has been a symbol for longevity , strength and grace . It bends without breaking while having a tensile strength similar to steel . It has had a great reputation in both ancient and modern civilizations for its effective uses and for taking root in all sorts of climates . Such is SoTL and such is the goal for IJ - SoTL . An example of a visual analogy between a base domain ( object = bamboo ) and its target domain ( idea = IJ - SoTL ) : http : / / academics . georgiasouthern . edu / ijsotl / index . htm 9 Development of the Train Analogy Spring 2006 : Taught EESL 625 for 4 th time ( better but … ) Nov . 2006 : Registered for Master Teacher Seminar Dec . 2006 : Sketched idea during seminar Jan . 2007 : Created hand - drawn visual analogies Jan / Feb 2007 : Used hand - drawn analogies in class April 2007 : Shared analogies with mentor Dec . 2007 : Received feedback from a colleague Jan / Feb 2008 : Converted analogies to Power Point Spring 2008 : Used power point analogies in class Sum . 2008 : Designed 14 ppt sets & inserted analogies Fall 2008 : Used ppt sets in class and then adjusted Spring 2009 : Initiated research study 10 In Search of a Solution for : EESL 625 Discourse Analysis for ESL Teachers – Saturday sessions ( 8 : 00 am – 5 : 00 pm ) – Distance students ( 250 miles ) & Large classes ( 40 + ) – High level of anxiety among students Is this course going to be hair raising or what ? As I look at my notes , I wonder if I will survive this . I hope I am not in over my head . It scared me half to death . I was so lost . I felt like a foreigner in a world where I didn’t belong . I consumed most of a bottle of wine before retiring for the evening . My first reaction was that I had died and been sent to torment . My initial reaction to your course—I had an adrenalin rush . It reminds me of a chemistry class with all those formulas . 11 Birth of an Analogy UAB Master Teacher Seminar 12 / 17 / 06 ( Harvey Brightman ) • Identify your most difficult course ( or concept ) • Brainstorm association with an everyday object My most difficult course = EESL 625 Discourse Analysis • Difficult concepts = linguistics , phonology ( sound system ) • Most challenging of the MAE / ESL courses = – Describe sound production in the vocal tract larynx , vocal cords , cavities ( pharyngeal , nasal , oral ) , tongue , lips , teeth , alveolar ridge , palate , velum , uvula ; – Draw vocal tract structures for producing each sound ; – Recognize sounds ( phonemes ) and their variations ; – Match sounds with International Phonetic Alphabet ; – Identify pronunciation difficulties of English language learners ( ELLs ) ; and – Help ELLs improve their pronunciation . 12 Notes from my Master Teacher Seminar Binder - I had jotted down major concepts from EESL 625 . - I had started sketching a train . - I had selected one major concept . - I took the idea home . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - I found an old train analogy that I had created for teaching composition ( my first conference presentation—1987 ) . 13 First Steps of the Train Analogy December 18 , 2006 - January 5 , 2007 • Developed the idea – Brainstormed : Thought about it repeatedly – Identified missing pieces • Driving to California • Watching trains go by • Put the idea on paper – Looked for an artist ( I am not an artist ! ) – Sketched it the night before the first class – Started out with 8 train cars on one page – Ended up with a separate page per train car 14 Started with simple shapes for representing different types of consonants : Identified structural similarity between base domain ( object = train ) and target domain ( new idea = types of consonants ) 15 Continued with the more complicated designs 16 Finished with the engine & coal car 17 Used Train Analogy in Class Saturday , January 6 , 2007 ( 8 : 00 – 4 : 45 ) - Showed each drawing as the corresponding concept was introduced  – Posted each drawing on the classroom wall – Completed a train of 8 cars by end of day Jan . 20 , Feb . 10 , Mar . 3 , Mar . 10 , and April 21 – Displayed drawings throughout each class – Displayed even during quizzes and midterm – Emailed explanation of similarities between train cars and types of consonants 18 Emailed an Explanation of Similarities Tracks = Context ( place , topic , speech partners , etc . ) Conductor = Speaker ( personal characteristics : gender , age , SES , etc . ) Smoke = Suprasegmental Features : stress , pitch , length , intonation , juncture , linking , rhythm These permeate the utterance ( train ) & unite the segmental features . Cars = Segmental Features : Vowels & Consonants ( one after the other ) Coal Car = VOWELS ( energy ) : Each syllable ( and word ) must have a vowel . Other Cars = CONSONANTS ( Different cars = Manner of Articulation ) Box Car = STOPS ( total obstruction of air flow ) Cage / Racks = FRICATIVES ( partial obstruction with noisy air flow ) Combo - Car = AFFRICATES ( starts as a stop and ends as a fricative ) Grain Car = NASALS ( funny shape with different place for releasing air ) Tanker = LIQUIDS ( association with a liquid product ) Flatbed = SEMI - CONSONANTS ( just partial structure of the others ) 19 Next Stage of the Train Analogy April 21 , 2007 Course Evaluation : Received feedback from students April 28 Follow - up with Mentor ( Harvey Brightman ) : Shared feedback Open - ended questions about train analogy with respect to learning the content and “surviving” the 8 - hour class sessions • 29 helpful , useful , great , awesome , excellent ( “loved it” ) • 3 fun , interesting , cute • 2 seemed somewhat indifferent • 2 it didn’t really help It really helps to understand the overall picture and how each “car” depends on the other . I am a visual learner and the train analogy was very helpful in learning how segmentals and suprasegmentals work together in speech . I prefer to come up with my own analogies . It’s much more meaningful to me that way . The visuals made it easier to commit to memory . / / It really helped my understanding . An appropriate analogy - - - and I know how hard they are to come by . Cute analogy—helped with initially grasping big picture when so much was new and overwhelming . One of my favorites ! It helped to solidify the concepts . / / Helped in recall for the quizzes . Once explained , it made a lot of sense and was a great resource . The train helped the difficult information to be more understanding . It was a little hard to follow at first , but after the initial discussion , it was helpful . This was great ! I referred to it often ! / / It helped me learn the concepts very quickly ! 20 Another Stage of the Train Analogy December 2007 Chance encounter with a colleague ( Spanish Dept . ) – Shared his experience in Master Teacher seminar – Impressed with Dr . Brightman’s comments about the train – Sent me a copy of train analogy from updated binder Page 9 from the Master Teacher Program – PowerPoint of Prof . Spezzini’s “Big picture diagram” – 4 types of train cars from a child’s train book 21  Catalyst for finding a different way to do this analogy 22 Growth of Train Analogy Saturday , January 12 , 2008 ( first class session for EESL 625 ) – Used hand - drawn train from previous year • Not nearly as effective as in January 2007 • Enormous classroom : 50 students ( couldn’t see ) – Realized need to make analogy more effective Saturday , January 19 th ( professional conference ) – Impressed with a colleague’s PowerPoint  Transferred analogies onto PowerPoint  Added explanations and other features 23 Maturing of Train Analogy Saturday , January 26 , 2008 ( 2 nd class session for EESL 625 ) – Introduced new concepts with PowerPoint analogies – Continued expanding the train analogy – Shared PowerPoint with colleagues & former students Saturday , February 9 th ( third class session for EESL 625 ) – “The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology ” – Freight cars : : Manner of Articulation ( types of consonants ) NEW FEATURES Accompanied by text for explaining similarities . Projected on a screen for showing to large classes . Posted on Blackboard for online delivery . 24 Copyright ( 07 / 14 / 08 ) : Susan Spezzini , The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology — Permission granted for reproduction with courtesy line . p . 24 A Freight Car is like Manner of Articulation : : BOXCAR : : Stop Consonants p b t d k g CATTLE CAR : : Fricative Consonants f v Ө ð š ž h CIRCUS CAR : : Affricate Consonants č GRAIN CAR : : Nasal Consonants m n ŋ TANKER : : Liquid Consonants l r FLATBED : : Semi - Consonants ( Glides ) y w j ˇ In English : FREIGHT CAR MANNER OF ARTICULATION 25 Displaying the Visual Analogies Display each analogy on a separate slide . The base domain is a common object ( e . g . , train car ) . – Select an easily recognizable well - known object ( train ) . – Place the term ( boxcar ) for the already - known object on the left . – Draw a picture of this common object to symbolize the new concept . • Use lines and shapes from the drawing tools on Power Point . • Select items from Clip Art but for different functions : – Lamps viewed from above are the train wheels ; and – Four - sided arrows are the hitching mechanisms . ( The fourth arrow is “hidden” behind a black strip . ) The target domain is the new concept ( e . g . , stop consonants ) . – Place the term for the unknown concept ( stop consonants ) on the right . – Insert drawing of common object under the term for the new concept . – Include information about this new concept on the picture . Example : / p / / b / / t / / d / / k / / g / pot bot tot dot cot got ape Abe ate aid ache egg 26 Copyright ( 07 / 14 / 08 ) : Susan Spezzini , The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology — Permission granted for reproduction with courtesy line . BOXCAR / p / / b / / t / / d / / k / / g / STOP CONSONANTS ( in the English Language ) pot ape bot Abe tot ate dot aid cot ache got egg 27 Identifying the Visual Analogies Write analogy statements that … Start with a common object A Common Object is like a _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ End with the new concept A Common Object is like a New Concept Include the symbol : : A Common Object is like a New Concept : : Example : A Boxcar is like a Stop Consonant : : 28 Copyright ( 07 / 14 / 08 ) : Susan Spezzini , The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology — Permission granted for reproduction with courtesy line . BOXCAR A Boxcar is like a Stop Consonant : : / p / / b / / t / / d / / k / / g / STOP CONSONANTS ( in the English Language ) pot ape bot Abe tot ate dot aid cot ache got egg 29 Explaining the Visual Analogies Place bulleted explanations under the picture and its analogy statement . The first bullet describes the common object ( base domain ) : • In a boxcar , the door creates an obstruction with total closure . The door fully blocks the air from flowing from the inside to the outside ( and vice versa ) . When the door is opened , the air is released and flows freely . The second bullet describes the new concept ( target domain ) : • In a stop consonant , the articulator ( lower lip or tongue ) creates an obstruction with total closure . The articulator fully blocks the air stream ( which originated in the lungs ) from flowing from the inside ( mouth , i . e . , oral cavity ) to the outside . When the articulator is lowered , the air stream is released and flows freely . 30 Copyright ( 07 / 14 / 08 ) : Susan Spezzini , The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology — Permission granted for reproduction with courtesy line . BOXCAR A Boxcar is like a Stop Consonant : : - In a boxcar , the door creates an obstruction with total closure . The door fully blocks the air from flowing from the inside to the outside ( and vice versa ) . When the door is opened , the air is released and flows freely . - In a stop consonant , the articulator ( lower lip or tongue ) creates an obstruction with total closure . The articulator fully blocks the air stream ( which originated in the lungs ) from flowing from the inside ( mouth , i . e . , oral cavity ) to the outside . When the articulator is lowered , the air stream is released and flows freely . / p / / b / / t / / d / / k / / g / STOP CONSONANTS ( in the English Language ) pot ape bot Abe tot ate dot aid cot ache got egg 31 Maintaining Parallel Structure Common Object : Boxcar New Concept : Stop Consonant 1 st Sentence In a boxcar , the door creates an obstruction with total closure . 1 st Sentence In a stop consonant , the articulator ( lower lip or tongue ) creates an obstruction with total closure . 2 nd Sentence The door fully blocks the air from flowing from the inside to the outside ( and vice versa ) . 2 nd Sentence The articulator fully blocks the air stream ( which originated in the lungs ) from flowing from the inside ( mouth , i . e . , oral cavity ) to the outside . 3 rd Sentence When the door is opened , the air is released and flows freely . 3 rd Sentence When the articulator is lowered , the air stream is released and flows freely . Use parallel structures in the bulleted explanations : Use the same number of sentences ; and Use the same sentence structure in corresponding pairs of sentences . 32 Expansion of the Train Analogy Summer 2008 Created a total of 15 train analogy slides Developed 16 power point sets with about 20 slides per set Threaded the train analogy as a theme throughout sets Language use Vowels Stops Fricatives Affricates Nasals Liquids Glides Intonation 33 Fall 2008 Used ppt sets in EESL 625 ( Tuesday evenings ) Observed anecdotal evidence : • Student concerns regarding course content diminished substantially . • Students experienced less anxiety and greater success . • Feedback indicated enhanced abilities and attitudes towards phonology . • Learner factors ( different learning styles and background knowledge ) were being addressed . • Students felt more empowered . • Students reported incorporating visual analogies into their own teaching . 34 Pilot Study ( February – April 2009 ) 31 Students who took EESL 625 on Tuesday evenings : - without visual analogies ( Fall 2005 ) - with visual analogies ( Fall 2008 ) Actual Study ( May – August 2009 ) 176 Students who took EESL 625 in a Saturday format : - without visual analogies ( Spring 2004 , 2005 , 2006 ) ; - with visual analogies ( Spring 2007 , 2008 , 2009 ) . Extension of Study ( Fall 2009 – Spring 2010 ) Students who will take EESL 625 ( Fall 2009 & Spring 2010 ) : - with visual analogies Timeline of the SoTL Study 35 Research Questions 1 ) How did the visual analogies used in EESL 625 affect student learning as indicated by test scores , reflective assignments , and survey responses ? 2 ) As self - reported by former EESL students , to what extent did visual analogies affect their knowledge of phonology , their ability to teach pronunciation , their motivation to learn , their anxiety about phonology and pronunciation , and their attitude towards the course ? 3 ) Did the use of visual analogies for teaching EESL 625 influence students’ use of visual analogies in their own teaching ? 36 Data Sources Learner based outcomes Exam scores ( quizzes & midterm ) Course evaluations ( SOE ) PRAXIS scores ( ESOL # 0360 ) Selected course assignments Reaction to first class and to phonology Final Course Reflection Survey responses SurveyMonkey : quantitative & qualitative Selected interviews Fall 2009 & Spring 2010 37 Pilot Study : SurveyMonkey Invitational emails were sent on March 5 th at 3 : 00pm . 22 potential participants from Fall 2005 9 potential participants from Fall 2008 The first response came the next day at 7 : 00 am . I really like this format . It was fast and easy to participate . It took less than 15 minutes Four more responses came that same day . ( One used the attachment but did it electronically yesterday . ) Another response came four days later . 5 - day Response Rate : 10 % ( 2005 ) and 44 % ( 2008 ) 38 Self - Reported by Former Students Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 10 % without visual analogies Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 44 % with visual analogies 1 . How many years have you been teaching ? 1 - 2 years x x 3 - 5 years x 6 - 9 years x 10 - 19 years x 20 + years x 2 . How many years have you been teaching ELLs ? 1 - 2 years x x x x 3 - 5 years x 6 - 9 years 10 - 19 years x 20 + years 3 . What is your current position ? ( mark all that apply ) Content teacher ESL Teacher x x x x x Resource Teacher Admin / Supervision Other x x 4 . What grades / ages do you currently teach ? ( all that apply ) Grades PK - 5 x Grades 6 - 8 x Grades 9 - 10 x x College ELLs x Other adult ELLs x x Information about the Participants of the Pilot Study ( March 2009 ) 39 Preliminary Results of Pilot Study Likert Scale ( 1 - 5 ) : none - just a little - some - quite a bit - a lot Self - Reported by Former Students Before taking EESL 625 After the first class After finishing course Right now 1 . Knowledge about phonology without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 2 2 . 5 4 . 5 4 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 2 . 25 2 . 75 4 . 5 4 . 75 2 . Ability to teach pronunciation without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 2 2 . 5 4 . 5 4 . 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 1 . 25 2 . 75 4 . 5 4 . 5 3 . Motivation to learn phonology without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 2 . 5 3 4 3 . 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 3 . 5 4 . 25 4 . 75 4 . 75 4 . Motivation to learn to teach pronunciation without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 2 . 5 3 . 5 4 3 . 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 2 . 75 4 5 4 . 75 5 . Anxiety regarding EESL 625 ( reversed scale ) without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 3 2 . 5 5 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 1 . 75 2 . 5 4 . 5 5 6 . Attitude towards EESL 625 very negative , negative , indifferent , positive , very positive without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 4 4 . 5 5 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 2 . 75 3 . 75 4 . 75 5 40 Self - Reported by Former Students Very negatively , Somewhat negatively I’m not sure Somewhat positively Very positively 7 . WITHOUT VISUAL ANALOGIES ( Fall 2005 ) If visual analogies would have been used in your EESL 625 course , how do you think they would have affected … Your knowledge of phonology X X Your ability to teach pronunciation X X Your motivation to learn phonology X x Your motivation to learn to teach pronunciation X X Your anxiety regarding EESL 625 X X Your attitude towards EESL 625 X X 7 . WITH VISUAL ANALOGIES ( Fall 2008 ) How do you think the visual analogies used in your EESL 625 course affected … Your knowledge of phonology X X X X Your ability to teach pronunciation X X X X Your motivation to learn phonology X X X X Your motivation to learn to teach pronunciation X X X X Your anxiety regarding EESL 625 X X X X Your attitude towards EESL 625 X X X X 41 Self - Reported by Former Students Likert Scale ( 1 - 5 ) : never – rarely – sometimes – often - always Before taking EESL 625 After taking EESL 625 8 . How often to you use visual analogies in your own teaching ? without visual analogies : Fall 2005 ( N = 2 ) 3 3 . 5 with visual analogies : Fall 2008 ( N = 4 ) 1 . 75 3 . 5 42 9 . If you wish , please provide comments and / or insights regarding the use of visual analogies for teaching and learning . Fall 2005 Respondents ( without visual analogies ) a ) I’m not sure what visual analogies are and / or if I have used them . b ) Very effective . As a teacher , thinking of the analogies deepens my own understanding which helps me convey information more effectively . Fall 2008 Respondents ( with visual analogies ) I found the use of the visual analogies helpful not only in organizing the information in my mind , but also in my ability to retain that organized information 10 . If you wish , please provide comments and / or insights regarding the use of visual analogies in courses like EESL 625 . Fall 2005 Respondents ( without visual analogies ) a ) If visual analogies are using a tissue to demonstrate aspiration of sounds , then I feel these techniques are a supportive tool . b ) Visual analogies help learners connect what they are learning to what they already know - - which " jumpstarts " understanding and increases retention Fall 2008 Respondents ( with visual analogies ) ( no comments were provided ) 43 Anticipated Adjustments for Conducting the Actual Study Define visual analogies . Shorten the invitational email . ( pending IRB amendment ) Do not include the survey as an attachment to the invitational email . Confirm emails in advance or use work emails ( A potential 2005 candidate had called about something else and , when asked about the survey , she responded that she hadn’t received the email . ) 44 Tips for Creating Effective Analogies • Common Object – Select an object that is immediately recognizable ( train ) – Make sure the object will not need to be defined • Example : I replaced the term “Stock Car” with “Cattle Car” • Directionality : from Known to Unknown – Describe the common object and then the concept • Example : First describe the train car and then the sound system – Avoid reversing the direction – Use simple language in describing the analogy – Use parallel sentence structure in explaining the similarities . • Give a Name to your Analogy – “ Fun - Analogy Train” – The Fun - Analogy Train : An Introduction to Phonology 45 References Brightman , H . ( 2006 , December ) . Master Teacher Seminar sponsored by the Office of Faculty Development . University of Alabama at Birmingham . Birmingham , AL . Feild , C . T . , & Graves , R . L . ( 1981 ) . The hint factor in pictorial analogies . Teaching English in the Two - Year College , 7 ( 3 ) , 205 - 207 . Issing , L . J . ( 1990 ) . Learning from pictorial analogies . European Journal of Psychology of Education , 5 ( 4 ) . 489 - 499 . Krieger , P . A . ( 2005 ) . A Visual Analogy Guide to Human Anatomy . Colorado : Morton . Lin , H . , & Chiu , H . ( 2000 ) . Using computers to support a beginning teacher’s professional development . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 9 ( 4 ) , 367 - 373 . Lin , H . , Shiau , B . , & Lawrenz , F . ( 1996 ) . The effectiveness of teaching science with pictorial analogies . Research in Science Education , 26 ( 4 ) , 495 - 511 . Paris , N . A , & Glynn , S . M . ( 2004 ) . Elaborate analogies in science text : Tools for enhancing preservice teachers’ knowledge and attitudes . Contemporary Educational Psychology 29 , 230 – 247 . Perkins , D . N . , & Unger , C . ( 1994 ) . A new look in representations for mathematics and science learning . Instructional Science , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 - 37 . Siqueira , A . J . S . , Remiao , J . O . R . , & Azevedo , A . M . ( 1988 ) . Metabo - lonograms to teach biochemistry . Biochemical Education , 16 ( 1 ) , 20 - 22 . 46 Thank you !