Research Article Believe It or Not On the Possibility of Suspending Belief Uri Hasson , 1 Joseph P . Simmons , 2 and Alexander Todorov 2 1 Brain Research Imaging Center , The University of Chicago , and 2 Department of Psychology , Princeton University ABSTRACT— We present two experiments that cast doubt on existing evidence suggesting that it is impossible to suspend belief in a comprehended proposition . In Experiment 1 , we found that interrupting the encoding of a statement’s ve - racity decreased memory for the statement’s falsity when the false version of the statement was uninformative , but not when the false version was informative . This suggests that statements that are informative when false are not represented as if they were true . In Experiment 2 , partici - pants made faster lexical decisions to words implied by preceding statements when they were told that the state - ments were true than when the veracity of the statements was unknown or when the statements were false . The ﬁndings suggest that comprehending a statement may not require believing it , and that it may be possible to suspend belief in comprehended propositions . Is it possible to suspend belief in a comprehended proposition ? In attempting to answer this question , Gilbert ( 1991 ) distin - guished between the philosophies of Descartes and Spinoza . According to Descartes , people ﬁrst comprehend a proposition and then later assess its veracity . Thus , in Descartes’ view , comprehension precedes belief , and belief suspension is there - forepossible . Incontrast , accordingtoSpinoza , comprehendinga proposition requires believing it to be true . Thus , in his view , comprehension and belief occur simultaneously , and belief suspension is therefore impossible . Although Descartes’ position on this issue is more intuitively appealing , existing evidence seems to favor the Spinozan view . This evidence comes in two forms . First , there is research sug - gesting that truth is represented more quickly and easily than falsity . People are quicker to assess the veracity of true than false statements ( e . g . , Just & Carpenter , 1976 ) , and they more easily represent true than false propositions ( Johnson - Laird & Savary , 1999 ) . Second , Gilbert and his colleagues have demonstrated that when people are under cognitive load or time pressure , they tend tomisrememberandmisrepresent false informationasbeingtrue ( Gilbert , Krull , & Malone , 1990 ; Gilbert , Tafarodi , & Malone , 1993 ) . In a study ostensibly about language learning , Gilbert et al . ( 1990 , Experiment 1 ) presented participants with state - ments about the meaning of words in the Hopi language ( e . g . , A tica is afox ) . Each statement was presented on acomputer screen for 8 s , and then immediately followed by the word true or false to indicate whether the proposition was an accurate or inaccurate statement about the Hopi language . Critically , on some learning trials , participants were asked to respond as quickly as possible to the sound of a tone , which was meant to interrupt the encoding of the proposition’s veracity by depleting participants’ cognitive resources . After this learning phase , participants were presented with some of these propositions and were required to recall whether they were originally presented as true or as false . Results were consistent with the Spinozan hypothesis ; interruption decreased the recall accuracy of false but not true statements . Participants’ recall accuracy was 55 % for uninterrupted true propositions , 58 % forinterruptedtruepropositions , and55 % foruninterrupted false propositions , but only 35 % for interrupted false proposi - tions . Gilbert et al . ( 1990 , Experiment 2 ) replicated this effect with different materials ( smiling faces that were either sincere or insincere ) and a more difﬁcult interruption task that required participants to judge whether the interrupting tone was high pitched or low pitched . Gilbert ( 1991 ) interpreted these demonstrations as evidence for a dual - process model of belief . At Stage 1 , propositions are simultaneously comprehended and believed . Subsequently , at Stage 2 , people effortfully ‘‘unbelieve’’ false propositions . Cog - nitive load interrupts the two - stage process before it runs to completion , causing the process to output after Stage 1 . Conse - quently , cognitive load causes false propositions to remain believed , and therefore to be wrongly recalled as true . This dual - process model has been used to explain a variety of effects , Address correspondence to Uri Hasson , Brain Research Imaging Center , Biological Sciences Division , The University of Chicago , 5841 S . Maryland Ave . , MC - 2030 , Chicago , IL 60637 ; e - mail : uhasson @ uchicago . edu . PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 566 Volume 16—Number 7 Copyright r 2005 American Psychological Society including source - monitoring errors ( Schacter , Norman , & Kout - staal , 1997 ) , acquiescence effects ( Knowles & Condon , 1999 ) , and anchoring effects ( Chapman & Johnson , 2002 ) . Although extant evidence is certainly consistent with the Spinozan view , the verdict is still out on the possibility of belief suspension . First , people may encode assertions of truth more easily than assertions of falsity simply because true statements are encountered more often than false statements ( Skurnik , 1998 ) , orbecausefalsestatementstendtobemoregrammatically complex than true statements ( Clark & Chase , 1972 ) . Second , although cognitive load may cause people to misrep - resent some false propositions as true , this effect may not gen - eralize to all propositions , because falsity may be represented differently depending on what is said to be false . In line with this argument , previous research has demonstrated that negated statements are more easily represented to the extent to which the negations promote meaningful , informative inferences ( Fil - lenbaum , 1966 ; Wason , 1965 ) . For example , Fillenbaum ( 1966 ) and Mayo , Schul , and Burnstein ( 2004 ) found that participants misrecalled negated statements as afﬁrmations less frequently when the negation allowed for a meaningful and informative in - ference or could be accommodated by a preexisting schema . These ﬁndings suggest that the representation of negation may not always constitute a simple ‘‘tag’’ of the afﬁrmation , but that whether or not a tagging system is employed may depend on the informativeness of the negation . Specifically , when the negation of a term does not offer a meaningful , informative inference , then negation might be represented as a tag ( Clark & Chase , 1972 ) . However , when negated content provides an available inference , people may not represent negation as a tag of the afﬁrmative but , instead , make the allowable inference . In a study supporting this possibility , Fillenbaum ( 1966 ) found that the most frequent memory error for informative negations involved misrecalling a negated adjective as its antonym . Although Fillenbaum’s research focused on negation rather than falsity , it seems likely that negation and falsity are repre - sented similarly ( Gilbert , 1991 ; Just & Carpenter , 1976 ) . Rep - resentingastatementasfalsemayrequireapplyingafalsitytagto the statement if its false version is uninformative , because there isnootherwaytorepresentit . However , whenaproposition’sfalse version is informative , then the false statement may be repre - sentedintermsofwhatitsfalsityimpliesorsuggests . Thus , afalse statement may be much more easily represented , and less likely to be misrecalled as true , when knowing that it is false provides a perceiver with meaningful information . In their research , Gilbert et al . ( 1990 ) used primarily stimuli thatwereuninformativewhenfalse . Learningthatthestatement a tica is a fox is false does not allow for a meaningful inference , because knowing that a tica is not afox implies nothing at all ; tica could mean an inﬁnite number of things . As we have suggested , whenstatementsarenotmeaningfulwhenfalse , participantsmay have no choice but to represent falsity in terms of the afﬁrmative proposition , perhapsaccompaniedbyaneffortfulapplicationofa falsity tag . This in turn may lead people to incorrectly recall false statements as true when the encoding of falsity is interrupted . 1 However , in general , many propositions that people encounter are highly informative when false . For example , consider the proposition George owns a television . This is an informative proposition when false , because knowing that it is false supplies you with knowledge about George—it suggests that George is unlike most people . Thus , when learning that such propositions are false , people may be able to represent them in terms of what their falsity suggests ( e . g . , George is atypical ; he is the bookish type ) , rather than by applying a falsity tag to the afﬁrmative proposition . Evidence from person perception is consistent with the possi - bility that this process may be completed independently of cog - nitive load . People are remarkably good at making spontaneous person inferences from minimal information ( Todorov & Uleman , 2002 ) . Suchinferencespersistdespitelackofexplicitmemoryfor the information that triggered them ( Carlston & Skowronski , 1994 ; Todorov & Uleman , 2002 ) . More important , Todorov and Uleman ( 2003 ) have shown that spontaneous person inferences occur under conditions of cognitive load , rapid presentation of information , and shallow processing , suggesting that such infer - ences are automatic . Perhaps , then , when statements are in - formative when they are false , people will not misrecall them as true , even under time pressure or cognitive load . Such a ﬁnding would cast doubt on the claim that comprehending a statement requires believing it , and that belief suspension is impossible . EXPERIMENT 1 In our ﬁrst experiment , we used a variant of the paradigm of Gilbert et al . ( 1990 ) to examine whether people under cognitive load can refrain from believing informative false statements . In thisstudy , wepresentedparticipantswithaseriesoftrueandfalse propositions that were pretested to be either informative or un - informative when false . Occasionally , the presentation of the statement was followed by a tone that participants had to cate - gorizeaseitherhighpitchedorlowpitched . Thisinterruptionwas designed todeprivepeopleofthetimeandresourcesnecessaryto assess the veracity of the statement . After encoding the state - ments , participants were asked to recall the veracity of each proposition . We expected interruption to interfere with the en - coding of falsity only among statements that were uninformative when false . Method Participants Twenty undergraduates from Princeton University participated in this study for course credit . 1 Gilbert et al . ( 1993 ) also provided information that was uninformative when false . Theyexplicitlyselectedsuchstatements‘‘sothatsubjectswouldnotassume that a false statement . . . could be negated to create a true statement’’ ( p . 223 ) . Volume 16—Number 7 567 Uri Hasson , Joseph P . Simmons , and Alexander Todorov Materials We selected 48 statements from a pool of 100 statements that we pretested on the dimensions of informativeness when true and informativeness when false . In pretesting , 18 participants rated how informative each statement would be about an anonymous 30 - year - oldperson , ifthatstatementwastheonlythingtheyknew about the person . They made the ratings on an 11 - point scale ranging from 0 ( couldn’t tell anything about the person given this information ) to 10 ( could tell a lot about the person given this information ) . We chose 12 statements that were informative both when true ( M 5 5 . 1 , SD 5 0 . 8 ) and when false ( M 5 4 . 8 , SD 5 0 . 5 ; e . g . , this person is a liberal ) . Twelve were informative when true ( M 5 5 . 5 , SD 5 1 . 1 ) but not when false ( M 5 0 . 8 , SD 5 0 . 4 ; e . g . , this person walks barefoot to work ) . Twelve were informative whenfalse ( M 5 4 . 8 , SD 5 1 . 2 ) butnotwhentrue ( M 5 1 . 0 , SD 5 1 . 0 ; e . g . , this person owns a television ) . And 12 were uninforma - tivebothwhentrue ( M 5 1 . 9 , SD 5 0 . 8 ) and whenfalse ( M 5 1 . 0 , SD 5 0 . 4 ; e . g . , this person drinks tea for breakfast ) . In pretesting andtheexperiment , allthestatementswereoftheform thisperson followed by a descriptive clause . Design Participants were presented with statements that were indicated to be either true or false , and the presentation was either inter - rupted or not interrupted by a tone . The statements themselves were of the four types just described . The design was therefore 2 ( veracity : true , false ) (cid:1) 2 ( interruption : yes , no ) (cid:1) 2 ( informa - tiveness when true : high , low ) (cid:1) 2 ( informativeness when false : high , low ) . The materials were rotated across four lists so that each of the statements appeared once in each list as either true or false and as either interrupted or not ( i . e . , each statement ap - pearedinallfourlists , butineachlistitwasassignedtoadifferent experimental condition ) . Each participant learned 48 experi - mental statements . Procedure Learning Stage . Participants were presented with information on a computer screen . On each trial , they were presented with a person’sfaceand , underneathit , astatementthatwasindicatedto be either true or false of that person . Participants were told to pay attention to all of the information on the screen , because they would be asked some questions about the people they were seeing . Each face and its accompanying proposition were pre - sented for 4 s and then removed . On interruption trials , this 4 - s presentation was followed by a low or high tone that was sounded for 650 ms . Participants were instructed to press ‘‘K’’ when hearing the high tone and ‘‘S’’ when hearing the low tone . There was a 1 , 700 - ms break between trials . The ﬁrst three trials served as buffers for primacy effects , and the last three trials served as buffers for recency effects . Data from these trials were not recorded . Test Stage . After the learning stage , participants were presented with thefacesand statementsthatthey learnedearlier . Their task was to determine whether the given statement was previously indicated to be true or false of the person in the picture . To dis - suade participants from giving an equal number of ‘‘true’’ and ‘‘false’’ decisions , we told them that only a subset of the original faces would be presented , and that they should therefore not be alarmed if the majority of the test faces were accompanied by either true or false attributions in the learning stage ( following Gilbert et al . , 1990 ) . Each face and its associated statement were presented on the screen until participants gave their answer . Results and Discussion Figure 1 presents the recall accuracy for statements that were uninformative versus highly informative when false . The top panel shows that for statements that were uninformative when false , we replicated the ﬁndings of Gilbert et al . ( 1990 ) : Inter - ruption had no effect on the encoding of truth , but increased the tendency to report false statements as true . The bottom panel of Figure1showstherecallaccuracyforstatementsthatwerehighly informative when false . As predicted , for these statements , in - terruptionhadnoeffectonrememberingastatement’sfalsity , and no asymmetry was found between memory for truth and memory for falsity . Statistical analyses by subjects ( F 1 ) and by items ( F 2 ) cor - roborated these observations . We subjected the error data to a 2 ( veracity : true , false ) (cid:1) 2 ( interruption : yes , no ) (cid:1) 2 ( informa - tiveness when true : high , low ) (cid:1) 2 ( informativeness when false : high , low ) within - subjects analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . At - testing to the effectiveness of the interruption task , recall was more accurate for trials that were not followed by an interruption than for interrupted trials , F 1 ( 1 , 19 ) 5 8 . 3 , p 5 . 01 , Z 2 5 . 31 ; F 2 ( 1 , 44 ) 5 7 . 1 , p 5 . 01 , Z 2 5 . 14 . Although the effect of in - terruption was greater for the encoding of falsity than for the encoding of truth , F 1 ( 1 , 19 ) 5 5 . 0 , p < . 05 , Z 2 5 . 22 , and F 2 ( 1 , 44 ) 5 3 . 7 , p 5 . 06 , Z 2 5 . 08 , this effect was driven by those statements that were uninformative when false , as indicated by a reliable three - way Veracity (cid:1) Interruption (cid:1) Informativeness When False interaction , F 1 ( 1 , 19 ) 5 10 . 4 , p 5 . 005 , Z 2 5 . 36 ; F 2 ( 1 , 44 ) 5 6 . 4 , p 5 . 015 , Z 2 5 . 13 . The three - way interaction reﬂects the fact that for items that were uninformative when false ( Fig . 1 , top panel ) , there was a reliable Veracity (cid:1) Interruption interaction , F 1 ( 1 , 19 ) 5 15 . 2 , p < . 001 , Z 2 5 . 45 ; F 2 ( 1 , 23 ) 5 8 . 9 , p 5 . 007 , Z 2 5 . 28 . Incontrast , as shown in the bottom panel of Figure1 , there was no interaction for statements that were informative when false ( both F s < 1 ) . No other effects were reliable . These results support the idea that the effect of resource de - pletion on the encoding of falsity ultimately depends on whether or not the proposition’s false version is informative . It seems that resource depletion affects the encoding of falsity when a propo - sitionisuninformativewhenfalse ( asdiscoveredbyGilbertetal . , 568 Volume 16—Number 7 Believe It or Not 1990 ) , but not when the statement’s false version is informative . ThisresultisconsistentwiththeCartesiannotionthatbeliefisnot an inevitable result of comprehension . In Experiment 2 , we more directly examined the question of whether people can suspend belief in a proposition . EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment 1 , we demonstrated that interruption has no effect on the encoding of highly informative false statements . In Ex - periment 2 , we sought to conceptually replicate this effect , while also exploring a different aspect of the Spinozan hypothesis . Gilbert ( 1991 ) noted that the Spinozan hypothesis makes at least two specific predictions . First , when people are under cognitive load or otherwise interrupted , they should represent false state - ments as if they were true . We investigated this hypothesis in Experiment 1 . Second , ‘‘when people comprehend information whose truth value cannot be determined via assessment , they [ should ] act as though they believe the information to be true’’ ( Gilbert , 1991 , p . 115 ) . Wetested thispredictioninExperiment 2 using a lexical decision task . Decades of research on priming and lexical decisions indicate that people are more quickly able to identify words when those words are highly accessible in memory ( e . g . , Neely , 1991 ) . Thus , when people are asked to determine whether a letter string is a word or not , they are more quickly able to do so when they have previously read a text that has made the word more accessible . In this experiment , we again presented participants with faces and statements that referred to the people depicted . After the pre - sentation of each face - sentence pair , participants were required to rapidly make a lexical decision . There were three types of statements : True statements were indicated to be true of the person ; false statements were indicated to be false of the person ; andveracity - unknownstatementswerenotindicatedtobetrueor false until after the lexical decision task . On critical trials , the word presented for the lexical decision task was related to either the true or the false version of the sentence preceding it . If , as the Spinozan hypothesis suggests , people represent veracity - unknown statements as if they were true , then participants would be expected to respond equally quickly to words associated with the truth of the statement ( i . e . , true - related words ) following true statements and following ve - racity - unknown statements . If people do not represent veracity - unknown statements as if they were true , then participants would be expected to respond more slowly to true - related words fol - lowing veracity - unknown statements than following true state - ments . This was our expectation . In addition , given the results of Experiment1 , weexpectedparticipantstorespondmoreslowlyto true - related words following false statements than following true statements . Method Participants Sixteen undergraduates from Princeton University participated in this study for course credit . Materials Fromapoolof80pretestedstatements , weselected24statements that conformed to the following criteria : ( a ) The statements were ratedashighlyinformativebothwhentrueandwhenfalse , and ( b ) the statements were strongly associated with certain words both when true and when false . For example , the statement this person thinks that things turn out for the best was rated as strongly as - sociated with the terms optimist when true and pessimist when false . We also chose 24 additional statements to serve as ﬁller materials that would be followed by legal nonwords . In this study , weusedonlypicturesofmen , becausesomeofthestatementsmay have different implications when referring to men and women . Fig . 1 . Percentage of correct recall of statements’ truth or falsity in Ex - periment1asafunctionofwhetherthestatementswerepresentedastrueorfalseandwhethertheirpresentationwasinterruptedoruninterrupted . The top panel presents data for statements that were uninformative when false ( e . g . , this person drinks tea for breakfast ) , and the bottom panel presents data for statements that were informative when false ( e . g . , this person is loved by family members ) . Volume 16—Number 7 569 Uri Hasson , Joseph P . Simmons , and Alexander Todorov Design Statements were said to be true or false immediately , or their veracity was unknown until after the lexical decision task . In addition , eachstatementwasfollowedbyalexicaldecisiontarget that was related either to the meaning of the statement when true or to the meaning of the statement when false . Thus , the design was 3 ( sentence veracity : true , false , unknown ) (cid:1) 2 ( lexical de - cision target : true related , false related ) . The dependent variable was the decision latency for lexical decisions to the target words . The materials were rotated across lists so that each participant was presented with either the true - or the false - related target for each item , in one of the three priming conditions . Procedure On each trial , participants were presented with a photo of a person and a statement underneath the photo ; they were told that their task was to learn information about the people presented to them . They were informed that in some cases they would be told immediately whether the statement was true or false of the per - son , and in some cases they would be told after a delay . Each photo - statement pair remained on the screen for 4 s and was immediately followed by the lexical decision letter string . This letter string remained on the screen for 250 ms , and participants were required to quickly press a button to indicate whether or not it was a word in the English language . On half of the trials , the statements accompanying the photo - graphs were immediately marked as either true or false of the person depicted . On the other half of the trials , participants did not learn whether the statement was true or false of the person until after they responded to the lexical decision letter string . On these veracity - unknown trials , the ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ prompt ap - peared after the participant’s lexical decision response , and it remained on the screen for 3 s . Between trials there was a 3 - s interval . Results and Discussion Response latencies for true - related and false - related targets for each of the three sentence types are shown in Figure 2 . As pre - dicted , sentence veracity had a reliable effect on the response times to true - related targets , F 1 ( 2 , 30 ) 5 6 . 7 , p < . 01 , Z 2 5 . 30 ; F 2 ( 2 , 46 ) 5 4 . 2 , p 5 . 02 , Z 2 5 . 16 . The left side of Figure 2 reveals that , consistent with our prediction , lexical decisions to true - related targets were faster when the statement was said to be true ( M 5 626 ms ) than when its veracity was unknown ( M 5 698 ms ) or when it was false ( M 5 721 ms ) , p s < . 05 . For example , the word optimist was veriﬁed more quickly when the statement this personthinksthatthingsturnoutforthebest wassaidtobetrueofa personthanwhentheveracityofthestatementwasundetermined or when the statement was said to be false . AsshownintherightsideofFigure2 , sentenceveracitydidnot exert a reliable effect on response latencies for false - related targets ( p s > . 30 ) . Although informative false statements are sometimesrecalledintermsoftheinferencestheyafford ( Mayoet al . , 2004 ) , false statements did not speed up responding to false - related targets . This suggests that although false statements re - duced the accessibility of true - related concepts , they did not immediately activate semantic content consistent with their implications ( see Hasson & Glucksberg , 2005 , for similar ﬁnd - ings in an investigation of lexical negation ) . Perhaps people are able to immediately grasp the gist implications of informative false sentences without immediately grasping their semantic implications . As a result , people may spontaneously form a general impression ( e . g . , ‘‘George is a bad person’’ ) instead of automatically making an elaborative inference ( e . g . , ‘‘George is dishonest’’ ; cf . McKoon & Ratcliff , 1992 ) . We look forward to future research that investigates this intriguing possibility . Most important for our central thesis is that the results of Ex - periment 2 contradict the Spinozan hypothesis . When the ve - racity of a statement is unknown or false , people do not seem to represent the statement as though they believe that it is true . GENERAL DISCUSSION In this article , we have presented two studies that cast doubt on the Spinozan notion that belief and comprehension occur si - multaneously , and that belief suspension is therefore impossible . Previous evidence for the Spinozan hypothesis comes from studies demonstrating that cognitive load or interruption causes people to misremember explicitly false statements as being true ( Gilbert et al . , 1990 ) . In Experiment 1 , we replicated this effect , but only when the false versions of statements were uninforma - Fig . 2 . Response latencies to lexical decision targets in Experiment 2 as a functionofwhethertheywererelatedtothetruthorfalsityoftheprecedingsentence . Results are shown separately for statements that were indicated to be true , those that were indicated to be false , and those whose veracity was unknown at the time of the lexical decision . 570 Volume 16—Number 7 Believe It or Not tive . Whenthefalseversionsofthepropositionswereinformative suchthattheyconveyedmeaningfulinformationaboutthepeople that they described , interruption did not impair memory . This result suggests that comprehension may not necessitate belief . Whenfalseinformationisinformative , peoplecanrememberthat the information is false—even when elaboration of that infor - mationisinterrupted . Itseemsthatextantevidenceinfavorofthe Spinozan hypothesis does not generalize to statements that convey meaningful information when the statements are false . In Experiment2 , we conceptually replicated this effect using a lexical decision task . When propositions were denoted as false , or when the veracity of the propositions was unknown , partici - pants responded more slowly to true - related words than they did when the propositions were denoted as true . Contrary to the Spinozan hypothesis , this result suggests that people do not necessarily treat false propositions or veracity - unknown propo - sitions as if they were true . The relation between comprehension and belief is a complex one . One possibility , examined here , is that comprehension cannot exist without belief . Some researchers ( e . g . , Recanati , 1997 ) have suggested that people can believe propositions that they do not completely understand ( i . e . , whose representation is undetermined ) . Furthermore , comprehension may not be a nec - essary precursor for disbelief . People might not understand a proposition such as there is not one place in which an electron exists at any given time , yet disbelieve the proposition exactly because they cannot comprehend it . Further research on the relation between the processes of belief and comprehension may very well demonstrate that comprehension and belief are two independent processes . Acknowledgments— Wethank Dan Gilbert for hiscomments on a previous version of this article . REFERENCES Carlston , D . E . , & Skowronski , J . J . ( 1994 ) . Saving in the relearning of traitinformationasevidenceforspontaneousinferencegeneration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 840 – 856 . Chapman , G . B . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 2002 ) . Incorporating the irrelevant : Anchors in judgments of belief and value . In T . Gilovich & D . Grifﬁn ( Eds . ) , Heuristics and biases : The psychology of intuitive judgment ( pp . 120 – 138 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Clark , H . H . , & Chase , W . G . ( 1972 ) . On the process of comparing sen - tences against pictures . Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 472 – 517 . Fillenbaum , S . ( 1966 ) . Memory for gist : Some relevant variables . Lan - guage and Speech , 9 , 217 – 227 . Gilbert , D . T . ( 1991 ) . How mental systems believe . American Psycholo - gist , 46 , 107 – 119 . Gilbert , D . T . , Krull , D . S . , & Malone , P . S . ( 1990 ) . Unbelieving the un - believable : Some problems in the rejection of false information . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 59 , 601 – 613 . Gilbert , D . T . , Tafarodi , R . W . , & Malone , P . S . ( 1993 ) . Youcan’tnotbelieve everything you read . JournalofPersonality andSocialPsychology , 65 , 221 – 233 . Hasson , U . , & Glucksberg , S . ( 2005 ) . Does comprehending negation entail afﬁrmation ? Manuscript submitted for publication . Johnson - Laird , P . N . , & Savary , F . ( 1999 ) . Illusory inferences : A novel class of erroneous deductions . Cognition , 71 , 191 – 229 . Just , M . A . , & Carpenter , P . A . ( 1976 ) . Relation between comprehending and remembering some complex sentences . Memory & Cognition , 4 , 318 – 322 . Knowles , E . S . , & Condon , C . A . ( 1999 ) . Why people say ‘‘yes’’ : A dual - process theory of acquiescence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 77 , 379 – 386 . Mayo , R . , Schul , Y . , & Burnstein , E . ( 2004 ) . ‘‘I am not guilty’’ versus ‘‘I aminnocent’’ : Successfulnegationmaydependontheschemaused for its encoding . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 40 , 433 – 449 . McKoon , G . , & Ratcliff , R . ( 1992 ) . Inference during reading . Psycho - logical Review , 99 , 440 – 466 . Neely , J . H . ( 1991 ) . Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition : A selective review of current ﬁndings and theories . In D . Besner & G . W . Humphreys ( Eds . ) , Basic processes in reading : Visual word recognition ( pp . 264 – 336 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Recanati , F . ( 1997 ) . Can we believe what we do not understand ? Mind and Language , 12 , 84 – 100 . Schacter , D . , Norman , K . , & Koutstaal , W . ( 1997 ) . The recovered memories debate : A cognitive neuroscience perspective . In C . Martin ( Ed . ) , Recovered memories and false memories : Debates in psychology ( pp . 63 – 99 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Skurnik , I . W . ( 1998 ) . Metacognition and the illusion of truth . Unpub - lished doctoral dissertation , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ . Todorov , A . , & Uleman , J . S . ( 2002 ) . Spontaneous trait inferences are boundtoactors’faces : Evidencefromafalserecognitionparadigm . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 83 , 1051 – 1065 . Todorov , A . , & Uleman , J . S . ( 2003 ) . The efﬁciency of binding sponta - neous trait inferences to actors’ faces . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 39 , 549 – 562 . Wason , P . C . ( 1965 ) . The contexts of plausible denial . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 4 , 7 – 11 . ( R ECEIVED 6 / 17 / 04 ; R EVISION ACCEPTED 8 / 31 / 04 ) Volume 16—Number 7 571 Uri Hasson , Joseph P . Simmons , and Alexander Todorov