Integrins play central roles in the biology of metazoa 1 by controlling cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and cell migration , growth , differentiation and apoptosis . As a result , they contribute to the regulation of develop­ ment , immunity , inflammation and haemo stasis , and to the development of diseases including auto immunity , atherothrombosis and neoplasia 1 . Integrins are hetero­ dimers of transmembrane α­ and β­subunits 1 , which each have a large ectodomain , a single transmembrane domain and a generally short cytoplasmic tail ( BOX 1 ) . Integrin affinities for their cognate extracellular ligands , such as fibronectin , fibrinogen and collagen , are regulated by cell­ ular signalling , resulting in integrin activation through ‘inside – out’ signalling 1 ( BOX 2 ) . Consequently , integrin activation is important for a wide range of anchorage­ dependent cellular events , such as platelet aggregation and leukocyte transmigration 1 . In addition to changes in adhesion , integrin activation can control the polarity of migrating cells and the assembly of the ECM , thereby regulating events such as tumour metastasis 2 . Blockade of integrin activation may therefore be useful in anti­ adhesive therapies 3 . The broad bio logical and potentially therapeutic significance of integrin activation , and inter­ est in this prototype of inside – out signalling , give rise to a fertile field of investigation . Here , we summarize recent progress and controversies in the study of integrin activation , focusing on the terminal events that lead to activation ; that is , the ‘end game’ . We do not consider the ability of integrins to signal into cells ( ‘outside – in’ signalling ; BOX 2 ) ; instead , we emphasize recent advances that identify the cytoplasmic partners that trigger integrin activation , begin to explain how the association of these partners with integrins is regulated by signalling events , explain how these binding interactions activate integrins and identify transmembrane domain structural features that account for the ability of integrins to efficiently transmit signals across cell membranes . Roles of conformation and clustering Changes in the conformation of individual integrin hetero dimers and clustering of heterodimers into oligo­ mers can influence the binding of ligands 4 , the former through changes in single receptor affinity and the lat­ ter through increases in receptor valency that accompany integrin clustering 4 . Vigorous debate centres on the rela­ tive importance of each mechanism to integrin function 4 , 5 . Clarification of this debate has been hampered by inexact definitions of clustering and difficulties in quanti fying integrin microclusters 4 . Conformational change and clus­ tering are both likely to be important for integrin function , and their relative contributions might vary depending on the integrin , cell type and biological circumstances . For some integrins in circulating blood cells , such as αIIbβ3 integrin in platelets , changes in receptor confor­ mation are the primary means of regulating receptor affinity and ligand binding in response to agonists . Conformational changes . Much debate surrounds the nature of the extracellular domain conformational changes that underlie integrin activation and several excellent reviews have been devoted to this topic , which is not a main focus of this Review . In brief , integrin ectodomains * Department of Medicine , University of California San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , California 92093 , USA . Correspondence to M . H . G e‑mail : mhginsberg @ ucsd . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2871 Valency A term that refers to the number of chemical bonds between two atoms . Here it refers to the number of integrin - binding sites presented by a given adhesive ligand . Microcluster A loosely defined term that refers to a non - covalent oligomer of integrins on the cell surface that appears as a point source ( that is , with a diameter < 100nm ) in fluorescence microscopy . The final steps of integrin activation : the end game Sanford J . Shattil * , Chungho Kim * and Mark H . Ginsberg * Abstract | Cell - directed changes in the ligand - binding affinity ( ‘activation’ ) of integrins regulate cell adhesion and migration , extracellular matrix assembly and mechanotransduc - tion , thereby contributing to embryonic development and diseases such as atherothrombosis and cancer . Integrin activation comprises triggering events , intermediate signalling events and , finally , the interaction of integrins with cytoplasmic regulators , which changes an integrin’s affinity for its ligands . The first two events involve diverse interacting signalling pathways , whereas the final steps are immediately proximal to integrins , thus enabling integrin - focused therapeutic strategies . Recent progress provides insight into the structure of integrin transmembrane domains , and reveals how the final steps of integrin activation are mediated by integrin - binding proteins such as talins and kindlins . R E V I E W S 288 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology β A - domain Hybrid domain PSI domain β - Tail domain β - Propeller Thigh domain Calf 2 domain Calf 1 domain Cytoplasmicdomain Transmembrane domain α IIb integrin β 3 integrin Detergent micelle A globular aggregate of amphipathic detergent in aqueous solution , with detergent hydrophilic ends facing outside and hydrophobic ends facing inside . can exist in bent ‘closed’ conformations , intermediate extended conformations with a closed head­piece , and extended ‘open’ conformations 6 , 7 . These may corre­ spond to low affinity , activated , and activated and ligand occupied integrin conformers 8 , respectively , on cells 9 , 10 . The bent form can , in some circumstances , engage ligands such as fibronectin fragments 11 . This result is consistent with the idea that activation involves releasing a ‘deadbolt’ formed by an interface in the β­integrin subunit between the membrane­proximal β­tail domain and the α7 helix in the ligand­binding βA domain 11 , 12 ( BOX 1 ) . Downwards displacement of this α7 helix leads to conformational activation of the βA domain 13 , 14 ; thus , the deadbolt was proposed to prevent this displacement and block activa­ tion 11 , 12 . However , a structure of the αIIbβ3 integrin ecto­ domain lacked the deadbolt interface 15 . Furthermore , deletion of the loop connecting helices C and D ( CD loop ) in the β­tail domain , proposed to form the dead­ bolt , failed to activate αIIbβ3 integrin or αVβ3 integrin 16 , casting further doubt on the deadbolt hypothesis . The conformations of integrins have been studied in isolated ectodomains , or fragments of these , potentially leading to artefacts owing to the release of constraints imposed by interactions of cytoplasmic or transmembrane domains 17 . Electron cryomicroscopy studies of intact integrins in detergent micelles provide insights 18 . However , the struc­ ture of the β3 integrin transmembrane domain can differ between detergent micelles and phospholipid bilayers 19 ; the latter more accurately mimics biological membranes . Moreover , image selection bias is a potential problem in electron microscopy studies , and has been invoked 11 as an explanation for discrepancies 20 . Electron cryomicro­ scopy tomography of lipid­embedded αIIbβ3 integrin revealed an average height of 11 nm , much less than the 19 nm height expected of a fully extended integrin 6 , 21 . Furthermore , addition of Mn 2 + , which activates integrins directly by interaction with cation coordination sites in the βA domain , did not change the height , indicating a lack of extension 21 — a result in agreement with Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) studies of αVβ3 integrin in living cells 22 . Steered molecular dynamic modelling 15 , 23 and experimental studies 24 , 25 suggest that force can con­ tribute to integrin activation and extension . Furthermore , extension of unoccupied integrins may require either traction forces or collision with other membrane pro­ teins 15 . It seems likely that a resolution of some of these hotly debated issues must take into account the relative strengths of negative stain electron microscopy versus electron cryomicroscopy 26 , and awaits structural studies of a lipid­embedded , full­length integrin activated in a physiologically relevant manner . Clustering . Integrin clustering is defined as the inter­ action of heterodimers to form hetero­oligomers . It can be caused by inside – out signals that stimulate the recruitment of multivalent protein complexes to integrin cytoplasmic domains 27 , 28 , 29 , by binding of multivalent extracellular ligands to integrin ectodomains by the homodimerization of integrin transmembrane domains ( α­to­α or β­to­β ) 30 , or by the release of integrins from cytoskeletal constraints that leads to the free diffusion of integrins in the plane of the membrane 31 . Whatever the contribution to the binding of fibronectin or other adhe­ sive ligands , integrin clustering is important for triggering outside – in signalling , integrin recycling 32 and mechano­ transduction by adhesion­based intracellular structures that contain integrins and associated molecules 33 . These intracellular structures include focal complexes and focal adhesions 34 in adherent fibroblasts , immunological synapses and kinapses in activated T lymphocytes 35 , podosomes in adherent osteoclasts and macrophages , and invadopodia in cancer cells 36 . Technical issues currently limit the sepa­ ration of integrin clustering from conformational change . Box 1 | Integrin domain structures Integrins are heterodimeric adhesive receptors consisting of an α­ and a β - subunit . In mammals , there are 24 canonical integrins formed from combinations of 18 α - subunits and 8 β­ subunits . The ‘bent conformation’ seen in crystal structures ( see the figure ; left ) can be unfolded to facilitate visualization of the domains ( see the figure ; right ) . In most integrins the amino - terminal domain in the α - and β - integrin subunits ( the β - propeller and the β A domain , respectively ) , assemble by non - covalent interactions to form a ‘head’ and provide a ligand binding site . In 8 α­ integrin subunits ( α 1 , α 2 , α 10 , α 11 , α L , α M , α X and α D ) , the α A domain , which is homologous to the β A domain of the β - integrin subunit , is inserted into the β - propeller domain and is the main ligand - binding site in these integrins . In integrins that lack an A domain , such as α IIb β 3 integrin , which is depicted here , the β A domain forms the main ligand - binding site . Note that the plexin , semaphorin and integrin ( PSI ) domain is at the N terminus of the β - integrin subunit , but is joined by disulphide bonds to more carboxy - terminal residues . The remaining C - terminal extracellular domains of each subunit comprise two long ‘legs’ . The low affinity state of the integrin for its ligands is maintained by non - covalent interactions between the α - and β - integrin transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . Figure is modified , with permission , from EMBO J ReF . 44 © ( 2009 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 289 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Outside Inside Talin Cell adhesion and migration and ECM assembly Cell polarity , survivial and proliferation , cytoskeletal structure and gene expression Inside – out signalling α β Outside – in signalling Ligand Plasma membrane Integrin Förster resonance energy transfer ( FReT ) . A phenomenon in which one fluorophore ( the donor ) in its electronic excited state can transfer its energy to another fluorophore ( the acceptor ) in close proximity , so that excitation of the donor causes the acceptor to emit fluorescence . As the FReT only occurs when the distance between donor and acceptor is less than 10 nm , it is useful for monitoring interactions between two fluorophore - fused molecules . Focal complex A relatively small dot - like adhesion ( ~ 1 μ m in width ) mainly found in lamellipodia . It is a transient adhesion site during cell migration and can mature into a more stable focal adhesion . Thus , cell adhesion assays typically reflect the combined effects of integrin conformation and valency regula­ tion on adhesion strength 25 , 33 . Even the results of solu­ ble ligand binding assays , the classical method to study integrin affinity modulation in non­adherent cells such as leukocytes and platelets , can be subject to ambiguity . For example , since most integrin ligands are multivalent , their binding may be influenced by the cellular regulation of integrin clustering . Furthermore , multimeric ligand binding itself may modify the nature of the bond between integrin and ligand through ligand­induced confor­ mational changes 8 , microclustering 37 and outside – in signalling 38 . Finally , because the application of force can prolong the bond lifetimes between integrins and their ligands 25 , this so­called ‘catch bond’ behaviour may erroneously be attributed to integrin clustering . Advances in the detection of protein – protein inter­ actions in living cells by FRET 39 , bioluminescence resonance energy transfer ( BRET ) 37 , image correlation spectroscopy 40 and interferometric photoactivated localization microscopy 41 promise to improve our understanding of integrin cluster­ ing at the nanoscale . As certain integrins are expressed at high density ( for example , αIIbβ3 integrin molecules are < 200 Å apart in platelets 38 ) , spontaneous integrin micro­ clusters may be favoured . FRET and BRET also show that MnCl 2 activation of leukocyte αlβ2 integrin or platelet αIIbβ3 integrin fails to induce microclustering . Instead , microclustering requires the binding of multivalent ligands to these integrins and is enhanced by cytochalasins , presumably by releasing cytoskeletal constraints 37 , 42 . Transmembrane domains : signalling conduits Each α­ or β­integrin subunit is a typical type 1 trans­ membrane protein with the amino terminus outside and a single transmembrane domain that connects to a carboxy­terminal cytoplasmic tail ( BOX 1 ) . The transmem­ brane domain is therefore an essential connection for the transmission of information across the membrane . The topology of integrin transmembrane domains . ulmer’s laboratory used nMR spectroscopy of the indi­ vidual αIIb integrin and β3 integrin transmembrane domains and of the heterodimeric complex , to define their structure in phospholipid bicelles and to estimate the extent to which they are embedded in the mem­ brane 19 , 43 , 44 ( FIG . 1a ) . Studies of the transmembrane domain of the αIIbβ3 integrin heterodimer subunits show that the β3 integrin transmembrane domain adopts a long helix 19 , whereas the αIIb integrin transmembrane domain folds into a shorter helix followed by a backbone reversal that packs phe992 – phe993 against the trans­ membrane helix 43 ( FIG . 1b , c ) . one important contribution of these studies was clarifying the membrane embed­ ding of the α­ and β­integrin transmembrane domains . prediction methods placed 45 the boundaries between transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains at conserved lys or Arg residues that precede four to six apolar residues . Armulik and co­workers 46 used enzymatic glycosyl­ ation mapping , a method that examines the efficiency of microsomal membrane glycosylation of Asn­X­ ( Thr / Ser ) motifs ( where X is any amino acid ) placed at varying distances from the presumed transmembrane domain . They predicted that the conserved lys residues and the C­terminal apolar residues in α1 , α2 , β1 and β2 integrin subunits are lipid­embedded . protection from solvent water or paramagnetic relaxation of αIIb and β3 integrin transmembrane domains in bicelles confirmed the predictions of the glycosylation mapping studies 19 , 43 , 44 ( FIG . 1a ) . Consequently , for α­integrin subunits , the con­ served Gly­phe­phe residues C­terminal to lys­Arg are membrane embedded and terminate in a short transmembrane helix that is perpendicular to the plane of the membrane ( FIG . 1b ) . The β3 integrin transmembrane domain is predicted to be tilted by ~ 25º relative to the plane of the membrane to enable side chains of corre­ sponding hydrophobic residues in the β­subunit 19 , 43 , 44 to maintain membrane embedding ( FIG . 1b ) . This β3 integrin transmembrane helical tilt may also be favoured by the propensity of the positively charged side chain of a conserved membrane­embedded lys­Arg to reside in proximity to the negatively charged phospholipid head­ groups 19 . Mutational studies point to a crucial role for these membrane embedded , conserved apolar residues in both subunits in regulating integrin activation 47 – 49 , and the structural basis of the role of the transmembrane domain in activation has now become clear . Box 2 | Bidirectional integrin signalling There are two directions of integrin signalling , which have different biological consequences ( see the figure ) . During ‘inside – out’ signalling , an intracellular activator , such as talin or kindlins , binds to the β - integrin tail , leading to conformational changes that result in increased affinity for extracellular ligands ( integrin ‘activation’ ) . The relationship between specific conformations and activation remains controversial . Inside – out signalling controls adhesion strength and enables sufficiently strong interactions between integrins and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins to allow integrins to transmit the forces required for cell migration and ECM remodelling and assembly . Integrins also behave like traditional signalling receptors in transmitting information into cells by ‘outside – in’ signalling . Binding of integrins to their extracellular ligands changes the conformation of the integrin and , because many of the ligands are multivalent , contributes to integrin clustering . The combination of these two events leads to intracellular signals that control cell polarity , cytoskeletal structure , gene expression and cell survival and proliferation . Although we conceptually separate the two processes , they are often closely linked ; for example , integrin activation can increase ligand binding , resulting in outside – in signalling . Conversely , ligand binding can generate signals that cause inside – out signalling . R E V I E W S 290 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Gly972 Gly976 Phe992 Phe993 Trp715 Ile719 Arg995 Gly972 Gly976 Phe992 Phe993 Arg995 Gly708 Trp715 Ile719 Asp723 Asp723 Gly708 25° (cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:40)(cid:53)(cid:36)(cid:44)(cid:51)(cid:44)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:42)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:36)(cid:48)(cid:58)(cid:46)(cid:57)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:41)(cid:46)(cid:53)(cid:49)(cid:53)(cid:51) (cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:46)(cid:42)(cid:51)(cid:39)(cid:44)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:54)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:44)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:36)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:58)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:55)(cid:44)(cid:43)(cid:39)(cid:53)(cid:46)(cid:40)(cid:41) 960 970 980 990 690 700 710 720 α IIb integrin : β 3 integrin : Trp715 Ile719 Asp723 Phe992 Phe993 Arg995 Arg995 Asp723 Gly972 Gly976 Gly708 β 3 integrin β 3 integrin β 3 integrin β 3 integrin α IIb integrin α IIb integrin α IIb integrin α IIb integrin d Outer membrane clasp b a c e Inner membrane clasp α IIb integrin α IIb integrin α IIb integrin β 3 integrin β 3 integrin β 3 integrin Focal adhesion A large ( 2 – 5 μ m in width ) , elongated , oval - shaped protein complex found on the cell periphery , which connects the actin cytoskeleton ( F - actin bundle ) to the eCM and provides strong integrin - dependent adhesion . Immunological synapse A cell – cell junction between a T lymphocyte and an antigen presenting cell during T lymphocyte activation . Podosome A type of eCM contact that is different from focal complexes and focal adhesions . Podosomes have a core actin filament surrounded by a ring structure of integrin adhesive complexes . They are shorter than other eCM contacts in depth ( ~ 0 . 2 – 0 . 4 μ m ) and are typically found in monocytic lineages . Invadopodium A type of eCM contact that is different from focal complexes and focal adhesions but similar to podosomes . Invadopodia can extend up to ~ 8 μ m , associate with eCM - degrading enzymes and are seen in transformed fibroblasts or malignant cells . Bioluminescence resonance energy transfe r A FReT - like phenomenon in which bioluminescence generated by luciferase ( the donor ) can excite a nearby fluorophore ( the acceptor ) . Image correlation spectroscopy A method used to analyse molecular densities and rates of aggregation and diffusion of fluorescent molecules by autocorrelating the temporal ( or spatial ) fluctuation of intensities in confocal images . Interferometric photoactivated localization microscopy A recently developed fluorescent microscopy that provides 20 nm resolution in three dimensions , thus allowing single - molecule imaging . αβ - Integrin cytoplasmic domain interactions and signal - ling . Interactions of integrin cytoplasmic domains with each other or cytoplasmic proteins lead to the long­ range allosteric rearrangements of the integrins 48 , 50 that underlie activation . Recent work provides new insights into how such rearrangements cross the membrane . The association of α­ and β­integrin transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains regulates integrin signalling 17 , 51 – 54 . Mutational studies suggested that an electrostatic inter­ action between Asp723 of β3 integrin and Arg995 of αIIb integrin 17 might constrain the C­termini of these integrins to inhibit activ ation . Subsequent studies indi­ cated that mutations of the corresponding residues in β2 and β1 integrins could activate these integrins 55 , 56 ; Figure 1 | The structure of the α iib β 3 integrin transmembrane complex enables inside – out signal transduction . The models depicted are based on the average of an ensemble of 20 calculated simulated annealing NMR structures 44 ( Protein data bank identifier 2K9J ) . a | Sequences of the α IIb and β 3 integrin transmembrane domains . The membrane - embedded segments , as assessed by NMR spectroscopy of integrins in phospholipid bicelles , are highlighted in blue . b | Ile966 – Arg995 of α IIb integrin and Ile693 – Asp723 of β 3 integrin adopt well - structured conformations with a predicted crossing angle of 25° . c | Rotating the model in part b by 90° reveals the two discrete elements that mediate the principal interaction of the transmembrane domains . The β 3 ( left ) or α IIb ( right ) integrin transmembrane domains are depicted as space - filling models , with the ribbon structure in the middle . Basic residues are blue and acidic residues are red . The association of α­ and β - integrin transmembrane domains , through packing of Gly residues in the outer membrane leaflet , forms the outer membrane clasp . The novel assembly in the inner membrane leaflet extending into the membrane – cytosol interface forms the inner membrane clasp . d | The outer membrane clasp . Gly972 and Gly976 of α IIb integrin and Gly708 of β 3 integrin are shown as atoms that form holes into which side chains from the apposing space filling model of β 3 integrin pack ( left ) . Gly708 of β 3 integrin forms a hole into which α IIb integrin side chains pack ( right ) . e | The αβ - integrin transmembrane interaction is stabilized by interhelical packing mediated by Phe992 – Phe993 of α IIb integrin and then the electrostatic interaction of Arg995 of α IIb integrin with Asp723 of β 3 integrin to form the inner membrane clasp . The left panel depicts a space - filling model of the β 3 integrin transmembrane domain in which Asp723 of β 3 integrin is shown in red and space - filling models of the Phe992 , Phe993 and Arg995 side chains of α IIb integrin are shown . The right panel depicts a space - filling model of the α IIb integrin transmembrane domain in which Arg995 of α IIb integrin is shown in blue and space - filling models of the Trp715 , Ile719 and Asp723 side chains of β 3 integrin are shown . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 291 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology FLAGSP TMD 1 TMD 2 TAP - tagged bait TAC – prey TAC TAC TAP Outside Inside TAC Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Beads Calmodulin a b c Antibody Phospholipid bicelle A planar disc - shaped particle made of a phospholipid mixture . The centre of the bicelle consists of two layers of phospholipids and the edge of the bicelle is covered by phospholipids with shorter lipid chains . Microsomal membrane A membrane vesicle that is generated by fragmentation of the endoplasmic reticulum . Coiled coil A protein structure generated by dimerization or multimerization of α - helices . These α - helices typically consist of repeats of two hydrophilic residues , followed by a hydrophobic residue that is buried into the binding interface in aqueous solution . however , mutation of the Asp residue in β1 integrin produced no evident phenotype in mice 57 . Clasping the cytoplasmic or transmembrane domains together with artificial coiled coils inhibited activation 15 , 58 , as did linking the α­ and β­integrin transmembrane domains with disulphides 51 . nevertheless , efforts to identify inter­ actions of isolated α­ and β­integrin tails in aqueous solution by nMR spectro scopy 59 were either unsuccess­ ful , or reported differing structures of the αβ­integrin complex 60 , 61 . αβ - Integrin transmembrane domains and activation . Mutational studies and molecular modelling suggest that interactions between the transmembrane domain of an α­ and a β­integrin subunit are important in maintaining the low affinity inactive state , and that activation requires alteration of these transmembrane interactions 17 , 51 – 54 , 62 . Efforts to identify direct interactions between α­ and β­integrin transmembrane domains have yielded dif­ fering results 30 , 63 , 64 . An affinity capture assay using mini integrins , which have only transmembrane and cyto­ plasmic domains ( FIG . 2 ) , was recently used in conjunction with nMR spectroscopy to reveal preferential hetero­ dimeric association of αIIb integrin transmembrane cytoplasmic tails with those of β3 integrin by specific transmembrane interactions 65 . Furthermore , mutations in αIIb integrin ( at Arg995 ) and β3 integrin ( at Asp723 ) confirmed that an electrostatic interaction stabilizes the association between the αIIb and β3 integrin trans­ membrane tails . Finally , several transmembrane domain mutations that activate integrins reduce the αβ­integrin association . Thus , this affinity capture assay can be used to study interactions among transmembrane domains , and has documented the importance of αβ­integrin transmembrane interactions in integrin activation . αβ - Integrin transmembrane domain structure enables signalling . An nMR structure of the αβ­integrin transmem­ brane complex reveals that the transmembrane domains primarily associate through two structural elements , one in the inner membrane leaflet , which extends into the membrane – cytoplasmic interface , and the other at the outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer 44 ( FIG . 1c – e ) . In this way , perturbations at the cytoplasmic face , or separation of the legs of the ectodomain , can destabilize the αβ­integrin transmembrane dimer . Early models envisaged a coiled­ coil­like arrangement for the αβ­integrin transmembrane complex 62 ; however , the extended intersubunit inter­ face of such a structure might be too stable to transmit perturb ations at the cytoplasmic face to the ectodomain . The αIIbβ3 integrin transmembrane domain structure 44 reveals that the dimer is stabilized by two structural assem­ blies , termed the inner membrane clasp ( IMC ) and outer membrane clasp ( oMC ) ( FIG . 1c – e ) . The oMC is formed by the packing interactions of three Gly residues , Gly972 of αIIb integrin , Gly976 of αIIb integrin and Gly708 of β3 integrin , which cause the α­ and β­integrin transmem­ brane helices to cross within their n­terminal halves at an angle of ~ 25° ( FIG . 1d ) . Because of this crossing angle and their differing lengths , the αIIb and β3 integrin transmem­ brane helices would dissociate C­terminally to lys712 of β3 integrin . However , this loss of contact is overcome by the placement of phe992 – phe993 of αIIb integrin between the transmembrane domains , which brings the aromatic rings of these residues in proximity to the aromatic ring of Trp715 of β3 integrin , and by contacts between Ile719 of β3 integrin and phe992 – phe993 of αIIb integrin . This structural motif brings Arg995 of αIIb integrin and Asp723 of β3 integrin into sufficient proximity to enable the electrostatic interactions that were predicted nearly 15 years ago 17 to stabilize the IMC ( FIG . 1e ) . Importantly , nMR structures calculated without using this electrostatic interaction as a distance restraint reveal an essentially identical IMC structure 44 . Furthermore , mutations that disrupt this electrostatic interaction lead to destabiliza­ tion of the αβ­integrin transmembrane dimer , as shown by nMR spectroscopy in bicelles and affinity capture in mammalian cell membranes 65 . Rosetta modelling 66 makes use of computer searches to identify short sequences of known structure for use in the prediction of protein structure from amino acid sequence . Thirty percent of the cluster 1 structures predicted by Rosetta modelling , combined with sparse restraints , indicate that Arg995 of αIIb integrin and Asp723 of β3 integrin are in proximity . Many of the Rosetta structures also indicate that the side chain of lys716 of β3 integrin forms hydrogen bonds with αIIb integrin backbone carbonyl oxygens to stabilize the α­ and β­integrin association . Substitution of this lys with polar neutral or acidic residues or a bulky hydrophobic residue activated αIIbβ3 integrin , which was interpreted to provide support for this additional αβ­integrin inter­ action 67 . The IMC structure in phospholipid bicelles differs from that of the same region of the isolated cyto­ plasmic domains in aqueous solution 60 , suggesting that the distinct lipid tail­to­headgroup environment is impor­ tant in driving IMC assembly . Indeed , the IMC structure formed by the αIIb and β3 integrin transmembrane Figure 2 | an affinity - capture method to study transmembrane domain interactions . Use of an affinity - capture method reveals the preferential interaction of α IIb and β 3 integrin transmembrane domains ( TMDs ) . a | The transmembrane domain tail bait and prey constructs are depicted . The bait consists of the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domain fused to a FlAG tag ( for detection ) , with a signal peptide at the amino terminus and a tandem affinity purification ( TAP ) tag at the carboxy terminus . The transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the prey are joined at the N terminus to the extracellular domain of an irrelevant type 1 membrane protein , such as the TAC subunit of the interleukin 2 receptor . b | Chinese hamster ovary cells are transiently transfected with baits and preys , cells are lysed and the bait is rapidly and efficiently captured through its TAP tag . Capture of the TAP tag with calmodulin beads is depicted . c | Bound preys are detected by western blotting using an anti - TAC antibody . SP , signal peptide . R E V I E W S 292 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Pathological thrombosis The formation of an occlusive mass of fibrin , platelets and leukocytes in a blood vessel , which results in diseases such as myocardial infarction and stroke . cytoplasmic domains in a 50 % acetonitrile / water solution closely resembles that of the isolated cytoplasmic domains in water 68 . Mutations that disrupt either the IMC or oMC destabilize the association of the αIIb and β3 integrin transmembrane domains 44 , 65 , providing experimental vali­ dation for the idea that both clasps are required to main­ tain the transmembrane complex . Thus , the binding of cytoplasmic proteins to the integrin intracellular domains can disrupt the IMC , in a manner that is described below for talin , destabilizing the transmembrane complex and resulting in rearrangements in the ectodomain that lead to integrin activation . The structure of the integrin transmembrane domain described above was obtained with integrin transmem­ brane peptides in a model membrane , but how does it relate to the structure of an intact integrin in the plasma membrane ? Rosetta modelling 66 was combined with a few distance restraints provided by engineered disulphide bonds between introduced Cys mutations in the α­ and β­integrin subunits to calculate seven clusters of ( collec­ tions of similar ) low energy models of the structure of the αIIbβ3 integrin transmembrane complex in mammalian cell membranes 67 . The centre structure of the most highly populated cluster is similar to the average structure calcu­ lated from nMR restraints obtained with αIIbβ3 integrin transmembrane peptides in bicelles 44 . The calculated nMR structures of the αIIb and β3 integrin transmem­ brane monomers were available before publication of the Rosetta model ; however , the authors emphasized that those structures were not used to inform the Rosetta mod­ elling 67 or the selection of the representative structure . Similarly , models of the αIIbβ3 integrin transmembrane domain , derived by two different methods , both converged on the published nMR structure . These models exhibited close similarities with the averaged nMR structure ; the root mean square deviation of α­carbons ( or backbone carbons linked to both the amide and carbonyl groups in amino acids ) was 1 . 1 and 1 . 6 Å from the averaged nMR structure 69 . Consequently , the modelling approaches used complementary methods to independently derive similar overall topographies to the nMR­derived structures of the integrin transmembrane domains in bicelles . Importantly , the sequences that form the IMC are highly conserved between integrins , suggesting that the mechanisms that regulate the IMC to induce integrin activation are likely to be shared . Indeed , the same cytoplasmic proteins ( talins and kindlins ) are involved in activating multiple classes of integrins ( see below ) . Conversely , the oMC is less conserved in sequence , suggesting that the stability of the oMC might differ between integrins . These sequence variations may account for differences in transmembrane signalling among integrin classes . How is integrin activation transmitted ? After the idea emerged that interactions between integrin cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains might maintain the low affinity state 17 , the idea followed that activation involves a rearrangement of these domains . protein engineering studies established that enforcing the association of the integrin transmembrane or cytoplasmic domains with coiled coils or engineered disulphide bonds prevents integrin activation 15 , 51 , 58 , 70 . More importantly , elegant work showed that mutational activation of a recombinant integrin altered the formation of intersubunit disulphide bonds between Cys mutations in the outer portion of the transmembrane domain , suggesting that a complete sepa­ ration of the transmembrane domains leads to integrin activation 51 . oxidation­dependent disulphides formed in the activated integrin at 37° , but not at 0º . The authors emphasized that at 0º the mobility of these transmem­ brane domains would be greatly reduced , thus the lack of disulphide formation at this temperature indicates a loss of stable transmembrane domain association . In a subsequent paper 67 , the same group found that certain activating Cys substitutions did not prevent the forma­ tion of engineered disulphides at 0º in the transmembrane or cytoplasmic domains . Inclusion of these disulphides as restraints in the Rosetta calculations did not alter the predicted structures 67 . These results imply that the α­ and β­integrin transmembrane domains continue to interact in integrins bearing these activating Cys substitutions . The authors have proposed that this seeming discrepancy may be because “The apparent lack of effect on cross­linking by these activating mutations may result from the use of 0°C and 37°C in cross­linking and activation assays , respectively” ( ReF . 67 ) . Measures of the interactions of α­ and β­integrin transmembrane domains showed that certain activating mutations can weaken but not com­ pletely disrupt their association 44 , 65 . Thus , whereas the idea that integrin activation requires complete disruption of transmembrane assembly is attractive , available evidence does not exclude other plausible rearrangements 45 . Cytoplasmic activators of integrins The idea that the integrin cytoplasmic domains are the trigger point for conformational changes that result in activation 47 , 48 led to efforts to find cytoplasmic domain­ binding proteins that might mediate this process . Many candidates have been identified 71 and compelling evidence shows that talins and kindlins are major players . Talins activate integrins . Studies in cultured cells showed that the binding of talin 1 to the cytoplasmic domain of the β­integrin subunit is a common step in β1 and β3 integrin activation in vitro 72 . later studies extended this principle to β2 integrins in vitro 73 and to mice , in which deletion of platelet talin 1 blocks activation of platelet β1 and β3 integrins 74 , 75 . Furthermore , insights from structural studies 76 enabled the creation of mice in which β3 integrin – talin 1 binding was disrupted . These mice were defective in activating αIIbβ3 integrin 3 and protected from pathological thrombosis , without experienc­ ing the severe bleeding associated with complete loss of β3 integrin 3 . Thus , disrupting the β3 integrin – talin 1 inter­ action may offer an anti­thrombotic benefit by blocking integrin activation . In addition to activating integrins , talin 1 links integrins to filamentous actin ( F­actin ) and actin­binding proteins ( reviewed in ReF . 77 ) , thereby link­ ing the actin cytoskeleton to the ECM . More recent analysis of talin 1 structure has identified talin 1 and integrin mutants that have little effect on the binding of talin 1 to the β­integrin tail , or on talin 1 recruitment to integrin in R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 293 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 PTB domain ( Phosphotyrosine binding domain ) . A protein domain that recognizes an Asn - Pro - X - Tyr motif that is found in most β - integrin tails . FERM domain ( 4 . 1 protein , ezrin , radixin and moesin homology domain ) . A common domain found in a number of proteins that mediate linkage of the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane . The FeRM domain often interacts with the cytoplasmic tail of transmembrane proteins . Pleckstrin homology domain A lipid - binding protein domain originally identified in Pleckstrin . cells , but do block the ability of talin 1 to induce activa­ tion 78 , 79 . These mutants offer the possibility of selectively disrupting the ability of talin 1 to activate integrins , without preventing integrin linkage to the cytoskeleton . Talin 1 consists of a large C­terminal rod and an n­terminal head domain ( THD ) containing four sub­ domains : F0 , F1 , F2 and F3 ( ReFs 76 , 80 , 81 ) . The F3 sub­ domain has a PTB domain , which contains a high affinity binding site for β­integrin tails and is sufficient to activate integrins 81 ; other portions of the THD enhance activa­ tion 82 . A crystal structure of the THD F2 and F3 sub­ domains in complex with a 12 residue fragment from the mid­portion of the β3 integrin tail reveals that the F3 – integrin interaction strongly resembles pTB domain interactions with peptide ligands 76 . Several other pTB domains bind to β3 integrin in a similar manner 83 , but talin 1 is uniquely designed to activate integrins because of an additional interaction between it and the mem­ brane­proximal region of the β3 integrin cytoplasmic domain 60 , 79 , 84 , 85 . Mutations in the integrin or talin that block this interaction prevent integrin activation in cells . Thus , talin F3 interacts with β­integrin tails through a pTB­like interaction that is shared with many pTB domain­containing proteins and through a second inter­ action that is not shared with most of these pTB domains but is required for integrin activation . How does the interaction of talin 1 with the mem­ brane­proximal portion of the β­integrin tail lead to rearrangement of the integrin transmembranes to cause activation ? Talin 1 binding destabilizes the inter­ action of the αIIb integrin transmembrane tail with the β3 integrin transmembrane tail 60 , 65 . Structure – function analysis of the talin F3 and β­integrin tail interaction 79 , together with the structure of the integrin transmembrane complex 44 , provide a compelling model to explain how talin 1 can alter the integrin transmembrane complex . First , binding of talin F3 stabilizes the helical structure of the membrane­proximal β3 integrin tail 79 such that the β3 integrin transmembrane domain forms a continuous helix 19 . Second , the F3 – β3 integrin interaction orients a group of lys residues in F3 towards the negatively charged membrane phospholipid head groups . Mutation of some of these lys residues disrupts activation 79 . An additional contribution may come from the asymmetric structure of the αIIbβ3 integrin transmembrane at the cytosolic face . In particular , the non­helical phe992 – phe993 seg­ ment of αIIb integrin juxtaposes Arg995 of αIIb integrin and Asp723 of β3 integrin so that an electrostatic inter­ action can stabilize the transmembrane complex . Arg995 of αIIb integrin and Asp723 of β3 integrin are readily accessible to the THD , which could therefore prevent this electrostatic interaction ( FIG . 1 ) . Indeed , a recent struc­ ture of the F2 – F3 region of a talin 1 paralogue , talin 2 , in complex with the β1D integrin cytoplasmic domain revealed that talins can form a salt bridge with the con­ served Asp residue of the β­integrin subunit ( for exam­ ple , Asp723 of β3 integrin ) , thus potentially disrupting its electrostatic interaction with the conserved Arg resi­ due in the α­integrin subunit ( for example Arg995 of αIIb integrin ) 86 . This structure also identified additional basic residues in F2 that form a ‘membrane orientation patch’ that can interact with phospholipid head groups to enable talin to alter the tilt angle of the β­integrin trans­ membrane domain . The predicted capacity of talin to alter this tilt angle explains why talin binding is required for full activation 72 , 79 , even when the interaction of Arg995 of αIIb integrin with Asp723 of β3 integrin is prevented by mutation of Asp723 of β3 integrin . In sum , the THD is exquisitely engineered for activating integrins by binding to β­integrin tails through a pTB­like interaction and by engaging a membrane­proximal β­integrin tail site , which has three important consequences . First , it positions basic patches on talins for an extended electrostatic interaction with the phospholipid head groups of the membrane . Second , it favours the formation of a stable , continuous helix that spans the β­integrin transmembrane and the membrane­proximal portion of the tail , enabling talins to enforce an altered crossing angle on the β­integrin trans­ membrane domain . Third , talins may directly disrupt the conserved α­integrin Arg and β­integrin Asp interaction by forming a salt bridge with the β­integrin Asp . This unique combination of structural elements in talins , and complementary elements in integrins , explains why they are obligatory partners in the activation process . Kindlins cooperate with talins . Talins are essential for integrin activation , but are they sufficient to activate integrins ? Recent studies from model organisms and humans have established that another family of β­integrin­ binding proteins , the kindlins , are important players in integrin activation . The ~ 76 kDa vertebrate kindlins include kindlin 1 ( also known as FERMT1 and uRp1 ) , kindlin 2 ( also known as FERMT2 , MIG2 and uRp3 ) and kindlin 3 ( also known as FERMT3 and uRp2 ) . Each is structurally related to unC­112 , a Caenorhabditis elegans protein implicated in integrin­dependent muscle devel­ opment 87 . Kindlins and unC­112 contain a FeRM domain near the C­terminus that is similar in sequence to the talin FERM domain , but is unique in that its F2 subdomain is interrupted by a pleckstrin homology domain 88 . The split FERM domain , and its F3 subdomain in particular , mediates the interaction of kindlins with β­integrin cyto plasmic tails . This interaction requires a region of the integrin tails ( for example , Asn­X­X­Tyr in β1 and β3 integrins and Asn­X­X­phe in β2 integrin ; where X is any amino acid ) that is distal to the talin­binding Asn­pro­X­Tyr / phe region , as well as a Ser or Thr in an 8 – 16 amino acid tract that separates these two regions 89 – 91 . Kindlin 2 and unC­112 also interact , through conserved regions n­terminal to their FERM domain , with two addi­ tional proteins , migfilin and integrin­linked kinase , which are frequently found in adhesion complexes 87 , 89 , 92 . Kindlin 1 deficiency in mice and humans causes Kindler syndrome — epithelial cell dysfunction leading to a skin blistering phenotype and gasterointestinal mani­ festations 93 – 95 . Morpholino knockdown of kindlin 2 in zebrafish embryos causes abnormalities of cardiac muscle development owing to defective cytoskeletal organiza­ tion at sites of membrane attachment 96 , and kindlin 2 deficiency in mice causes peri­implantation lethality owing to detachment of the endoderm and epiblast from basement membranes 89 . Mice deficient in kindlin 3 die R E V I E W S 294 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 ? A2 A2 A2 A2 Signalling event Direct model Indirect model A1 A2 A2 Displacement of inhibitor model A1 A2 A2 A1 A1 A2 ? Inactive activator 1 Active activator 1 Active activator 2 Unknown co - factor Inhibitor of integrin activation Plasmamembrane a b c Integrin α β Mesenteric arteriolar thrombosis Thrombosis that occurs in an arterial vessel of mesentery . Mesentery is the anatomical term indicating the layers of membrane that suspend the small intestine from the back wall of the abdomen . Glanzmann thrombasthenia A genetic bleeding disorder caused by a lack of α IIb β 3 integrin or by mutations that inhibit α IIb β 3 integrin function . with diffuse haemorrhages and osteopetrosis shortly after birth 97 . Given the known integrin and cytoskeletal protein interaction partners of the kindlins , defects in bi directional integrin signalling probably underlie some of these severe phenotypes . Studies of cells using knockdown or overexpression strategies indicate that kindlin 1 , kindlin 2 and kind­ lin 3 are capable of regulating the activation of specific integrins , but only in concert with the interaction of talin 1 with the integrin cytoplasmic tail . For example , ligand binding to αIIbβ3 or α5β1 integrins in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHo ) cells is stimulated by overexpres­ sion of the THD . This activation of αIIbβ3 integrin , but not of α5β1 integrin , is increased by co­expression of kindlin 1 or kindlin 2 but not kindlin 3 , and is decreased by small interfering RnA knockdown of endogenous kindlin 2 . However , neither kindlin 1 nor kindlin 2 are stimulatory in the absence of THD 89 – 91 , 93 . In another study , loss of kindlin 1 from intestinal epithelial cells or a colon carcinoma cell line reduced talin­dependent β1 integrin activation and / or β1 integrin­mediated cell adhesion 95 . Thus , kindlins can co­activate integrins and talin 1 , but their precise effects may vary with the kindlin , integrin and cell type involved . Kindlin 3 in leukocyte and platelet integrin activation . platelets that develop from mice with kindlin 3­ deficient haematopoietic precursors exhibit defective activation of the αIIbβ3 integrin fibrinogen receptor and the α2β1 integrin collagen receptor , and impaired aggregation 97 . Kindlin 3­deficient platelets also show reduced adhesion to fibrinogen after direct activation of αIIbβ3 integrin by MnCl 2 , suggesting an additional defect in outside – in αIIbβ3 integrin signalling . Furthermore , the mice are resistant to mesenteric arteriolar thrombosis follow­ ing vessel injury by FeCl 3 . In addition , kindlin 3 deficiency results in defective activation of neutrophil β2 integrins , as evidenced by reduced agonist­dependent binding of inter­ cellular adhesion molecule 1 ( ICAM1 ) and the inactive complement factor 3b fragment ( iC3b ) in vitro , and defec­ tive firm adhesion and arrest of neutrophils on activated endothelial cells in vivo 98 . These platelet and leukocyte integrin defects in kindlin 3­deficient mice phenocopy blood cell abnormalities in a rare human autosomal recessive disorder called leukocyte adhesion deficiency 1 ( lAD1 ) variant ( lAD 1v ; also known as lAD3 ) 99 , 100 . This disorder is characterized by recurrent bleeding similar to that seen in individuals with Glanzmann thrombasthenia owing to a lack of αIIbβ3 integrin , and by a purulent bac­ terial infection and leukocytosis similar to that seen in individuals with lAD1 caused by a lack of β2 integrins . In contrast , lAD1v platelets and leukocytes express these integrins but exhibit an impairment of agonist­induced integrin activation . Earlier studies had suggested that lAD1v is due to a splicing defect in the Ca 2 + ­ and DAG­regulated gua­ nine nucleotide exchange factor 1 ( CALDAG - GEFI ; also known as RASGRP1 ) gene , resulting in reduced levels of its encoded protein RAp1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) in haematopoietic cells 101 . This seemed reasonable because RAp1 is involved in integrin activ ation 102 – 104 , and CALDAG - GEFI ­knockout mice 105 , 106 exhibit defects , albeit partial , in platelet and leukocyte integrin activation . However , recent studies have now shown that kindlin 3 mutations are a cause of lADIv in several families , including some previously reported to be deficient in CAlDAG­GEFI and others with normal levels of CAlDAG­GEFI 107 – 110 . Affected individuals share a common haplotype involving a region on chromo­ some 11 that harbours mutations in kindlin 3 that result in a premature stop codon 108 – 110 . primary haemato poietic cells or EBV­transformed lymphocytes from affected individuals exhibit reduced levels of kindlin 3 mRnA 107 or absent kindlin 3 protein 108 , 109 . Various haematopoietic cells show defective agonist­induced binding of ligands to β1 , β2 or β3 integrins 99 , 107 , 108 . Importantly , the integrin phenotype in kindlin 3­deficient cells is rescued by expression of recombinant kindlin 3 ( ReFs 107 , 108 ) , and RnA interference­mediated knockdown of kindlin 3 in normal haematopoietic cells recapitulates the integrin phenotype 108 . Figure 3 | activators , such as talins and kindlins , bind to integrins to cause their activation . a | In a direct model of integrin activation , both activators ( A1 and A2 ) bind simultaneously to the integrin tail and , together , modify or disrupt the inner membrane clasp . Other proteins might be involved . In the other two general models , A1 is the primary activator and A2 is an ‘enabler’ . b | In an indirect model , A2 regulates a signalling event ( for example , synthesis of co - factors ) that enables the activator ( A1 ) to bind β - integrin and induce activation . c | In a displacement of an inhibitor model , A2 – β - integrin binding displaces an inhibitor of A1 , enabling A1 to bind and activate the integrin . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 295 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Amphipathic helix An α - helix that contains hydrophilic amino acids on one side and hydrophobic amino acids on the other . Whereas the evidence is clear that kindlins are key regulators of talin­dependent integrin activation by virtue of their association with β­integrin cytoplasmic domains , many questions remain ( FIG . 3 ) . Is the kindlin interaction with β­integrin cytoplasmic domains regulated and , if so , how ? The kindlin­binding protein , migfilin , binds to filamin A . As filamin A can block talin 1 binding to β­integrin tails , what role , if any , does the shuttling of fila­ min A on and off integrins have in the ability of kindlins to co­activate integrins 111 , 112 ( for example , see FIG . 3c ) ? Is talin the direct integrin activator and kindlin the enabler , or is the reverse true ( for example , see FIG . 3b ) ? Do all kindlins activate integrins in the same way ? Are there yet unidentified integrin­binding proteins that are required for integrin activation in concert with talins and kindlins ( for example , see FIG . 3a ) ? How do the kindlins participate in outside – in integrin signalling 89 ? RIAM activates talin 1 Agonist stimulation ( the triggering event ) leads to integrin activation through many signalling inter­ mediaries . If talin 1 binding is a common step in integrin activation , how do these signalling intermediaries regu­ late the talin – integrin interaction ? Recent work has elucidated one such group of signalling intermediaries that are important in this activation — the Ras GTpases 113 . Ras proteins are small monomeric GTpases that cycle between the GTp­bound active form and the GDp­bound inactive form . GEFs promote Ras activity by exchanging bound GDp for GTp , whereas GTpase activating proteins ( GAps ) enhance the hydrolysis of Ras­bound GTp to GDp 114 . The Ras subfamily members RAp1A and RAp1B stimulate integrin activation 102 – 104 . Knockout of RAp1B 115 or its exchange factor CALDAG - GEFI 116 in mice , results in the partial impairment of agonist­dependent fibrino­ gen binding to αIIbβ3 integrin and platelet aggregation . Several RAp1 effectors are implicated in integrin acti­ vation 117 – 119 . RAp1 – GTp­interacting adaptor molecule ( RIAM ; also known as ApBB1Ip ) is a RAp1 effector that is a member of the MIG10 , RIAM and lamellipo­ din ( MRl ) family of adaptor proteins 118 . RIAM contains Ras association and pleckstrin homology domains and pro­rich regions . In lymphoid cells , RIAM overexpres­ sion induces β1 and β2 integrin­mediated cell adhesion , and RIAM knockdown abolishes RAp1­dependent cell adhesion 118 . RIAM increases cellular F­actin content 118 , possibly through its interaction with EnA and VASp — related proteins that can promote actin polymer­ ization to form F­actin . Whereas RIAM is enriched in haemato poietic cells , lamellipodin is a paralogue present in fibroblasts and other cells 120 . Agonists do not efficiently activate recombinant αIIbβ3 integrin expressed in CHo cells ; this observation led to a synthetic reconstruction of an integrin activa­ tion pathway in CHo cells . Its use in combination with forward and reverse genetics enabled the dissection of a pathway to integrin activation 121 . RAp1 activation induces the association of RAp1 , RIAM and talin 1 , which leads to αIIbβ3 integrin – talin 1 interactions . More recently , CHo cells transfected with the thrombin receptor proteinase­ activated receptor 1 ( pAR1 ; also known as F2R ) enabled activation of αIIbβ3 integrin by a natural platelet ago­ nist . Furthermore , bimolecular fluorescence comple­ mentation showed that RIAM overexpression stimulates , and RIAM knockdown blocks , talin 1 recruitment to αIIbβ3 integrin in living cells 78 . These studies facilitated the construction of a road map between receptor agonists and integrin activation ( FIG . 4 ) . Moreover , mapping studies identified short amphipathic helices in RIAM and lamelli­ podin that bind talin 1 ; joining these helical peptides to the membrane targeting sequences of RAp1 led to a minimal RAp1 – RIAM module that was sufficient to recruit talin 1 to integrins and to activate the integrins 122 . Thus , RIAM functions as a scaffold that connects the membrane­targeting sequences in Ras GTpases to talin 1 , thereby recruiting talin 1 to the plasma membrane and activating integrins . An intriguing alternative mechanism was identified in lymphocytes , in which WASp­family verprolin homologue 2 ( WAVE2 ) , an actin­nucleating protein , recruited vinculin to the immuno logical synapse , thereby recruiting talin 1 ( ReFs 123 ) . Taken together , these studies raise the possibility of a general mechanism for integrin activ ation : talin­binding proteins that contain membrane­targeting motifs or that associate with proteins that possess such motifs can target talin 1 to integrins and induce activation . α - Integrin subunit - specific activators Talin 1 and kindlins bind to β­integrin subunits ; however , early experiments pointed to an important role for the cytoplasmic domains of α­integrin subunits in regulating activation 47 , 124 . Whereas the protein sequences of the mem­ brane proximal α­integrin subunits that form the IMC ( for example , Gly­phe­phe­lys­Arg ) are well conserved , the sequences of the more distal α­integrin subunits are far more variable . Thus , because there are 18 α­integrin subunits , the complex literature on α­integrin subunit­ binding proteins is too large to be thoroughly reviewed here . nevertheless , a few outstanding examples will be mentioned . naik , parise and co­workers identified Ca 2 + ­ and integrin­binding protein 1 ( CIB1 ) as an αIIb integrin tail­binding protein 125 and subsequent work reported that it functions to oppose talin 1 binding , thereby serving as an inhibitor of activation 126 . Surprisingly , a lack of plate­ let CIB1 led to defective thrombosis and no increase in αIIbβ3 integrin activation 127 , possibly owing to compen­ sation by CIB1 paralogues 128 . Similarly , Katagiri , Kinashi and co­workers identified regulator for cell adhesion and polarization enriched in lymphoid tissues ( RApl ; also known as noRE1 and RASSF5 ) as a RAp1­binding pro­ tein that physically associates with αlβ2 integrin in an αl integrin­specific manner and regulates αlβ2 integrin­ mediated adhesiveness 129 , 130 . More recent elegant in vivo studies 131 – 133 show that RApl regulates lymphocyte traf­ ficking , in part through MST1 ( also known as STK4 ) , a STE20 kinase­like binding partner . In addition , these studies have also clarified the complementary roles of talin 1 and RApl in the regulation of lymphocyte adhe­ sion by RAp1 ( ReF . 131 ) . It is clear that the diversity of α­integrin tail sequences and the consequent plethora of α­integrin­binding proteins will continue to be an exciting and fertile area for future investigation . R E V I E W S 296 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Integrinactivation DAG IP 3 PKC CALDAG - GEFI Ca 2 + RAP1 RAP1 RAP1 RAP1 RAP1 RIAM Talin 1 Thrombin Plasma membrane Integrin β α GDP GTP GTP GTP GTP PAR1 ( PAR4 in mouse ) Endogenous suppressors of integrins negative regulators of integrin activation might be as important as positive regulators . In principle , nega­ tive regulation might occur at any step in the process of inside – out signalling . This is exemplified in plate­ lets by the blockade of specific agonist pathways to αIIbβ3 integrin activation by aspirin , which inhibits cyclo oxygenase , thus blocking synthesis of thromboxane , or by clopidogrel , which blocks p2Y12 ADp receptors 134 . Similarly , enforced activation of extracellular signal­ regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ; also known as MApK3 ) and ERK2 ( also known as MApK1 ) by activated HRas sup­ presses integrin activation in many cell types 135 , an effect that may be pertinent to the changes in adhesion and ECM assembly of transformed cells 136 . ERK1 and ERK2 kinase activity is required for this suppression , and they exert their effects at the plasma membrane 137 . However , the relevant ERK1 and ERK2 substrate or substrates have not been identified . Most pertinent to this review is the potential for the regulation of integrin activation at its final steps — through the interactions of talin 1 or kindlins with integrin tails . one example of this type of regulation may be the expression and localization to adhesion sites of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type Iγ­90 , a protein that competes with β­integrin tails for bind­ ing to talin 1 ( ReFs 138 , 139 ) . Another example is the Tyr phosphorylation of β­integrin tails that is triggered by ligand binding to integrins , and mediated by Src family kinases 140 . Tyr in the membrane­proximal Asn­pro­X­Tyr motif of β­integrin tails may exert multiple effects on cell adhesion through phosphorylation­dependent and phosphorylation­independent mechanisms 141 – 144 . phosphorylation of this Tyr may serve as an integrin activation ‘off switch’ by interfering with required acidic and hydrophobic interactions between this region of the β­integrin tail and talin 1 , thereby reducing the affin­ ity of the interaction . Moreover , Tyr phosphorylation promotes the interaction of the β­integrin tail with competing pTB domain­containing proteins , such as docking protein 1 ( DoK1 ) , which , unlike talin 1 , do not activate integrins 83 , 145 . Furthermore , integrin cyto­ plasmic domain­associated protein 1 ( ICAp1 ; also known as ITGB1Bp1 ) can bind to the β1A integrin tail and compete for talin 1 binding , thus blocking activa­ tion 146 . Another potential negative regulator of integrin activation is filamin A , the blockade of talin 1 binding to β­integrin tails by which may be regulated by kind­ lin through their mutual binding partner , migfilin 111 , 147 . To date , studies of negative regulation of integrin activa­ tion have been conducted largely with purified proteins or cell lines . Determining their bio logical significance will require further work in model organisms and humans . Activation of integrins from the outside Although the focus of this review is on the inside – out activation of integrins , integrins can be activated directly by extracellular factors , including ECM ligands , and ligand binding to integrins triggers outside – in signalling 148 . non­physiological reducing agents such as dithiothreitol 149 have been used experimentally for years to activate purified integrins and integrins in cells . For example , reducing agents activate αIIbβ3 integrin in platelets , a response attributed to disulphide exchange between selected Cys residues in the Cys­rich extra­ cellular epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) ­like domains of β3 integrin 150 . Disulphide exchange involving αIIbβ3 or αVβ3 integrins may occur during agonist­induced integrin activation and require thiol isomerases , such Figure 4 | a road map from thrombin receptors to α iib β 3 integrin activation . The schematic represents the minimal elements of one pathway of α IIb β 3 integrin activation by thrombin receptors , which were identified through the synthetic reconstruction of pathway components in Chinese hamster ovary cells and studies of gene - targeted platelets . Thrombin cleavage or ligand occupancy of the thrombin receptor proteinase - activated receptor 1 ( PAR1 ; also known as F2R ) in human platelets , or PAR4 receptors in mouse platelets , stimulates phospholipid hydrolysis , which results in the generation of inositol trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol ( DAG ) . IP 3 stimulates an increase in cytosolic free Ca 2 + , activating Ca 2 + - and DAG - regulated ( CALDAG - GEFI ; also known as RASGRP1 ) , which in turn converts its encoded protein , RAP1 , from a GDP - bound to an active GTP - bound form . Ca 2 + and DAG also activate certain protein kinase C ( PKC ) isoforms , including PKC α , which among other actions may facilitate the activation of CALDAG - GEFI . Activation of RAP1 leads to recruitment of its effector , RAP1 – GTP - interacting adaptor molecule ( RIAM ; also known as APBB1IP ) , and its binding partner , talin 1 , to the plasma membrane . This enables talin binding to the β 3 integrin tail and talin - induced activation of α IIb β 3 integrin . Kindlin 3 plays a crucial role in this process , but because its mechanistic role is uncertain , it is not depicted here . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 297 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 as protein disulphide isomerase or endoplasmic reticu­ lum protein 5 , or thiol isomerase activity intrinsic to β3 integrin 149 , 151 , 152 . However , the role of di sulphide exchange in integrin activation in cells , and how it relates to talin­dependent activation , will require more study . Integrin affinity can also be modulated extrinsically by the binding of ligands . Even the binding of monovalent ligands , such as short Arg­Gly­Asp peptides , can induce conformational changes in integrin ectodomains 153 , as reported by ligand­induced binding site antibodies ( anti­lIBS ) 154 . FRET studies indicate that these conform­ ational changes can be propagated across the plasma membrane , leading to alteration of the α­ and β­integrin tails 155 . Consequently , inside – out and outside – in signal­ ling responses are coupled by dynamic interactions of the integrins with proteins on both sides of the plasma mem­ brane , and they are further modified by forces applied to integrins in adherent cells by virtue of integrin linkages with the ECM and the cytoskeleton . Perspectives Integrin activation has been studied for over two decades by a range of experimental techniques . progress in this area has accelerated in recent years owing to studies using forward and reverse genetics , biochemistry and cell and structural biology . In addition , studies of integrin activa­ tion are a prime example of successful bidirectional infor­ mation transfer between basic scientists and inquisitive clinicians making careful observations on patients with perplexing abnormalities of cell adhesion . Consequently , this field has come closer to a molecular understanding of the ‘end game’ , the final cell signalling events that regu­ late activation at the level of integrin transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . predictably , new discoveries have led to new questions , such as the precise relationships between talins , kindlins and other regulatory proteins dur­ ing integrin activation , and the structural basis of integrin activation in the context of intact integrin heterodimers in their native membrane environments . Thus , for integrin ologists the end game is not the end of the game . 1 . Hynes , R . O . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Partridge , A . & Shattil , S . J . Integrin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 509 – 516 ( 2005 ) . 3 . Petrich , B . G . et al . The antithrombotic potential of selective blockade of talin - dependent integrin α IIb β 3 ( platelet GPIIb - IIIa ) activation . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 2250 – 2259 ( 2007 ) . Shows that the mutational inhibition of talin 1 binding to the β 3 integrin tail prevents activation of α IIb β 3 integrin , resulting in protection from thrombosis without spontaneous pathological bleeding . 4 . Carman , C . V . & Springer , T . A . Integrin avidity regulation : are changes in affinity and conformation underemphasized ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 547 – 556 ( 2003 ) . 5 . Bazzoni , G . & Hemler , M . E . Are changes in integrin affinity and conformation overemphasized ? Trends Biochem . Sci . 23 , 30 – 34 ( 1998 ) . 6 . Xiong , J . P . et al . Crystal structure of the extracellular segment of integrin α V β 3 . Science 296 , 151 – 155 ( 2001 ) . The landmark high - resolution structure of the extracellular domain of α v β 3 integrin . 7 . Nishida , N . et al . Activation of leukocyte β 2 integrins by conversion from bent to extended conformations . Immunity 25 , 583 – 594 ( 2006 ) . 8 . Frelinger , A . L . , III . et al . Occupancy of an adhesive glycoprotein receptor modulates expression of an antigenic site involved in cell adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 12397 – 12402 ( 1988 ) . 9 . Mould , A . P . & Humphries , M . J . Regulation of integrin function through conformational complexity : not simply a knee - jerk reaction ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 544 – 551 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Takagi , J . , Petre , B . M . , Walz , T . & Springer , T . A . Global conformational rearrangements in integrin extracellular domains in outside - in and inside - out signaling . Cell 110 , 599 – 611 ( 2002 ) . Proposes that integrin activation and molecular extension are linked . 11 . Adair , B . D . et al . Three - dimensional EM structure of the ectodomain of integrin α V β 3 in a complex with fibronectin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 1109 – 1118 ( 2005 ) . An elegant electron microscopy study that unambiguously establishes that the bent integrin conformer can bind a macromolecular ligand . 12 . Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Goodman , S . L . & Arnaout , M . A . New insights into the structural basis of integrin activation . Blood 102 , 1155 – 1159 ( 2003 ) . 13 . Emsley , J . , Knight , C . G . , Farndale , R . W . , Barnes , M . J . & Liddington , R . C . Structural basis of collagen recognition by integrin α 2 β 1 . Cell 101 , 47 – 56 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Luo , B . H . , Takagi , J . & Springer , T . A . Locking the β 3 integrin I - like domain into high and low affinity conformations with disulfides . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 10215 – 10221 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Zhu , J . et al . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell 32 , 849 – 861 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Zhu , J . , Boylan , B . , Luo , B . H . , Newman , P . J . & Springer , T . A . Tests of the extension and deadbolt models of integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 11914 – 11920 ( 2007 ) . A mutational analysis that shows that deletion of residues involved in the ‘deadbolt’ does not activate β 3 integrins . 17 . Hughes , P . E . et al . Breaking the integrin hinge : a defined structural constraint regulates integrin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 6571 – 6574 ( 1996 ) . Proposes that αβ - integrin cytoplasmic domain interactions maintain the low affinity state . 18 . Adair , B . D . & Yeager , M . Three - dimensional model of the human platelet integrin α IIb β 3 based on electron cryomicroscopy and x - ray crystallography . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 14059 – 14064 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Lau , T . L . , Partridge , A . W . , Ginsberg , M . H . & Ulmer , T . S . Structure of the integrin β 3 transmembrane segment in phospholipid bicelles and detergent micelles . Biochemistry 47 , 4008 – 4016 ( 2008 ) . Provides a structure of a β - integrin transmembrane domain and defines its membrane insertion . 20 . Takagi , J . & Springer , T . A . Integrin activation and structural rearrangement . Immunol . Rev . 186 , 141 – 163 ( 2002 ) . 21 . Ye , F . , Liu , J . , Winkler , H . & Taylor , K . A . Integrin α IIb β 3 in a membrane environment remains the same height after Mn2 + activation when observed by cryoelectron tomography . J . Mol . Biol . 378 , 976 – 986 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Xiong , J . P . et al . Crystal structure of the complete integrin α V β 3 ectodomain plus an α / β transmembrane fragment . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 589 – 600 ( 2009 ) . 23 . Puklin - Faucher , E . , Gao , M . , Schulten , K . & Vogel , V . How the headpiece hinge angle is opened : New insights into the dynamics of integrin activation . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 349 – 360 ( 2006 ) . Uses steered molecular dynamics to predict that force could activate integrins . 24 . Alon , R . & Ley , K . Cells on the run : shear - regulated integrin activation in leukocyte rolling and arrest on endothelial cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 525 – 532 ( 2008 ) . A scholarly review that discusses the concepts of the force - induced integrin extension in the context of leukocyte function . 25 . Friedland , J . C . , Lee , M . H . & Boettiger , D . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls α 5 β 1 function . Science 323 , 642 – 644 ( 2009 ) . Provides direct proof that force can activate integrins . 26 . Ohi , M . , Li , Y . , Cheng , Y . & Walz , T . Negative staining and image classification — powerful tools in modern electron microscopy . Biol . Proced . Online 6 , 23 – 34 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Critchley , D . R . & Gingras , A . R . Talin at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1345 – 1347 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Wu , C . The PINCH - ILK - parvin complexes : assembly , functions and regulation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1692 , 55 – 62 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Wu , C . PINCH , N ( i ) ck and the ILK : network wiring at cell - matrix adhesions . Trends Cell Biol . 15 , 460 – 466 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Li , R . et al . Activation of integrin α IIb β 3 by modulation of transmembrane helix associations . Science 300 , 795 – 798 ( 2003 ) . 31 . Kucik , D . F . Rearrangement of integrins in avidity regulation by leukocytes . Immunol . Res . 26 , 199 – 206 ( 2002 ) . 32 . Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . Integrin trafficking and the control of cell migration . Traffic 7 , 14 – 21 ( 2006 ) . 33 . Puklin - Faucher , E . & Sheetz , M . P . The mechanical integrin cycle . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 179 – 186 ( 2009 ) . 34 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . & Bershadsky , A . D . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 ( 2009 ) . A comprehensive and thought - provoking review of the functions of focal adhesions . 35 . Dustin , M . L . The cellular context of T cell signaling . Immunity 30 , 482 – 492 ( 2009 ) . A thorough review by a leader in the cell biological analysis of T cell integrin signalling . 36 . Gimona , M . , Buccione , R . , Courtneidge , S . A . & Linder , S . Assembly and biological role of podosomes and invadopodia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 235 – 241 ( 2008 ) . A valuable analysis of the similarities and differences amongst these relatively less - studied adhesion structures . 37 . Buensuceso , C . , de Virgilio , M . & Shattil , S . J . Detection of integrin α II β b3 clustering in living cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 15217 – 15224 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Coller , B . S . & Shattil , S . J . The GP IIb / IIIa ( integrin α IIb β 3 ) odyssey : a technology driven saga of a receptor with twists , turns and even a bend . Blood 112 , 3011 – 3025 ( 2008 ) . 39 . Smith , E . A . , Bunch , T . A . & Brower , D . L . General in vivo assay for the study of integrin cell membrane receptor microclustering . Anal . Chem . 79 , 3142 – 3147 ( 2007 ) . 40 . Wiseman , P . W . et al . Spatial mapping of integrin interactions and dynamics during cell migration by image correlation microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 5521 – 5534 ( 2004 ) . 41 . Shtengel , G . et al . Interferometric fluorescent super - resolution microscopy resolves 3D cellular ultrastructure . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 3125 – 3130 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Kim , M . , Carman , C . V . , Yang , W . , Salas , A . & Springer , T . A . The primacy of affinity over clustering in regulation of adhesiveness of the integrin α L β 2 . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 1241 – 1253 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 298 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 43 . Lau , T . L . , Dua , V . & Ulmer , T . S . Structure of the integrin α IIb transmembrane segment . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 16162 – 16168 ( 2008 ) . Reports the unusual structure of an α - integrin transmembrane domain and describes the membrane insertion of this domain . 44 . Lau , T . L . , Kim , C . , Ginsberg , M . H . & Ulmer , T . S . The structure of the integrin α IIb β 3 transmembrane complex explains integrin transmembrane signalling . EMBO J . 28 , 1351 – 1361 ( 2009 ) . Provides the first structure of a heterodimeric transmembrane domain and shows how integrin transmembrane domains are designed for bidirectional signalling . 45 . Williams , M . J . , Hughes , P . E . , O’Toole , T . E . & Ginsberg , M . H . The inner world of cell adhesion : integrin cytoplasmic domains . Trends Cell Biol . 4 , 109 – 112 ( 1994 ) . 46 . Armulik , A . , Nilsson , I . , von Heijne , G . & Johansson , S . Determination of the border between the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of human integrin subunits . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 37030 – 37034 ( 1999 ) . Uses a creative transmembrane domain mapping strategy to identify the inner border of integrin transmembrane domains . 47 . O’Toole , T . E . et al . Modulation of the affinity of integrin α IIb β 3 ( GPIIb - IIIa ) by the cytoplasmic domain of α IIb . Science 254 , 845 – 847 ( 1991 ) . 48 . O’Toole , T . E . et al . Integrin cytoplasmic domains mediate inside - out signal transduction . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 1047 – 1059 ( 1994 ) . 49 . Hughes , P . E . , O’Toole , T . E . , Ylanne , J . , Shattil , S . J . & Ginsberg , M . H . The conserved membrane - proximal region of an integrin cytoplasmic domain specifies ligand binding affinity . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 12411 – 12417 ( 1995 ) . 50 . Du , X . et al . Long range propagation of conformational changes in integrin α IIb β 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 23087 – 23092 ( 1993 ) . 51 . Luo , B . H . , Springer , T . A . & Takagi , J . A specific interface between integrin transmembrane helices and affinity for ligand . PLoS . Biol . 2 , 776 ( 2004 ) . Uses disulphide cross - linking to establish the proximity of the α - integrin and β - integrin transmembrane domains and shows that stabilization of their interaction could prevent activation . 52 . Luo , B . H . , Carman , C . V . , Takagi , J . & Springer , T . A . Disrupting integrin transmembrane domain heterodimerization increases ligand binding affinity , not valency or clustering . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 3679 – 3684 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Partridge , A . W . , Liu , S . , Kim , S . , Bowie , J . U . & Ginsberg , M . H . Transmembrane domain helix packing stabilizes integrin α IIb β 3 in the low affinity state . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 7294 – 7300 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Li , W . et al . A push - pull mechanism for regulating integrin function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 1424 – 1429 ( 2005 ) . References 52 – 54 show that point mutations in the integrin transmembrane domain could activate them , presumably by disrupting αβ - integrin transmembrane helix packing . 55 . Lu , C . F . & Springer , T . A . The α subunit cytoplasmic domain regulates the assembly and adhesiveness of integrin lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 . J . Immunol . 159 , 268 – 278 ( 1997 ) . 56 . Imai , Y . et al . Genetic perturbation of the putative cytoplasmic membrane - proximal salt bridge aberrantly activates α 4 integrins . Blood 112 , 5007 – 5015 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Czuchra , A . , Meyer , H . , Legate , K . R . , Brakebusch , C . & Fassler , R . Genetic analysis of β 1 integrin “activation motifs” in mice . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 889 – 899 ( 2006 ) . 58 . Lu , C . , Takagi , J . & Springer , T . A . Association of the membrane proximal regions of the α and β subunit cytoplasmic domains constrains an integrin in the inactive state . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 14642 – 14648 ( 2001 ) . 59 . Ulmer , T . S . , Yaspan , B . , Ginsberg , M . H . & Campbell , I . D . NMR analysis of structure and dynamics of the cytosolic tails of integrin α IIb β 3 in aqueous solution . Biochemistry 40 , 7498 – 7508 ( 2001 ) . 60 . Vinogradova , O . et al . A structural mechanism of integrin α IIb β 3 “inside - out” activation as regulated by its cytoplasmic face . Cell 110 , 587 – 597 ( 2002 ) . Reports the association of the α IIb integrin and β 3 integrin cytoplasmic domains , and that talin 1 could disrupt their interaction . 61 . Weljie , A . M . , Hwang , P . M . & Vogel , H . J . Solution structures of the cytoplasmic tail complex from platelet integrin α IIb - and β 3 - subunits . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 5878 – 5883 ( 2002 ) . 62 . Gottschalk , K . E . A coiled - coil structure of the α IIb β 3 integrin transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains in its resting state . Structure 13 , 703 – 712 ( 2005 ) . 63 . Li , R . et al . Oligomerization of the integrin α IIb β 3 : Roles of the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 12462 – 12467 ( 2001 ) . 64 . Li , R . et al . Dimerization of the transmembrane domain of integrin α IIb subunit in cell membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 26666 – 26673 ( 2004 ) . 65 . Kim , C . , Lau , T . L . , Ulmer , T . S . & Ginsberg , M . H . Interactions of platelet integrin α IIb and β 3 transmembrane domains in mammalian cell membranes and their role in integrin activation . Blood 113 , 4747 – 4753 ( 2009 ) . Describes a new method to study interactions among transmembrane domains and uses it to establish the primacy of αβ - integrin interactions among integrin transmembrane domains . 66 . Das , R . & Baker , D . Macromolecular modeling with Rosetta . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 77 , 363 – 382 ( 2008 ) . Describes the principles of Rosetta modelling and its applications . 67 . Zhu , J . et al . The structure of a receptor with two associating transmembrane domains on the cell surface : integrin α IIb β 3 . Mol . Cell 34 , 234 – 249 ( 2009 ) . Combines Rosetta modelling with disulphide cross - linking to propose models of the α IIb β 3 integrin that include some clusters of transmembrane domain structures that resemble the structures reported in references 19 , 43 and 44 . 68 . Yang , J . et al . Structure of an integrin α IIb β 3 transmembrane - cytoplasmic heterocomplex provides insight into integrin activation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 17729 – 17734 ( 2009 ) . A structure of the α IIb β 3 integrin transmembrane domain tails in a 50 % acetonitrile / water solution , in which the IMC structure resembles that reported in reference 60 for the cytoplasmic tails in aqueous solution . Together with reference 44 , this establishes the importance of the lipid – water interface in assembling the IMC . 69 . Metcalf , D . G . , Kulp , D . W . , Bennett , J . S . & Degrado , W . F . Multiple approaches converge on the structure of the integrin α IIb / β 3 transmembrane heterodimer . J . Mol . Biol . 392 , 1087 – 1101 ( 2009 ) . Structural modelling by two approaches provides αβ - integrin transmembrane domain models that converge on the NMR structure reported in reference 44 . 70 . Zhu , J . et al . Requirement of α and β subunit transmembrane helix separation for integrin outside - in signaling . Blood 110 , 2475 – 2483 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Liu , S . , Calderwood , D . A . & Ginsberg , M . H . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - binding proteins . J . Cell . Sci . 113 , 3563 – 3571 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Tadokoro , S . et al . Talin binding to integrin tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science 302 , 103 – 106 ( 2003 ) . Shows that talin 1 binding to the β - integrin tail is required to activate β 1 and β 3 integrins in cells . 73 . Simonson , W . T . , Franco , S . J . & Huttenlocher , A . Talin1 regulates TCR - mediated LFA - 1 function . J . Immunol . 177 , 7707 – 7714 ( 2006 ) . 74 . Nieswandt , B . et al . Loss of talin1 in platelets abrogates integrin activation , platelet aggregation , and thrombus formation in vitro and in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 3113 – 3118 ( 2007 ) . Shows that deletion of talin 1 profoundly impairs integrin activation in platelets . 75 . Petrich , B . G . et al . Talin is required for integrin - mediated platelet function in hemostasis and thrombosis . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 3103 – 3111 ( 2007 ) . Shows that the platelet - specific deletion of talin 1 impairs integrin activation in platelets and leads to profound haemostatic defects . 76 . Garcia - Alvarez , B . et al . Structural determinants of integrin recognition by talin . Mol . Cell 11 , 49 – 58 ( 2003 ) . Provides a high resolution structure of the F2 – F3 domain of talin 1 in complex with a fragment of the β 3 integrin tail , confirming that it is a PTB domain - like interaction , as predicted in reference 81 . 77 . Critchley , D . R . Genetic , biochemical and structural approaches to talin function . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 1308 – 1312 ( 2005 ) . 78 . Watanabe , N . et al . Mechanisms and consequences of agonist - induced talin recruitment to platelet integrin α IIb β 3 . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 1211 – 1222 ( 2008 ) . Reconstruction of the connections between thrombin stimulation and integrin activation , accompanied by the direct measurement of talin – integrin interactions in living cells . 79 . Wegener , K . L . et al . Structural basis of integrin activation by talin . Cell 128 , 171 – 182 ( 2007 ) . The structure of the interface between talin 1 and the membrane - proximal region of the β - integrin cytoplasmic domain elucidates the mechanism by which talin 1 activates integrins . 80 . Rees , D . J . G . , Ades , S . E . , Singer , S . J . & Hynes , R . O . Sequence and domain structure of talin . Nature 347 , 685 – 689 ( 1990 ) . 81 . Calderwood , D . A . et al . The phosphotyrosine binding - like domain of talin activates integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 21749 – 21758 ( 2002 ) . 82 . Bouaouina , M . , Lad , Y . & Calderwood , D . A . The N - terminal domains of talin cooperate with the phosphotyrosine binding - like domain to activate β 1 and β 3 integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 6118 – 6125 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Calderwood , D . A . et al . Integrin β cytoplasmic domain interactions with phosphotyrosine - binding domains : a structural prototype for diversity in integrin signaling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 2272 – 2277 ( 2003 ) . Establishes that β - integrin tails bind to a wide variety of PTB domain - containing proteins 84 . Ulmer , T . S . , Calderwood , D . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . & Campbell , I . D . Domain - specific interactions of talin with the membrane - proximal region of the integrin β 3 subunit . Biochemistry 42 , 8307 – 8312 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Knezevic , I . , Leisner , T . & Lam , S . Direct binding of the platelet integrin α IIb α 3 ( GPIIb - IIIa ) to talin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 16416 – 16421 ( 1996 ) . 86 . Anthis , N . J . et al . The structure of an integrin / talin complex reveals the basis of inside - out signal transduction . EMBO J . 28 , 3623 – 3632 ( 2009 ) . The first high resolution structure of talin F2 – F3 in complex with a full - length integrin tail reveals that talin 1 forms a salt bridge with an Asp residue in the β - integrin tail and may therefore directly disrupt the salt bridge that stabilizes the IMC between α - and β - integrin subunit transmembrane domains . 87 . Mackinnon , A . C . , Qadota , H . , Norman , K . R . , Moerman , D . G . & Williams , B . D . C - elegans PAT - 4 / ILK functions as an adaptor protein within integrin adhesion complexes . Curr . Biol . 12 , 787 – 797 ( 2002 ) . 88 . Moser , M . , Legate , K . R . , Zent , R . & Fassler , R . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science 324 , 895 – 899 ( 2009 ) . 89 . Montanez , E . et al . Kindlin - 2 controls bidirectional signaling of integrins . Genes Dev . 22 , 1325 – 1330 ( 2008 ) . Shows that the deletion of kindlin 2 profoundly impairs integrin function in fibroblasts and prevents recruitment of integrin - linked protein kinase ( ILK ) to focal adhesions . 90 . Ma , Y . Q . , Qin , J . , Wu , C . & Plow , E . F . Kindlin - 2 ( Mig - 2 ) : a co - activator of β 3 integrins . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 439 – 446 ( 2008 ) . Shows that kindlin 2 could synergize with talin 1 to activate integrins , and that this function requires the interaction of kindlin 2 with the β - integrin tail . 91 . Harburger , D . S . , Bouaouina , M . & Calderwood , D . A . Kindlin - 1 and - 2 directly bind the C - terminal region of β integrin cytoplasmic tails and exert integrin - specific activation effects . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 11485 – 11497 ( 2009 ) . 92 . Tu , Y . , Wu , S . , Shi , X . , Chen , K . & Wu , C . Migfilin and Mig - 2 link focal adhesions to filamin and the actin cytoskeleton and function in cell shape modulation . Cell 113 , 37 – 47 ( 2003 ) . Shows that kindlin 2 is important for integrin function in cells and reports the discovery of migfilin . 93 . Kloeker , S . et al . The Kindler syndrome protein is regulated by transforming growth factor - β and involved in integrin - mediated adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 6824 – 6833 ( 2004 ) . Demonstrates that TGF - β induces kindlin 1 expression , and that kindlin 1 binds to β - integrin cytoplasmic domains . 94 . Lai - Cheong , J . E . et al . Kindler syndrome : a focal adhesion genodermatosis . Br . J . Dermatol . 160 , 233 – 242 ( 2009 ) . R E V I E W S nATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology VoluME 11 | ApRIl 2010 | 299 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 95 . Ussar , S . et al . Loss of Kindlin - 1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial dysfunction . PLoS Genet . 4 , e1000289 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Dowling , J . J . et al . Kindlin - 2 is an essential component of intercalated discs and is required for vertebrate cardiac structure and function . Circ . Res . 102 , 423 – 431 ( 2008 ) . 97 . Moser , M . , Nieswandt , B . , Ussar , S . , Pozgajova , M . & Fassler , R . Kindlin - 3 is essential for integrin activation and platelet aggregation . Nature Med . 14 , 325 – 330 ( 2008 ) . A breakthrough paper that shows that deletion of kindlin 3 profoundly impairs integrin activation in platelets . 98 . Moser , M . et al . Kindlin - 3 is required for β 2 integrin - mediated leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells . Nature Med . 15 , 300 – 305 ( 2009 ) . Shows that kindlin 3 knockout impairs β 2 integrin function in neutrophils . 99 . Kuijpers , T . W . et al . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 ( LAD - 1 ) / variant . A novel immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by dysfunctional β 2 integrins . J . Clin . Invest . 100 , 1725 – 1733 ( 1997 ) . Discovery of patients with a defect in the activation of β 2 and β 3 integrins . 100 . Manevich - Mendelson , E . et al . Loss of Kindlin - 3 in LAD - III eliminates LFA - 1 but not VLA - 4 adhesiveness developed under shear flow conditions . Blood 114 , 2344 – 2353 ( 2009 ) . 101 . Alon , R . & Etzioni , A . LAD - III , a novel group of leukocyte integrin activation deficiencies . Trends Immunol . 24 , 561 – 566 ( 2003 ) . 102 . Boettner , B . & Van Aelst , L . Control of cell adhesion dynamics by Rap1 signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 684 – 693 ( 2009 ) . 103 . Bos , J . L . Linking Rap to cell adhesion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 123 – 128 ( 2005 ) . 104 . Kooistra , M . R . , Dube , N . & Bos , J . L . Rap1 : a key regulator in cell - cell junction formation . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 17 – 22 ( 2007 ) . 105 . Crittenden , J . R . et al . CalDAG - GEFI integrates signaling for platelet aggregation and thrombus formation . Nature Med . 10 , 982 – 986 ( 2004 ) . 106 . Pasvolsky , R . et al . A LAD - III syndrome is associated with defective expression of the Rap - 1 activator CalDAG - GEFI in lymphocytes , neutrophils , and platelets . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1571 – 1582 ( 2007 ) . 107 . Svensson , L . et al . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency - III is caused by mutations in KINDLIN3 affecting integrin activation . Nature Med . 15 , 306 – 312 ( 2009 ) . 108 . Malinin , N . L . et al . A point mutation in KINDLIN3 ablates activation of three integrin subfamilies in humans . Nature Med . 15 , 313 – 318 ( 2009 ) . Shows that activation of β 1 , β 2 and β 3 integrins is deficient in primary haematopoietic cells of kindlin 3 - deficient humans . 109 . Kuijpers , T . W . et al . LAD - 1 / variant syndrome is caused by mutations in FERMT3 . Blood 113 , 4740 – 4746 ( 2009 ) . 110 . Mory , A . et al . Kindlin - 3 : a new gene involved in the pathogenesis of LAD - III . Blood 112 , 2591 ( 2008 ) . References 107 – 110 identify kindlin 3 mutations as the cause of defective integrin activation in cells of the hematopoietic lineage . 111 . Ithychanda , S . et al . Migfilin : a molecular switch in regulation of integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 4713 – 4722 ( 2009 ) . Shows that migfilin competes with integrins for filamin binding , and proposes that kindlins act by recruiting migfilin to prevent filamin from competing with talin for integrin binding . 112 . Lad , Y . et al . Structural basis of the migfilin - filamin interaction and competition with integrin β tails . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 35154 – 35163 ( 2008 ) . Shows that migfilin competes with integrins for filamin binding . 113 . Kinbara , K . , Goldfinger , L . E . , Hansen , M . , Chou , F . L . & Ginsberg , M . H . Ras GTPases : integrins’ friends or foes ? Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 767 – 776 ( 2003 ) . 114 . Marshall , C . J . Ras effectors . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 197 – 204 ( 1996 ) . 115 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , Smyth , S . S . , Schoenwaelder , S . M . , Fischer , T . H . & White , G . C . , 2nd . Rap1b is required for normal platelet function and hemostasis in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 680 – 687 ( 2005 ) . 116 . Bergmeier , W . et al . Mice lacking the signaling molecule CalDAG - GEFI represent a model for leukocyte adhesion deficiency type III . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 1699 – 1707 ( 2007 ) . 117 . Katagiri , K . , Maeda , A . , Shimonaka , M . & Kinashi , T . RAPL , a Rap1 - binding molecule that mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion through spatial regulation of LFA - 1 . Nature Immunol . 4 , 741 – 748 ( 2003 ) . 118 . Lafuente , E . M . et al . RIAM , an Ena / VASP and Profilin ligand , interacts with Rap1 - GTP and mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion . Dev . Cell 7 , 585 – 595 ( 2004 ) . A breakthrough paper that shows that RIAM is a Rap effector important in the activation of leukocyte integrins . 119 . Zhang , Z . , Rehmann , H . , Price , L . S . , Riedl , J . & Bos , J . L . AF6 negatively regulates Rap1 - induced cell adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 33200 – 33205 ( 2005 ) . 120 . Krause , M . et al . Lamellipodin , an Ena / VASP ligand , is implicated in the regulation of lamellipodial dynamics . Dev . Cell 7 , 571 – 583 ( 2004 ) . Discovery of the role of lamellipodin , a paralogue of RIAM , in lamellipodial dynamics . 121 . Han , J . et al . Reconstructing and deconstructing agonist - induced activation of integrin α IIb β 3 . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1796 – 1806 ( 2006 ) . Elucidates the molecular linkage between RAP1 and talins in integrin activation . 122 . Lee , H . S . , Lim , C . J . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , Shattil , S . J . & Ginsberg , M . H . RIAM activates integrins by linking talin to Ras GTPase membrane - targeting sequences . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 5119 – 5127 ( 2009 ) . 123 . Nolz , J . C . et al . WAVE2 regulates high - affinity integrin binding by recruiting vinculin and talin to the immunological synapse . Mol . Cell Biol . 27 , 5986 – 6000 ( 2007 ) . 124 . O’Toole , T . E . et al . Integrin cytoplasmic domains mediate inside - out signal transduction . J . Cell Biol . 124 , 1047 – 1059 ( 1994 ) . 125 . Naik , U . P . , Patel , P . M . & Parise , L . V . Identification of a novel calcium - binding protein that interacts with the integrin α IIb cytoplasmic domain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 4651 – 4654 ( 1997 ) . The discovery of CIB as an α IIb integrin tail - binding protein . 126 . Yuan , W . et al . CIB1 is an endogenous inhibitor of agonist - induced integrin α IIb β 3 activation . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 169 – 175 ( 2006 ) . 127 . Naik , M . U . et al . CIB1 deficiency results in impaired thrombosis : the potential role of CIB1 in outside - in signaling through integrin α IIb β 3 . J . Thromb . Haemost . 7 , 1906 – 1914 ( 2009 ) . 128 . Denofrio , J . C . , Yuan , W . , Temple , B . R . , Gentry , H . R . & Parise , L . V . Characterization of calcium - and integrin - binding protein 1 ( CIB1 ) knockout platelets : potential compensation by CIB family members . Thromb . Haemost . 100 , 847 – 856 ( 2008 ) . 129 . Katagiri , K . , Maeda , A . , Shimonaka , M . & Kinashi , T . RAPL , a Rap1 - binding molecule that mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion through spatial regulation of LFA - 1 . Nature Immunol . 4 , 741 – 748 ( 2003 ) . Identification of RAPL as a regulator of α L β 2 integrin - mediated adhesion . 130 . Tohyama , Y . et al . The critical cytoplasmic regions of the α L / β 2 integrin in Rap1 - induced adhesion and migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 2570 – 2582 ( 2003 ) . 131 . Ebisuno , Y . et al . Rap1 controls lymphocyte adhesion cascade and interstitial migration within lymph nodes in RAPL - dependent and - independent manners . Blood 115 , 804 – 814 ( 2009 ) . Elucidation of the complementary roles of talins and RAPL in RAP1 - regulated adhesion and migration of lymphocytes . 132 . Katagiri , K . et al . Mst1 controls lymphocyte trafficking and interstitial motility within lymph nodes . EMBO J . 28 , 1319 – 1331 ( 2009 ) . 133 . Katagiri , K . , Imamura , M . & Kinashi , T . Spatiotemporal regulation of the kinase Mst1 by binding protein RAPL is critical for lymphocyte polarity and adhesion . Nature Immunol . 7 , 919 – 928 ( 2006 ) . 134 . Coller , B . S . Platelet GPIIb / IIIa antagonists : the first anti - integrin receptor therapeutics . J . Clin . Invest . 99 , 1467 – 1471 ( 1997 ) . 135 . Hughes , P . E . et al . Suppression of integrin activation : a novel function of a Ras / Raf - initiated MAP kinase pathway . Cell 88 , 521 – 530 ( 1997 ) . 136 . Wierzbicka - Patynowski , I . & Schwarzbauer , J . E . The ins and outs of fibronectin matrix assembly . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3269 – 3276 ( 2003 ) . 137 . Chou , F . L . et al . PEA - 15 binding to ERK1 / 2 MAP kinases is required for its modulation of integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 52587 – 52597 ( 2003 ) . 138 . Ling , K . et al . Tyrosine phosphorylation of type I γ phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase by Src regulates an integrin - talin switch . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1339 – 1349 ( 2003 ) . 139 . Calderwood , D . A . , Tai , V . , Di Paolo , G . , De Camilli , P . & Ginsberg , M . H . Competition for Talin results in trans - dominant inhibition of integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 28889 – 28895 ( 2004 ) . 140 . Law , D . A . , Nannizzi - Alalmo , L . & Phillips , D . R . Outside - in integrin signal transduction : α IIb β 3 ( GPIIb - IIIa ) tyrosine phosphorylation induced by platelet aggregation . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 10811 – 10815 ( 1996 ) . 141 . Blystone , S . D . , Williams , M . P . , Slater , S . E . & Brown , E . J . Requirement of integrin β 3 tyrosine 747 for β 3 tyrosine phosphorylation and regulation of α v β 3 avidity . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 28757 – 28761 ( 1997 ) . 142 . Chen , H . et al . In vivo β 1 integrin function requires phosphorylation - independent regulation by cytoplasmic tyrosines . Genes Dev . 20 , 927 – 932 ( 2006 ) . 143 . Law , D . A . et al . Integrin cytoplasmic tyrosine motif is required for outside - in α IIb β 3 signalling and platelet function . Nature 401 , 808 – 811 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Sakai , T . , Jove , R . , Fassler , R . & Mosher , D . F . Role of the cytoplasmic tyrosines of β 1A integrins in transformation by v - src . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 3808 – 3813 ( 2001 ) . 145 . Oxley , C . L . et al . An integrin phosphorylation switch : the effect of β 3 integrin tail phosphorylation on Dok1 and talin binding . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 5420 – 5426 ( 2008 ) . 146 . Millon - Fremillon , A . et al . Cell adaptive response to extracellular matrix density is controlled by ICAP - 1 - dependent β 1 - integrin affinity . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 427 – 441 ( 2008 ) . 147 . Kiema , T . et al . The molecular basis of filamin binding to integrins and competition with talin . Mol . Cell 21 , 337 – 347 ( 2006 ) . Reports the first structure of a β - integrin tail bound to filamin , explaining how talin and filamin could compete for binding to the integrin . 148 . Schwartz , M . A . , Schaller , M . D . & Ginsberg , M . H . Integrins : emerging paradigms of signal transduction . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 549 – 599 ( 1995 ) . 149 . Essex , D . W . Redox control of platelet function . Antioxid . Redox Signal . 11 , 191 – 225 ( 2008 ) . 150 . Yan , B . & Smith , J . W . A redox site involved in integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 39964 – 39972 ( 2000 ) . 151 . O’Neill , S . et al . The platelet integrin α IIb β 3 has an endogenous thiol isomerase activity . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 36984 – 36990 ( 2000 ) . 152 . Jordan , P . A . et al . A role for the thiol isomerase protein ERP5 in platelet function . Blood 105 , 1500 – 1507 ( 2005 ) . 153 . Du , X . et al . Ligands “activate” integrin α IIb β 3 ( platelet GPIIb - IIIa ) . Cell 65 , 409 – 416 ( 1991 ) . 154 . Frelinger , A . L . , III , Du , X . , Plow , E . F . & Ginsberg , M . H . Monoclonal antibodies to ligand - occupied conformers of integrin α IIb β 3 ( glycoprotein IIb - IIIa ) alter receptor affinity , specificity , and function . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 17106 – 17111 ( 1991 ) . 155 . Kim , M . , Carman , C . V . & Springer , T . A . Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins . Science 301 , 1720 – 1725 ( 2003 ) . Uses FRET to show that integrin activation is associated with a change in the cytoplasmic domains . Acknowledgements Researches quoted from our laboratories were supported by the National Institutes of Health . C . K . is the recipient of a postdoctoral fellowship from the American Institute for Cancer Research . We thank our colleagues for their understanding in cases where space limitations have forced us to cite or discuss their work less thoroughly than we would have liked to . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES Entrez Gene : www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gene CALDAG - GEFI OMIM : www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / omim Kindler syndrome | lAD1 | lAD1v UniProtKB : www . uniprot . org α 1 | α 2 | α IIb β 3 | α 5 | α l β 2 | α V | β 1 | CIB1 | ERK1 | ERK2 | ICAM1 | ICAP1 | kindlin 1 | kindlin 2 | kindlin 3 | MST1 | RAP1A | RAP1B | RAPl | RIAM | PAR1 | UNC - 112 | WAVE2 FURTHER INFORMATION Mark H . Ginsberg’s homepage : http : / / pstp . ucsd . edu / ginsberg all links are acTive in The online pdf R E V I E W S 300 | ApRIl 2010 | VoluME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10