4chan and / b / : An Analysis of Anonymity and Ephemerality in a Large Online Community Michael S . Bernstein 1 , Andr´es Monroy - Hern´andez 1 , Drew Harry 1 , Paul Andr´e 2 , Katrina Panovich 1 and Greg Vargas 1 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Southampton Cambridge , MA 02139 SO17 1BJ , United Kingdom { msbernst , amonroy , dharry , kp , gvargas } @ mit . edu pa2 @ ecs . soton . ac . uk Abstract We present two studies of online ephemerality and anonymity based on the popular discussion board / b / at 4chan . org : a website with over 7 million users that plays an inﬂuential role in Internet culture . Although re - searchers and practitioners often assume that user iden - tity and data permanence are central tools in the design of online communities , we explore how / b / succeeds de - spite being almost entirely anonymous and extremely ephemeral . We begin by describing / b / and performing a content analysis that suggests the community is dom - inated by playful exchanges of images and links . Our ﬁrst study uses a large dataset of more than ﬁve million posts to quantify ephemerality in / b / . We ﬁnd that most threads spend just ﬁve seconds on the ﬁrst page and less than ﬁve minutes on the site before expiring . Our sec - ond study is an analysis of identity signals on 4chan , ﬁnding that over 90 % of posts are made by fully anony - mous users , with other identity signals adopted and dis - carded at will . We describe alternative mechanisms that / b / participants use to establish status and frame their interactions . Introduction Identity representation and archiving strategies are central features to the design of online communities . However , our current understanding of them focuses mainly on strong identity and permanent archival . Researchers and practition - ers argue that real names and pseudonyms can help “pro - mote trust , cooperation , and accountability” ( Millen and Pat - terson 2003 ) , whereas anonymity may make communica - tion impersonal and undermine credibility ( Hiltz , Johnson , and Turoff 1986 ; Rains 2007 ) . Inﬂuential industry players like Facebook argue that pseudonyms and multiple iden - tities show “a lack of integrity” ( Kirkpatrick 2010 ) . Simi - larly , data permanence is also the norm : search engines will resurface content years after it is created ( Rosen 2010 ) , so - cial network sites allow friends to browse updates and pho - tos from years ago , and online communities will often ex - pect newcomers to read their archives ( Millen 2000 ) . Some scholars have questioned these design approaches , suggest - ing that anonymous contributions and ephemeral partici - pation online can be desirable ( Lampe and Resnick 2004 ; Copyright c (cid:13) 2011 , Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . Ren , Kraut , and Kiesler forthcoming ; Grudin 2002 ) . How - ever , we have a limited understanding of how an anonymous and ephemeral community design might actually play out — especially at large scale . In this paper we analyze one such large - scale , anony - mous , and ephemeral community : the imageboard website 4chan . We focus on 4chan’s ﬁrst and most popular board , the “random” board known as / b / . Our goal is to use / b / as a lens to understand the concepts of anonymity and ephemerality online . / b / implements these concepts in more extreme ways than most other online communities . First , posts are fully anonymous by default and very rarely contain pseudonyms or other identity signals . This lack of identity makes traditional reputation systems unworkable . Second , instead of archiving conversations , / b / deletes them when newer content arrives — often within minutes — which leads to a chaotic , fast - paced experience . By making com - plete anonymity and content deletion the norm , / b / lets us study these concepts in situ at a larger scale than before . This work quantiﬁes the outcomes of 4chan’s design de - cisions , and starts a discussion on how those decisions af - fect the community and its culture . Although / b / ’s imple - mentation of anonymity and ephemerality are extreme and unusual , the concepts themselves are not unique . Sites like Twitter , for instance , feel ephemeral because of their con - tinuous content stream , while others like Formspring use anonymity as a core feature . By studying the impact of dif - ferent points on the identity and archival continuums , we can broaden our understanding of community design strategies . Readers may know of 4chan and / b / ( Figure 1 ) from their inﬂuence on Internet culture and media coverage of their off - site activities . The site boasts over seven million users ( Poole 2010 ) and is a proliﬁc meme factory : it originated popular memes like LOLcats ( Rutkoff 2007 ) and rickrolling ( Leckart 2009 ) . Additionally , some 4chan and / b / members have been known to participate in highly visible off - site ac - tivities . These activities include manipulating a Time Mag - azine poll to elect 4chan’s creator the “World’s Most Inﬂu - ential Person” and participating in hacktivist group ‘Anony - mous’ . Anonymous has executed highly visible protests of the Church of Scientology ( Coleman 2011 ) and DDoS at - tacks against Mastercard and Paypal in support of Wik - ileaks ( Mackey 2010 ) . Reactions are diverse : while memes have brought the site positive media attention ( Brophy - > > > > File : 1220794693370 . jpg - ( 87 KB , 1041x789 , FUUUcvg . jpg ) Anonymous 09 / 07 / 08 ( Sun ) 09 : 38 : 1 No . 84128674 it ' s that time again / b / Anonymous 09 / 07 / 08 ( Sun ) 09 : 39 : 0 No . 84128780 File : 1220794749140 . jpg - ( 116 KB , 1041x789 , 1220648295541 . jpg ) Anonymous 09 / 07 / 08 ( Sun ) 09 : 39 : 5 No . 84128894 File : 1220794797598 . jpg - ( 115 KB , 1041x789 , 1220645223703 . jpg ) Figure 1 : A “rageguy ( FFFFUUUU ) comic” themed thread on / b / . Source : 4chanarchive . org , where / b / members save memorable threads . Warren 2008 ) , harassment and activism have often been been negatively and sensationally covered . For example , a Fox News afﬁliate called 4chan the “internet hate machine” ( Shuman 2007 ) . However , some media outlets have pro - ﬁled the site in more nuanced ways ( Dibbell 2009 ; 2010 ; Poole 2010 ) . Much of this coverage is a response to / b / ’s distinctive culture – a culture that merits critical analysis be - yond the scope of this paper . Here , we focus on the board’s design choices of anonymity and ephemerality , and how they may support or inﬂuence its culture . In this paper , we perform a content analysis and two data - driven studies of / b / , focusing on anonymity and ephemer - ality . To begin , we survey related work . We then introduce 4chan , its design , and the / b / board . To ground our discus - sion of the site , we perform a content analysis on a sample of / b / threads . We then turn to our two studies : 1 ) ephemerality , tracking the site’s tempo and content deletion dynamics ; 2 ) anonymity , examining participant practices around identity . A note before proceeding : large portions of the 4chan site , and / b / in particular , are offensive or obscene . We warn that quotes and vocabulary in this paper may offend . Related Work Our work builds on prior literature on anonymity and ephemerality . 4chan and / b / can contribute insights into how this literature plays out in the wild at large scale . Online communities choose points on the spectrum of anonymity — from completely unattributed to real names . For example , while Facebook embraces real names ( Face - book 2010 ) , Myspace does not ( Dwyer , Hiltz , and Passerini 2007 ) , and some Usenet boards allow posting from anony - mous e - mail addresses ( Donath 1999 ) . Slashdot decided to enable anonymous commenting so users could feel more free to speak their minds , then controlled behavior with user moderation of comments ( Lampe and Resnick 2004 ) . However , while they may allow fully anonymous posting , anonymity is much less common in these communities than on / b / . G´omez et al ( 2008 ) found that fully anonymous posts made up only 18 . 6 % of Slashdot comments . Instead , pseudonymity tends to become the norm as usernames al - low members to build a reputation . Our work extends this research by studying the dynamics of a more thoroughly anonymous community . Evidence is mixed on how anonymity may affect an on - line community . In many scenarios , researchers argue for the importance of identity - based reputation systems in promot - ing pro - social behavior ( Millen and Patterson 2003 ) . How - ever , anonymity may foster stronger communal identity , as opposed to bond - based attachment with individuals ( Ren , Kraut , and Kiesler forthcoming ) . Anonymity may impact participation : it increases equity in classrooms ( Collins and Berge 1995 ) , but results in more ‘ﬂaming’ on e - mail lists ( Thompsen and Ahn 1992 ) . 4chan and / b / play out these concepts on a larger stage than has been previously studied . Computer - mediated communication has studied anonymity in small groups , and our work reconsiders their results in larger online communities . Removing traditional social cues can make communication impersonal ( Short , Williams , and Christie 1976 ) and cold ( Hiltz , John - son , and Turoff 1986 ) , and choosing to remain anonymous will undermine credibility ( Rains 2007 ) . However , we will argue that / b / ’s community has developed alternative credibility mechanisms — via language and images — that still function effectively . Anonymity can also have positive outcomes : groups working anonymously and with critical confederates produce more ideas ( Jessup , Connolly , and Galegher 1990 ) ; non - anonymous groups feel more personal , but have less overall cohesion ( Tanis and Postmes 2007 ) . Ephemerality is rare in a large - scale online community , and to our knowledge , we are the ﬁrst to study it di - rectly in situ . Most communities that have been studied rely heavily on archives . For example , Millen ( 2000 ) reports that community members often expect each other to search group archives before asking new questions . Ephemeral - ity may have community - wide downsides – a lack of his - tory tends to decrease cooperation in social dilemma games ( Fehr and G ¨ achter 2000 ) . However , instituting permanence in previously - unarchived chat rooms has elicited strong neg - ative reactions ( Hudson and Bruckman 2004 ) . Through our investigation of / b / , we hope to contribute to scholarly conversations about data permanence . For ex - ample , Grudin ( 2002 ) suggests that we evolved to live in an ephemeral world , yet our technology takes us from the “here and now” to the “everywhere and forever . ” Similarly , Mayer - Schonberger ( 2009 ) emphasizes the value of “soci - etal forgetting , ” where “the limits of human memory ensure that people’s sins are eventually forgotten . ” Blanchette and Johnson ( 2002 ) pointed to the recognition of social forget - fulness in three areas of social policy ( bankruptcy law , ju - venile crime records and credit reports ) , arguing that “data retention and disposal should be addressed as a fundamental characteristic of information . ” These topics are not just of academic interest , but have clear practical implications for online social environments . Practitioners face similar challenges . For example , online game retailer Blizzard recently reversed a decision to require the use of out - of - game identities in its online forums ( M . G . 2010 ) , Formspring found both popularity and controversy by allowing teens to ask anonymous questions of their friends ( boyd 2010a ) , and AOL angered its users when a hacker de - anonymized old search logs ( Barbaro and Jr . 2006 ) . Type % Description Example Themed 28 % Setting theme , often with an exemplar im - age . ITT [ “In this thread” ] we only post stuff we have laughed at so hard we had tears Sharing content 19 % Offering content for the community to en - joy or critique . This guy is a hero . : ) http : / / www . youtube . com / [ xxxxx ] Question , advice and recommenda - tion 10 % Asking for suggestions or , often quite in - timate , life advice . Soup / b / Recently I’ve been hanging out with a girl a lot , we’re both in college . I spend the night at her place all the time and we kiss and whatnot . Problem is , she just broke up with her ex [ . . . ] and I know she’s not over him . I really like her but I dunno what to do , so what do / b / ? Sharing Personal Information 9 % Sharing or requesting content with per - sonal information . U JELLY ? [ “You jealous ? ” ] This is me suiting up at my formal looking fucking brilliant , then there is you fags sitting back and watching . Discussion 8 % Calling for discussion , debate or some back - and - forth over a topic . Hi Anonymous ! So ive started this game called League of Legends a few days ago . [ . . . ] Is there anyone here who also plays it ? Lets talk about it ! Request for item 8 % Requesting information about previously - seen images , or other valuable informa - tion such as credentials for pay sites . anyone has a pic of that star wars battle tank with the german insignia shooped [ “photoshopped” ] on it ? in return tits [ a misogynous but common mechanism for “paying back” a favor with pornographic images ] Request for action 7 % Intending to agitate for real - life action , like harassing another website Make a group saying [ name ] is awesome on face book . DO IT FAGGOTS Meta 5 % Discussing / b / itself or playing with the site’s mechanics ( e . g . , post numbers ) Heidi Ho there / b / I’m a Newfag and now that i’ve been here all Summer I was wondering if i need a letter of recommendation From a Registered OldFag ? Other 6 % Unable to categorize . excuse all the blood Table 1 : Content typology of threads on / b / : appearance frequency and an exemplar ( some quotes are paraphrased ) . ( n = 598 ) 4chan and / b / 4chan was created in 2004 by Christopher Poole as an online discussion board focused on Japanese anime ( Sorgatz 2009 ) . It has grown from its anime roots to encompass sixty boards on topics ranging from politics to fashion , science and “sexy beautiful women . ” Poole , better known by his pseudonym moot , created 4chan by copying the format of Futaba Chan - nel , a popular Japanese discussion forum . 1 4chan’s aesthetic is simple , though it can appear confusing and cluttered : the Wall Street Journal describes it as “archaic [ . . . ] a quaint throwback to the earliest webpages” ( Brophy - Warren 2008 ) . 4chan is composed of boards , threads and posts . Each board is themed ( e . g . , / v / is “Video Games” ) . Like most dis - cussion boards , 4chan groups posts into threads ( Figure 2 ) . Posts starting a thread are required to include an image while images on replies are optional . Threads are organized into pages , where each page previews ﬁfteen threads with their original post and a small sample of replies — users can click through to read the entire thread . In this paper , we focus on the 4chan “random” board , known as / b / . 2 We focus on / b / not only because it is 4chan’s ﬁrst and most active board — it claims 30 % of all 4chan traf - ﬁc — but also because , in the words of its creator , it is the “life force of the website” , and the place where “rowdiness and lawlessness” happen ( Sorgatz 2009 ) . Content ephemerality on 4chan is enforced by thread ex - piration and a large volume of incoming content . Threads begin on page one and are pushed down as new threads are 1 http : / / www . 4chan . org / faq # what4chan 2 http : / / boards . 4chan . org / b / Figure 2 : Structure of a 4chan board . added . If a user replies to a thread , it is bumped back to the top of the ﬁrst page . If the thread reaches the bottom of the ﬁfteenth page , the thread is removed permanently and its URL returns a ‘Page Not Found’ error . This entire pro - cess can take place over a matter of minutes , as Study 1 will demonstrate . 4chan’s anonymity plays out through its posting mecha - nisms and defaults . Unlike other sites , where being anony - mous usually means not using your “real” name or identity , most posts on / b / are disconnected from any identity . There are no accounts ; all information is entered on a per - post ba - sis . If the user does not change the default empty name ﬁeld , 4chan assigns the name Anonymous . Even if a user claims a pseudonym , any other user can claim it themselves in any subsequent post . 4chan does have a cryptographically - powered feature for users to guarantee their identity , called a tripcode . Tripcodes use a password to generate a unique string after the username ( e . g . , username ! ! Oo43raDvH61 ) , giving the password - holder a unique and inimitable iden - tiﬁer . However , 4chan users largely eschew tripcodes and pseudonyms , as Study 2 will show . Content posted on / b / / b / ’s content is frequently intentionally offensive , with little held sacred . There is racist , sexist , homophobic language , groups are often referred to using a “fag” sufﬁx ( e . g . , new members are “newfags” , British users are “britfags” ) , and a common response to any self - shot picture by a woman is “tits or GTFO” ( post a topless photo or get the f * * * out ) . This language is part of the group identity : pushing the bounds of propriety in order to “hack the attention econ - omy” and turn heads ( boyd 2010b ) . While the content on / b / can be offensive , it can also be funny , open , and creative , as its creation and promotion of numerous memes attests to . In order to characterize the content and discourse on the board , we began with eight months of participant obser - vation on the site . Using a series of informal samples of thread - starting posts on / b / , we conducted a grounded anal - ysis ( Charmaz 2006 ) similar to that which has been applied to other kinds of online participation ( Naaman , Boase , and Lai 2010 ) . After a few rounds of iteration , we settled on a scheme with nine high - level categories to describe the differ - ent kinds of posts that initiate threads on / b / . To measure the relative frequency of these thread categories , we collected a sample of 598 thread - initiating posts over the course of ten days ( November 16 – 26 , 2010 ) . The threads were selected such that their temporal distribution matches the underlying distribution of 4chan posts . Our sample included the text and accompanying image from the post that started the thread . Table 1 reports the thread composition in our sample . In keeping with / b / ’s identity as an image board and the re - quirement that each thread - starter post an image , a common purpose of the board is to share images and web content . The two most prevalent thread types ( Themed , 28 % , and Shar - ing Content , 19 % ) both revolve around images and make up nearly half of all threads in our sample . There is also ev - idence for the off - / b / activities that the media focuses on : threads attempting to organize such activities ( Request for Action ) make up 7 % of the sample . Of those threads , the poster often attempted to generate comments on Facebook or Youtube pages or get people to call a particular phone number . / b / ’s posters often disdain such calls because they are seen as self - serving , dismissing them by replying “ / b / is not your personal army . ” In the future , we plan to examine whether content category is associated with outcomes like thread length or reply frequency . Study 1 . Ephemerality Ephemerality is one of / b / ’s most striking qualities . The board moves at such a fast pace , and threads expire so quickly , that the site is largely different with each page re - fresh . In this section , we quantitatively describe the temporal properties and dynamics of posts on / b / . We compare / b / ’s volume to other sites to provide a sense of turnover speed . We then relate how / b / users have developed coping mech - anisms like personal archives to cope with the quick expi - ration of material , as well as practices like “bumping” to keep threads alive . Finally , we explore how strict ephemer - ality policies may actually encourage increased community participation . Method We collected a dataset of activity on / b / for two weeks : July 19 – August 2 , 2010 . 3 This data includes 5 , 576 , 096 posts in 482 , 559 threads . Although there are likely some phenomena that inﬂuence / b / ’s posts over longer time scales than two weeks ( e . g . holidays ) , most of the major daily and weekly cycles are represented in a sample of this size . The dataset is missing a negligible number of posts during high - load peri - ods . These missing posts are relatively randomly distributed and we do not believe that they impact our analysis . We did not capture images due to concerns over the nature of the material that may be posted to the website . We calculated the time each thread spent on / b / by replay - ing the history of all post events from our two - week dataset . We used creation timestamps as reported by the website to simulate the positions of each thread . For example , after a thread has a new reply , it moves to the top position on the ﬁrst page ; after a post is made in another thread , the ﬁrst thread is pushed down to the second position . By replaying this history , we calculated the lifetime for each thread . Results Entire Lifetime The majority of threads have a short lifes - pan and a small number of replies ; the median life of a thread is just 3 . 9 minutes . Thread lifetimes are right - skewed similar to a power law , making the mean less meaningful : 9 . 1 min - utes ( σ = 16 . 0 min ) . The fastest thread to expire was gone in 28 seconds ( i . e . , a thread with no responses during a very high activity period ) ; the longest - lived lasted 6 . 2 hours ( i . e . , a thread with frequent new posts to bump it ) . Six hours is a very long time in / b / , but it is near - instantaneous when com - pared to the forever - archived nature of most other websites . The longest - lived thread in our dataset was a discussion of paganism . The original poster was a pagan who adver - tised the opportunity to Ask A Pagan Anything , remarking “go on do your worst ( or alternatively actually get my re - spect and actually ask something useful ) . ” One question was “how do you worship your so called gods ? ” , with the answer “From day to day just by reveling in the beauty and wonder of life , in all it’s forms [ sic ] from studying martial arts to sat - iﬁe [ sic ] my masculinity to taking care of my garden . ” Other questions included “How does it feel knowing Christianity raped your religion ? ” , “What exactly do you worship ? ” , and “Do you believe in magic ? ” Other long - lived threads fell in the “themed” category , like a “creepypasta thread” , “info threads” ( posting useful knowledge about some topic , like how to tie a tie or keyboard shortcuts ) , and self - shot nudity . 3 More information about our data collection tool available at http : / / projects . csail . mit . edu / chanthropology Short - lived threads on / b / varied , but many were failed attempts to get the community’s attention ( e . g . , “Well guyz , I hope you’re glad the captcha is gone , woo yeah , let’s all be random lolz ! ” ) . The short - lived posts often came in spurts during high - activity periods when it was easy to miss them . As might be implied by short lifetimes , a large number of threads ( 43 % ) get no replies at all ; the median is 2 posts per thread , the original post and one reply . This 43 % ﬁgure is roughly consistent with Usenet , where 40 % of posts get no reply ( Joyce and Kraut 2006 ) . Again , some threads become quite large , resulting in a mean of 13 . 27 posts / thread ( σ = 37 . 28 posts , min = 1 , max = 519 ) . First Page Only Another way to look at how ephemerality plays out in the board is by looking at each thread’s expo - sure to the ﬁrst page . The ﬁrst page of results is where many items , like search results , get much of their overall visibility and click - throughs ( Joachims et al . 2005 ) . The median thread spends just 5 seconds on the ﬁrst page over its entire lifetime . The mean time on the ﬁrst page is 36 seconds ( σ = 109 sec ) . The fastest thread was pushed off the ﬁrst page in less than one second ( actually , 58 of them shared this dubious honor ) , and the most prominent thread spent 37 minutes on the ﬁrst page cumulatively over its lifetime . The thread that spent the most time on the ﬁrst page was a “roll” thread ( a meta thread in our content analysis , playing with the mechanics of the board ) . In a roll thread , / b / posters reply to get a 4chan - assigned post number ( e . g . , 1234567 ) , and the last digit of their post number instructs them on an action to take . In this case , participants had to share personal secrets , a game that combines Spin the Bottle with Truth or Dare . Example responses included : “honestly , i dont know . Nothing has ever made me feel too terriﬁed for my life . Maybe when I had taken too much cocaine and thought my heart was gonna overwhelm itself” , “I gave into temptation by having two boyfriends at once instead of 1” , “chose 9 i get angry at the idea of people having control over me and abusing it or manipulating me , a weird contrast to my mind control fetish” , and “blue 5 : my biggest regret is not asking her out” . User Control over Ephemerality : Bumping and Sage 4chan has developed two main ways for users to control thread ephemerality : bumping and sage . Bumping means re - plying to a thread to keep it alive , sometimes explicitly with a phrase like “bump” , “bumping” or “bamp” . In our sam - ple , we observed that 2 . 16 % of all replies contained these words or similar inﬂections . This is a lower - bound estimate , since any post will effectively “bump” a thread . The second method of control is sage , which allows a user to comment on a thread but not bump it to the ﬁrst page ( i . e . , bury it ) . This lets users comment on a disliked thread without attract - ing attention to it , and to count the reply toward a system - enforced bump limit , thus ensuring the thread will expire more quickly . We found that 0 . 77 % of all replies used the sage feature . So , / b / posters will explicitly manipulate the ephemerality of some threads , though they seem more likely to promote threads than bury them . 100 900 9 : 00 am 5 : 00 pm 1 : 00 am 12 : 00 am 22 9 : 00 am 3 5 : 00 pm 1 : 00 am 12 : 00 am EXPOSURE TO FIRST PAGE ( in secs ) THREAD LIFETIME ( in secs ) 7 , 500 9 : 00 am 31 , 250 5 : 00 pm 1 : 00 am 12 : 00 am THREADS PER HOUR Figure 3 : Daily board activity in our two - week dataset . Thread Lifetime and Exposure to First Page are medians ; Threads per Hour averages the volume during that hour over fourteen days . All times in EST . Time of Day / b / ’s daily trends can help us understand how ephemerality is affected by time of day . The slower the traf - ﬁc on / b / , the longer a thread will last . Threads last the longest between 9am and 10am EST and expire fastest between 5pm and 7pm EST . High activity is sustained until 3am or 4am EST . This result suggests that , despite the not infrequent references to European and British users ( e . g . “eurofags” and “britfags” ) , the demographics of / b / are primarily North Americans that use the website after business or school hours . Figure 3 shows the synchronized spikes in lifespan and drop in number of posts per thread . Discussion / b / creates a sense of ephemerality through a fast tempo and content deletion . In regards to tempo , we found that the board had roughly 35 , 000 threads and 400 , 000 posts per day . For comparison , Usenet volume ( which still con - tinues to grow ) across all Big - 8 newsgroups is 25 , 000 posts per day 4 , or 1 / 16 th of / b / ’s volume . Szabo and Huberman ( 2010 ) found that Digg has about 7 , 100 “threads” each day ( 1 . 3 million over six months ) , and 65 , 000 new YouTube videos each day . So , / b / has roughly the same amount of posting activity as arenas like Usenet and Youtube , but all of this activity happens in one forum board . Though the site may be ephemeral , / b / users have devel - oped other mechanisms to keep valuable content . For exam - ple , users often refer to having a “ / b / folder” on their com - puters where they preserve images for future enjoyment or remixing . / b / posters ask others to dig into their archives ; for example , this user wants to shock a friend , and donates an image of a cat in return : “Have a friend here , need the most fucked up shit you have in your / b folder , can’t pro - vide much , considering not on my comp , but here is a cat . ” / b / users have also developed sites like 4chanarchive . org to save particularly important or “epic” threads . Content deletion may play a role in pushing the / b / com - munity to quickly iterate and generate popular memes like LOLcats , Advice Dog and Archaic Rap . Having no history 4 http : / / www . newsadmin . com / top100tmsgs . asp moderates some the “rich get richer” phenomena ( Barab´asi and Albert 1999 ) . 4chan’s founder has argued that / b / ’s “lack of retention [ . . . ] lends itself to having fresh content , ” so only the ﬁttest memes survive ( Sorgatz 2009 ) . To keep con - tent around , users must make an explicit decision to save it to their hard drive and repost it later . Finally , and perhaps unintuitively , ephemerality may raise community participation . One may think users would see no point to contributing if their actions will be removed within minutes . However , if / b / users want to keep a thread from expiring within minutes , they need to keep conversation ac - tive . This “bump” practice , combined with a norm of quick replies , may encourage community members to contribute content . This hypothesis was derived from our observations , and will need to be tested more rigorously . Study 2 . Identity and Anonymity / b / makes it easy to participate without requiring a real or even pseudonymous identity . In this section , we inves - tigate the frequency of the most common names used by / b / posters , we discuss the impact of anonymity on / b / ’s culture , and report on / b / ’s alternative status and authenticity signals . We also discuss the effects of anonymity - fuelled disinhibi - tion , like those seen in the “relationship advice” threads and “Anonymous” raids . Method Using our two - week data sample , we analyzed the identity metadata of each post . / b / allows posters to enter no name ( “Anonymous” ) , choose any name , or use a cryptographic identity mechanism known as a tripcode . We investigated the prevalence of each of these identity markers in our dataset . Results It is extremely uncommon to post using a name or pseudonym on / b / . In our sample , 90 . 07 % ( 5 , 022 , 149 ) of posts were credited to the default name “Anonymous” ( Ta - ble 2 ) . The closest comparison available in the literature is that anonymous commenting makes up 18 . 6 % of Slashdot comments ( G ´ omez , Kaltenbrunner , and L ´ opez 2008 ) . The remaining 10 % use a wide diversity of names . Some relate to an inside joke where many users claimed one name , David , 5 and others show mistaken uses of 4chan - speciﬁc keywords like sage or noko . Some users claimed to be “OP” ( the orig - inal poster of the thread ) , demonstrating a way in which / b / posters ﬂuidly claim identity when needed . E - mails are even less common ( Table 3 ) . Fully 98 . 3 % ( 5 , 478 , 573 ) of posts in our sample did not contain an e - mail . Of those that did complete the e - mail ﬁeld , 40 . 73 % ( 39 , 725 ) are not actual emails but rather posts trying not to bump the thread ( using the sage feature ) . The rest are mis - spellings of 4chan’s special commands , some of them tem - porary . For example , “ : stopsound : ” got rid of the vuvuzela buzzing that 4chan administrators added to the page during the 2010 World Cup . 5 http : / / encyclopediadramatica . com / Operation _ / b / ipolar Name Num . of Posts % of Posts Anonymous 5 , 022 , 149 90 . 07 % David 59 , 320 1 . 06 % – 14 , 070 0 . 25 % OP 13 , 576 0 . 24 % ( blank ) 13 , 077 0 . 23 % sage 13 , 003 0 . 23 % anonymous 6 , 150 0 . 11 % noko 5 , 727 0 . 10 % Table 2 : The most popular post names on / b / during our two - week sample . Anonymous has over ninety percent of the posts ( n = 5 , 576 , 095 ) . E - mail Num . of Posts % of Posts ( blank ) 5 , 478 , 573 98 . 25 % sage 39 , 725 0 . 71 % Noko 5 , 037 0 . 09 % : stopsound : 3 , 377 0 . 06 % : soundoff : 1 , 627 0 . 02 % Table 3 : The most common emails on / b / during our two - week sam - ple . Most posts leave the e - mail ﬁeld blank ( n = 5 , 576 , 095 ) . Tripcodes are the only way a 4chan user can guarantee that they are the same author of a previous post ; however , they are very rarely used . Five percent of posts ( 281 , 367 ) – one twentieth of our sample – contained a tripcode . This number is likely inﬂated , because participating in the “David” in - joke mentioned above required using a shared tripcode among many users , which is uncommon . Ignoring the “David ! 4changtcqk” tripcode occurrences lowers the to - tal to 4 % ( 211 , 068 ) . Discussion The usual narrative around anonymity suggests that com - munities beneﬁt by revealing participants’ names and repu - tations ( Millen and Patterson 2003 ) , and that anonymity will be a negative inﬂuence due to the “online disinhibition ef - fect” ( Suler 2005 ) . Certainly , / b / is a crude place and is given to antisocial behavior . Not only does anonymity invoke dis - inhibition on / b / , but styling the collective as “Anonymous” also suggests de - individuation and mob behavior . It may be safe for / b / posters to act in a way they never would do of - ﬂine because they can be relatively certain that their actions will not come back to haunt them . However , the dynamics on 4chan and / b / also suggest ways that anonymity can be a positive feature for communi - ties . Disinhibition can be beneﬁcial : in advice and discussion threads , anonymity may provide a cover for more intimate and open conversations . For example , in Table 1 , the poster asks anonymously for advice about a potential girlfriend . Such threads are quite common . In addition , anonymity may encourage experimentation with new ideas or memes . As seen in Study 1 , failure is quite common on 4chan : almost half of all threads receive no replies . Anonymity masks that failure , softening the blow of being ignored or explicitly chastised for trying to start uninteresting threads ( Dibbell 2010 ) . In communities with stronger identity mechanics , a history of poor posts would never go away . On 4chan , it is irrelevant . Figure 4 : Timestamping lets users circumvent technological barri - ers to guarantee identity . Source : 4chanarchive . org . / b / has given rise to more ﬂuid practices to signal identity and status in spite of , or perhaps because of , the lack of tech - nological support . Because anyone can post a picture and claim to be that person , / b / ’s posters have developed a prac - tice of “timestamping” to guarantee authenticity . To claim identity , users often take a picture of themselves with a note containing the current day and time ( Figure 4 ) . To communicate high status in the community , most users tend to turn to textual , linguistic , and visual cues . In many communities , including / b / , slang plays a role in delineat - ing group membership ( Eble 1996 ) . Simply writing in 4chan dialect is non - obvious to outsiders and in - dialect writing serves as an entry - level signal of membership and status . Second , images on 4chan function a bit like fashion . Speciﬁc classes of images have periods of limited experimentation , turning into wider adoption , followed by subsequent aban - donment . Fluency in the styles that are in vogue is an impor - tant way to signal status , as in fashion ( Simmel 1957 ) . Lack of ﬂuency is dismissed with the phrase “LURK MOAR” , asking the poster to spend more time learning about the cul - ture of the board . One example status signal in / b / is the classic barrier for newcomers called “triforcing . ” Triforcing means leaving a post using Unicode to mimic the three - triangle icon of pop - ular video game The Legend of Zelda : Newcomers will be taunted by a challenge that “newfags can’t triforce . ” Uninitiated users will then copy and paste an existing triforce into their reply . It will look like a correct tri - force in the reply ﬁeld ; however , after posting , the alignment is wrong : The only way to display high status and produce a correct triforce on 4chan is to use a complicated series of Unicode character codes . In signaling theory terms , we can think of triforcing as an index : a signal whose presentation is only possible by someone with particular skill or knowledge ( Smith and Harper 1995 ) . That communities enforce boundaries and communicate status using language and differentiated social practices is perhaps not surprising in the social psychology literature . What we see as particularly noteworthy in this case is how these boundary - sustaining practices are informed by the technical context in which they take place . Furthermore , the extreme nature of community practices on / b / can obscure the underlying role these behaviors play to the casual ob - server . We see our role as partly one of translating these practices into terms familiar to scholars . Conclusion In this article we investigate the 4chan / b / board as a vehicle for understanding the effects of ephemerality and anonymity in online communities . Analyzing ephemerality via two weeks of of site activity , we found that the median thread spends just ﬁve seconds on / b / ’s ﬁrst page before being pushed off by newer posts , and that the median thread expires completely within ﬁve min - utes . Even in a world informed by Twitter and newsfeeds , where content is out of users’ attentional sphere quickly , we argue that such rapid content deletion drives many of / b / ’s community dynamics . On / b / , ephemerality and deletion cre - ate a powerful selection mechanic by requiring content the community wants to see be repeatedly reposted , and poten - tially remixed . We believe this is critical to the site’s inﬂu - ence on internet culture and memes . We then examined anonymity on / b / . We found that over 90 % of posts are made completely anonymously , and that 5 % of posts use system mechanisms like tripcodes to guar - antee identity . Instead , the / b / community uses non - technical mechanisms like slang and timestamping to signal status and identity . Consistent with common identity theory ( Ren , Kraut , and Kiesler forthcoming ) , / b / ’s anonymity is likely shaping a strong communal identity among a very large set of individuals . We hope to open the door to future 4chan work . 4chan is widely credited with being the source of many online memes , making it an excellent venue for studying innova - tion diffusion . By tracking images ( and genres of images ) we could see how trends spread through 4chan and into the wild . It is also clear that 4chan represents only one part of a larger online ecosystem . Future work might focus on how 4chan’s users move between other tools and interaction venues to or - ganize both online and ofﬂine action . Finally , a closer study of the content on 4chan and its users would enable us to make more substantial claims about the relationship between 4chan’s design and its users’ practices and culture . As large Internet players like Facebook or Google evolve their models for identity and archiving , it becomes increas - ingly important to understand what happens in large com - munities that occupy the opposite positions on the user iden - tity and data permanence design continuums . Communities like 4chan have immense impact on Internet culture , and / b / ’s anonymous , ephemeral community design is playing a strong role in that cultural inﬂuence . Acknowledgements We would like to thank for their feedback : danah boyd , Amy Bruckman , Gabriella Coleman , Danyel Fisher , Ben - jamin Mako Hill , Alex Leavitt , Rob Miller , Lisa Nakamura , Chris Schmandt , Christina Xu and Sarita Yardi . References Barab´asi , A . , and Albert , R . 1999 . Emergence of scaling in random networks . Science 286 ( 5439 ) : 509 . Barbaro , M . , and Jr . , T . Z . 2006 . A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No . 4417749 . New York Times . Blanchette , J . , and Johnson , D . G . 2002 . Data retention and the panoptic society : The social beneﬁts of forgetfulness . The Infor - mation Society : An International Journal 18 ( 1 ) : 33 . boyd , d . 2010a . Harassment by q & a : Initial thoughts on form - spring . me . http : / / dmlcentral . net / blog / danah - boyd / harassment - qa - initial - thoughts - formspringme . boyd , d . 2010b . “for the lolz” : 4chan is hacking the attention econ - omy . http : / / www . zephoria . org / thoughts / archives / 2010 / 06 / 12 / for - the - lolz - 4chan - is - hacking - the - attention - economy . html . Brophy - Warren , J . 2008 . Modest web site is behind a bevy of memes . Wall Street Journal . Charmaz , K . 2006 . Constructing Grounded Theory : A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis . London : Sage Publications . Coleman , G . 2011 . ”’I did it for the lulz ! but i stayed for the outrage : ’ anonymous , the politics of specta - cle , and geek protests against the church of scientology . ” . http : / / techtv . mit . edu / videos / 10237 . Collins , M . , and Berge , Z . 1995 . Introduction : Computer - mediated communications and the online classroom in higher education . In Berge , Z . , and Collins , M . , eds . , Computer mediated communica - tion and the online classroom : Vol . 2 . Higher education . Hampton Press . 1 – 10 . Dibbell , J . 2009 . The Assclown Offensive : How to Enrage the Church of Scientology . Wired . Dibbell , J . 2010 . Radical Opacity . Technology Review . Donath , J . 1999 . Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community . In Kollock , P . , and Smith , M . , eds . , Communities in Cyberspace . London : Routledge . Dwyer , C . ; Hiltz , S . ; and Passerini , K . 2007 . Trust and privacy concern within social networking sites : A comparison of Facebook and MySpace . In Proc . of AMCIS . Eble , C . 1996 . Slang & sociability : In - group language among college students . The University of North Carolina Press . Facebook . 2010 . Statement of rights and responsibilities . http : / / www . facebook . com / terms . php . Fehr , E . , and G¨achter , S . 2000 . Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments . The Am . Econ . Rev . 90 ( 4 ) : 980 – 994 . G´omez , V . ; Kaltenbrunner , A . ; and L´opez , V . 2008 . Statistical analysis of the social network and discussion threads in slashdot . In Proc . of WWW , 645 – 654 . New York , NY , USA : ACM . Grudin , J . 2002 . Group dynamics and ubiquitous computing . Com - mun . ACM 45 ( 12 ) : 74 – 78 . Hiltz , S . ; Johnson , K . ; and Turoff , M . 1986 . Experiments in group decision making communication process and outcome in face - to - face versus computerized conferences . Human Communication Re - search 13 ( 2 ) : 225 – 252 . Hudson , J . M . , and Bruckman , A . 2004 . “Go away” : Participant objections to being studied and the ethics of chatroom research . The Information Society : An International Journal 20 ( 2 ) : 127 . Jessup , L . ; Connolly , T . ; and Galegher , J . 1990 . The effects of anonymity on GDSS group process with an idea - generating task . MIS Quarterly 14 ( 3 ) : 313 – 321 . Joachims , T . ; Granka , L . ; Pan , B . ; Hembrooke , H . ; and Gay , G . 2005 . Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit feed - back . In Proc . of SIGIR , 154 – 161 . Joyce , E . , and Kraut , R . 2006 . Predicting continued participation in newsgroups . J . of Computer - Mediated Comm . 11 ( 3 ) : 723 – 747 . Kirkpatrick , D . 2010 . The Facebook Effect . Simon & Schuster . Lampe , C . , and Resnick , P . 2004 . Slash ( dot ) and burn : distributed moderation in a large online conversation space . In Proc . of CHI , 543 – 550 . Leckart , S . 2009 . The Ofﬁcial Prankonomy : From rickrolls to malware , a spectrum of stunts . Wired 17 ( 9 ) : 91 – 93 . Mackey , R . 2010 . ‘Operation Payback’ Attacks Target MasterCard and PayPal Sites to Avenge WikiLeaks . New York Times . Mayer - Schonberger , V . 2009 . Delete : The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age . Princeton University Press . M . G . 2010 . A Blizzard of protest over privacy . Economist . Millen , D . R . , and Patterson , J . F . 2003 . Identity disclosure and the creation of social capital . In Proc . of CHI , 720 – 721 . Millen , D . R . 2000 . Community portals and collective goods : Conversation archives as an information resource . HICSS . Naaman , M . ; Boase , J . ; and Lai , C . 2010 . Is it really about me ? : message content in social awareness streams . In Proc . of CSCW , 189 – 192 . Poole , C . 2010 . The case for anonymity online . TED2010 . Rains , S . 2007 . The impact of anonymity on perceptions of source credibility and inﬂuence in computer - mediated group communica - tion : A test of two competing hypotheses . Communication Re - search 34 ( 1 ) : 100 . Ren , Y . ; Kraut , R . E . ; and Kiesler , S . forthcoming . Encouraging commitment in online communities . In Kraut , R . , and Resnick , P . , eds . , Evidence - based social design : Mining the social sciences to build online communities . MIT Press . Rosen , J . 2010 . The web means the end of forgetting . The New York Times . Rutkoff , A . 2007 . With ‘LOLcats’ Internet Fad , Anyone Can Get In on the Joke . Wall Street Journal 25 . Short , J . ; Williams , E . ; and Christie , B . 1976 . The social psychol - ogy of telecommunications . Wiley London . Shuman , P . 2007 . Fox 11 investigates : ‘anonymous’ . http : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = DNO6G4ApJQY . Simmel , G . 1957 . Fashion . Am . J . of Soc . 62 ( 6 ) : 541 – 558 . Smith , M . , and Harper , D . 1995 . Animal signals : models and ter - minology . Journal of Theoretical Biology 177 ( 3 ) : 305 – 311 . Sorgatz , R . 2009 . Macroanonymous is the new microfamous . http : / / ﬁmoculous . com / archive / post - 5738 . cfm . Suler , J . 2005 . The online disinhibition effect . International Jour - nal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies 2 ( 2 ) : 184 – 188 . Szabo , G . , and Huberman , B . A . 2010 . Predicting the popularity of online content . Commun . ACM 53 : 80 – 88 . Tanis , M . , and Postmes , T . 2007 . Two faces of anonymity : Para - doxical effects of cues to identity in CMC . Computers in Human Behavior 23 ( 2 ) : 955 – 970 . Thompsen , P . A . , and Ahn , D . 1992 . To be or not to be : An explo - ration of e - prime , copula deletion and ﬂaming in electronic mail . Et Cetera : A Review of General Semantics 146 – 164 .