Impact of branching on the elasticity of actin networks Thomas Pujol , Olivia du Roure 1 , Marc Fermigier , and Julien Heuvingh Physique et Mécanique des Milieux Hétérogènes , École Supérieure de Physique et Chimie Industrielle de la ville de Paris , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7636 , Université Pierre et Marie Curie , Université Paris Diderot , 10 rue Vauquelin , 75005 Paris , France Edited by David A . Weitz , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , and approved May 22 , 2012 ( received for review December 23 , 2011 ) Actin filaments play a fundamental role in cell mechanics : as - sembled into networks by a large number of partners , they ensure cell integrity , deformability , and migration . Here we focus on the mechanics of the dense branched network found at the leading edge of a crawling cell . We develop a new technique based on the dipolar attraction between magnetic colloids to measure mechan - ical properties of branched actin gels assembled around the col - loids . This technique allows us to probe a large number of gels and , through the study of different networks , to access fundamental re - lationships between their microscopic structure and their mechan - ical properties . We show that the architecture does regulate the elasticity of the network : increasing both capping and branching concentrations strongly stiffens the networks . These effects occur at protein concentrations that can be regulated by the cell . In ad - dition , the dependence of the elastic modulus on the filaments ’ flexibility and on increasing internal stress has been studied . Our overall results point toward an elastic regime dominated by enthal - pic rather than entropic deformations . This result strongly differs from the elasticity of diluted cross - linked actin networks and can be explained by the dense dendritic structure of lamellipodium - like networks . cytoskeleton ∣ dendritic networks ∣ magnetic dipolar forces ∣ enthalpic elasticity ∣ semiflexible polymer T he cytoskeleton is an interconnected network of filamentous polymers and regulatory proteins . The cell ’ s integrity , deform - ability , and capacity to change shape come from the mechanical properties of these organized assemblies of filaments . Both the flexibility of the filaments themselves and their relative organiza - tion give the assembly its mechanical properties . We are inter - ested in unraveling the link between mechanical properties and microscopic architecture in actin cytoskeleton networks . In cells , the actin filaments are organized by a large variety of proteins into different types of structures , depending on their location in the cell and their function ( 1 ) . For example , in cell motility , actin polymerization drives protrusion of the leading edge of a crawling cell ( 2 ) within two organelles , lamellipodia and filopodia , based on two different actin polymerization machineries ( 3 , 4 ) . In lamellipodia , which are broad , flat protrusions , actin filaments assemble into a dendritic network through the branching protein complex Arp2 / 3 ( 4 , 5 ) . The polymerization of actin filaments at their barbed ends generates the driving force that extends the cell membrane forward . In filopodia , which are long finger - like pro - trusions filled with bundled actin filaments , processive actin barbed - end assembly is induced by formins at the tip ( 6 ) . Actin is also present in the cortex , a cross - linked structure found be - neath the plasma membrane , where it ensures cell integrity and mechanical support . These actin meshworks predominantly contribute to the cell ’ s ability to sense the micromechanical en - vironment properties and to transmit compressive and tensile stresses . Their mechanical properties are crucial to determine the distance over which cellular response can be triggered by me - chanical cues ( 7 ) . Polymer networks have elastic properties that directly rely on the individual behavior of their polymer chains and their relative organization . Actin filaments are semiflexible polymers : in all networks found in the cell , their typical length is less or compar - able to their persistence length , i . e . , they do not form loops and are nearly straight . As a consequence , the elasticity of their net - works arises from two contributions : an entropic one that origi - nates in the thermal fluctuations of individual filaments and an enthalpic one that comes from mechanical deformations of the filaments themselves ( Fig . 1 A ) . In entropic elasticity , filaments resist extension by the decrease in the number of available con - figurations . Near full extension , as the available conformations are drastically reduced , the filaments resist strongly to further ex - tension . This phenomenon appears even at small strains in net - works formed from semiflexible polymers , as they are already close to extension . Networks formed from such polymer stiffen when subjected to increasing stress , a behavior called nonlinear elasticity , typical of biological networks ( 8 ) . Cross - linked actin networks exhibit this kind of entropic elasticity with a strong stress - stiffening ( 9 , 10 ) . Enthalpic elasticity comes from the me - chanical deformation of the molecular links between monomers within the filament . Two regimes of enthalpic elasticity have been identified , one dominated by filament bending , the other by com - pression or stretching of the filaments ( 11 – 13 ) . In enthalpic elas - ticities , the above - mentioned mechanism responsible for stress stiffening is absent . However , the enthalpic buckling of filaments subjected to an important force can lead to stress - softening , as was observed in dense branched networks ( 1 ) . Here we present a new technique that allows the collection of large amounts of data on the mechanical properties of actin networks . We study actin organized in structures comparable to the lamellipodium . The actin network is directly assembled in dendritic gels around superparamagnetic colloids , and mechan - ical measurements are based on magnetic dipolar attraction be - tween colloids . The network growth occurs from the surface of the colloids and requires a limited number of proteins including actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex and a capping protein ( 14 , 15 ) . Due to this assembly process , we can probe denser and more organized actin networks than those that have been measured by macro - or micro - rheology . Previous experiments based on these techniques have used purified actin filaments either entangled or cross - linked by various proteins , forming loose networks ( 16 ) . Mea - surements have been performed on branched actin networks grown form a surface via the Arp2 / 3 complex , as in our experi - ments ( 17 , 18 ) . These experiments are delicate , as they use macroscopic force sensor such as AFM and micropipette , which prevents the authors from studying a large range of parameters . On the contrary , in our experiment , each pair of colloids is a mea - surement device by itself , which allows us to carry out orders of Author contributions : O . d . R . , M . F . , and J . H . designed research ; T . P . , O . d . R . , and J . H . performed research ; T . P . , O . d . R . , and J . H . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; O . d . R . , and J . H . analyzed data ; and T . P . , O . d . R . , and J . H . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : olivia . duroure @ espci . fr . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1121238109 / - / DCSupplemental . 10364 – 10369 ∣ PNAS ∣ June 26 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 26 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1121238109 magnitude more measurements than those allowed previously . We have thus studied the mechanical properties of gels with dif - ferent histories and architectures by tuning the growth conditions . Using reconstituted medium allows us to modify the growth con - centration of two proteins crucial for the architecture of the network : Arp2 / 3 complex , which induces the formation of new branches , and gelsolin , which regulates the length of filaments by capping the growing end . Hence we aim to establish the rela - tionship between the growth process , the architecture , and the mechanics of actin networks . Results In this work , dendritic gels of actin grow around superparamag - netic colloids . We use a minimal set of proteins ( 14 , 15 ) : F - actin , gelsolin , Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin , and colloids covered with the VCA domain of the protein neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich Syn - drome protein ( N - WASP ) . The polymerization is localized at the surface of magnetic beads . The formation and the integrity of the gel are checked by fluorescence microscopy using labeled actin . Specifically we let the gel grow for 15 min before stopping the polymerization by dilution in a buffer containing phalloidin . We thus obtain a stable configuration in which actin filaments do not polymerize ( due to dilution , the actin concentration becomes smaller than the critical concentration for polymerization ) and do not depolymerize ( due to the stabilization of the filaments by phalloidin ) . These gels are stable for at least one hour . No evolu - tion of the gels thickness or fluorescence was observed during the time course of an experiment . The mean fluorescence in the shell is measured for each actin gel , and gives an estimation of the actin concentration in the networks of the order of 170 μ M ( Materials and Methods ) . Under a uniform magnetic field , each colloid acquires a mag - netic moment that depends on the magnetic field intensity , and the only force applied to the colloids arises from dipolar interac - tion between neighboring beads . As a consequence , the colloids self - organize in chains parallel to the field and do not migrate ( Fig . 1 B ) . The dipolar forces between colloids in chains have al - ready been used successfully to measure colloidal forces ( 19 ) and actin - polymerization induced forces ( 20 ) . Increasing the mag - netic field increases the attractive dipolar force between the col - loids ( 21 ) and induces deformation of the gels present on the colloids . The relative displacement of the beads is measured by video microscopy as a function of field strength , and a force - dis - tance profile is reconstructed from these measurements ( Fig . 1 B ) . The main advantage of this technique is that each pair of beads is a sensor by itself and tens of force - distance curves can thus be recorded within half an hour in one sample . To provide a well - defined surface of contact during the defor - mation of the actin shells , we mix actin - covered beads with non - adhesive bare beads ( BSA - coated ) and only consider actin gels facing bare beads ( see SI Text and Fig . S1 for a typical experiment between two actin - covered beads ) . As the surface of the gel is spherical , the area in contact with the neighboring bead increases when the gel is deformed . This situation is a typical problem of contact mechanics described by the Hertz contact theory . The ex - perimental force - distance curves are fitted by a modified Hert - zian model that takes into account the finite thickness of the elastic medium ( 22 ) . Both the elastic modulus and the thickness of the gel are used as adjustable parameters . A typical force - distance curve showing the deformation of an actin gel is given in Fig . 1 B . The difference between the loading ( compression ) and unloading ( decompression ) curves is minimal . The fit is in good agreement with the experimental curves , except for the largest distances between colloids ( SI Text ) . Fig . 1 C shows the histogram of elastic modulus obtained from 129 different actin gels grown at our reference concentrations of proteins ( 180 nM Arp2 / 3 and 90 nM gelsolin ) . The mean value of the elas - tic modulus is 5 . 2 kPa and has a standard deviation of only 1 . 9 kPa . Thanks to the large number of measurements in one sample ( between 50 and 150 gels are probed in one experiment ) , the confidence interval at 95 % for the mean elastic modulus is 10 % of the mean . Reproduction of the same experimental con - ditions introduces new uncertainties , and the standard deviation between the mean elastic modulus of different experiments is on the order of 20 % , which is still much lower than published values on comparable branched actin networks . Our measurements are in good agreement with values pro - vided by Chaudhuri et al . and Marcy et al . on dendritic actin gels grown from a surface with the same Arp2 / 3 machinery ( 17 , 18 ) , but differ strongly from measurements on cross - linked networks . This discrepancy can be explained by stronger actin concentration ( 23 ) and the different architectures of the networks . Our mea - surements are also compatible with the values measured in single cells and in tissues . Typical Young ’ s moduli range from 650 Pa Fig . 1 . Modes of deformation and principle of measurements . ( A ) Schematic of enthalpic ( Left ) and entropic ( Right ) deformations of Arp2 / 3 branched fi - laments . The deformationof thebox isvertical and the material isconsidered incompressible . ( B ) Typical force - distance curve . Blue circle : compression ; red crosses : decompression ; black lines : Hertzian fit modified for finite thickness ( plain : rangeofthefit ; dotted : extrapolation tothewholerangeofdistance ) . Inset : bright - field and fluorescent images of a chain . Three beads are covered by actin gel as shown by the fluorescent image . Scale bar , 4 μ m . ( C ) Histogram of Young ’ s moduli extracted from one experiment ( 129 probed gels ) at ½ gelsolin (cid:1) ¼ 90 nM and ½ Arp 2 ∕ 3 (cid:1) ¼ 180 nM . Mean value is 5 . 2 kPa ; standard deviation is 1 . 9 kPa . Inset : Histogram of thicknesses ; mean value is 650 nm ; standard deviation is 130 nm . Pujol et al . PNAS ∣ June 26 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 26 ∣ 10365 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y for liver to tens of kPa for muscle ( 7 ) . On single cells in culture , typical values scatter between 0 . 1 and 40 kPa ( 24 ) . Elasticity and Architecture . As the architecture of the gels is tightly linked to the growth process , varying the concentration of the branching and capping proteins in the polymerization medium changes the architecture of the studied networks . We carry out measurements in which the concentration of one protein is varied while all the others are kept constant . At constant gelsolin ( 90 nM ) we investigate a range of Arp2 / 3 concentrations from 10 nM to 400 nM . Note that lower values induce formation of fractured gels . Likewise , at constant Arp2 / 3 ( 180 nM ) , we inves - tigate a range of gelsolin concentrations from 20 nM to 250 nM . In this case , lower values induce formation of gels that are too thin to be probed . Each point is reproduced at least three times for a total of 200 – 400 measurements for each condition . The ac - tin concentration around the beads is estimated from the fluor - escence measurements for the different concentrations of Arp2 / 3 and gelsolin ( Fig . 2 , insets ) . The variation of actin density is at most a factor of 1 . 6 for gelsolin variation and 1 . 5 for Arp2 / 3 var - iation . Such a weak actin density variation with branching has already been observed in similar networks ( 25 ) . Meanwhile , the gels strongly stiffen as the concentration of branching protein increases ( from 1 kPa at 10 nM to 8 kPa at 100 nM ) , and the Young ’ s modulus levels off at a concentration above 100 nM ( Fig . 2 A ) . The increase in capping also strongly stiffens the net - work ( from 2 kPa at 20 nM to 7 kPa at 90 nM ) before plateauing ( Fig . 2 B ) . Thus , the increase of the capping and branching protein concentrations during the assembly process , while having weak effect on the actin density , induces a drastic stiffening of the actin networks . These dependences on protein concentrations will be discussed in light of existing models of polymer network elasticity in the discussion section . Rigidification by Phalloidin . To further investigate the link between microscopic and macroscopic mechanical properties of the net - work , we study the role of the rigidification of filaments induced by phalloidin . We thus conduct experiments in the presence or in the absence of phalloidin . In the latter case , as the gel grows , the shape of the gels in already - formed chains can become nonsphe - rical . Consequently , we adapt the protocol by stopping the mag - netic field in between each measurement and only analyzing the newly - formed pair of beads , reduced to 22 in five different sam - ples . A typical force distance curve is given in Fig . S2 . We obtain a Young ’ s modulus around half the value of the phalloidin - stabilized sample ( 3 . 4 (cid:2) 0 . 6 kPa , compared to 5 . 9 (cid:2) 0 . 8 kPa ) . We then compare these networks measurements to the flexibil - ity of individual filaments . The persistence length of actin fila - ments varies from 18 μ m for actin stabilized by phalloidin to 9 μ m for ( ADP ) actin with no phalloidin ( 26 ) . In solution , cofilin strongly increases the bending flexibility of the filaments it inter - acts with . The persistence length of actin in presence of excess cofilin has been measured to be 2 . 2 μ m ( 27 ) . In our case , the con - centration of cofilin is lower and the tension applied to the fila - ments both during the network growth and deformation may perturb the interaction of cofilin with actin filaments ( 28 ) . Hence , in our experiments without phalloidin , the persistence length of actin filaments is comprised between 2 . 2 and 9 μ m . For actin fila - ments in the presence of both cofilin and phalloidin , no value of the persistence length was present in the literature . We thus performed the measurements at the concentrations used in the colloidal - chain experiments and found a persistence length of 16 . 2 (cid:2) 1 . 4 μ m ( Materials and Methods and Fig . S3 ) . The stabilization by phalloidin therefore stiffens the network by a factor of approximately 2 while increasing the persistence length of individual filaments by a factor of 2 to 8 ( depending on the interaction of cofilin with the filaments ) . The experimental dependence of the network elasticity on the persistence length is therefore linear or less . Influence of Time Growth . Because polymerization of the actin gels proceeds from the surface of the bead , the older network is pushed away from the surface by the new polymerizing network . The external layer of the growing gel is therefore tangentially stretched while the inner layers are radially compressed ( 29 ) . The tangential stress can lead to the development of a notch and ultimately to the fracture of the gel ( 30 ) . Here , studying gels at different growth times gives indications of the internal stress de - pendence of the mechanics of branched actin networks . Specifi - cally , polymerization is stopped by dilution in phalloidin after different growth times from 4 – 30 min . We test two concentrations of Arp2 / 3 ( 44 and 400 nM ) while gelsolin is kept constant ( 90 nM ) . The high Arp2 / 3 concentration results in a situation where very few gels break . In this case , the elastic modulus evolves slightly while the mean thickness of the gel significantly increases up to 25 min after the initiation of polymerization ( Fig . 3 A ) . We estimate the average tangential and radial stresses in our experiments by using the calculations of Noireaux et al . ( 29 ) with the elastic modulus and thickness measured for each gel in our experiments . We compute that the average tangential stress changes from 700 Pa after 3 min of polymerization to 1 , 500 Pa after 30 min , while the average radial stress changes from 250 Pa to 1 , 000 Pa ( Fig . 3 B ) . In the same time , the measured elastic modulus evolves slightly from 5 . 7 (cid:2) 0 . 6 kPa to 6 . 6 (cid:2) 0 . 6 kPa . This result signals a weak stress - stiffening when com - pared to measurements on cross - linked networks . Fig . 2 . Architecture of gels influences Young ’ s modulus . Evolution of the Young ’ s modulus with [ Arp2 / 3 ] at ½ gelsolin (cid:1) ¼ 90 nM ( A ) and with [ gelsolin ] at ½ Arp 2 ∕ 3 (cid:1) ¼ 180 nM ( B ) . Each point represents the mean of 200 – 400 probed gels obtained from at least three reproductions of the same conditions . The error bars represent the 95 % confidence interval on the mean elastic mod - ulus . Inset : evolution of fluorescence density with [ Arp2 / 3 ] and [ Gelsolin ] , giving an estimate of actin concentration in the networks . 10366 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1121238109 Pujol et al . In the low Arp2 / 3 case , the majority of gels are unbroken 12 min after the start of polymerization , while very few remain intact after 20 min of growth ( Fig . 3 D ) . During the analysis each gel is classified either homogenous or broken , based on fluorescent images ( Fig . 3 E – G ) . For some gels the classification is ambiguous and those gels are disregarded . We obtain two curves of the Young ’ s modulus as a function of growth time for broken and unbroken gels ( Fig . 3 C ) . Similar to the high Arp2 / 3 case , the elasticity of homogenous gel exhibits no significant evo - lution , although its thickness and thus its internal stress increases ( from 320 Pa at 4 min to 650 Pa at 12 min ) . After the gels break , the elastic modulus is divided by a factor of two ( 2 . 0 kPa (cid:2) 0 . 5 for broken gels compared to 3 . 8 kPa (cid:2) 0 . 4 for unbroken gels ) . After the appearance of the first notch , stresses in the gel due to geo - metrical constraints are released although the gel is still not de - tached and a stress could remain . The measurements at different growth times thus indicate a weak stress - stiffening of the probed gels : the Young ’ s modulus does not evolve significantly with time even though the radial internal stress is increased four times and its maximum variation corresponds to a factor of two when a large part of the internal stress is released . Discussion In this paper , we study the relationship between network archi - tecture and elasticity of lamellipodium - like actin networks . We report , for the first time , the dependence of the elasticity of such networks on the concentration of capping and branching pro - teins . We show a strong stiffening of the networks when either capping or branching concentrations are increased . The more Arp2 / 3 is present , the more branched the networks are . This re - sults in a weak increase of the actin density within the network whereas the networks strongly stiffen . When [ Arp2 / 3 ] is increased further , the Young ’ s modulus reaches a plateau , which can be at - tributed to a saturation of Arp2 / 3 activation by the VCA present on the colloids . We also look at the effect of the protein gelsolin , which caps growing ends of the filaments . We find a four - fold stiffening of the networks when gelsolin concentration is in - creased from 20 to 90 nM . Increasing the concentration of gel - solin will increase the rate of capping and thus reduce the length of the actin filament from the branching point to its capped end . This reduced length will decrease the connectivity of the network and thus induce its softening ( 31 ) . Additionally , due to the semi - flexibility of the filaments , the orientation of adjacent strands re - mains correlated ; shorter strands will induce shorter long - range correlation , which will also result in the softening of the network ( 12 ) . Both these effects would point to a softening when the con - centration of gelsolin increases , in contrast to the observed stif - fening . Nevertheless , the protein gelsolin has also been shown to reduce the distance between branches in reconstituted systems ( 25 , 32 ) . The major mechanical effect of increasing gelsolin is neither the decreasing connectivity nor the decrease of the fila - ments total length but rather the reduction of the distance be - tween branching points . The various mechanical models that describe the elasticity of semiflexible polymer networks are built on different microscopic origins of elasticity . They are all based on the same parameters : the persistence length of the filaments , l p , the mesh size of the network , ξ , and a characteristic length of the network , L . In cross - linked networks , L is the distance between crosslinks . The mesh size ξ for this type of polymer is given by ξ ∼ ð a c A Þ − 1 ∕ 2 where a is the size of the actin monomer and c A the actin concentration ( 33 , 34 ) . The entropic elasticity model has been used to interpret dilute actin network rheology . In this model , the elastic modulus reads E ∼ kT ξ − 2 l p 2 L − 3 ( 23 ) , where kT is the thermal energy . For models where the elasticity arises from the enthalpic bending of the filaments , the elastic modulus has been proposed to scale as E ∼ kT ξ − 2 l p L − 2 ( 13 , 35 ) . However , the elastic modulus of this mode of deformation may be overestimated , due to its non - affine nature : the deformation is localized in some parts of the gel . When the elasticity comes from the enthalpic stretching , the modulus can be rewritten from ( 13 ) as E ∼ kT ξ − 2 l p a − 2 . A re - gime in which enthalpic bending and enthalpic stretching are coupled has also been found in 3D simulations with an intermedi - ate dependence on L ( 13 ) . In the following discussion we will in - terpret our experimental results in light of these models . In our experiments we found a weak dependence ( linear or less ) of network elasticity on persistence length . An entropic ori - gin would lead to a quadratic dependence of the elasticity to l p , which is far from our measurements . Instead , this result strongly suggests a dominant enthalpic contribution to the origin of elas - ticity in the branched actin networks . As pointed out by Bausch and Kroy , the identification of the characteristic length L is delicate ( 16 ) . An obvious choice for cross - linked networks is the mean distance between two cross - links . In the case of lamellipodium - like networks , the character - istic length , L , can be chosen as the distance between branching points . Raising the concentration of Arp2 / 3 is expected to in - crease the number of branches and thus to decrease L . More pre - cisely , measurements of the polymerization kinetics show that the number of free barbed ends , and thus of branches , is proportional to the Arp2 / 3 concentration at low values ( 36 ) . It has also been observed by microscopy that the distance between branching points is smaller with more Arp2 / 3 complexes ( 37 ) . We measure a ten - fold stiffening of branched actin networks when the concen - tration of Arp2 / 3 is increased ten - fold , while actin concentration in the shell varies only by a factor of 1 . 5 . This stiffening is too strong to be attributed to the variation of actin concentration because the dependence of the elastic modulus on the actin con - centration is linear in all the models described above . We thus interpret most of the dependence between E and [ Arp2 / 3 ] as the Fig . 3 . Effect of gel growth . ( A ) Evolution of the Young ’ s modulus with growthtimeat ½ Arp 2 ∕ 3 (cid:1) ¼ 400 nMand ½ gelsolin (cid:1) ¼ 90 nM . ( B ) Corresponding evolution of the estimated mean tangential ( black horizontal triangles ) and radial ( blue Down triangles ) stresses . ( C ) Evolution of Young ’ s modulus with growth time at ½ Arp 2 ∕ 3 (cid:1) ¼ 44 nM and ½ gelsolin (cid:1) ¼ 90 nM : blue close circles , homogenousgels ; redopencircles , brokengels . Thelinesarethemeanvalue . ( D ) Proportion of homogenous gels ( blue ) and broken gels ( red ) as a function of growth time in all probes gels ( including the undetermined ones ) . The dotted linesareguidesfortheeye . ( E – G ) Classificationbetweenhomogenous ( E ) , undetermined ( F ) , and broken ( G ) gels . In ( G ) , the arrows indicate failures in the gel . The images are 8 × 8 μ m . Pujol et al . PNAS ∣ June 26 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 26 ∣ 10367 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y consequence of the decrease of L . Our results are not compatible with a purely entropic regime that exhibits a strong dependence on L ( E ∼ L − 3 ) . Our results are more in agreement with enthalpic modes of deformation , especially the coupled bending stretching regime . The already mentioned plateau above 100 nM [ Arp2 / 3 ] could also be due to a crossover to a purely enthalpic stretching mode , in which the elasticity is independent of L . The crossovers between the entropic and both enthalpic regimes of elasticity in semiflexible networks have been studied theoretically as a function of filament length and distance between crosslinks ( 31 ) . Decreasing the distance between cross - links modifies the origin of elasticity from entropic to enthalpic stretching , as the thermal fluctuations of the filaments become negligible . Similarly , in cross - linked networks , reducing the length of the filaments changes the origin of the elasticity from entropic stretching to enthalpic bending . Indeed , as the length of the filaments decreases , the connectivity of the network decreases until filaments are not connected in a unique network anymore . Just above this transition , the network is loosely connected and the softest mode of deformation is the mechanical bending of the filaments . Typical rheological experiments on actin networks are carried out at concentrations around 10 – 20 μ M , and their elas - ticity has been shown to be entropic ( 10 ) . Actin networks grown from a surface by Arp2 / 3 are more concentrated : we estimated a concentration of 170 μ M in our experiments , giving a mesh size of 60 nm [ ξ ∼ ð a c A Þ − 1 ∕ 2 with a ¼ 2 . 7 nm ∕ monomer ] . These branched networks are also less connected than cross - linked net - works , even at the same concentration , as each node connects three strands instead of four . Hence , both the concentration and the connectivity of branched actin networks may explain an im - portant enthalpic contribution to their mechanics . The last result of this study is the evolution of elasticity during growth and after gel breakage . While in our experiments , the con - tinued growth of the gels results in a buildup of internal stress , no significant increase in the elastic modulus is measured . Comparing intact gels with internal stresses on the order of one kPa to frac - tured gels with a released stress , a softening of a factor of two is measured . This effect is comparable to the nonlinear effects seen by Chaudhuri and colleagues in similar branched networks where the elastic modulus varies by a factor of less than three at similar stresses ( from 0 . 9 kPa at stress below 10 Pa to 2 . 5 kPa at 600 Pa , with a maximum of 4 kPa at 250 Pa ) ( 18 ) . These reduced stress - stiffening effects on dense branched networks are markedly differ - ent from what is observed in dilute cross - linked actin networks : stiffening as large as two orders of magnitude has been reported ( 10 ) . Such a strong stress - stiffening is considered a signature of the entropic elasticity , since small strain drastically reduces the avail - able configurations in nearly extended polymers . On the contrary , the enthalpic elasticities originating from the mechanical bending or extension and compression of polymers do not present this kind of intrinsic nonlinearity . The observed weak stress - stiffening of the networks is in agreement with the measured dependence of E on l p and [ Arp2 / 3 ] that converge into a strong enthalpic contribution to the elasticity of actin branched networks . Conclusion We have developed a new technique based on the dipolar attrac - tion of superparamagnetic colloids to probe the mechanics of actin gels assembled around colloids . As each pair of beads is a sensor by itself , this method allows us to carry out tens of mea - surements in one sample . Using this method , we investigate dense dendritic actin networks resembling the ones found in lamellipo - dium of a crawling cell . We found elastic moduli in the range of 1 – 10 kPa , in good agreement with published values on similar reconstituted systems and compatible with cells and tissues elas - ticity . The massive parallel measurements allowed by our techni - que enable the investigation of the impact on network elasticity with variations of capping and branching concentrations , indivi - dual filament flexibility , and internal stress . All these dependen - cies point toward an elasticity of branched actin networks whose main contribution arises from mechanical bending , stretching , and compression of individual filaments . This type of elasticity does not exhibit strong stress - stiffening , in contrast to entropic elasticity , which is the main contribution to elasticity in cross - linked actin networks . The increase in capping and branching concentrations stiffens the networks while only changing the actin concentration slightly within the network . This is direct evidence of the strong depen - dence between the branched networks architecture and elasticity . More precisely , the dominant effect of the architecture on the elasticity is the reduction of the distance between branching points when concentration of branching or capping is increased . The concentrations of branching ( 10 – 100 nM ) and capping pro - teins ( 20 – 100 nM ) at which we find strong variations of the elastic modulus are compatible with intracellular regulation . These find - ings indicate that a cell can modulate its cytoskeleton elasticity by intracellular regulation of the branching dynamics . Materials and Methods Materials . The superparamagnetic colloids ( Dynabeads M - 450 Epoxy 4 (cid:2) 0 . 02 μ m diameter measured in a chain ) are purchased from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . VCA domain of the human WASP protein ( GST tagged ) , Arp2 / 3 protein complex from bovine brain , gelsolin recombinant human pro - tein and cofilin1 recombinant human protein are purchased from Cytoske - leton ( Denver , CO , USA ) . Rabbit muscle G actin and fluorescent G actin ( alexa 488 and 594 ) have been provided by M - F Carlier ’ s lab ( Gif sur Yvette , France ) . All other chemicals are from Sigma - Aldrich ( St Louis , MO , USA ) . SamplePreparation . Colloids are coated byVCA : 3 . 5 μ L ofbeadsstocksolution ( volumic fraction 0 . 013 ) are diluted in 47 μ L of milliQ water , washed twice with X buffer ( Hepes 10 mM , KCl 100 mM , CaCl 2 0 . 1 mM , MgCl 2 10 mM ) and then mixed with VCA ( 23 μ M ) in X buffer . After one hour of incubation , 5 μ L of BSA 10 % is added for passivation ( 15 min ) . By centrifugation the sus - pending medium is replaced by X buffer with 0 . 1 % of BSA , and the volumic fraction of beads is 0 . 1 % . Bare beads are coated with 1 % BSA following the same protocol . G - actin is polymerized at 29 μ M ( including 5 % labeled monomers ) using KME ( KCl 2 M , MgCl 2 20mM , EGTA4 mM ) . The gel growth occurs at 6 . 5 μ M of actin , 6 . 5 μ M of cofilin , 20 – 250 nM of gelsolin , 10 – 400 nM of Arp2 / 3 , and 0 . 01 % VCA covered beads ( Hepes 6 mM , ATP 1 . 8 mM , DTT 6 . 2 mM , Dabco 140 μ M , KCl 80 mM , CaCl 2 100 μ M , MgCl 2 6 mM , and EGTA 42 μ M at pH 7 . 8 ) . The polymerization is stopped between 3 – 30 min by a 10 times dilution in X buffer with 20 μ M phalloidin . Actin - covered colloids are then concentrated and bare beads are added at the same volumic fraction of 0 . 01 % . The sample is introduced in homemade chambers ( 22 (cid:3) 1 (cid:3) 0 . 25 mm 3 ) coated with BSA . Magnetic Setup . The setup is mounted on an Axio A1 inverted microscope from Zeiss ( Carl Zeiss , Germany ) with an oil - immersion 100x objective ( NA ¼ 1 . 4 ) and equipped with X - cite XPS - 120 lamp for fluorescence . The magnetic field is generated by two coaxial coils ( SBEA , Vitry , Fr ) with mu metal core ( length 40 mm , diameter 26 – 88 mm , 750 spires ) . The coils are powered by a bipolar operational power supply amplifier 6A / 36V ( Kepco , Flushing , NY ) controlled by Labview software ( National Instruments , Austin , TX ) . The max - imum field generated is 100 mTwith a gradient less than 0 . 1 mT·mm − 1 over the sample . The chains are formed with a constant field of 3 mT and the ac - quisition goes from 1 mT to 80 mT in 5 s . The CCD camera is a Coolsnap ES 2 ( Roper Scientific , Ottobrunn , Germany ) used at a frame rate of 27 Hz . The measurement of the tension used to control the field is synchronized with the frame acquisition . After each measurement , a fluorescent image ( δ t ¼ 100 ms ) of the chain is acquired . Fluorescence Measurements . The fluorescence density is the average value of fluorescence on the thickness of the shell in an angular sector of π ∕ 3 perpen - dicular to the chain ( the thickness is extracted from mechanical analysis detailed below ) . An estimation of the actin concentration in the shell is ob - tained by measuring the fluorescence intensity of known concentrations of labeled G - actin between the slide and the coverslip with 4 μ m beads as spacers . 10368 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1121238109 Pujol et al . Experiment Analysis . Image analysis is carried out using Image J ( NIH ) and data processing using Matlab ( MathWorks , MA ) . The center of each particle is determined by a weighted mean of gray levels giving a precision of 20 nm . The attractive dipolar force between two particles reads F d ¼ 3 μ 0 m 2 ∕ ð 2 π d 4 Þ , where μ 0 is the permittivity of the empty space , m the magnetic moment of the particles , and d the distance between their center . Also , m ¼ VH χ m , with V the volume of the particle , H the magnetic excitation , and χ m the magnetic susceptibility measured by Fonnum et al ( 38 ) . The force on one gel is calculated by the sum of the force between the pair of beads and their first neighbors . To fit force indentation curves , we use the relationship for Hertzian con - tact modified to take into account the finite thickness of the elastic medium ( incompressible bonded sample , ref . 22 ) : F i ¼ 16 ∕ 9 ER 1 ∕ 2 δ 3 ∕ 2 ð 1 þ 1 . 133 χ þ 1 . 283 χ 2 þ 0 . 769 χ 3 þ 0 . 0975 χ 4 Þ ; where F i is the force , E the Young ’ s modulus , R the equivalent radius , δ the indentation , and χ ¼ δ 1 ∕ 2 R 1 ∕ 2 ∕ h − 1 , with h being the thickness of the gel . The Poisson ratio was assumed to be 0 . 5 ( 39 ) . The indentation is the distance be - tween beads compared to their distance when gels are undeformed . Both theelasticmodulusand thethicknessofthegelwereusedasadjustablepara - meters . The equivalentradiusiscalculated asR ¼ ½ R b − 1 þ ð R b þ h 0 Þ − 1 (cid:1) − 1 , with R b being the radius of the beads and h 0 being the thickness of the shell evaluated at small forces . All estimations of the fit were conducted from 0 – 500 pN to allow comparisons between different gels . The strain rate is 0 . 01 Hz , and the mean stress is around 500 Pa . It should be noted that when a contacting sphere deforms an elastic shell , the stress and strain applied during deformation are not homogenous in the elastic medium . The strain is maximum at the center of the area of contact , and minimal at the rim . On an axis spanning the center of the two spheres , it is highest at the surface of contact and decreases inside the medium ( 40 ) . It is therefore difficult to characterize the nonlinear behavior of elastic materials using spherical contacts . Hence , the elastic properties measured in this study should be considered to be an average over different stresses and strains act - ing on the network . We check for each curve the maximum indentation to ensure that the cor - rection for finite thickness is accurate and that the area of contact calculated from Hertz theory is valid , and therefore , that quantitative comparison be - tween the mechanics of different architecture networks is reliable ( SI Text ) . To compute the mean elastic modulus and the 95 % confidence interval of each experimental condition , weaggregatedthe meanand standarderror of each of 3 – 4 repetitions of the same condition and used a random effect meta - analysis ( 41 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . The authors want to thank Marie - France Carlier and Guillaume Romet - Lemonne for the gift of actin and fluorescent actin , Cecile Sykes , Marie - France Carlier , Guillaume Romet - Lemonne , Christian Frétigny , and Jean Baudry for useful discussions , Julien Browaeÿs for statistical help , andJoseph Tavacoliforthecarefulreadingofthemanuscript . Funding comes from Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR - 09 - PIRI - 0001 Actimag , Pro - gramme SESAME Région Ile - de - France SMACS . 1 . Fletcher D , Mullins RD ( 2010 ) Cell mechanics and the cytoskeleton . Nature 463 : 485 – 492 . 2 . Welch MD , Mallavarapuf A , Rosenblattf J , Mitchison TJ ( 1997 ) Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 54 – 61 . 3 . Hall A ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 : 509 – 514 . 4 . SvitkinaTM , BorisyGG ( 1999 ) Organizationandtreadmillingofactinfilamentarrayin lamellipodia . Cell 145 : 1009 – 1026 . 5 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : Mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 . 6 . Le Clainche C , Carlier M - F ( 2008 ) Regulation of actin assembly associated with protru - sion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev 88 : 489 – 513 . 7 . LeventalI , GeorgesPC , JanmeyPA ( 2007 ) Softbiologicalmaterialsandtheirimpacton cell function . Soft Matter 3 : 299 – 306 . 8 . Storm C , Pastore JJ , MacKintosh FC , Lubensky TC , Janmey PA ( 2005 ) Nonlinear elasti - city in biological gels . Nature 435 : 191 – 194 . 9 . Gardel ML , et al . ( 2006 ) Prestressed F - actin networks cross - linked by hinged filamins replicate mechanical properties of cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 1762 – 1767 . 10 . Gardel ML , et al . ( 2004 ) Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 : 1301 – 1305 . 11 . Head D , Levine A , MacKintosh F ( 2003 ) Deformation of cross - linked semiflexible poly - mer networks . Phys Rev Lett 91 : 2 – 5 . 12 . Wilhelm J , Frey E ( 2003 ) Elasticity of stiff polymer networks . Phys Rev Lett 91 : 1 – 4 . 13 . Broedersz CP , Mao X , Lubensky TC , MacKintosh FC ( 2011 ) Criticality and isostaticity in fibre networks . Nat Phys 7 : 983 – 988 . 14 . Loisel TP , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF ( 1999 ) Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 . 15 . Bernheim - Groswasser A , Wiesner S , Golsteyn RM , Carlier M - F , Sykes C ( 2002 ) The dy - namics of actin - based motility depend on surface parameters . Nature 417 : 308 – 311 . 16 . Bausch AR , Kroy K ( 2006 ) A bottom - up approach to cell mechanics . Nature Physics 2 : 231 – 238 . 17 . Marcy Y , Prost J , Carlier M - F , Sykes C ( 2004 ) Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : A direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 5992 – 5997 . 18 . Chaudhuri O , Parekh SH , Fletcher D ( 2007 ) Reversible stress softening of actin net - works . Nature 445 : 295 – 298 . 19 . Dreyfus R , Lacoste D , Bibette J , Baudry J ( 2009 ) Measuring colloidal forces with the magnetic chaining technique . Euro Biophys J : E , Soft Matter 28 : 113 – 123 . 20 . Brangbour C , et al . ( 2011 ) Force - velocity measurements of a few growing actin fila - ments . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000613 . 21 . LealCalderonF , StoraT , MondainMonvalO , PoulinP , BibetteJ ( 1994 ) Directmeasure - ment of colloidal forces . Phys Rev Lett 72 : 2959 – 2962 . 22 . Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F , Maresca J , Kachar B , Chadwick RS ( 2002 ) Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Bio - phys J 82 : 2798 – 2810 . 23 . MacKintosh FC , Käs J , Janmey PA ( 1995 ) Elasticity of semiflexible biopolymer net - works . Phys Rev Lett 75 : 4425 – 4428 . 24 . JanmeyPA , McCullochCA ( 2007 ) Cellmechanics : Integratingcellresponsestomechan - ical stimuli . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 9 : 1 – 34 . 25 . Wiesner S , et al . ( 2003 ) A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechan - ism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 160 : 387 – 398 . 26 . Isambert H , et al . ( 1995 ) Flexibility of actin filaments derived from thermal fluctua - tions . J Biol Chem 270 : 11437 – 11444 . 27 . McCullough BR , Blanchoin L , Martiel J - L , De la Cruz EM ( 2008 ) Cofilin increases the bending flexibility of actin filaments : Implications for severing and cell mechanics . J Mol Biol 381 : 550 – 558 . 28 . HayakawaK , TatsumiH , SokabeM ( 2011 ) Actinfilamentsfunction as a tensionsensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J Cell Biol 195 : 721 – 727 . 29 . Noireaux V , et al . ( 2000 ) Growing an actin gel on spherical surfaces . Biophys J 78 : 1643 – 1654 . 30 . van der Gucht J , Paluch E , Plastino J , Sykes C ( 2005 ) Stress release drives symmetry breaking for actin - based movement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 7847 – 7852 . 31 . Head D , Levine AJ , MacKintosh F ( 2003 ) Distinct regimes of elastic response and deformation modes of cross - linked cytoskeletal and semiflexible polymer networks . Phys Rev E 68 : 1 – 15 . 32 . AchardV , etal . ( 2010 ) A “ primer ” - basedmechanismunderliesbranchedactinfilament network formation and motility . Curr Biol 20 : 423 – 428 . 33 . Schmidt CF , Barmann M , Isenberg G , Sackmann E ( 1989 ) Chain dynamics , mesh size , and diffusive transport in networks of polymerized actin . A quasielastic light scatter - ing and microfluorescence study . Macromolecules 22 : 3638 – 3649 . 34 . deGennesPG , PincusP , VelascoRM ( 1976 ) Remarksonpolyelectrolyteconformations . J Physique ( Paris ) 37 : 1461 – 1473 . 35 . Joly - duhamel C , Hellio D , Ajdari A , Djabourov M ( 2002 ) All gelatin networks : 2 . The master curve for elasticity . Langmuir 18 : 7158 – 7166 . 36 . Higgs HN , Blanchoin L , Pollard TD ( 1999 ) Influence of the C terminus of Wiskott - Al - drichsyndromeprotein ( WASp ) andtheArp2 / 3complexonactinpolymerization . Bio - chemistry 38 : 15212 – 15222 . 37 . BlanchoinL , etal . ( 2000 ) DirectobservationofdendriticactincomplexandWASP / Scar proteins . Nature 171 : 1007 – 1011 . 38 . Fonnum G , Johansson C , Molteberg A , Morup S , Aksnes E ( 2005 ) Characterisation of Dynabeads by magnetization measurements and Mössbauer spectroscopy . J Magn Magn Mater 293 : 41 – 47 . 39 . Gardel M , Valentine M , Crocker J , Bausch A , Weitz D ( 2003 ) Microrheology of en - tangled F - actin solutions . Phys Rev Lett 91 : 8 – 11 . 40 . Lin DC , Shreiber DI , Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F ( 2009 ) Spherical indentation of soft mat - terbeyondthe Hertzianregime : Numericalandexperimentalvalidationof hyperelas - tic models . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 8 : 345 – 58 . 41 . Borenstein M , Hedges LV , Higgins JPT , Rothstein HR ( 2009 ) Introduction to Meta - Analysis ( Wiley , New York ) . Pujol et al . PNAS ∣ June 26 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 26 ∣ 10369 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y