Pruning the Answer Garden : Knowledge Sharing in Maintenance Engineering Volkmar Pipek * and Volker Wulf + * ProSEC , Inst . for Computer Science III , University of Bonn , Roemerstr . 164 , 53117 Bonn , and International Institute for Socio - Informatics ( IISI ) , Heerstr . 148 , 53111 Bonn , Germany , volkmar . pipek @ iisi . de + Institute for Information Systems , University of Siegen , Hölderlinstr . 3 , 57068 Siegen , Germany ; and : Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Computer Science ( FhG - FIT ) , Schloß Birlinghoven , 53754 Sankt Augustin , Germany , wulf @ fit . fhg . de Abstract . The Answer Garden supports knowledge sharing in two intertwined ways : by making relevant information retrievable and by mediating access to people with knowledge . We present a case study in which the Answer Garden approach was applied to encourage knowledge sharing in maintenance engineering of a steel mill . The results show that the sheer amount of drawings and the long history of changing classification schemes challenge the Answer Garden approach as well as domain - specific needs for technically mediated communication . Moreover , the given division of labor and organizational micro - politics prevent the Answer Garden approach from encouraging knowledge sharing . Based on these experiences , design directions for knowledge management systems are pointed out . Finally , the results of the study are related to a recent controversy on technology support for expertise location . Introduction Knowledge is typically distributed among different actors and embodied in various artifacts ( cf . Hutchins 1995 ; Ackerman and Halverson 1998 ; Davenport and Prusak 1998 ) . There are mainly two - often interrelated - ways to share knowledge among human actors . In the direct way , human actors with different kinds of expertise can communicate and help each other to construct new knowledge . In the mediated way , a knowledgeable actor can create artifacts which may facilitate knowledge construction processes of others . People who need to learn face usually the problem of finding either the appropriate material or the right expert . Groupware applications can play an important role in tackling these problems . They can support the locating of experts as well as the communication with them . Moreover , groupware may stimulate joint creation and sharing of artifacts which capture aspects of human knowledge . Within the field of CSCW , the sharing of knowledge in organizations have been studied both empirically and with regard to the design of information systems ( cf . Bannon and Kuutti 1996 , Ackerman and Halverson 1998 , Trigg et al . 1999 , Groth and Bowers 2001 , Lutters and Ackerman 2002 ) . Looking at the design - oriented approaches , the Answer Garden ( AG ) approach by Ackerman ( with Malone 1990 , 1994 , with McDonald 1996 , 1998 ) has been extremely influential and is widely referred to ( e . g . Stahl and Herrmann 1999 , Fagrell et al . 1999 , McDonald 2000 ) . Beyond the author’s own realizations , there are several third party implementations available ( Smeaton and Neilson 1995 ) . The AG supports knowledge management in two intertwined ways : by making relevant information retrievable and by making people with knowledge accessible . Ackerman ( 1994 ) evaluated the first version of the AG with groups of users who carried out different software engineering projects related to the X - windows system . The results of this study suggest that the basic design assumptions turned out to be supported , while certain design issues had to be reconsidered . Ackerman ( 1996 ) provides the results of another evaluation study . However , it focuses on the concept of “organizational memory” rather than on the AG system itself ( see Bannon and Kuutti 1996 ) . Due to the evaluations , the AG system was redesigned ( cf . Ackerman and McDonald 1996 ) . However , an empirical evaluation of the redesigned system ( AG 2 ) has not yet been published . The core innovation of the AG is the tighter coupling of information and communication spaces , and their integration into one architecture . Though we concentrate on the AG architecture here , we estimate our results to be relevant for other architectures and tools which aim at supporting knowledge management in a similar way , as well . In contrasting with earlier success stories , in this paper we report about a failed attempt to introduce the AG approach . We tried to support maintenance engineering of a major German steel mill with the AG architecture . In the following we briefly describe the AG approach , and explain why it seemed promising for our application field . Then we report on problems which the steel mill encountered in knowledge sharing . We present the experiences made when applying the answer garden to the problems of the steel mill . Based on these findings , we evaluate the AG approach and suggest further research directions . We finally relate our findings to the actual discussion on the nature of expertise sharing and tools for its technical support . The Answer Garden Approach The Answer Garden ( AG ) is an integrated approach which makes recorded knowledge retrievable as well as individuals with knowledge better accessible . Ackerman ( 1994 ) does not explicitly mention for which types of knowledge domains the approach fits best . However , the following criterias were relevant for him to select the domain of his field study : software - engineers in need of support in programming with the X - windows system ; ( cf . Ackerman 1994 , p . 246 ) : (cid:127) the complex nature of the knowledge domain , (cid:127) the interactive nature of the problem solving process , (cid:127) sufficient technological infrastructure ( computers with network connections and e - mail ) at the workplaces , (cid:127) lack of a body of commonly accepted knowledge , (cid:127) dynamic changes with regard to the relevant knowledge . For these kinds of knowledge domains , the AG combines an information retrieval system with a communication system in an innovative way ( cf . Figure 1 ) . A user who has a problem and seeks information first of all checks in an information retrieval system where relevant artifacts about the knowledge domain are stored . If he can find the necessary information , he will continue working on the problem . If the user can not find the appropriate information , he can ask a question via e - mail to a human expert . By means of a location mechanism , the AG system locates an expert and routes this question to her . The expert may then answer the question ( via e - mail ) and if she thinks the answer is one of common interest , she can insert it into the knowledge database . In response to a question , the expert may also want to update existing material in the database or change the classification scheme of the database . So the database grows in relevant and retrievable information . Ackerman ( 1994 , p . 245 ) believes that it pays for the experts to improve the AGs database , because they save time in answering frequently asked questions . As a result of the first evaluation study , a second version of the AG system was developed . Besides a modularized technical infrastructure , the location mechanism to route the mails to the appropriate experts was improved . Moreover , the expert’s publishing process to the database received increased support . In the first version of the AG system , the location mechanism was based on the idea that there was a fixed list of external experts to whom the questions could be routed . Indeed this group was divided into two subgroups : first and second level experts . All questions were first routed to the first level experts , who forwarded them to the second level experts whenever they felt that they were unable to answer the questions appropriately ( cf . Ackerman 1994 , p . 246 ) . Such a location mechanism is based on the assumption that the group of experts is different from the other users . In the second version of the AG this assumption was abandoned and the collaborative help among all users became the design rationale of the location mechanism . An “Escalation Agent” was implemented which incorporated a hierarchy of different user groups or media ( e . g . local chat system , bulletin board , human experts ) . Whenever a user cannot find the relevant information in the database , his question is routed to the first level of the hierarchy ( e . g . chat system ) . After a certain period of time the escalation agent asks the user whether his question was answered . In case it is not , the agent sends the question to the next level in the support hierarchy . The escalation agent can be used to navigate through different levels of locality , assuming that this way the information seeker is investigating appropriate contexts first . ( Ackerman and McDonald 1996 , pp . 101 ff . ) . Concerning the publishing process , in the first version of the AG it was assumed that the ( edited ) answers given by the experts would also be helpful to others . They were published to the shared database . In the second version of the AG , additional functions to support the authoring process of the experts were developed . These functions allow collecting , culling , and classifying , and finally distilling cooperatively those materials which have been authored to answer questions from support seekers ( cf . Ackerman and McDonald 1996 , pp . 102 ) . Figure 1 gives an overview of the AG approach for sharing knowledge within an organization . In the following we look at the case of knowledge sharing in maintenance engineering to find out whether the AG approach is applicable in that domain . Maintenance Engineering – Setting and Research Approach We have investigated knowledge sharing in maintenance engineering processes of a Major German steel mill in the Ruhr area . The investigations took place in the context of the O RG T ECH project ( Wulf et al . 1999 ) . The project’s goal was to support cooperative work processes within the steel mill as well as between the steel mill and two engineering offices . The two engineering offices take on subcontractual work from the steel mill in the field of maintenance engineering , DataBase Locat . Mech . Experts InformationSeeker ( 1 ) Search ( 2a ) Pose Question ( 2b ) Route Question ( 3 ) Answer the Question ( 5 ) Restructure Database ( 4 ) Update Database DataBase Locat . Mech . Experts InformationSeeker ( 1 ) Search ( 2a ) Pose Question ( 2b ) Route Question ( 3 ) Answer the Question ( 5 ) Restructure Database ( 4 ) Update Database Figure 1 : The Answer Garden Approach e . g . the construction and documentation of steel furnace components . A construction department inside the steel mill coordinates the planning , construction and documentation processes , and manages the contracts with the external offices . Research Method The OrgTech project follows an action research approach , the Integrated Organization and Technology Development ( OTD ) framework ( Wulf and Rohde 1995 ) . The OTD process is characterized by : a parallel development of workplace , organizational and technical systems ; the management of ( existing ) conflicts by discourse and negotiation ; and the immediate participation of the organization members affected . The project started with on - site visits , semi - structured interviews , a market overview of relevant applications , and participative workshops to build a shared understanding ( project establishment phase ) . The project proceeded in an evolutionary way , i . e . completing cycles of problem analysis , interventions and their evaluation ( cf . Wulf et al . 1999 ) . Within this change process , the question of how to support the sharing of knowledge among the different experts involved in the maintenance of the steel mill became a focus of concern . Our decision to apply the AG approach was motivated by several issues . First , our application field carried the properties that have been recommended in the literature for the application of the AG approach ( see section above ) . Second , the engineers basically showed a culture of cooperation at a personal level that made it likely that technological support for knowledge sharing would be appreciated . So we developed an architecture for an AG system for the steel mill that involved and extended the existing technological infrastructures , and demonstrated prototypical implementations of some of its functionality in workshops . In the discussions following these presentations and workshops , it became clear that the AG architecture was rejected . These discussions and observations in that context helped us to reassess the AG approach Archives Internal ConstructionDepartment Workshop : Maintenance Plant Operators ExternalEngineeringOffices ( 1 ) Initiate the Order ( 2 ) Checkthe Order ( 3 ) Give the Order ( 4 ) , ( 7 ) Searchfor Drawings ( 5 ) , ( 8 ) Provide drawings ( 6 ) Request further drawings ( 9 ) Provide Documentationof Project ( 10 ) Archive Drawings ( 11 ) ProvideDrawings Steel Mill Archives Internal ConstructionDepartment Workshop : Maintenance Plant Operators ExternalEngineeringOffices ( 1 ) Initiate the Order ( 2 ) Checkthe Order ( 3 ) Give the Order ( 4 ) , ( 7 ) Searchfor Drawings ( 5 ) , ( 8 ) Provide drawings ( 6 ) Request further drawings ( 9 ) Provide Documentationof Project ( 10 ) Archive Drawings ( 11 ) ProvideDrawings Steel Mill Figure 2 : The Process of Maintenance Engineering as well as to broaden our understanding of organizational dynamics of knowledge sharing . The results presented in this paper stem from a variety of different sources : Analysis of the work practice : By means of about 25 semi - structured interviews , further workplace observations and additional open - ended interviews , the given work practice was examined . Analysis of the documents available : By looking at the documents relevant for the maintenance engineering process , especially the drawings and the system descriptions ( user handbooks ) , the relevant artifacts were investigated . System evaluation : On the basis of task - oriented examinations like usability tests and expert reviews , the given database system was examined , especially with regard to its suitability for the maintenance engineering tasks . Project workshops : During different workshops , organizational and technological interventions were presented and discussed to improve the maintenance engineering processes . Field of Application The Maintenance Engineering Department of the steel mill deals with repairing and improving the plant . Maintenance Engineering is a distributed process in which different organizational units of the steel mill and the external engineering offices are involved . Figure 2 gives a schematic overview of the maintenance engineering process . In general , the starting point for a maintenance order is the plant operator . The steel mill consists of several organizationally independent plants , e . g . coke chambers , blast - furnace . The operators of each plant control the production equipment and machinery in their plant . Maintaining the plant also involves the repair , replacement or even redesign of outdated or deteriorated parts of the machinery , pipelines or buildings . When this kind of maintenance is necessary , the maintenance department of the plant operator asks the internal construction department for further processing . Depending on the type of order and the measures required , the transaction is handled internally or passed on to the external engineering offices . An external order will be prepared and surveyed by the responsible contact person in the internal construction department . For this reason , the necessary drawings and documents are compiled from the archives and passed on to the engineering office for further processing . Usually , the order specifications contain errors and need further clarification right from the very beginning . So discussions among the different actors and extensive re - ordering of drawings often become necessary . The additional requirements for documents are to be expressed in a comprehensive way and have to be returned to the construction department of the steel mill . Once again drawings and documents have to be found , coordination work has to be done and contacts with other departments have to be initiated . This process of renegotiating the order and reordering additional drawings requires a high level of work and expenditure of time for all participants involved . After the external offices finish their engineering task , the internal construction department has to check it , to include the modified drawings and new ones into the archives , and to initiate the production process of the required spare parts . After being either produced by the internal workshop or ordered externally , the spare parts are assembled into the plant . While this is the general process schema of maintenance engineering , various sorts of informal communication and self - organized variations of the process can be found and add to the complexity of the problems we will describe now . The Current State of a Plant – A Problem of Knowledge Sharing In the following we will investigate the problem of knowledge sharing concerning one specific aspect of the process of maintenance engineering . In this case , the problem to be solved is to find out the “actual state” of those parts of a plant that are relevant for a maintenance engineering problem . “State” addresses e . g . details of the assembly of a machinery , the materials it consists of and their age , or the production process it is involved in . But it also addresses information on its location and related conditions that might interfere with necessary maintenance construction efforts , e . g . strength of the ground or where old pipelines run in the walls . This information should be available in the official technical drawings referring to that machine or location , but as we describe further below , the state described in the drawings is not necessarily the actual state of the plant . The steel mill has a history of more than 100 years . During that time the different plants of the steel mill have been continuously modified , destroyed and replaced with other plants . The knowledge about this process is distributed among different actors in the plant and several archives containing drawings of the plant . These drawings are stored on various media . The central drawing archives contain about 300 , 000 technical drawings , about 2 , 500 files with technical descriptions , part lists , statics information and calculations , and about 500 files with plans of electronic and hydraulic devices . A large part of these documents is filed in conventional paper form and saved on microfilm . The electronic drawing data consists of scanned drawings , which are saved in raster format and specific CAD formats . The electronically archived document stock contains about 5 , 000 CAD - drawings , about 20 , 000 raster format drawings and 30 , 000 scanned drawings on microfilm files , and about 90 , 000 documents describing the plant , maintenance processes and drawings . In order to be able to handle the large number of drawings and documents , in 1995 an electronic archiving system was implemented to archive and provide the technical documentation . This system allows one to find drawings by numbers or keywords . Drawings are identified by two types of numbers . The first type is the drawing number which is given in a rather chronological order to all newly created drawings . It is specified by the filing clerk and does not contain any semantic information concerning the content of the drawing . For classification reasons the drawings get a second number , the so - called basic number . These basic numbers classify the drawings according to the plants and plant components they refer to . This classification scheme stems from accounting and controlling demands . It classifies the components of the plants in a way which does not fit well with the concepts and needs of engineers . The electronic documentation is stored on a data jukebox , which is equipped with magneto - optical disks . Descriptions of the documents are stored on an Oracle data base and may be retrieved via the archiving system ( called ADOS ) programmed in Microsoft Access . At present , conventional and electronic archiving methods are being used in parallel , since the conversion from conventional to electronic archives is expensive and takes a long period of time to be implemented . A continuous conversion of all relevant data is aimed for . The central archives suffer from a couple of problems ( cf . Hinrichs 2000 ) : (cid:127) Approximately 20 % of the drawings stored in the archives do not have any classification ; a direct assignment to plants or their location is not stated . Their categorization can only be processed with in - depth system knowledge . (cid:127) A large number of drawings is old , of bad quality or has to be reconstructed in order to provide the information . (cid:127) Approximately 25 % of the drawings are saved in the archive system without the correct basic or drawing number or are stored without keywords . Such drawings can only be found by the description used in the ADOS system or are accessible by search via indirect paths only ( e . g . asking colleagues ) . (cid:127) The existing archive system does not offer extended search functions . Only drawing numbers and basic numbers ( both of which are not self - explanatory ) can be used as search attributes . Due to the problems of the central archives there exist a couple of local archives maintained by the different actors involved in plant maintenance . (cid:127) Additional drawings are distributed among individuals in the maintenance department of the different plants . These individuals often have built up their private paper - based archives of those aspects of the plant they are responsible for . These archives contain up to 500 sketches and often occupy several shelves in their offices . (cid:127) Individuals of the internal construction department store documents relevant for construction , such as plant specific compiled drawing lists , in a decentralized way . They are typically filed in local paper - based archives . Some of the engineers prefer using these documents instead of the “official” ones when searching for drawings , since they contain important information in a compact form . Such documents are not within the range of electronic search functions and electronic access . Further aspects add to the complexity of the problem to find out about the actual state of a plant in the steel mill . While already the handling of the different types of documents and archives requires some knowledge of the actors involved , certain modifications of the state of the plant cannot be found in the drawings at all . When handling accidents , plants may be modified instantly without prior planning and documentation by means of drawings . At the end of a budget year , certain work is carried out instantly to use still available funds of the respective plants . This work is typically not documented in drawings . Finally , even well planned and documented modifications of the plant may have been finally realized in a slightly different way than they are documented in the drawings . This can be caused by inadequate plans , which have to be adapted to the given environment . Sometimes the realization is carried out completely disregarding the given plans . So the knowledge about the actual state of the steel mill is distributed between different drawing archives and human actors . The workers of the maintenance departments of the different plants within the mill typically kept the best record about the actual state of their plant . So , the problem of finding out the actual state of a plant has similar properties to the problem discussed in Ackerman’s study ( 1994 ) . As a reason for choosing his approach to support knowledge management for programmers of the X windows system he described specific attributes of the problem to be solved ( cf . section 2 ) . In our these attributes also apply : (cid:127) The knowledge domain is typically complex because the individual plants of the steel mill typically consist of a big variety of different components , which are interrelated in different ways . Moreover a huge variety of physical constraints has to be taken into account to understand the state of a plant . (cid:127) Like in the software engineering case , there is a lack of a body of commonly accepted knowledge . In the case of the steel mill , actors in the different organizational units maintain different drawing archives which again may document different states of the plant . (cid:127) The state of the plant changes dynamically . Maintenance activities are typically triggered by accidents , technological progress , capacity adjustments , or market changes . Some of these modifications of the plants are not documented in drawings , because they had to be carried out instantly . This prevents actors in the steel mill from acquiring a lasting expertise . (cid:127) Maintenance engineering is often an interactive process because ideas to improve a plant have to be discussed and reversed several times . So , the AG approach should be well applicable to the problem of finding out about the actual state of a plant . Applying the Answer Garden Approach to Maintenance Engineering Finding out about the actual state of a certain plant in the steel mill is a central problem in maintenance engineering . We investigated how the different elements of the AG approach could be applied to this problem . The Steps of the Answer Garden Approach We will discuss our experiences along the different steps of the AG approach and describe underlying organizational problems . Search the database : The first element of the approach is the provision of electronic artifacts about the knowledge domain in a retrievable form . These artifacts exist in the case of the steel mill ; the central archives contain different types of technical documents in three different media . The internal construction department and the plant operators maintain their own local paper archives . The paper artifacts are not easily retrievable as they are distributed among various locations of the steel mill . Their owners regard them as their „private“ property . By contrary , the central electronic archives are easily accessible by any engineer . But the artifacts are not easily retrievable in the database . The common way to retrieve documents is via their basic number . The classification scheme according to basic numbers is not very intuitive to engineers because it was set up by the accounting department to allocate costs . Additionally , many documents are not included in the database or are not classified by basic numbers . Finally , the specification of queries to the archives is not very intuitive . So , retrieving documents in the archive database already requires quite some experience . We have discussed different approaches to improve the electronic support for the retrieval of drawings with the engineers . First , all the drawings could be included into the database and could be classified correctly according to the basic numbers . However such an approach would require a huge amount of time of human experts . Due to the high costs and the fact hat the long - term future of the steel mill is unclear , this option is not viable from the point of view of the steel mill’s management . Another approach could be to make more attributes of the drawings available for retrieval . For instance , one could apply pattern recognition or optical character recognition ( OCR ) algorithms on the scanned drawings to make the legend on each of the drawings available for key word search . The information given in drawing lists could be used to find drawings of artifacts which have been created or modified within the same project . All these extensions of the database scheme would require considerable input of labor because it cannot be implemented automatically . Due to the high costs involved it was not acceptable for the management , either . A similar scenario and the related problems have been described by Trigg et al . ( 1999 ) . Finally , the user interface of the drawing database could be improved . For instance , users could document and share successful search inquiries to help each other in finding relevant search results . This approach was agreed upon and is currently implemented in a prototype . In conclusion one can say that the retrieval of the drawings is a complex problem in databases which have a long history of usage . As classification schemes change over time , information retrieval requires considerable expertise . In these cases information retrieval in the database can not be seen as an isolated first step as Ackerman ( 1994 ) describes it . Only if the required expertise to retrieve the information is available , can the drawing database serve as a primary source of information . Pose a Question : If the database retrieval does not lead to the desired information , the AG offers the chance to formulate a corresponding question in textual form . In our case , the textual explication of a question is not always a viable way . The engineers typically ask specific questions , which may be further refined in an ongoing discussion with each other and the plant operators . Within such a discussion , artifacts like drawings , sketches or even the parts of the plants help to improve the mutual understanding . Route the Question : Next , in the AG system the questions are routed to human experts . The system incorporates location mechanisms to find the appropriate expert . Such a location mechanism requires explicit algorithms for how to locate human experts . Indeed , such an algorithm is given in the case of the steel mill . If the information seeker is able to refer to a certain part of a plant by means of the two leading figures of the basic number , the relevant experts in the internal construction department as well as in the maintenance departments of the plant operators can be located . Additionally , the members of the archives have gained relevant experience since they have always been responsible when drawings of the plant had to be found . So , the guidance to find appropriate experts could also be provided by the information systems . We discussed an extension of the database , which would give hints to the users whom to ask concerning certain aspects of a plant . This was assessed by the plant staff as an improvement which was mainly relevant for newcomers . Engineers who work for a longer time in maintaining the plant would typically know whom to ask . Answer the Question and Update the Database : As a next step , in the AG approach the experts answer the questions of the information seekers and they incorporate this answer into the database with little extra effort . By updating the database they benefit from being less often asked by information seekers lateron . As already mentioned , in our case it may be difficult to share knowledge by one - way text - based communication channels . Typically an artifact - supported discussion is required . To document a given advice , multimedia recording and editing tools need to be applied . The complexity in handling these tools may well exceed the technological abilities of the experts . Moreover , the efforts being made to help the information seeker can not always be represented within the database . The database offers a structure to store drawings . Indeed some of the advice given to information seekers will lead to either an update or a better categorization of certain drawings . However most advice will just be given verbally . The current structure of the database does not allow this type of content to be represented . Organizational Issues Even if these problems could be overcome , the existing division of labor within the steel mill would prevent the AG approach from being applied . The maintenance of the drawing archives and especially of the database is the responsibility of the archives group . This group is , like the internal construction department , a part of the central support division of the steel mill . Between the central support division and the different plant operating divisions there is an ongoing rivalry for power and resources ( despite good relations among the engineers at a personal level ) . The competition for resources has led to a strict division of labor between these organizational units . Only the archives group has the right to modify the central database . The construction department has to send the drawings to the archives group after their job is finished . Afterwards , they have only read access to the central database . They cannot modify missing or incorrect classifications or update documents . On the other side , they don’t have a strong interest in the material stored in the central archives . The workers in the local maintenance departments , who have built up their own local archives based on paper drawings , do not use the electronic drawing database very much . This is also due to the poor user interface for searching ( Hinrichs 2000 ) . The restrictive access rights make it difficult to gain the benefits of the AG approach in our case . Most of the persons responsible for the inquiries of external engineers concerning the current state of a plant , cannot document their answers or at most parts of them in the shared database . While the given technological equipment at the workplaces does not allow for multimedia explanations , the reclassification and the update of certain parts of the drawings would be possible . In case of a more flexible division of labor and corresponding access rights , the maintenance departments of the plant operators and the internal construction department could both update and improve the content of the database . When we discuss this issue with the workers of the different plants , they were not willing to improve a database they have been neither responsible for nor using much . The given division of labor and the existing conflicts between the organizational units prevented the actors from activities which would have improved the quality of the central database . Discussion We discuss our experiences along two lines . First , we abstract from our concrete experiences and comment on possible future directions of the AG approach and similar functionality . Second , we add to a recent discussion on the usefulness of expertise location algorithms . Growing an Answer Garden Our experiences showed several obstacles for realizing the AG approach . We believe that the AG is based on the following implicit assumption which were not all given in our case : (cid:127) The information seekers know exactly what their problem is . (cid:127) The categorization scheme of the database is understandable by information seekers . Moreover , they are able to handle the retrieval mechanism of the database in an appropriate way . (cid:127) Information seekers are able to use computer mediated communication ( CMC ) and are able express their questions in plain text . (cid:127) The location mechanism incorporates appropriate assumptions about the location of human expertise within the organization . (cid:127) If an expert is found , she is able to understand the question and give an understandable answer by means of written language . (cid:127) The experts ( group of persons ) have an interest in investing additional work in updating the common database . (cid:127) The experts are able to understand the given categorization scheme of the database . Given these assumptions underlying the AG approach , we now can explicate criteria for settings in which the AG is especially applicable : Settings in which CMC is a usual way for organizational communication : In distributed settings , like virtual organizations , there is a chance that members have built a culture of organization - and work - related CMC , which also eases the communication between expert and information seeker . Settings with a complex expertise structure : The basic problem the AG approach addresses is : “What do I do when expertise is not at hand ? ” . In some situation this relates to the fact that it is hard to get an overview on the competences and expertise available in complex organizational settings . Again , that problem is more likely to occur in distributed settings , when there is less opportunity for a peripheral awareness of others’ expertise . The AG helps to find knowledgeable people in these settings ( cf . Groth and Bowers 2001 ) . Settings with a strong tradition in using digital storage and collaboration media : Obviously , the problems surrounding digital artifacts made the application of the AG difficult in our case . However , one has to realize that the AG approach relies on algorithms which use metadata ( e . g . who worked on what project ? ) to operate . This data has to be available . So the reality the data represents needs to be formalized appropriately , and that there should be cost - effective ways to maintain the metadata and the associated models . This was surely given in the AG’s first application domain , i . e . the work group of programmers of the “X windows” system . Settings with an open help culture : Several aspects related to the organizational culture may lead to restrictive practices of passing knowledge to others . Our example showed - despite good relations at a personal level - a conflict between two departments , but knowledge ownership might also be a relevant issue for individual experts . Establishing and maintaining an open help culture is important for many approaches to support knowledge transfer , but to systems like the AG it is crucial . Referring to our experiences , we can also comment on some ways to improve the approach : Opening up personal acres for the Answer Garden : We saw in our examples , that the engineers created private archives with own information artifacts . These often manifest a personal perspective on a problem , item or project , and often represent information which is only interpretable with the background of the private archive’s creator . Yet , private archives are the first information experts refer to when explaining things to others , and they support the experts’ re - contextualization process related to a problem they solved maybe years ago . Relating this personal information landscape to the public information base ( e . g . as retrievable , contextualized “second opinion” on information available in public artifacts , or as a secondary stage for information retrieval before asking the expert ) , and supporting the use of this material in expertise communication seem to be an important direction of future work . Growing answers using representations as seed : In the context we described , the drawings are not purely information “containers” , but also focal points for given explanations . They represent an abstraction of the reality which is , when related to a specific problem , usually enriched by further information from other sources ( bookkeeping information , project descriptions , co - workers ) to complete the picture accordingly . These kind of representation can be valuable to clarify the communication between an expert and the information seeker , and to use representation in these communications should be supported . Using representations from the database would add the opportunity to collaboratively improve the information stored there ( Buckingham Shum 1997 , Pipek and Won 2002 ) . Harvesting in the neighbor’s garden : Not being able to retrieve the information needed from own resources , the employees of the steel mill sometimes ask external engineering offices involved in related projects for material ( drawings and other information ) to approach a problem . This practice shows that networking AG systems could also improve the overall quality of the information infrastructure . “Distributed AGs” have been part of the original concept , but our case would also call for a concept of interconnectivity for different implementations of the AG concept which works across organizational boundaries . On technological support for expert finding A recent controversy on a specific part of the AG approach again posed the question , to what extent technology support may be appropriate for knowledge management . McDonald and Ackerman ( 2000 ) described an architecture ( ER - Arch ) which used concepts from the field of recommender systems for the problem of expertise location . In this architecture they used metadata derivable from information artifacts or other sources ( groupware , email clients , browsers , organization models ) to support the identification and the selection of experts . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) challenged the architecture and the relevance of these algorithms with a study on expert finding in a consultancy company . Consultants there showed patterns of behavior ( i . e . choosing accessibility and availability for prioritizing which expert to contact ) when searching expertise which were seemingly not covered by the ER - Arch ( the ER - Arch prioritizes according to heuristics which are based on data concerning expertise and concerning personal / organizational relations between the information seeker and potential experts ) . The study’s authors further claim that , since expert location in practice is always situated , an architecture for building expertise locators would pose undesired restrictions on the information seeker . Rather than supporting expertise location they suggest to increase the awareness of experts ' activities and availability . We will now revisit our case study and provide further empirical evidence to that debate . Expertise location follows very explicit heuristics in our case . After the identification of a problem in maintenance engineering , the experts are rather easy to be found when asking concerning the current state of ( one part of ) the plant . Many of the workers are very confident with the machines and plants they work with , and they are experts for the functioning and current state for them . But the process of maintenance engineering is a specialized activity in which only few actors ( plant operators , maintenance staff ) are involved . So , the choice among the experts is rather limited . A heuristic can be easily explicated and implemented . Often the given organizational micro - politics determine whom to ask in which order ( see section 5 ) . Contrary to Groth and Bower’s ( 2001 ) observation , the current availability or a notion for activity / workload patterns is not a key factor in selecting somebody to ask in our case . Although steel mill workers devote a considerable part of their time to meetings , contact with them is not the major problem . But even in case it would become a major problem , there is little chance to ask somebody else . Awareness mechanisms may facilitate the interaction between information seeker and expert here . Our case study suggests that history data concerning artifacts which represent knowledge may be a source for further heuristics for expertise location . In case more external service provider supports the maintenance engineering process , the relevant knowledge will be distributed among more actors . The simple matching algorithm between the experts and plants would not apply anymore . Due to the incomplete documentation provided by the drawings up to now , such a heuristic may just partially solve the problem . A closer examination of McDonald ' s work sheds new light on the controversy discussed here . In his dissertation in which the ER - Arch is worked out , McDonald ( 2000 , p . 176 ) describes a use scenario where he explicitly describes how recommendations brought up by the system are discarded because the user has additional information about the recommended experts’ availability . The realizations of the architecture obviously are open to users’ choices on how to proceed in the overall expert contacting process . So , it is possible ( and potentially helpful ) to work with heuristics which seem to cover a significant amount of strategies encountered in an organization . However , one should allow the choice among different strategies ( e . g . with the “escalating” functionality by McDonald , or with different or no technological support ) . On the other hand , even from the case given by Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) it is not credible that information seekers do not consider the competences and knowledge of their colleagues before thinking about their availability . The steps of the ER architecture reflect these considerations and give the interactive choices to navigate in recommendations . They do not restrict the strategies and options users choose from . This controversy shows a common discussion pattern among the disciplines involved in CSCW . Designers of technology are criticized for working with inappropriate abstractions of the reality . But there is an inherent need to abstract when computer support is implemented . We have to remember that technological artifacts always face the challenge of practice some day , and that their appropriation in practice decides merciless on the quality of these abstractions . Given McDonald ' s ( 2000 ) design approach which is grounded in a profound field study , the complete inappropriateness of the resulting artifacts is rather implausible . However , his work does not reflect the “total cost of modeling” ( meaning model generation as well as model maintenance ) to which his approach leads . In his approach , huge amounts of metadata have to be generated and frequently updated to make the expertise identification and expertise selection algorithms work . Whether the benefit of the concept justifies its costs is still to be evaluated , and repositioning the concept with regard to appropriate organizational contexts might be required . Conclusion The understanding of the dynamics between technical tools and organizational aspects is still a challenge for knowledge management in organizations ( cf . Ackerman , Pipek , and Wulf 2003 ) . In this contribution we discussed the failure of an introduction of the Answer Garden ( AG ) architecture in a steel mill . We mentioned reasons for the introduction of the AG when describing the application field ( see above ) . We now want to briefly comment on traditional approaches from the field of knowledge management we considered and rejected . Looking back at the experiences presented in the section “Search the Data Base” , it becomes clear that the traditional approach of repository - based support for knowledge management would have failed in this field of application . Approaches such as improving the interoperability of the distributed databases , imposing a general categorization scheme or establishing a universal access point ( e . g . a web portal ) to all documents could have helped improving the knowledge exchange processes . However , inaccurate and incomplete data , a complex classification problem , cost considerations , and organizational rivalries made such options unviable . Extending traditional repository - based approaches by combining information and communication spaces into one architecture , the Answer Garden offered an innovative architecture . Therefore we applied it to a knowledge management problem which could not have been solved by traditional repository - based approaches : retrieving the current state of the plant within the general maintenance engineering process . However , our proposal has been rejected by the different actors although the scenario in the application field seems to fulfill the preconditions of the AG . So the case study adds to the discussion of appropriate organizational settings and possible improvements of the AG , or similar architectures . From revealing some implicit assumptions of the AG , we derive four conditions for organizational settings where the AG approach might be especially appropriate to use . These relate to the acceptance of computer - mediated communication , to the complexity of the expertise structure , to the tradition of digital collaboration media , and to the organization ' s culture . Extensions of the concept our experiences suggest are (cid:127) the consideration of the experts’ strategies to maintain private archives with information artifacts they can use for re - contextualization and explanation processes connected to a request , (cid:127) the use of representation in communication , the option to collaboratively improve representations from the database , (cid:127) and the idea to connect available archives and databases to improve the quality of the overall information infrastructure . We also showed that in our case the given division of labor and intra - organizational rivalries also hindered an AG implementation , processes of organizational development may be required . Additionally , actors which provide information to others may need some additional qualification in documenting their knowledge ( e . g . in editing the corresponding documents ) and indexing their input appropriately . If knowledge cannot be easily expressed via electronic media or if the size of the knowledge domain requires sophisticated classification schemes , it is questionable whether experts are willing to take the additional efforts required . All our experiences stress the importance of an integrated perspective on technical tools and organizational issues in the context of knowledge management support . Along the second line of argumentation , we referred to a recent discussion on the appropriateness of heuristics generated for expert finding support . This is a problem which is also central to the AG approach . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) challenged McDonald ' s and Ackerman ' s ( 2000 ) proposal questioning the usefulness of their heuristics . According to them , the situatedness of expertise finding strategies prevents implemented heuristics for expertise location from being effective . Due to the distribution of expertise in our field study , appropriate heuristics could easily be generated . However , they were not regarded to be useful . We believe that the ER Arch approach ( like the AG and other expertise management systems ) may be problematic due to the high costs involved in building and maintaining appropriate computer models on expertise location . So the " total costs of modeling " have to be considered carefully . Like our study with the AG , we need more in depth evaluations of expertise management systems in different organizational settings . So insights about the match between technical artifacts and organizational settings can be gained . Inappropriate design assumptions become obvious and directions for future research can be derived . This controversy around the ER - Arch shares some aspects with the one between Suchman and Winograd concerning the Coordinator ( Flores et al . 1988 , Winograd 1988 , Suchman 1993 , JCSCW 1995 ) . In both cases , the technological system ( there : Winograd’s “Coordinator” ) which derived design aspects from technically manifesting empirical concepts and results ( there : speech acts used to coordinate work ) was challenged because the resulting artifacts imposed major restrictions on users ' ability to act . We do believe that it is important to observe these design trajectories carefully and critically , but we want to point out that there is a difference whether or not an architecture or technological concept is meant to replace other practices in the work setting it addresses . “Replacement architectures” ( like the “Coordinator” since its concepts address a task – coordination – which inherently affects all work group members ) have to be challenged much harder than “Supplement Architectures” . With regard to Supplement Architectures , practice will show whether or not the ideas of the designers work out . The AG approach and McDonald’s ER - Arch were never meant to replace other knowledge finding strategies . So other choices are still available to work group members . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Gerry Stahl for inspiring and valuable discussions on earlier versions of this paper . We would also like to thank our colleagues Joachim Hinrichs , Markus Klann , Matthias Krings , Bernhard Nett , Tim Reichling , Markus Rohde , Gunnar Stevens , and Markus Won for their comments and contributions to the field work . References Ackerman , M . S . ; Malone , T . W . ( 1990 ) : Answer Garden : A tool for growing Organizational Memory ; in : Proc . of the ACM Conference on Office Information Systems , pp . 31 - 39 Ackerman , M . S . ( 1994 ) : Augmenting the organizational memory : a field study of Answer Garden , in : Proc . of the CSCW ' 94 Conference , ACM Press , pp . 243 - 252 Ackerman , M . S . ( 1996 ) : Definitional and Contextual Issues in Organizational and Group Memories , in : Technology and People , Vol . 9 , No . 1 , pp . 10 - 24 Ackerman , M . S . ; McDonald , D . W . ( 1996 ) : Answer Garden 2 : Merging Organizational Memory with Collaborative Help , in : Int . Conf . on CSCW ' 96 , ACM Press , pp . 97 - 105 Ackerman , M . S . ( 1998 ) : Augmenting Organizational Memory : A Field Study of Answer Garden , in : ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) , 16 ( 3 ) . pp . 203 - 224 Ackerman , M . S . ; Halverson , C . ( 1998 ) . Considering an Organization ' s Memory . Int . Conf . on CSCW ' 98 , Seattle , WA , ACM Press , New York , pp . 39 – 48 Ackerman , M . S . ; Pipek , V . ; Wulf , V . ( eds ) ( 2003 ) : Sharing Expertise : Beyond Knowledge Management , MIT Press , Cambridge MA Bannon , L . ; Kuutti , K . ( 1996 ) : Shifting Perspectives on Organizational Memory : From Storage to Active Remembering , in : Proceedings of HICSS - 29 , pp . 156 - 167 Buckingham Shum , S . ( 1997 ) : Negotiating the Construction and Reconstruction of Organisational Memories ; in : Journal of Universal Computer Science ( Special Issue on IT for Knowledge Management ) , 3 ( 8 ) , 899 - 928 , http : / / www . jucs . org / Davenport , T . H . and Prusak , L . ( 1998 ) : Working Knowledge : How Organizations Manage What They Know . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA , USA . Ehrlich , K . ( 2003 ) : Locating Expertise : Design Issues for an Expertise Locator System , in : Ackerman , M . ; Pipek , V . ; Wulf , V . ( eds ) : Expertise Sharing : Beyond Knowledge Management , MIT - Press , Cambridge MA , pp . 137 - 158 Fagrell , H . , Ljungberg , F . and Kristofferson , S . ( 1999 ) : Exploring support for knowledge management in mobile work . in : Proceedings of the 6 th European Conference on CSCW ( Copenhagen , Denmark , 1999 ) , Kluwer , Dordrecht , The Netherlands , pp . 259 - 276 Flores , F . , Graves . M . , Hartfield , B . , Winograd , T . ( 1988 ) . Computer Systems and the Design of Organizational Interaction . Tran . on Office Information Systems . 6 ( 2 ) , pp . 153 - 172 . Groth , K . ; Bowers , J . ( 2001 ) : On Finding things out : Situated organizational knowledge in CSCW , in : Proceedings of the 7 th ECSCW , Kluwer , Dordrecht , pp . 279 - 298 Hinrichs , J . ( 2000 ) : Telecooperation in Engineering Offices - The problem of archiving . in : Designing Cooperative Systems ( COOP 2000 ) , IOS Press , Amsterdam , pp . 259 - 274 Hutchins , E . ( 1995 ) : Cognition in the Wild . MIT Press , Cambridge MA JCSCW ( 1995 ) , Several contributions in the Commentary Section , Int . Journal on CSCW 3 ( 1 ) , Kluwer , pp . 29 - 95 Lutters , W . G . ; Ackerman , M . S . ( 2002 ) : Archiving Safety : A Field Study of Boundary Objects in Aircraft Technical Support , in : Int . Conf . on CSCW ' 02 , New Orleans , LO , ACM Press , New York , pp . 266 – 275 McDonald , D . W . ( 2000 ) : Supporting Nuance in Groupware Design : Moving from Naturalistic Expertise Location to Expertise Recommendation , PhD - thesis , University of California , Irvine 2000 McDonald , D . W . ; Ackerman ; M . ( 2000 ) : Expertise Recommender : A Flexible Recommendation System and Architecture , in : Int . Conf . On CSCW , ACM Press , New York , pp . 231 - 240 Pipek , V . ; and Won , M . ( 2002 ) . Communication - oriented Computer Support for Knowledge Management . Informatik / Informatique - Magazine of the Swiss Informatics Societies 2002 ( 1 ) : pp . 39 - 43 . Smeaton , C . ; Neilson , I . ( 1995 ) . The Answer Web . Fourth International World Wide Web Conference 1995 , Boston , MA , USA , available upon request from http : / / www . orbitalsw . com . Stahl , G . ; Herrmann , T . ( 1999 ) : Intertwining Perspectives and Negotiation ; in : Int . Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP’99 ) , ACM Press , New York , pp . 316 - 325 Suchman , L . ( 1993 ) . Do Categories Have Politics ? The Language / Action Perspective reconsidered . Europ . Conf . on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW ' 93 ) , Milan , Italy , pp . 1 - 14 . Trigg , R . H . , Blomberg , J . and Suchman , L . ( 1999 ) : Moving document collections online : The evolution of a shared repository . In : 6th European Conference , Kluwer , Dordrecht , NL , pp . 331 - 350 . Winograd , T . ( 1988 ) : A language / action perspective on the design of cooperative work . In : Greif , I . ( ed . ) , CSCW - A book of readings , Morgan Kaufman , San Mateo , CA , pp . 623 - 656 . Wulf , V . ; Krings , M . ; Stiemerling , O . ; Iacucci , G . ; Maidhof , M . ; Peters , R . ; Fuchs - Fronhofen , P . ; Nett , B . ; Hinrichs , J . ( 1999 ) : Improving Inter - Organizational Processes with Integrated Organization and Technology Development , in : JUCS , Vol . 5 , No . 6 , 1999 , pp . 339 - 365 Wulf , V . ; Rohde , M . ( 1995 ) : Towards an Integrated Organization and Technology Development . in : Symposium on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ' 95 ) , ( Ann Arbor , MI , USA , 1995 ) , ACM Press , New York , pp . 55 – 64