University of Texas at El Paso DigitalCommons @ UTEP Rhetoric and Composition PhD papers Department of English 1 - 1 - 2005 Seeking a Rhetoric of the Rhetoric of Dis / abilities Scott Lunsford The University of Texas at El Paso , sslunsford @ utep . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . utep . edu / rhet _ comp Comments : © Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 2005 . This is the authors’ version of the work . It is posted here by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . for your personal use . Not for redistribution . The definitive version was published in : Rhetoric Review . 2005 , Vol . 24 , No . 3 , Pages 330 - 333 . http : / / www . leaonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1207 / s15327981rr2403 _ 6 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Department of English at DigitalCommons @ UTEP . It has been accepted for inclusion in Rhetoric and Composition PhD papers by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ UTEP . For more information , please contact lweber @ utep . edu . Recommended Citation Lunsford , Scott , " Seeking a Rhetoric of the Rhetoric of Dis / abilities " ( 2005 ) . Rhetoric and Composition PhD papers . Paper 1 . http : / / digitalcommons . utep . edu / rhet _ comp / 1 Seeking a Rhetoric of the Rhetoric of Dis / abilities There exists a disability of the rhetoric of disabilities . There are collective labels : the disabled , the deaf , the blind . Insults : crip , retard . Euphemisms : differently abled , handicapable . Pejorative terms : handicapped , wheelchair - bound , victims of paralysis . Plato’s terms : deformed , lunatic . There are those deemed “appropriate” : people with disabilities , people who use wheelchairs . And then there are no words for those who do not talk about disabilities . There is only silence . As an advocate for including dis / ability studies alongside the critical and traditional triumvirate of race , class , and gender , I was excited to see the disability symposium in a recent issue of Rhetoric Review ( 22 . 2 ) . I use the form dis / abilities to emphasize the importance of its inclusion as an issue of difference which we approach as critically as we do race , class , and gender : Just as we cannot discuss race without arguing how “whiteness”—at least in this country—performs hegemonic control over other racial identities , we cannot ignore how “ability” realizes its constituent disability . But how do we go about discussing dis / ability ? How do we move out of this silence and unawareness which strengthen stigma about various forms of disability ? I imagine a metadiscussion to realize a more complicated discourse of disabilities , a discourse which must confront its own disability . First , we must understand the hegemony which makes dis / ability invisible through silence . To put this notion into a context of race , some members of “white” society remain color - blind and resist talking about race , rendering race invisible . As such , some members of an ableistic society sometimes choose to be silent about disability ; thus , disability remains invisible . Ability , too , can be invisible . Those of us who are “able - bodied” might not see it because we are it . Plus , we often do not see that our ability constructs disability . Second , once we’ve made dis / ability visible , we can then expand our awareness through language by becoming sensitive to various terminologies assigned to various disabilities . Last , we must always question the language we use so that we do not slip back into hegemonic unawareness , where we simply take for granted yet another term ( handicapped or person with a disability or differently abled ? ) which becomes trite and falls into emptiness and then back into silence . My interest here , then , is to provide a metadiscussion of the discourse of dis / abilities , examining some of the symposium authors’ use of discourse in their articles and related texts : the rhetoric of the rhetoric of dis / abilities , if you will . The first step in this process can be exemplified in Lend Me Your Ear : Rhetorical Constructions of Deafness , by Brenda Jo Brueggemann , who with Georgina Kleege wrote the symposium article “Gently Down the Stream : Reflections on Mainstreaming . ” In her book , Brueggemann uses the forms d / Deaf and h / Hearing . With their lower - cased initials , the former halves of these dichotomized words signify the audiological aspects of deafness and hearing ; the latter halves denote cultural significance . Yet while those who consider themselves belonging to a Deaf culture , those of us who consider ourselves Hearing might not necessarily assign the initial - capped H designation ; some of us just might not realize we are part of a Hearing culture . But should we hearing folks consider ourselves part of a Hearing culture ? Wouldn’t it further marginalize those who are deaf and hard - of - hearing by making it obvious that we want our own designation in our ableistic community ? Maybe . We who hear provide the normative basis for those who do not hear and who are hard of hearing . Once we realize that idea , we become part of the Hearing culture , and then we are able to see the hegemonic control over Deaf culture . Awareness of hegemony established , we can then further this awareness into the realization of how words and their concepts maintain control over “other” halves of conceptually dichotomized cultures . As I move to the use of words—the second step to this envisioned process—I will invoke Brueggemann again . In Lend Me Your Ear , she asserts that she does not want to focus on words alone : “Rather than to turn to the text , as Aristotle might prefer , and analyze the terms on its page , I favor a more process - centered and person - dominated over a product - centered and strictly linguistic approach” ( 27 ) . But I must consider that , as rhetoric is interested in studying words and the realities they create , we do indeed pay attention to words sometimes on their own merit . Doing so , we bring sensitivity to the various uses of words and realize their rhetorical value . 2 For example , Cynthia Lewiecki - Wilson , in her symposium article , “Representing Disability Rhetorically , ” cites collective labels such as the severely mentally retarded and mentally ill ; the disabled ( 157 ) ; and schizophrenics ( 163 ) , yet in the introduction to Embodied Rhetorics , she and coeditor James Wilson use person - first terms such as disabled people with mental illness and cognitive impairments ( 10 ) . The first group of words , the collective labels , has by some advocates been deemed “negative” ; these terms not only ignore individual identity by labeling people collectively , but also maintain that the person is the disability itself . The person - first terms within the second group , a single phrase , are considered “affirmative” or “appropriate” ; the person comes before the disability , not seen as the disability or grouped under a label . I may seem to be criticizing what looks like an inconsistency in term use , but instead I am trying to complicate the issue so that I myself can become more sensitive to these uses . We have a multitude of words to choose from , and we must become sensitive to their kairotic natures and the implications for using them rhetorically . For instance , newspapers may write the disabled in a headline because the appropriate phrase people with disabilities doesn’t fit . Does this usage further marginalize those in wheelchairs who want to be known as people with disabilities and not the disabled ? Perhaps . But what about those who call themselves “handicapped” ? This term seems inappropriate to advocates for disability issues . Who gets to choose—the advocate , the person with the disability , or the community of people with disabilities as a whole ? Further , is it appropriate for two people in wheelchairs to call each other “crip” and inappropriate for an “outsider” to give either one of them the same pleasantry ? Sure . Shared language strengthens the identity of a discourse community . On the other hand , what authority does anyone have over owning language that others can’t use ? So , yes , discussing words , and ultimately asking why we valorize some words over others , is important . How else do we perform metadiscussions without these words , words appropriate or not ? When we stop interrogating the rhetoricity of rhetoric we stop theorizing about our own discipline . I think it’s safe to say that we might never find the answers to Why ? , but it doesn’t mean we shouldn’t ask the questions about our own rhetorics . When we stop complicating any rhetoric , its discourse may become 3 fixed , second - nature , and taken for granted . We stop thinking about that discourse , and , eventually , it becomes trite and slips into silence and then invisibility . We cannot stop questioning what becomes commonplace : “It must be that way because it’s always been that way . ” And , thus , we cannot stop questioning authority . Science , for example , in its authoritative “absolutism” and “objectivity , ” should not escape criticism of labels used about people with disabilities . Should we not question scientific terms which are set firm because of their very “scientificity” ? James Wilson takes on this question in his symposium article , “Evolving Metaphors of Disease in Postgenomic Science : Stigmatizing Disability . ” He examines terms used in eugenics , terms which can be figuratively attached to attributes shared by people with disabilities . The eugenics movement , Wilson says , attempts in part to “eliminate so - called ‘defectives’” such as “deadbeat , ” “oft - shifty , ” “renegade , ” and “immigrant” DNA sequences ( 199 ) . Genes termed as mutants , lesions , and errant “are cast as misfits that subvert the social collective” ( 198 ) . Thus , these metaphors “are profoundly disturbing to many members of the disability community” ( 199 ) . If these terms are set by science , what is the likelihood for change ? Does science prevail while rhetoric continues only to ask questions ? Probably . But the fact that we are even asking questions about terms and tropes leads to awareness . When we become aware that science is not always linguistically appropriate , that there might just be a Hearing culture , that terms not yet created will someday be so and people will have their disagreements with these new terms as well—when we become conscious of all of these and more , we will not return to hegemonic unawareness where dis / abilities are invisible . Deconstructing questions must always be asked , for if we become satisfied with our answers , we run the risk of slipping back into our own comfortable silence . Scott Lunsford University of Texas at El Paso 4 Works Cited Brueggemann , Brenda Jo . Lend Me Your Ear : Rhetorical Constructions of Deafness . Washington , D . C . : Gallaudet U P , 1999 . Symposium : Representing Disability Rhetorically . Ed . Theresa Enos . Rhetoric Review . 22 . 2 ( 2003 ) : 154 - 202 . Wilson , James C . , and Cynthia Lewiecki - Wilson , eds . Embodied Rhetorics : Disability in Language and Culture . Carbondale : Southern Illinois U P , 2001 . 5