Creating Creative Spaces for Co - Designing with Autistic Children - The Concept of a “Handlungsspielraum” Julia Makhaeva , Christopher Frauenberger , Katharina Spiel Institute for Design and Assessment of Technology , Vienna University of Technology , Austria julia . makhaeva @ tuwien . ac . at christopher . frauenberger @ tuwien . ac . at katharina . spiel @ tuwien . ac . at ABSTRACT Participatory design is inherently concerned with creatively invent - ing alternative futures . From this perspective we argue that facili - tating meaningful participation is conﬁguring processes that allow for the unfolding of creative potentials of participants . To this end , we have developed the concept of “Handlungsspielraum” – the con - ceptual creative space in which participants and designers collabo - rate , exploring unique pathways by balancing given structures and freedoms in order to creatively think about the design at hand . Be - yond the theoretical value of this perspective , we have found the concept to be a powerful , practical tool which allows designers to plan , conduct and reﬂect on co - design activities . In the Outside - TheBox project it has supported us in systematically developing tailored co - design activities with autistic children to design inter - active “smart” objects . It has allowed us to consciously design creative spaces by providing social , physical and mental – method - ological structures as well as creative freedoms . In the paper we establish the concept of a “Handlungsspielraum” and provide four case studies to demonstrate the practical guidance that it offers . CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; Keywords creativity ; children ; autism ; participatory design 1 . INTRODUCTION Historically , concepts of “participation” have evolved in response to different domains and purposes . While the Scandinavian tradi - tion was ideologically concerned about workplace democracy , un - derstandings of participation shifted to involve users in the design of interactive technologies , systems and products , for more prag - matic reasons [ 24 ] . Despite the differences in interpretation , par - ticipatory design ( PD ) practices are fundamentally concerned about facilitating creative processes to create alternative futures . How - ever , although the creative process is considered a central and un - Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . PDC ’16 , August 15 - 19 , 2016 , Aarhus , Denmark © 2016 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4046 - 5 / 16 / 08 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940306 derlying mechanism in PD , creativity as a concept is rarely explic - itly discussed in PD literature ( e . g . , [ 44 , 40 , 3 ] ) . In this paper we argue that using creativity as a conceptual lens on participation provides a powerful means to design , conduct and reﬂect on participatory work . While much PD literature is con - cerned about methodological contributions [ 24 ] , a creativity per - spective shifts the focus toward creating the right conditions for participants to contribute in creative ways . The challenge of mean - ingful participation is a challenge of conﬁguring structures and freedoms for a gradual unfolding of the creative potentials of par - ticipants . This perspective supports designers and researchers to have a broader view on how to facilitate participation within their speciﬁc context . It provides a systematic approach to tailor pro - cesses to participants and go beyond adapting or ( re - ) interpreting methods . We are motivated to explore this avenue by the challenge of in - volving autistic 1 children in the design of ubiquitous computing artefacts . Our speciﬁc context requires customised conﬁgurations to enable the children to meaningfully participate in the design pro - cess . It also requires us not only to stay responsive to the evolv - ing collaboration but also to be ﬂexible in planning and conduct - ing participatory work with autistic children . To systematically in - form the process , we developed the concept of “Handlungsspiel - raum” ( HSR ) , inspired by the experiences of Malinverni et al . [ 34 ] in facilitating creative processes in a similar context , Peschl and Fundneider’s [ 37 ] framework of enabling spaces and the framework of Benton et al . [ 3 ] for involving neurodiverse children in the tech - nology design process . The concept allows us to prepare , conduct and reﬂect on the creative process at hand and to stay responsive to the individual needs of different participants within PD sessions . The German term “Handlungsspielraum” signiﬁes a range of differ - ent meanings : the common translation “Scope of Action” suggests constraints while the literal translation of the three components of the compound word : Handlungs - Spiel - Raum – Action - Play - Space – hints at the notion of creatively making use of the given room for manoeuvre . In our interpretation , the concept of “HSR” supports designers in planning co - design sessions by framing the creative process through structures and freedoms , in conducting co - design work by exploring the individual pathways to unfold the creative potentials of participants within these frames and in reﬂecting on the process to inform the planning of subsequent co - design ses - sions . In this paper we develop the concept of “HSR” and demonstrate how it guided us in designing the participatory work in the Outside - TheBox project . We begin by discussing related work in creativity 1 We are fully aware about the complex discussions surrounding person - ﬁrst vs . label - ﬁrst language ; we opt for the latter , due to it being the predominantly self - chosen form [ 31 ] . 51 research , PD and creativity , PD with autistic children and the seem - ingly contradictory status of creativity in autism , then follow by introducing the concept of “HSR” in more detail , before turning to speciﬁc examples from OutsideTheBox , and conclude by reﬂecting on our experiences . 2 . RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Creativity The term creativity “originates” from the Latin word “creare” , which means “to make” or “to create” . It was ﬁrst applied only in the ﬁeld of arts and only to individuals considered geniuses . Contemporary psychological notions of creativity go back to Paul Guilford in 1950 , who in his research linked creativity to divergent thinking of individual persons . Over the decades , the concepts of creativity have been researched from different perspectives , other than the psychological , and were broaden to an understanding of creativity as resulting from the synergy of different socio - material sources , moving away from the individual perspective as a sudden insight of the individual creative mind [ 33 , 10 ] . All approaches of creativity research are explained best by considering four aspects : the person , including individual experience and creative behaviour , the creative outcome , the creative process and the creative situation or environment [ 43 ] . For researchers of cognitive science , creativity occurs inside peo - ple’s mind as part of a cognitive system . Boden [ 5 ] examines cre - ativity as “an aspect of human intelligence [ . . . ] grounded in every - day abilities” and “the ability to come up with ideas or artefacts that are new , surprising and valuable” . She deﬁnes as “psychological creative” , outcomes that are new and valuable to the person , thus categorising something as new depends on an individual subjective point of view , as opposed to what she calls “historical creative” , outcomes that are new and valuable to the majority of people . This deﬁnition focuses on the novelty and value of the outcomes . Boden’s concept of “psychological creativity” takes into con - sideration the individual creative interpretation similarly to the “C Model” of Kaufman and Beghetto [ 1 ] . However , as opposed to Bo - den , they highlight the creative experience and the process “within a particular socio - cultural context” [ 29 ] . To be able to consider ev - eryone’s creative potentials , Kaufmann and Beghetto focus on the distinction between “Big - C” , “little - c” and “mini - c” ; which they describe , “mini - c” as “personally meaningful interpretation of the creative experience” , “little - c” as everyday creativity and “Big - C” as “breakthrough creativity that changes a ﬁeld” . Several researchers of the creative process argue that creativity occurs as a reaction to different environmental and socio - cultural aspects . Hennessey and Amabile [ 25 ] , for example , stressed the “intrinsically” and “extrinsically” factors of motivation for creative activity , as well as Csikszentmihalyi [ 10 ] , who also deﬁnes his in - terrelational “systems model” of creativity to include three parts : domain , ﬁeld and individual person . Csikszentmihalyi introduces and deﬁnes a “ﬂow experience” of creativity in relation to the pro - cess and the individual experience as a feeling when “the abilities are well matched to opportunities for action” . The notion of creativity as an everyday activity embedded in a social and cultural context , went on to be taken up by anthropologi - cal research on cultural creativity . Friedman [ 22 ] deﬁnes social and existential conditions , as well as explicit and implicit constraints , as a foundation for creativity , and explains the concept of creativ - ity as a “social phenomenon” producing cultural worlds . Liep [ 33 ] identiﬁes two modes of creativity : “conventional creativity” that occurs as “the small - scale or everyday production of solutions to current problems following habituated generative structures” and “true” creativity where “meaningful forms are renewed or emerge through unconventional extension or application” . The concept of “conventional creativity” , which involves con - tinually making implicit decisions and improvising in the moment according to the constantly changing social and physical environ - ment [ 27 ] , could be connected to the approach of “little - c” and “mini - c” creativity , that refer to the situation in which creativity appears . Petruschat [ 38 ] argues that there is a strong connection between creativity and consciousness : following the theory of con - sciousness by Edelman and Tononi [ 16 ] , he sees consciousness as a cognitive process of an individual in which a continuous stream of data , delivered by the central nervous system , is used to con - struct an inner model of the external context within which the self operates [ 12 ] . This awareness of a situated self , enables individuals to act beyond their instinctive and predeﬁned behaviours , and this ability to set up an inner model for self awareness and for acting in a physical environment and its socio - cultural dimensions , he claims , should be considered as the fundamental action and framework for any kind of human creativity . These divers perspectives on creativity allow us to extract a mean - ing that serves as a lens on our work with autistic children . Relevant for our research on autistic creativity is the individual ability of the children to act and produce solutions in a socio - material context . The next sections discuss the notions of creativity in a collabora - tive setting of PD , in general and with autistic children . 2 . 2 PD and Creativity Creativity in the context of PD refers to the capacity for creating meaningful alternative futures and constitutes a core resource in de - sign practice . Although PD researchers and practitioners recognise the explicit need to provide appropriate methods and conditions to enable “participatory creativity” ( e . g . [ 6 , 34 ] ) , only little explana - tion , as emphasised by Warr and O’Neill [ 44 ] , is provided of what is actually meant by this and what the creative process consists of . Fischer [ 17 ] describes “the social nature of creativity” and points out that in collaborative design practices , creativity occurs within a cultural context , particularly through interaction with others or with artefacts . Concerning the design process in PD as a collective and social practice , Warr and O’Neill [ 44 ] discuss the potentials and challenges in terms of social inﬂuences on the collective creativity that design teams have , such as generating and expressing ideas , evaluating apprehension and social loaﬁng . In addition , Sanders et al . [ 40 ] highlight the general difﬁculty many people have “to be - lieve they are creative” and to be able to contribute their ideas in the unfamiliar role as co - creators . They suggest different levels of creativity that take place in the daily lives of the participants . The idea that “everyone is creative” can be directly connected to the theories of “C - Model” , “conventional creativity” , “improvi - sation” and “self awareness and acting” [ 1 , 33 , 27 , 38 ] mentioned previously . These concepts of creativity fundamentally shape our perspective on creativity in participatory processes presented in this paper . We argue that this perspective allows PD practitioners and researchers to appreciate the creative ability in non - professional participants and shift the focus to the design of appropriate envi - ronments and conditions to fathom creative potentials . For our de - sign practice with autistic children and on the basis of the theories presented above , we deﬁne creativity as a quality everyone pos - sesses that gives rise to something novel within and contingent on the particular socio - material environment , including social interac - tions and the wider cultural context . 52 2 . 3 PD with Autistic Children A diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Conditions ( ASC ) is given across a wide range of possible characteristics including unusual recipro - cal socio - communicative interaction and repetitive interests or be - haviours , which are expressed differently between autistic individ - uals . Worldwide prevalence is estimated at about 1 % [ 8 ] . It is widely recognised that the design of technologies for autistic chil - dren fundamentally beneﬁts from their inclusion in the design pro - cess and a range of methods to do so have emerged in recent years ( cf . [ 2 ] for a review on involving children with special needs in design ) . As Millen et al . [ 35 ] point out , tasks have to be presented in a structured , focused and constrained way . For them , this means preparing PD sessions well , but also being ﬂexible when unplanned events occur . Frauenberger et al . [ 20 ] conducted PD sessions with typically developing and autistic children . They structured their sessions along experiences with sensory objects and storytelling . They also point out how important it is to leave design processes open ended , to not suggest that outcomes have to be correct . In related work , Frauenberger et al . [ 19 ] also highlight the speciﬁc challenges for involving autistic children in the design process , which include managing narrow interests , perfectionism or social anxiety . In a more general approach , Benton et al . [ 3 ] address a whole range of neurodiverse children with their concept and put a focus on consid - ering the children’s strengths . They identify four steps for facilitat - ing PD workshops in such a fashion : understanding the culture of the child , tailoring sessions to individual strengths and needs , struc - turing the environment appropriately and providing support when needed . Another angle is provided by Malinverni et al . [ 34 ] , who consider the beneﬁts of PD processes for the children . They make clear that the activities have to be meaningful to the children and create a feeling of competency for them . This does not only en - tail that researchers have to be aware of a child’s current mood and feeling in a session and adapt to that , but also continuously reﬂect on how the session was meaningful for the child . 2 . 4 Creative Potentials in Autistic Children Earlier studies refer to a connection between executive dysfunc - tion and imagination deﬁcit in autism ( e . g . , [ 36 , 39 ] ) . Ozonoff et al . , e . g . , describe the executive function “as the ability to main - tain an appropriate problem - solving set for attainment of a future goal” [ 36 ] . Limitations in skills associated with executive function , such as planning , organised searching , ﬂexibility in thinking and acting , are therefore limiting creative behaviours in autistic people . Consistent with the cognitive theory of executive dysfunction in autism , Baron - Cohen and Craig tested and assessed creative think - ing of autistic children and illustrated that children with autism and Asperger syndrome tend to perform less creative on given tasks [ 9 ] . However , all of these studies and recent research ( e . g . , [ 4 , 13 ] ) show that autistic children do have the ability for creative think - ing . Many people with ASCs are visual and pattern thinkers , typi - cally with great attention to detail . Often they show extraordinary skills , remarkable abilities and a passion for particular subject areas [ 23 ] . According to our conception of creativity as an innate qual - ity of everyone , autistic creativity is individual and subjective , as all children have talents and creative potentials in unique ways , but particularly for children on the autistic spectrum it is difﬁcult to un - fold their potential of creativity in environments shaped by and for non - autistic adults and children . Well - intentioned efforts to inte - grate autistic children into non - autistic living conditions by design - ing rules and structures often miss the needs for self - determination , autistic expression and support for individual abilities . Focusing on the special needs of autistic children highlights the limits and deﬁcits of the disability and does little to create environments in which alternative ways of being creative are positively scaffolded ( cf . [ 18 ] ) . Creativity as we deﬁned it , arises within a social - material context rooted in the individual experience of the socio - physical en - vironment . We therefore have to create safe and customised condi - tions that encourage , enable and motivate an autistic child towards unfolding their creative potentials . 3 . THE CONCEPT OF “HANDLUNGSSPIELRAUM” We developed the concept of “Handlungsspielraum” ( HSR ) to refer to the conceptual space in which creative co - design activities take place , and were inspired by Peschel and Fundneider’s concept of enabling spaces as a framework of factors to support innova - tion activities [ 37 ] . Our approach enables PD practitioners and re - searchers to systematically prepare , conduct and reﬂect on collab - orative creative processes . It emphasises the relevance of tailored conditions that enable the ﬂexible exploration of creative potentials of participants , in order to make meaningful contributions within the PD process . The German term “Handlungsspielraum” ﬁts our intentions , both in the sense of its common translation “Scope - of - Action” as well as in the verbatim translation of “Handlungs - Spiel - Raum” in “Action - Play - Space” . We suggest structure and creative freedom as the two core com - ponents of “HSR” and recognise , along with Malinverni et al . [ 34 ] , “the balance between creative freedom and structure” as a vital in - strument to facilitate creative processes and to create favourable conditions for gradual testing of boundaries and unfolding of cre - ative potentials of participants [ 21 ] . The space for creative action and exploration within the creative process emerges from the ten - sion between creative freedom and structure , as the creative free - dom offers possibilities for creative action and the structures focus the direction of the explorations . Johnson - Laird deﬁnes “freedom and constraint in creativity” as “individual’s freedom of choice” and this “choice is made from among options that are speciﬁed by criteria” [ 28 ] , but instead of rigid constraints , we intentionally de - scribe such criteria with the term “structure” to allow more ﬂexibil - ity within . “HSR” frames the dynamic balance between structure and creative freedom , aiming to ﬁnd the appropriate balance for each participant , thus enabling them to experience their own cre - ativity . It allows for a systematic adjustment of conﬁgurations to facilitate a creative process . We see the concept of “HSR” not only as a theoretical lens but also as a practical tool that supports designers in three ways : 1 . In planning co - design activities : we frame a creative space – a HSR – by conﬁguring structures and freedoms that are tailored to our participants . 2 . In conducting activities : we explore individual pathways through the HSR to fathom creative potentials . The concept supports the continuous balancing act between structure and freedom and allows a participant to stay in the ﬂow . 3 . In reﬂecting on activities after the fact : we analyse the path - way taken in the session and consider the features of the HSR and how they facilitated choices . This directly informs the planning process for subsequent sessions . Figure 1 illustrates the iterative process of conﬁguring the partic - ipation . In the following sections we provide further detail on the three iterative stages in which we use our concept . 53 Figure 1 : Iterative Re - Conﬁguration of Participatory Work through the Concept of “Handlungsspielraum” ( HSR ) 3 . 1 Framing Creative Space – Creating a HSR The individual capacities and abilities of participants serve as the basis for developing possible structures and aspects of creative free - dom which frame the creative space – the HSR – for a co - design ac - tivity . Focusing on neurodiverse children , Benton et al . emphasise the signiﬁcance of carefully considering their cultures , interests , talents and strengths [ 3 ] . We agree and argue that these individual requirements are fundamental for meaningful participation in any group of participants and should be taken into account during the preparation of each PD session . To systematically develop and prepare different kinds of struc - tures to create the HSR , we propose three categories : social struc - tures , physical structures , and mental - methodological structures . Social structures include the roles and relations of all involved hu - man actors . These structures can also be partly hidden , such as implicit power - structures ( cf . [ 7 ] ) . Physical structures deﬁne the environmental and material frames of the session , including fea - tures of the physical spaces in which the collaboration takes place or the kinds of materials that are available to the participants . Men - tal structures include the interests , thought patterns or habits of par - ticipants , and while being internal , with less scope for actively de - signing them , can be embedded into activities to different degrees , thus providing more or less structure for the participants . Method - ological structures include the actual PD methods or the design in - tent . Scope for creative freedom is systematically created in one of two ways : On the one hand , it emerges from the conscious de - cision to omit or limit different kinds of structures , for example , reducing the speciﬁcity of the task opens the creative freedom to explore the design space more freely or reducing affordances of materials create opportunities for divergent thinking . On the other hand , and conversely , introducing structures as opportunity spaces can unlock creative freedoms , for example , through technology im - mersion techniques [ 15 ] , narrative frames [ 14 ] or simply by diver - sifying materials . Other creative freedoms are created through at - titudes : this includes , for example , positive enforcement of explo - rative behaviours or a non - judgemental atmosphere . Depending on the domain and the context , structures and cre - ative freedoms can take on various forms . However , the underlying intention can be clearly articulated : structures aim to provide safe spaces in which participants feel comfortable , relaxed and stimu - lated . Spaces for creative freedom open possibilities for partici - pants to contribute their own ideas . It is the subtle interplay and balance between those two that , we argue , leads to meaningful par - ticipation . 3 . 2 Exploring Pathways in a HSR After having created a possible HSR for a co - design activity by designing structures and freedoms , we interpret conducting the ac - tivity as exploring pathways through this creative space . Facili - tating this exploration means staying attentive to the situation and being ﬂexible about balancing structures and freedoms as needed . This process of fathoming creative potentials is likely marked with cycles of trial and error . Starting from well known structures , a gradually scope for creative freedom is introduced until its poten - tial declines or becomes an obstacle . This is not always a contin - uum , in that structures and freedoms can be scaled at will , but also an exploration of the appropriate kinds of structures and freedoms to scaffold the creative process . The concept here bears similarities to the concept of ﬂow by Csikszentmihalyi [ 11 ] . Seeking the bal - ance between structure and freedom with the aim of ﬁnding sweet spots for creative contributions could be interpreted as a variation of balancing skills and challenges to experience ﬂow . A consequence of viewing co - design activities as exploring path - ways through a HSR , is that facilitators are required to stay agile in the process . This relates to Schön’s concept of reﬂection in ac - tion [ 41 ] as it draws attention to the fact that practitioners deal with uncertainties , instabilities and uniqueness by drawing on their tacit knowledge , accumulated through reﬂecting in action . A HSR pro - vides them a conceptual frame that supports this kind of reﬂective work . 3 . 3 Reﬂection and Re - Conﬁguration In closing the iteration cycle , the concept of the “HSR” enables designers and researchers to systematically reﬂect on their experi - ences with the goal to inform the re - conﬁguration of the participa - tion for future sessions . Reviewing the pathways taken and identi - fying enablers and obstacles to creative expressions in the process , provides the basis for evolving or replacing the structures and cre - ative freedoms . For example , if the participants had difﬁculties to participate in a speciﬁc task , what kind of structures and freedom were particularly hindering , or , if the participants were in the cre - ative ﬂow , what kind of structures and freedom were particularly enabling . The evaluated insights can be used to create a new HSR for the next session . 3 . 4 Format of the Concept Figure 2 : Blueprint for the Conception of the HSR 54 The blueprint in Figure 2 is presented as a visual aid for design - ers to start creating unique HSR appropriate to the particular con - text and participants group . When applying the concept of “HSR” for the ﬁrst time , it can be helpful to list the possible structures and aspects of freedom to develop a repertoire of facilitating strategies and to reﬂect afterwards on how they shaped the creative process . In our experiences , the visualisation is particularly helpful in ear - lier stages of the collaboration , but it also reﬂects a way - of - thinking that does not always need to be externalised , i . e . , it becomes a lightweight , practical tool - to - think - with that allows designers to stay agile and responsive during their work . We also want to em - phasise that designers will need to develop their own strategy and appropriate formats for balancing between structure and freedom , depending on their own particular socio - material environment . 4 . CASE STUDIES In this section we present four case studies , prefaced with a short description of OutsideTheBox to put them into their research con - text . Throughout the descriptions , we have set in italic the elements of the HSR ( structures and aspects of freedom ) as well as the deci - sions during the process and the insights during the reﬂection . 4 . 1 OutsideTheBox OutsideTheBox explores new roles of technologies in the lives of autistic children and promotes a paradigm shift away from a narrow focus on limitations and deﬁcits towards a holistic and participatory perspective . Autistic children are individually involved in a one - year design process with the goal to design their own technological objects , that affords positive experience and supports them in shar - ing those experiences with their social environment . Our research aims to demonstrate , how focusing on child - led innovation of assis - tive technologies by considering the experiences , preferences and individual interests of the child , can result in valuable and unique contributions . In order to provide appropriate PD methods for each child , we re - interpreted different design co - working methods to the individual contexts . During the ﬁrst year of OutsideTheBox we worked with four children : Bruno , Thomas , Holger and Lucas 2 , and developed with and for each of them their very own personal smart object , based on the individual interests and desires of each child . They were aged between 6 and 8 years and attended integrative main schools in Austria , where we met with each of them every other week during the school year for a total of 10 to 14 sessions per child . Their individual diagnosis varied as much as their strengths and abilities , as we discuss in their individual case studies below . When we met with the children , two researchers were always present . One of them took the role of a Play Partner while the other one acted as an Active Observer . The Play Partner took on the role of a design partner who fulﬁlled undesired tasks , such as writing , that the Active Observer gave the design team consisting of child and Play Partner . The Active Observer was responsible for giving feedback , handing out tasks , structuring the sessions and documenting them . Next to these social structures , we also de - signed spatial structures for different activities ( publication forth - coming ) . Over the span of the sessions , we identiﬁed ﬁve overall design activities : ideation , conceptualisation , prototyping , testing and evaluation . We consider these phases to be overlapping , itera - tive and ﬂexible . The following case studies present examples from these different activities and for different children , to demonstrate how our concept can be applied throughout the design process . For 2 Pseudonyms were used for this publication in order to ensure the privacy of each child . each case study , we present how we ﬁrst conceptualised the HSR for one particular session , second how we conducted the session and ﬁnally how we reﬂected on it to inform subsequent work . A more detailed description of our project and our four design pro - cesses with the children during the ﬁrst project year , including the ﬁnished prototypes , is provided in [ 21 ] ) In the following sections we demonstrate how the concept of “HSR” has guided us through the participatory work in the Out - sideTheBox project . We are presenting ﬁgures exemplifying one of our case studies to illustrate our co - design activities . 4 . 2 Ideation - Session with Bruno Bruno has been diagnosed with High Functioning Autism . Dur - ing our collaboration he was 6 years old and attending the ﬁrst grade . We met Bruno at school in a small nurse room furnished initially with one table and three big chairs . When we got to know him on our ﬁrst meeting , we identiﬁed a great interest in letters . Despite his young age he was already very good at reading and writing . The following case study describes the second session of contextual exploration with Bruno , during the initial ideation de - sign activity . The goal of the planned session was to set up the documentation folder of the project and to design its personal front page . Framing the creative space : As a ﬁrst methodological structure we created a visual schedule in form of numbered tasks in order to support Bruno’s need for predictability . To create scope for creative freedom we opted for a variety of craft materials , such as glue and paper , that offered an open ended range of affordances and possi - bilities . As a mental structure we prepared a set of letters made of paper , with the intention to connect the activity to his special in - terest . We also planned to experiment with de - contextualising the letters from writing and to observe how Bruno could re - interpret them in other possible ways , e . g . as graphic patterns . This opened another potential creative space to explore in the session . Exploring pathways : First , Bruno read the schedule with the numbered tasks and tallied them when he was ready to go to the next . For the task of designing the folder , the Active Observer of - fered all materials by putting them on the table . The letters were more interesting than all other materials , including the folder , and Bruno quickly compounded different letters into words . To put this letter play aside and return to the purposed task of designing the front page of the folder , the Play Partner suggested to glue one of the composed words on it . Bruno then took the glue and delegated the task to his Play Partner . As the ﬁrst word was on the folder , he picked the coloured pen and replicated the word with his handwrit - ing . He then asked his Play Partner to draw the object that the word referred to . In order to involve Bruno in the drawing activity , the Play Partner drew only the outline and asked Bruno to colour it . This procedure was repeated until the front page of the folder was full of words and drawings . After the design was ﬁnished , the Ac - tive Observer proposed Bruno to draw his favourite toy on a blank sheet of paper , offering Bruno a lot of creative space , but instead , he started to write down the names of his classmates and stopped only after all of them were written down . As the session ended , Bruno started to feel uncomfortable sitting on a chair that was too big for him . He changed his position frequently and was working with us while standing most of the time . Reﬂection : After the session , we reviewed our observations con - cerning our interaction with Bruno as well as the conditions of the session . First , we discerned that the physical environment of the room provided little opportunities for ﬂexible movement , play and creative action for any of us . To improve this we agreed on the ne - cessity to rearrange the physical space of the room by moving the 55 table to the side and creating a work and play space on the ﬂoor . The collaborative redesign of the space in the next session should also increase Bruno’s acceptance of the physical environment and his overall well - being in the room . Second , we recognised the impor - tance of the role of the Play Partner as a social structure . Letting the Play Partner direct activities subtly , opens creative spaces for Bruno as it reduces the feeling of task - obedience when instructions were given by the Active Observer . Lastly , while the mental struc - ture of letters has proven powerful , it also restricted his creative input . The role of paper , pen and letters had to be limited in the activity to not let him fall into rigid behaviour patterns with little possibilities to divert his attention toward exploring new things . Figure 3 shows the planning stage of the concept of “HSR” and the conducting activities , illustrating a pathway through the HSR with Bruno . Figure 3 : Example of the Planning of Structures and Aspects of Freedom , and Concluding Exploration of a Pathway through the HSR in the Ideation Session with Bruno Figure 4 illustrates the reﬂecting stage of the concept of “HSR” presenting our considerations for the subsequent session with Bruno . Figure 4 : Example of the Reﬂection on Co - Design Activities with Bruno 4 . 3 Conceptualisation - Session with Thomas Thomas has been diagnosed with a Pervasive Developmental Disorder and was attending the third grade during our collabora - tion . He was additionally supported individually through a special education teacher . We got to know Thomas , then at the age of 9 , as a friendly but very shy child , who loved playing computer games and drawing . Due to limited functional language , Thomas used his drawing skills as an instrument for communicating with his envi - ronment . We worked with Thomas in a play room attached to his classroom . Initially , his special education teacher was present to re - duce the anxiety for this unknown social setting . In this case study we present the ﬁrst session of the conceptualisation activity with Thomas . Based on how relevant drawing is for him , we wanted to observe in detail his interaction with his own drawings in different contexts . Framing the creative space : First , we prepared already known physical structures , like pens and paper , which always motivated Thomas to interact with us through his drawings . With the purpose to open the space for novel explorations , we took one of his original drawings of a cat and reproduced it in different sizes . Even though the deﬁned character of the cat , as physical and mental structure , might implicitly frame the activity , the variety of sizes was deemed to provide more creative space and inspire him to use the charac - ter in different ways , e . g . for a puppet show . In addition , to give Thomas the space to freely explore his drawings , we decided to fa - cilitate the session without a concrete task . As social structures , the Active Observer was prepared to give Thomas continuous positive feedback and the Play Partner intended to constantly support him and to try out new things ﬁrst in order to enable him . Exploring pathways : At the beginning of the session , Thomas refused to work with us and sought shelter under a couple of blan - kets on the couch . The Play Partner encouraged Thomas by im - promptu also taking cover under another blanket as well as further covering him up with it . The Active Observer showed Thomas and his Play Partner his sketches from the last session and invited them to explore these . As Thomas recognised his own drawing of the cat , he was curious and started interacting with us . He kept his blanket around him as an element that increased his feeling of safety in this new situation . The Play Partner also kept the blanket around them , giving him a feeling of acceptance . The Active Observer continued revealing copies of the drawing in different sizes . First , Thomas explored all the drawings and verbally gave them different roles ; for instance , the smallest one was identiﬁed as “a baby - cat” whereas the largest one became “a grandpa - cat” . He then arranged the cats according to their size and explained this to his Play Part - ner . While apparently having fun with the replicated drawings , he removed his blanket cover soon after . Later on , to provide more structure for the explorations , the Active Observer gave Thomas a pen and suggested to sign the drawings with their new roles , but he instead drew on them new added elements like wings , magic wands or crowns and described new roles for the characters : “the butterﬂy cat” , “the magic cat” and “the princess cat” , for example . As he ﬁnished , Thomas expressed his wish to present his new drawings to his teacher . Reﬂection : Reﬂecting on the session , we noted that to begin , Thomas required a known physical structure , the blanket , to feel safe , but simultaneously exciting physical structures , his drawing of the cat in different sizes , to engage him , motivate him and to get his curiosity peaked to start interacting with us . Pens and blank paper were also important physical structures . Concerning the so - cial structures , the Active Observer gave Thomas constant posi - tive feedback and praise and the Play Partner took on a strict non - judgemental role and created a playful atmosphere imitating his 56 actions , both of which reduced his stress and enabled him to act freely . At last , we recognised his own tacit rules as mental - struc - ture that guided him through the non - directed exploration of his drawings , and realised that in order to be able to close the session successfully and satisfyingly for Thomas , as methodological struc - ture , a space for sharing his achievements has to be implemented . 4 . 4 Prototyping - Session with Holger Holger has been diagnosed with High - Functioning Autism . He was 6 years old and in his ﬁrst year at school during our collabo - ration . Right from the very beginning we have come to appreciate his great verbal communication and reﬂection skills . He identiﬁed himself as our research colleague , showed great interest in research and discovery and was very excited to develop his own novel smart object . Taking into consideration our previous experiences with Bruno , we redesigned the room where we met , together with Hol - ger , into a consistent physical environment : a “research lab” . Hol - ger developed during the ideation and conceptualisation activities the idea of a thinking and remembering machine . However , his ﬁrst concept result was a one - on - one copy of the Gyro Gearloose 3 thinking cap . The following case study shows our ﬁrst prototyping session with Holger . The main goal of the purposed session was to encourage Holger to create his own thinking cap and to explore the possible forms , sizes and elements of the machine . Framing the creative space : We prepared two type of physical structures : ﬁrst , diverse craft materials that were open for multi - ple interpretation , like different types of cardboard , paper , scissors , glue , threads and rods , and second , various materials that would suggest some applications and afford speciﬁc actions , in case he would be needing more structural support . As a methodological structure , we decided to use the representation of his ﬁrst proto - type in form of a photograph to serve as a basis for the generation of ideas , but we also elaborated speciﬁc critical questions to chal - lenge the existing idea of the thinking cap to open the creative space for new design ideas . Finally , as another methodological structure , we created a visual schedule to provide an overview of the session and to keep focus of the main purposed goal . Exploring pathways : We started the session as usual with a short view on the schedule and reﬂecting on the last session , open - ing a space for an exchange of ideas . The photograph of his last prototype initiated a discussion between Holger and his Play Part - ner . The Active Observer gave the task to brainstorm and write down novel ideas for the thinking and remembering machine , based on the collaborative insights regarding advantages and disadvan - tages of the previous prototype . Because of his self proclaimed “imperfection in writing and drawing” , he delegated the writing task to his Play Partner . While in the ﬂow of ideas exchange , the Play Partner asked Holger how to draw or to write some of the ideas in a better way , effectively encouraging him to take the pen himself and to assist . In the next step , the Active Observer sug - gested materials and Holger chose the appropriate ones accord - ing to the criteria of the discussed prototype ideas . Interestingly , he straightaway rejected all materials that were concretely deﬁned and had a concretely deﬁned application . Holger also managed the chronological order of the prototyping activities and delegated more difﬁcult tasks to his Play Partner . From time to time during the whole process , he turned away from the topic to explain sci - entiﬁc stories not related to the work to both the Play Partner and the Active Observer , but the visual schedule and above all the pro - totyping of a concrete object helped to return the direction back to the topic . While constructed from different materials , the prototype of this session was still very much fuelled by the initial inspiration 3 a Walt Disney ﬁctional character of an inventor duck of Gyro Gearloose’s thinking cap . However , the functionality was expanded towards remembering situations as well . Reﬂection : As a social structure , we discerned as fundamentally important the function of the Play Partner in supporting Holger by taking on the writing task and giving him therefore the space to fo - cus completely on the development of ideas and not be diverted by his hang - up about writing . Furthermore , by working as a design team the Play Partner creatively affected Holger with her contribu - tions , offering him a space for his own ideas and encouraging him to try more difﬁcult tasks . The ideas deﬁned together and partic - ularly their visualisation created an implicit mental structure that framed the selection of the materials for the prototyping activities . Despite the discussed ideas and the different elements , the new prototype embodied the same form as the ﬁrst copy of the Gyro Gearloose thinking cap , but incorporated additional functionality realised by an attached second object . For the next session , in order to open more space for Holger’s own creative ideas , we decided to prepare a number of concrete questions and scenarios as mental - methodological structures that challenge the design of the cap by putting it in different situations and environments , like in school or outdoors . 4 . 5 Evaluation - Session with Lucas Lucas has been diagnosed with autism and has been receiving Applied Behavioural Analysis Therapy since very young age . He was 8 years old during our collaboration and attending the third grade . At the beginning he interacted with us in a very shy and reserved way , but the more we gave him the feeling that we appre - ciate his ideas , the more he felt comfortable with his contributions . A strong relationship developed between Lucas and his Play Part - ner over the course of the sessions , providing him a secure and trustful space to play and work , as well as encouraging him to try out new activities like role playing or using ﬁnger paint . Because of his interests in movies and stories , we developed an object together with Lucas , L - Smart , that allows him to view and share trailers of upcoming movies and sequences of pictures to scaffold his story - telling . The following case study presents one of the last testing and evaluation sessions after Lucas had used his object and interacted with it during the summer holidays . Framing the creative space : In previous sessions we had es - tablished that Lucas had difﬁculties to express his opinion directly . We therefore opted for a different approach and planned the evalu - ation session along drama - based techniques [ 32 ] as a methodolog - ical structure . We conceptualised the session within the narrative frame of Lucas’ current favourite movie 4 . By doing so we tried to reference mental structures to support the exploration of different emotions that might play a role in the interaction with his smart object . We intended to follow principles of “Chairwork Gestalt - Therapy” by Frederick ’Fritz’ Perls [ 30 ] by placing ﬁve chairs in the middle of the room and sticking a picture of each emotion from the movie as well as a piece of cloth in the correlating colour . The chairs , pictures and pieces of cloth were prepared to provide phys - ical structures for the evaluation . Lucas was supposed to literally put himself in place of an emotion using his smart object – through the chairs and the props he could do so spatially as well as men - tally . Methodologically , we planned to ease him into this new and unknown activity by a range of low - key warm up exercises that gradually increased in complexity . Three realistic and well - known situations were conceptualised in which he would recreate his ex - periences with his smart object . Lucas would choose the situation and the emotion he associates himself with in that situation . The Play Partner as a social structure would also play a part in these 4 Inside Out , Pixar , 2015 57 scenarios , showing Lucas that the activity was safe and enjoyable and encouraging him if he hesitated . Exploring pathways : While Lucas was happy to see both re - searchers after a long break , during this session he seemed espe - cially close to his Play Partner . They enjoyed performing the ac - tivities the Active Observer assigned to them as a team and en - sured each others comfort during the session . The Active Observer also opened up free space to explore options by constantly provid - ing positive feedback . Upon seeing the chairs , each with a charac - ter picture and a cloth attached to them , he curiously investigated the physical structures we provided and immediately used them as we had methodologically planned . This meant , we did not require warm up exercises and could rather provide more open space for casual play between Lucas and his Play Partner . When Lucas was instructed to start the situational role play , he was mildly confused at ﬁrst , but picked up his task quickly after the Play Partner started playing in the assigned role . Lucas then had the freedom to care - fully choose an emotion for each of the situations and through that choice and how he played it , he gave us feedback about his opinion of his smart object . Reﬂection : The Play Partner and the Active Observer provided the intended freedom for Lucas to feel comfortable and relaxed . These structures were also well established , due to the evaluation being at the end of our collaboration . Our initial concerns of Lu - cas being potentially overwhelmed by drama techniques were un - founded . He increased the complexity of his acting requiring only little guidance . Tying the activity back into his core interests was a great motivation for Lucas . He happily explored the creative pos - sibilities each emotion role offered him , based on what he knew about the movie . Especially by drawing from the scenes in the closing credits , where he learnt that core emotions are different in everyone , he was able to abstract them from the given characters in the movie and adapt them to the situations we provided . The smart object physically tied back to the overarching project and gave Lu - cas an anchor to orient himself on during the role playing activity . 5 . DISCUSSION The case studies above present examples of how a HSR can be created by framing structures and freedoms , how different these structures and freedoms can be , how the concept facilitates the ex - ploration of individual pathways and reﬂection to inform subse - quent work . Each creative process with each child was framed by the appropriate social , physical and methodological and men - tal structures to enable and motivate the child to interact , play and explore . Above all , the social structures we provided through con - sciously designing our own roles as Play Partner and Active Ob - server contributed to facilitating a creative process . The Play Part - ner opened secure and inspiring spaces that enabled the child to interact in a relaxed atmosphere and guided the child implicitly within the playful action , while on the other hand , the Active Ob - server provided more explicit and formal structure . As Thomas unpredictably refused to interact with us , the Play Partner took his side and joined his action , providing support and the feeling of not being on his own . While Lucas , when he was confused by a new drama exercise , the Play Partner created an inspiring playful atmo - sphere encouraging him to open up and to step forward into the unknown task without the fear of failure . In comparison , the Ac - tive Observer acted in a more explicit way , ﬂexibly providing ap - propriate materials for Thomas and clarifying the rules for Lucas by suggesting possible ways of action in the unknown ﬁeld . As discussed above , autistic children ﬁnd it particularly difﬁcult to be creative in physical environments that are shaped by and for non - autistic adults or children . We regard the physical structure of the environment therefore as a signiﬁcant frame that should be care - fully created at the beginning of each collaboration . In our cases , the well - known environment at school reduced the children’s anxi - eties , but at the same time they were often not geared towards cre - ative work . In the case of Bruno , the initial room arrangement was impeding the possibility to freely move around and to play . In - side the ( meta - ) structure of the well - known environment we tried to break up existing structures like seating arrangements and work - places and created new ones , actively involving Bruno in the re - design of the environment . We also rearranged the environment with Holger and labelled it as a research lab , which opened a cre - ative space where he felt like a scientist . Alongside environmental structures , different materials offer phys - ical structures , providing opportunities to explore and experiment , sometimes beyond the affordances ﬁrst associated with them . For example , a pen triggered in Thomas the drawing activity and in combination with the replicated character of one of his previous drawings in different sizes , he added novel and original elements to each character . By combining a well - known activity with well - known , but slightly modiﬁed elements , he felt free to appropriate them in original ways . At other moments on the pathway through a HSR , it is the diversity of materials that unlock the creative po - tential . During prototyping , Holger selected explicitly open ended materials over others that suggested some sort of speciﬁc use , to be able to experiment with forms that would best embody his idea . The special interests and strengths of the children , letters and writing for Bruno , drawing for Thomas , research and inventions for Holger and movies and stories for Lucas , were not only of impor - tance for the development of ideas , but provided safe and motivat - ing starting points for explorations , as individual pathways through HSR . They also serve as “tacit mental criteria” [ 28 ] in the sense that they subconsciously shape the choices made in creative spaces . Each individual pathway was molded through a continuous balance between freedom and structure . We gradually tested the boundaries of the creative potential by increasing or reducing the complexity of tasks or by adding well - known or new elements . During our PD sessions , we gave the children a HSR to explore their own creative potentials , and based on our understanding of creativity , we have come to appreciate different and very personal moments of creativity in each child , similar to the ideas of “mini - C” creativity , " conventional creativity " and the " self awareness and acting " theory [ 1 , 33 , 38 ] . Composing words , redesigning draw - ings , choosing materials for prototyping , play - acting and particu - larly the ability to act and react , should be seen as creative actions . With an appropriate individual balance between structure and cre - ative freedom and based on their individual strengths and interests , all children developed their own novel ideas for the technological objects , as unique contributions to the design of new technologies for autistic children , that non - autistic adults would not have been able to make in this form . As such , our approach has had a sig - niﬁcant impact on the outcomes ( for a detailed discussion see [ 21 , 42 ] ) . We recognise as a possible limitation of the concept of " HSR " , that the creative moments and creative ideas of the participants need to be interpreted in order to become meaningful for the researchers who are developing a technology . This is even more pronounced for autistic children who might use non - verbal modes of communi - cation . The concept of “HSR” extends the scope of the “empowerment dimension” [ 34 ] of PD activities . This is the case not only in terms of the possibility for the participants to learn design - thinking skills and meaningfully contribute as co - designers , but also as a frame - work in which they can discover and experience their creativity . 58 We argue that the conscious framing of the two core concept com - ponents – structure and freedom – is crucial for the planning and customising of methods and conditions to create an individual cre - ative space for each participant during the co - design activities . In our current work we re - interpret digital fabrication and a mak - ers approach [ 26 ] as co - design methods in which the concept of “HSR” offers us valuable guidance . We see that digital fabrication offers a wide spectrum of structures , as well as a variety of opportu - nities for action , but requires different conditions and collaboration methods , unlike the analog handicraft materials used in the case studies above . 6 . CONCLUSION In this paper we have introduced “Handlungsspielraum” ( HSR ) , a concept that supports the planning and conducting of PD sessions , by framing the creative process through structures and freedoms , then balancing the structures and freedoms within these frames to discover individual pathways for each participant to unfold their creative potentials and culminating with a reﬂection on the whole process to complement the planning of the subsequent session with the gained insights . Being aware of the signiﬁcance of creativity in context with PD , we were inspired and motivated by our work with autistic children in the OutsideTheBox project and by the common contradictory misconception between autism and creativity . We have exempliﬁed the concept and its application through four case studies of our PD practises , and to illustrate the broad spec - trum of the individual requirements for structures and freedom of the participants , as well as to demonstrate the ﬂexibility of “HSR” by means of this broad spectrum , each study represents one session with a different child at a different design stage . We consciously conceived “HSR” as an open concept , because we are aware of how multifaceted different PD processes in all their aspects can be , e . g . their goals , their participants and their methods . The concept is a ﬂexible and adaptable companion for designers . Creating , exploring and reﬂecting on HSR offers them a unique perspective into the creative processes driving the design process . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research is funded by the Austrian Science Fund ( FWF ) : [ P26281 - N23 ] “OutsideTheBox - Rethinking Assistive Technolo - gies with Children with Autism” project . We would also like to thank our participating children , families , schools and the local government . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] R . A . Beghetto and J . C . Kaufman . 2007 . Toward a Broader Conception of Creativity : A Case for “mini - c” Creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts 1 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 73 – 79 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 1931 - 3896 . 1 . 2 . 73 [ 2 ] L . Benton and H . Johnson . 2015 . Widening participation in technology design : A review of the involvement of children with special educational needs and disabilities . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( 2015 ) . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 07 . 001 [ 3 ] L . Benton , A . Vasalou , R . Khaled , H . Johnson , and D . Gooch . 2014 . Diversity for Design : A Framework for Involving Neurodiverse Children in the Technology Design Process . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3747 – 3756 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557244 [ 4 ] C . Best , S . Arora , F . Porter , and M . Doherty . 2015 . The Relationship Between Subthreshold Autistic Traits , Ambiguous Figure Perception and Divergent Thinking . ( 2015 ) . [ 5 ] M . A . Boden . 1994 . Creativity : A framework for research . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17 , 03 ( Sept . 1994 ) , 558 – 570 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0140525X00035986 [ 6 ] T . Bratteteig and I . Wagner . 2010 . Spaces for participatory creativity . ACM Press , 51 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900449 [ 7 ] T . Bratteteig and I . Wagner . 2012 . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’12 ) . ACM , Roskilde , Denmark , 41 – 50 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2347635 . 2347642 [ 8 ] CDC . 2015 . Facts About ASDs . ( 2015 ) . http : / / www . cdc . gov / ncbddd / autism / facts . html [ 9 ] J . Craig and S . Baron - Cohen . 1999 . Creativity and imagination in autism and Asperger syndrome . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 29 , 4 ( 1999 ) , 319 – 326 . http : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1023 / A : 1022163403479 [ 10 ] M . Csikszentmihalyi . 1996 . Creativity : ﬂow and the psychology of discovery and invention ( 1st ed ed . ) . HarperCollinsPublishers , New York . [ 11 ] M . Csikszentmihalyi . 2009 . Flow : The psychology of optimal experience . Harper [ and ] Row , New York . [ 12 ] A . R . Damasio . 2000 . The feeling of what happens : body and emotion in the making of consciousness ( 1 . harvest ed ed . ) . Harcourt , San Diego , CA . [ 13 ] M . L . Diener , C . A . Wright , K . N . Smith , and S . D . Wright . 2014 . Assessing Visual - Spatial Creativity in Youth on the Autism Spectrum . Creativity Research Journal 26 , 3 ( July 2014 ) , 328 – 337 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2014 . 929421 [ 14 ] C . Dindler and O . S . Iversen . 2007 . Fictional Inquiry - design collaboration in a shared narrative space . CoDesign 3 , 4 ( Dec . 2007 ) , 213 – 234 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / doi : 10 . 1080 / 15710880701500187 [ 15 ] A . Druin . 1999 . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 592 – 599 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 [ 16 ] G . M . Edelman and G . Tononi . 2001 . A universe of consciousness : how matter becomes imagination ( 1 . paperback ed . , [ nachdr . ] ed . ) . Basic Books , New York , NY . [ 17 ] G . Fischer . 2004 . Social creativity : turning barriers into opportunities for collaborative design , Vol . 1 . ACM Press , 152 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1011870 . 1011889 [ 18 ] C . Frauenberger . 2015 . Disability and Technology - A Critical Realist Perspective . In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility . ACM Press , Lisbon , Portugal , 8 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2700648 . 2809851 [ 19 ] C . Frauenberger , J . Good , A . Alcorn , and H . Pain . 2013 . Conversing Through and About Technologies : Design Critique as an Opportunity to Engage Children with Autism and Broaden Research ( er ) Perspectives . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 1 , 2 ( May 2013 ) , 59 38 – 49 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2013 . 02 . 001 [ 20 ] C . Frauenberger , J . Good , and W . E . Keay - Bright . 2011 . Designing Technology for Children with Special Needs - Bridging Perspectives through Participatory Design . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts 7 , 1 ( March 2011 ) , 1 – 28 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2011 . 587013 [ 21 ] C . Frauenberger , J . Makhaeva , and K . Spiel . 2016 . Designing Smart Objects with Autistic Children – Four Design Exposès . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing System . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858050 [ 22 ] J . Friedman . 2001 . The Iron Cage of Creativity : An Exploration . In Locating cultural creativity , J . Liep and Københavns Universitet ( Eds . ) . Pluto Press , London . [ 23 ] T . Grandin . 2009 . How does visual thinking work in the mind of a person with autism ? A personal account . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 364 , 1522 ( May 2009 ) , 1437 – 1442 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0297 [ 24 ] K . Halskov and N . B . Hansen . 2015 . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 – 2012 . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 74 ( Feb . 2015 ) , 81 – 92 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 003 [ 25 ] B . A . Hennessey and T . M . Amabile . 1988 . The conditions of creativity . In The Nature of creativity : contemporary psychological perspectives , R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ; New York . [ 26 ] S . Hyysalo , C . Kohtala , P . Helminen , S . Mäkinen , V . Miettinen , and L . Muurinen . 2014 . Collaborative futuring with and by makers . CoDesign 10 , 3 - 4 ( July 2014 ) , 209 – 228 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 983937 [ 27 ] T . Ingold and E . Hallam . 2007 . Creativity and cultural improvisation : An Introduction . In Creativity and cultural improvisation , E . Hallam and T . Ingold ( Eds . ) . Berg , New York , NY . [ 28 ] P . N . Johnson - Laird . 1988 . Freedom and constraint in creativity . In The Nature of Creativity : contemporary psychological perspectives . , R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , New York , 202 – 219 . http : / / mentalmodels . princeton . edu / papers / 1988freedomandconstraint . pdf [ 29 ] J . C . Kaufman and R . A . Beghetto . 2014 . Creativity in the Schools : Renewed Interest and Promising New Directions . In Handbook of positive psychology in schools ( second edition ed . ) , M . J . Furlong , R . Gilman , and E . S . Huebner ( Eds . ) . Routledge , New York . [ 30 ] S . H . Kellogg . 2004 . Dialogical encounters : Contemporary perspectives on “chairwork” . In Psychotherapy : Research , Theory , Practice , Training . Number 41 . 310 – 320 . http : / / transformationalchairwork . com / articles / dialogical - encounters / [ 31 ] L . Kenny , C . Hattersley , B . Molins , C . Buckley , C . Povey , and E . Pellicano . 2015 . Which terms should be used to describe autism ? Perspectives from the UK autism community . Autism ( July 2015 ) , 1362361315588200 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361315588200 [ 32 ] T . Liao and O . Person . 2015 . Drama , play - making and ambiguity in the early stages of design . CoDesign 11 , 2 ( April 2015 ) , 134 – 148 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1061558 [ 33 ] Liep , J . 2001 . Introduction . In Locating cultural creativity , J . Liep and Københavns Universitet ( Eds . ) . Pluto Press , London . [ 34 ] L . Malinverni , J . MoraGuiard , V . Padillo , M . Mairena , A . Hervás , and N . Pares . 2014 . Participatory Design Strategies to Enhance the Creative Contribution of Children with Special Needs . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 85 – 94 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593981 [ 35 ] L . Millen , S . Cobb , and H . Patel . 2011 . A method for involving children with autism in design . In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’11 ) . ACM , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 185 – 188 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1999030 . 1999057 [ 36 ] S . Ozonoff , B . F . Pennington , and S . J . Rogers . 1991 . Executive Function Deﬁcits in High - Functioning Autistic Individuals : Relationship to Theory of Mind . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 32 , 7 ( Nov . 1991 ) , 1081 – 1105 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1469 - 7610 . 1991 . tb00351 . x [ 37 ] M . F . Peschl and T . Fundneider . 2014 . Designing and Enabling Spaces for collaborative knowledge creation and innovation : From managing to enabling innovation as socio - epistemological technology . Computers in Human Behavior 37 ( Aug . 2014 ) , 346 – 359 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2012 . 05 . 027 [ 38 ] J . Petruschat . 2005 . Das Leben ist bunt . In Form + Zweck , Till Bruttel ( Ed . ) . Form und Zweck , Berlin . [ 39 ] J . Russell ( Ed . ) . 1997 . Autism as an executive disorder . Oxford University Press , Oxford ; New York . [ 40 ] E . B . - N . Sanders and P . J . Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . CoDesign 4 , 1 ( March 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701875068 [ 41 ] D . A . Schön . 1983 . The Reﬂective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action . Basic Books , New York . [ 42 ] K . Spiel , J . Makhaeva , and C . Frauenberger . 2016 . Embodied Companion Technologies for Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the ACM International conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction . Eindhoven . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839495 [ 43 ] C . W . Taylor . 1988 . Various approaches to and deﬁnitions of creativity . In The Nature of creativity : contemporary psychological perspectives , R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ; New York . [ 44 ] A . Warr and E . O’Neill . 2005 . Understanding design as a social creative process . ACM Press , 118 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1056224 . 1056242 60