Personality and Social Psychology Review 2001 , Vol . 5 , No . 3 , 184 - 200 Copyright © 2001 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . A Social Identity Theory of Leadership Michael A . Hogg School ofPsychology University of Queensland A social identity theory of leadership is described that views leadership as a group process generated by social categorization and prototype - based depersonalization processes associated with social identity . Group identification , as self - categorization , constructs an intragroup prototypicality gradient that invests the most prototypical member with the appearance of having influence ; the appearance arises because members cognitively and behaviorally conform to the prototype . The appearance of influence becomes a reality through depersonalized social attraction processes that makefollowers agree and comply with the leader ' s ideas and suggestions . Consensual social attraction also imbues the leader with apparent status and creates a sta - tus - based structural differentiation within the group into leader ( s ) and followers , which has characteristics ofunequal status intergroup relations . In addition , afunda - mental attribution process constructs a charismatic leadership personality for the leader , which further empowers the leader and sharpens the leader - follower status differential . Empirical support for the theory is reviewed and a range ofimplications discussed , including intergroup dimensions , uncertainty reduction and extremism , power , and pitfalls ofprototype - based leadership . Over the past 25 years social psychology has placed relatively little emphasis on the study of leadership . This is probably associated with the well - documented decline during the 1960s and 1970s of interest in small group research , the associated ascendency of social cognition , the European emphasis on large scale inter - group relations , and the " outsourcing " of small group and leadership research to organizational and manage - ment departments ( for historical overviews , see Abrams & Hogg , 1998 ; Hogg & Abrams , 1999 ; Jones , 1998 ; McGrath , 1997 ; Moreland , Hogg , & Hains , 1994 ; Sanna & Parks , 1997 ) . In recent years , however , the social identity perspec - tive has begun to provide an integrative conceptual fo - cus for a revival of interest among social psychologists in group phenomena and for a dynamic linkage of social cognitive and intergroup processes ( Hogg & Abrams , 1999 ; Moreland et al . , 1994 ) . This has generated social identity analyses of a diverse range of phenomena ( e . g . , Abrams & Hogg , 1990 , 1999 ; Capozza & Brown , 2000 ; Ellemers , Spears , & Doosje , 1999 ; Hogg & Abrams , This article was made possible by a research grant from the Aus - tralian Research Council . I thank Kelly Fielding , Margaret Foddy , Sarah Hains , Leigh Mor - ris , and Sherry Schneider for their various intellectual contributions to the development of some of the ideas presented in this article . Requests for reprints should be sent to Michael A . Hogg , School of Psychology , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Austra - lia . E - mail : m . hogg @ psy . uq . edu . au 1988 ; Robinson , 1996 ; J . C . Turner , Hogg , Oakes , Reicher , & Wetherell , 1987 ; Worchel , Morales , Paez , & Deschamps , 1998 ) and has provided a social cognitive framework for social psychology to reexamine leader - ship as a group process . In this article I describe a social identity theory of group leadership . I develop the theory with an introduction to relevant aspects of social identity and self - categorization the - ory , and then I contextualize by a short dissertation on leadership research . I describe in some detail the em - pirical support for core components of the leadership theory with the emphasis on direct tests . In the latter part of the article , I draw out and describe some direct implications and extensions of the theory for a range of aspects of leadership . Brief Overview of Leadership Research Leadership has long been a focus of research for so - cial psychology and the wider social sciences ( e . g . , Bass , 1990a ; Chemers , 1987 , 2001 ; Eagly , Karau , & Makhijani , 1995 ; Fiedler & House , 1994 ; Graumann & Moscovici , 1986 ; Hollander , 1985 ; Stogdill , 1974 ; Yukl , 1981 ) . In recent years , however , it has waned in popularity for mainstream social psychology and is in - stead more commonly researched in other disciplines , 184 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP particularly organizational psychology ( e . g . , Wilpert , 1995 ; Yukl & Van Fleet , 1992 ) . Although personality perspectives identify some per - sonality correlates of leadership ( e . g . , talkativeness ; Mullen , Salas , & Driskell , 1989 ) , and personality ex - plains some variance in the emergence of leaders in ini - tially leaderless groups ( Kenny & Zaccaro , 1983 ) , scholars agree that personality alone is a relatively poor correlate of leadership ( Stogdill , 1974 ; Yukl , 1981 ; but see Albright & Forziati , 1995 ) . An alternative , situational perspective is that almost anyone can be an effective leader if the circumstances are right ( e . g . , Bales , 1950 ; Sherif , 1966 ) . In the 1960s , drawing on a third strand of research that described the actual behavior of leaders ( e . g . , Bales , 1950 ; Lippitt & White , 1943 ; Stogdill , 1974 ) , Fiedler ( 1965 , 1971 ) introduced an interactionist model ; the leadership effectiveness of a particular behav - ioral style is contingent on the favorability ofthe situation to that behavioral style . Fiedler ' s contingency theory is generally reasonably well supported ( e . g . , Strube & Gar - cia , 1981 ) despite some continuing controversy ( e . g . , Pe - ters , Hartke , & Pohlmann , 1985 ) . Another perspective focuses on leadership as a dy - namic product of transactions between leaders and follow - ers ( Bass , 1990b ; Hollander , 1985 ; Lord & Maher , 1991 ; Nye & Simonetta , 1996 ) . For example , because leaders play a significant role in helping followers achieve their goals , followers bestow power and status on leaders to re - store equity . Relatedly , followers may try to redress the power imbalance in groups by gaining personal informa - tion about the leader . This is an attributional process that imbues the leader with charisma and thus additional power ( Fiske , 1993 ; Fiske & Depret , 1996 ) . Leaders may also ac - cumulate " idiosyncrasy credit " with the group by con - forming to group norms . This subsequently allows them to be innovative and effective leaders ( Hollander , 1958 ; Hol - lander & Julian , 1970 ) . Recent transactional leadership perspectives , mainly in organizational psychology ( Wilpert , 1995 ) , focus on transformational leadership . Charismatic leaders are able to motivate followers to work for col - lective goals that transcend self - interest and transform organizations ( Bass , 1990b ; Bass & Avolio , 1993 ; see Mowday & Sutton , 1993 , for critical comment ) . This focus on charisma is particularly evident in " new lead - ership " research ( e . g . , Bass , 1985 , 1990b , 1998 ; Bryman , 1992 ; Burns , 1978 ; Conger & Kanungo , 1987 , 1988 ) , which proposes that effective leaders should be proactive , change oriented , innovative , mo - tivating and inspiring , and have a vision or mission with which they infuse the group . They should also be interested in others and be able to create commitment to the group and extract extra effort from , and gener - ally empower , members of the group . Social psychology ' s emphasis on social cognition has produced an extension of implicit leadership the - ory ( Hollander & Julian , 1969 ) called leader categori - zation theory ( e . g . , Lord , Foti , & DeVader , 1984 ; Nye & Forsyth , 1991 ; Palich & Hom , 1992 ; Rush & Rus - sell , 1988 ; also see Nye & Simonetta , 1996 ) . People have preconceptions about how leaders should behave in general and in specific leadership situations . These preconceptions are cognitive schemas of types of leader ( i . e . , categories of leader that are represented as person schemas ) that operate in the same way as other schemas ( see Fiske & Taylor , 1991 ) . When someone is categorized on the basis of their behavior as a leader , the relevant leadership schema comes into play to gen - erate further assumptions about behavior . Leadership schemas vary in situational inclusiveness . Subordinate schemas apply only to specific situations ( they may re - late to specific status characteristics , as described by expectation states theory ; e . g . , Berger , Fisek , Norman , & Zelditch , 1977 ; Ridgeway , 2001 ) , whereas superordinate schemas apply to a wide range of situa - tions and embody very general leadership characteris - tics . Good leaders are people who have the attributes of the category of leader that fits situational requirements . This perspective treats leader categories as nominal categories - that is , cognitive groupings of instances that share attributes but do not have any psychological existence as a real human group . Indeed , the notion of a social group only of leaders makes little sense ; who would lead and who would follow ? Leadership is viewed as a product of individual information process - ing , not as a structural property of real groups nor as an intrinsic or emergent property of psychological ingroup membership ( see Hogg , 1996a ) . Commentary on Leadership Research and a New Direction With only a few notable exceptions , then , the recent study of leadership has been conducted outside of con - temporary mainstream social psychology and so has not benefitted from some of the recent conceptual ad - vances made within social psychology . Although most perspectives now recognize that leadership is a rela - tional property within groups ( i . e . , leaders exist be - cause of followers and followers exist because of leaders ) , there is no analysis of leadership that de - scribes how leadership may emerge through the opera - tion of ordinary social cognitive processes associated with psychologically belonging to a group . In contrast , the most recent analytic emphasis is mainly on ( a ) individual cognitive processes that cat - egorize individuals as leaders - the social orientation between individuals is not considered , and thus group processes are not incorporated ; or ( b ) whether indi - viduals have the charismatic properties necessary to meet the alleged transformational objectives of lead - 185 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG ership - leadership is a matter of situationally attrac - tive individual characteristics rather than group processes . Both these perspectives have recently in - vited some criticism for neglecting the effects of larger social systems within which the individual is embedded ( e . g . , Hall & Lord , 1995 ; Haslam & Platow , 2001 ; Lord , Brown , & Harvey , 2001 ; Pawar & Eastman , 1997 ) . Lord et al . ( 2001 ) explained that leadership cannot be properly understood in terms of a leader ' s actions or in terms of abstract perceptual categories of types of leader , and that a paradigm shift in how we understand leadership is called for . Their solution is to explore a connectionist , or parallel con - straint satisfaction , level model . However , if leadership is indeed a structural feature of ingroups , then leaders and followers are interdepen - dent roles embedded within a social system bounded by common group or category membership . Thus , leadership dynamics may be significantly affected by the social cognitive processes associated with group membership ( and group behaviors ) , specifically the processes of self - categorization and depersonalization now believed to be responsible for social identity pro - cesses , group behavior , and intergroup relations . Leaders may emerge , maintain their position , be effec - tive , and so forth , as a result of basic social cognitive processes that cause people 1 . To conceive of themselves in terms of the defin - ing features of a common and distinctive ingroup ( i . e . , self - categorization , or identification , in terms of the ingroup prototype ) . 2 . To cognitively and behaviorally assimilate themselves to these features ( i . e . , cognitive and behav - ioral depersonalization in terms of the ingroup proto - type producing ingroup stereotypic or normative perceptions , attitudes , feelings , and behaviors ) . 3 . To perceive others not as unique individuals but through the lens of features that define relevant ingroup or outgroup membership ( i . e . , perceptual depersonal - ization of others in terms of the ingroup or outgroup prototype , producing stereotypical homogenization ) . If leadership is produced by these group processes contingent on psychologically belonging to the group , then having the prototypical or normative characteris - tics of a psychologically salient ingroup ( i . e . , being a prototypical ingroup member ) may be at least as im - portant for leadership as being charismatic or having schema - consistent characteristics of a particular type or category of leader ( i . e . , being schematic of a nomi - nal leader category ) . My aim in this article is to show that a social iden - tity analysis can provide this sort of new , group mem - bership oriented analysis of leadership processes . First , I briefly review social identity and self - categori - zation theory , then describe the proposed leadership theory followed by empirical support for its core ten - ets , and finally I explore a range of specific implica - tions , extensions , and future directions . Social Identity and Self - Categorization The social identity perspective contains a number of compatible and interrelated components and empha - ses , in particular an original emphasis by Tajfel and Turner and their associates on social identity , social comparison , intergroup relations , and self - enhance - ment motivation ( often simply called social identity theory ; e . g . , Tajfel & Turner , 1979 ) and a later cogni - tive emphasis by J . C . Turner and his associates on the categorization process ( called self - categorization the - ory ; e . g . , J . C . Turner et al . , 1987 ) . Social identity the - ory and self - categorization theory have been extensively overviewed as an integrated whole else - where ( e . g . , Hogg , 1996a , 2000a , 2001 ; Hogg & Abrams , 1988 , 1999 ; Hogg , Terry , & White , 1995 ; J . C . Turner , 1999 ) . Social Identity and Intergroup Relations Tajfel ( 1972 ) introduced the idea of social identity to theorize how people conceptualize themselves in in - tergroup contexts , how a system of social categoriza - tions " creates and defines an individual ' s own place in society " ( p . 293 ) . He defined social identity as " the in - dividual ' s knowledge that he belongs to certain social groups together with some emotional and value signif - icance to him of this group membership " ( Tajfel , 1972 , p . 292 ) . Because groups only exist in relation to other groups , they derive their descriptive and evaluative properties , and thus their social meaning , in relation to these other groups . Furthermore , because social identity is self - evaluative and derives its value from the evaluative properties of the ingroup , social compari - sons between groups are focused on establishing evaluatively positive distinctiveness for one ' s own group . Intergroup relations involve a process of com - petition for positive identity ( J . C . Turner , 1975 ) in which groups and their members strive to protect or en - hance positive distinctiveness and positive social iden - tity . The specific way this occurs is governed by people ' s subjective understanding of the psychological permeability of group boundaries and the stability and legitimacy of status relations between groups ( Tajfel & Turner , 1979 ) . This aspect of social identity theory has had a significant impact on social psychology ( see Ellemers , 1993 ; Hogg & Abrams , 1988 ) . 186 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP Self - Esteem Hypothesis The drive for evaluatively positive social identity through positive distinctiveness is underpinned by a ba - sic human need for positive self - esteem ( e . g . , J . C . Turner , 1982 ; J . C . Turner , Brown , & Tajfel , 1979 ) , a self - enhancement motive . The implication is that self - esteem motivates social identification and group behavior , and social identification satisfies the need for self - esteem ( Abrams & Hogg , 1988 ) . Reviews of re - search on this self - esteem hypothesis reveal inconsistent findings that suggest a distinction between individual and group membership based self - esteem , and that the relationship between self - esteem and group behavior may be affected by other variables such as self - esteem extremity , identity strength , and group threat ( see Abrams & Hogg , 1988 ; Hogg & Abrams , 1990 ; Long & Spears , 1997 ; Rubin & Hewstone , 1998 ) . Crocker and her colleagues ( e . g . , Crocker , Blaine , & Luhtanen , 1993 ; Crocker & Luhtanen , 1990 ; Luhtanen & Crocker , 1992 ) have explored self - esteem processes in inter - group behavior extensively and have developed a col - lective self - esteem scale that some researchers employ as a measure of social identity . Self - Categorization , Prototypicality , and Depersonalization The cognitive dimension of social identity is speci - fied by self - categorization theory ( J . C . Turner , 1985 ; J . C . Turner et al . , 1987 ) in terms of the causes and con - sequences of social categorization of self and others ( Hogg , 2001 ) . The process of social categorization perceptually segments the social world into ingroups and outgroups that are cognitively represented as pro - totypes . These prototypes are context specific , multidi - mensional fuzzy sets of attributes that define and prescribe attitudes , feelings , and behaviors that charac - terize one group and distinguish it from other groups . Social categorization of other people perceptually as - similates them to the relevant ingroup or outgroup pro - totype and thus perceptually accentuates prototypical similarities among people in the same group and prototypical differences between people from different groups ; there is an accentuation effect ( e . g . , Tajfel , 1959 , 1969 ) that underpins stereotyping . This overall process is called depersonalization because people are not viewed as unique and multifaceted individuals but as matches to the relevant ingroup or outgroup proto - type ; prototypicality , not individuality , is the focus of attention . Depersonalization refers to change in the ba - sis of perception ; it does not have the negative conno - tations of deindividuation or dehumanization . Social categorization of self , self - categorization , has the same effect but more so . It not only depersonal - izes self - perception but goes further in actually trans - forming self - conception and assimilating all aspects of ones attitudes , feelings , and behaviors to the ingroup prototype ; it changes what people think , feel , and do . Depersonalization is the basic process underlying group phenomena ; it perceptually differentiates groups and renders perceptions , attitudes , feelings , and behav - iors stereotypical and group normative . Prototypes are often stored in memory to be " called forth " by social categorization in a particular context to guide perception , self - conception , and action . How - ever , they are almost always modified to varying de - grees , and they can be entirely constructed by specifics of a particular social context . Prototypes are contextu - ally responsive , and the principle governing this con - textual sensitivity is metacontrast . New prototypes form , or existing ones are modified , in such a way as to maximize the ratio of perceived intergroup differences to intragroup similarities ; prototypes form to accentu - ate similarities within a category and differences be - tween categories . Social Attraction Hypothesis Depersonalization affects people ' s feelings about one another . They become based on perceived prototypicality ( called social attraction ) rather than idiosyncratic prefer - ences or personal relationships ( called personal attrac - tion ) , which is the social attraction hypothesis ( Hogg , 1992 , 1993 ; for direct empirical tests , see Hogg , Coo - per - Shaw , & Holzworth , 1993 ; Hogg & Hains , 1996 , 1998 ; Hogg & Hardie , 1991 ; Hogg , Hardie , & Reynolds , 1995 ) . Ingroup members are liked more than outgroup members because the former are perceptually assimilated to a relatively positive ingroup prototype , or because their prototypical similarity to self is perceptually accentuated , or because self - liking ( self - esteem ) is extended to em - brace people who are to some extent now viewed as prototypical extensions of self . Within the ingroup there is consensual liking that is stronger for more prototypical than for less prototypical members ; there is a proto - type - based social attraction gradient . Uncertainty Reduction Hypothesis It has recently been suggested that social identity processes are not only motivated by self - enhancement ( the self - esteem hypothesis ) but also by an epistemic or self - evaluative motive to reduce subjective uncer - tainty ( the uncertainty reduction hypothesis ; Hogg , 2000b ; Hogg & Abrams , 1993 ; Hogg & Mullin , 1999 ; for direct empirical evidence , see Grieve & Hogg , 1999 ; Hogg & Grieve , 1999 ; Jetten , Hogg , & Mullin , 187 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG 2000 ; Mullin & Hogg , 1998 , 1999 ) . This motive is closely tied to social categorization . Subjective uncertainty about important , usually self - conceptually relevant matters is aversive ; thus , subjec - tive uncertainty reduction is a powerful human motive . The processes of self - categorization and prototype - based depersonalization reduce uncertainty because perceptions , attitudes , feelings , and behavior are now prescribed by an ingroup prototype that usually has consensual validation from other group members . Groups with high entitativity ( e . g . , Campbell , 1958 ; see Brewer & Harasty , 1996 ; Ham - ilton & Sherman , 1996 ) , with clear , unambiguous , and consensual prototypes , and which are located in a clearly delineated intergroup structure , are most effective at re - ducing subjective uncertainty . Salience A key question for social identity theory is what causes social identity ( as defined earlier ) as opposed to personal identity ( self - conception in terms of unique properties of self or of one ' s personal relationships with specific other individuals ) , or one social identity rather than another , to become the contextually salient basis of perception , thought , and behavior ? Theory and research suggest that there is an interaction between category accessibility and category fit ( e . g . , Oakes , Haslam , & Turner , 1994 ) that operates within the moti - vational framework provided by self - esteem and un - certainty reduction ( see Hogg , 1996a , 2001 ) . People , influenced by self - enhancement and uncer - tainty reduction motives , categorize the social context in terms of categories , represented as prototypes , which are chronically accessible in memory or rendered acces - sible by the immediate context , or both . That categoriza - tion becomes salient , which best accounts for relevant similarities and differences among people in the context ( structural or comparative fit ) , which best accords with the social meaning of the context ( normative fit ) , and which best satisfies self - enhancement and self - evaluative concerns . Situational cues or personal agenda , or both , cause people to " try out " different cate - gories or prototypes to make sense of the social field in ways that also evaluate self relatively favorably . This is a fast and relatively automatic cognitive perceptual iter - ative process that stabilizes when fit is optimized . Only then does self - categorization occur , in the sense of de - personalized self - conception , cognition , and behavior . Social Identity and Intragroup Processes and Structures Social identity theory originally focused on inter - group behavior in the context of large social categories : intergroup social comparisons , positive distinctiveness , stereotypes , discrimination , and intergroup relations . Intragroup behavior was generally treated as an unproblematic by - product of intergroup relations ; ingroups were largely treated as homogenous and undif - ferentiated . In contrast , the recent emphasis on self - cate - gorization and depersonalization has prompted recognition that groups are internally structured with re - spect to prototypicality . Within a group , some people are more prototypical than others . Therefore , deperson - alized social identity processes within groups may in - volve differentiation among people that is not interpersonal but is genuinely grounded in common cat - egory membership . Initially , this idea was explored in the context of group cohesion and social attraction ( Hogg , 1992 , 1993 ) , and group polarization ( e . g . , Abrams , Wetherell , Cochrane , Hogg , & Turner , 1990 ; McGarty , Turner , Hogg , David , & Wetherell , 1992 ; see J . C . Turner , 1991 ) , but it has subsequently pro - duced other research on social identity - based intragroup processes ( Hogg , 1996a , 1996b ) : for ex - ample , structural differentiation into subgroups within groups ( e . g . , Hornsey & Hogg , 1999 , 2000a , 2000b ) , and deviance and the " black sheep effect " ( e . g . , Marques & Paez , 1994 ) . However , perhaps the most basic and pervasive structural differentiation within groups is into leader ( s ) and followers . Social Identity , Self - Categorization , and Leadership Building on preliminary ideas in a book chapter ( Hogg , 1996a ) , I describe how social identity pro - cesses influence leadership , followed in the next sec - tion by discussion of empirical support for these ideas . Leadership is about how some individuals or cliques have disproportionate power and influence to set agenda , define identity , and mobilize people to achieve collective goals . The differential ability of some peo - ple to stamp their mark on attitudes , practices , deci - sions , and actions is endemic to all social groups - for example , nations , communities , organizations , com - mittees , cliques , and families . Leaders are people who have disproportionate influence , through possession of consensual prestige or the exercise of power , or both , over the attitudes , behaviors , and destiny of group members . Leadership is very much a group process ( Chemers , 2001 ) . I propose that there are three core processes that operate in conjunction to make prototypicality an increasingly influential basis of leadership processes as a function of increasing social identity salience : prototypicality , social attraction , and attribution and information processing . These pro - cesses are described mainly in terms of emergent lead - 188 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP ership in new groups . However , they also apply to situations in which established leadership roles are structurally assigned ; this is explicitly addressed later . Prototypicality We have seen that when group membership is psy - chologically salient , social categorization of self and other ingroup members depersonalizes perception , cognition , affect , and behavior in terms of the contex - tually relevant ingroup prototype . The more salient the group the more profound is the effect . Group members conform to , and thus are influenced by , the prototype . Those people who are more prototypical to begin with will be less influenced than those who are less prototypical to begin with ; the former make fewer changes than the latter to approximate the prototype . ( For a review of evidence for prototypical depersonal - ization as the basis for conformity see J . C . Turner , 1991 . ) In salient groups , people are highly sensitive to prototypicality , as it is the basis of perception and eval - uation of self and other group members . Thus , they no - tice and respond to even very subtle differences in how prototypical fellow members are ; there is a clearly per - ceived gradient of prototypicality within the group , with some people perceived to be more prototypical than others ( e . g . , Haslam , Oakes , McGarty , Turner , & Onorato , 1995 ; Hogg , 1993 ) . Within a salient group then , people who are perceived to occupy the most prototypical position are perceived to best embody the behaviors to which other , less prototypical members are conforming . There is a perception of differential in - fluence within the group , with the most prototypical member appearing to exercise influence over less prototypical members . In new groups , this is an " ap - pearance " because the most prototypical person does not actively exercise influence ; it is the prototype that he or she happens to embody that influences behavior . In established groups the appearance is backed up by actual influence ( see following ) . We have seen that prototypes are contextually sen - sitive to the intergroup social comparative context ( the metacontrast principle ) . Thus , if the context re - mains unchanged , the prototype will remain un - changed , and the same individual group member will occupy the most prototypical position . It follows that the longer a particular individual occupies the most prototypical position , the stronger and more en - trenched will be the appearance that he or she has ac - tively exercised influence over others . In new groups this person is perceived to occupy an embryonic lead - ership role , although leadership has not been exer - cised . There is an embryonic role differentiation into leader and followers . As group membership becomes more salient , and members identify more strongly with the group , prototypicality becomes an increasingly influential ba - sis for leadership perceptions . People also , of course , rely on general and more task - specific schemas of lead - ership behaviors ( what Lord and his colleagues call leader categories ; e . g . , Lord et al . , 1984 ) . However , the importance of these schemas is either unaffected by self - categorization , or they become less important as group prototypicality becomes more important . In either case , leadership schemas should become less influential relative to group prototypicality as group membership becomes psychologically more salient . Social Attraction Leadership is more than passively being a prototypical group member ; it involves actively influ - encing other people . One way in which this is made possible is through the social attraction process . We have seen that self - categorization depersonalizes the basis of attraction within groups , such that more prototypical members are liked more than less prototypical members , and that where there is a con - sensual prototype this has the effect of producing consensually greater liking for prototypical members ( e . g . , Hogg , 1992 , 1993 ) . The person occupying the most prototypical position may acquire , in new groups , or possess , in established groups , the ability to actively influence because he or she is socially attractive and thus able to secure compliance with suggestions and recommendations he or she makes . A well - researched consequence of liking is that it in - creases compliance with requests . If you like someone you are more likely to agree with them and comply with requests , suggestions , and orders ( e . g . , Berscheid & Reis , 1998 ) . In this way , the most prototypical person is able to exercise leadership by having his or her ideas ac - cepted more readily and more widely than ideas sug - gested by others . This empowers the leader and publicly confirms his or her ability to exercise influence . Con - sensual depersonalized liking , particularly over time , confirms differential popularity and public endorsement of the leader . It imbues the leader with prestige and sta - tus and begins to reify an intragroup status differential between leader ( s ) and followers . Social attraction may also be enhanced by the be - havior of highly prototypical members . More prototypical members tend to identify more strongly and thus display more pronounced group behaviors ; they will be more normative , show greater ingroup loy - alty and ethnocentrism , and generally behave in a more group serving manner . These behaviors further con - firm their prototypicality and thus enhance social at - traction . A leader who acts as " one of us " by showing 189 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG strong ingroup favoritism and intragroup fairness is not only more socially attractive but is also provided with legitimacy . Indeed , research on justice consider - ations in group contexts confirms that although distrib - utive justice is complicated ( intragroup fairness conflicting with intergroup bias ) , intragroup proce - dural justice is critical . According to the group value model of procedural justice , members feel more satis - fied and more committed to the group if the leader is procedurally fair ( Lind & Tyler , 1988 ; Tyler , 1997 ; Tyler , DeGoey , & Smith , 1996 ; Tyler & Lind , 1992 ; also see Platow , Reid , & Andrew , 1998 ) . Attribution and Information Processing Prototypicality and social attraction work in con - junction with attribution and information processing to translate perceived influence into active leadership . As elsewhere , attribution processes operate within groups to make sense of others ' behavior . Also as in other con - texts , attributions for others ' behavior are prone to the fundamental attribution error ( Ross , 1977 ) or corre - spondence bias ( Gilbert & Jones , 1986 ; also see Gilbert & Malone , 1995 ; Trope & Liberman , 1993 ) , a tendency to attribute behavior to underlying disposi - tions that reflect invariant properties , or essences , of the individual ' s personality . This effect is more pro - nounced for individuals who are perceptually distinc - tive ( e . g . , figural against a background ) or cognitively salient ( e . g . , Taylor & Fiske , 1978 ) . We have seen that when group membership is sa - lient , people are sensitive to prototypicality and attend to subtle differences in prototypicality of fellow mem - bers . Highly prototypical members are most informa - tive about what is prototypical of group membership ( see J . C . Turner , 1991 ) , and so , not surprisingly , in a group context they attract most attention . They are sub - jectively important and are distinctive or figural against the background of other less informative mem - bers . Research in social cognition shows that people who are subjectively important and distinctive are seen to be disproportionately influential and have their be - havior dispositionally attributed ( e . g . , Erber & Fiske , 1984 ; Taylor & Fiske , 1975 ) . We have also seen how highly prototypical mem - bers may appear to have influence due to their relative prototypicality , and may actively exercise influence and gain compliance as a consequence of consensual social attraction . Together , the leadership nature of this behavior and the relative prominence of prototypical members is likely to encourage an internal attribution to intrinsic leadership ability , or charisma . This attri - bution will be facilitated if cultural theories of the causes of leadership favor the belief that leadership re - flects personality ( e . g . , in individualist cultures ; see Morris & Peng , 1994 ) . In groups , then , the behavior of highly prototypical members is likely to be attributed , particularly in stable groups over time , to the person ' s personality rather than the prototypicality of the position occupied . The consequence is a tendency to construct a charismatic leadership personality for that person that , to some ex - tent , separates that person from the rest of the group and reinforces the perception of status - based structural differentiation within the group into leader ( s ) and fol - lowers . This may make the leader stand out more starkly against the background of less prototypical fol - lowers , as well as draw attention to a potential power imbalance , thus further fueling the attributional effect . The fact that followers do tend to focus on the leader and make dispositional attributions for that person ' s be - havior has some empirical support . Fiske ( 1993 ; Fiske & Depret , 1996 ) showed how followers pay close atten - tion to leaders and seek dispositional information about leaders because detailed individualized knowledge helps redress the perceived power imbalance between leader and followers . Conger and Kanungo ( 1987 , 1988 ) described how followers attributionally construct a charismatic leadership personality for organizational leaders who have a " vision " that involves substantial change to the group . Meindl , Ehrlich , and Dukerich ( 1985 ) showed that simplified dispositional attributions for leadership were more evident for distinctive leader - ship behaviors and under crisis conditions . Emergence and Endurance of Leaders Social identity processes associated with leadership do not only apply to emergent leaders but also to endur - ing and structurally designated leaders . Whether you are an emergent or an established leader , prototypicality processes influence leadership perceptions and effec - tiveness when group membership salience is elevated . Under conditions of depersonalization , prototypicality becomes a significant basis for all leadership percep - tions . In new groups , the associated processes of so - cial attraction and prototype - based attribution and information processing can translate these percep - tions into proactive leadership behavior . The longer an individual remains in a leadership position the more they will be socially liked , the more consensual will be the social attraction , and the more entrenched will be the fundamental attribution effect . Having ac - quired effective influence in these ways , the person occupying the prototypical position can , just like an established leader whose position is structurally des - ignated , adopt more active aspects of being a leader , including the ability to actively maintain his or her leadership position . 190 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP Although an established leader has the power base sim - ply to maintain his or her position , it is often advantageous if the group continues to view them as highly prototypical . However , as we have seen , social contextual changes im - pact prototypicality . Thus , over time and across contexts , the leader may decline in prototypicality whereas other members become more prototypical , opening the door , particularly under high salience conditions , to a redistribu - tion ofinfluence within the group . An established leader is well placed in terms of resources to combat this by redefin - ing , usually through rhetoric and polemic ( e . g . , Reicher & Hopkins , 1996 ) , the prototype in a self - serving manner to prototypically marginalize contenders and prototypically centralize self . This can be done by accentuating the exist - ing ingroup prototype , by pillorying ingroup deviants , or by demonizing an appropriate outgroup . Generally all three tactics are used , and the very act of engaging in these tactics is often viewed as further evidence of effective leadership . National leaders often engage in these tactics . During the 1982 Falklands War between Britain and Ar - gentina , Margaret Thatcher , the British Prime Minister , ac - centuated her nationalistic prototype of Britain , pilloried deviant groups within Britain who did not represent her prototype , and demonized the Argentinian outgroup . Her leadership ratings rose significantly . Leadership endurance also benefits from consensual prototypicality because of the effect of consensual pop - ularity on social attraction . In groups with less consen - sual prototypes , there is less consensus of perceptions of and feelings for the leader , and thus the leader may have less power and may occupy a less stable position . It is in the leaders ' s interest to maintain a consensual proto - type . Simple and more clearly focused prototypes are less open to ambiguity and alternative interpretations and are thus better suited to consensuality . In addition , ingroup deviants serve an important function ; by creat - ing and rejecting such deviants the leader is well able to clarify the self - serving focus of the prototype . Another strategy is to polarize or extremitize the ingroup relative to a specific " evil " outgroup . Leaders can also accentu - ate or create intergroup conflict to achieve these ends ( e . g . , Rabbie & Bekkers , 1978 ) . These processes clearly operate in extremist groups with all - powerful leaders . For example , in Cambodia in the 1970s , Pol Pot con - structed a simple and orthodox national prototype ; he engaged in a campaign of prototypical purification that involved exterminating deviants , and he polarized from and demonized the " decadent " West . Tests of the Social Identity Theory of Leadership The central prediction from the social identity the - ory of leadership is that as people identify more strongly with a group , the basis for leadership percep - tions , evaluations , and endorsement becomes increas - ingly influenced by prototypicality ; prototypical mem - bers are more likely to emerge as leaders , and more prototypical leaders will be perceived to be more effec - tive leaders . This idea has been directly tested and sup - ported in a series of studies . Hains , Hogg , and Duck ( 1997 ) conducted a labora - tory study of emergent leadership perceptions and eval - uations in ad hoc and relatively minimal groups . Three independent variables ( group salience , group prototypicality , and leader schema congruence ) were manipulated in a 2 x 2 x 2 design . Under conditions of high or low group salience , student participants ( N = 184 ) anticipated joining a small discussion group formed on the basis of attitude congruence . They were informed that a randomly appointed group leader was group prototypical or nonprototypical ( group prototypicality ) in terms of the attitude dimension and had a behavioral style ( on the basis of a pretest ) that was congruent or incongruent with a leader schema ( leader schema congruence ) . Dependent measures were taken ostensibly in anticipation ofthe upcoming discussion . In addition to checks on each of the three manipulations , we also measured group identification ( 11 - item scale ) and perceived leader effectiveness ( 10 - item scale ) . As predicted , when group membership was salient people identified more strongly with the group and endorsed the prototypical leader as being much more effective than the nonprototypical leader ; low - salience partici - pants did not differentiate between prototypical and nonprototypical leaders . Although leader schema con - gruent leaders were perceived overall to be more effec - tive than schema incongruent leaders , we found that this effect disappeared for high - salience participants on one leadership effectiveness item . Although social attrac - tion for the leader was not explicitly tested , the 10 - item leadership effectiveness scale contained an item mea - suring liking for the leader ; thus , leadership effective - ness was associated with liking . To complement this highly controlled laboratory experiment , we conducted a naturalistic field study of leadership in small interactive " outward bound " groups in which real leaders emerged and actually lead the groups in wilderness and outdoor experiences ( Fielding & Hogg , 1997 ) . There were 13 mixed - sex , approximately 11 - person groups of people mainly in their 20s from around Australia ( N = 143 ) . The groups stayed together for 3 weeks . We replicated the labora - tory experiment as closely as we could , but of course in a measurement - based regression format . Leadership schemas , group membership variables , and leadership effectiveness perceptions were measured a week to 10 days apart . In this study we were also able to measure social attraction . As predicted , ( a ) group identification , perceived leadership effectiveness , and social attrac - tion for the leader increased over time as the group be - 191 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG came a more cohesive entity ; and ( b ) perceived leadership effectiveness was a positive function of so - cial attraction for and group prototypicality of the leader , and this was amplified among high identifying participants . Perceived leader schema congruence of the leader was a predictor of perceived leadership ef - fectiveness but was uninfluenced by identification . We now returned to the laboratory where we con - ducted two minimal group studies based closely on Hains et al . ' s ( 1997 ) methodology ( Hogg , Hains , & Mason , 1998 ) . The main aim of these somewhat com - plex studies was to treat prototypicality and leadership as relativistic properties of a comparative frame of ref - erence in which individuals are perceived and evalu - ated in relation to other individuals who are ingroup or outgroup members . The first study had student partici - pants ( N = 82 ) nominate a leader for a small high sa - lience discussion group they were ostensibly going to join . They were provided with a carefully constructed transcript of an earlier meeting of the group that pro - vided leadership schema congruence and group prototypicality information for each of the other mem - bers . They rated the group , their nominated leader and all other group members , and their identification with the group . The second study was a 2 x 2 x 2 experiment ( N = 164 ) in which group salience , leadership schema congruence of the leader , and group prototypicality of the leader were orthogonally manipulated . The key feature of this experiment was that the prototypicality of the leader was indirectly manipulated by construct - ing an intergroup comparative context that , on the ba - sis of metacontrast , influenced the location of the prototype in precisely calculable ways . Across these two studies , we found that leadership schema congruence became a less influential , and group prototypicality a more influential , determinant of leadership endorsement in more cohesive groups with which people identified more strongly . We also found , as expected , that identification accentuated per - ceived prototypical similarities between ingroup mem - bers and thus between leader and nonleaders , and that this weakened the prototype - leadership relation when leadership and prototypicality were measured relativ - istically ( leaders relative to nonleaders ) . We argued , however , that this effect was due to the ad hoc and emergent nature of the group , and that over time the perceptual gulf between leader and followers , de - scribed by the theory , would gradually develop . There is further support for the proposed theory from recent social identity - based research into leadership . I describe this work more briefly . First , Platow and van Knippenberg ( 1999 ) have recently replicated the find - ing from Hains et al . ( 1997 ) that prototypicality be - comes an increasingly influential basis for leadership endorsement as group membership becomes more sa - lient . Second , Duck & Fielding ( 1999 ) , drawing directly on the social identity theory of leadership , conducted two laboratory experiments that , in a relatively minimal way , simulated equal status subgroups nested within a larger organization ( total of 328 participants ) . They measured group identification and evaluations of orga - nization leaders who were randomly appointed from participants ' own or the other subgroup . Ingroup , thus prototypical , leaders were more strongly supported than outgroup , thus nonprototypical , leaders , and this effect was more pronounced to the extent that participants identified strongly with their own subgroup . Again , the basis of leadership perception and endorsement is more firmly grounded in prototypicality as people identify more strongly with the group . Platow , Reid , and Andrew ( 1998 ) provided some in - direct support for the leadership theory from a laboratory experiment in which they manipulated group salience ( interpersonal vs . intergroup context ) , and whether a ran - domly appointed leader was procedurally fair - unfair and distributively fair - unfair ( N = 132 ) . If it is assumed that fairness is a general property of leadership schemas , but that ingroup favoritism is a generally prototypical and so - cially attractive property of group membership , then we would predict that distributively and procedurally ingroup favoring leaders would be more strongly en - dorsed under high - than low - salience conditions . This is precisely what Platow and his colleagues found . Haslam et al . ( 1998 ) reported three experiments ( to - tal N = 387 ) that support the idea that systematically se - lected leaders may be less favorably perceived than randomly appointed leaders . They argue , from social identity theory , that this may be because a systematic se - lection process draws attention away from the group and toward individuality . It personalizes the leader and sep - arates him or her from the group and thus renders the leader perceptually less prototypical . It may even also weaken group identification . In contrast , a random pro - cess keeps attention on the group as a whole . It does not personalize the leader , and thus allows him or her to be viewed as a prototypical group member . It may also strengthen group identification . Again , prototypicality becomes an increasingly important basis of leadership as group membership becomes more salient . Finally , there are studies conducted within a social dilemmas tradition . Drawing on social identity theory and on Tyler and Lind ' s ( 1992 ) group value model , van Vugt and de Cremer ( 1999 ) conducted two experi - ments ( total of 189 participants ) in which they found that when people strongly identify with a group faced by a social dilemma they prefer a leader who shares the group ' s values ( i . e . , is prototypical ) and believe that such a leader will actually be more effective . Van Vugt and de Cremer explicitly viewed this as supporting the social identity theory of leadership . In another social dilemma study , de Cremer and van Vugt ( in press ) ma - nipulated a number of variables including how much 192 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP participants identified with the group and how much a randomly appointed leader ostensibly identified with the group ( N = 94 ) . Dependent measures focused mainly on cooperation with the leader as a reflection of leader approval , support , and effectiveness . The results showed that members cooperated more with a high - than low - identifying leader , and that this was particu - larly the case for members who identified strongly with the group . In addition , the effect was clearly me - diated by social attraction . De Cremer and van Vugt ( in press ) explicitly stated that these data support the so - cial identity theory of leadership . Finally , Foddy and Hogg ( 1999 ) reported some data of their own that sug - gest that where there are leaders managing a scarce re - source , those leaders who identify more strongly with the group ( and thus consider themselves to be more prototypical ) tend to be more conserving of the scarce resource and are thus more effective leaders . In this section I have reviewed social identity re - search that directly tests or indirectly tests the leader - ship theory presented here . There is consistent and reliable support for the core idea that as groups become more salient and people identify more strongly with them , prototypicality of the leader becomes an increas - ingly significant basis for leadership perceptions . There is some evidence that as prototypicality be - comes more important , leadership schema congruence becomes less important . There is also support for the idea that prototype - based depersonalized social attrac - tion may facilitate leadership . There is some direct evi - dence from the studies by Fielding and Hogg ( 1997 ) and de Cremer and van Vugt ( in press ) , whereas in other studies social attraction is a component of the leadership evaluation measure ( e . g . , Hains et al . , 1997 ; Hogg et al . , 1998 ) . The attribution and associated structural differentiation components of the theory have indirect support ( e . g . , Fiske , 1993 ; Fiske & Depret , 1996 ) , but remain to be directly tested . Some Implications , Extensions , and Future Directions The social identity theory of leadership has a num - ber of qualifications , elaborations , and implications for our understanding of leadership processes . Although mainly speculative , these ideas point to promising di - rections for future research . Intergroup Context of Leadership Social identity theory is an intergroup theory , and thus the model presented here is an intergroup model of lead - ership . Leadership in salient groups can only be under - stood in its intergroup context , because groups can only be understood in their intergroup context . Prototypes are determined by metacontrast involving both intragroup and intergroup comparisons , and thus leadership is influ - enced by intergroup relations . In turn , although leaders provide a focus for ingroup members , they often lead their groups against outgroups and struggle to promote their group in competition with other groups ( e . g . , Rabbie & Bekkers , 1978 ) . Also , as discussed earlier , leaders ma - nipulate followers ' intergroup representations and com - parisons in ways that secure or promote tenure by ensuring that the leader is highly prototypical . Groups often interact and communicate with one another through their leaders ; indeed , most intergroup bargaining and negotiation is via group leaders . These are intergroup encounters . Social identity research shows that intergroup encounters generally strengthen identification and polarize prototypes ( e . g . , Abrams et al . , 1990 ) , and the proposed leadership theory suggests that leaders under high - salience conditions tend to be prototypical and highly identified with the group . We have also seen that justice considerations specify that leaders should be fair within groups but should favor ingroup over outgroup ( e . g . , Platow et al . , 1998 ) . To - gether , these ideas point to the clear prediction that in - tergroup bargaining tends to accentuate competitive - ness , particularly when leaders feel accountable to and under surveillance by their group ; research con - firms this ( e . g . , Carnevale , Pruitt , & Britton , 1979 ; Morley , Webb , & Stephenson , 1988 ) . Uncertainty Reduction and Leadership Social identity processes are motivated by self - en - hancement ( e . g . , J . C . Turner , 1982 ) and by uncertainty reduction ( e . g . , Hogg , 2000b ; Hogg & Mullin , 1999 ) . We have seen how depersonalized social attraction ( e . g . , Hogg , 1993 ) , which perhaps owes more to self - enhancement , influences leadership . How might uncertainty reduction affect leadership ? As described earlier , the more that people feel self - conceptually uncertain about things that matter , the more they are inclined to identify with groups , par - ticularly with groups that have clearly focused and consensual prototypes , groups that are often thought to be extreme . From a leadership perspective , these are precisely the conditions that favor prototype - based leadership that may be enduring enough to entrench a strong leader . Under high self - conceptual uncertainty , members strive for a simple and distinct prototype , support witch - hunts to purify the group of deviants , ex - press consensual social attraction , are highly attuned to prototypicality , and invest the leader with a highly charismatic leadership personality . A good example of this is " totalist " groups such as cults ( e . g . , Curtis & Curtis , 1993 ; Galanter , 1989 ) . In 193 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG these groups , leaders are often distinct and remote from followers . There is a steep and rigid prestige dif - ferential between leaders and followers that provides a clearly delineated intragroup status structure . This ar - rangement contributes further to uncertainty reduction under conditions of extreme uncertainty because it im - bues the intragroup structural arrangement , and thus the leader , with perceived legitimacy that protects the system from change ( see Jost & Banaji ' s , 1994 , system justification theory ) . Leaders may also maintain or strengthen their leadership position through strategic management of uncertainty ( see Marris ' s , 1996 , notion that certainty is power ) . Specifically , they can deliber - ately raise uncertainty ( e . g . , the specters of war , eco - nomic collapse , cultural disintegration ) , and at the same time define a clear social identity predicated on a prototype that closely matches the leader . Uncertainty reduction automatically endorses the leader . Leadership , Influence , and Power Definitions of leadership usually distinguish leader - ship from power ( e . g . , Chemers , 2001 ; Lord et al . , 2001 ) . Leadership is a process of influenc . " hat enlists and mobilizes the involvement of others in the attain - ment of collective goals ; it is not a coercive process in which power is exercised over others . The social iden - tity theory of leadership is consistent with this type of definition ( Hogg & Reid , 2001 ) . Prototypical leaders do not need to exercise power to have influence ; they are influential because of their position and the deper - sonalization process that assimilates members ' behav - ior to the prototype . They and their suggestions are intrinsically persuasive because they embody the norms of the group ; they have referent power ( Raven , 1965 ) , or position power , and therefore do not need to exercise personal power ( Yukl & Falbe , 1991 ) . In ad - dition to not needing to exercise power , it is possible that prototypical leaders may be unable to exercise power . High prototypicality is associated with strong ingroup identification ; self and group are tightly fused prototypically , and thus any form of negative behavior directed against fellow members is effectively directed against self . There may exist an empathic bond be - tween leader and followers that protects against any desire to exercise power over others let alone the de - structive use of power or the abuse of power . However , leaders sometimes do exercise power in harmful ways . Why does this happen ? How can it be curbed ? One possibility , based on the leadership the - ory , is that increasing status - based differentiation be - tween leader and followers effectively instantiates an intergroup relationship . The empathic ingroup bond that protects against abuse of power is severed . In addi - tion , the leader is now no longer prototypical for the followers . Leadership through ingroup proto - type - based influence is no longer effective , therefore the leader now needs to , and can , gain influence by ex - ercising power over other members of the group as if they were outgroup members . Such a relationship will be competitive and potentially exploitative , far re - moved from prototype - based leadership . This is likely to be more pronounced in hierarchical extremist groups in which leader - follower role differentiation is more tangible and stark , and in groups in which there is a leadership clique rather than a single leader . The po - tential for the abuse of power is likely to be much ac - centuated in these types of groups . The progression from benign influence to destructive wielding of power can be curbed by anything that inhib - its the process of structural differentiation and that regrounds leadership in prototypicality . External threat from an outgroup might be particularly effective in this regard , as it enhances identification and depersonaliza - tion and increases solidarity and social attraction ( e . g . , Hogg , 1993 ) . Power may , paradoxically , also be curbed by quite the opposite circumstances . If a group becomes less cohesive , more diverse , and less consensual about its prototype , it is less likely that followers will endorse the same person as the leader . Thus , the leader ' s power base will fragment , and numerous new " contenders " may emerge . Although this limits the leader ' s ability to abuse power , it also undermines prototype - based lead - ership . Also note that leaders who have become accus - tomed to exercise power may vigorously resist any threats to their ability to exercise power . The social identity analysis of leadership and power presented here is explored fully by Hogg and Reid ( 2001 ) . It suggests that leaders only exercise power when the self - categorization contingent processes of social attraction and prototypical attribution structur - ally differentiate the leader from the rest of the group and thus change the leader - group relationship from an intragroup relationship into some form of unequal sta - tus intergroup relationship . The exercise of power now becomes associated with other intergroup behaviors ( e . g . , stereotyping , intergroup discrimination , social dislike ) that inevitably widen the gulf between leaders and followers . This analysis remains to be formally tested ; however , there is evidence that people in power do tend to stereotype followers ( e . g . , Fiske , 1993 ; Fiske & Depret , 1996 ; Goodwin & Fiske , 1996 ; Goodwin , Gubin , Fiske , & Yzerbyt , 2000 ) . Pitfalls of Prototype - Based Leadership Prototype - based leadership can be very effective and mutually satisfying because there is no need to be coer - cive , and attitude change occurs automatically via the depersonalization process associated with self - categori - 194 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP zation and social identification . However , we have seen that other processes such as social attraction and prototypical attribution can change the leader - follower relationship in ways that may have undesirable effects . There are some pitfalls to prototype - based leadership . Processes associated with prototype - based leader - ship may , paradoxically , distance the leader from the group , sever the empathic intragroup bond , and recon - struct a form of intergroup relationship between leader and followers . This encourages stereotypic perception and treatment of followers , and the exercise of power to have influence ; taken in tandem , this provides a framework for abuse of power that resembles the ethnocentric and competitive nature of intergroup be - havior . It also allows leaders to engage in typically re - pressive dominant group strategies to protect their status from apparent threats ( e . g . , Hogg & Abrams , 1988 ; Tajfel & Turner , 1979 ) . Where leadership is in - vested in a group rather than a single individual , these processes are likely to be much amplified . Another potential problem with prototype - based leadership arises because as people identify more strongly with a group ( the group becomes more co - hesive ) , leadership becomes increasingly based on prototypicality rather than leader schemas or intrin - sic status characteristics . In group decision - making contexts this can degrade decision - making pro - cesses . Rather than basing leadership on leader schemas that generally contain optimal situation and task - specific leadership prescriptions , a situation can exist where there is a powerful leader who em - bodies a group prototype that does not prescribe op - timal decision - making procedures . This may produce groupthink ( Janis , 1972 ) ; powerful leaders and the absence of norms for optimal decision mak - ing conspire in highly cohesive groups to produce suboptimal decision - making procedures that lead to poor decisions ( Hogg & Hains , 1998 ; M . E . Turner , Pratkanis , Probasco , & Leve , 1992 ) . Another pitfall of prototype - based leadership is that social minorities ( e . g . , based on race , ethnicity , gender , disability ) may find it difficult to assume leadership roles in some contexts . For example , if the normative environment for business , or the organizational culture within specific organizations , renders social minorities intrinsically less prototypical than majorities , then mi - norities will find it more difficult to achieve and main - tain an effective leadership role ( see Hogg & Terry , 2000 ) . Highly cohesive groups with focused proto - types also often have members who identify very strongly with the group because the group very effec - tively reduces extreme subjective uncertainty . These groups are particularly prone to hierarchical leadership structures with remote and powerful leaders who are invested with enormous charisma and who can exer - cise and abuse their position of power . Some Caveats and Clarifications The theory of leadership I present here is intended to describe the role of social identity processes in all forms of leadership : Under appropriate conditions prototypicality has a significant effect on emergent as well as established leadership in groups ranging from small task - oriented teams to entire nations . Most direct tests of the theory have , however , focused - under controlled experimental conditions - on emergent leadership in short - lived laboratory groups . Although this research has been essential , it has operationalized prototypes as a unidimensional construct , whereas in fact prototypes are complex multidimensional fuzzy sets . Leaders probably have much greater latitude to maintain power when they are located by a multidi - mensional prototype than a unidimensional prototype . It may be easier for leaders to acquire and maintain power by emphasizing different aspects of the proto - type than by trying to keep unchanged a single group - defining attribute . Many groups exist primarily to perform specific tasks ( e . g . , work teams ) , and thus , members of these groups may focus on how competent the leader is leadership effectiveness may rest heavily on per - ceived leader competence . Indeed , specific status char - acteristics and situation / task - specific leader schemas embody leadership attributes such as competence . These are very sound bases for effective leadership that often dominate leadership processes . My theory does not disagree with this . The theory simply states that under certain circumstances , self - definition as a group member may be extremely salient , in which case group prototype - based depersonalization becomes an important basis of leadership . This process may be more powerful in groups that are strongly defined in terms of identity rather than the performance of a spe - cific task , but given the right circumstances , even task - oriented groups may focus on self - definitional group norms rather than task performance . Concluding Comments Leadership research along with research on small groups and intragroup processes lost popularity with social psychologists in the 1960s . Since the early 1970s , social psychology has made enormous ad - vances in the study of social cognition and intergroup relations , which together have recently revived interest in the study of group phenomena . Social identity the - ory has become an important part of this integration and shift of interest within social psychology . Social psychology is now poised to revisit group phenomena with new , more sophisticated theories , concepts , and 195 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG methodologies . In this article I have sketched out a so - cial identity theory of group leadership . Aggregates of individuals mainly base their leader - ship perceptions and endorsements on judgements of how well individuals fit the specifications of situation and task - specific schemas of types of leaders . How - ever , as the aggregate increasing becomes a psycho - logical group - a collection of people who categorize themselves in terms of the same descriptive and pre - scriptive ingroup prototype - leadership perceptions and endorsements are increasingly influenced by how well individuals match the group prototype . In very co - hesive groups with which members identify very strongly , leadership processes will be strongly deter - mined by prototypicality . However , prototypicality alone does not imply active leadership . Prototypical members do not actively lead but rather appear to have influence ; they act as the attitudinal and behavioral fo - cus of the group due to self - categorization based prototypical depersonalization processes . It is social attraction , an associated effect of depersonalization , that facilitates active influence . Group membership based social attraction enables the leader to secure compliance with suggestions and recommendations and also endows the leader with sta - tus and evaluative differentiation from the rest of the group . The leader now occupies a high - status role and is able to be actively innovative . The third process is an attributional one through which followers , influenced by correspondence bias and the fundamental attribu - tion error , attribute the leaders influence , status , popu - larity , and ability to innovate and lead , internally to the leader ' s personality , thus constructing a charismatic leadership personality for the leader that further reifies the leader ' s distinctive status within the group . I reviewed empirical evidence for this analysis of leadership . Direct tests have focused on the fundamen - tal core prediction that as a group becomes more sa - lient emergent leadership processes and leadership effectiveness perceptions become less dependent on leader schema congruence and more dependent on group prototypicality . There is solid support for this idea from laboratory experiments ( e . g . , Duck & Fielding , 1999 ; Hains et al . , 1997 ; Hogg et al . , 1998 ; Platow & van Knippenberg , 1999 ) and a naturalistic field study ( Fielding & Hogg , 1997 ) . There is also indi - rect support from a range of studies of leadership that are in the social identity tradition ( de Cremer & van Vugt , in press ; Foddy & Hogg , 1999 ; Haslam et al . , 1998 ; Platow et al . , 1998 ; van Vugt & de Cremer , 1999 ) . There is also support for the idea that proto - type - based depersonalized social attraction may facili - tate leadership . There is some direct evidence from the studies by Fielding and Hogg ( 1997 ) and de Cremer and van Vugt ( in press ) , whereas in other studies social attraction is a component of the leadership evaluation measure ( e . g . , Hains et al . , 1997 ; Hogg et al . , 1998 ) . The attribution and associated structural differentia - tion components of the theory have indirect support ( e . g . , Fiske , 1993 ; Fiske & Depret , 1996 ) , but remain to be directly tested . This and further research is currently under way . It should , however , be recognized that the empirical status of the leadership theory rests on good evidence for social identity theory as a whole . On the basis of what we know so far , we could now advise leaders of cohesive groups to pay attention to how prototypical they are to remain in power , and lead - ers of less cohesive groups to pay attention to how well they match task and situation specific leader schemas . Put differently , prototypical leaders would do well to raise group solidarity and cohesion while accentuating their prototypicality , whereas nonprototypical leaders should lower solidarity and cohesion while accentuat - ing how well they match leader schemas . The social identity theory of leadership has many additional complexities that are described in this arti - cle ; these are extensions and implications that are spec - ulative and still need to be fully explored conceptually and empirically . For example , social attraction and prototypical attribution processes may transform a prototypical ingroup leader into a high status role oc - cupant who has a charismatic leadership personality . A structural differentiation is created within the group that severs the empathic bond between leader ( s ) and followers and instantiates a form of intergroup rela - tions . This transforms influence into power and pro - vides a social structural framework that makes very real the opportunity to abuse power . Another example is that conditions of high subjective uncertainty en - courage the formation of very cohesive groups with high entitativity and clearly focused and consensual prototypes . These groups tend not only to be very ex - treme , but also to have a steep and rigid leadership structure with a highly charismatic leader . The leader is often considered God - like by followers and exer - cises enormous power , often in deleterious ways . A fi - nal example is that encounters between leaders of different groups can be particularly effective in engag - ing prototype - based leadership processes , which can have undesirable consequences if the encounter was intended to provide a context for negotiation to resolve intergroup differences . In conclusion , the social identity theory of leader - ship views leadership as a group process that arises from the social categorization and depersonalization processes associated with social identity . Proto - type - based depersonalization and the behavior of fol - lowers play a critical role : They empower individuals as leaders , imbue them with charisma , create a status differential between leader ( s ) and followers that has some of the typical characteristics of uneven status in - tergroup relations , and set up conditions that are con - 196 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP ducive to the exercise and possible abuse of power . These ideas are a potentially rich source of conceptual explorations and basic and applied empirical research into social identity and leadership . References Abrams , D . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1988 ) . Comments on the motivational status of self - esteem in social identity and intergroup discrimi - nation . European Journal of Social Psychology , 18 , 317 - 334 . Abrams , D . , & Hogg , M . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1990 ) . Social identity theory : Constructive and critical advances . Hemel Hempstead , Eng - land : Harvester Wheatsheaf . Abrams , D . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Prospects for research in group processes and intergroup relations . Group Processes and Inter - group Relations , 1 , 7 - 20 . Abrams , D . , & Hogg , M . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1999 ) . Social identity and social cognition . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Abrams , D . , Wetherell , M . S . , Cochrane , S . , Hogg , M . A . , & Turner , J . C . ( 1990 ) . Knowing what to think by knowing who you are : Self - categorization and the nature of norm formation , confor - mity , and group polarization . British Journal of Social Psychol - ogy , 29 , 97 - 119 . Albright , L . , & Forziati , C . ( 1995 ) . Cross - situational consistency and perceptual accuracy in leadership . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 21 , 1269 - 1276 . Bales , R . F . ( 1950 ) . Interaction process analysis : A method for the study of small groups . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Bass , B . M . ( 1985 ) . Leadership and performance beyond expecta - tions . New York : Free Press . Bass , B . M . ( 1990a ) . Bass and Stogdill ' s handbook of leadership : Theory , research and managerial applications . New York : Free Press . Bass , B . M . ( 1990b ) . From transactional to transformational leader - ship : Learning to share the vision . Organizational Dynamics , 18 , 19 - 31 . Bass , B . M . ( 1998 ) . Transformational leadership : Industrial , mili - tary , and educational impact . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Bass , B . M . , & Avolio , B . J . ( 1993 ) . Transformational leadership : A response to critiques . In M . M . Chemers & R . A . Ayman ( Eds . ) , Leadership theory and research : Perspectives and directions ( pp . 49 - 80 ) . London : Academic . Berger , J . , Fisek , M . H . , Norman , R . Z . , & Zelditch , M . , Jr . ( 1977 ) . Status characteristics and social interaction . New York : Elsevier . Berscheid , E . , & Reis , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Attraction and close relation - ships . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , The handbook of social psychology ( 4th ed . , Vol . 2 , pp . 193 - 281 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Brewer , M . B . , & Harasty , A . S . ( 1996 ) . Seeing groups as entities : The role of perceiver motivation . In E . T . Higgins & R . M . Sorrentino ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motivation and cognition , Vol . 3 : The interpersonal context ( pp . 347 - 370 ) . New York : Guilford . Bryman , A . ( 1992 ) . Charisma and leadership in organizations . Lon - don : Sage . Burns , J . M . ( 1978 ) . Leadership . New York : Harper & Row . Campbell , D . T . ( 1958 ) . Common fate , similarity , and other indices of the status of aggregates of persons as social entities . Behav - ioral Science , 3 , 14 - 25 . Capozza , D . , & Brown , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . Social identity processes . London : Sage . Carnevale , P . J . D . , Pruitt , D . G . , & Britton , S . D . ( 1979 ) . Looking tough : The negotiator under constituent surveillance . Personal - ity and Social Psychology Bulletin , 5 , 118 - 121 . Chemers , M . M . ( 1987 ) . Leadership processes : Intrapersonal , inter - personal , and societal influences . In C . Hendrick ( Ed . ) , Review of personality and social psychology ( Vol . 8 , pp . 252 - 277 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Chemers , M . M . ( 2001 ) . Leadership effectiveness : An integrative re - view . In M . A . Hogg & R . S . Tindale ( Eds . ) , Blackwell hand - book of social psychology : Group processes ( pp . 376 - 399 ) . Ox - ford , England : Blackwell . Conger , J . A . , & Kanungo , R . N . ( 1987 ) . Towards a behavioral theory ofcharismatic leadership in organizational settings . Academy of Management Review , 12 , 637 - 647 . Conger , J . A . , & Kanungo , R . N . ( 1988 ) . Behavioral dimensions of charismatic leadership . In J . A . Conger & R . N . Kanungo ( Eds . ) , Charismatic leadership : The elusive factor on organizational effectiveness ( pp . 309 - 323 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Crocker , J . , Blaine , B . , & Luhtanen , R . ( 1993 ) . Prejudice , intergroup behaviour and self - esteem : Enhancement and protection mo - tives . In M . A . Hogg & D . Abrams ( Eds . ) , Group motivation : Social psychological perspectives ( pp . 52 - 67 ) . Hemel Hempstead , England : Harvester Wheatsheaf . Crocker , J . , & Luhtanen , R . ( 1990 ) . Collective self - esteem and ingroup bias . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 , 60 - 67 . Curtis , J . M . , & Curtis , M . J . ( 1993 ) . Factors related to susceptibility and recruitment by cults . Psychological Reports , 73 , 451 - 460 . de Cremer , D . , & van Vugt , M . ( in press ) . Intergroup and intragroup dynamics of leadership in social dilemmas : A relational model of cooperation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology . Duck , J . M . , & Fielding , K . S . ( 1999 ) . Leaders and sub - groups : Oneof us or one ofthem ? Group Processes and IntergroupRelations , 2 , 203 - 230 . Eagly , A . H . , Karau , S . J . , & Makhijani , M . G . ( 1995 ) . Gender and the effectiveness of leaders : A meta - analysis . Psychological Bulle - tin , 117 , 125 - 145 . Ellemers , N . ( 1993 ) . The influence of socio - structural variables on identity enhancement strategies . European Review of Social Psychology , 4 , 27 - 57 . Ellemers , N . , Spears , R . , & Doosje , B . ( Eds . ) . ( 1999 ) . Social identity . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Erber , R . , & Fiske , S . T . ( 1984 ) . Outcome dependency and attention to inconsistent information . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 47 , 709 - 726 . Fiedler , F . E . ( 1965 ) . A contingency model of leadership effective - ness . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 149 - 190 ) . New York : Academic . Fiedler , F . E . ( 1971 ) . Leadership . Morristown , NJ : General Learning Press . Fiedler , F . E . , & House , R . J . ( 1994 ) . Leadership theory and research : A report of progress . In C . L . Cooper & I . T . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Key reviews in managerial psychology : Concepts and research for practice ( pp . 97 - 116 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . Fielding , K . S . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Social identity , self - categori - zation , and leadership : A field study ofsmall interactive groups . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 1 , 39 - 51 . Fiske , S . T . ( 1993 ) . Controlling other people : The impact of power on stereotyping . American Psychologist , 48 , 621 - 628 . Fiske , S . T . , & Depret , E . ( 1996 ) . Control , interdependence and power : Understanding social cognition in its social context . Eu - ropean Review of Social Psychology , 7 , 31 - 61 . Fiske , S . T . , & Taylor , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Social cognition ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Foddy , M . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Impact of leaders on resource con - sumption in social dilemmas : The intergroup context . In M . Foddy , M . Smithson , S . Schneider , & M . A . Hogg ( Eds . ) , Re - solving social dilemmas : Dynamic , structural , and intergroup aspects ( pp . 309 - 330 ) . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . 197 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG Galanter , M . ( Ed . ) . ( 1989 ) . Cults and new religious movements . Washington , DC : American Psychiatric Association . Gilbert , D . T . , & Jones , E . E . ( 1986 ) . Perceiver - induced constraint : Interpretations of self - generated reality . Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology , 50 , 269 - 280 . Gilbert , D . T . , & Malone , P . S . ( 1995 ) . The correspondence bias . Psy - chological Bulletin , 117 , 21 - 38 . Goodwin , S . A . , & Fiske , S . T . ( 1996 ) . Judge not , lest . . . : The ethics of power holders ' decision making and standards for social judgment . In D . M . Messick & A . E . Tenbrunsel ( Eds . ) , Codes of conduct : Behavioral research into business ethics ( pp . 117 - 142 ) . New York : Russell Sage Foundation . Goodwin , S . A . , Gubin , A . , Fiske , S . T . , & Yzerbyt , V . Y . ( 2000 ) . Power can bias impression processes : Stereotyping subordi - nates by default and by design . Group Processes andIntergroup Relations , 3 , 227 - 256 . Graumann , C . F . , & Moscovici , S . ( Eds . ) . ( 1986 ) . Changing concep - tions ofleadership . New York : Springer - Verlag . Grieve , P . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Subjective uncertainty and inter - group discrimination in the minimal group situation . Personal - ity and Social Psychology Bulletin , 25 , 926 - 940 . Hains , S . C . , Hogg , M . A . , & Duck , J . M . ( 1997 ) . Self - categorization and leadership : Effects of group prototypicality and leader stereotypicality . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 23 , 1087 - 1100 . Hall , R . J . , & Lord , R . G . ( 1995 ) . Multi - level information processing explanations of followers ' leadership perceptions . Leadership Quarterly , 6 , 265 - 287 . Hamilton , D . L . , & Sherman , S . J . ( 1996 ) . Perceiving persons and groups . Psychological Review , 103 , 336 - 355 . Haslam , S . A . , McGarty , C . , Brown , P . M . , Eggins , R . A . , Morrison , B . E . , & Reynolds , K . J . ( 1998 ) . Inspecting the emperor ' s clothes : Evience that random selection of leaders can enhance group performance . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 2 , 168 - 184 . Haslam , S . A . , Oakes , P . J . , McGarty , C . , Turner , J . C . , & Onorato , S . ( 1995 ) . Contextual changes in the prototypicality of extreme and moderate outgroup members . European Journal of Social Psychology , 25 , 509 - 530 . Haslam , S . A . , & Platow , M . J . ( 2001 ) . Your wish is our command : The role of shared social identity in translating a leader ' s vision into followers ' action . In M . A . Hogg & D . J . Terry ( Eds . ) , So - cial identity processes in organizational contexts ( pp . 213 - 228 ) . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . Hogg , M . A . ( 1992 ) . The social psychology of group cohesiveness : From attraction to social identity . New York : New York Uni - versity Press . Hogg , M . A . ( 1993 ) . Group cohesiveness : A critical review and some new directions . European Review of Social Psychology , 4 , 85 - 111 . Hogg , M . A . ( 1996a ) . Intragroup processes , group structure and so - cial identity . In W . P . Robinson ( Ed . ) , Social groups and identi - ties : Developing the legacy of Henri Tajfel ( pp . 65 - 93 ) . Oxford , England : Butterworth - Heinemann . Hogg , M . A . ( 1996b ) . Social identity , self - categorization , and the small group . In E . H . Witte & J . H . Davis ( Eds . ) , Understanding group behavior . Vol . 2 : Small group processes and interper - sonal relations ( pp . 227 - 253 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Hogg , M . A . ( 2000a ) . Social identity and social comparison . In J . Suls & L . Wheeler ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social comparison : The - ory and research ( pp . 401 - 421 ) . New York : Plenum . Hogg , M . A . ( 2000b ) . Subjective uncertainty reduction through self - categorization : A motivational theory of social identity processes . European Review of Social Psychology , 11 , 223 - 255 . Hogg , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Social categorization , depersonalization , and group behavior . In M . A . Hogg & R . S . Tindale ( Eds . ) , Blackwell handbook of social psychology : Group processes ( pp . 56 - 85 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Hogg , M . A . , & Abrams , D . ( 1988 ) . Social identifications : A social psychology of intergroup relations and group processes . Lon - don : Routledge . Hogg , M . A . , & Abrams , D . ( 1990 ) . Social motivation , self - esteem and social identity . In D . Abrams & M . A . Hogg ( Eds . ) , Social identity theory : Constructive and critical advances ( pp . 28 - 47 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Hogg , M . A . , & Abrams , D . ( 1993 ) . Towards a single - process uncer - tainty - reduction model of social motivation in groups . In M . A . Hogg & D . Abrams ( Eds . ) , Group motivation : Social psycho - logical perspectives ( pp . 173 - 190 ) . London : Har - vester - Wheatsheaf . Hogg , M . A . , & Abrams , D . ( 1999 ) . Social identity and social cogni - tion : Historical background and current trends . In D . Abrams & M . A . Hogg ( Eds . ) , Social identity and social cognition ( pp . 1 - 25 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Hogg , M . A . , Cooper - Shaw , L . , & Holzworth , D . W . ( 1993 ) . Group prototypicality and depersonalized attraction in small interactive groups . Personality and SocialPsychology Bulletin , 19 , 452 - 465 . Hogg , M . A . , & Grieve , P . ( 1999 ) . Social identity theory and the crisis of confidence in social psychology : A commentary , and some research on uncertainty reduction . Asian Journal ofSocial Psy - chology , 2 , 79 - 93 . Hogg , M . A . , & Hains , S . C . ( 1996 ) . Intergroup relations and group solidarity : Effects of group identification and social beliefs on depersonalized attraction . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 , 295 - 309 . Hogg , M . A . , & Hains , S . C . ( 1998 ) . Friendship and group identifica - tion : A new look at the role ofcohesiveness in groupthink . Euro - pean Journal of Social Psychology , 28 , 323 - 341 . Hogg , M . A . , Hains , S . C . , & Mason , I . ( 1998 ) . Identification and leadership in small groups : Salience , frame of reference , and leader stereotypicality effects on leader evaluations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 1248 - 1263 . Hogg , M . A . , & Hardie , E . A . ( 1991 ) . Social attraction , personal at - traction and self - categorization : A field study . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 , 175 - 180 . Hogg , M . A . , Hardie , E . A . , & Reynolds , K . ( 1995 ) . Prototypical sim - ilarity , self - categorization , and depersonalized attraction : A perspective on group cohesiveness . European Journal of Social Psychology , 25 , 159 - 177 . Hogg , M . A . , & Mullin , B . - A . ( 1999 ) . Joining groups to reduce un - certainty : Subjective uncertainty reduction and group identifi - cation . In D . Abrams & M . A . Hogg ( Eds . ) , Social identity and social cognition ( pp . 249 - 279 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Hogg , M . A . , & Reid , S . A . ( 2001 ) . Social identity , leadership , and power . In A . Y . Lee - Chai & J . A . Bargh ( Eds . ) , The use and abuse of power : Multiple perspectives on the causes of corrup - tion ( pp . 159 - 180 ) . Philadelphia : Psychology Press . Hogg , M . A . , & Terry , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Social identity and self - categori - zation processes in organizational contexts . Academy of Man - agement Review , 25 , 121 - 140 . Hogg , M . A . , Terry , D . J . , & White , K . M . ( 1995 ) . A tale of two theo - ries : A critical comparison of identity theory with social identity theory . Social Psychology Quarterly , 58 , 255 - 269 . Hollander , E . P . ( 1958 ) . Conformity , status , and idiosyncracy credit . Psychological Review , 65 , 117 - 127 . Hollander , E . P . ( 1985 ) . Leadership and power . In G . Lindzey & E . Aronson ( Eds . ) , The handbook of social psychology ( 3rd ed . , Vol . 2 , pp . 485 - 537 ) . New York : Random House . Hollander , E . P . , & Julian , J . W . ( 1969 ) . Contemporary trends in the analysis of leadership processes . Psychological Bulletin , 71 , 387 - 391 . 198 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from SOCIAL IDENTITY THEORY OF LEADERSHIP Hollander , E . P . , & Julian , J . W . ( 1970 ) . Studies in leader legitimacy , influence , and innovation . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 5 , pp . 34 - 69 ) . New York : Academic . Hornsey , M . J . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Subgroup differentiation as a response to an overly - inclusive group : A test of optimal distinc - tiveness theory . European Journal of Social Psychology , 29 , 543 - 550 . Hornsey , M . J . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 2000a ) . Intergroup similarity and subgroup relations : Some implications for assimilation . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 , 948 - 959 . Hornsey , M . J . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 2000b ) . Subgroup relations : A com - parison of mutual intergroup differentiation and common ingroup identity models of prejudice reduction . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 26 , 242 - 256 . Janis , I . L . ( 1972 ) . Victims ofgroupthink : A psychological study of foreign policy decisions and fiascoes . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Jetten , J . , Hogg , M . A . , & Mullin , B . - A . ( 2000 ) . Ingroup variability and motivation to reduce subjective uncertainty . Group Dynam - ics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 , 184 - 198 . Jones , E . E . ( 1998 ) . Major developments in five decades of social psychology . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) , The handbook of social psychology ( 4th ed . , Vol . 1 , pp . 3 - 57 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Jost , J . T . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 1994 ) . The role of stereotyping in sys - temrjustification and the production of false consciousness . British Journal of Social Psychology , 33 , 1 - 27 . Kenny , D . A . , & Zaccaro , S . J . ( 1983 ) . An estimate of variance due to traits in leadership . Journal of Applied Psychology , 68 , 678 - 685 . Lind , E . A . , & Tyler , T . R . ( 1988 ) . The social psychology ofproce - dural justice . New York : Henry Holt . Lippitt , R . , & White , R . ( 1943 ) . The ' social climate ' of children ' s groups . In R . G . Barker , J . Kounin , & H . Wright ( Eds . ) , Child behavior and development ( pp . 485 - 508 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Long , M . K . , & Spears , R . ( 1997 ) . The self - esteem hypothesis revis - ited : Differentiation and the disaffected . In R . Spears , P . J . Oakes , N . Ellemers , & S . A . Haslam ( Eds . ) , The socialpsvchol - ogy of stereotyping and group life ( pp . 296 - 317 ) . Oxford , Eng - land : Blackwell . Lord , R . G . , Brown , D . J . , & Harvey , J . L . ( 2001 ) . System constraints on leadership perceptions , behavior and influence : An example of connectionist level processes . In M . A . Hogg & R . S . Tindale ( Eds . ) , Blackwell handbook of social psychology : Group pro - cesses ( pp . 283 - 310 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Lord , R . G . , Foti , R . J . , & DeVader , C . L . ( 1984 ) . A test of leadership categorization theory : Internal structure , information process - ing , and leadership perceptions . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 34 , 343 - 378 . Lord , R . G . , & Maher , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Leadership and information pro - cessing : Linking perceptions and performance . Winchester , MA : Unwin Hyman . Luhtanen , R . , & Crocker , J . ( 1992 ) . A collective self - esteem scale : Self - evaluation of one ' s social identity . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 18 , 302 - 318 . Marques , J . M . , & Paez , D . ( 1994 ) . The black sheep effect : Social cat - egorization , rejection of ingroup deviates , and perception of group variability . European Review of Social Psychology , 5 , 37 - 68 . Marris , P . ( 1996 ) . The politics of uncertainty : Attachment in private and public life . London : Routledge . McGarty , C . , Turner , J . C . , Hogg , M . A . , David , B . , & Wetherell , M . S . ( 1992 ) . Group polarization as conformity to the prototypical group member . British Journal ofSocial Psychology , 3 ] , 1 - 20 . McGrath . J . E . ( 1997 ) . Small group research , that once and future field : An interpretation of the past with an eye to the future . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 1 , 7 - 27 . Meindl , J . R . , Ehrlich , S . B . , & Dukerich , J . M . ( 1985 ) . The romance of leadership . Administrative Science Quarterly , 30 , 78 - 102 . Moreland , R . L . , Hogg , M . A . , & Hains , S . C . ( 1994 ) . Back to the fu - ture : Social psychological research on groups . Journal of Exper - imental Social Psychology , 30 , 527 - 555 . Morley , I . E . , Webb , J . , & Stephenson , G . M . ( 1988 ) . Bargaining and arbitration in the resolution of conflict . In W . Stroebe , A . W . Kruglanski , D . Bar - Tal , & M . Hewstone ( Eds . ) , The social psy - chology of intergroup conflict : Theory , research , and applica - tions ( pp . 117 - 134 ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Morris , M . W . , & Peng , K . ( 1994 ) . Culture and cause : American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 67 , 949 - 971 . Mowday , R . T . , & Sutton , R . I . ( 1993 ) . Organizational behavior : Linking individuals and groups to organizational contexts . An - nual Review of Psychology , 44 , 195 - 229 . Mullen , B . , Salas , E . , & Driskell , J . E . ( 1989 ) . Salience , motivation . and artifact as contributions to the relation between participa - tion rate and leadership . Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 25 , 545 - 559 . Mullin , B . - A . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dimensions of subjective un - certainty in social identification and minimal intergroup dis - crimination . British Journal of SocialPsychology , 37 , 345 - 365 . Mullin , B . - A . , & Hogg , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Motivations for group mem - bership : The role of subjective importance and uncertainty re - duction . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 21 , 91 - 102 . Nye , J . L . , & Forsyth , D . R . ( 1 991 ) . The effects of prototype - based bi - ases on leadership appraisals : A test of leadership categorization theory . Small Group Research , 22 , 360 - 379 . Nye , J . L . , & Simonetta , L . G . ( 1996 ) . Followers ' perceptions of group leaders : The impact of recognition - based and infer - ence - based processes . In J . L . Nye & A . M . Bower ( Eds . ) , What ' s social about social cognition : Research on socially shared cognition in small groups ( pp . 124 - 153 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Oakes , P . J . , Haslam , S . A . , & Turner , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Stereotyping and social reality . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Palich , L . E . , & Hom , P . W . ( 1992 ) . The impact of leader power and behavior on leadership perceptions : A lisrel rest of an expanded categorization theory of leadership model . Group and Organi - Zation Management , 17 , 279 - 296 . Pawar , B . S . , & Eastman , K . ( 1997 ) . The nature and implications of contextual influences on transformational leadership . Academy of Management Review , 22 , 80 - 109 . Peters , L . H . , Hartke , D . D . , & Pohlmann , J . T . ( 1985 ) . Fielder ' s con - tingency theory of leadership : An application of the meta - ana - lytic procedure of Schmidt and Hunter . Psychological Bulletin , 97 , 287 - 300 . Platow , M . J . , Reid , S . , & Andrew , S . ( 1998 ) . Leadership endorse - ment : The role of distributive and procedural behavior in inter - personal and intergroup contexts . Group Processes and Inter - group Relations , 1 , 35 - 47 . Platow , M . J . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 1999 , July ) . The impact of leaders ' ingroup prototypicality and normative fairness on leadership endorsements in an intergroup context . Paper pre - sented at the XII General Meeting of the European Association of Experimental Social Psychology , Oxford , England . Rabbie , J . M . , & Bekkers , F . ( 1 978 ) . Threatened leadership and inter - group competition . European Journal of Social Psychology , 8 , 9 - 20 . Raven , B . H . ( 1965 ) . Social influence and power . In I . D . Steiner & M . Fishbein ( Eds . ) , Current studies in social psychology ( pp . 371 - 382 ) . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . 199 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from HOGG Reicher , S . D . , & Hopkins , N . ( 1996 ) . Seeking influence through characterising self - categories : An analysis of anti - abortionist rhetoric . British Journal of Social Psychology , 35 , 297 - 311 . Ridgeway , C . L . ( 2001 ) . Social status and group structure . In M . A . Hogg & R . S . Tindale ( Eds . ) , Blackwell handbook of socialpsy - chology : Group processes ( pp . 352 - 375 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Robinson , W . P . ( Ed . ) . ( 1996 ) . Social groups and identities : De - veloping the legacy of Henri Tajfel . Oxford , England : Butterworth - Heinemann . Ross , L . ( 1977 ) . The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychol - ogy ( Vol . 10 , pp . 174 - 220 ) . New York : Academic . Rubin , M . , & Hewstone , M . ( 1998 ) . Social identity theory ' s self - es - teem hypothesis : A review and some suggestions for clarifica - tion . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 2 , 40 - 62 . Rush , M . C . , & Russell , J . E . A . ( 1988 ) . Leaderprototypes and proto - type - contingent consensus in leader behavior descriptions . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 24 , 88 - 104 . Sanna , L . J . , & Parks , C . D . ( 1997 ) . Group research trends in social and organizational psychology : Whatever happened to intragroup research ? Psychological Science , 8 , 261 - 267 . Sherif , M . ( 1966 ) . In common predicament : Social psychology of in - tergroup conflict and cooperation . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Stogdill , R . ( 1974 ) . Handbook of leadership . New York : Free Press . Strube , M . J . , & Garcia , J . E . ( 1981 ) . A meta - analytic investigation of Fiedler ' s contingency model of leadership effectiveness . Psy - chological Bulletin , 90 , 307 - 321 . Tajfel , H . ( 1959 ) . Quantitative judgement in social perception . Brit - ish Journal of Psychology , 50 , 16 - 29 . Tajfel , H . ( 1969 ) . Cognitive aspects of prejudice . Journal of Social Issues , 25 , 79 - 97 . Tajfel , H . ( 1972 ) . Social categorization . English manuscript of ' La categorisation sociale . ' In S . Moscovici ( Ed . ) , Introduction a la Psychologie Sociale ( Vol . 1 , pp . 272 - 302 ) . Paris : Larousse . Tajfel , H . , & Turner , J . C . ( 1979 ) . An integrative theory of intergroup conflict . In W . G . Austin & S . Worchel ( Eds . ) , The social psy - chology of intergroup relations ( pp . 33 - 47 ) . Monterey , CA : Brooks / Cole . Taylor , S . E . , & Fiske , S . T . ( 1975 ) . Point - of - view and perceptions of causality . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 , 439 - 445 . Taylor , S . E . , & Fiske , S . T . ( 1978 ) . Salience , attention , and attribu - tion : Top of the head phenomena . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Ad - vances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 11 , pp . 249 - 288 ) . New York : Academic . Trope , Y . , & Liberman , A . ( 1993 ) . The use of trait conceptions to identify other people ' s behavior and to draw inferences about their personalities . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 , 553 - 562 . Turner , J . C . ( 1975 ) . Social comparison and social identity : Some prospects for intergroup behaviour . European Journal of Social Psychology , 5 , 5 - 34 . Turner , J . C . ( 1982 ) . Towards a cognitive redefinition of the social group . In H . Tajfel ( Ed . ) , Social identity and intergroup rela - tions ( pp . 15 - 40 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Turner , J . C . ( 1985 ) . Social categorization and the self - concept : A so - cial cognitive theory of group behavior . In E . J . Lawler ( Ed . ) , Advances in group processes : Theory and research ( Vol . 2 , pp . 77 - 122 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI . Turner , J . C . ( 1991 ) . Social influence . Buckingham , England : Open University Press . Turner , J . C . ( 1999 ) . Some current issues in research on social iden - tity and self - categorization theories . In N . Ellemers , R . Spears , & B . Doosje ( Eds . ) , Social identity ( pp . 6 - 34 ) . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Turner , J . C . , Brown , R . J . , & Tajfel , H . ( 1979 ) . Social comparison and group interest in ingroup favouritism . European Journal of Social Psychology , 9 , 187 - 204 . Turner , J . C . , Hogg , M . A . , Oakes , P . J . , Reicher , S . D . , & Wetherell , M . S . ( 1987 ) . Rediscovering the social group : A self - categoriza - tion theory . Oxford , England : Blackwell . Turner , M . E . , Pratkanis , A . R . , Probasco , P . , & Leve , C . ( 1992 ) . Threat , cohesion , and group effectiveness : Testing a social iden - tity maintenance perspective on groupthink . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 63 , 781 - 796 . Tyler , T . R . ( 1997 ) . The psychology of legitimacy : A relational per - spective on voluntary deference to authorities . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 1 , 323 - 345 . Tyler , T . R . , DeGoey , P . , & Smith , H . ( 1996 ) . Understanding why the justice of group procedures matters : A test of the psychological dynamics ofthe group - value model . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 70 , 913 - 930 . Tyler , T . R . , & Lind , E . A . ( 1992 ) . A relational model of authority in groups . In M . P . Zanna ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 25 , pp . 115 - 191 ) . New York : Academic . van Vugt , M . , & de Cremer , D . ( 1999 ) . Leadership in social dilem - mas : The effects of group identification on collective actions to provide public goods . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 76 , 587 - 599 . Wilpert , B . ( 1995 ) . Organizational behavior . Annual Review of Psy - chology , 46 , 59 - 90 . Worchel , S . , Morales , J . F . , Pdez , D . , & Deschamps , J . - C . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Social identity : International perspectives . London : Sage . Yukl , G . ( 1981 ) . Leadership in organizations . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Yukl , G . A . , & Falbe , C . M . ( 1991 ) . Importance of different power sources in downward and lateral relations . Journal ofApplied Psychology , 76 , 416 - 423 . Yukl , G . , & Van Fleet , D . D . ( 1992 ) . Theory and research on leader - ship in organizations . In M . D . Dunnette & L . M . Hough ( Eds . ) , Handbook of organizational psychology ( 2nd ed . , Vol . 3 , pp . 147 - 197 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . 200 at Bobst Library , New York University on March 23 , 2015 psr . sagepub . com Downloaded from