148 Rural Encounters : Cultural Translations Through Video David Browning James Cook University Discpl . IT ( TVL ) david . browning @ jcu . edu . au Nicola J Bidwell James Cook University Discpl . IT ( CNS ) nic @ it . jcu . edu . au Dianna Hardy James Cook University Discpl . IT ( TVL ) dianna . hardy @ jcu . edu . au P - M Standley James Cook University Discpl . IT ( CNS ) petamarie . standley @ jcu . edu . au ABSTRACT Requirements gathering for design in rural and remote areas needs to be considered within the prevailing cultural context . We explain our use of video as a technological site for cultural encounters during the preparatory elicitation of cultural influen - ces and determinants . We outline the factors leading to the development of a co - generative approach arising from our understanding of the role played by indexicality during such encounters with different cultural systems of knowledge . Categories and Subject Descriptors H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . General Terms Design , Human Factors , Theory . Keywords Rural , indexicality , co - generative methods , design , performa - tive knowledge , cultural encounters , video 1 . INTRODUCTION We consider the use of video in preparation for determining methods of requirements gathering appropriate for contexts that are remote from those typically focused on in design . We agree with Harper et al . , [ 1 ] , that fresh views of the ‘perceived role or function’ of a technology can alter the trajectory of conceptual frameworks that designers draw upon when determining poten - tial technology use . We extend this by re - evaluating the role of technology deployed so routinely , by designers during require - ments gathering , that we often no longer attend to it as a site of interaction . We aim to pave the way for co - generating methods for design with communities whose cultural systems of know - ledge and communication differ from those currently emphas - ised . The influence any technology has on a community is shaped both by its design and how it is appropriated ( eg [ 2 ] ) . Video is increasingly used by diverse communities to tell stories and raise issues ( see [ 3 ] ) , even in contexts with limited access to the technological world . As a narrative resource , video is well suited to contexts that emphasise oral traditions and tangible interaction with material aspects of the world , and where core skills and practices are acquired through intra - communal and family relationships and by trial and error rather than through formal systems of education . It is just such contexts that pose a considerable challenge for design methods and technologies grounded in current conceptual frameworks that emphasise formalism and rationalism . Thus , for the purposes of adapting conceptual frameworks , community appropriation of video presents an opportunity to gain insights into how technological encounters are shaped in otherwise disenfranchised contexts . In HCI , design , and , to an extent , in ethnography , video is typically used as a supplemental data - recording tool . Since the late ‘80s , it has partly addressed problems of ‘single pass’ observations , helping facilitate the collection of rich data sets for analysis and inspiration . Goldman - Segall describes video as way of providing a record of a " thicker description " [ 4 ] , but also notes the complexity of the data [ 5 ] . Video has been used to cue more detailed recall ( [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] ) of decision - making in the wild . As a ‘quick and dirty’ ethnographic technique , video has been used to ‘deepen’ time in the field during HCI and product design enabling the production of detailed analytical reportage despite constraints on prolonged durations in situ [ 8 ] . Video can also extend ethnographic reach in large , complex and difficult to access settings , such as out - door contexts [ 9 ] or offer design - ers perspectives on contexts ‘normalised’ by cultural commen - tators [ 10 ] . Video also provides detailed records of task per - formance , allowing analysis and interpretation of the structure of activities [ 11 ] and interactions [ 9 ] . Frequently , video - artefacts are used to support user centred design ( [ 12 ] ) , to bridge the gap between abstraction and detail ( [ 13 ] ) , and in teaching design ( [ 14 ] ) . We do not promote a particular method for recording but rather draw insight from interactions during our use of various video methods . These interactions show how video can act as a tech - nological site for a cultural encounter . The interactions with and through video are a form of meaning making in which partici - pants , their community context and the video process are " mu - tually defining and subject to multiple interpretations " [ 15 ] . Without such an encounter it is difficult , if not impossible , to collect requirements in domains where there is insufficient shared context to index experience . Participants in their own domain , cannot possibly articulate sufficient information about their experience and culture , history and sociality , beliefs and praxis , to allow the unfamiliar , non - domain designer , even if in situ , to understand . In ethnography , participant observation [ 16 ] recognises that researchers act as both insiders and outsiders , and we exploit that term to emphasise the role of video in our active construction of contexts during the in situ and post - activity phases of interpretation . Our intent in this paper is to report on insights arising from mutual involvement and discovery during both the participants’ and the observers’ use of video technology . We do not seek to explain a process of requirements gathering in rural or remote areas . Rather , we try to explore the common ground in which requirements might be co - generatively elicited . To do this , cultural influences need to be exposed [ 17 ] and a mutually OZCHI 2008 , December 8 - 12 , 2008 , Cairns , QLD , Australia . Copyright the author ( s ) and CHISIG . Additional copies can be ordered from CHISIG ( secretary @ chisig . org ) . OZCHI 2008 Proceedings ISBN : 0 - 9803063 - 4 - 5 149 beneficial modus operandi established between participants and designers . Using video affords a record of the construction of such meanings and sets the scene for progression beyond the widely reported failures , largely caused by getting the cultural translation wrong ( see examples in [ 18 ] ) . The issues and themes arising from cultural encounters through video are drawn from our research into communities with strong associations with land and rural places . So we start by describing why rural contexts may hold different qualities that need to be understood and articulated . Next we position video as a situated cultural encounter and indicate the importance of indexicality [ 19 ] . We then outline the research situations in which we used video before presenting themes that emerged in our analysis . We conclude by discussing approaches that draw on cultural translations that inform co - generative methods . 2 . ODD DESIGN IN COMMON PLACES As designers we are unusual because we inhabit sparsely popu - lated rural settings in Australia and Africa while most design is situated in urban contexts [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] . The sensitivities acquired by living in rural areas motivate us to design technologies that support relationships with and within these settings . More broadly , we are less unusual since just less than 50 % of the world’s population resides rurally . Various banal instances indicate that constraints in rural areas , due to remoteness from centres of institutional power , demographics and lack of access to technological infrastructure , are overlooked , to the detriment of rural users [ 21 ] . Often , users need to be inventive to circum - navigate the constraints that arise from urban - based design and these circumventions create their own local ecologies , for example , developing alternative power sources to run devices and creating small businesses based on phone recharging . Not understanding technology use in rural areas confines the trajectory of conceptual frameworks . Consider the ‘perceived role or function’ [ 1 ] of technologies in the absence of developed infrastructures , for example the meaning of the mobile phone in less developed countries . According to the ITU 2007 Report , cell phone networks cover in excess of 95 % of South Africa , and there are 87 . 1 handsets per 100 inhabitants . This compares with 102 . 5 handsets per 100 inhabitants in Australia , and 83 . 5 handsets per 100 inhabitants in the United States . So , in rural southern Africa , leapfrogging the intervening stage of landlines , and wide mobile coverage means mobile phones have never been just supplementary . In contrast in rural Australia where , for example , there is no mobile coverage from 50km inland of the major cities in north Queensland , the cell phone has rather less mobile use . Consider also that , in southern Africa , mobile phones are the only digital , computational devices most people have used or owned , and are foreseeably likely to do so . Life - style in the rural environments of even wealthy countries is distinguished by less access to amenities , urban infrastructure , lower incomes , higher unemployment and different demograph - ics . The digital divide is wider for people residing rurally , regardless of their cultural background and economic status , and deeper because the consequences for digital exclusion are greater . Technology diffusion and infrastructure in rural Austra - lia considerably differs from urban centres ; contrast Internet access for only 20 % of rural Aboriginal communities yet near universal access in cities . Disparities in access to technology create further differences in gaining experience to use technol - ogy into everyday life , so that the competence of users and their familiarity with technology differs . While people in urban places become veterans in Internet - based technologies rural people are less likely to find help from a neighbour , or a friend locally to start to deal with the online world . Limiting the tra - jectory of conceptual frameworks that determine a technology’s function and meaning by confining consideration to urban places merely perpetuates such lifestyle differences . The technological and usability gaps revealed in rural areas are manifestations of the affordances and priorities of urban places that widely shape design . In struggling to interact with the LCD screens and unsealed housings of mobile devices in the high ambient light , humidity or dust of rural settings , we , as design - ers , interpret design features as indexed to urban environments . This symbolism goes beyond objective understandings of different constraints . The apparently prosaic relatives that distinguish urban life - styles , such as more technological infra - structure or educational achievement , are imbued with cultural conceptions of progress , style , excitement and endless diver - sion . By contrast , rural areas are portrayed as quiet , perhaps idyllic ( e . g . [ 22 ] , [ 23 ] ) , attracting visitors and sea - changers , who happily forego the rush and buzz of the city , at least tem - porarily , also retaining longer term residents who are at home with whatever the rural life offers , while railing against the lack of resources and opportunities . However , cultural encounters with settings exceed stereotypical instrumental constructions of contemporary facilities or nostalgic alternatives . Wherever we are , be it in urban dream or nightmare [ 24 ] , sub - urban order or mediocrity , or rural arcadia or torpor , we have a ’felt - life’ [ 25 ] sensed in the experience that is often deeply interconnected with our values . Our in situ interactions in " being in the world " [ 26 ] are bound with values . So we experi - ence intimate , sensual interactions as we work , play , relax and move in and through our environments , interactions that are coupled with our value - laden construction of the components of rural life . One of the starkest examples in Australia is the need to look beyond western cartographic representations and find new ways of depicting relationships with country in order to respect and prize the values associated with the Traditional Knowledge of Australian Indigenous communities . Values , however , are problematic . In being nebulous and obscured by culturally bound ways of knowing , they can be difficult to describe and communicate . Despite this , there is an increasing interest in designing to respond to people’s values [ 2 ] . 3 . VIDEO AS CULTURAL ENCOUNTER As we prompt , access and record the flow of meanings gener - ated in our engagement with rural users , video becomes a tech - nological site for a cultural encounter with ways of knowing . In common with other participatory observation methods this goes beyond normal engagement in the social situation [ 27 ] , as , in our efforts to observe , we simultaneously participate in the encounter , albeit in a thrown state . Video gives us time to later reflect upon the performance of the rich interaction into which we have been drawn . It affords formalizing , articulating and transforming of domain properties into requirements . By engag - ing in a reflective coding process , repeated listening to , watch - ing and interpreting , we experience a simulacrum of the lived encounter at the time of recording , and curious feelings of revisiting to see things in the past that we did not notice at the time [ 1 ] . The process of video - cued review also allows us to begin to reveal the performative knowledge buried in the sub - text of the interaction and affords understandings of how such knowledge is indexed to rural places . 150 3 . 1 Using Video Our analysis of video in five different projects , where we used in vivo video to gather data in rural environments and obtain a rich picture of participant’s world - view , reveals numerous indexicality issues . Rural locales are settings in which the meaning of place is generated by interactions that are bound by " particular kinds of extent , opportunity and potency " , [ 28 ] . These index both behaviour and experience . Indexicality is determined by issues such as distance , lack of urban - type infrastructure ( e . g . communications networks , transport networks , financial networks , and amenities networks ) , rural infrastructure ( e . g . greater degree of communality , greater self - reliance , closeness to nature ) , as well as culture , history and sociality . For example , the Indigenous Australians we work with repeatedly remind us of the interconnections between country , knowledge , ceremony and people , plants and animals . Indexicality is also indicated in the concrete sense of partici - pants’ encounters with the technological world through the video , an encounter shaped by the degree of access to technol - ogy and by the rural context . During the co - authorship of mean - ing with the rural context and the participants , video acts as a symbol of the technological world undergoing cultural adapta - tion . As a technological site for a cultural encounter it becomes part of the active construction of rural and indigenous culture . Our use of video does not assume ethnographic depth but rather provides sufficient time to gain some understanding of social , cultural , historical and locational context [ 29 ] . In Alligator Creek we used egocentric Point of View ( egoPOV ) video to record participant’s traversals of natural places and observer - directed static camera video to record post - activity interviews [ 19 ] . In former Transkei we used researcher - directed video to record data on contextual meanings during planned interviews , walkabouts and spontaneously arising occasions of note due to differing cultural contexts and on Ibo we used video to record translated focus group meetings . The goal of the two projects in which Indigenous Australians describe and focus upon details of their life and history of importance is as much to benefit the participants directly , on their own terms , as , as to inform re - searchers and designers . Thus , in the Gugu Badhun [ 30 ] and the Kuku Thaypan [ 3 ] projects we refer to video material that has been directed by members of the respective indigenous com - munities . 3 . 1 . 1 Revisiting Alligator Creek We used egoPOV video to collect experiences of local com - munity members as they traversed the semi - natural site of Alligator Creek [ 19 ] . We collected data over an area of 2 , 500 m 2 area , part of the large Bowling Green National Park , 28 km south of Townsville CBD , which included camping and picnic facilities , a swimming hole , sections of the adjoining Cockatoo Creek and a path to a waterfall . It is popular with families , who swim and picnic at weekends but is otherwise quiet and suited to walking and watching wildlife . EgoPOV video supports interpretation of the situated experience , as similarity between speaker and listener ' s eye - movements in viewing scenes pro - motes comprehension [ 31 ] . The fleeting and ongoing experi - ences of people in situ contributed to creating meaning during spatially embedded interaction . 3 . 1 . 2 Gugu Badhun Cultural History We use digital audio and video recordings by the Gugu Badhun , the Aboriginal traditional owners of the land surrounding the Valley of Lagoons , an inland area to the NE of the Burdekin River and surrounding area in North Queensland . Traditionally , cultural knowledge is transferred orally face - to - face , but due to the separation of group members over considerable distances in recent years so the clan has worked closed with researchers from our university over many years to create recordings relat - ing their cultural history and family ties . These recordings provide a means to pass on knowledge and culture to their own descendents and are a rich resource for the researchers to more clearly understand the Gugu Badhun culture and motivations . Rich video resources allow complex ideas to be conveyed in a relatively short span of time to both members of the group , but to interested outsiders . In addition , we have used these videos as resources for discussions with members of the clan , some - times recording their interactions while viewing previous videos to derive more nuanced understandings . 3 . 1 . 3 Kuku - Thaypan Traditional Knowledge We refer to video gathered as Elders and younger clan members of Indigenous groups in Cape York practically demonstrating their knowledge as they record it are on - country , as part of the Traditional Knowledge Revival Pathways ( TKRP ) . The priority of TKRP is to fulfil the expressed wishes of the Elders to trans - fer and record as much of their Traditional Knowledge as pos - sible to the clan youth before it is lost , to secure , demonstrate , apply and communicate this knowledge to contemporary issues of community concern . This arm of the TKRP applies com - munity informatics to promote the effective use of IT and empower community voice via training [ 43 ] . Both Indigenous and non - Indigenous trainers transfer IT skills however non - Indigenous trainers are guided by their Indigenous colleagues . In TKRP – Kuku Thaypan Fire Management Research Project we draw on video in a number of ways compatible with In - digenous people communicating on their own terms . The pro - ject records the Elders communication efforts to re - shape the problem space relating to fire management practices on their country . Elders and younger clan members on country recorded their own traditional knowledge on fire practice and one of us , the co - generative researcher in the project , had access to unre - stricted footage and recorded on - country interviews , as well as remote sensing and GPS records to assist in reporting on what the Elders directed , rather than speaking on their behalf . . 3 . 1 . 4 Xhosa Power Structures & Process We used video recordings in a situated design endeavour in the Kingdom of Pondoland , rural Transkei , South Africa . One of us , lived and worked in situ in the remote , traditional village of Lwandile for over two months to gain more intimate insights into culture and technological constraints and opportunities than accessible by visits of short duration . We integrated design processes into traditional power channels and sought to under - stand the relation of these power channels in community life and co - generate design activities according to their priorities . Video was the preferred method of recording data for planned ‘interviews’ , walkabouts , and situations that arose sponta - neously because it enabled sharing the very different context with designers and developers beyond that situation . 3 . 1 . 5 Mwani Elders in Ibo Island We used video recordings to record meetings and translations with groups of male and female elders in defining opportunities for design projects on the remote island of Ibo , Quirimbas Archipelago , Capo Delgado Province , in northern Mozambique . The purpose of the meetings was to gain insight into the elders’ priorities and opinions on the changes the island has undergone 151 and continues to undergo . Few of the Elders speak English or Portuguese , thus a young Quimana - speaking Mozambiquan who had lived on the island for several years acted as both cultural and linguistic translator . The video thus became a resource for discussion with the translator afterwards as well as with designers beyond the context . 3 . 2 Value of Video In trying to using video to provoke contextual enquires that benefit both participants and researchers , we pay particular attention to aspects of the cultural exchange related to self - representation in terms of control over form and content [ 32 ] . We accept that this fixes , once again , the cultural aspects of the participants in our own interpretative terms , absolutist and inflexible . Nevertheless , we are not sole authors of the active construction of the encounter . The participants use video as a voice , but video simultaneously changes that voice . 4 . EMERGING THEMES In the video interactions the participants draw the researcher ( s ) in , providing sufficient to include them in some small way , in the participant ' s daily practices and culture . It is a sharing and translation of performative and cognitive knowledge [ 28 ] , far more intimate than just a relating of the bare facts . Concurrently and often unwittingly , both observer and participant subtly acknowledge the performative requirements of the transference of situated , indexed knowledge . 4 . 1 Depth and Detail Highly specific detail , usually conveyed by participants in both dialogue and deixis , enables interactants to create scenes that afford meaning making . The degree to which that scene is familiar is the degree to which the interactants share the indexi - cality of the details . However , the sharing of context is not static . The participant , in revealing details beyond simply con - veying of information , employs an involvement strategy [ 33 ] . So , for example , a Gugu Badhun elder , is asked by her grand - son , " Can you tell us what happened in Malanda with your father and how he came out and married Granny Kitty ? " The elderly woman first describes a highly complex family situation dealing with the local police , cattle station owners , the Queens - land " chief protector of aborigines " , J . W . Bleakley , and a for - mer Queensland Premiere [ 42 ] . Only then does she describe how her mother had married a Russian émigré . Rapport build - ing through the supplying of detail is more prevalent in rural communities and in communities with oral traditions . In urban communities conversational details are often regarded as a waste of time and a liability [ 34 ] . Descriptions often include lists of events and the naming of associated places with contingent details such as ownership , temporality and importance . The level of detail revealed might also reflect the degree to which interactants are to be included . So a relative outsider might get some detail as part of an in - volvement strategy but a member of the particular community might receive either great detail by way of diachronic repetition ( see 4 . 2 below ) or very little because it was assumed it was shared information . In the latter case , references are often very abbreviated , and rely on cultural and historical indexicality to fill in the gaps . We observe this in the grandmother’s response to her grandson in the previous example . The participant showed what appeared to be extreme discomfort , looking down at the table and rubbing her neck as she decided how to answer . She appeared surprised to be asked about this topic during the video , perhaps remembering that the grandson was familiar with this story . A long pause before the woman begins her story suggests that revealing knowledge of her family may not be appropriate in the setting , concern about publishing the details of the story on video tape , and , finally , an acceptance that the story is of sufficient importance to relate in the given situation . Details add a sense of vividness and authenticity . Describing his friends jumping off high rocks into the creek below , a com - mon activity amongst teenagers at an Alligator Creek swim - ming hole , a participant reflects on how old he was when he moved to Townsville from further south on the Queensland coast . Remembering moving to Townsville just prior to becom - ing a teenager , prompts him to explain how he is part of a close - knit family , with his now sixty - year - old father often taking part in the children’s activities . He then recalls how his mother playfully reminded his father of this childish behaviour during the course of a sermon is father was preaching recently . Video can often reveal additional information regarding the participants based on the choice of who will be recorded and who will do the interviewing . In the Gugu Badhun videos , male elders were primarily the focus of the interviews although a spouse was often seated nearby off - camera . At times the male interviewee asked for supporting details from his spouse , but her role was mainly supportive . Ensuring details are demonstra - bly correctly cited , by consulting other sources , is another means of supporting authenticity . As with ethnography , ad - hoc details are informative . Even in video where participants are sitting calmly in domestic or com - munity spaces the rural life insists on actively shaping the interaction . For example , on Ibo , videos under ‘meeting trees’ or in Chief’s backyards were invariably annotated with the noises and appearances of chickens and goats , and family members , from small children to once a drunken villager . In one Gugu Baden video a dog runs into camera bearing part of the video equipment within his teeth . Some ad - hoc details may only arise because video is occurring . For example , in the Transkei a forest warden attempted to stop a recording , reveal - ing power structures and permits in the village . 4 . 2 Supportive mechanisms Interactions have their foundations , not only in the immediate moment , but also in prior occasions . In Heideggerian terms , " ( A ) ny association requires a fore - having " , [ 26 ] . Interactions occur against a backdrop of a relational totality , or as McHoul puts it , a " …’gestalt‘ of practical competence " [ 35 ] . They have meaning precisely because they occur within a familiar context . Repetition , either in discourse or of tangible interaction , plays a role in the active construction of interaction . It is used to set the scene or to draw particular attention to part of the scene . Dia - chronic repetition , which seems to be used to establish shared context , occurs across time ; so , for example , retelling a story or reporting a previous interaction . Synchronic repetition occurs within an interaction , for example , a phrase that is repeated during discourse or a repeated gesture . An interview with the Headsman in Lwandile village took place in front of the Headsman’s house , under a tree , in an area where , traditionally and to this day , men and respected visitors gather to discuss village business . Perched above Lwandile , the gathering area commands a good view of the village and the environs , and , as the Headsmen recited details about the extent of his domain , the researcher was able to record areas to which he or his son pointed . The interview under the tree illustrates that the Headsman ensured that the data recorded accorded with 152 his priorities , which were to demonstrate the integral role of ancestry and power structures of his clan . This is of course very valuable data , in terms of giving meaning to the physical , cul - tural and historical context and illustrating the achievement of considerable trust between the researcher and the Headsman . Video recording , in and of itself , can be seen as affording rep - etition . Video histories are an important use of technology in Aboriginal contexts to preserve Traditional Knowledge and write indigenous voices back into Australia’s modern , colonial history . The Traditional Knowledge Revival Pathways ( TKRP ) – Kuku Thaypan Fire Management Research Project uses video to record Elders and younger clan members practically demon - strating their knowledge whilst on - country . Repetition of inter - actions in situ allows country to speak to the people and people to speak to country and is an important element in the retention of Traditional Knowledge ( TK ) in Indigenous culture , one that ensures that both country and people remain healthy . Unlike more recent projects applying the use of western ICT and design strategies to deal with issues of TK loss , ( see [ 36 ] ) and emancipation ( see [ 37 ] ) the TKRP project originated from grassroots Indigenous identified need and action led by In - digenous peoples directed by their Elders . Further , the commu - nities it operates in maintain ownership and control of their TKRP project . A recent example from this project is the disap - pointment one of the Elders had in using GPS based applica - tions to support passing on fire knowledge . Early results were positive but more recently he felt that people were not picking up the finer nuances of the knowledge embedded in country and the behaviour of walking country . The indexicality of know - ledge embedded in performance was not allowed enough room to breath in the context of GPS use . In contrast , co - generation , by elder and researcher , of the video method enabled an en - counter around technology to record the cultural interaction , allowing room for vital values and beliefs . In another example , the positive response that the Gugu Badhun have toward the preservation of their knowledge on video reveals a belief that their knowledge is endangered by the dynamic transformation of their culture under pressure from western systems . In collaboration with researchers at James Cook University , the Gugu Badhun undertook the recording of over 50 hours over video of members of the group describing their family histories and events in living memory [ 30 ] . State - ments by members of the group such as ' the video is important to preserving history for future generations ' reveal both that the video of history and country has important indexical value for the future and the belief that this indexicality is threatened . Performance of synchronic repetition demonstrates specific aspects of an interaction as being particularly significant . An Alligator Creek participant vigorously gesticulates frequently during an exchange in which he describes some of the activities he and his friends used to engage in , and in so doing shows various topographical features they used during their play . Often the motions he makes do not completely tally with the words he utters at the time . Nevertheless , the egoPOV video shows the features he means . Repetition here seems to be used to enhance the dramatic quality of the performance and ensure the sharing of the context . By repeatedly gesticulating at the actual landmark objects , the participant gives authenticity to his story , which was about how his friends used to jump from high rocks into the creek below , and how his fear of heights pre - cluded him from following suite . The video record shows both the gestures and the frequency of his glances and deixis . In addition to repetition , many groups use conversational over - laps as a supportive mechanism in the continuation of dialog . Recordings of the Gugu Badhun often show participants , par - ticularly females , finishing each other ' s sentences and talking over the last few words of a sentence . This provides feedback to the conversants that the other person actively engages in the conversation and shows approval . Tannen [ 38 ] reports that this is not merely a female penchant , but is quite common in many non - westernised groups , however we noticed gender differences in African communities . For example , in video of Mwani elders 3 to 4 people would frequently and extensively ‘layer’ their speech over each other in female only groups but took turns in male only speech . In the patriarchal processes of mixed - gender Xhosa community meetings observed highly formalised turn - taking in communication protocols . The impact of layering conversational style can have on asynchronous communication conveyed via Web 2 . 0 tools provides an interesting conundrum for localising design appropriately . 4 . 3 Broadcasting In using video to afford cultural encounters in rural contexts , we frequently observe participants use of its publishing affordance . For example , a Gugu Badhun Elder repeatedly raises financial issues , reflecting not only her concern at her lack of resources , but also the difficulties associated with using money in rural areas . She talked about the lack to auto - teller facilities , having to buy things over the telephone , the difficulty of getting fund - ing for projects important to the Gugu Badhun , and a range of matters associated with wages . Although the topic was not always central to the immediate discussion , she returned to it on numerous occasions . One interpretation is that she made use of the opportunity to make her concern public , and like other means of digital storytelling , they were " not merely empirical accounts of some sequence of events ; they were stories fabri - cated with certain goals in mind " [ 1 ] . The appropriation of the video as voice , may inspire confidence . In Ibo , all members of all groups agreed to video recording though often one person in the group seemed shyer . For example , a man positioned himself out of view ; women in separate groups obscured their faces . As time went on and participants turned to references to a raft of aspects of immediate importance in participants ' lives , from the price of rice to the irreverent behaviour of the young , all par - ticipants became more comfortable and talked towards the camera . This is an active construction in that the use of video provides a stage upon which participants can air a variety of concerns that otherwise would remain submerged . Each year the Gugu Badhun hold a week - long ' cultural camp ' where members of their community journey back to their coun - try ( or as close as they are able to get to it ) to reconnect with the land and share important tenets of their culture and spirituality with their children . During one of these campouts , a short 15 - minute silent video was taken . A researcher , working with a group of Gugu Badhun women , requested that they view the video as a group and talk about what they saw or felt . During this session , many of the themes found in the previous research were discussed , i . e . family ties , the importance of teaching the children about their cultural history , but of more importance to the group was the fact that this campout was not as satisfying to them as it could have been due to the fact that they were re - stricted from visiting important places in their cultural and family history by the current of leaseholder of that property . The members of the Gugu Badhun community have emotional and spiritual attachment to their country . Actions taken by the 153 current leaseholder to restrict them from the property reveal different motivations and beliefs . Statements by the Gugu Badhun , for example " This is where we ' d like to be camping . This is where our families used to live . It’s a shame that we can ' t go to that place , because we ' d like to take the kids back there and tell them what our uncles and aunties and great granddad lived . " The word ' this ' refers to a contextualised set of values shared by the group , and only part of the angst caused by this situation is grasped by the researcher . The importance of these issues is revealed by the frequency that the topic is raised . After viewing of video , when the participants had moved on to another design activity , one group member brought up the subject again , describing the situation in more detail and ex - panding the reasons that the current state of affairs caused them grief . Many allusions to these problems were made by individu - als in the group such as " the current trouble with the owner " . This statement was made with the assumption that everyone present would understand the full details of the issue . Shared information like this , within a group , provides a bonding mechanism and a sense of mutual understanding of issues . In this last example , not only is repetition and detail being used to show the interactants as a cohesive group , but the common grievance also binds them whilst setting them apart from the researcher . Revealing this grievance by way of commenting on the video as a platform establishes context beyond the immedi - ate subject matter and speaks of deeper socio - political concerns . 4 . 4 Pride in Being Local In exploring rural and remote contexts it is important to get at the subtexts that interaction in rural and remote locations exem - plify . Inhabitants of rural and remote areas take pride in being local and create opportunities to display connections with local practices and stories . They often also display detailed know - ledge about their locale to demonstrate their lived familiarity . EgoPOV video often reveals very particular local connections . For example , during a traversal of Alligator Creek , a popular swimming hole in a National Park south of Townsville , north - ern Queensland , a participant is particularly struck by seeing a burnt area , along one side of a walkway . He , in fact , derives quite a lot of pleasure in seeing this . The video shows him glancing at this quite substantial area a number of times , and then pointing at it , before he talks about it . He mentions that he loves the look of places that have been back - burnt . He then goes on to explain that when it rains , then you get green shoots coming up in the burnt areas , and that he particularly enjoys the contrasting colours , the green on the black . He attributes his taking pleasure in this to having " been around bush areas and that sort of thing " for a fair bit of his life . For him , the destruc - tive force of the fire and then the new growth epitomises rural Australia , the bushland of which he very much feels a part . Local and rural also often reflect how Australia’s depiction and the orientational axes through which places gain meaning [ 28 ] relate closely to its natural heritage and resources . Also clear from this Alligator Creek video is that prior to his observations of the back - burnt areas , the participant had seen a number of Eastern Brown wallabies , and Rock wallabies , and had re - marked that Australia was one of the few countries that enjoyed eating meat taken from one of its national emblems . In the post - activity interview he links these two incidents , mentioning that he had been thinking about things that made him feel good about being Australian , and both eating kangaroo and seeing bushfires reminded him of this . These remarks were made with both a sense of pride and slight self - deprecation . Of course , as a corollary , there is also degree of homogenisation between urban and rural . Despite the economic , occupational and social life of rural areas remaining distinct , there are occa - sions that can lead to somewhat confused expectations . The Gugu Badhun place great emphasis on conveying their culture to their children in order to aid their descendents to find their place in the modern world . This includes a concept of being both Aboriginal and Australian . An anecdote related by one the mothers in the group concerned an incident experienced by her son at school . His primary school teacher asked the children to draw a picture of what " aboriginal children eat for dinner " . Her son drew a picture of a McDonald ' s bag , and received a poor grade . He protested his mark to the teacher proudly claiming , " I ' m Aboriginal and I eat McDonalds ! " 4 . 5 Using Landmarks In stories during encounters provided by the use of video it seems inevitable that much of the content is indexed to physical infrastructure such as landmarks or to imagery associated with physical objects . The landscape prompts recollections [ 19 ] . Detailed and perhaps embellished memories are often indexed to very specific topological features . For example , many par - ticipants refer to particular landmarks that played a role in their activities at Alligator Creek . One of the participants repeatedly talks about water and the part played by swimming in north Queensland life . He talks animatedly about times spent at the creek , frequently gesticulating and using particular landmarks as prompts for further reminiscences . The video clearly shows the particular landmarks , and is indicative of how these keep the narrative progressing . So talking about trying to climb out of some fast - flowing water on to some particular rocks in mid - stream reminds the participant of numerous occasions spent at Alligator Creek , which in turn leads to an explanation for the frequency of visits , during which he reveals further connections a church community and school . As found for egocentric photographic records yielded by Sense Cam , the co - joining of the features of story telling and the material used in that story - telling are bound to complex personal hopes and dreams [ 1 ] . Meaning is often indexed to physical infrastructure . In the Transkei project once the video recording was freed from the constraints of spaces chosen to depict power and domain , we were able to elicit the smaller , lived stories of places that arose during conversations en route around the village and environs . These situated stories afford ex situ researchers and designers watching the video , some opportunity to for deeper appreciation of meanings . In one walk along roads and paths criss - crossing the village , the second son of the Headsman , showed various places " where people meet " , such as the football ground , the great place , food stalls , shebeens , Spaza shops , churches and family member’s homes . Recording video in this context was relatively straightforward and provided rich contextual data to share with other designers not in context . Being accompanied by a trusted member of the village meant few people encount - ered were concerned by the video and seemed sufficiently at ease to ask for it to be turned off if they felt uncomfortable . 4 . 6 Reflecting on the Uncomprehended EgoPOV video provides suitable material for later reflection and discussion . The initial interaction reveals more than is initially understood . EgoPOV video doesn’t just describe this interaction , complex though that is . It also provides a cue to further investigate what was either completely missed at the time , or perhaps not understood , there being no opportunity 154 afforded by the trajectory of the interaction to seek clarification . For example , during the setup of the video recording equip - ment , again for a traversal of Alligator Creek , two men engage the participant and observer in a conversation . The two men are third parties to the traversal session , one being quite a bit older than the other , possibly a father and son . The older man is very interested in the equipment setup that is going on . The younger person at Alligator Creek suddenly says to the participant , " Hey , ( indistinct ) , probably the best band in the world . . . " to which the participant replies , " They were awe - some in Sydney , when I saw them in Sydney , for sure . " It is clear from the egoPOV video that the participant is looking at the younger man and that that particular interaction is between them . The observer and older man continue the previous con - versation about equipment , seemingly unaware of the signifi - cance of the interruption . Later , the observer recalls not making much sense of this strange , out - of - the - blue interjection , which , as it became evident during the post - activity interview , was provoked by the band - tour t - shirt the participant was wearing . 4 . 7 Situated Constraints Video as a technological site for a rural encounter very con - cretely indicates the constraints that do not come to the fore in urban places . A serious constraint in the Transkei and Ibo was the availability of electricity to charge the camera . In the Tran - skei the situated researcher relied on a small solar set - up to charge a car battery and in unstable weather conditions often needed to choose whether her day’s research activities would involve using power for her video recorder , computer , or her own and others mobile phones . In Ibo , she relied on reciprocity with the small community of people who had diesel generators . Other aspects of rural contexts contributed to breakdowns in interacting with video technology . For example the elder son who will shortly take over the position of Headsman from his father , in Transkei used a walk through the hilly grassland , forest , coastal boulders and across a river in the Lwandile environs to graphically illustrate his concerns and plans for various initiatives in the area . The act of walking through this landscape considerably assisted our understanding and building trust but negotiating steep , slippery and thornily thicketed paths ultimately prevented recording the experience . Concern relating to equipment can plays a part in momentarily breakdowns of our understanding of the interaction we are both observing and participating in , for example , when batteries deplete during recording . In our throwness we cannot address the breakdown , and therefore we find it useful to be able to review the video record . And on many occasions it is only when we have a chance to review the video and reflect , that we are sensitised to those breakdowns . We just don’t have the re - sources to recognise them at the time . 5 . DISCUSSION Insights gained through an understanding of cultural transla - tions as they unfold during our use of video have prompted us to consider how we might adopt co - generative methods grounded in those cultural translations . We note that the themes that have emerged during our use of video are largely centred on revealing the indexicality of culturally bound knowledge . Rather than providing a set of requirements for any specific design , they are indicative of the necessity for a change in trajectory of technologies we might use for revealing require - ments for domains that are organised in a culturally different ways . Co - generative methods , in combining the strengths of both participants and designers , provide the necessary traction . So , although repetition is conventionally viewed as negative and boring [ 39 ] , designers should be aware of the role of both the synchronic and diachronic forms . Tannen [ 34 ] suggests that repetition facilitates comprehension by providing connection with earlier material , and that it plays an important role in the interaction of communication . Indeed , repetitive words , sounds and action might be the defining trait of oral traditions [ 40 ] , which are more common in rural areas . In addition to managing the interaction of communication , repetition also exhibits a group’s cohesiveness and is a way to drawing outsiders into a group . As Tannen says " repetition serves an over - arching pur - pose of creating interpersonal involvement " [ 34 ] . Depth of detail affords involvement through tactics that in - crease the sharing of context . To allow technologies to work across contexts , designers need to consider involvement strat - egies that not only provide opportunities to render depth of detail , but also permit tangential information . Detailed tangen - tial information not only establishes context but also often is used to establish verisimilitude . If we are to yield control over the interaction so as to play our part in co - generation of meth - ods we must accept that it is the participants with the know - ledge who should exert their control over direction . The context necessarily brought to methods for gathering requirements and later , to design , should primarily be that of the participants rather than the researchers . Detailed context is also sometimes indicative of submerged issues of concern . So an Elder’s frequent allusions to her finan - cial circumstances can be seen not only as expressing deep - seated worries , but also as sharing fundamental concerns . Par - ticipants , in using video as a publishing medium , are setting a context that is predicated by such fundamental concerns . Mechanisms for establishing the degree of inclusion of outsid - ers , including researchers , also involve demonstrations of close connections with the local . The ability to exhibit these and the pride taken in establishing the connections might demonstrate dominant power structures but also can be seen as an offer to share local context and thus draw outsiders in . Sharing of local contexts also seems to establish degrees of trust . 6 . CONCLUSION Designers in HCI , particularly those adopting user centred design methods , seek to conceptualise and distil the flow of meanings generated in engagements with potential users of the future technology . Operating in the realm of situated perspec - tives [ 15 ] , we try to articulate , formalise and transform the knowledge " out in the wild " , as part of the creative activity that culminates in the future development of those new technolo - gies . In the rural research context we inhabit , and against the backdrop of our experience of ill - fitting methods as practiced in homogenised urban environments , we have become sensitised to rural modes of being . Rural and remote cognitive and tacit knowledge is often in - dexed to locations and practices that are frequently not shared by current researchers . Until one realises the need to turn to co - generative methods developed with the inhabitants of other indexicalities , one is doomed to the non - productive re - employment of techniques born out of conventional urban - based design . It is in developing methods for co - generation that sufficient cultural translation can occur to move beyond the mistakes of the past . And it takes an alteration of philosophical 155 bent to appreciate the importance of indexicality , without which , as Harper et al . [ 1 ] so adroitly put it , " One can imagine again the surly researcher complaining that they cannot see the link between these philosophical delicacies and computing . " There is a particular way of experiencing the mutually defining relation between human being and place that is an aspect of social life in rural and remote areas . As Gray puts it , " the rural is a mode of being - in - place , a sense of place , a form of em - bodied experience uniting self and space , " ( as quoted in [ 41 ] ) . It is this that motivates us to make use of video as a technological site for translational cultural encounters . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank the Kuku Thaypan Elders and Victor Steffensen , the Gugu Badhun people , the ARCHER team and MPIT at JCU , the Sithelos of Lwandile , Martha and Junior of Ibo . 8 . REFERENCES 1 . Harper , R . , Randall , D . , Smyth , N . , Evans , C . , Heledd , L . , & Moore , R . ( 2008 ) . The past is a different place : they do things differently there . Proc . DIS2008 , Cape Town . 2 . Nathan , L . P . , Klasnja , P . V . , & Friedman , B . ( 2007 ) . Value scenarios : a technique for envisioning systemic effects of new technologies . 3 . Bidwell , N . J . , Standley , P - M . , George , T . , & Steffensen , V . ( 2008 ) . The landscape ' s apprentice : lessons for place - centred design from grounding documentary . Proc . DIS ' 08 , Cape Town . 4 . Goldman - Segall , R . ( 1989 ) . Thick Descriptions : a Tool for Designing Ethnographic Interactive Videodiscs . SIGCHI Bull , 21 ( 2 ) , 118 – 122 . 5 . Goldman - Segall , R . ( 1993 ) . Interpreting Video Data : Introduc - ing a " significance Measure " to Layer Description . Jour . of Ed . Multimedia and Hypermedia , 261 - 281 . 6 . Omodei , M . M . & McLennan , J . ( 1994 ) . Studying Complex Decision Making in Natural Settings : Using a Head - mounted Video Camera to Study Competitive Orienteering . Perceptual & Motor Skills , 79 ( ( 3 , Pt 2 ) , 1411 - 1425 . 7 . McLennan , J . , Pavlou , O . , & Klein , P . ( 1999 ) . Using Video During Training to Enhance Learning of Incident Command and Control Skills . Moreton - in - Marsh , Gloucester . 8 . Millen , D . R . ( 2000 ) . Rapid ethnography : time deepening strategies for HCI field research . Proc . DIS , New York , NY , USA . 9 . Crabtree , A . , Benford , S . , Greenhalgh , C . , Tennent , P . , Chalmers , M . , & Brown , B . ( 2006 ) . Supporting Ethnographic Studies of Ubiquitous Computing in the Wild . Proc . DIS , New York , NY , USA . 10 . Gaver , W . , Boucher , A . , Law , A . , Pennington , S . , Bowers , J . , Beaver , J . et al . ( 2008 ) . Threshold devices : looking out from the home . Proc . CHI ' 08 , New York , NY , USA . 11 . Harris , S . R . ( 2004 ) . Morphological Analysis of HCI Video data Using Activity Theory . HCI 2004 : Design for Life , 41 - 44 . 12 . Buur , J . & Soendergaard , A . ( 2000 ) . Video card game : an augmented environment for user centred design discussions . Proc . DARE 2000 , New York , NY , USA . 13 . Mackay , W . E . , Ratzer , A . V . , & Janecek , P . ( 2000 ) . Video artifacts for design : bridging the Gap between abstraction and detail . Proc . DIS , New York , NY , USA . 14 . Brereton , M . , Donovan , J . , & Viller , S . ( 2003 ) . Talking About Watching : Using the Video Card Game and Wiki - web Technol - ogy to Engage it Students in Developing Observational Skills . Proc . CRPITS ' 20 , Adelaide , Australia . 15 . Harrison , S . , Tatar , D . , & Sengers , P . Three Paradigms of HCI . 16 . Wolcott , H . F . ( 2004 ) . The Art of Fieldwork . Altamira Press . 17 . Winschiers , H . & Fendler , J . ( 2007 ) . Assumptions Considered Harmful . Lecture Notes in Comp . Sci , 4559 , 452 . 18 . Siegel , D . A . & Dray , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Making the Business Case for International User Centered Design . in Bias , R . G . & May - hew , D . J . ( Eds . ) . Cost - Justifying Usability : An Update for an Internet Age . Morgan Kaufmann . 19 . Bidwell , N . & Browning , D . ( 2006 ) . Making There : Methods to Uncover Egocentric Experience in a Dialogic of Natural Places . Proc . OZCHI , Sydney . 20 . Ashok , A . & Beck , C . ( 2007 ) . Using Activity Theory to De - velop a Design Framework for Rural Development . 21 . Maunder , A . , Marsden , G . , & Tucker , W . D . ( 2006 ) . Evaluat - ing the Relevance of the ' Real Access ' Criteria as a Framework for Rural HCI Research . Proc . CHI - SA 2006 . 22 . Creed , G . W . & Ching , B . ( 1997 ) . Recognizing Rusticity : Identity and the Power of Place . Knowing Your Place : Rural Identity and Cultural Hierarchy , 1 - 38 . 23 . Halfacree , K . H . ( 1996 ) . Out of place in the country : travellers and the ‘rural idyll’ . Antipode , 28 : 1 , 42 - 72 . 24 . Short , J . ( 1991 ) . Imagined Country . London : Routledge . 25 . McCarthy , J . & Wright , P . ( 2005 ) . Putting ' felt - life ' at the centre of human - - computer interaction ( HCI ) . Cognition , Tech - nology & Work , 7 ( 4 ) , 262 - 271 . 26 . Dreyfus , H . L . ( 1991 ) . Being - in - the - world : a Commentary on Heidegger ' s Being and Time . Mit Pr . 27 . Spradley , J . P . ( 1980 ) . Participant observation . New York : Holt , Rinehart and Winston . 28 . Brewer , J . , & Dourish , P . ( 2006 ) . Storied Spaces : Cultural Accounts of Technology and Environmental Knowing . 29 . Sperschneider , W . & Bagger , K . ( 2003 ) . Ethnographic Field - work Under Industrial Constraints : Toward Design - in - Context . Int . Jour . HCI , 15 ( 1 ) , 41 - 50 . 30 . Hardy , D . , Bidwell , N . J . , Cadet - James , Y . , & Atkinson , I . ( 2007 ) . Domesticating Design by a Disenfranchised Com - munity . Proc . SimTECH , Melbourne . 31 . Richardson , D . C . & Dale , R . ( 2004 ) . Looking to Understand : the Coupling Between Speakers ' and Listeners ' Eye Movement and Its Relationship to Discourse Comprehension . Proc . Cogni - tive Science Society . 32 . Dodson , M . ( 1994 ) . The end in the beginning : Re ( de ) finding Aboriginality ( 1 ) . Reprinted in Michele Grossman ( coord . ed ) 2003 , Blacklines : Contemporary Critical Writing by Indigenous Australians , Carlton , Vic . : Melbourne University Press , 25 - 42 . 33 . Chafe , W . & Tannen , D . ( 1987 ) . The Relation Between Written and Spoken Language . Ann . Rev . in Anthrop , 16 ( 1 ) , 383 - 407 . 34 . Tannen , D . ( 1989 ) . Talking voices : repetition , dialog , and images in conversational discourse . Cambridge : CUP 35 . McHoul , A . W . ( 1997 ) . Cyberbeing and ~ space . Postmodern Culture Retrieved 1st July 2008 , 2008 , from http : / / muse . jhu . edu / journals / postmodern _ culture / v008 / 8 . 1mchoul . html 36 . Verran , H . ( 2007 ) . Designing digital knowledge management tools with Aboriginal Australians . Digi . Crea . , 18 ( 3 ) , 129 - 142 . 37 . O ' Brien V . , Djusipov , K . , & F , W . ( 2007 ) . Visible voices , shared worlds : using digital video & photography in pursuit of a better life . Proc . SIMTech ' 07 , Melbourne . 38 . Tannen , D . ( 2001 ) . You Just Don ' t Understand : Women and Men in Conversation . Harper Paperbacks . 39 . Conrad , P . ( 1997 ) . It ' s Boring : Notes on the Meanings of Boredom in Everyday Life . Qual . Soc , 20 ( 4 ) , 465 - 475 . 40 . Rosenberg , B . A . ( 1987 ) . The Complexity of Oral Tradition . Oral Tradition , 2 ( 1 ) , 73 - 90 . 41 . Casey , E . S . ( 1996 ) . How to get from space to place in a fairly short stretch of time : phenomenological prolegomena . Senses of Place , 13 - 52 . 4 2 . Govor , E . V . ( 2008 ) . My Dark Brother : The Story of the Illins , a Russian - Aboriginal Family . Sydney : Univ . NSW Press . 43 . Gurnstein , P . ( 2007 ) . Creating Digital Public Space : Implica - tions for Deliberative Engagement . in ( Ed . ) . Learning Civil Societies : Shifting Contexts for Democratic Planning and Gov - ernance . University of Toronto Press .