ATHack : Co - Design and Education in Assistive Technology Development Jaya Narain Hosea Siu Ishwarya Ananthabhotla MIT Lincoln Laboratory Samuel Mendez Lexington , MA 02421 , USA Cameron Taylor hoseasiu @ mit . edu Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lora Brugnaro Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA Independent researcher lorabrugnaro @ icloud . com jnarain @ mit . edu ishwarya @ mit . edu Adriana Mallozzi samuelme @ mit . edu Puffin Innovations crtaylor @ mit . edu Woburn , MA 01801 adriana @ puffininno . com Abstract ATHack , an annual assistive technologies hackathon at MIT , is unique in that community members living with disabilities ( co - designers ) propose projects and work with hackers to create prototypes over a two - week period . Since 2014 , over 75 co - designers and 400 students have participated in ATHack . We present an overview of the program goals and implementation and share our reflections on the strengths and challenges surrounding the event as organizers , participants , and co - designers . Our reflections include that open communication between co - designers and participants is crucial , and that working on well - scoped , feasible projects is motivating for participants . From a survey ( n = 48 ) of ATHack participants from 2014 - 2019 , 89 % of respondents would recommend the event and 75 % reported that they learned about disability and user - centered design . Our reflections suggest that the collaborative hackathon model can engage students spark innovations in accessible interfaces . We hope this report will inspire and guide others in implementing similar educational and design initiatives . Author Keywords Assistive technology ; accessibility education ; co - design ; education ; design methodology ; Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI 2020 Extended Abstracts , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6819 - 3 / 20 / 04 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3383096 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 1 CSS Concepts • Human - centered computing ~ Accessibility • Human - centered computing ~ Accessibility design and evaluation methods • Applied computing ~ Collaborative learning Introduction Co - design , a method of user - centered design where designers work on teams with people who will be using their product , is particularly important in the field of assistive technology . In a qualitative study on co - design in assistive technology , Luck [ 5 ] found that it was critical to engage users in the design process . De Couvreur outlined benefits of the co - design process for assistive devices , which included encouraging participants to take action in the process , and allowing for better exploration of the design space [ 1 ] . Despite active research in the field and a growing push for accessibility , educational opportunities to teach engineers and computer scientists how to design accessible products are limited [ 4 ] , and opportunities that utilize co - design are more limited . Other hackathons in this space have worked with individuals with disabilities as mentors [ 1 ] , focused on web accessibility [ 8 ] , had weekend long make - a - thons [ 9 ] , worked with a residence for people with disabilities [ 6 ] , and focused on specific technologies [ 7 ] . ATHack is unique among accessibility - education hackathons in that projects are proposed by the co - designers and jointly created with students over a two - week period . A subset of the authors has been involved with ATHack since it began in 2014 . Here we report our experiences as event organizers , co - designers , and participants . The presented reflections and survey results suggest that a program like ATHack can provide a valuable educational experience and spark innovation in accessible interfaces . We present an overview of the program and its goals , results from a survey with past hackers , our personal journeys , and our reflections on the strengths and limitations of our model . Contributions include the program design , insights regarding the educational and design impact of the event , and recommendations for program organization , communication practices , and project selection . Program Goals ATHack was established and operates with the following primary aims : 1 . Spreading awareness : ATHack can play a role in heightening awareness on the ways in which a disability might impact quality of life . 2 . Fostering connections : Through the process of working and innovating with a community member living with a disability , students can build meaningful relationships that extend beyond the event . 3 . Broad student reach : The 2 - week event takes place in a short time frame ( e . g . , compared to a semester class ) . The event has a low barrier to entry and reaches ~ 100 students each year across campus . 4 . A new context : ATHack is a venue for participants to apply their skills to a context they may not have previously considered . A major goal is to inspire students to pursue related work and consider accessibility implications in future projects . The Model of ATHack ATHack consists of two events spaced approximately two weeks apart – a “Meet the Co - Designers” dinner and a final build day ( Figure 1 ) . The two - event Figure 1 : A team works on a prototype that makes it easier to throw and catch balls during the build day of ATHack 2019 Sample of 2019 Projects An app to magnify and filter 7 - segment displays for people with low vision A customized neck stabilization brace for a teenager with cerebral palsy and secondary dystonia A modified walker that is robust to rough terrains and that can be used more easily with public transportation An easy - to - use , portable bidet to improve restroom accessibility for a person with limited upper mobility Table 1 : A sample of completed projects from ATHack 2019 CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 2 structure is designed to allow teams to get to know their co - designer before the event , ideate , begin designing , and request specialized materials they may need for their project . Hackers are allowed to work on their projects as much or as little as they would like between the dinner and final build day . All teams give short presentations on their work at a closing ceremony at the end of the build day , and awards are given for co - designer collaboration , functionality , technical innovation , and documentation . ATHack recruits co - designers from interest lists at rehabilitation facilities , schools , disability service centers at universities , and from internally compiled lists of people who have expressed interest in the program in the past . The recruitment e - mails include that the hackathon is an educational program , and that co - designers may not have a working prototype after participating in the event . Prospective co - designers are asked to submit a short description of themselves , the project they would like to work on at the hackathon , and descriptions any potential prototypes they have already envisioned . Table 1 shows a sample of successfully completed projects from 2019 . The following criteria are used to guide conversations with prospective co - designers and select projects : ▪ F easibility : Does the underlying technology needed to execute the project exist in a usable form ? Is the project well - scoped for a two - week event ? ▪ Safety : Can the teams test solutions safely ? ▪ Co - Designer Availability : Can the co - designer attend both the dinner and hackathon ? Most hackathon participants are upper - level undergraduate and graduate students in computer science , electrical engineering , mechanical engineering , and media arts and sciences . A smaller number of students from other majors and universities ( e . g . occupational therapy ) have participated . During the dinner , all the projects are briefly presented to the attendees , and hackers and co - designers mingle and discuss ideas . After the dinner , student teams submit their project preferences immediately and provide a summary of their background and skills . The matching process prioritizes matching each co - designer with a team , giving hackers a project as aligned with their preferences as possible , and building teams that seem to have the skills needed to implement the described project . Co - designers and teams are encouraged to meet to plan , finalize material requests , and get to know each other before the hackathon . Many of the proposed projects require components that are not available in a workspace . Teams can request materials to be purchased by the organizing team up to one week before the build day . The organizing team instead assesses the total budget requested by all teams holistically and , if needed , works with teams to make budget - appropriate selections . For the hackathon itself , the functionality of the space for prototyping and ideation is critical . ATHack has had the partnership of MIT / Lincoln Labs Beaver Works since 2015 . The space includes classroom worktables , a workshop for electronics prototyping and hand tools , rapid prototyping equipment and a full machine shop . The space includes basic mechanical and electrical prototyping and assembly equipment . Volunteer professional and student machinists mentor hackers . Survey Forty - eight participants from ATHack 2014 - 2019 responded to a survey conducted in August 2019 about Figure 2 : Participants reported learning about disability and user - centered design . Figure 3 : Participants generally felt connected to their co - designer and were motivated by their project . Over half of participants said they “agree” or “strongly agree” that they often think about accessibility while designing CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 3 their experiences in the event ( see Figures 2 - 3 and sidebars “Survey Open Response” , and “Respondent Quotes” ) . Of these respondents , 75 % reported that they learned about accessibility and co - design and many participants reported learning other skills . ATHack may have attracted some participants who were already motivated to create accessible designs and may have inspired some participants to incorporate accessibility more in their work . Many participants reported that their experience in the program influenced how they design , suggesting that programs like ATHack may help produce designers who create accessible interfaces . Reflections Firsthand perspectives are included to provide insights on motivations , challenges , and successes . Participant Reflection “ I have had the opportunity to participate in ATHack for the last two years . The first year , my team improved the interface between our co - designer ' s cochlear implant and their mobile phone . The excitement when they made their first phone call was immediate and full compensation for all of the planning and work . The second year , my team created a wheelchair - mounted portable bidet for someone with cerebral palsy . You wouldn’t typically consider a bidet an assistive technology , but for our co - designer , it was critical to their mobility . Again , the most rewarding part of this process was experiencing the excitement of our co - designer after a functional prototype was built . One of the most important elements of ATHack is the open , caring , respectful conversations with co - designers . What I have really appreciated about working with co - designers at ATHack is that they have been patient as we have brainstormed unconventional solutions and have trusted us enough to be vulnerable in sharing their needs . ” Co - Designer Reflection I “Living with a disability forces people to become inherent problem solvers and innovative in their approach to even the most mundane of daily tasks . I ' m Adriana Mallozzi , a quad with CP , and successful participant of 2 AT Hacks - one of which has resulted in me creating a startup to bring the solution to market . What makes a co - designer / student team experience a successful one is collaboration . It is imperative that all interested parties have that in mind when going into it ; the students have the technical expertise while the co - designer has experiential knowledge of the problem the team is attempting to solve , the combination of which can lead to some pretty amazing solutions . Both of my hackathon projects were successful because we worked as a team and combined ideas to make the whole better . As a former team member stated , “Design is a conversation , ” and that couldn ' t be more true for a successful AT Hack . Two of my friends participated in the event and had very negative experiences because the hackers did not take any of their input . It wasn’t collaborative at all . They were not open to the co - designer’s suggestions and went off and did things without including the co - designer at all . In fact , they did the exact opposite of what the co - designer wanted and something he knew would not work . With my teams , I think it helped that I am very vocal and outgoing . I made it very clear - this is what I need and this is what I think will work . As a co - designer , you need to push . It’s a give and take . Not everyone is comfortable with this , and it might help Survey Open Response * Questions 1 and 2 were asked prior to the multiple - selection question on learning ( Figure 2 ) to avoid influencing responses . 1 ) Did ATHack impact your views and / or practices on design , and if so , how ? • 23 responses – importance of accessibility ( 11 ) , importance of user - centered design ( 5 ) , importance of communication and coordination in teams ( 3 ) , no effect ( 3 ) 2 ) What , if anything , did you learn during your ATHack experience ? • 28 responses – technical knowledge ( 7 ) , related to co - design ( 5 ) , about disability ( 5 ) , about accessibility ( 4 ) , teamwork ( 4 ) , design process ( 4 ) , user - centered design ( 3 ) , on making an impact ( 3 ) 3 ) If there is anything else you would like to add about your experience you can write about it here : • 15 responses – positive sentiment ( 14 ) , negative sentiment ( 1 ) CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 4 for the students to really learn prior to the event that they have the technical expertise but we as co - designers have the experiential knowledge of how the problem really affects us as someone with a disability . They can assume what the problem is but they can’t actually know because they don’t have that problem . You can’t actually experience something that someone else is experiencing unless you are in that position . Everyone needs to be open and listening for the process to work . ” Co - Designer Reflection II “I have cerebral palsy , am middle aged and have balance issues . Living in Boston , alone and working I have needed an assistive device for 15 years . For 15 years the rollators I used minimized the falls but became akin to walking with one heel because they all collapsed and / or flipped over on any uneven surface , even those which appeared too small to cause an accident . I felt powerless to change things . When I submitted my application , I was not sure of what to expect . I was nervous about presenting my design idea at the initial event . However , from an educational perspective this experience was one of the most exciting moments of my life ; speaking to groups of young engineers and presenting my design problems in concrete , coherent terms . The team of four students who I was assigned were curious and excited ; serious and experimental . Within two short weeks they had interviewed me , and followed me around to film me trying to get about . The day of the Hack - a - thon they whipped together a new rollator which we affectionately called Ben Herr , BenHere , Benthere ! I was part of the entire day , constantly trying out my new wheels , giving feedback . At the end of the night we all went outside , coatless in February to find every sidewalk crack , pothole , and ice formation for me to roll over . I’ll never forget those moments as we realized our model worked . I was finally safe ! ! My team stuck with me until the school year ended ; coming up with design tweaks and fixes . We have a prototype that changed my life forever and I hope theirs too . We learned together . I learned how to look at problems as curiosities to be explored and that my experience is equally as important as an engineer’s knowledge . I also learned that the end user needs to be a contributor to design . In my case I thought I was stuck with a rollator that flipped over , thinking designers had done the best they can . I was so wrong about this . Assistive technology can meet the needs of the end user when they are provided the opportunity to describe their needs and be part of the design ! The difficulty has been letting go of the project . There is further progress to be made and I will eventually need to replicate this model when it wears down . Having the one and only unstoppable walker seems leaves many questions . If I could improve one thing about the hackathon I would have some sort of sustainability plan for those co - designers or teams who want to continue . ” Lessons Learned & Discussion ATHack 2014 had only two projects and less than ten hackers . Lessons learned in the first year informed how to grow the program . Many registered hackers did not show up for the event . This led to a more involved registration process , a timing shift to take place before midterm exams begin , and more active recruitment of hackers via email and social media . Because teams Respondent Quotes [ I learned about the ] “Importance of collaboration with end user . You cannot truly optimize your design without direct user feedback , because without it you are designing for only yourself no matter how hard you try to imagine another person ' s perspective . ” “ATHack introduced an excitement for me to pursue assistive technology as my career , which I am currently doing . ” “ [ ATHack ] Encouraged more thought during the design process about accessibility . ” “ It felt like too short of a time period to really understand the space ” “It was a rewarding experience . After ATHack I helped install the device at the co - designers domicile where it continues to be used . I wish I had time to make this product accessible to others . CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 5 were held back from lack of access to materials and workspaces , a material request process was added and the event venue was moved to a workspace with a machine shop . Since 2015 , 80 - 100 hackers have participated in the event annually . Adjustments to the event are made annually based on observations and feedback from co - designers and hackers . Earlier ATHack events included complex technical challenges – like robotic limbs . The infeasibility of testing and iterating systems that would require as - yet undeveloped technology was frustrating for both hackers and co - designers . The documentation prize was added in 2019 so that the work done by hackathon teams might be more easily shared with the larger community . As a result , many teams created high - quality instructions and drawings to help others understand their work . Our observations and reflections from ATHack 2014 - 2019 suggest that success is most likely to occur when the criteria outlined in the sidebar “Elements of hackathon success” are met . There is a difficult trade - off in balancing placing high enough expectations on participants’ involvement to make the experience worthwhile for co - designers with maintaining a low enough barrier to entry that students want to participate in the event in addition to their academic obligations . A goal of the event is reaching tentatively curious students unfamiliar with the field - imposing too many requirements might keep them from registering . A critical aspect of a successful program is engaged communication between all parties – hackers , co - designers , and organizers . Because of the complexity of the event and number stakeholders involved , addressing and responding to inquiries requires a large amount of organizational time , which can be challenging for the small volunteer organizing team . Another major is challenge is that some student teams and co - designers are not communicative . If brought to the organizing team’s attention , there are some steps that can be taken that have mixed success – like reaching out to the involved parties to suggest possible next steps or adding additional members to the team . It is important to communicate to co - designers before the event begins that some teams are not able to build functional prototypes during the event . It can be particularly disappointing when teams nearly complete but do not finish a functional prototype . Conclusions Collaboration and open conversation are crucial to the experience of both co - designers and participants in ATHack . A difficulty with this model is the lack of support for the continuation of projects after the event . Most participants reported that they enjoyed the event , and some said it inspired them to pursue additional assistive technology projects . Most participants learned about disability , user - centered design , and working with a co - designer during the hackathon . Since 2014 , a number of novel accessible interfaces that began in ATHack have been delivered to the co - designer , like the rollator described in co - designer reflection I . Others have reached a wider audience – as in the start - up , Puffin Innovations , alluded to in co - designer reflection II . Future work could refine this work using the approach of Action Research [ 3 ] . The presented reflections and survey results suggest that an extracurricular collaborative assistive technology hackathon can inspire participation and innovation in the field . Elements of hackathon success The co - designer and team members are highly engaged and communicate openly before and during the event . The project scope has minimal technical complexity . Early years included challenges like robotic limbs , which overwhelmed . Project scope is considered during project selection ; the organizing team works with co - designers to define well - scoped projects . Hackers are encouraged to focus on needs - driven not technology - driven solutions . The project team has the required skills and experiences . Expert learners , in this case experienced undergraduate students or graduate students , tend to be successful in the hackathon , a non - guided learning experience [ 10 ] CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 6 References [ 1 ] AccessComputing . 2019 . evoHaX : Accessibility Hackathons . Retrieved July 9 , 2019 from https : / / www . washington . edu / accesscomputing / ev ohax - accessibility - hackathons [ 2 ] Lieven De Couvreur , Walter Dejonghe , Jan Detand , and Richard Goossens . 2013 . The Role of Subjective Well - Being in Co - Designing Open - Design Assistive Devices . International Journal of Design 7 , 3 . [ 3 ] Gillian R . Hayes , 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - Computer Interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interactions . [ 4 ] Selena Larson . July 24 , 2015 . Tech giants push for accessibility education in computer science courses . Retrieved June 8 , 2019 from https : / / www . dailydot . com / debug / accessibility - disability - linkedin - teaching [ 5 ] Rachael Luck . 2018 . Inclusive design and making in practice : Bringing bodily experience into closer context with making . Design Studies 54 : 96 - 110 . [ 6 ] Makers Making Change . 2018 . NextFab Philadelphia : Accessibility Hackathon . Retrieved July 9 , 2019 from https : / / www . makersmakingchange . com / event / ne xtfab - philadelphia - accessibility - hackathon / [ 7 ] MSNE Staff . June 29 , 2018 . New England Machine Learning Accessibility Hackathon Designs for Inclusion . Retrieved July 9 , 2019 from https : / / blogs . microsoft . com / newengland / 2018 / 06 / 29 / new - england - machine - learning - accessibility [ 8 ] Partnership on Employment and Accessibility Technology . 2016 . WWW + W4A ACCESSIBILITY HACKATHON . Retrieved July 9 , 2019 from https : / / www . peatworks . org / content / wwww4a - accessibility - hackathon [ 9 ] TOM . 2019 . Events . Retrieved July 9 , 2019 from https : / / tomglob al . org / events [ 10 ] Jeroen J . G . van Marriënboer and John Sweller . 2005 . Cognitive Load Theory and Complex Learning : Recent Developments and Future Directions . Educational Psychology Review . 17 , 2 : 147 - 178 Acknowledgements A warm thanks to the co - designers and student hackers who have participated in ATHack . ATHack was founded in 2014 with the help of Professor Seth Teller . We continue to be inspired by him . We are thankful for the continued support of Robert Shin of MIT Lincoln Labs , for the administrative help of Sandra Lipnoski at the MIT Edgerton Center , and for our event sponsors . Abigail Klein co - founded the event ( along with authors Narain and Ananthabhotla ) . ATHack has had a dedicated team , which has also included : Hosea Siu , Sally Beiruti , Tareq El Dandachi , Imane Bouzit , Sam Mendez , Amanda Fike , Tally Portnoi , Alex Chen , Emma Nelson , Ben Rosen - Filardo , Jennifer Tylock , William Li , Annie Dai , Dhruv Jain , Jason Yang , and Sresht Rengesh . CHI 2020 Late - Breaking Work CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA LBW302 , Page 7