REVIEWS Best Practice Strategies for Effective Use of Questions as a Teaching Tool Toyin Tofade , PharmD , MS , Jamie Elsner , MS , and Stuart T . Haines , PharmD University of Maryland School of Pharmacy , Baltimore , Maryland Submitted February 8 , 2013 ; accepted March 29 , 2013 ; published September 12 , 2013 . Questions have long been used as a teaching tool by teachers and preceptors to assess students’ knowl - edge , promote comprehension , and stimulate critical thinking . Well - crafted questions lead to new in - sights , generate discussion , and promote the comprehensive exploration of subject matter . Poorly constructed questions can stiﬂe learning by creating confusion , intimidating students , and limiting cre - ative thinking . Teachers most often ask lower - order , convergent questions that rely on students’ factual recall of prior knowledge rather than asking higher - order , divergent questions that promote deep thinking , requiring students to analyze and evaluate concepts . This review summarizes the taxonomy of questions , provides strategies for formulating effective questions , and explores practical considerations to en - hance student engagement and promote critical thinking . These concepts can be applied in the class - room and in experiential learning environments . Keywords : questioning , critical thinking , pedagogy , effective teaching , teaching tool INTRODUCTION Using questions to teach is an age - old practice and has been a cornerstone of education for centuries . 1 , 2 Ques - tions are often used to stimulate the recall of prior knowl - edge , promote comprehension , and build critical - thinking skills . Teachers ask questions to help students uncover what has been learned , to comprehensively explore the subject matter , and to generate discussion and peer - to - peer interaction . Student - initiated questions increase higher - order learning by requiring them to analyze in - formation , connect seemingly disparate concepts , and ar - ticulate their thoughts . 3 Indeed , questions are ubiquitous , but are the right kinds of questions – ones that promote learning , not recall – asked at the appropriate time ? 4 Poor questions can stiﬂe learning by creating confusion , in - timidating students , and limiting creative thinking . 5 Effec - tive questions asked in a psychologically safe learning environment support student learning by probing for un - derstanding , encouraging creativity , stimulating critical thinking , and enhancing conﬁdence . 6 The art of asking the right questions at the appropri - ate time is not innate . 7 Bloom’s taxonomy of learning categorizes cognitive levels into several domains . 8 Ques - tions that elicit responses in the knowledge , comprehen - sion , and application domains are frequently considered lower - order questions , while questions in the analysis , synthesis , and evaluation domains are considered higher - order questions . 9 Higher - order questions elicit deeper and critical thinking ; therefore , teachers are encouraged to ask questions in these domains ( Table 1 ) . 2 , 10 - 12 This does not mean that lower - order questions should not be asked . It is appropriate to ask questions to address all cognitive do - mains as long as the desired learning outcome is kept in mind and a good mix of questions is used during each teaching session . 2 Given that the learning objectives in most courses in graduate and professional degree programs are often intended to stimulate high order cognitive pro - cesses , one would expectthat higher - orderquestionswould prevail during encounters between students and teachers . Unfortunately , observations of classroom - based instruc - tors have repeatedly shown that lower - order questions are far more frequently used . 11 , 13 Perhapsteachers do not value higher - order questions and feel they are not effective , or perhaps a lack of formal training on how to formulate questions to stimulate learning is the root cause . 4 There is a paucity of empirical data regarding how to mosteffectivelyusequestionstoteach . 1 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 14 Thepurpose of this review is to examine the taxonomy of questions and suggest some best practice strategies for formulating ques - tions that can help achieve desired teaching objectives and learning outcomes . 12 To effectively illustrate these concepts , the examples provided throughout this manuscript relate to a speciﬁc content area : analgesics and pain management . TAXONOMY OF QUESTIONS Questions have been classified into several taxon - omies intended to describe their fundamental essence . Corresponding Author : Toyin Tofade , PharmD , MS , University of Maryland School of Pharmacy , 20 North Pine Street , S730A , Baltimore , MD 21201 . Tel : 410 - 706 - 1495 . Fax : 410 - 706 - 0988 . E - mail : ttofade @ rx . umaryland . edu American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 1 For the purposes of teaching , these taxonomies can be used by educators to formulate questions intended to elicit specific cognitive processes . The basic way to characterize questions is to classify them as either con - vergent or divergent . 1 A convergent question , often called a closed question , is intended to elicit a speciﬁc re - sponse or a narrow list of possible responses . Educators use convergent questions to draw a single “best” response from learners . In contrast , divergent questions , also known as open questions , elicit a wide range of responses that often require substantive elaboration . Divergent questions do not have a single “best” response . Educators use divergent questions to stimulate dialog and explore a range of issues related to the topic ( Table 1 ) . Another way to classify questions is to examine their cognitive level or complexity . A hierarchal ap - proach to cognition was originally described by Bloom and subsequently modified by Anderson and Krathwohl ( Table 2 ) . 2 , 8 , 15 Questions may address various levels of cognition ranging from mere recall of memorized facts to processes that require deep critical thinking . 10 Ques - tions can , therefore , address various cognitive domains with the intent of achieving speciﬁc learning outcomes . Each domain is further categorized as lower or higher order in terms of cognitive difﬁculty . Remembering , which is the act of recalling informa - tion , is considered the lowest order of cognitive process - ing and yet recall - type questions are the most frequently posed by educators . Questions aimed at eliciting a stu - dent’s understanding of the material are those that ask the learner to provide examples , classify items , summarize information , and / or draw inferences . Application ques - tions require the learner to execute a procedure or pro - cess , mental or physical , to an unfamiliar situation or circumstance . Analysis requires the learner to break down the material into constituent parts and determine the inter - relationships among them . Analysis questions may ask the learner to organize elements within a struc - ture , distinguish relevant from irrelevant information , or deconstruct underlying values and biases . Evaluation requires formulating judgments based on standards or existing criteria . Evaluating questions require the learner to critique a work or product , determine the appropriate - ness of a process or product for a given problem , or examine the inconsistencies in a theory . Finally , creating is considered the most difﬁcult task in terms of cognitive Table 1 . Types of Nonhierarchical Questions Used as Teaching Tools 1 , 2 , 12 Question Type Description Sample Question ( Content Area : Analgesics and Pain Management ) Convergent Closed , not offering many options ; converges on a single or narrow list of “best” answers ; encourages focused , succinct response What percentage of the population is a poor metabolizers , and therefore , unlikely to have an adequate analgesic response to codeine ? Divergent Open , having many responses ; permits the exploration of diverse perspectives ; encourages dialog Codeine isn’t used as much today for analgesia as it once was . Why ? Focal Student must choose or justify a position . Would you recommend the use of a fentanyl patch in a patient with a history of substance abuse ? If so , why ? If not , why not ? Brainstorm Questions that generate a list of ideas or viewpoints . If you could create the ideal analgesic product , one that could be widely used in any population for various causes of pain , what features would it have ? Shotgun Questions containing several content areas with no particular link . What are the potential risks of using NSAIDs ? When was aspirin first synthesized ? Methadone is available in what dosage forms ? What patient - specific data should be obtained prior to initiating tramadol therapy ? What the best way to manage opioid - induced constipation ? Funnel Multiple questions starting broadly and gradually leading to more focused inquiry . What federal laws and regulations apply to the sale of narcotic analgesics ? What are the record keeping requirements for a pharmacy that stocks and dispenses narcotic analgesics ? What are the potential benefits and risks of the narcotic prescription monitoring program requirement in our state ? Can a pharmacist legally dispense an orally transmitted prescription order for methadone ? Abbreviations : NSAIDs 5 nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 2 processing . Questions that address this cognitive domain may require learners to generate alternative hypotheses based on observed phenomena , devise a new procedure to accomplish a task , or conceptualize a new product . Questions can also be classified into knowledge di - mensions . Anderson and Krathwohl describe 4 types of knowledge : factual , conceptual , procedural , and meta - cognitive . 15 These knowledge dimensions range from the concrete to abstract ( Table 3 ) . Factual knowledge in - cludes the technical vocabulary used in a discipline and the details extracted from reliable sources of information . While factual questions often ask students to recall speciﬁc elements from a reference source , they address higher - order thinking . Questions on the factual dimension of knowledge can be constructed to demonstrate under - standing , prompt analysis , or evaluate the work of others . Conceptual knowledge includes an awareness of the inter - relationships between the elements of a larger structure . Conceptual questions might ask learners to justify an an - swer based on underlying principles or theories , or to classify elements into categories . Procedural knowledge is the ability to use algorithms , techniques , or criteria as well as the ability to determine when it is appropriate to use them . Procedural questions might ask the learner about well - established methods for gathering information or selecting the most appropriate equation in a particular situation . Finally , metacognitive knowledge is an aware - ness of one’s own cognition . Metacognition questions might ask a learner to articulate a cognitive strategy re - quired to complete a task or examine personal motiva - tions and values . 15 Teachers predominantly ask lower - level cogni - tive questions that do not effectively stimulate critical thinking . 11 , 13 During classroom - based instruction , re - searchers observed 91 faculty members asking 3 , 407 questions , and categorized the type and level of each ques - tion posed . 11 The majority of the questions asked were lower - level questions ( 68 . 9 % ) . In a similarly designed study , Sellappah and colleagues found that during practice - based experiences , clinical instructors asked lower - level questions 91 . 2 % of the time . 13 Further , the clinical instruc - tors’ years of experience as a practitioner or teacher were not correlated with their propensity to ask lower - or higher - order questions . A study by Phillips and Duke Table 2 . Classification of Questions Based on Cognition Dimension and Student Actions Required for Achieving Specific Learning Outcomes 8 , 16 Cognitive Dimension Cognitive Level Actions Required Sample Question ( Content Area : Analgesics and Pain Management ) Remembering ( Knowledge ) Low List , name , identify , show , define , recognize , recall , state What is the mechanism of action of acetaminophen ? Understanding ( Comprehension ) Low Summarize , explain , interpret , describe , compare , paraphrase , differentiate , visualize , restate , put in your own words Describe the goals of therapy in patients with malignant pain ? Applying ( Application ) Low Solve , illustrate , calculate , use , interpret , relate , manipulate , apply , classify , modify , put into practice According to the World Health Organization guidelines on persisting pain in children , what would be the most appropriate treatment choice in this case scenario ? Analyzing ( Analysis ) High Analyze , organize , deduce , choose , contrast , compare , distinguish Given the patient’s symptoms , what are the most likely etiologies of her pain ? Evaluating ( Evaluation ) High Evaluate , estimate , judge , defend , criticize , justify Based on the findings of this study , what do you believe is the role of pregabalin in the treatment of post - herpetic neuralgia ? Creating ( Synthesis ) High Design , hypothesize , support , schematize , write , report , discuss , plan , devise , create , construct This patient has had four emergency room visits in the past month due to uncontrolled pain . How would you manage this patient to prevent yet another urgent care visit ? American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 3 compared the cognitive level of questions asked by full - time clinical faculty members and volunteer preceptors in nursing programs . 14 Both faculty members and preceptors asked lower - order questions far more frequently than higher - order ones . However , full - time faculty members asked higher - order cognitive questions more frequently than preceptors . Several nonhierarchical types of question prompts , including focal , brainstorm , shotgun , and funnel ques - tions , are widely used in teaching ( Table 1 ) . 12 Shotgun questions and funnel questions often elicit confusion and generally should be avoided . A study that used a variety of question prompts directed at students enrolled in an online course found that brainstorming questions elicited the highest number of responses per prompt while shotgun questions elicited the least . Questions in the comprehen - sion and application domains of Bloom’s taxonomy eli - cited the highest average number of responses per prompt , whereas questions in the synthesis and comprehension level elicited the highest number of student - to - student exchanges . STRATEGIES FOR FORMULATING QUESTIONS Socratic Method Questioning The Socratic method of questioning is a popular teaching approach . 16 , 17 This method uses a form of in - quirythatpromotesopendiscussioninwhichoneviewpointiscomparedtoanother . Instead of providing information to students directly , the lesson is taught through probing and thought - provoking questions in an effort to stimulate original thought from the students . In order to master the Socratic method , instructors must become skillful at developing 3 categories of questions : exploratory , spon - taneous , and focused ( Table 4 ) . 17 Exploratory questioning is used to find out how much students know about the issue under discussion . This type of question may be implemented to introduce a new topic to the audience , review past discussions of a topic , or determine how much students have retained from the previous learning sessions . A broad range of related issues and topics can be evaluated through this method of questioning . To ensure that the conversation is guided in an intellectual manner , it is best to plan exploratory ques - tions and topics in advance . Spontaneous questioning is best used when students are naturally curious about the topic or when an ongoing discussion slows . Spontaneous questions are used to pro - be students’ thoughts in an effort to get them to explore their beliefs and assumptions . This type of question prompts students to self - correct , rather than be corrected by the in - structor , through reﬂection on the question being asked . Spontaneous questioning can also be used when an im - portant issue is raised , when students are on the edge of a breakthrough in learning , or when discussion requires clariﬁcation . Focused questioning narrows the content down to specific issues on which the teacher would like the audi - ence to reflect . Focused discussion helps to stimulate stu - dents intellectually by forcing them to evaluate their thoughts and perspectives . Students are able to experience an ordered dialogue in which they discover and share ideas and insights with regard to the topic . A noted benefit of the Socratic method is that students often uncover personal knowledge deficits about the sub - ject matter . This can be a difficult realization for students Table 3 . Classification of Questions Based on Knowledge Dimensions 15 Knowledge Dimension Sample Questions , Cognitive Level ( Content Area : Analgesics and Pain Management ) Factual According to the textbook , what dose of morphine would be equianalgesic to 10mg of hydromorphone ? ( Low ) Based on the results of this study , what would the equianalgesic dose of hydromorphone for a patient who is currently taking morphine 30mg daily and how conﬁdent can we be in that estimate ? ( High ) Conceptual Describe the steps in the WHO pain management pyramid ? ( Low ) In what ways is the WHO pain management pyramid similar to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network cancer pain guidelines ? In what ways are they different ? ( High ) Procedural What interviewing techniques can be used to determine the severity of a patient’s pain ? ( Low ) Several techniques are available to evaluate pain . What do you perceive are the strengths and weaknesses of each ? ( High ) Metacognitive Thinking back on your encounter with this patient , how well do you think you addressed his pain ? ( Low ) Given that you feel you handled the patient interaction in a less than optimal manner , what do you think would help you do a better job addressing patients’ pain in the future ? ( High ) Abbreviations : WHO 5 World Health Organization . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 4 striving for success in the classroom . This is not neces - sarily a negative consequence and is often an important step in the learning process . 18 When students recognize their knowledge gaps , it can spur them to clarify ideas and seek to better understand the concepts . Question Circles Question circles is a strategy that leads students from superficial responses to deeper discussions of the subject matter . 2 Originally conceptualized as a process to explore students’ understanding of written texts , question circles can be easily adapted to discuss a wide range of learning materials ( eg , case studies , videos ) or experiences ( eg , laboratory exercises , advanced practice experiences ) . Using this model , questions are posed in 3 different do - mains : subject matter , personal response , and external reality ( Table 5 and Figure 1 ) . The subject matter includes the factual , conceptual , and procedural knowledge de - rived directly from the reading , learning materials , or experience . The personal response is the learner’s reac - tion to , perceptions of , and direct experiences related to the subject matter . The external reality relates to the broad context in which the subject matter exists and its relation - ship with society at large as well as other disciplines . After the more superﬁcial issues related to the subject matter , personal response , and external realities have been ex - plored , the teacher then formulates questions related to multiple circles . Enriched questions are those that are de - Table 4 . Sequencing of Questions Using the Socratic Method of Questioning as an Effective Teaching Tool Content Area : Opioids and Pain Management d Why does the group Physicians for Responsible Opioid Prescribing want to limit the dosing , supply , and duration of opioid analgesics for chronic , non - malignant pain ? ( Exploratory ) d What assumptions do you think underlie their rationale ? ( Spontaneous ) d Who is most likely to become addicted to opioid analgesics ? ( Focused ) d How would you deﬁne legitimate opioid use ? ( Exploratory ) d Based on your deﬁnition of legitimate use , what patient - speciﬁc data would you need in order to discriminate between the legitimate use of opioids for pain and illegitimate uses ? ( Spontaneous ) d What does the data from other countries tell us about the positive and negative consequences of restricting the use of opioids ? ( Focused ) d If opioid analgesic use were restricted by the FDA to a maximum of 3 months for the treatment of non - malignant pain in the United States , do you think the consequences would be similar or dissimilar to what has been observed in other countries ? ( Spontaneous ) d Given what you know now and your values , what do you consider to be the most compelling reasons to either restrict or liberalize the use of opioid analgesics for the treatment of pain ? ( Spontaneous ) Abbreviations : FDA 5 Food and Drug Administration . Table 5 . Example of Using the Question Circles Method of Questioning 2 Circle ( s ) Sample Question ( Content Area : NSAIDs and Pain Management ) Subject Matter How do NSAIDs work in terms of reducing pain ? Personal Response Under what circumstances have you used an NSAID for pain ? External Environment According to the American Academy of Family Physicians , what are some circumstances when we should recommend against the use of NSAIDs for pain ? Subject Matter & Personal Response ( Enriched ) If you had safety concerns about chronic NSAIDs use by one of your patients with persistent pain , what strategies would you use to discourage continued use ? Subject Matter & External Environment ( Enriched ) What public policy changes related to the prescribing of NSAIDs would have a positive impact on patient outcomes ? Personal Response & External Environment ( Enriched ) If NSAIDs were no longer available over the counter , what would you do to manage your pain ? Subject Matter , Personal Response , & External Environment ( Dense ) After verifying the physician’s intent and the patient’s desire for treatment , under what circumstances would you refuse to ﬁll a prescription for an NSAID ? Abbreviations : NSAIDs 5 nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 5 rived from the juxtaposition of 2 domains and dense ques - tions are intended to explore the inter - relationships among all 3 domains . Student - generated Questions Most questioning approaches focus on the teacher asking the questions . However , student - generated ques - tions also can lead to deep learning . 19 , 20 Requiring stu - dents to create their own questions can elicit a greater understanding of the course material . 19 Rather than contin - ually questioning students regarding the material , Bowker achievedcontentunderstandingbymakingdeclarativestate - ments intended to elicit questions from students . When there were no deﬁnitive answers to the questions asked , students were expected to reﬂect on all possible answers , known and hypothetical , to gain a deeper knowledge of the ma - terial . Using this questioning strategy , students demon - strated greater thought complexity and engagement . Another strategy is the questioning as thinking ( QAT ) framework where students are encouraged to gen - erate questions to aid in their exploration or understanding of a subject matter . 20 QAT incorporates both questioning and think - aloud learning strategies to support metacogni - tion . Students are expected to independently monitor their learning by asking themselves questions such as , “What are my goals for learning ? ” and “Does this material make sense to me ? ” The think - aloud technique encourages stu - dents to verbalize their inner thoughts , thinking processes , and decision - making strategies . As students become more proﬁcient in this exercise , they internalize the dialogue . Educators can facilitate QAT by modeling the relationship between questioning and thinking aloud . Using content material , a teacher can prepare an example think - aloud to demonstrate how multiple answers can stem from a ques - tion . The teacher should model the types of metacognitive questions that students must ask themselves . Once the QAT strategy has been modeled by the teacher , students are asked to formulate their own questions , answers , and thought processes during classroom discussions . 20 PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS Phrasing and Clarity The phrasing and clarity of words used in formulat - ing a question greatly influences its effectiveness . An ambiguous question is one that is unclear to students and confounds their response . 2 Posing compound ques - tions that require multiple responses frequently leads to confusion . Teachers should avoid this practice . Limiting the number of action verbs per question to 1 will simplify the question . 8 , 15 A well - phrased question enables students to effectively understand the nature and scope of the ques - tion being posed . Even the most seasoned teacher is guilty ofoccasionally formulatingvagueorambiguous questions . Careful attention to students’ facial expressions and body language can provide clues that signal potential confusion . When a desired response is not forthcoming after the ﬁrst prompt , rephrasing the question or providing clarifying comments may help elucidate the intent of the question for students . In other instances , repeating the question after a sufﬁcient wait time may also be helpful . 2 An effective teacher is able to gauge the audience and formulate questions to fit the cognitive level of stu - dents as well as formulate followup questions in response to unexpected answers . 1 , 12 It is best to ask a variety of questions that address different cognitive levels and knowledge domains . Repeatedly asking the same type of questions might intimidate students . There are times when higher - order questions are not appropriate without ﬁrst establishing a strong knowledge foundation . For ex - ample , it would be appropriate to ask lower - level questions in an introductory course . In a capstone course , the instruc - tor should quickly proceed to higher - order questions after posing some lower - order questions intended to elicit prior knowledge . The mix of questions should vary depending on the course content and objectives . Psychological Safety When students refrain from answering questions despite repetition , rephrasing , and reducing the cognitive level of the questions , the teacher should consider whether the atmosphere of the classroom or other learning setting is perceived as intimidating , hostile , or unwelcoming . A psychologically unsafe environment will prevent students from expressing their thoughts and opinions aloud . 2 , 4 The behavior and demeanor of the teacher greatly inﬂuences the perceived psychological safety of the learning envi - ronment . Repeatedly interrupting students before they have ﬁnished responding ; breaking eye contact with the responder ; or using an aggressive or condescending tone Figure 1 . The Question Circles Method . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 6 of voice , facial expressions such as grimacing , and / or alienating body language such as turning away from the responder will erode students’ sense of safety and self - worth . Students who do not feel safe or self - conﬁdent will not initiate responses to questions , or will provide short or purposefully erroneous answers when called on . 2 , 4 Stu - dents should always be reminded that there may be sev - eral correct answers to questions and just because the answer did not match the instructor’s , does not mean it was an incorrect response unworthy of discussion . The teacher should strive to ensure that each student feels valued . Students should be permitted to provide a full answer to the question without fear of penalty for an incor - rect response . 2 , 4 Positive reinforcement from the teacher is important . Behaviors such as maintaining eye contact , nodding , making afﬁrming verbal comments or sounds , or asking a student to continue with additional clarifying remarks are all ways to encourage more participation . 2 Sequencing and Balance Two additional components of effective questioning are sequencing and balance . Sequencing is asking ques - tions in a patterned order with the purpose to elicit mean - ingful responses from the audience . Balance is asking both convergent and divergent questions from multiple knowledge domains and at varying cognitive levels . For example , some professors like to ﬁrst ask students lower - order questions to create a psychologically safe environ - ment . After a few simple questions to get students involved and interested , they move toward questions relating to ma - terial that is more analytical in nature . Achieving balance also requires paying attention to the frequency at which questions are used relative to the amount of time spent presenting new information , providing examples , and en - gaging students in other active - learning activities . The ex - cessive use of questions can lead to negative outcomes and student passivity . 4 Some teachers in the classroom have asked up to 400 questions in a day . An overuse of ques - tioning may discourage students from participating in dis - cussions as they begin to feel threatened or interrogated . 2 Wait Time Defined as the lapse of time that occurs between the teacher’s question and a student’s response , or the time between a teacher’s ﬁrst and second questions to students , wait time inﬂuences the quality and quantity of student responses as well as the initiation of subsequent dialog . 2 If students do not respond within a relatively brief period of time ( often as little as 1 second ) after being asked a question , teachers often will attempt to move the conver - sation forward by repeating the question , rephrasing the question , or calling on students . 2 When a teacher uses higher - order questions , ones that require complex cogni - tiveprocesses , it may be necessary to provide 1 to 2 minutes of wait time before soliciting responses from students . 21 , 22 A series of wait time studies involving both small groups and large classes was conducted . 21 , 23 , 24 Wait times were manipulated with student participants at various levels of cognitive development , ranging from elementary school through university classrooms , to determine the optimal wait time and potential beneﬁts for both students and teachers . Increasing wait time by a few seconds had sev - eral positive effects on the attitudes and behaviors of both students and teachers . 21 Longer wait times consistently resulted in longer student responses , an increase in the number of students volunteering to respond , and an in - crease in the number of followup questions posed by stu - dents . Students signiﬁcantly reduced the frequency of “I don’t know” responses and student achievement scores on tests signiﬁcantly increased . Improvements in teacher be - haviors were also observed after they increased wait times . Question quality , ﬂexibility , and variety increased while the number of questions declined . Conversely , too much wait time can be detrimental to student participa - tion . Depending on the nature and cognitive complexity of the question , a wait time of more than 20 seconds may be perceived as threatening and result in equally poor responses . 22 Many teachers make the mistake of answering their own questions , and this behavior will quickly become self - defeating . After a relatively short wait time , some teachers attempt to fill the silence by providing their own answer to the question posed . This behavior has sev - eral negative consequences . Students are deprived of the opportunity to grapple with the question and formulate their own responses , a process essential for learning . The teacher fails to learn what the students already know and , more importantly , what they do not understand and merits more instruction . Students will quickly adapt to this be - havior by simply “waiting out” the teacher . By repeatedly answering his / her own questions , the teacher is indirectly communicating to students that it is acceptable for them to not answer questions because the teacher will eventually do so . The work of learning will have been shifted away from the students . If students are unable to answer a ques - tion after a suitable wait time , the teacher should rephrase the question or modify it in order to address a related or supporting concept that is less cognitively difﬁcult . Think time is a closely related concept to wait time and is another strategy to improve student participation . Think time is a period of uninterrupted silence imposed by the teacher so that all students can process the question and formulate an answer . 1 Because some students can pro - cess and respond to questions more rapidly than others , American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 7 imposing a think time during which no responses will be accepted allows all students an opportunity to process their thoughts and formulate an answer . Pimping Questions The term pimping refers to asking a series of difﬁcult questions to a trainee or student in an effort to establish respect for the educator’s superior knowledge and intel - lect . 25 Pimping questions are typically asked in rapid suc - cession , are unlikely to be answered correctly , and leave most learners feeling demoralized . Many students de - velop defense mechanisms in response to this questioning strategy . Dodging ( answering a question with a question ) , blufﬁng , using evasive techniques ( food in mouth ) , and using avoidance techniques ( no eye contact ) are all ways students attempt to thwart a questioner . Some students may inform the teacher of their discomfort or respond with hostility . For example , some students have been reported to use personal digital assistants to look up in - formation and pimp the instructor in return . 25 , 26 Pimping harms learning because students feel little desire to en - gage with the material or ask additional questions . SUMMARY Teachers in classroom and experiential learning en - vironments frequently use lower - order , recall - type ques - tions , and the overuse of this type of question hampers efforts to promote deeper , higher - order , critical thinking in students . 27 Understanding the taxonomy of questions and best practice strategies may help pharmacy educators formulate a wider range of questions that not only stimu - late the recall of important factual , conceptual , and pro - cedural knowledge but also requires learners to analyze , evaluate , and create . Greater attention to metacognition and the learner’s personal responses through effective questions can lead students to deep insights . The clarity , sequencing , and delivery of questions , and the psycholog - ical safety of the learning environment inﬂuence student perceptions , motivation , and achievement of desired edu - cational outcomes . Questions are among the most powerful teaching tools and adopting best practices can signiﬁcantly enhance the quality of instruction . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Thomas Dowling , PharmD , PhD , and Robert Michocki , PharmD , for their critical feedback regarding manuscript revisions in response to peer review comments . REFERENCES 1 . McComas W , Abraham L . Asking more effective questions . Rossier School of Education . http : / / cet . usc . edu / resources / teaching _ learning / material _ docs / Asking _ Better _ Questions . pdf . Accessed December 4 , 2012 . 2 . Christenbury L , Kelly PP . Questioning : A Path to Critical Thinking . Urbana , IL : National Council of Teachers of English ; 1983 . 3 . Ciardiello AV . Did you ask a good question today ? Alternative cognitive and metacognitive strategies . J Adolesc Adult Lit . 1998 ; 42 ( 3 ) : 210 - 219 . 4 . Brualdi AC . Classroom questions . Practical Assessment , Research & Evaluation . 1998 ; 6 ( 6 ) . http : / / PAREonline . net / getvn . asp ? v 5 6 & n 5 6 . Accessed October 16 , 2012 . 5 . Chin C . Teacher questioning in science classrooms : what approaches stimulate productive thinking ? J Res Sci Teach . 2007 ; 44 ( 6 ) : 815 - 843 . 6 . Gose M . When Socratic dialogue is ﬂagging : questions and strategies for engaging students . J Coll Teach Learn . 2009 ; 57 ( 1 ) : 45 - 49 . 7 . Lorsch N , Ronkowski S . Teaching Tips for TA’s . Effective Questioning Enhances Student Learning , Instructional Development . Santa Barbara , CA : Ofﬁce of Instructional Consultation , University of California , Santa Barbara ; 1982 . 8 . Bloom BS . Taxonomy of Educational Objectives : The Classiﬁcation of Educational Goals : Handbook 1 : Cognitive Domain . New York : David McKay Co Inc ; 1956 . 9 . Neal MA . Engaging students through effective questions . Educ Can . 2012 ; 52 ( 4 ) . www . cea - ace . ca / education - canada / article / engaging - students - through - effective - questions . Accessed October 16 , 2012 . 10 . Wilen WW . Questioning Skills for Teachers , 3rd ed . Washington DC : NEA Professional Library , National Education Association ; 1991 : 5 - 32 . 11 . Saeed T , Khan S , Ahmed A , Gul R , Cassum S , Parpio Y . Development of students’ critical thinking : the educators’ ability to use questioning skills in the baccalaureate programmes in nursing in Pakistan . J Pak Med Assoc . 2012 ; 63 ( 3 ) : 200 - 203 . 12 . Ertmer PA , Sadaf A , Ertmer DJ . Student - content interactions in online courses : the role of question prompts in facilitating higher level engagement with course content . J Comput High Educ . 2011 ; 23 ( 2 - 3 ) : 157 - 186 . 13 . Sellappah S , Hussey T , Blackmore AM , McMurray A . The use of questioning strategies by clinical teachers . J Adv Nurs . 1998 ; 28 ( 1 ) : 142 - 148 . 14 . Phillips N , Duke M . The questioning skills of clinical teachers and preceptors : a comparative study . J Adv Nurs . 2001 ; 33 ( 4 ) : 523 - 529 . 15 . Anderson LW , Krathwohl DR , Airasian PW , et al . Taxonomy of Learning , Teaching , and Assessing : A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives , 2nd ed , abridged . Boston , MA : Pearson Allyn & Bacon ; 2001 . 16 . Yang YC , Newby TJ , Bill RL . Using Socratic questioning to promote critical thinking skills through asynchronous discussion forums in distance learning environments . Am J Distance Educ . 2005 ; 19 ( 3 ) : 163 - 181 . 17 . Paul R , Elder L . Critical thinking : the art of Socratic questioning , part III . J Dev Educ . 2008 ; 31 ( 3 ) : 34 - 35 . 18 . Boghossian P . Socratic pedagogy : perplexity , humiliation , shame and a broken egg . Educ Philos Theory . 2012 ; 44 ( 7 ) : 710 - 720 . 19 . Bowker MH . Teaching students to ask questions instead of answering them . Thought & Action . 2010 ; 26 ( Fall ) : 127 - 134 . 20 . Wilson NS , Smetana L . Questioning as thinking : a metacognitive framework to improve comprehension of expository text . Literacy . 2011 ; 45 ( 2 ) : 84 - 90 . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 8 21 . Rowe , MB . Wait time : slowing down may be a way of speeding up ! J Teach Educ . 1986 ; 37 ( 1 ) : 43 - 50 . 22 . Nicholl HM , Tracey CA . Questioning : a tool in the nurse educator’s kit . Nurse Educ Pract . 2007 ; 7 ( 5 ) : 285 - 292 . 23 . Rowe MB . Relation of wait time and rewards to the development of language , logic and fate control : part one - wait time . J Res Sci Teach . 1974 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 291 - 308 . 24 . Rowe MB . Pausing principles and their effects on reasoning in science . New Dir Community Coll . 1980 ; 31 : 27 - 34 . 25 . Brancati FL . The art of pimping . JAMA . 1989 ; 262 ( 1 ) : 89 - 90 . 26 . Detsky A . The art of pimping . JAMA . 2009 ; 301 ( 13 ) : 1379 - 1381 . 27 . Zygmont DM , Schaeffer KM . Assessing the critical thinking skills of faculty : what do the ﬁndings mean for nursing education ? Nurs Educ Perspect . 2006 ; 27 ( 5 ) : 260 - 268 . American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 2013 ; 77 ( 7 ) Article 155 . 9