1 Regeneration of actin filament branches from the same Arp2 / 3 complex Foad Ghasemi 1 , LuYan Cao 2 , Miroslav Mladenov 2 , Bérengère Guichard 1 , Michael Way 2 , 3 , Antoine Jégou 1 , * , Guillaume Romet - Lemonne 1 , * 1 Université Paris Cité , CNRS , Institut Jacques Monod , F - 75013 Paris , France . 2 The Francis Crick Institute , London , UK . 3 Department of Infectious Disease , Imperial College , London , UK . * Corresponding author . Email : antoine . jegou @ ijm . fr ; romet @ ijm . fr Abstract : Branched actin filaments are found in many key cellular structures . Branches are nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex activated by nucleation - promoting factor ( NPF ) proteins and bound to the side of pre - existing ‘mother’ filaments . Over time , branches dissociate from their mother filament , leading to network reorganization and turnover , but this mechanism is less understood . Here , using microfluidics and purified proteins , we examined the dissociation of individual branches under controlled biochemical and mechanical conditions . We observe that Arp2 / 3 remains bound to the mother filament after most debranching events , even when accelerated by force . Unexpectedly , this mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 readily nucleates a new actin filament branch , without being activated anew by an NPF : it simply needs to exchange its nucleotide and bind an actin monomer . The protein GMF , which accelerates debranching , prevents branch re - nucleation . Our results suggest that actin filament re - nucleation can provide a self - repair mechanism , helping branched networks to sustain mechanical stress in cells over extended periods of time . 2 INTRODUCTION In cells , branched actin filaments are involved in a variety of essential processes . They are key components of the cell cortex , of the lamellipodium at the front of a migrating cell , and of endocytic cups ( 1 , 2 ) . Branched actin filaments are also important to displace and reshape mitochondria in the cytoplasm ( 3 ) , and to repair damaged chromatin in the nucleus ( 4 ) . These filament networks have specific dynamics , as both their assembly and disassembly are precisely controlled . In most of these processes , branched actin networks play a mechanical role , exerting forces as the filaments elongate , and adapting to mechanical loads ( 5 – 7 ) . An actin filament branch is nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex bound to the side of a pre - existing “mother” filament ( reviewed in ( 8 ) ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of seven subunits , including Actin - related proteins ( Arp ) 2 and 3 which can template the polymerization of an actin filament . In its basal state , however , the Arp2 / 3 complex adopts an inactive conformation where Arp2 and Arp3 are splayed apart and adopt a twisted conformation similar to monomeric actin ( G - actin ) , and thus cannot nucleate a filament ( F - actin ) ( 9 – 13 ) . Activation is mediated by membrane - anchored nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) , whose VCA domains simultaneously bind Arp2 / 3 and G - actin . This results in a conformational change of the Arp2 / 3 complex , allowing it to bind to the side of the mother filament and to reposition Arp2 and Arp3 into a filament - like conformation . Upon detachment of the VCA domains , the new barbed end will elongate and form a branch , or “daughter” filament , with a well - characterized 70° angle with respect to the mother filament ( 14 ) . Like actin , Arp2 and Arp3 have a nucleotide - binding pocket . The nucleation of the branch requires the Arp2 / 3 complex to be loaded with ATP , which will be hydrolyzed after the branch has nucleated ( 15 – 18 ) . As long as it remains in the branch junction , the Arp2 / 3 complex is not able to exchange its nucleotide , which will thus be a marker of its age : older branches will have an ADP - Arp2 / 3 at their junction . Branches eventually dissociate from the mother filament , thereby contributing to the reorganization and the turnover of the branched network . In spite of its importance for the control of actin turnover , the mechanism of branch dissociation is less understood than that of branch nucleation ( 19 , 20 ) . In vitro studies have shown that ATP hydrolysis in the Arp2 / 3 complex favors branch dissociation : “older” ADP - Arp2 / 3 branches dissociate more easily ( 17 , 19 , 21 ) . Further , the Arp2 / 3 complex can be directly targeted by the protein GMF to accelerate debranching , or by the protein cortactin to stabilize the branch ( 21 – 25 ) . In addition , Pandit et al . have recently shown that the application of sub - piconewton pulling forces to branches dramatically accelerates their dissociation ( 21 ) . This observation is of prime importance because branched actin networks are exposed to mechanical forces in cells , and this raises the question of how they are able to sustain prolonged mechanical stress . It also means that one needs to control the mechanical context in order to properly study branch dissociation . In spite of these recent advances , basic aspects of branch dissociation are still unclear . For instance , whether the Arp2 / 3 complex remains on the mother filament or departs with the dissociated branch remains elusive ( 26 ) . Nonetheless , it is often considered that branch dissociation results from the detachment of the Arp2 / 3 complex from the mother filament ( 14 , 21 ) . In this scenario , the pointed end of the dissociated branch could remain capped by Arp2 / 3 , preventing depolymerization and reannealling with a free barbed end . Recent cryo - EM data of branch junctions provide accurate descriptions of buried surface areas between the Arp2 / 3 complex and the mother and daughter filaments ( 27 – 29 ) . Yet , they do not provide estimations of 3 the free energy associated with these interfaces , and their relative strengths remains an open question . To address this question , we have monitored the dissociation of branches in controlled mechanical conditions . We find that , not only does Arp2 / 3 remain bound to the mother filament after nearly all debranching events , but , strikingly , it can then rapidly reload fresh ATP and nucleate a new branch , without being reactivated by NPFs . RESULTS All experiments were carried out in vitro at 25°C , using purified proteins ( from mammalian origin unless specified otherwise ) , in a buffer at pH 7 . 0 containing 50 mM KCl ( see Methods ) . In most experiments , we used alpha - skeletal actin , but we also used gamma - cytoplasmic actin where specified . Branch dissociation and re - nucleation We used a microfluidics assay ( 30 – 32 ) to monitor the nucleation and the dissociation of branches while exposing them to controlled mechanical tension ( Fig . 1A ) . We first elongated filaments from surface - anchored seeds by flowing fluorescently labeled actin monomers ( G - actin ) in the microchamber . We subsequently generated branches by flowing in Arp2 / 3 together with the VCA region of the NPF N - WASP and G - actin labeled with a different fluorescent color in order to facilitate the identification of branches , which tend to align with the mother filament because of the flow ( see Methods ) . We next flowed labeled G - actin alone in the microchamber , in order to monitor the elongation and the dissociation of the branches without nucleating new branches . This allowed us to keep the branch density low enough to clearly monitor the fate of individual branches ( Fig . 1B , C ) . We quantified the dissociation of branches over time , as we exposed them to different flow velocities and thus to different forces ( see Methods and ( 31 , 32 ) ) . Similar to Pandit et al . ( 21 ) , we observed that branches dissociated faster from mother filaments when exposed to increasing forces in the picoNewton range ( Fig . 1D ) . Unexpectedly , however , we observed that the majority of dissociation events were followed by the growth of a new branch from the same location ( Fig . 1E , Supp Fig S1 ) . The regeneration of the branches took place immediately after branch dissociation , with no detectable lag ( Supp Fig S2 ) . The fraction of branches that regenerated after dissociating , a percentage we call the “branch re - nucleation ratio” , decreased with tension , but remained above 50 % for forces up to 5 pN ( Fig 1F ) . We also observed that the branch re - nucleation fraction increased with G - actin concentration ( Fig 1F ) . The branch re - nucleation events took place in the absence of Arp2 / 3 and VCA in solution , implying that Arp2 / 3 remained on the mother filament upon dissociation of the branch , and that a new branch could be nucleated from that same Arp2 / 3 . Actin filaments rarely fragment in our assay , in the absence of specific severing proteins such as ADF / cofilin ( 32 , 33 ) . Nevertheless , any severing event occurring close to the branching junction would be mistaken for a dissociation event , and the subsequent elongation of the severed branch would be wrongly interpreted as re - nucleation . We thus sought to determine whether our observation of branch dissociation events was contaminated by branch severing events . First , we verified that the branch re - nucleation ratio was unaffected by changes in actin fluorescent labeling and illumination ( Supp Fig S3A ) . Second , we designed a specific experiment to test if any actin subunits from the first nucleation event were still present in the re - nucleated branch 4 ( Supp Fig S3B - D ) . This experiment is similar to Fig 1A , except that we used G - actin with a high labeling fraction of a third fluorophore for the branching reaction ( step 2 ) , resulting in branches with a clearly labeled pointed end . After branch dissociation and the nucleation of new branches , these fluorescently - labeled actin subunits could no longer be detected at the branch junction , in illumination conditions where single fluorophores could be detected . We conclude that the branch departure events that we observe are genuine branch dissociation events , where no actin subunits from the initial daughter filament remain bound to the Arp2 / 3 complex associated to the mother filament . Fig . 1 . New actin branches can grow from the same Arp2 / 3 complex after a branch dissociation event . ( A ) Schematic of a typical branching and debranching experiment using microfluidics . Filaments are first elongated from surface - anchored spectrin - actin seeds by flowing in Alexa488 ( 10 % ) - G - actin ( magenta ) . Branches are then nucleated by flowing in h s , ch ts ch ng by in 5 Alexa568 ( 10 % ) - G - actin ( cyan ) with VCA and Arp2 / 3 . They are further elongated by flowing in Alexa568 ( 10 % ) - G - actin alone . The elongation and dissociation of branches can then be monitored over time . The flowing solution applies a pulling force to the mother filament and the branches . ( B ) Portion of a TIRF microscopy field of view , showing mother filaments ( magenta ) and branches ( cyan ) formed as indicated in ( A ) . ( C ) Time lapse showing the elongation of a mother filament ( magenta ) , the nucleation of branches ( cyan ) , their elongation , and the dissociation of a branch ( red box ) . ( D ) Pulling forces accelerate the dissociation of branches . Each curve shows the surviving fraction of n branches monitored over time , for a different experiment ( branches aged for 20 minutes with 0 . 3 µM actin , between step 2 and 3 indicated in panel ( A ) ) . Each experiment was carried out with a different flow rate , in order to apply different forces , indicated as the average force applied to the branches as they dissociated . ( E ) Timelapse , similar to the one in ( C ) , showing an example of branch re - nucleation ( red box ) . ( F ) Pulling forces moderately reduce the fraction of branches that re - nucleate after dissociation . Each point is from a single experiment , analyzing , from left to right , n = 32 , 30 , 35 , 55 , 55 , 40 branches ( 0 . 3 µM actin ) and n = 34 , 50 , 50 branches ( 1 µM actin ) . Error bars are standard deviations . Our observation that Arp2 / 3 remained bound to the mother filament upon dissociation of the branch appeared to contradict Pandit et al . who detected no fluorescently labeled Arp2 / 3 on the mother immediately after branch dissociation ( 21 ) . We wondered if this difference could come from our using mammalian Arp2 / 3 and mammalian actin , while Pandit et al . used Arp2 / 3 from fission yeast and mammalian actin . To test this hypothesis , we repeated our experiments with Arp2 / 3 from budding yeast , and observed a branch re - nucleation ratio of less than 10 % ( Supp Fig S4B ) . Our interpretation is that the interface between the mother filament and the Arp2 / 3 complex is much weaker when the latter is from yeast while the former is made of mammalian actin . Consistently , we find that branches dissociate much faster when using yeast Arp2 / 3 instead of mammalian Arp2 / 3 ( Supp Fig S4A ) . Impact of force orientation In our standard experiment , the mother filaments aligned with the flow , and thus the pulling force applied to the branches is parallel to the mother filaments ( Fig 1 ) . We wondered if the orientation of the force impacts the branch dissociation rate and re - nucleation . In order to vary the angle between the mother filament and the flow , we modified our assay as follows ( Fig 2 , Methods ) . We worked in the region of the microchamber where the channels intersect , so we can orient the flow of the incoming solutions in different directions . We grew filaments from surface - anchored seeds by flowing in fluorescently labeled G - actin , as before , but we then elongated them further with a solution supplemented with biotinylated G - actin . This created a biotinylated filament segment , that we could then anchor to surface - anchored biotin - BSA , by flowing in neutravidin . As a result , the orientation of mother filaments was fixed , imposed by the anchored seed and the anchored biotinylated segment , regardless of the orientation of the flow . We then nucleated and elongated branches , and monitored their fate as before . To avoid potential artifacts due to local anchoring points , we only followed branches whose junction was in the unanchored segment of the mother filament . By flowing the G - actin solution from one channel into the three others , we obtained different local flow directions , so that applied forces have different angles with respect to the mother filaments , within the same microchamber ( Fig 2A ) . Mother filaments whose biotinylated segment 6 failed to bind the surface provided local control situations where the mother and the branch were aligned with the flow . In a separate experiment , we verified that the local flow velocity was the same for the different flow directions , by tracking the movement of micrometer - size beads ( Supp Fig S5 ) . The forces we applied to the actin filament branches thus had different orientations but similar amplitudes ( approximately 1 pN ) . We pooled branches into four subpopulations , based on the angle (cid:0) between the local direction of the flow ( i . e . the direction of the applied force ) and the mother filament . We found that branches dissociated at a similar rate from their mother filaments , regardless of the orientation of the force ( Fig 2B ) . We found that the branch re - nucleation ratio was very mildly affected across the range of angles we studied ( 0 - 145° ) . The branch re - nucleation ratio was approximately 30 % higher when (cid:0) was in the vicinity of 70° , the canonical angle of the branch junction ( Fig 2C ) . These results show that branch re - nucleation following debranching is a general mechanism , taking place regardless of the orientation of the pulling force . The higher branch re - nucleation ratio measured around (cid:0) = 70° indicates that Arp2 / 3 is even more likely to remain bound to the mother filament when the tension is applied without bending the branch and without shearing the branch junction . Actin isoform and profilin Our results so far imply that , following the majority of branch dissociation events , Arp2 / 3 remains on the mother filament and nucleates a new branch . Since we made these observations using alpha - skeletal actin , we wondered whether they would differ if we used cytoplasmic actin . To be closer to physiological conditions , where actin is unlabeled , we modified our assay to monitor branch junctions made with unlabeled cytoplasmic gamma - actin ( Fig 3A - B , Methods ) . Briefly , we successively flowed different actin solutions in the microchamber , to elongate mother filaments comprising a long segment made entirely of unlabeled gamma - actin , between two segments made of labeled alpha - actin from skeletal muscle . Next , we nucleated branches using unlabeled gamma - actin . Finally , we elongated the branches and monitored their outcome while continuously flowing labeled alpha - actin in the chamber . This enabled us to monitor the dissociation of branches where only unlabeled gamma - actin was in contact with the Arp2 / 3 complex , in both the mother filament and the pointed region of the branch . We found that the branch re - nucleation ratio was the same as for our standard branches , monitored simultaneously in the same microchamber ( Fig 3C , Methods ) . We also wondered if our results could be specific to the NPF we used to nucleate the first branches , VCA from N - WASP . We thus repeated our experiments using VCA from WASP and found that 55 % ( ±11 % , n = 22 ) of branches were regenerated after dissociating from the mother filament . This is similar to what we observed for branches nucleated using VCA from N - WASP . Since , in cells , available actin monomers are mostly in complex with profilin ( 34 ) , we asked whether profilin could affect branch re - nucleation . We compared , side - by - side in the same microchamber , the behavior of branches in the presence of actin alone and supplemented with profilin ( Fig . 3D ) . We found that adding equimolar amounts of profilin to actin had no impact on the branch re - nucleation ratio . 7 Fig . 2 . Impact of force orientation on debranching and re - nucleation . ( A ) Schematic of the assay where branches are pulled on with different orientations . Mother filaments ( magenta ) are elongated with a biotinylated segment which is anchored to the surface ( step 1 ) . During the debranching and re - nucleation phase ( step 3 ) , the pulling force follows the direction of the flow , which makes different angles with respect to the mother filaments in different regions of the microfluidics chamber . The microscope images show examples from two different fields , with forces applied on branches at 30 - 47° ( top image ) and at 114 - 120° ( bottom image ) with respect to their mother filaments . ( B ) Each curve shows the surviving fraction of branches monitored over time , for a different population of n branches from 9 independent experiments pooled together according to the angle between the applied force and the mother filament . ( C ) The direction of the pulling force has a moderate impact on the branch re - nucleation ratio , computed for each of the four populations of branches whose detachment is shown in ( B ) . The value for 50 - 90° is significantly higher than for smaller angles ( p = 0 . 033 , two - sided Fisher’s exact test ) . Error bars indicate binomial standard deviations . the are the w , the ith to ver er of of is ars 8 Fig . 3 . Branch re - nucleation is not actin isoform - specific and occurs in the presence of profilin . ( A ) Schematic of experiment using microfluidics to study branch junctions made with unlabeled cytoplasmic gamma - actin . The mother filaments comprise a long segment made with unlabeled cytoplasmic gamma - actin ( steps 1 - 3 ) , and the branches are nucleated using unlabeled cytoplasmic gamma - actin ( step 4 ) . ( B ) Timelapse showing a branch dissociating and re - nucleating , from the unlabeled segment of the mother filament , during step 5 of the experiment described in ( A ) . ( C ) The branch re - nucleation ratio is similar for mother filaments made with unlabeled cytoplasmic gamma - actin or with Alexa488 - labeled ( 10 % ) alpha - skeletal actin . ( D ) The branch re - nucleation ratio is not affected by adding equimolar amounts of profilin to G - actin during the final step of the experiment ( branch dissociation and re - nucleation , step 3 in Fig 1A ) . In ( C , D ) each data point is from one experiment , monitoring n = 32 , 45 , 25 , 27 dissociating branches ( from left to right ) for experiments in ( C ) and n = 32 dissociating branches for each experiment in ( D ) . Points with matching symbols are from observations carried out simultaneously , in different regions of the same microfluidics chamber . Error bars indicate standard deviations . of de ent ted ch ing for - by ent e for ith of 9 Nucleotide exchange on mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 Having established that branch regeneration is a robust mechanism , we next sought to better understand the underlying molecular mechanism . Earlier reports indicate that Arp2 / 3 needs to be loaded with ATP in order to be activated by an NPF and nucleate a branch ( 15 , 16 ) . This led us to wonder whether this was also the case for the re - nucleation events we observed . In order to determine if branches were re - nucleated from ADP - or ATP - Arp2 / 3 , we took advantage of the fact that ADP - Arp2 / 3 branches dissociate faster ( 17 , 19 , 21 ) . To obtain ADP - Arp2 / 3 branches , we aged them for 20 minutes before monitoring their dissociation ( Fig 4A ) . As expected , in our experiments , the surviving fraction of aged branches ( i . e . mostly ADP - Arp2 / 3 at the start of the experiment ) decreased faster than that of non - aged branches ( i . e . ATP - Arp2 / 3 and ADP - Pi - Arp2 / 3 at the start of the experiment ) ( Fig 4A , B ) . Strikingly , in both situations we observed that the re - nucleated branches dissociated slowly , like non - aged branches ( Fig 4B ) . This suggests that Arp2 / 3 is loaded with ATP when it re - nucleates a filament , after dissociation of the first branch . The fact that aged branches dissociate faster than non - aged branches ( Fig 4B ) implies that most mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 complexes are in the ADP - state . Thus , our result that branches are re - nucleated from ATP - Arp2 / 3 indicates that Arp2 / 3 exchanges its nucleotide after branch dissociation , in order to nucleate a new branch . Consistently with this , we observed that re - nucleated branches , after they dissociated , were re - nucleated again , with the same branch re - nucleation ratio ( Fig 4C ) . This could be observed for multiple generations , as if each re - nucleation event was independent of the past history of that specific Arp2 / 3 complex . To further confirm the notion that the mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 exchanges its nucleotide in order to nucleate a new branch , we decreased the ATP concentration to see if that would impair branch re - nucleation . To maintain G - actin in the ATP state , we did not fully remove ATP from solution . We verified , by measuring the elongation rate at filament barbed ends , that all the G - actin was indeed loaded with ATP in our experiments , even at our lowest concentrations of ATP . We observed that branches dissociating while exposed to G - actin in an ATP - deficient solution ( [ ATP ] < 1 µM , see methods ) re - nucleated more than 2 - fold less frequently than in our control experiment ( [ ATP ] = 200 µM ) carried out simultaneously in the same microchamber ( Fig 4D ) . This result confirms that ATP in solution is required for branch re - nucleation . We were not able to accurately measure ATP concentrations below 1 µM , and thus could not determine its affinity for Arp2 / 3 bound to the mother filament . However , we measured that branch re - nucleation was unaffected when the ATP concentration was decreased as low as 1 . 2 µM ( Fig 4E ) . Together , our results indicate that actin filament branches dissociate from the ADP - Arp2 / 3 complex which remains on the mother filament , and that this mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 complex is able to rapidly exchange its nucleotide to become ATP - Arp2 / 3 and re - nucleate a branch . 10 11 Fig . 4 . Arp2 / 3 binds fresh ATP to re - nucleate a branch . ( A ) Schematic of the aging experiment using microfluidics . Compared to the standard assay shown in Fig 1 , an extra step ( step 4 ) is added in order to age the branch junctions without elongating the branches : a lower concentration of G - actin is flowed in for 0 min ( non - aged branches ) or 20 min ( aged branches ) . ( B ) Kinetics of branch dissociation , for aged ( purple curve ) and non - aged branches ( dark green curve ) , and for the branches that have re - nucleated in each case ( “second generation” ) . ( C ) Time - lapse showing a branch detaching and re - nucleating , twice . In this experiment , 71 % of the initial branches ( n = 41 ) re - nucleated , and 69 % of the second generation of branches ( n = 29 ) re - nucleated . ( D ) The branch re - nucleation ratio decreases when ATP is depleted from the buffer , and is rescued by adding back ATP . ( E ) The Branch re - nucleation ratio is not affected when ATP is diluted to 1 . 2 µM . In ( D , E ) each data point is from one experiment , monitoring ( from left to right ) n = 34 , 34 , 36 , 34 , 38 , 36 dissociating branches for experiments in ( D ) and n = 34 , 30 , 35 , 30 dissociating branches for each experiment in ( E ) . Points with matching symbols are from observations carried out simultaneously , in different regions of the same microfluidics chamber . Error bars indicate standard deviations . Detachment of mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 In order to estimate the rate at which the mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 exchanges its nucleotide , we needed to take into account competing reactions . We reasoned that , following branch dissociation , the mother - remaining ADP - Arp2 / 3 can either exchange its nucleotide to become ATP - Arp2 / 3 , or dissociate from the mother filament . In turn , the ATP - Arp2 / 3 complex can either dissociate from the mother filament , or bind an actin monomer , which we assumed would stabilize its interaction with the mother filament as in a new branch junction . This last assumption is consistent with our observation that the branch re - nucleation ratio increases with the G - actin concentration ( Fig 1F ) . We thus sought to quantify the dissociation of the Arp2 / 3 complex from the mother filament . To do so , we fluorescently labeled the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Methods ) and verified that this labeling did not affect the nucleation , dissociation and re - nucleation of the branches ( Fig 5A ) . We could thus directly visualize the same Arp2 / 3 complex remaining bound to the mother filament throughout branch dissociation and re - nucleation . We then performed experiments in the absence of G - actin ( buffer only ) during the debranching step , to monitor the dissociation of the Arp2 / 3 complex from the mother filament , following the dissociation of the branch ( Fig 5B ) . Experiments were performed in an ATP - free buffer to measure the off - rate of ADP - Arp2 / 3 ( Fig 5C ) , as well as in our standard buffer ( 200µM ATP ) to measure the off - rate of ATP - Arp2 / 3 ( Fig 5D ) . We found similar dissociation rates for both situations : k off = 0 . 66 ( ±0 . 16 ) s - 1 for ADP - Arp2 / 3 ( Fig 5C ) , and 0 . 57 ( ±0 . 22 ) s - 1 for ATP - Arp2 / 3 ( Fig 5D ) . Knowing the off - rate for ADP - Arp2 / 3 , and considering that the branch re - nucleation ratio is within 5 % of the plateau value with 1 . 2 µM ATP ( Fig 4E , based on our error bars ) we can determine that the effective rate constant for ATP reloading is greater than 6 µM - 1 s - 1 . This ensures that , with 200 µM ATP , nucleotide exchange is infinitely fast compared to the dissociation of ADP - Arp2 / 3 , and that it is indeed the dissociation of ATP - Arp2 / 3 that is observed . In addition , the exponential fits of the survival curves of mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 complexes ( Fig 5C , D ) allow us to estimate ( y - intercepts ) that approximately 70 % of Arp2 / 3 complexes remained on the mother filament upon debranching , in these experiments where we applied a 2 . 2 - 12 2 . 9 pN pulling force to the branches ( in order to accelerate debranching and minimize the photobleaching of Arp2 / 3 while we acquired images at a rate of 0 . 2 - 1 . 25 Hz , see Methods ) . Our estimation of 70 % mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 complexes is consistent with the branch re - nucleation ratios we have measured in this force range ( Fig 1F ) . Fig . 5 . Dissociation of Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament following debranching . ( A ) Schematic and timelapse of an experiment carried out with Alexa488 - labeled Arp2 / 3 complex , showing branch dissociation and re - nucleation . Similar to experiments with the same conditions and unlabeled Arp2 / 3 , 70 % of the dissociated branches ( n = 23 ) were re - nucleated . ( B ) Schematic and timelapse of an experiment carried out with fluorescently - labeled Arp2 / 3 complex , in the absence of G - actin during the final step ( branch dissociation ) . Note the shorter time interval between images in this experiment , in order to monitor the departure of Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament , following the dissociation of the branch . ( C ) Fraction of Arp2 / 3 bound to the mother filament ( log scale ) as a function of time , observed as described in panel ( B ) , using an ATP - free buffer in step 4 . The data are pooled from 4 experiments ( n = 6 , 15 , 7 , 2 branches ) . ( D ) Fraction of Arp2 / 3 bound to the mother filament ( log scale ) as a function of time , observed as described in A ) ex , ns tic the val er her ree of in 13 panel ( B ) , using our standard buffer with 200 µM ATP in step 4 . The data are pooled from different experiments using different time intervals : 0 . 8 seconds ( diamonds , 9 experiments with n = 4 , 5 , 8 , 7 , 4 , 4 , 14 , 10 , 2 branches ) ; 1 . 5 seconds ( squares , 7 experiments with n = 14 , 14 , 4 , 3 , 7 , 1 , 9 branches ) ; 5 seconds ( triangle , 2 experiments with n = 26 , 31 ) . In ( C , D ) time t = 0 corresponds to the dissociation of the branch . Fig . 6 . Impact of G - actin concentration on branch re - nucleation , and model for debranching and branch re - nucleation . ( A ) Impact of G - actin concentration on the branch re - nucleation ratio . Each black data point is from a single experiment , monitoring n dissociating branches : n = 17 , 32 ( 0 . 2 µM actin ) ; 35 , 32 , 38 , 32 ( 0 . 25 µM ) ; 32 , 36 ( 0 . 3 µM ) ; 34 , 30 , 26 ( 0 . 5 µM ) ; 32 , 36 , 35 ( 0 . 8 µM ) ; 14 , 22 ( 1 µM ) ; 22 , 30 , 20 ( 1 . 2 µM ) ; 36 , 38 ( 1 . 5 µM ) . Red bars indicate average values for each actin concentration . The solid line is a fit , considering that re - nucleation occurs when an actin subunit is added to the Arp2 / 3 complex before it detaches from the mother filament ( see Methods ) . ( B ) Global model for debranching and branch regrowth . Aged actin m ith , 7 , ds for - ing 0 . 5 ate ion her tin 14 filament branches dissociate in a force - sensitive manner , most often leaving an ADP - Arp2 / 3 complex bound to the mother filament . This mother - remaining Arp2 / 3 complex will nucleate a new branch , provided that it can load fresh ATP and bind G - actin before detaching from the mother filament . Quantitative model for branch dissociation and re - nucleation In our description of the different pathways leading either to the dissociation of Arp2 / 3 from the mother filaments or to the re - nucleation of a branch , we hypothesized that the binding of an actin monomer to the ATP - Arp2 / 3 complex would stabilize its interaction with the mother filament , and promote the nucleation of a new branch . This is consistent with our observation that the branch re - nucleation ratio increases with the G - actin concentration ( Fig 1F ) . In order to quantify this reaction , we measured the branch re - nucleation ratio over a broader range of G - actin concentrations ( Fig 6A ) . We found that it follows a typical saturation curve , with less than 25 % of branches re - nucleating below 0 . 2 µM G - actin , and more than 85 % of branches re - nucleating above 1 . 5 µM . Knowing the rate constant of the competing reaction ( dissociation of ATP - Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament , Fig 5D ) we can fit this curve to estimate that G - actin binds to mother - bound ATP - Arp2 / 3 with rate constant k on = 3 . 4 ( ±1 . 24 ) µM - 1 s - 1 and a critical concentration C c = 0 . 14 ( ±0 . 2 ) µM . The fit also yields a plateau value of 97 ( ±3 ) % , which is an estimation of the fraction of debranching events that leave Arp2 / 3 bound to the mother filament , in the conditions of this experiment where a 1 - 2 pN force was applied to the branches . With these last measurements , we have quantified the final step of the global reaction scheme leading to branch re - nucleation ( Fig 6B ) . This scheme can be summarized as follows . Over time , the Arp2 / 3 complex in the branch junction hydrolyzes its ATP , and debranching then becomes more likely . This branch dissociation step is accelerated by mechanical forces , which also favor the departure of Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament . Nonetheless , up to several piconewtons of applied force , the vast majority of debranching events occur with Arp2 / 3 remaining bound to the mother filament . This mother - remaining ADP - Arp2 / 3 complex then rapidly exchanges its nucleotide , reloading fresh ATP from solution . If [ ATP ] > 1µM , this reaction always occurs before the dissociation of ADP - Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament . The mother - bound ATP - Arp2 / 3 can then bind G - actin from solution , thereby nucleating a new branch that is identical to the initial branch . If the concentration of G - actin is greater than a few micromolars , this reaction always occurs before the dissociation of ATP - Arp2 / 3 from the mother filament . These rapid reaction rates explain why branches appear to re - nucleate instantly , within the resolution of our experiments ( Supp Fig S2 ) . Impact of GMF We wondered whether the global reaction scheme leading to branch re - nucleation ( Fig 6B ) could be affected by regulatory proteins . To address this question , we monitored branch dissociation and re - nucleation in the presence of Glia Maturation Factor ( GMF ) , a protein known to accelerate debranching ( 22 ) . We used GMF from Drosophila , which is very similar to human GMF ( Supp Fig S6 ) . We confirmed that GMF accelerates debranching , and we measured that it does so with an apparent dissociation constant K D = 260 ( ±117 ) nM and a maximum debranching rate k max = 0 . 071 ( ±0 . 008 ) s - 1 ( for ADP - Arp2 / 3 and an average pulling force of 1 pN , Fig 7A , B ) . We also found that GMF drastically hinders branch re - nucleation ( Fig 7C ) . In fact , GMF seemed particularly efficient at preventing branch re - nucleation : in the presence of 25 nM GMF , where 15 we can estimate that [ GMF ] / ( [ GMF ] + K D ) = 9 % of branch dissociation events are caused by GMF , the fraction of branches that re - nucleate in the presence of 0 . 6 µM actin was reduced more than 3 - fold ( Fig 7C ) . We verified that GMF did not affect barbed end elongation in our experiments , confirming that GMF does not interact with actin , and indicating that GMF directly binds to Arp2 / 3 to prevent branch re - nucleation . Fig . 7 . Impact of GMF on branch dissociation and branch re - nucleation . ( A ) Fraction of remaining branches over time , for different GMF concentrations ( after 30 minutes of aging , and with an average 1 pN pulling force applied to the branches ) . ( B ) Branch dissociation rate versus GMF concentration . The rates were determined by exponential fits of the survival curves shown in ( A ) and the error bars are asymmetrical 95 % confidence intervals ( Methods ) . The solid line is a fit by a Michaelis - Menten equation , assuming a rapid equilibrium between GMF and the branch junction . The fit yields a dissociation constant K D = 260 ( ±117 ) nM , a maximum debranching rate k max = 0 . 071 ( ±0 . 008 ) s - 1 and a debranching rate in the absence of GMF comprised between 0 and 0 . 005 s - 1 ( 95 % C . I . ) . ( C ) Branch re - nucleation ratio as a function of GMF concentration , for two different actin concentrations . The data at 0 . 3 µM actin is from the same data set as panel ( A ) . The data points at 0 . 6 µM actin each represent an independent experiment , monitoring n = 32 , 40 , 35 , 30 , 40 dissociating branches , from left to right . Inset : data at 0 . 3 µM actin shown over a larger range of GMF concentrations . ( D ) Schematic summarizing our interpretation of the different outcomes based on which factor promotes debranching . If branch dissociation is caused by GMF , the dominant outcome is an effective debranching , resulting in a linear filament with no F , of nd us wn is ch ate nd wo ) . 40 , r a the ed no 16 branch . In contrast , if debranching is a consequence of mechanical stress , the dominant outcome is the dissociation of the branch followed by the rapid nucleation of a new branch by the same , ATP - reloaded Arp2 / 3 complex . This results in a reinforcement of the branch junction . The impact of GMF on branch re - nucleation contrasts with that of pulling forces , which have a strong effect on the rate of branch dissociation and a moderate impact on branch re - nucleation ( Fig 1 ) . It thus appears that the final outcome following a debranching event depends on what factor triggered debranching ( Fig 7D ) . When a branch dissociates because of mechanical stress , the Arp2 / 3 complex is almost certain to remain bound to the mother filament and nucleate a new branch , and this new branch will be more resistant because it has ATP - Arp2 / 3 at its junction . In contrast , when branch dissociation is caused by GMF , it is likely that no branch will regrow . DISCUSSION We show here that , in contrast with what is often assumed , the Arp2 / 3 complex stays bound to the mother actin filament when the branch dissociates . Further , the Arp2 / 3 that remains on the mother filament can readily nucleate a new branch , from the same location , without requiring reactivation by an NPF . We show that this is a robust mechanism , taking place over a wide range of conditions ( Figs 2 and 3 ) . Nonetheless , the likelihood of branch re - nucleation can be reduced by pulling on the branch junction , and by decreasing the concentration of ATP or G - actin . This reflects the three requirements for branch re - nucleation ( Fig 6B ) : first , Arp2 / 3 must stay on the mother filament upon debranching ( slightly less likely when pulling on the branch ) ; second , it must then exchange its nucleotide before detaching ( less likely at very low ATP concentration ) ; third , the ATP - Arp2 / 3 complex must bind actin monomers before detaching ( less likely at very low G - actin concentration ) . In contrast to these factors , which require extreme conditions ( high forces , or nearly total depletion of ATP or G - actin ) to impact branch re - nucleation , GMF at moderate concentration efficiently prevents the re - nucleation of dissociated branches ( Fig 7 ) . Molecular insights Quite strikingly , our data indicate that the dissociation of the branch does not inactivate the Arp2 / 3 complex remaining on the mother filament . During the initial activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex , binding to the mother filament can be viewed as a later step , taking place after key conformational changes have been imparted by the binding of the NPF together with G - actin ( 10 , 28 ) . This implies that , after the branch has dissociated , the mother - Arp2 / 3 interactions are able to maintain the Arp2 / 3 complex in a quasi - active conformation , where it only needs to reload ATP in order to efficiently nucleate a new branch . The presence of ATP in Arp2 / 3 is required to nucleate the initial branch ( 15 , 16 ) and ATP hydrolysis promotes branch dissociation , which we show here to result predominantly from the rupture of the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface . It thus seems that the nucleotide state of Arp2 and Arp3 is key for their interaction with actin . In contrast , the nucleotide state of Arp2 and Arp3 does not seem to directly affect the interaction of the Arp2 / 3 complex with the mother filament . For instance , after debranching , loading ATP does not stabilize the interaction of the Arp2 / 3 complex with the mother filament ( Fig 5C , D ) . What seems to stabilize the interaction with the mother filament is the binding of actin to Arp2 and Arp3 , which thus appears to trigger an allosteric conformational change of the Arp2 / 3 complex . At this stage , it is unclear whether binding one 17 actin monomer to Arp2 and Arp3 suffices to stabilize the Arp2 / 3 complex on the mother filament , or if more actin monomers are required . In the lone Arp2 / 3 complex that remains on the mother filament when the branch dissociates , Arp2 and Arp3 exhibit a behavior that is reminiscent of both G - actin and F - actin . The rapid reloading of ATP ( Fig 4 ) , similar to what has been reported for free Arp2 / 3 ( 15 , 16 ) , suggests that Arp2 and Arp3 should be in an open G - actin - like conformation , with accessible nucleotide - binding pockets . This seems to change once the Arp2 / 3 complex is loaded with ATP , as it can bind actin subunits with an on - rate that is only 3 - fold lower than that of a filament barbed end ( Fig 6 ) . It thus appears that Arp2 and Arp3 are then in a conformation similar to that of a filament barbed end , where the two terminal actin subunits adopt an F - actin - like conformation , as recently shown by cryo - EM ( 35 ) . At this stage , we do not know whether it is the nucleotide state of Arp2 or Arp3 that determines the behavior of the Arp2 / 3 complex during branch re - nucleation . Early reports suggest that ATP is hydrolyzed more rapidly in Arp2 ( 15 ) but recent cryo - EM data on yeast Arp2 / 3 suggest that it could rather be in Arp3 ( 29 ) . Our quantification of the branch re - nucleation ratio provides decisive insights into the relative strength of the mother - Arp2 / 3 and Arp2 / 3 - daughter interfaces . Within the range of forces we have studied , Arp2 / 3 remains bound to the mother filament during the vast majority of debranching events , showing that the mother - Arp2 / 3 interface is the stronger . The acceleration of debranching with force indicates an overall “slip bond” behavior , where interactions are destabilized by force . The fact that force moderately affects the branch re - nucleation ratio indicates that both interfaces are similarly affected by force , and thus that they both behave like slip bonds . Yet , since the branch re - nucleation ratio decreases with force , it seems that the mother - Arp2 / 3 interface is slightly more sensitive to force than the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface . Our data also show that the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface is weaker than the interface between actin subunits within the filament . This is consistent with our recent observations on linear ( i . e . , non - branched ) filaments nucleated by Arp2 / 3 after activation by SPIN90 ( 25 ) . In this situation , the need for a mother filament is bypassed and Arp2 / 3 is bound simultaneously to SPIN90 and to the pointed end of the nucleated filament ( 36 , 37 ) . We observed that the interface between Arp2 / 3 and the filament ruptured first , leaving Arp2 / 3 bound to SPIN90 with no actin subunits ( 25 ) . This indicates that the interface between the SPIN90 - activated Arp2 / 3 complex and the nucleated filament , which is very similar to the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface in branch junctions ( 28 ) , is weaker than the interface between actin subunits . The weakness of the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface could stem from the specific conformation adopted by the D - loop of the first two actin subunits of the daughter filament in contact with Arp2 and Arp3 , as recently observed in branch junctions using cryo - EM ( 29 ) . Our results showing that GMF prevents branch re - nucleation are reminiscent of our recent observations where GMF enhanced the detachment of Arp2 / 3 from both SPIN90 and the pointed end of the filament ( 25 ) . They also provide new information on the interaction of GMF with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Co - crystal structures from GMF and ATP - Arp2 / 3 show that GMF binds primarily to Arp2 ( 23 ) and possibly also to Arp3 ( 38 ) , and both of these interactions should destabilize the interface between Arp2 / 3 and the daughter filament . Our data indicate that GMF is more efficient at preventing branch re - nucleation than at accelerating branch dissociation : the half - maximum effect is reached with less than 25 nM GMF for branch re - nucleation , and with 200 nM GMF for branch dissociation ( Fig 7 ) . This suggests that different binding sites could be involved for the two mechanisms , as GMF would interfere with more than one step in our global reaction scheme ( Fig 6B ) . 18 We also show that , while branch re - nucleation is the dominant outcome for branches made using mammalian Arp2 / 3 and mammalian actin , it is rare if branches are made using budding yeast Arp2 / 3 and mammalian actin ( Supp Fig S4B ) . Together with our observation that branches made with yeast Arp2 / 3 and mammalian actin also dissociate faster ( Supp Fig S4A ) , this suggests that the interface between the mammalian actin mother filament and the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex is weaker than in an all - mammalian branch junction . Consistently , fission yeast Arp2 / 3 was recently reported to dissociate from mammalian actin mother filaments upon debranching ( 21 ) . This result possibly reflects a weaker interaction between proteins from evolutionarily distant species . Alternatively , it could reflect a specific difference between branch junctions in yeast and in mammals . Recent cryo - EM data highlight structural differences between fission yeast and mammalian Arp2 / 3 at branch junctions , but so far they report no major difference regarding the mother - Arp2 / 3 interface ( 28 , 29 ) . Physiological implications In animal cells , the cytoplasm typically contains 100 - 200 µM G - actin and millimolars of ATP ( 34 , 39 ) . These concentrations are far above the ranges where G - actin and ATP are limiting factors for branch re - nucleation ( Fig 4D , E and Fig 6A ) . We thus expect that branch dissociation events would nearly all be followed by branch re - nucleation events , unless they were triggered by a regulatory protein like GMF ( Fig 6B ) . Indeed , the fact that GMF and mechanical forces both accelerate debranching but have a very different impact on branch re - nucleation , lead us to propose that the fate of the Arp2 / 3 complex largely depends on what factor triggers debranching ( Fig 7B ) . If debranching is caused by the regulatory protein GMF , it is then very unlikely that a branch will grow back . In this situation , GMF would control the evolution of the branched network towards a more linear architecture , as observed in the rear of lamellipodia or when stress fibers emerge from the cell cortex ( 40 , 41 ) . Indeed , a fully effective debranching , where no new branch is re - nucleated , appears essential in order to fully remodel or disassemble the filament network . As such , we propose that the prime role of GMF in cells may be to prevent branches from growing back , redefining its importance for the control of network architecture and disassembly . Whether and how other proteins affecting branch stability , such as coronin or cortactin , would affect branch re - nucleation is now an open question . Other factors should also be investigated , such as the isoform composition of the Arp2 / 3 complex , which was shown to affect branch stability and its vulnerability to oxidation ( 26 , 27 ) . In addition , our results on the weakness of the Arp2 / 3 - daughter interface in branch junctions indicate that the pointed end of the dissociated branch is unlikely to be capped by Arp2 / 3 . We thus propose that the pointed end of dissociated branches may depolymerize or reanneal with barbed ends , thereby contributing to the reorganization of the network . In contrast to GMF - induced debranching , if the branch dissociates because of mechanical forces applied to the branch junction , then a new branch is likely to grow back . This is a frequent situation in cells , as branched networks can be exposed to significant mechanical stress . In a lamellipodium , for example , global compression can result in forces with a variety of orientations at the scale of individual branch junctions ( 1 ) . A pushing force exerted on an individual branch , pushing toward the back of the network , would apply a mechanical load on the branch junction similar to the high - angle tension we applied in Fig 2 . In a tensed cortex , the combined action of myosin motors and filament crosslinkers could pull on branch junctions in all directions . Since 19 the orientation of the force has a mild impact on the outcome ( Fig 2 ) , branch re - nucleation could occur in a broad range of situations . The forces we have applied in our experiments , in the picoNewton range , are comparable to what can be expected for single filaments in cells . Moreover , since debranching is greatly accelerated by force , an ADP - Arp2 / 3 branch exposed to an increasing load is likely to dissociate rapidly , when the force is still moderate . It will then leave behind an Arp2 / 3 complex that will rapidly be “rejuvenated” by ATP and from which a new branch will grow . The network would thus rapidly shed old , fragile branches and replace them with new , more resistant branches . This is a new mechanism by which branched actin networks could adapt to mechanical stress by self - repairing , reorganizing and strengthening . Importantly , branch re - nucleation events can take place away from NPF - decorated surfaces . In the context of the lamellipodium , this could explain why growing barbed ends can sometimes be observed away from the leading edge ( 42 – 44 ) . Branched actin networks are found in a variety of cellular contexts , with different turnover rates and different functional requirements . Future studies should uncover how the rejuvenation mechanism endowed by branch re - nucleation contributes to their maintenance and turnover . References 1 . P . Lappalainen , T . Kotila , A . Jégou , G . Romet - Lemonne , Biochemical and mechanical regulation of actin dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol ( 2022 ) , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 022 - 00508 - 4 . 2 . M . Bovellan , Y . Romeo , M . Biro , A . Boden , P . Chugh , A . Yonis , M . Vaghela , M . Fritzsche , D . Moulding , R . Thorogate , A . Jégou , A . J . Thrasher , G . Romet - Lemonne , P . P . Roux , E . K . Paluch , G . Charras , Cellular control of cortical actin nucleation . Curr Biol . 24 , 1628 – 1635 ( 2014 ) . 3 . A . S . Moore , S . M . Coscia , C . L . Simpson , F . E . Ortega , E . C . Wait , J . M . Heddleston , J . J . Nirschl , C . J . Obara , P . Guedes - Dias , C . A . Boecker , T . - L . Chew , J . A . Theriot , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , E . L . F . Holzbaur , Actin cables and comet tails organize mitochondrial networks in mitosis . Nature . 591 , 659 – 664 ( 2021 ) . 4 . B . R . Schrank , T . Aparicio , Y . Li , W . Chang , B . T . Chait , G . G . Gundersen , M . E . Gottesman , J . Gautier , Nuclear ARP2 / 3 drives DNA break clustering for homology - directed repair . Nature . 559 , 61 – 66 ( 2018 ) . 5 . P . Bieling , T . - D . Li , J . Weichsel , R . McGorty , P . Jreij , B . Huang , D . A . Fletcher , R . D . Mullins , Force Feedback Controls Motor Activity and Mechanical Properties of Self - Assembling Branched Actin Networks . Cell . 164 , 115 – 127 ( 2016 ) . 6 . J . Mueller , G . Szep , M . Nemethova , I . de Vries , A . D . Lieber , C . Winkler , K . Kruse , J . V . Small , C . Schmeiser , K . Keren , R . Hauschild , M . Sixt , Load Adaptation of Lamellipodial Actin Networks . Cell . 171 , 188 - 200 . e16 ( 2017 ) . 7 . T . - D . Li , P . Bieling , J . Weichsel , R . D . Mullins , D . A . Fletcher , The molecular mechanism of load adaptation by branched actin networks . Elife . 11 , e73145 ( 2022 ) . 8 . A . M . Gautreau , F . E . Fregoso , G . Simanov , R . Dominguez , Nucleation , stabilization , and disassembly of branched actin networks . Trends Cell Biol . 32 , 421 – 432 ( 2022 ) . 9 . M . Shaaban , S . Chowdhury , B . J . Nolen , Cryo - EM reveals the transition of Arp2 / 3 complex from inactive to nucleation - competent state . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 27 , 1009 – 1016 ( 2020 ) . 10 . A . Zimmet , T . Van Eeuwen , M . Boczkowska , G . Rebowski , K . Murakami , R . Dominguez , Cryo - EM structure of NPF - bound human Arp2 / 3 complex and activation mechanism . Sci Adv . 6 , eaaz7651 ( 2020 ) . 20 11 . I . Rouiller , X . - P . Xu , K . J . Amann , C . Egile , S . Nickell , D . Nicastro , R . Li , T . D . Pollard , N . Volkmann , D . Hanein , The structural basis of actin filament branching by the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 ( 2008 ) . 12 . M . Rodnick - Smith , Q . Luan , S . - L . Liu , B . J . Nolen , Role and structural mechanism of WASP - triggered conformational changes in branched actin filament nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 113 , E3834 - 3843 ( 2016 ) . 13 . S . Espinoza - Sanchez , L . A . Metskas , S . Z . Chou , E . Rhoades , T . D . Pollard , Conformational changes in Arp2 / 3 complex induced by ATP , WASp - VCA , and actin filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 115 , E8642 – E8651 ( 2018 ) . 14 . R . D . Mullins , J . A . Heuser , T . D . Pollard , The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) . 15 . C . Le Clainche , D . Didry , M . F . Carlier , D . Pantaloni , Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein is linked to enhanced binding of ATP to Arp2 . J Biol Chem . 276 , 46689 – 46692 ( 2001 ) . 16 . M . J . Dayel , E . A . Holleran , R . D . Mullins , Arp2 / 3 complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 98 , 14871 – 14876 ( 2001 ) . 17 . C . Le Clainche , D . Pantaloni , M . - F . Carlier , ATP hydrolysis on actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex causes debranching of dendritic actin arrays . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 100 , 6337 – 6342 ( 2003 ) . 18 . M . J . Dayel , R . D . Mullins , Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex : addition of the first subunit of the new filament by a WASP protein triggers rapid ATP hydrolysis on Arp2 . PLoS Biol . 2 , E91 ( 2004 ) . 19 . A . C . Martin , M . D . Welch , D . G . Drubin , Arp2 / 3 ATP hydrolysis - catalysed branch dissociation is critical for endocytic force generation . Nat Cell Biol . 8 , 826 – 833 ( 2006 ) . 20 . C . Xie , Y . Jiang , Z . Zhu , S . Huang , W . Li , G . Ou , Actin filament debranching regulates cell polarity during cell migration and asymmetric cell division . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 118 , e2100805118 ( 2021 ) . 21 . N . G . Pandit , W . Cao , J . Bibeau , E . M . Johnson - Chavarria , E . W . Taylor , T . D . Pollard , E . M . De La Cruz , Force and phosphate release from Arp2 / 3 complex promote dissociation of actin filament branches . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 117 , 13519 – 13528 ( 2020 ) . 22 . M . Gandhi , B . A . Smith , M . Bovellan , V . Paavilainen , K . Daugherty - Clarke , J . Gelles , P . Lappalainen , B . L . Goode , GMF is a cofilin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate filament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol . 20 , 861 – 867 ( 2010 ) . 23 . Q . Luan , B . J . Nolen , Structural basis for regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex by GMF . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 20 , 1062 – 1068 ( 2013 ) . 24 . J . V . G . Abella , C . Galloni , J . Pernier , D . J . Barry , S . Kjær , M . - F . Carlier , M . Way , Isoform diversity in the Arp2 / 3 complex determines actin filament dynamics . Nat Cell Biol . 18 , 76 – 86 ( 2016 ) . 25 . L . Cao , F . Ghasemi , M . Way , A . Jégou , G . Romet - Lemonne , Regulation of branched versus linear Arp2 / 3 - generated actin filaments . EMBO J . 42 , e113008 ( 2023 ) . 26 . C . Galloni , D . Carra , J . V . G . Abella , S . Kjær , P . Singaravelu , D . J . Barry , N . Kogata , C . Guérin , L . Blanchoin , M . Way , MICAL2 enhances branched actin network disassembly by oxidizing Arp3B - containing Arp2 / 3 complexes . J Cell Biol . 220 , e202102043 ( 2021 ) . 27 . F . Fäßler , G . Dimchev , V . - V . Hodirnau , W . Wan , F . K . M . Schur , Cryo - electron tomography structure of Arp2 / 3 complex in cells reveals new insights into the branch junction . Nat Commun . 11 , 6437 ( 2020 ) . 21 28 . B . Ding , H . Y . Narvaez - Ortiz , Y . Singh , G . M . Hocky , S . Chowdhury , B . J . Nolen , Structure of Arp2 / 3 complex at a branched actin filament junction resolved by single - particle cryo - electron microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 119 , e2202723119 ( 2022 ) . 29 . S . Z . Chou , M . Chatterjee , T . D . Pollard , Mechanism of actin filament branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex revealed by a high - resolution cryo - EM structureof the branch junction . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 119 , e2206722119 ( 2022 ) . 30 . A . Jégou , T . Niedermayer , J . Orbán , D . Didry , R . Lipowsky , M . - F . Carlier , G . Romet - Lemonne , Individual actin filaments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001161 ( 2011 ) . 31 . A . Jégou , M . - F . Carlier , G . Romet - Lemonne , Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin filaments . Nat Commun . 4 , 1883 ( 2013 ) . 32 . H . Wioland , A . Jegou , G . Romet - Lemonne , Torsional stress generated by ADF / cofilin on cross - linked actin filaments boosts their severing . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 116 , 2595 – 2602 ( 2019 ) . 33 . H . Wioland , B . Guichard , Y . Senju , S . Myram , P . Lappalainen , A . Jégou , G . Romet - Lemonne , ADF / Cofilin Accelerates Actin Dynamics by Severing Filaments and Promoting Their Depolymerization at Both Ends . Curr Biol . 27 , 1956 - 1967 . e7 ( 2017 ) . 34 . J . Funk , F . Merino , L . Venkova , L . Heydenreich , J . Kierfeld , P . Vargas , S . Raunser , M . Piel , P . Bieling , Profilin and formin constitute a pacemaker system for robust actin filament growth . Elife . 8 , e50963 ( 2019 ) . 35 . P . J . Carman , K . R . Barrie , G . Rebowski , R . Dominguez , Structures of the free and capped ends of the actin filament . Science . 380 , 1287 – 1292 ( 2023 ) . 36 . A . R . Wagner , Q . Luan , S . - L . Liu , B . J . Nolen , Dip1 defines a class of Arp2 / 3 complex activators that function without preformed actin filaments . Curr Biol . 23 , 1990 – 1998 ( 2013 ) . 37 . C . J . Balzer , A . R . Wagner , L . A . Helgeson , B . J . Nolen , Single - Turnover Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex by Dip1 May Balance Nucleation of Linear versus Branched Actin Filaments . Curr Biol . 29 , 3331 - 3338 . e7 ( 2019 ) . 38 . O . S . Sokolova , A . Chemeris , S . Guo , S . L . Alioto , M . Gandhi , S . Padrick , E . Pechnikova , V . David , A . Gautreau , B . L . Goode , Structural Basis of Arp2 / 3 Complex Inhibition by GMF , Coronin , and Arpin . J Mol Biol . 429 , 237 – 248 ( 2017 ) . 39 . F . M . Gribble , G . Loussouarn , S . J . Tucker , C . Zhao , C . G . Nichols , F . M . Ashcroft , Novel method for measurement of submembrane ATP concentration . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 30046 – 30049 ( 2000 ) . 40 . T . Vignaud , C . Copos , C . Leterrier , M . Toro - Nahuelpan , Q . Tseng , J . Mahamid , L . Blanchoin , A . Mogilner , M . Théry , L . Kurzawa , Stress fibres are embedded in a contractile cortical network . Nat Mater . 20 , 410 – 420 ( 2021 ) . 41 . J . I . Lehtimäki , E . K . Rajakylä , S . Tojkander , P . Lappalainen , Generation of stress fibers through myosin - driven reorganization of the actin cortex . Elife . 10 , e60710 ( 2021 ) . 42 . N . Watanabe , T . J . Mitchison , Single - molecule speckle analysis of actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . Science . 295 , 1083 – 1086 ( 2002 ) . 43 . A . Ponti , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , G . Danuser , Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science . 305 , 1782 – 1786 ( 2004 ) . 44 . A . Lewalle , M . Fritzsche , K . Wilson , R . Thorogate , T . Duke , G . Charras , A phenomenological density - scaling approach to lamellipodial actin dynamics ( † ) . Interface Focus . 4 , 20140006 ( 2014 ) . 22 45 . J . A . Spudich , S . Watt , The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J Biol Chem . 246 , 4866 – 4871 ( 1971 ) . 46 . T . Hatano , L . Sivashanmugam , A . Suchenko , H . Hussain , M . K . Balasubramanian , Pick - ya actin - a method to purify actin isoforms with bespoke key post - translational modifications . J Cell Sci . 133 , jcs241406 ( 2020 ) . 47 . C . Le Clainche , M . - F . Carlier , Curr Protoc Cell Biol , in press , doi : 10 . 1002 / 0471143030 . cb1207s24 . 48 . L . Cao , M . Kerleau , E . L . Suzuki , H . Wioland , S . Jouet , B . Guichard , M . Lenz , G . Romet - Lemonne , A . Jegou , Modulation of formin processivity by profilin and mechanical tension . Elife . 7 , e34176 ( 2018 ) . 49 . G . Romet - Lemonne , B . Guichard , A . Jégou , Using Microfluidics Single Filament Assay to Study Formin Control of Actin Assembly . Methods Mol Biol . 1805 , 75 – 92 ( 2018 ) . 50 . J . Schindelin , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , J . - Y . Tinevez , D . J . White , V . Hartenstein , K . Eliceiri , P . Tomancak , A . Cardona , Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods . 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 51 . H . Wioland , F . Ghasemi , J . Chikireddy , G . Romet - Lemonne , A . Jégou , Using Microfluidics and Fluorescence Microscopy to Study the Assembly Dynamics of Single Actin Filaments and Bundles . J Vis Exp ( 2022 ) , doi : 10 . 3791 / 63891 . Acknowledgments : We thank Alphée Michelot for the gift of Arp2 / 3 purified from budding yeast , Pekka Lappalainen for the gift of GMF plasmid , and Mohan Balasubramanian for the gift of the P . pastoris strain . We thank Tamara Advedissian , Arnaud Echard , Cécile Leduc and Hugo Wioland for reading an earlier version of this manuscript and making useful suggestions . Funding : European Union’s Horizon 2020 Marie Sklodowka - Curie individual fellowship program H2020 - MSCA - IF - 101028239 - MolecularArp ( LC ) . Cancer Research UK CC2096 core funding to the Francis Crick Institute ( MM , MW ) UK Medical Research Council CC2096 core funding to the Francis Crick Institute ( MM , MW ) Wellcome Trust CC2096 core funding to the Francis Crick Institute ( MM , MW ) European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme , grant agreement No 810207 ( MW ) European Research Council ( ERC ) grant StG - 679116 ( AJ ) Agence Nationale de la Recherche grant RedoxActin ( GRL ) Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale grant EQU202203014630 ( GRL ) Author contributions : Conceptualization : AJ , GRL Resources : LC , MM , BG 23 Methodology : FG , LC , MW , AJ , GRL Formal analysis : FG , AJ , GRL Investigation : FG Visualization : FG , AJ , GRL Funding acquisition : LC , MW , AJ , GRL Project administration : AJ , GRL Supervision : AJ , GRL Writing – original draft : AJ , GRL Writing – review & editing : FG , LC , MW , AJ , GRL Competing interests : Authors declare that they have no competing interests . Supplementary Materials Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S6 References 45 - 51