Physics - Informed Deep Learning Characterizes Morphodynamics of Asian Soybean Rust Disease August 2021 Henry Cavanagh 1 , Andreas Mosbach 2 , Gabriel Scalliet 2 , Rob Lind 3 , Robert G . Endres 1 * * Corresponding author : r . endres @ imperial . ac . uk 1 Imperial College London , Centre for Integrative Systems Biology and Bioinformatics , London , UK , SW7 2BU ; 2 Syngenta Crop Protection AG , Schaﬀhauserstrasse 101 , 4332 Stein , Switzerland ; 3 Syngenta Interna - tional Research Centre , Jealott’s Hill , Berkshire , UK , RG42 6EY a r X i v : 2 110 . 07345v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 14 O c t 2021 Abstract Medicines and agricultural biocides are often discovered using large phenotypic screens across hun - dreds of compounds , where visible eﬀects of whole organisms are compared to gauge eﬃcacy and possible modes of action . However , such analysis is often limited to human - deﬁned and static features . Here , we introduce a novel framework that can characterize shape changes ( morphodynamics ) for cell - drug inter - actions directly from images , and use it to interpret perturbed development of Phakopsora pachyrhizi , the Asian soybean rust crop pathogen . We describe population development over a 2D space of shapes ( mor - phospace ) using two models with condition - dependent parameters : a top - down Fokker - Planck model of diﬀusive development over Waddington - type landscapes , and a bottom - up model of tip growth . We dis - cover a variety of landscapes , describing phenotype transitions during growth , and identify possible per - turbations in the tip growth machinery that cause this variation . This demonstrates a widely - applicable integration of unsupervised learning and biophysical modeling . Introduction Quantiﬁcations of cell shape changes ( morphodynamics ) can reveal key developmental transitions and be - havioural strategies , as well as modes of action of drugs by comparison with known drug - phenotype mappings [ 1 , 2 ] . While recent progress in automated image analysis has popularized static descriptors beyond mean growth rates and metabolic ﬂuxes [ 3 ] , the incorporation of dynamics can provide more complete system descriptions [ 4 ] , and may also aid the development and validation of mechanistic models [ 5 ] . Here , we de - veloped such a framework and used it to interpret how fungicides aﬀect the morphodynamics of Phakopsora pachyhizi , the pathogen that causes rust disease in the soybean crop worldwide . Spores land on soybean leaves , grow germ tubes , penetrate the plant using appressoria , and subsequently form haustoria that extract nutrients [ 6 ] , as sketched in Fig . 1a . This little - understood pathogen can cause economically devastating yield losses of up to 80 % [ 7 ] and is fast resistance - evolving [ 8 ] . Current methods for quantifying organism morphodynamics typically rely on a low - dimensional space of interpretable features [ 9 ] . Though existing methods have uncovered remarkable behavioural patterns , revealing chemotactic strategies , temporal processing and social cooperation in a range of organisms [ 10 – 13 ] , typical shortcomings are as follows : ﬁrst , they are often based on particular shape descriptors ( e . g . 1D centerlines ) , restricting analysis to a narrow range of morphologies , often requiring sophisticated feature extraction algorithms . Second , they focus on stereotyped behaviours , which may not be characteristic of early development . Finally , states are often discretized and transition probabilities extracted , which obscures the continuous nature of morphodynamics . Alternatively , statistical analysis can be based on thousands of behavioral features to cluster and classify compounds and compare the results with known modes of action , but results can be diﬃcult to interpret [ 2 ] . In contrast to statistical correlates , interpretable continuous and stochastic models can be considered , but are not yet associated with morphodynamics . For instance , in Waddington’s epigenetic landscape , cells begin at the top as pluripotent , and subsequently develop into a number of diﬀerentiated states , represented as lower - level valleys [ 14 ] . Despite many applications [ 15 – 19 ] , to our knowledge such landscapes have only been uncovered at steady - state . A major method for image analysis , dimensionality reduction , and inference is deep learning [ 20 ] . Feed - forward deep neural networks are comprized of a series of interconnected layers of artiﬁcial neurons , which transform inputs through a series of non - linear operations [ 21 ] . Network parameters are updated through stochastic gradient descent and its variants in order to minimize a human - deﬁned objective ( the loss ) . These networks have been proven capable of approximating any function , given a suﬃcient number of parameters [ 22 ] . To link data analysis and modeling , two types of network are particularly important : ﬁrst , autoencoders , which are capable of capturing low dimensional structure in data through a constrained reconstruction task [ 23 ] . Due to their high ﬂexibility , autoencoders have many advantages over non - parametric t - distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( t - SNE ) and linear principal component analysis ( PCA ) algorithms . Sec - ond , physics - informed neural networks ( PINNs ) . While forward problems can be solved fast with grid - based methods , PINNs can solve inverse ( inference ) problems for a wide range of diﬀerential equations [ 24 , 25 ] . Here , we aimed to extract morphodynamic characterizations for intuitive comparison across compounds . Speciﬁcally , we analyzed P . pachyrhizi , germinating in vitro in a control compound and several fungicides , by ﬁrst using an autoencoder to uncover a single 2D morphospace of salient features from high - throughput images of ﬁxated fungi ( Fig . 1a - b ) . We then ﬁtted two minimal models of dynamics over this morphospace 1 Approximate Bayesian Computation p Physics - informed neural network Condition - dependent Fokker Planck PDE residual Landscapes Parameter posteriors Simulation embeddings Autoencoder Data embeddings Image snapshots at 9 time points Morphospace a U Top - down landscape interpretation Bottom - up biophysical model 𝑈 ( 𝐱 ) b d c Figure 1 : Morphodynamics of the Asian soybean rust pathogen , P . pachyrhizi , are charac - terized through condition - dependent dynamics over a global morphospace . ( a ) P . pachyrhizi burrows into soybean leaves to extract nutrients , as sketched ( top ) . Image sets at 9 time points under 6 conditions ( bottom ) are processed to yield aligned , single - fungus images . ( b ) An autoencoder learns the bio - physical degrees of freedom from the images , discovering a 2D morphospace . ( c ) Dynamics are characterized using two models : a top - down landscape ( U ( x ) ) model , where a physics - informed neural network ﬁts the Fokker - Planck equation to the morphospace embeddings , and a bottom - up persistent random walk model of the growth zone , with parameters ﬁtted using approximate Bayesian computation with a morphospace - derived similarity metric . These yield ( d ) interpretable , condition - dependent characterizations in the form of Waddington - type landscapes and tip growth parameter posteriors . and took their condition - dependent parameters as informative characterizations ( Fig . 1c - d ) . The two models approach the dynamics from opposite directions : the ﬁrst is a top - down model that utilizes a Fokker - Planck description to uncover the global morphodynamic driving forces in the form of Waddington - type landscapes , and the second is a bottom - up persistent random walk model of the growth zone at the tip . We used a PINN to infer the landscapes , and approximate Bayesian computation , in conjunction with a morphospace - derived similarity metric , to infer the parameter posteriors of the tip growth model . The uncovered landscapes show that morphodynamics are diﬀusion - dominated until the germ tube begins to bend , at which point deterministic forces begin to drive trajectories apart . Fungicide - induced deformations include barriers , plateaus and canalized pathways , which may arise from diﬀering stabilities of the growth zone . To avoid ‘black - box’ methods , we analyzed our PINN to interpret the convergence . Our work shows how intuitive system characterizations can be acquired directly from images , by integrating unsupervised learning and biophysical modeling . Results A Global Morphospace Reveals Perturbed Morphodynamics Manual categorization of phenotypes is time consuming and limited to discrete human - deﬁned features ( Fig . 2a ) . In contrast , manifold - based dimensionality reduction can provide a continuous low - dimensional space where dynamics are as simple as possible [ 26 ] . This is because an imaged dynamic system with n degrees of freedom traces out an n - dimensional manifold within the higher dimensional pixel space , irrespective of the image dimensionality . To learn such a morphospace for P . pachyrhizi growth , we carried out a high - throughput imaging assay of distinct populations at 9 equally - spaced time points , between 90 and 210 minutes after mixing with diﬀerent compounds ( code names used henceforth given in brackets ) : a dimethylsulphoxide control ( DMSO ) , methyl benzimidazol - 2 - ylcarbamate at 1 . 1 mgL - 1 ( carbendazim , Compound A ) , PIK - 75 hydrochloride at 3 . 3 mgL - 1 ( Compound B ) , benzovindiﬂupyr ( Compound C ) at 0 . 041 mgL - 1 and 10 mgL - 1 , and Compound X ( a Syngenta research compound related to triﬂuoromethyloxadiazoles [ 27 ] , see Supplementary Fig . 7 for the chemical structure ) at 1 . 1 mgL - 1 . These compounds were identiﬁed at pre - screening to show a range of phenotypes . We henceforth refer to each combination of compound and concentration as a condition . We 2 a 210 min embeddings Spores – Lower dimensional manifolds Early curve Lengthening Different final shape Spores 10 Late curve Straight Many curves Branched 10 - 10 - 10 - 10 10 - 10 DMSOCompound A Compound B Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound C ( 10mgL - 1 ) Compound X c b Figure 2 : Global morphospace learned by a convolutional autoencoder . ( a ) Human categorization of P . pachyrhizi phenotypes is time consuming and introduces human biases and unnatural discretization . ( b ) A convolutional autoencoder addresses these shortcomings by learning the manifold associated with each condition , sketched inset . Morphospace features are shown by propagating morphospace coordinates on a grid through the decoder . ( c ) 210 min embeddings for all conditions show that fungicides can induce per - turbed dynamics over the morphospace , which therefore represents for an expressive space for diﬀerentiating morphodynamics upon . extracted single - fungus images from the snapshot data sets , aligned such that the initial growth directions coincided , using automated processing , which yielded approximately 600 , 000 images in total ( with mean and standard deviation across snapshots of approximately 11 , 000 and 3 , 000 respectively ) . In order to validate the inferred Fokker - Planck model parameters and to motivate the tip growth model , we also gathered a small number of time - lapse videos of individual fungi for each compound ( 3 - 8 , see Supplementary Movies 1 - 5 ) , and aligned these manually . High - throughput analysis is not carried out with time - lapse videos in industry due to technical limitations . See Methods and Supplementary Note 1 for details on the compounds , imaging and 3 image processing , and Supplementary Fig . 4a for an example time - lapse sequence . The morphodynamics are perturbed diﬀerently in diﬀerent conditions , and so the manifold traced out by a P . pachyrhizi population is condition - dependent ( as sketched in the inset of Fig . 2b ) . To pull the condition - dependent manifolds together into a global morphospace , we trained a convolutional autoencoder ( CAE ) [ 28 ] , an architecture specialized for images , with a 2D code space on images from all conditions and times ( see Supplementary Note 1 for details on the architecture and training ) . To ensure the CAE used the morphodynamic manifolds to solve this reconstruction task , we selected the network complexity and training time that provided the simplest trajectories for embeddings associated with a small number of single - fungus videos . Figure 2b shows the distribution of features over the morphospace , found by propagating morphospace coordinates on a grid through the decoder . Distance from the spore embedding loosely captures lengthening , and angle captures variation in ﬁnal shape . Figure 2c shows the 210 min embeddings for all conditions , revealing how fungicides can perturb dynamics over the morphospace . Some introduce novel features , e . g . the branching by Compound B , whereas others change the distribution over wild - type features , e . g . the increased prevalance of straightening induced by Compound X . In order to move from coarse - grained qual - itative insights to quantitative characterizations , we next ﬁtted two simple models of dynamics over the morphospace . Emergent Landscapes Show the Morphodynamic Driving Forces Condition - dependent Waddington - type landscapes are intuitive morphodynamic characterizations that can be inferred from the snapshot embeddings evolving over the morphospace . We model each condition as inducing a time - independent ﬁeld of driving forces , F ( x ; c , λ ) , that depends on the compound concentration , c , and any pharmacophores , captured in a parameter vector , λ . In the absence of any curl , as we assume for early development , the force ﬁeld can be associated with the gradient of a quasi - potential , U , via F = −∇ U , which we take as the developmental landscape . For cases where the underlying force ﬁeld does have curl , landscapes can still be uncovered by splitting the force into curl - free and curl - containing components , yielding a ‘potential and ﬂux’ description [ 15 ] . To enable the inference of landscapes , we connected the evolving snapshot embeddings to the driving forces through a Fokker - Planck model . These embeddings were transformed into probability density func - tions ( PDFs ) on a grid using kernel density estimation ( KDE , Fig . 3a ) [ 29 ] . The Fokker - Planck partial diﬀerential equation ( PDE ) is used to separate out a system’s driving forces and stochastic processes , and model statistical ensembles of Brownian particles . Each particle moves over the landscape according to the following stochastic diﬀerential equation : dx = −∇ U ( x ) dt + σ ( x , t ) dW , ( 1 ) where x and t are the position in 2D space and time , σ ( x , t ) is a noise matrix and dW is the Wiener process . σ ( x , t ) has diagonal entries p 2 D ( x , t ) and zeros elsewhere , with D being the diﬀusivity . The Fokker - Planck equation for the evolution of the PDF of the particle positions , p ( x , t ) , is then ∂p ( x , t ) ∂t = 2 X i = 1 ∂ ∂x i (cid:20) ∂U ( x ) ∂x i p ( x , t ) + ∂ ∂x i [ D ( x , t ) p ( x , t ) ] (cid:21) . ( 2 ) To learn the Fokker - Planck landscapes ( and diﬀusivities ) given the PDF data , i . e . solve the inverse problem , we used a physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) [ 24 ] . These learn PDE solutions by optimally matching PDF data , minimising the magnitude of the PDE residual , and satisfying any further constraints , e . g . boundary conditions . PINNs have several favorable properties over alternative methods for solving the inverse problem [ 25 ] . First , in going from the forward to the inverse problem , the only change required is the addition of extra learnable parameters ; second , they can infer the governing equation with only sparse data , since they solve the inference of the full PDF and governing equation as a joint task [ 30 ] ; third , they learn a continuous fully - diﬀerentiable solution , which means other variables of interest can be calculated directly from the learned variables , without numerical approximation ( useful when transitioning between potential and force , for example ) ; fourth , they learn progressively more complex functions as training progresses . As we show , this is a useful property when combined with early stopping if the required function complexity is 4 90 min 210 min ln 𝐅 m . u . min - 1 𝑥 ! 𝑝 ( 𝐱 , 𝑡 ) 𝑡 𝑥 " & 𝑝 ( 𝐱 , 𝑡 ) residual , 𝑈 ( 𝐱 ) 𝐿 # $ % 𝐿 # $ & , 𝐿 ’ ( , 𝐿 ) * + , Fokker Planck PDE residual 𝒩 & 𝑝 , , 𝑈 , , 𝐷 𝐿 - * - . / , 𝐷 ( 𝐱 , 𝑡 ) 𝑥 ! 𝑥 " 𝑡 𝑥 ! 𝑥 " 𝑡 𝑥 ! 𝑥 " < −5 a b c d > −2 6 , 000 Mini - batch 500 12 , 000 17 , 000 Waddington’s landscape Steep Shallow DMSO Compound A Compound B Compound X Figure 3 : Morphodynamic landscapes learned by the PINN . ( a ) Morphospace embeddings are trans - formed into probability density functions ( PDFs ) , p ( x , t ) , using kernel density estimation ( KDE ) , yielding nine snapshots per condition . ( b ) A physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) learns the landscapes by ﬁtting the Fokker - Planck equation to the PDFs . For each condition , the architecture comprizes a neural network to learn each of the PDF , ˆ p ( x , t ) , diﬀusivity , ˆ D ( x , t ) , and landscape , ˆ U ( x ) . The outputs of these are put through a series of diﬀerential operators that outputs the Fokker - Planck residual , N , and the architecture is trained to match the data ( L PDF ) , minimize the magnitude of the residual ( L PDE ) , satisfy the boundary conditions ( L BC ) and learn a normalized PDF ( L norm ) . ( c ) The architecture is trained over a series of mini - batches , with lower frequency solutions explored ﬁrst . ( d ) Landscapes with simulated particles , from 90 mins ( pink ) to 210 mins ( blue ) after mixing with compounds , are shown , colored by the gradient magnitude , k F k ( in terms of morphospace units , m . u . ) . These are analogous to Waddington’s epigenetic landscape , as sketched in the inset . The black outlines show the contour where the PDF learned by the PINN is 10 − 3 for DMSO and each condition . The inner region therefore highlights areas with high data density , with the remaining areas shown to facilitate connection with the morphospace and outer tendencies . Contour lines are plotted along equal landscape values , with spacings of 0 . 11 , 0 . 08 , 0 . 07 and 0 . 09 m . u . 2 min - 1 for the landscapes from left to right . Morphodynamics are diﬀusion - dominated until the germ tube begins to bend , at which point deterministic forces begin to drive trajectories apart . Fungicide - induced deformations including barriers , plateaus and canalized pathways . This susceptibility to deformation , combined with the generality of the model , make the Fokker - Planck model well - suited for system characterization . not known a priori . Finally , they scale more favorably with system dimensionality than grid - based methods , which can often perform well only for low - dimensional problems . This ﬁnal property will prove especially useful when extending this work to higher - dimensional morphospaces . We used one network to learn each of the PDF , diﬀusivity and potential ( Fig . 3b ) . The outputs of these ( ˆ p ( x , t ) , ˆ D ( x , t ) and ˆ U ( x ) respectively ) are put through a series of diﬀerential operators ( N ) that outputs the Fokker - Planck residual , N ( ˆ p , ˆ U , ˆ D ) = − ∂ ˆ p ∂t + 2 X i = 1 ∂ ∂x i " ∂ ˆ U ∂x i ˆ p + ∂ ∂x i ( ˆ D ˆ p ) # , ( 3 ) which is incorporated into the loss so that the solution obeys the PDE . The total loss to be minimized ( L total ) is the sum of four terms ( shown in full in Methods ) . The ﬁrst three are calculated over randomized mini - batches . They are the mean squared error between the data and learned PDF ( L PDF ) , the mean squared PDF at the boundary ( L BC ) , and the mean squared PDE residual ( L PDE ) . The ﬁnal term ensures the PDF is normalized , and is the squared diﬀerence between unity and a numerical integration over the full grid at a randomly - selected time point ( L norm ) . The relative importance 5 of these terms is determined by hyperparameters a , b , c and d , L total = aL PDF + bL BC + cL PDE + dL norm , ( 4 ) and lower frequency functions are explored ﬁrst ( Fig . 3c , [ 31 ] ) , in alignment with Occam’s razor . An ablation analysis also conﬁrms that both space and time - dependent diﬀusion are required for the best model ﬁt ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) . Letting the PINN train to convergence would result in overﬁtting . This is the phenomenon where a neural network’s function pushes beyond the problem - dependent desired complexity ; for example , in image classiﬁcation the network begins to learn spurious patterns and to generalize poorly to new data . In the context of inference from independent snapshots , overﬁtting corresponds to ﬁtting to diﬀerences between individual snapshots that arise from variability between P . pachyrhizi batches . While having independent snapshots is beneﬁcial in that it shows a wider range of dynamics , this can result in features like a non monotonically - decreasing fraction of spores , which should not be captured in the model . The PINN learns trends common to all snapshots ﬁrst , and we stop training before overﬁtting begins , identiﬁed by monitoring the spore region ( as shown in Supplementary Fig . 1b - c for three training repeats ) . This regularization technique is known as early stopping . We note that the loss exponentially decays after an initial period of fast improvement . Hence , reasonable results can be achieved using much earlier stopping points than used here , if computational time is limited . Further details on the PINN architecture , hyperparameters and optimization can be found in Methods and Supplementary Note 2 . Figure 3d shows the landscapes learned by the PINN , as well as a sample of forward simulations of Eq . 1 ( see Methods for details on the forward simulations ) , and the correspondence between the landscapes and morphospace is shown in Supplementary Fig . 2 . The overﬁtting point described above approximately corre - sponds to 30 , 30 , 30 , 20 , 25 and 25 hours of training for DMSO and Compounds A , B , C ( 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ) , C ( 10 mgL - 1 ) and X , respectively . Diﬀusion over the landscapes has two sources : morphodynamic diﬀusion , i . e . the fundamental unpredictability of morphology change from one time step to the next on the 2D morphological data manifold ; and embedding noise , which arises because variations in image resolution , segmentation and alignment induce perturbations away from the manifold , and the complexity of the autoencoder’s embedding function means these perturbations are not always just mapped to the closest point on the 2D manifold . Since the same image pre - processing algorithms were used on all conditions , diﬀerences in the Fokker - Planck diﬀusion over the same region of morphospace will be morphodynamic in nature , rather than arising from the embedding noise . The condition - dependent landscapes are highly interpretable ( Fig . 3d ) . DMSO development begins in a metastable region of spores where diﬀusion dominates , with a threshold energy required for germination , and annealing diﬀusivity capturing a subpopulation of spores that never cross this threshold ( Supplementary Fig . 2a ) . This may be similar to germination mechanics in ﬁssion yeast , where a polar cap stochastically wanders as the spore grows and ultimately breaks out once a critical strain is passed [ 32 ] . Morphodynamics are diﬀusion - dominated until the germ tube begins to bend , at which point deterministic forces begin to drive trajectories apart . Compound A introduces a plateau in the region where tip bending begins , revealing growth stunting , and also opens up new features with numerous bends . Extreme cases of heteregeneous growth , for example the diﬀerence between fungi with dramatically slowed growth and others with completely unhindered growth , are captured by the Fokker - Planck model through plateaus followed by abnormally high gradients , shown dark red . Compound B opens up a new branching feature region immediately following germination . Some fungi do develop normally , but without signiﬁcant bending , and with reduced growth rates . Compound X canalizes trajectories through only a subset of the features expressed in DMSO , namely straightening , with fungi closely following the landscape , before stunting occurs at a common location for most . Supplementary Fig . 1 - 2 show that Compound C at 0 . 041 mgL - 1 inhibits growth slightly , primarily through reduced diﬀusion rather than reduced landscape gradients , and increasing the concentration to 10 mgL - 1 drastically increases the stability of the spore region . The data PDFs compare well with PDFs generated by a kernel density estimate ( KDE ) of simulated tra - jectories for all conditions , validating the solution accuracy ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Images from the videos can also be embedded in the morphospace , and the mean squared displacements of the video trajectories with those of the simulations show good agreement ( Supplementary Fig . 4b - c ) . Furthermore , the entropy of the simulations always increases ( Supplementary Fig . 4d ) . To get a measure of the uncertainty in the inferred landscapes and diﬀusivities , we trained the PINN three times for each compound , which exposed 6 the algorithm to diﬀerent data mini - batches . For each condition , the total losses decreased at similar rates ( meaning the solutions are equally good at each training time ) , with overﬁtting occurring at approximately the same point . We therefore quantiﬁed uncertainty through the standard deviation of the ﬁelds across repeats at the early stopping times described above ( Supplementary Fig . 1b - f ) . The landscapes therefore provide intuitive comparisons of morphodynamics across conditions . Landscape Deformations are Caused by Perturbations in the Tip Growth Ma - chinery 210 min θ global 90 min 150 min 210 min DMSO Compound A Compound X Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) DMSO Compound A Compound X Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) datasimulation 10 - 10 - 10 10 θ tip Growth zone 𝜅 a b c d e L DMSO DMSO Figure 4 : A persistent random walk model of the growth zone is ﬁtted to image data . ( a ) Tip growth is described with variables for length , L , linearly increasing in time , and path curvature , κ , which undergoes a persistent random walk , with relaxation to straight growth ( i . e . a central growth zone ) . Dynamics of κ may be the result of a diﬀusing growth zone , shown with angular location θ tip , which causes a changing direction of growth , described by θ global in the lab frame . ( b ) All parameters were ﬁtted using approximate Bayesian computation with sequential Monte Carlo ( ABC - SMC ) . Lengthening parameters were ﬁtted using length ( L ) histograms at 9 equally - spaced time points ( 3 of the 9 DMSO snapshots are shown here , with data in grey and simulations in black ) , between 90 and 210 min after mixing with solution . ( c ) Bending parameters were ﬁtted by comparing morphospace embeddings of the 210 min snapshot data with those of images simulated with MAP lengthening parameters , as shown here for DMSO . ( d ) MAP germination time cumulative density functions ( CDFs ) and growth rate probability density functions ( PDFs ) show typical perturbations include premature germination , reduced germination frequency , and reduced maximum and mean growth rates . ( e ) Bending parameter posteriors ( for stochasticity , σ , and relaxation to straight growth , τ − 1 ) show ﬁnal morphologies depend primarily on the ratio of the two bending parameters , and fungicides can both increase and decrease this ratio . Accepted parameters of the ﬁnal ABC - SMC population are plotted in white , with MAP values in red . Source data are provided for ( d - e ) . The morphospace can also be used for data - driven development of a minimal mechanistic model to reveal potential causes of the landscape deformations discovered above . Having a single model with condition - dependent parameters provides further cell - mechanical characterization . We developed such a model for tip growth under all but Compound B and Compound C at 10 mgL - 1 ( we excluded these because Compound B induces branching , which cannot be captured under the proposed model , and Compound C at 10 mgL - 1 does not permit a signiﬁcant germ tube to develop ) . The morphospace reveals ﬁnal shape and associated lengthening to be the primary degrees of freedom across the populations , motivating equations for length , 7 L , and tip bending . From the videos , we observed three core features of lengthening ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) : that germination time is variable , that length increases approximately linearly with time , and that this growth rate is variable . We therefore modeled germination time , t g , and subsequent linear growth rate , α , as lognormally - distributed , with growth rate distributed according to a reversed lognormal distribution truncated at zero . The lognormal distribution is widely used to model skewed phenomena across biology , including heterogeneous sensitivity to fungicides [ 33 ] . We compared three models for tip bending : a simple random walk in growth direction , θ global ( Fig . 4a ) ; a random walk in the curvature of the growth path , κ ; and a persistent random walk in κ with parameters for stochasticity , σ , and relaxation to straight growth , τ − 1 ( see Methods for the mathematical expression of each model ) . Dynamics in κ are a simple way to capture the eﬀects of a diﬀusing growth zone , as has been described in ﬁssion yeast , where it is directed by landmark proteins concentrated at microtubule end points [ 34 ] . This connection can be made slightly more explicit by the introduction of an angular growth zone position , θ tip , and a mapping κ = f ( θ tip ) . While f is unknown , this function is likely monotonically increasing , and passing through the origin ( i . e . a central growth zone corresponds to straight growth ) . Supplementary Fig . 5b shows θ global variation in time for the three models , for some intuition on the dynamics . For both parameter inference and model selection , we used approximate Bayesian computation with se - quential Monte Carlo ( ABC - SMC , details on the SMC are in Methods ) [ 35 ] . In ABC , parameters are selected from a prior distribution and simulations are run . If the simulations are within some threshold of similarity with the data , then the parameters are stored . The density over the stored parameters forms the posterior distribution . For model selection , model index is introduced as an additional parameter and the posterior distribution is found over the joint space of model index and parameters , with the marginal distribution over model index giving the model probabilities . This biases towards low - dimensional parameter spaces , favoring the most parsimonious models . For the parameters involved in lengthening , we used histograms of fungus lengths at each snapshot ( see Fig . 4b for three of the nine DMSO snapshots ) . For the bending parameters , we then simulated fungus images using maximum a posteriori probability ( MAP ) lengthening parameters , and compared histograms of their morphospace embeddings with those of the 210 min snapshot data ( Fig . 4c for DMSO ) . Further details can be found in Methods . Compound A data was used for model selection , as it covered the full spectrum of features . Only Model 3 could reproduce the data with high accuracy ( in particular the multiple bends , where relaxation to central growth is required to reproduce the alternating bending direction ) . This match is shown by the probabilities of the three models and MAP simulations ( Supplementary Fig . 5c - d ) . The equations governing dynamics after germination are therefore for t > t g ( dL = αdt dκ = − τ − 1 κdt + σdW , ( 5 ) where dW is the Wiener process , and for t ≤ t g we have L = κ = 0 . Figure 4d shows the cumulative density functions ( CDFs ) of germination time and PDFs of growth rate associated with MAP parameters for each condition . Germination time is strongly skewed , with fungicides inducing premature germination and reducing subsequent germination frequency . Growth rates are less skewed , and both the maximum and mean growth rates are reduced by all fungicides . The bending posterior distributions ( Fig . 4e ) have linear shape , showing that for all conditions , the morphology depends primarily on the ratio of τ − 1 to σ . Compounds A and X induce decreased and increased ratios of relaxation to stochasticity , respectively . Comparisons of MAP simulations with data for all conditions are shown in full in Supplementary Fig . 6 . Discussion Phenotypic screens are often used to identify drug eﬃcacy and mode of action by comparing visible fea - tures like morphology . However , such screens are often limited to human - deﬁned and static features , and any incorporation of dynamics typically focuses on stereotyped behaviors . Here , we characterized morpho - dynamics of the Asian soybean rust crop pathogen , P . pachyrhizi , germinating in vitro in the presence of diﬀerent fungicides , directly from image sets . We found that morphodynamics are diﬀusion - dominated until the tip begins to bend , at which point deterministic forces begin to drive trajectories apart . Fungicide - induced landscape deformations include barriers , plateaus and canalized pathways . These features may arise 8 from physical perturbations including premature but lower - frequency germination , reduced growth rates , and both increased and reduced stabilities of the growth zone . The global morphospace therefore allowed us to extract meaningful morphodynamic parameters directly from images , revealing perturbed driving forces in the Fokker - Planck model , and providing a similarity metric for the tip growth model . For both models , the non - linear embedding aﬀords crucial interpretability through visualization . Moreover , the two models give complementary views of the dynamics . Taking Compound X as an example , the landscape model reveals low diﬀusion following germination when compared with DMSO . Hence , once germinated with Compound X , fungi grow at very similar rates , with little bending , tightly following the underlying landscape . The tip growth model similarly shows a narrowed distribution of growth rates and reduced bending , and these observations are conﬁrmed when reviewing the time - lapse videos after the analysis . Despite many beneﬁts , the analysis in its current form has limitations . For systems with higher - dimensional dynamics , a 2D morphospace may be unsuitable . For instance , we omitted a compound that induced blistering along the germ tube , which expanded the compound’s morphospace beyond two dimen - sions . For such cases , the bottom - up mechanistic model parameter ﬁtting can be done in higher dimensions , but at the cost of increased computation time and reduced interpretability . For the Fokker - Planck model , higher - dimensional systems may still be characterized in terms of networks of attractors [ 18 ] , and the marginal dynamics of pairs of morphological degrees of freedom could still be visualized in 2D . Such characterizing of dynamics over non - linear representations may be most powerful when diﬀerent conditions cover similar features , such that diﬀerences have a physical , rather than algorithmic , origin . As well as being able to char - acterize dynamics across multiple conditions , these simple models are useful for systems without a priori established dynamics . Do the landscapes correspond to any physical quantities beyond representing a distilled statistical rep - resentation ? The potentials represent the deterministic part of the motion , e . g . extension of the germ tube from turgor pressure and vesicle delivery ( the potentials largely drive in the direction of increasing length ) . Furthermore , diﬀusion captures features that vary at single - fungus level , including the precise growth rate , and the direction of bending ( potentially caused by a diﬀusing growth zone or noise [ 34 ] ) . The observed phenotypes are certainly plausible based on putative modes of action of the drugs in terms of inhibiting microtubules , kinases , and gene expression ( see Supplementary Note 4 ) . An interesting area for future work is to extend unsupervised morphodynamic analysis beyond minimal characterizations , to more detailed models . This could be achieved by joint learning of the underlying rep - resentation and equations of motion e . g . by minimizing the prediction error and complexity of the equations of motion . Such approaches have been shown capable of recovering physical laws in Cartesian coordinates from warped video footage [ 36 ] , and it would be interesting to extend this to complex biological systems , where the underlying laws are less clear . Modeling of cell growth in terms of generalized shape coordinates is an area of active research , with one promising model balancing dissipative , mechanical and active forces [ 37 ] . Another interesting area for future work is to better understand the connection between internal me - chanics and morphodynamics . This could be achieved by joint modeling morphology and organelles ( using ﬂourescent markers ) , conditional on various pharmacophores . Interesting organelles and molecular processes may include secretory vesicles for membrane delivery , small GTPases for growth cone labelling , and motor and cytoskeletal proteins for transport and structure [ 38 ] . Interpretable representations for each could be found using non - linear dimensionality reduction , as done here for morphology [ 39 ] . Although often hailed as the future of deep learning , use of unsupervised learning techniques within the natural sciences often stops at low - dimensional data visualizations . We hope the work presented here may stimulate further work leveraging the discovery power of unsupervised methods within interpretable physical models . Methods Algorithms were run in Python , and packages used are detailed in Supplementary Methods . Imaging and Image Processing For the snapshot data , spores were mixed in each of the 6 treatment solutions and imaged in 96 - well plates on the Opera QEHS running Opera Software 2 . 0 ( EvoShell , Opera CHKN / QEHS Red Ver . 2 . 0 . 0 . 12017 Rev . : 9 89046 , PerkinElmer Inc . ) . At 9 equally - spaced times between 90 and 210 min , cell walls were stained with Calcoﬂuor White solution with KOH , which ﬁxated the fungi . Each snapshot was therefore of a diﬀerent batch of spores . The staining procedure enabled the collection of two images for each well and time point , using diﬀerent excitation wavelengths , one showing the spores and another showing the germ tubes . For the time - lapse videos , images were taken at 3 min intervals on the JuLI Stage Real Time Cell History Recorder running JuLI Stage V . 2 . 0 . 1 and JuLI EDIT V . 1 . 0 . 0 . 0 ( NanoEnTek Inc . ) , without staining , meaning only one image was collected for each well and time , showing the full fungi . All imaging was done at 10 × magniﬁcation . Full details on the imaging can be found in Supplementary Information . The snapshots and time - lapse videos were processed diﬀerently , because a ) the snapshots had spores and germ tubes separated which we took advantage of to automate alignment , and b ) the small number of time - lapse videos meant we could manually align these for higher precision . For processing the snapshot images , we used adaptive binarization ( to account for lighting defects ) to get two images for each view : one of germ tube contours , another of spore contours . Adding these together then gave an image with full fungi . Contours with an area above a threshold found by trial and error were removed as obvious overlapping fungi , and the remaining ones were cropped by ﬁnding the minimum bounding rectangle . These regions of interest ( ROIs ) were rotated to align with the pixel grid and padded so all were 200 × 200 pixels , to ﬁt the largest fungi in the set . Incomplete fungi were also removed at the image borders . We then used a supervised convolutional network , trained on a sample of hand - labelled images , to remove contours that contained overlapping fungi . Remaining individual fungi were then translated and rotated so the initial growth directions coincided , and a ﬂip was executed if the right - most point of the fungus was higher than the germination point ( see Supplementary Note 1 ) . Finally , we replaced all spores with identical circles , so as to prioritize modeling of the germ tube ; the resulting morphospace point is then widened into a spore region through the kernel density estimation . For the time - lapse videos , we again binarized the frames ( non - adaptive this time , as there were not signiﬁcant lighting defects ) . We then found series of contours across frames whose centers of mass were closest , and manually looked through these series to ﬁnd those that corresponded to tracking an individual fungus . We then manually aligned these so that the initial growth directions coincided , this time using ImageJ and Gimp . Before being inputted into the autoencoder , snapshot and time - lapse video pixels were asigned to a value in the set { 0 , 1 } . Full details on the image processing can be found in Supplementary Note 1 . Neural Networks For the autoencoder’s encoder , we used four convolutional layers with 16 , 32 , 64 and 16 feature maps , all with 3 × 3 kernels , ReLU activations , batch normalization , and alternating stride sizes of 1 and 2 in PyTorch . The decoder’s structure mirrored the encoder’s , but with transposed convolutions . We used a sigmoid output activation and binary cross entropy loss , over mini - batches of 50 images , and trained for 4 epochs using the Adam optimizer [ 40 ] with a learning rate of 10 − 4 , which took 2 hours with a Quadro RTX 6000 GPU card . Training was stopped at the point at which the trajectories of the single - fungus videos were least complex . For the PINN , the loss function to be minimized comprizes four terms , with the ﬁrst three calculated over random mini - batches of N data points , and the ﬁnal one over the full spatial grid of M data points . The ﬁrst is the mean squared diﬀerence between the learned PDF , ˆ p ( x j , t j ) , and data , p ( x j , t j ) , L PDF = 1 N N X j = 1 [ ˆ p ( x j , t j ) − p ( x j , t j ) ] 2 , ( 6 ) with { x j , t j } in the nine snapshots . The second is the mean squared PDF at the boundary , L BC = 1 N N X j = 1 [ ˆ p ( x j , t j ) ] 2 ( 7 ) with { x j , t j } selected from 10 6 uniformly distributed boundary points , and the third term is the mean 10 squared PDE residual ( N , given in Eq . 3 ) , L PDE = 1 N N X j = 1 [ N ( ˆ p ( x j , t j ) , ˆ D ( x j , t j ) , ˆ U ( x j ) ) ] 2 , ( 8 ) with { x j , t j } selected from 10 6 points uniformly distributed over the whole domain . The ﬁnal term ensures the PDF integrates to one : L norm =   M X j = 1 ∆ x 1 ∆ x 2 ˆ p ( x j , t ) − 1   2 , ( 9 ) with x j covering the full spatial grid and t randomly selected . For the total loss ( Eq . 4 ) , we used hyperpa - rameters of 1 , 1 , 500 , 0 . 01 for a , b , c and d , with reasons discussed in Supplementary Note 2 . The three PINN neural networks had 5 fully connected layers , each with 50 neurons , with residual skip connections , and swish activations between layers . Output variables that share inputs ( e . g . the PDF and diﬀusivity ) can be outputted from a single neural network if they are likely to have similar features , for increased computational eﬃciency . We used the Adam optimizer [ 40 ] with a learning rate of 5 × 10 − 4 , and batch sizes , N , of 8 , 000 . To speed up training , the DMSO landscape was ﬁrst trained for 10 hours , and PINNs for the other conditions were initialized with these weights ( known as transfer learning ) . For forward simulations over the landscapes , particle starting positions were sampled from the initial PDF learned by the PINN , and then simulations were run by evaluating the potential and diﬀusivity on a 1000 × 1000 spatial grid , with 20 snapshots in time for the diﬀusivity , and simulating Eq . 1 with a time step of 0 . 01 min . Tip Growth Model The 3 - parameter lognormal probability density function is given by f ( x ; s , σ 2 , loc ) = 1 σ √ 2 π ( x − loc ) exp log 2 (cid:0) x − loc s (cid:1) 2 σ 2 ( 10 ) where σ is a shape parameter , s is a scale parameter ( also the median ) , and loc is a location parameter ( the lower bound ) . The 2 - parameter distribution has loc set to zero . We modeled germination time , t g , as distributed according to t g ∼ lognormal ( s t g , σ t g , loc t g ) , and growth rate , α , as distributed according to α = loc α − x , with x ∼ lognormal ( s α , σ α , 0 ) and resampling for negative α . Length data was extracted by summing the binarized fungus images , and both the lengthening and bending parameters were ﬁtted using ABC - SMC [ 35 ] . This is a computationally eﬃcient implementation of ABC , identifying intermediate distributions over a series of populations , and gradually decreasing the acceptance threshold . All histograms were compared using the summed absolute distance , and we trained the autoencoder for an extra two epochs with simulations generated randomly from the prior distribution to get coverage of any novel features . We compared three models for tip bending , with Model 3 found to reproduce the data best . For all of the following , σ is a noise parameter that was ﬁtted , and dW is the Wiener process . Fig . 4a shows a schematic with the bending angles and curvature . Model 1 was a random walk in the global direction , θ global , a simple model commonly used in the literature : dθ global = σdW . ( 11 ) Model 2 was a random walk in the curvature of the growth path , κ , in order to connect to cell tip mechanics : dκ = σdW . ( 12 ) Model 3 was a persistent random walk in the curvature , with an additional parameter , τ − 1 , for relaxation to straight growth , motivated by work analysing ﬁssion yeast tip growth mechanics [ 34 ] : dκ = − τ − 1 κdt + σdW . ( 13 ) See Supplementary Note 3 for details on the creation of the simulation images , and settings used for running ABC - SMC . 11 Acknowledgements We thank Suhail Islam for invaluable computational suppport . This work was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( grant number BB / M011178 / 1 ) and Syngenta provided ﬁnancial and technical support in the form of an iCASE studentship to H . C . Author Contributions H . C . and R . G . E . designed and H . C . performed the theoretical analysis ; A . M . and G . S . contributed the rea - gants and performed the imaging ; H . C . and R . L . did the image processing . All authors wrote the paper . Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests . Data Availability The image data that support the ﬁndings of this study have been deposited at http : / / cellimagelibrary . org / groups / 54615 . The ﬁgure data generated in this study are provided in the Supplementary Informa - tion / Source Data ﬁle . Code Availability The code used , along with a subset of images , are available at https : / / github . com / hcbiophys / morphodynamics [ 41 ] . References 1 . Nonejuie , P . , Burkart , M . , Pogliano , K . & Pogliano , J . Bacterial cytological proﬁling rapidly identiﬁes the cellular pathways targeted by antibacterial molecules . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 , 16169 – 16174 ( 2013 ) . 2 . McDermott - Rouse , A . et al . Behavioral ﬁngerprints predict insecticide and anthelmintic mode of action . Molecular systems biology 17 , e10267 ( 2021 ) . 3 . Usaj , M . M . et al . High - content screening for quantitative cell biology . Trends in cell biology 26 , 598 – 611 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Tweedy , L . , Witzel , P . , Heinrich , D . , Insall , R . H . & Endres , R . G . Screening by changes in stereotypical behavior during cell motility . Scientiﬁc reports 9 , 1 – 12 ( 2019 ) . 5 . Keren , K . et al . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Fanaro , G . B . & Villavicencio , A . L . C . The Asian Soybean Rust in South America . Soybean : Physiology and Biochemistry , 475 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Miles , M . R . , Frederick , R . D . & Hartman , G . L . Soybean rust : Is the US soybean crop at risk . APS net ( 2003 ) . 8 . Langenbach , C . , Campe , R . , Beyer , S . F . , Mueller , A . N . & Conrath , U . Fighting Asian soybean rust . Frontiers in plant science 7 , 797 ( 2016 ) . 9 . Berman , G . J . Measuring behavior across scales . BMC biology 16 , 23 ( 2018 ) . 10 . Tweedy , L . , Meier , B . , Stephan , J . , Heinrich , D . & Endres , R . G . Distinct cell shapes determine accurate chemotaxis . Scientiﬁc reports 3 , 2606 ( 2013 ) . 11 . Berman , G . J . , Choi , D . M . , Bialek , W . & Shaevitz , J . W . Mapping the stereotyped behaviour of freely moving fruit ﬂies . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 11 , 20140672 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Brown , A . E . , Yemini , E . I . , Grundy , L . J . , Jucikas , T . & Schafer , W . R . A dictionary of behavioral motifs reveals clusters of genes aﬀecting Caenorhabditis elegans locomotion . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 , 791 – 796 ( 2013 ) . 13 . Liu , M . , Sharma , A . K . , Shaevitz , J . W . & Leifer , A . M . Temporal processing and context dependency in Caenorhabditis elegans response to mechanosensation . Elife 7 , e36419 ( 2018 ) . 12 14 . Waddington , C . H . The strategy of the genes ( Routledge , 2014 ) . 15 . Xu , L . , Zhang , F . , Zhang , K . , Wang , E . & Wang , J . The potential and ﬂux landscape theory of ecology . PLoS One 9 , e86746 ( 2014 ) . 16 . Huang , S . , Li , F . , Zhou , J . X . & Qian , H . Processes on the emergent landscapes of biochemical reaction networks and heterogeneous cell population dynamics : diﬀerentiation in living matters . Journal of the Royal Society Interface 14 , 20170097 ( 2017 ) . 17 . Morris , R . , Sancho - Martinez , I . , Sharpee , T . O . & Belmonte , J . C . I . Mathematical approaches to modeling development and reprogramming . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 5076 – 5082 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Wang , L . - Z . et al . A geometrical approach to control and controllability of nonlinear dynamical net - works . Nature communications 7 , 1 – 11 ( 2016 ) . 19 . Su , Y . et al . Phenotypic heterogeneity and evolution of melanoma cells associated with targeted therapy resistance . PLoS computational biology 15 , e1007034 ( 2019 ) . 20 . Angermueller , C . , P¨arnamaa , T . , Parts , L . & Stegle , O . Deep learning for computational biology . Molecular systems biology 12 , 878 ( 2016 ) . 21 . LeCun , Y . , Bengio , Y . & Hinton , G . Deep learning . nature 521 , 436 – 444 ( 2015 ) . 22 . Hornik , K . , Stinchcombe , M . , White , H . , et al . Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approxi - mators . Neural networks 2 , 359 – 366 ( 1989 ) . 23 . Hinton , G . E . & Salakhutdinov , R . R . Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks . science 313 , 504 – 507 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Raissi , M . , Perdikaris , P . & Karniadakis , G . E . Physics - informed neural networks : A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial diﬀerential equations . Journal of Computational Physics 378 , 686 – 707 ( 2019 ) . 25 . Raissi , M . , Yazdani , A . & Karniadakis , G . E . Hidden ﬂuid mechanics : Learning velocity and pressure ﬁelds from ﬂow visualizations . Science 367 , 1026 – 1030 ( 2020 ) . 26 . Chan , C . K . , Hadjitheodorou , A . , Tsai , T . Y . - C . & Theriot , J . A . Quantitative comparison of principal component analysis and unsupervised deep learning using variational autoencoders for shape analysis of motile cells . bioRxiv ( 2020 ) . 27 . Winter , C . et al . Triﬂuoromethyloxadiazoles : inhibitors of histone deacetylases for control of Asian soybean rust . Pest Management Science 76 , 3357 – 3368 ( 2020 ) . 28 . LeCun , Y . , Bengio , Y . , et al . Convolutional networks for images , speech , and time series . The handbook of brain theory and neural networks 3361 , 1995 ( 1995 ) . 29 . Davis , R . A . , Lii , K . - S . & Politis , D . N . in Selected Works of Murray Rosenblatt 95 – 100 ( Springer , 2011 ) . 30 . Chen , X . , Yang , L . , Duan , J . & Karniadakis , G . E . Solving inverse stochastic problems from discrete particle observations using the fokker - planck equation and physics - informed neural networks . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2008 . 10653 ( 2020 ) . 31 . Rahaman , N . et al . On the spectral bias of neural networks in International Conference on Machine Learning ( 2019 ) , 5301 – 5310 . 32 . Bonazzi , D . et al . Symmetry breaking in spore germination relies on an interplay between polar cap stability and spore wall mechanics . Developmental cell 28 , 534 – 546 ( 2014 ) . 33 . Limpert , E . , Stahel , W . A . & Abbt , M . Log - normal distributions across the sciences : keys and clues . BioScience 51 , 341 – 352 ( 2001 ) . 34 . Drake , T . & Vavylonis , D . Model of ﬁssion yeast cell shape driven by membrane - bound growth factors and the cytoskeleton . PLoS Comput Biol 9 , e1003287 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Toni , T . , Welch , D . , Strelkowa , N . , Ipsen , A . & Stumpf , M . P . Approximate Bayesian computation scheme for parameter inference and model selection in dynamical systems . Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6 , 187 – 202 ( 2009 ) . 13 36 . Udrescu , S . - M . & Tegmark , M . Symbolic pregression : Discovering physical laws from distorted video . Physical Review E 103 , 043307 ( 2021 ) . 37 . Banerjee , S . , Scherer , N . F . & Dinner , A . R . Shape dynamics of growing cell walls . Soft matter 12 , 3442 – 3450 ( 2016 ) . 38 . Campas , O . & Mahadevan , L . Shape and dynamics of tip - growing cells . Current Biology 19 , 2102 – 2107 ( 2009 ) . 39 . Johnson , G . R . , Donovan - Maiye , R . M . & Maleckar , M . M . Building a 3D integrated cell . bioRxiv , 238378 ( 2017 ) . 40 . Kingma , D . P . & Ba , J . Adam : A method for stochastic optimization . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1412 . 6980 ( 2014 ) . 41 . Cavanagh , H . , Mosbach , A . , Scalliet , G . , Lind , R . & Endres , R . G . Physics - Informed Deep Learning Characterizes Morphodynamics of Asian Soybean Rust Disease , Morphodynamics . DOI : 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 5525043 ( 2021 ) . 14 Supplementary Information for Physics - Informed Deep Learning Characterizes Morphodynamics of Asian Soybean Rust Disease August 2021 Henry Cavanagh , Andreas Mosbach , Gabriel Scalliet , Rob Lind , Robert G . Endres * * Corresponding author : r . endres @ imperial . ac . uk Contents Supplementary Figures 1 Supplementary Figure 1 : Convergence of the physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) . . . . . . . 1 Supplementary Figure 2 : Correspondence between the landscapes and morphospace . . . . . . . . 3 Supplementary Figure 3 : Correspondence between the landscapes and morphospace . . . . . . . . 4 Supplementary Figure 4 : Comparison of simulation and data trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 Supplementary Figure 5 : Data - driven development of the tip growth model . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Supplementary Figure 6 : Comparisons of maximum a posteriori probability ( MAP ) simulations of Model 3 with data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Supplementary Figure 7 : Chemical structure of Compound X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Supplementary Notes 11 Supplementary Note 1 : P . pachyrhizi Imaging and Image Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Supplementary Note 2 : Autoencoder and PINN Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Supplementary Note 3 : Three Models of Tip Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Supplementary Note 4 : Possible Modes of Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Supplementary Methods 16 Supplementary References 16 a r X i v : 2 110 . 07345v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 14 O c t 2021 Supplementary Figures Supplementary Figure 1 : Convergence of the physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) b c d DMSO Compound A Compound B Compound X Equally good pre - overfitting solutions Overfitted global minimum Network weights 𝐿 ! " ! # $ e 60 hours 25 hours 30 hours run 1 run 2 run 3 Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) mean 𝜎 s . t . d 𝜎 a ln 𝐅 m . u . min - 1 < −5 > −2 ln ( s . t . d 𝐅 ) m . u . min - 1 < −7 > −4 ln ( mean 𝜎 ) m . u . min - 0 . 5 < −5 > 0 ln ( s . t . d 𝜎 ) m . u . min - 0 . 5 < −6 > −2 f run 1 run 2 run 3 𝐷 ( 𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑡 ) 𝐷 ( 𝑥 , 𝑦 ) 𝐷 ( 𝑡 ) 𝐷 data s . t . d 𝐅 l o g % & 𝐿 ! " ! # $ Hours trained Hours trained Snapshot Supplementary Figure 1 : Convergence of the physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) . Caption continued on the following page . 1 Supplementary Figure 1 : Convergence of the physics - informed neural network ( PINN ) . ( a ) An ablation analysis comparing how L total ( running mean over 200 mini - batches ) decreases as training progresses reveals that a diﬀusivity with both spatial and time dependence is the best model . The majority of the beneﬁt likely comes from the dynamics in the spore region of morphospace , where diﬀusion is very high at ﬁrst , and then strongly decreases such that not all spores germinate . ( b ) We repeat PINN network training three times for each condition , with diﬀerent mini - batches , and L total ( running mean over 200 mini - batches ) is shown here for each repeat of DMSO . ( c ) An approximation of the dynamics of the fraction of spores ( ≈ R spore ˆ p ( x , t ) ) across snapshots for DMSO ( with the ﬁrst snapshot not shown due to its much higher fraction of spores ) , found by numerically integrating a box around the spore PDF peak . The data is shown in red , and the three repeats have the same coloring as in ( b ) . The PINN ﬁrst explores smooth low - frequency solutions , ﬁtting trends common to all snapshots , before ultimately beginning to overﬁt to the individual snapshots , as shown for one repeat at 60 hours in black . We stop training when the PINN begins to ﬁt to the individual snapshots , which approximately corresponds to 30 , 30 , 30 , 20 , 25 and 25 hours for DMSO and Compounds A , B , C ( 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ) , C ( 10 mgL - 1 ) and X , respectively . ( d ) Sketch of the loss landscape , whereby the global minimum is an overﬁtted solution , and there may be many equally good solutions before overﬁtting . ( e ) The landscapes from each of the three repeats after 30 hours of training for DMSO show many common features in the central data - rich region . ( f ) For each of the conditions with signiﬁcant germination ( i . e . excluding Compound C at 10 mgL - 1 ) , three outputs are shown : the uncertainty in the force magnitude , k F k , calculated from the standard deviation across the three training repeats ; the mean σ ( from Eq . 1 ) , averaged over time for the same training repeat as those of the landscapes shown in the other ﬁgures , and only calculated over regions where the PDFs are above 10 − 3 ; and the uncertainty in σ , calculated in the same way as the uncertainty for k F k . All outputs are expressed in terms of morphospace units , m . u . Source data are provided for ( c ) . 2 Supplementary Figure 2 : Correspondence between the landscapes and mor - phospace a ln 𝐅 m . u . min - 1 < −5 > −2 b c d e DMSO Compound A Compound B Compound X Compound C ( 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ) Compound C ( 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ) Compound C ( 10 mgL - 1 ) Supplementary Figure 2 : Correspondence between the landscapes and morphospace . ( a - d ) Land - scapes for DMSO and Compounds A , B and X , with samples of fungus images from the underlying mor - phospace , both colored by the gradient magnitude , k F k , at regions where the PDFs are above 10 − 3 . ( e ) The same as described above , but for Compound C at 0 . 041 mgL - 1 , alongside the landscapes for Compound C at 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ( with contours along equal landscape values , spaced 0 . 14 m . u . 2 min - 1 apart , where m . u . stands for morphospace units ) and 10 mgL - 1 ( with contours spaced 0 . 02 m . u . 2 min - 1 apart ) . 3 Supplementary Figure 3 : Correspondence between the landscapes and mor - phospace Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) DMSO Compound A Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound B a b c d Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) 4 Compound X Compound C ( 10mgL - 1 ) e f Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) Data KDE Forward simulation KDE Difference ( data - simulation ) Supplementary Figure 3 : Validation of the landscapes and diﬀusivities learned by the PINN . For each condition ( a - f ) , three panels are shown : the ﬁrst panel is the data kernel density estimate ( KDE ) , the second is the KDE over simulations , and the third is the error ( data KDE - simulation KDE ) . All are displayed on a logarithmic scale , and the error is truncated at 10 − 2 . 5 , which is the probability density generated by a single particle , in order to highlight more systematic errors . For the forward simulations , particle starting positions were sampled from the initial probability distribution learned by the PINN , and then simulations were run by evaluating the potential and diﬀusivity on a 1000 × 1000 spatial grid , with 20 snapshots in time for the diﬀusivity . The ﬁgure shows good agreement across all conditions , validating the landscapes and diﬀusivities learned by the PINN . 5 Supplementary Figure 4 : Comparison of simulation and data trajectories l og 10 M S D ( m . u . 2 ) simulationdata simulationdata simulationdata simulationdata DMSO DMSO simulations Compound A Compound B Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound X Δt = 3 min 5 - 10 - 8 8 DMSO Compound B Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound X Compound A Time ( min ) after mixing with solution a c b d 60 min 78 min 96 min 114 min 132 min 150 min … … … … simulationdata DMSO A B C X - 0 . 25 - 1 . 2 DMSOCompound A Compound B Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound X E n t r op y ( b i t s ) Time ( min ) after mixing with solution log 10 ( d ) Supplementary Figure 4 : Comparison of simulation and data trajectories . ( a ) An example sequence from the DMSO time - lapse videos . Images were taken every 3 min , from 60 min after mixing with the compounds . ( b ) Trajectories of sequential frames of the time - lapse videos ( colored ) and a sample of DMSO simulations ( black ) . For the forward simulations , particle starting positions were sampled from the initial probability distribution learned by the PINN , and then simulations were run by evaluating the potential and diﬀusivity on a 1000 × 1000 spatial grid , with 20 snapshots in time for the diﬀusivity . ( c ) Mean squared displacement ( MSD , in terms of morphospace units , m . u . ) plots against time for the time - lapse videos ( colored ) and forward simulations ( black ) . Time - lapse videos were taken under higher temperatures , which results in early germination . A confusion matrix of the mean absolute diﬀerences ( d ) of the plots is also shown . For each simulation - data pairing ( videos down the rows , simulations across columns ) , the time series were shifted horizontally and the result for each pairing taken to be the minimum of the mean absolute diﬀerences across the shifts . Simulations match their corresponding data generally the best , except for the simulations of Compound X . ( d ) The entropy of PDFs from a KDE over single particle simulations of Eq . 1 reveals that entropy always increases with time . Entropy is calculated as − P x 1 P x 2 p ( x ) log 2 p ( x ) ∆ x 1 ∆ x 2 with x = ( x 1 , x 2 ) and only summing over morphospace regions where the PDFs are above 10 − 3 . Source data are provided for ( c - d ) . 6 Supplementary Figure 5 : Data - driven development of the tip growth model Model 2 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 3 datasimulation Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Population 1 Population 2 Population 3 Population 6 Population 5 Population 4 Model probability Compound A Population 9 Population 8 Population 7 Model probability Model probability datasimulation datasimulation DMSOCompound A Compound X Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) Compound A Compound A 10 - 10 - 10 10 10 - 10 - 10 10 10 - 10 - 10 10 210 min 210 min 210 min a b c d Model 1 Length ( µm ) Time ( min ) Time ( min ) Time ( min ) Time ( min ) 𝜃 ! " # $ % " ( r ad ) Supplementary Figure 5 : Data - driven development of the tip growth model . Caption continued on the following page . 7 Supplementary Figure 5 : Data - driven development of the tip growth model . ( a ) Time - lapse video data shows length increasing approximately linearly with time for all conditions . ( b ) Variation in global direction , θ global , for the three tip bending models tested ( using bending MAP values for Compound A , with a growth rate of 0 . 75 µ m min - 1 ) . Model 1 is a random walk in θ global , Model 2 is a random walk in path curvature , κ , and Model 3 is a persistent random walk in κ , with relaxation to straight growth . ( c ) Model selection using ABC - SMC . For early populations where the acceptance threshold is high , the lower dimensional parameter spaces of models 1 & 2 lead to better ﬁts . At lower acceptance thresholds , however , models 2 & 3 ﬁt better , validating model conception in the tip frame , and ultimately the relaxation to straight growth in Model 3 is required to reproduce the data distribution . ( d ) Comparison of Compound A snapshot data ( pink ) and MAP simulations ( black ) for the three models at 210 min , with an enlarged example of a randomly selected simulation and data fungus shown in the inset of the Model 1 box . While all models introduce bending too early for some fungi ( the region below the spore where there are simulations but no data ) , Model 3 can reproduce the feature distribution best . In particular , it is the only model that can reproduce fungi with multiple bends in alternating directions . Overall , this feature is less well separated in this 2D morphospace that prioritizes global features . Source data are provided for ( a , c ) . 8 Supplementary Figure 6 : Comparisons of maximum a posteriori probability ( MAP ) simulations of Model 3 with data DMSO Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) 90 min 105 min 120 min 135 min 150 min 165 min 180 min 195 min 210 min data simulation data simulation data simulation data simulation Compound X Compound A Compound X datasimulation datasimulation datasimulation Compound A Compound C ( 0 . 041mgL - 1 ) 90 min 105 min 120 min 135 min 150 min 165 min 180 min 195 min 210 min 90 min 105 min 120 min 135 min 150 min 165 min 180 min 195 min 210 min 90 min 105 min 120 min 135 min 150 min 165 min 180 min 195 min 210 min - 10 - 10 10 10 10 - 10 - 10 10 - 10 - 10 10 10 210 min 210 min 210 min a b PDF PDF PDF PDF 𝐿 ( µ m ) 𝐿 ( µ m ) 𝐿 ( µ m ) 𝐿 ( µ m ) Supplementary Figure 6 : Comparisons of maximum a posteriori probability ( MAP ) simulations of Model 3 with data . ( a ) Comparisons of the length distributions for the snapshot data ( colored ) and simulations ( black ) with MAP parameters for all conditions , showing good agreement . ( b ) Comparisons of snapshot data ( colored ) and simulations ( black ) with MAP parameters at 210 min , showing good agreement for tip bending . Source data are provided for ( a ) . 9 Supplementary Figure 7 : Chemical structure of Compound X Supplementary Figure 7 : Chemical structure of Compound X . 10 Supplementary Notes Supplementary Note 1 : P . pachyrhizi Imaging and Image Processing P . pachyrhizi spore propagation Urediniospores of the plant pathogenic basidiomycete P . pachyrhizi Syd . & P . Syd were prepared in a biosafety class 2 laboratory at Syngenta Stein , Switzerland , as follows : Glycine max ( var . Toliman ) plants were grown for 22 - 25 days in 8 cm pots in substrate with fertilizer . On the day before infection , all leaves except the second trifolium were cut , and plants were watered well . Approx . 30 mg of freshly harvested urediniospores of strain K8108 were suspended in 5 mL of 0 . 05 % ( v / v ) Tween 20 solution in sterile water , and the suspension was diluted to a ﬁnal concentration of 5 × 10 4 spores per mL in 100 mL Tween solution . The plants were inoculated inside a sterile bench by spraying the bottom sides of the leaves evenly using an airbrush . Infected plants were then incubated at 22 ° C , > 90 % relative humidity , in the dark . 24 h post infection , the plants were placed back under light ( 20 K Lux , Metal Halid ) at 22 ° C day / 20 ° C night conditions , 70 % relative humidity , and watered every 3 d . Once pustules ( uredinia ) were formed ( usually 10 days post infection ) the leaves were cut oﬀ and placed inside large Petri dishes containing a moisturized paper towel . The Petri dishes were closed with Paraﬁlm and incubated for 3 to 4 d in the dark at room temperature . The spores were then detached from the upside - down held leaves inside a biosafety class 2 cabinet by gentle tapping , collected on sterile aluminum foil and used for microscopy assays on the same day . P . pachyrhizi in vitro germination assay for snapshot and time - lapse imaging Chemicals tested were either provided by Syngenta or purchased from Merck KGaA ( Darmstadt , Ger - many ) or other vendors as indicated . Stock solutions were prepared at 10 gL - 1 in DMSO ( Fisher Chem - ical , D / 4121 / PB15 ) : Carbendazim ( CAS - number 10605 - 21 - 7 ; Merck , 45368 - 250MG ) , PIK - 75 ( 2 - Methyl - 5 - nitrobenzenesulfonic acid [ ( 6 - bromoimidazo [ 1 , 2 - a ] pyridin - 3 - yl ) methylene ] methylhydrazide hydrochloride ; CAS - number 372196 - 77 - 5 ; Angene AG00C6HA / AGN - PC - 0RDGQ1 ; stock solution stored frozen at - 80 ° C in small aliquots ) , Compound X ( Syngenta research compound related to triﬂuoromethyloxadiazoles [ 1 ] ) , Benzovindiﬂupyr ( CAS - number 1072957 - 71 - 1 ; Syngenta ) . All compounds tested were diluted to two - fold the ﬁnal concentration in water , either directly from the concentrated stock solutions or from serial 3 - fold dilutions in DMSO . Assay plates in 96 - well format were prepared before the spore suspensions by pipetting 50 µ L of two - fold concentrated treatment solution into the respective wells of CellCarrier - 96 Ultra plates ( PerkinElmer , 6055302 ) . Approx . 20 mg of freshly harvested P . pachyrhizi urediniospores were suspended in 2 mL of 0 . 015 % ( v / v ) Tween 20 in sterile water by shaking in a 5 mL vial ( Axygen , SCT - 5ML - S ) . After determining the spore concentration by using a hemocytometer ( Neubauer improved ) , the required volume of two - fold concentrated suspension with 20 , 000 spores per mL in 0 . 0015 % Tween 20 was prepared . The assay was started immediately by mixing 50 µ L of spore suspension with treatment solution in the 96 - well plates prepared in advance , resulting in a ﬁnal one - fold concentration of the test compounds ( Carbendazim : 1 . 1 mgL - 1 ; PIK - 75 : 3 . 3 mgL - 1 ; Compound X : 1 . 1 mgL - 1 ; Benzovindiﬂupyr : 0 . 041 and 10 mgL - 1 ) and 1000 spores per well , in a ﬁnal DMSO concentration of 0 . 1 % in all wells . The plates were then incubated in a closed box at 20 ° C in the dark . After 9 diﬀerent incubation times between 90 and 210 min in 15 min intervals , 25 µ L Calcoﬂuor White staining solution ( Merck , 18909 - 100ML - F ) and 25 µ L KOH 10 % ( w / v ) were added to each well to stain the fungal cell walls and simultaneously kill the germlings to enable snapshot imaging . The plates were sealed with adhesive aluminium PCR sealing foil ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , AB - 0626 ) , mixed well by vortexing , and left at least for 20 min at room temperature to ensure consistent staining and to allow the spores to settle . Imaging on the Opera QEHS High - Content Screening System ( PerkinElmer ) was performed with the following settings for excitation of Calcoﬂuor White ﬂuorescence ( cell walls of germ tubes ) : 405 nm laser ( 350 µ W ) , 10x air objective lens , 40 ms exposure time , camera bandpass ﬁlter 450 / 50 nm , pixel binning 2 . For the excitation of autoﬂuorescence of spore hulls ( to diﬀerentiate them from germ tubes and appressoria ) the following settings were used : 488 nm laser ( 15900 µ W ) , 10x air objective lens , 1 , 600 ms exposure time , camera bandpass ﬁlter 565 / 40 nm , pixel binning 2 . Twelve technical replicate wells were imaged per condition , and 47 images were taken per well at diﬀerent positions . 11 Germination time - lapse imaging was performed on the JuLI Stage Real - Time Cell History Recorder ( NanoEnTek Inc . ) . The germination assay was set up as described above , but after mixing spores with treatment solutions the assay plates were incubated directly in the imaging device , which itself was placed inside of a climate cabinet set to 20 ° C . Imaging started with an autofocus run , followed by 321 runs with 3 min intervals to cover germination between + 1 and + 17 h after setup . No replicate wells were prepared to minimize interval times , but 5 diﬀerent spots were imaged per well . The transmission light LED and the 10x objective were used with settings : 15 ms exposure time , LED power “3” , brightness correction “10” . Image Processing The size of the snapshot image sets necessitated fully - automated processing . We extracted fungus contours using adaptive binarization , where the threshold value varies based on the statistics of a surrounding window . We used 100 × 100 windows ( the approximate size of lighting defects ) out of full images of 503 × 685 pixels , and the threshold point was found from the cross correlation of this area with a Gaussian window , and shifted with biases of 30 and 0 out of the [ 0 , 255 ] pixel range for the germ tube and spore images , respectively ( found through trial and error ) . See the adaptiveThreshold function in OpenCV . This yielded two images per view : one with spore contours , and another with germ tube contours . Adding these together then gave an image with full fungi . Contours in this combined image with an area above a threshold found by trial and error were removed as obvious overlapping fungi , and the remainder were cropped by ﬁnding the minimum bounding rectangle ( using OpenCV’s minAreaRect function ) , and rotating to align with the pixel grid ( using OpenCV’s warpAﬃne function with bilinear interpolation ) with padding so all were 200 × 200 regions of interest ( ROIs ) , to ﬁt the largest fungi in the set . Incomplete fungi were also removed by detecting if any of their outline points touched the image border . We then used a supervised convolutional neural network to remove overlapping morphologies , given a set of hand - labelled examples . Single - fungus images were then translated and rotated so the initial growth directions coincided , and a ﬂip was executed if the right - most point of the fungus was higher than the germination point . To do this alignment , we utilized the fact that there was one image of the spores , and another of the germ tubes for each view , and that these two contours overlapped slightly . The fungi were all translated so the points at which the germ tube hit the spore coincided . This point was found to be the center of mass of the overlap of the spore and germ tube contours . Since the germ tubes grow out perpendicular to the spore surface , alignment of the initial germination direction was then achieved by rotating the line joining the two points where the germ tube contour hit the spore to be vertical . These two points were found by tracing from the point on the germ tube contour furthest from the spore - germ tube intersection point in opposite directions until the spore was hit . We replaced all spores with identical circles , so as to prioritize modeling of the germ tube ; the resulting morphospace point is then widened into a spore region through the kernel density estimation . We removed overlapping fungi , which we note means larger morphologies are more likely to be removed than smaller ones ( e . g . ungerminated spores ) , leading to a slight bias towards smaller morphologies . However , the DMSO data shows that there is very little germination after the ﬁrst snapshot , which would lead to an artiﬁcially increasing percentage of spores if the bias was signiﬁcant , which Supplemetary Fig . 1c does not show ; instead , the inter - snapshot variability is the much more dominant factor . In other words , the variance in the latent variables that cause inter - snapshot variability dominates over the slight bias induced by removing overlapping fungi . In future , however , this slight bias can be resolved by using more sophisticated segmentation algorithms that can resolve overlapping morphologies [ 2 ] , which would also increase the amount of data extracted per image . For the time - lapse videos , we again binarized ( using trial and error for a suitable threshold value , and without adaptive binarization , since there were not signiﬁcant lighting defects ) , and found the fungus con - tours . We then found series of contours across frames whose center of mass were closest , and manually looked through these to ﬁnd those that corresponded to tracking an individual fungus . We then used ImageJ to color over the spore with the background color ( black background , white fungi ) , and aligned all germination points ( found simply as the intersection point on the initial full - fungus contour image and the new contour image with the germ tube only ) . We then manually rotated and ( where neccessary ) ﬂipped the images using Gimp , to ensure the initial growth directions coincided . Before being inputted into the autoencoder , snapshot and time - lapse video pixels were assigned to a value in the set { 0 , 1 } . 12 Supplementary Note 2 : Autoencoder and PINN Neural Networks Autoencoder architecture and training For the autoencoder’s encoder , we used four convolutional layers with 16 , 32 , 64 and 16 feature maps , all with 3 × 3 kernels , ReLU activations , batch normalization , and alternating stride sizes of 1 and 2 . The decoder’s structure mirrored the encoder’s , but with transposed convolutions . We used a sigmoid output activation and binary cross entropy loss , over mini - batches of 50 images , and trained for 4 epochs using the Adam optimizer [ 3 ] with a learning rate of 10 − 4 , which took 2 hours with a Quadro RTX 6000 GPU card . Training was stopped at the point at which the trajectories of the single - fungus videos were least complex . Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) is a commonly - used linear dimensionality technique that ﬁnds a set of orthogonal features based on the data variance in diﬀerent directions . While this method can ﬁnd very interpretable features , non - linear methods can be more expressive , capturing curved data manifolds to describe the data in fewer dimensions . This non - linearity is particularly useful for our work , as it allows us to ﬁnd a 2D morphospace , which then enables intuitive visualization of the Fokker - Planck model landscapes . t - distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( t - SNE , [ 4 ] ) is another commonly - used non - linear dimen - sionality reduction algorithm that could be used for ﬁnding the morphospace , and for characterizing mor - phodynamics with the Fokker - Planck model . However , this algorithm is non - parametric , meaning that when new data is added , it must be re - run in full , and so is not well - suited for the implementation of approximate Bayesian inference on mechanistic model parameters . If the autoencoder is too small ( i . e . shallow or narrow ) , the embedding function may be too simple to capture curved data manifolds . For example , autoencoders with single hidden layer and linear activation functions can only learn linear features . However , if the network is too large , it can reconstruct the data without needing to closely describe the underlying manifold . This can be thought of as a form of overﬁtting . For higher - dimensional latent spaces , this can be a more signiﬁcant problem , and so autoencoder variants that regularize the latent space are typically used , for example the Variational Autoencoder ( VAE ) [ 5 ] , which imposes a Gaussian prior distribution over the latent space . These ensure the latent space is smooth , with meaningful features throughout . We found that the autoencoder architecture used here was suitable for capturing the data manifold , and avoided variants like the VAE because they warped fungus trajectories that were more natural with a standard autoencoder . Learning landscapes from snapshot data For the PINN , the loss function to be minimized comprizes four terms , with the ﬁrst three calculated over random mini - batches of N data points , and the ﬁnal one over the full spatial grid of M data points . The ﬁrst is the mean squared diﬀerence between the learned PDF , ˆ p ( x j , t j ) , and data , p ( x j , t j ) , L PDF = 1 N N X j = 1 [ ˆ p ( x j , t j ) − p ( x j , t j ) ] 2 , ( S1 ) with { x j , t j } in the nine snapshots . The second is the mean squared PDF at the boundary , L BC = 1 N N X j = 1 [ ˆ p ( x j , t j ) ] 2 ( S2 ) with { x j , t j } selected from 10 6 uniformly distributed boundary points , and the third term is the mean squared PDE residual ( N , given in Eq . 3 ) , L PDE = 1 N N X j = 1 [ N ( ˆ p ( x j , t j ) , ˆ D ( x j , t j ) , ˆ U ( x j ) ) ] 2 , ( S3 ) with { x j , t j } selected from 10 6 points uniformly distributed over the whole domain . The ﬁnal term ensures the PDF integrates to one : L norm =   M X j = 1 ∆ x 1 ∆ x 2 ˆ p ( x j , t ) − 1   2 , ( S4 ) 13 with x j covering the full spatial grid and t randomly selected . For the total loss ( Eq . 4 ) , we used hyperparameters of 1 , 1 , 500 , 0 . 01 for a , b , c and d . Previous work using PINNs to solve the Fokker - Planck equation [ 6 , 7 ] used a weighting for L PDE of 100 , and the same values for the other hyperparameters as we used . Since our data was of snapshots of diﬀerent spore batches , we increased the weighting to 500 , to prioritize more the PDE ﬁtting over the data . While initially selected by trial and error through inspecting single particle forward simulations , this choice was later vindicated quantitatively . We trained the DMSO PINN with c values of 50 , 500 and 5000 for 10 hours each . Since changing the hyperparameters modiﬁes the loss calculation , L total cannot be used to test the quality of the inferred parameters . Instead , we compared the resulting ﬁts of single particle simulations of Eq . 1 with the data through the mean absolute probability error on the grid ( MAE ) . Particle starting positions were sampled from the initial PDF learned by the PINN , and then simulations were run by evaluating the potential and diﬀusivity on a 1000 × 1000 spatial grid , with 20 snapshots in time for the diﬀusivity , with a time step of 0 . 01 min . The MAE values for c values of 50 , 500 and 5000 were 9 . 8 × 10 − 6 , 9 . 0 × 10 − 6 and 9 . 9 × 10 − 6 respectively , showing 500 was a suitable choice for c , as it produced the model with the best ﬁt to the data . Reducing the relative weighting of the data penalty means there is no longer a guarantee of the learned PDF integrating to one , and so a normalization penalty is required . The weighting for L norm of 0 . 01 was found to normalize the data adequately , without excessively prioritising this constraint , in agreement with the ﬁndings of [ 6 , 7 ] . Since P . pachyrhizi were ﬁxated upon staining , the snapshots were of distinct populations . There are therefore latent variables that change the dynamics for each population . Ideally , the learned solution would be the average dynamics of inﬁnite repeats . Since neural networks learn smooth low - frequency solutions ﬁrst , we used early stopping to capture average dynamics , rather than letting the dynamics ﬁt exactly to each snapshot , primarily watching for when the PINN began to ﬁt individual snapshots . This point approximately corresponded to 30 , 30 , 30 , 20 , 25 and 25 hours for DMSO and Compounds A , B , C ( 0 . 041 mgL - 1 ) , C ( 10 mgL - 1 ) and X , respectively . For small numbers of snapshots , it is possible that spurious patterns emerge not only on the single - snapshot level , but also across many snapshots ; for example if two subsequent snapshots have similar low - probability latent variables , this will be captured by the PINN . However , such patterns become increasingly less problematic as the number of snapshots increases . An alternative solution is to constrain the solution physically , as we did with the tip growth model . The three neural networks had 5 fully connected layers , each with 50 neurons , with residual skip connec - tions , and swish activations between layers . A softplus output activation was used for the PDF , and sigmoid was used for the potential and diﬀusivity , with the potential multiplied by 3 to give a [ 0 , 3 ] output range . This sigmoid constraint prevents unphysical solutions that can arise with unbounded force and diﬀusivity . Output variables that share inputs ( e . g . the PDF and diﬀusivity ) can be outputted from a single neural network if they are likely to have similar features , for increased computational eﬃciency . We used the Adam optimizer [ 3 ] with a learning rate of 5 × 10 − 4 , and batch sizes , N , of 8 , 000 . To speed up training , the DMSO landscape was ﬁrst trained for 10 hours , and PINNs for the other conditions were initialized with these weights ( known as transfer learning ) . The landscapes for DMSO and Compound A formed deep bowls at the outer morphospace regions . For visualization , we therefore scaled landscape regions outside the PDF boundary of 10 − 3 towards the closest point on this boundary and applied a Gaussian smoothing to this outer region . This way , the full landscape can be easily compared with the morphospace , but with decreased gradients in regions where there is not signiﬁcant data density . This is a purely cosmetic choice , and the original landscapes can also be viewed unedited , since the translucency does enable viewing of valley regions . There are two sources of stochasticity in the fungus trajectories over the landscapes , which we call morphodynamic diﬀusion and embedding noise , both of which are consumed into the diﬀusion term of the Fokker - Planck model . Morphodynamic diﬀusion is the fundamental unpredictability of morphodynamics over time , arising from un - modeled internal and external factors that vary across fungi . This corresponds to diﬀusion over the approximately 2D morphological manifold within the high - dimensional pixel space . Embedding noise arises from fungi being randomly perturbed away from the 2D morphology manifold in the high - dimensional pixel space . Such perturbations arise from factors including image resolution , segmentation and alignment ( which for example add extra degrees of freedom to the images , and each degree of freedom expand the data manifold dimensionality ) , and the complexity of the autoencoder’s embedding function means these perturbations are not always just mapped to the closest point on the manifold . Since the same 14 image pre - processing algorithms were used on all conditions , diﬀerences in the Fokker - Planck diﬀusion over the same region of morphospace will be morphodynamic in nature , rather than arising from the embedding noise . Supplementary Note 3 : Three Models of Tip Growth The minimal model for fungus growth was composed of two equations : one for lengthening and another for tip bending , and we ran model selection on three candidate models for the bending part . For fungus lengthening , we used the 3 - parameter lognormal distribution to model both germination time , t g , and growth rate , α . The probability density function of the 3 - parameter lognormal distribution is given by f ( x ; s , σ 2 , loc ) = 1 σ √ 2 π ( x − loc ) exp log 2 (cid:0) x − loc s (cid:1) 2 σ 2 ( S5 ) where σ is a shape parameter , s is a scale parameter ( also the median ) , and loc is a location parameter ( the lower bound ) . The 2 - parameter distribution has loc set to zero . We modeled germination time , t g , as distributed according to t g ∼ lognormal ( s t g , σ t g , loc t g ) , and growth rate , α , as distributed according to α = loc α − x , with x ∼ lognormal ( s α , σ α , 0 ) and resampling for negative α . For inferring both the lengthening and bending parameters , we used ABC - SMC [ 8 ] . This is a computa - tionally eﬃcient implementation of ABC , identifying intermediate distributions over a series of populations , and gradually decreasing the acceptance threshold . All histograms were compared using the summed abso - lute distance , and we trained the autoencoder for an extra two epochs with simulations generated randomly from the prior distribution to get coverage of any novel features . For inferring lengthening parameters ( s t g , σ t g , loc t g , s α , σ α , loc α ) , we ran ABC - SMC with a population size of 100 , each with 5000 simulations , for 4 steps . All prior distributions were uniform distributions over the following ranges : s t g : [ 0 . 01 , 150 ] , σ t g : [ 0 . 01 , 5 ] , loc t g : [ 20 , 100 ] , s α : [ 0 . 01 , 2 ] , σ α : [ 0 . 01 , 1 ] , loc α : [ 0 . 3 , 1 . 5 ] . We compared three models for tip bending , and used ABC - SMC for both model selection and parameter inference . As described in the main text , the comparison was done using both the fungus length data and 210 min morphospace embeddings , and Model 3 was found to reproduce the data best . For all of the following , σ is a noise parameter that was ﬁtted , and dW is the Wiener process . Model 1 was a random walk in the global direction , θ global , a simple model commonly used in the literature : dθ global = σdW . ( S6 ) Model 2 was a random walk in the curvature of the growth path , κ , in order to connect to cell tip mechanics : dκ = σdW . ( S7 ) Model 3 was a persistent random walk in the curvature , with an additional parameter for relaxation to straight growth , τ − 1 , motivated by work analysing ﬁssion yeast tip growth mechanics [ 9 ] : dκ = − τ − 1 κdt + σdW . ( S8 ) Models 2 and 3 can be loosely connected to a diﬀusing growth zone at the tip as has been described in ﬁssion yeast [ 9 ] , by introducing an angular growth zone position , θ tip , and a mapping , κ = f ( θ tip ) , where f is unknown , but likely monotonically increasing , and passing through the origin ( i . e . a central growth zone corresponds to straight growth ) . For ﬁtting the bending parameters using ABC - SMC , images were created by taking the MAP lengthening parameters , running the model , and then converting to Cartesian coordinates using the relation dθ global dt = dLdt dθ global dL = ακ , such that : x N + 1 = x N + α ∆ t cos (cid:16)P Nn = 0 ακ ∆ t (cid:17) ( S9 ) y N + 1 = y N + α ∆ t sin (cid:16)P Nn = 0 ακ ∆ t (cid:17) . ( S10 ) 15 Coordinates were then converted to images using the polylines function in OpenCV . For selecting the optimal bending model , we ran ABC - SMC with a population size of 40 , each with 1000 simulations , for 9 steps . All prior distributions were uniform distributions over the following ranges : Model 1 , σ : [ 0 , 0 . 2 ] ; Model 2 , σ : [ 0 , 0 . 01 ] ; Model 3 , σ : [ 0 , 0 . 05 ] , τ − 1 : [ 0 , 0 . 2 ] . For subsequently inferring the bending parameters of Model 3 , we used a population size of 40 , each with 1000 simulations , and ran for 4 steps using the same prior distributions as for model selection . Supplementary Note 4 : Possible Modes of Action The compounds were identiﬁed at pre - screening by eye to show a range of phenotypes . Compound A ( methyl benzimidazol - 2 - ylcarbamate ) is a widely - used fungicide that inhibits the assembly of tubulin subunits into functional microtubules , which are an essential part of the cytoskeleton [ 10 ] . Micro - tubules participate in maintaining the shape of cells , the distribution of organelles , the transport of materials within the cell , and in the separation of chromosomes during mitosis . The bending of germ tubes that we observe may be in part induced by disturbed vesicle transport towards the growing hyphal tip , although there is likely a range of causes . Compound B ( PIK - 75 hydrochloride ) is a phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) inhibitor . PI3Ks are compo - nents of certain signaling pathways , which control growth , metabolism and other functions . PIK - 75 comes from the pharmaceutical industry and is technically not a fungicide . The fungal target is unknown , but if it inhibits fungal PI3K , then the observed phenotype could be due to the disturbance of cellular signaling required for normal tip growth . Compound C ( benzovindiﬂupyr ) has complex II of the respiratory chain as the target , and consequently an inhibition can lead to a depletion of energy . Therefore , depending on the concentration , the cell will stop growth because it lacks the ability to produce the required metabolites . Compound X ( a Syngenta research compound related to triﬂuoromethyloxadiazoles [ 1 ] , see Fig . 7 for the chemical structure ) is an inhibitor of a histone deacetylase ( HDAC ) . Histones are proteins that interact with nuclear DNA , and HDACs are enzymes that remove acetyl groups from histones . As a result , the DNA is packed more tightly , which has an inﬂuence on gene expression . HDAC - inhibitors result in de - regulation of this control mechanism for gene expression , however it is unknown why P . phakopsora germlings react to this compound in the observed manner . Supplementary Methods Python was used for all computing , with the OpenCV library [ 11 ] used for processing the snapshot images , and for data - driven development of the tip growth model . We manually built the PINN architecture using Tensorﬂow 2 [ 12 ] , however there is now a full PINN Python package , DeepXDE [ 13 ] . A Quadro RTX 6000 GPU card was used to speed up neural network training and inference . Finally , we used the pyABC library [ 14 ] for parameter ﬁtting of the tip growth model with ABC - SMC , the computationally eﬃcient implementation of approximate Bayesian computation . Supplementary References [ 1 ] C . Winter et al . “Triﬂuoromethyloxadiazoles : inhibitors of histone deacetylases for control of Asian soybean rust” . In : Pest Management Science 76 . 10 ( 2020 ) , pp . 3357 – 3368 . [ 2 ] Y . Song et al . “Accurate cervical cell segmentation from overlapping clumps in pap smear images” . In : IEEE transactions on medical imaging 36 . 1 ( 2016 ) , pp . 288 – 300 . [ 3 ] D . P . Kingma and J . Ba . “Adam : A method for stochastic optimization” . In : arXiv preprint arXiv : 1412 . 6980 ( 2014 ) . [ 4 ] L . Van der Maaten and G . Hinton . “Visualizing data using t - SNE . ” In : Journal of machine learning research 9 . 11 ( 2008 ) . [ 5 ] D . P . Kingma and M . Welling . “Auto - encoding variational bayes” . In : arXiv preprint arXiv : 1312 . 6114 ( 2013 ) . 16 [ 6 ] Y . Xu et al . “Solving Fokker - Planck equation using deep learning” . In : Chaos : An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 30 . 1 ( 2020 ) , p . 013133 . [ 7 ] X . Chen et al . “Solving inverse stochastic problems from discrete particle observations using the fokker - planck equation and physics - informed neural networks” . In : arXiv preprint arXiv : 2008 . 10653 ( 2020 ) . [ 8 ] T . Toni et al . “Approximate Bayesian computation scheme for parameter inference and model selection in dynamical systems” . In : Journal of the Royal Society Interface 6 . 31 ( 2009 ) , pp . 187 – 202 . [ 9 ] T . Drake and D . Vavylonis . “Model of ﬁssion yeast cell shape driven by membrane - bound growth factors and the cytoskeleton” . In : PLoS Comput Biol 9 . 10 ( 2013 ) , e1003287 . [ 10 ] N . Takeshita and R . Fischer . “On the role of microtubules , cell end markers , and septal microtubule organizing centres on site selection for polar growth in Aspergillus nidulans” . In : Fungal biology 115 . 6 ( 2011 ) , pp . 506 – 517 . [ 11 ] G . Bradski and A . Kaehler . Learning OpenCV : Computer vision with the OpenCV library . ” O’Reilly Media , Inc . ” , 2008 . [ 12 ] M . Abadi et al . “Tensorﬂow : A system for large - scale machine learning” . In : 12th { USENIX } symposium on operating systems design and implementation ( { OSDI } 16 ) . 2016 , pp . 265 – 283 . [ 13 ] L . Lu et al . “DeepXDE : A deep learning library for solving diﬀerential equations” . In : SIAM Review 63 . 1 ( 2021 ) , pp . 208 – 228 . [ 14 ] E . Klinger , D . Rickert , and J . Hasenauer . “pyABC : distributed , likelihood - free inference” . In : Bioin - formatics 34 . 20 ( 2018 ) , pp . 3591 – 3593 . 17