Actin cytoskeleton network self - organization through competition and cooperation Rachel S . Kadzik 1 , 3 , * , Kaitlin E . Homa 1 , * , David R . Kovar 1 , 2 1 Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology , The University of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA , 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , The University of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA , 3 Northwestern University , Molecular BioSciences , 2205 Tech Drive , Hogan 2 - 100 , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA . Abstract Many fundamental cellular processes such as division , polarization , endocytosis , and motility require the assembly , maintenance and disassembly of actin filament ( F - actin ) networks at specific locations and times within the cell . The particular function of each network is governed by F - actin organization , size and density , as well as actin filament dynamics . The distinct characteristics of different F - actin networks are determined through the coordinated action of specific sets of actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) . Furthermore , cells typically assemble and use multiple F - actin networks simultaneously within the same cytoplasm , so networks must self - organize from a common pool of shared actin monomers ( G - actin ) and overlapping sets of ABPs . Recent advances in multi - color imaging and analysis of ABPs and their associated F - actin networks in cells , as well as the development of sophisticated in vitro reconstitutions of networks with ensembles of ABPs , has allowed the field to start uncovering the underlying principles by which cells self - organize diverse F - actin networks to execute basic cellular functions . Self - organization and homeostasis in cell biology Cells are made up of complex mixtures of biomolecules , including nucleic acids , proteins , lipids , and carbohydrates that assemble into large and dynamic macromolecular assemblies , organelles , and membrane - bound compartments . Despite the vast number of component parts , cells maintain a remarkable degree of organization and stability across a wide range of sizes and shapes . A cell’s interior organization facilitates essential cellular processes , but our current understanding of the molecular mechanisms that determine the size and shape of cells and organelles is inadequate to completely explain observed cellular phenomena . How are these large , macromolecular structures built and maintained ? Address correspondence to : Rachel S . Kadzik , Kaitlin E . Homa , David R . Kovar , The University of Chicago , 920 East 58th Street , CLSC Suite 212 , Chicago , IL 60637 , rachel . kadzik @ northwestern . edu , homak @ uchicago . edu , drkovar @ uchicago . edu , Phone : 773 - 834 - 2810 . * These authors contributed equally HHS Public Access Author manuscript Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . Published in final edited form as : Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 2020 October 06 ; 36 : 35 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 032320 - 094706 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t To address central questions about the organization of living cells , biologists have begun to apply the principles of self - organization , first developed in chemistry and physics ( Karsenti , 2008 ; Misteli , 2001 ; Wedlich - Söldner and Betz , 2018 ) . In cell biology , self - organization refers to the capacity of a macromolecular structure , such as an organelle , to determine its own size and shape based on the physical interactions of its component parts ( Misteli , 2001 ) . The process of self - organization involves the association of molecules into adaptable steady - state structures ( Karsenti , 2008 ; Misteli , 2001 ) . A self - organizing system generally meets three main criteria : 1 ) the resulting macromolecular structure is dynamic , with the ability to vary in size , density , and shape , 2 ) the self - organized structure exchanges energy and matter with its environment , and 3 ) an overall stable configuration is generated from dynamic component parts ( Karsenti , 2008 ; Misteli , 2001 ) . In cell biology , self - organization is thought to regulate the assembly of several important cellular structures , including the mitotic spindle , the nucleolus , and the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons , thereby mediating many essential cellular processes ( Dundr et al . , 2000 ; Glick , 2002 ; Heald et al . , 1996 ; Karsenti and Vernos , 2001 ) . For example , bipolar spindles self - organize in the absence of external cues when chromatin , microtubules , and microtubule - associated proteins physically interact ( Heald et al . , 1996 ; Karsenti and Vernos , 2001 ) . Beyond the mitotic spindle , it is important that we broaden our understanding of cellular self - organization to better elucidate how cells achieve stability on the whole - cell level . This review will focus on the assembly , maintenance and architecture of the actin cytoskeleton , which exhibits many hallmarks of a self - organizing system . First , the actin cytoskeleton is remarkably dynamic , as actin filaments are constantly growing , disassembling , and undergoing turnover to adopt various architectures . These dynamic actin filaments assemble into a diverse array of stable , functionally distinct , higher - order networks that continuously exchange actin subunits and actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) with the cytoplasm . A fundamental question in cell biology is how a single actin subunit building block can assemble into so many structurally and functionally diverse actin cytoskeleton networks , and a significant key to understanding this phenomenon lies in its ability to self - organize . What is the physiological relevance of actin cytoskeletal self - organization ? The actin cytoskeleton plays a central role in determining cell shape and polarity , providing structural support , and facilitating essential cellular processes such as cell division and motility . To support these functions , actin filament ( F - actin ) networks must assemble and disassemble at the correct time and place , and with the proper organization and dynamics within a crowded cytoplasm . It has been largely accepted that signaling cascades control activation of actin assembly factors , thereby regulating actin assembly spatially and temporally . However , we have recently proposed a revised model , whereby following their activation at specific locations in the cell , F - actin networks exist in homeostasis , where their size and density are also regulated in part by a limited cytoplasmic pool of globular actin monomers that becomes depleted as F - actin networks grow ( Burke et al . , 2014 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ; Suarez and Kovar , 2016 ) . Thus , while actin homeostasis has historically referred to the cellular ratio of G - actin to F - actin , we have expanded this model to include the idea that actin filaments Kadzik et al . Page 2 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t are distributed between functionally diverse competing F - actin networks ( Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ; Gao and Bretscher , 2008 ; Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ; Kovar et al . , 2011 ; Nakano and Mabuchi , 2006 ; Suarez and Kovar , 2016 ) . In addition to actin filaments , higher - order F - actin networks are composed of many ABPs that work together to define the organization , structure and turnover of the network ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . While we know a lot about how individual ABPs associate with and influence F - actin , how ensembles of ABPs build distinct F - actin networks simultaneously is less well - understood . Here , we describe how self - organization and homeostasis may contribute to higher - order F - actin network behavior in a variety of cell types and discuss how competitive and cooperative interactions between ABPs contribute to F - actin network self - organization . F - actin assembly , disassembly , and network organization Although G - actin spontaneously assembles into F - actin , actin assembly and disassembly are tightly regulated in space and time in cells by a wide range of ABPs with complementary biochemical properties ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Cytoplasmic actin concentrations range from ~ 50 – 200 μM , approximately half of which appears to be unassembled . Most unpolymerized actin is bound to actin monomer - binding proteins that prevent their unregulated spontaneous assembly , namely profilin and β - thymosins ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) ( Kaiser et al . , 1999 ) . These monomer - binding proteins are just one class of actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) that collectively regulate actin assembly and disassembly in time and space . Many additional ABPs work together to nucleate and elongate F - actin from the pool of unpolymerized profilin - actin and organize higher order F - actin networks through a variety of activities including stabilizing , severing , crosslinking , and capping actin filaments ( for a more detailed description of ABPs , follow the Supplemental Materials link in the online version of this article or at http : / / www . annualreviews . org / ) . Functionally Distinct F - actin networks The diversity of actin assembly factors and ABPs ( described further in Supplemental Materials ) gives rise to a wide array of F - actin networks , each organized with architectures and properties to perform specific functions in the cell ( Figure 1 ) . These cellular roles include providing structural support , generating polarity , promoting endocytosis , cell motility , and cell division . Each of these functions requires networks with distinct qualities dictated by how the filaments are assembled , the rate of filament turnover , how F - actin is organized , and if or how they are bundled . F - actin networks differ in structure and molecular components depending on particular cellular requirements . In the following sections , we will highlight some of the model systems and networks in which actin cytoskeleton self - organization has been investigated . Fission yeast F - actin networks Because of the complexity of the actin cytoskeleton in multi - cellular systems , in which cells assemble numerous networks from a large variety of ABPs with multiple isoforms , Kadzik et al . Page 3 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t budding and fission yeasts have been widely used to investigate complexities of actin cytoskeletal network behavior and function ( Mishra et al . , 2014 ) . Compared to multicellular organisms , fission yeast has a simplified actin cytoskeleton with ~ 40 ABPs and a single actin isoform . Furthermore , vegetatively growing fission yeast cells build only three primary F - actin networks , each assembled by a distinct assembly factor ( Figure 1 ) : endocytic actin patches ( Arp2 / 3 complex ) , the cytokinetic contractile ring ( formin Cdc12 ) and polarizing actin cables ( formin For3 ) ( Kovar et al . , 2011 ) . Actin patches assemble at the tips of interphase cells and the midzone of dividing cells to mediate endocytosis ( Balasubramanian et al . , 2004 ; Gachet and Hyams , 2005 ) . Assembly of actin patches occurs in an ordered fashion , with proteins promoting membrane invagination arriving first , followed by adapter proteins and regulators of actin assembly , namely Arp2 / 3 complex and its NPFs ( Sirotkin et al . , 2010 ) . The mechanism by which Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly results in vesicle internalization is not completely understood , but models predict that actin patches contain ~ 150 short actin filaments ( 100 – 200 nm ) that are quickly capped by capping protein . These short , branched filaments are crosslinked by fimbrin Fim1 ( Akamatsu et al . , 2020 ; Lacy et al . , 2019 ) . Fission yeast cytokinesis has long served as a leading model for identifying and characterizing important players in contractile ring formation . The prevailing mechanism of contractile ring assembly in fission yeast , called Search , Capture , Pull , and Release , involves the assembly of pre - ring cytokinesis nodes containing type - II myosin Myo2 , formin Cdc12 , and other scaffolding and signaling proteins ( Laporte et al . , 2011 ; Vavylonis et al . , 2008 ; Wu et al . , 2003 ) . Myo2 exerts pulling forces on actin filaments elongated by Cdc12 on nearby nodes , driving node coalescence ( Coffman et al . , 2009 ; Wu et al . , 2003 ) . These node - node contacts are released by cofilin - mediated severing , and the cycle repeats to generate a mature contractile ring of antiparallel actin filaments bundled by the dynamic crosslinking protein α - actinin Ain1 ( Nakano and Mabuchi , 2006 ; Wu et al . , 2001 ) . Actin cables serve as polarized tracks for type V myosin - based transport of cargo to the growing tips of fission yeast cells . Actin cables are composed of short bundles of parallel F - actin assembled by the formin For3 , which associates with the cortex at the cells tips to nucleate and elongate F - actin ( Feierbach and Chang , 2001 ; Kamasaki et al . , 2005 ; Nakano et al . , 2002 ; Wang and Vavylonis , 2008 ) . Less is generally known about the assembly and ABP composition of actin cables compared to actin patches and the contractile ring , as cables are more difficult to image in live cells . Tropomyosin Cdc8 and coronin Crn1 localize to actin cables , but the ABP responsible for bundling filaments in cables is not known . Animal cell F - actin networks Although the underlying mechanistic principles of actin filament organization and dynamics are conserved , the metazoan actin cytoskeleton is highly specialized and actin filaments are organized into distinct subcellular domains that differ from the networks found in yeast cells ( Figure 1 ) . Contrasting with the three well - defined F - actin networks in vegatitive yeast cells , a typical animal cell has 18 – 20 F - actin networks with multiple actin isoforms , which are organized by hundreds of different ABPs ( Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ; Chhabra and Higgs , Kadzik et al . Page 4 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 2007 ) . While considerable work remains to determine the specific identity and behavior of F - actin structures in different cells , we will highlight some well - characterized networks that have been used to investigate competition and self - organization of the actin cytoskeleton in animal cells . One prominent feature of animal cells is the cortical F - actin network found adjacent to the plasma membrane composed of both branched and linear actin filaments ( Bovellan et al . , 2014 ) . In specific subregions of the membrane , this cortical F - actin network is organized into structures needed for diverse cellular functions ( Figure 1 ) including cell motility ( lamellipodia , lamella , filopodia , blebs ) , endocytosis ( phagosomes , endocytic patches ) , absorption ( microvilli ) , exocytosis , and invasion ( podosomes , invadosomes ) . Additionally , F - actin structures link the plasma membrane to intercellular structures such as stress fibers , as well as circumferential F - actin networks linked to adherens junctions . Each of these described networks have multiple specific assembly factors ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ) , and a plethora of ABPs with complementary properties that generate distinct actin filament organizations that are tailored for each network’s cellular function . Despite the complexity in animal cells , in subdomains and at particular times in the cell cycle , distinct F - actin networks have been identified and the properties dictating the kinetics and dynamics of these networks are starting to be appreciated from a systems - wide perspective . Due to their role in motility , several F - actin networks at the leading edge of motile cells have been well - studied and characterized , namely the lamellipodia and filopodia ( Figure 1 ) . The lamellipodia is a flattened , protrusive extension of the plasma membrane made up of dendritic F - actin networks ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . The assembly of this arborized network is controlled by the concerted action of multiple nucleators , but it is clear that Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia formation in many cell types ( Nicholson - Dykstra and Higgs , 2008 ; Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) as loss of Arp2 / 3 has effects on motility and causes large scale reorganization of F - actin networks in the lamellipodia ( Anderson et al . , 2017 ) . Additionally , recent work has demonstrated a requirement for formins FMNL2 and FMNL3 in the lamellipodia ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) . Emerging from the lamellipodia are protrusive , finger - like structures called filopodia that are made up of bundled , linear actin filaments that serve as guidance structures that sense and respond to the surrounding environment ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ) . The linear F - actin networks of the filopodia are polymerized ( nucleated and elongated , or elongated from Arp2 / 3 complex ) by assembly factors such as formins and Ena / VASP ( Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ) , and bundled by F - actin crosslinking proteins such as fascin ( Jansen et al . , 2011 ; Vignjevic et al . , 2006 ) . As is obvious from this brief description of the cellular structures required for motility at the leading edge , even specific subcellular structures in animal cells have a mix of actin assembly factors , ABPs , and architectures within each structure . Despite this complexity , the lamellipodia has proved a useful candidate for examining self - organization of the F - actin cortex of animal cells , which will be further elucidated below . While these studies have provided initial insight , due to the sheer number of networks in animal cells , investigating F - actin network self - organization at the cellular level remains a significant challenge . Kadzik et al . Page 5 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t In order to bridge the gap between the relative simplicity of yeast and mammalian cells , metazoan model systems where F - actin network self - organization can be interrogated on a systems - based level needs to be pursued . One promising candidate is the C . elegans one - cell embryo ( Figure 1 ) , which has a moderate number of four to five F - actin networks ( Davies et al . , 2014 ; Velarde et al . , 2007 ) , three actin isoforms ( of five isoforms total ) , and moderate number of ABPs , which typically have one to five isoforms ( Willis et al . , 2006 ) . Self - Organization There are a number of mechanisms that dictate when , where , and how distinct F - actin networks are established in the cell . The question as to how functionally and structurally diverse assemblies of actin filaments arise within a common cytoplasm has long been a prominent question in cell biology . Early studies into the hair cells of the chick auditory organ noted distinct F - actin networks that arose over developmental time and likely were due to multiple mechanisms , including regulation of actin nucleation as well as the ABPs associated with each network ( Tilney and Tilney , 1984 ) . In the intervening years , there has been significant focus on network specificity arising from regulated signaling that activates F - actin assembly at particular times and locations within the cell . Recent work has detailed additional mechanisms that affect network identity , including competition for actin monomers as well as cooperation and competition between ABPs that generate unique compositions of proteins localized to specific networks . Additionally , there is evidence that other factors , such as mechanical strain ( Wioland et al . , 2019 ) , actin filament helicity ( Jegou and Romet - Lemonne , 2019 ) , and F - actin network architecture ( Boujemaa - Paterski et al . , 2017 ; Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Reymann et al . , 2010 ) can affect the structure and function of networks as well as the proteins associated with each network . Historically , F - actin networks were studied in isolation , but now the focus is turning to the interplay between networks , highlighting how specific subgroups of ABPs co - localize to a particular structure and collectively influence F - actin organization . In the following sections , we will specifically highlight how one mechanism of self - organization , competition and cooperation , affects the distribution of actin monomers and ABPs to give rise to the functionally diverse filament structures found in the cell . Competition for actin monomers The size of individual F - actin networks in the cell is determined by the rate of actin filament nucleation , rates of filament elongation , and rates of network disassembly . A long - standing model has been that F - actin network size and density are regulated exclusively through the activation of actin assembly factors by GTPase signaling cascades , F - actin barbed end capping , and F - actin disassembly factors ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ; Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ; Michelot and Drubin , 2011 ; Pollard , 2016 ) . A key premise of this model is that functionally diverse F - actin networks within a common cytoplasm do not influence the size and density of each other , as the pool of actin monomers is large and unlimited . While the activation of actin assembly factors by GTPases has an important role in determining the time and place of cellular actin nucleation , many studies also provide examples of cross - talk and competition between different F - actin networks . Specifically , disruption of one network by affecting specific nucleation factors frequently results in an increase in the size and / or Kadzik et al . Page 6 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t density of other F - actin networks in a cell ( Dimchev et al . , 2017 ; Gao and Bretscher , 2008 ; Kumari et al . , 2020 ; Nicholson - Dykstra and Higgs , 2008 ; Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Sagot et al . , 2002 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) . Through systematic evaluation of this competition , we found that the depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex - generated actin patch networks in fission yeast results in a dramatic increase in F - actin assembled at the contractile ring or actin cables mediated by the formins Cdc12 and For3 ( Burke et al . , 2014 ) . Importantly , ectopic F - actin assembly due to inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex fails to occur if patch disassembly is inhibited , preventing release of actin patch monomers and re - incorporation into the remaining F - actin networks . Conversely , genetic depletion of formins increases the density of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin patches . Furthermore , increasing actin expression favors Arp2 / 3 complex actin patches , whereas lowering actin expression favors assembly of formin - mediated contractile rings . These results suggest an important regulatory mechanism whereby the actin cytoskeleton is in homeostasis , characterized by an intrinsic competition for a common pool of G - actin that helps set the number and size of diverse F - actin networks in fission yeast . This evidence supports the model that competition for a limited concentration of actin between rival F - actin networks contributes to the regulation of their size and density ( Figure 2 ) ( Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ; Gao and Bretscher , 2008 ; Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ; Kovar et al . , 2011 ) . By systematically inhibiting rival actin assembly factors , resulting in over - consumption of actin by remaining F - actin networks , several groups have now demonstrated that self - organized F - actin networks are in homeostasis , whereby they indirectly influence each other’s size / density by competing for limiting actin subunits in lamellipodia ( Lomakin et al . , 2015 ; Rotty et al . , 2015 ) and fission yeast actin networks ( Burke et al . , 2014 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Although competition for limiting actin cannot explain F - actin network size scaling on its own , this homeostatic mechanism appears likely to contribute to network sizing from fission yeast to animal cells ( Antkowiak et al . , 2019 ; Billault - Chaumartin and Martin , 2019 ; Chan et al . , 2019 ; Davidson et al . , 2018 ; Dimchev et al . , 2017 ; Faust et al . , 2019 ; Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ; Kumari et al . , 2020 ; Lomakin et al . , 2015 ; Sarmiento et al . , 2008 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) . Since the initial proposal of this model , there have been a number of studies that have identified mechanisms that contribute to the proper distribution of monomers to competitive F - actin networks . Several studies have focused on competition for polymerization - competent actin monomers and found that the small G - actin binding protein , profilin , plays a key role in mediating this competition ( Figure 2 ) . In fission yeast , profilin is required for formin to compete effectively with Arp2 / 3 complex for limited G - actin and to assemble F - actin for contractile ring formation in dividing cells ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Similarly , in the lamellipodia of fibroblasts , profilin favors Ena / VASP to assemble linear actin arrays over dendritic networks assembled by Arp2 / 3 complex activation ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) . A recent paper also focused on the lamellipodia of enterocytes found that profilin promotes the assembly of linear actin filaments ( likely by another linear filament assembly factor , Cobl ) in microvilli in competition with the branched network generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia ( Faust et al . , 2019 ) . Kadzik et al . Page 7 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A key aspect of these studies is that profilin reduces Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated branch formation by approximately 5 - fold and high profilin : : actin ratios reduces the amount of actin monomers incorporated into Arp2 / 3 complex - generated branched networks , thereby favoring ( and / or allowing ) linear filament assembly via a number of different nucleators such as formin and / or Ena / VASP ( Figure 2 ) . An important test of this model is that inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex ( pharmacologically or genetically ) suppresses genetic depletion of profilin in fission yeast , allowing formin - mediated contractile ring assembly at severely reduced profilin levels ( Balasubramanian et al . , 1996 , 1996 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . In this scenario , we have proposed that profilin competes with WASP ( fission yeast Wsp1 ) for binding actin monomers ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . Recent work has questioned this mechanism because the proline - rich region of WASP upstream of the VCA region could bind profilin : : actin and promote actin use by the VCA of WASP in filament nucleation and elongation along with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Bieling et al . , 2018 ) . At least in yeast , this mechanism seems unlikely , as Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated branched actin assembly activated by full - length recombinant WASP , is inhibited by profilin : : actin to the same extent as VCA alone ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . This was also observed with full - length Scar and Arp2 / 3 complex from Acanthamoeba ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . While branched assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex occurs with profilin : : actin , the rate is reduced as compared to actin alone . In organisms with multiple profilin isoforms ( Neidt et al . , 2009 ) , specific isoforms have differing effects on formin - mediated assembly rates of actin filaments . Likewise , different profilin isoforms in mammalian systems may be tuned to promote assembly depending on the NPF , linear assembly factor , and Arp2 / 3 complex isoforms present , and this potential specialization warrants future investigation . There remain some outstanding questions and alternative interpretations postulated for the role of profilin in mediating homeostasis between competing F - actin networks in cells . One proposed mechanism is that high concentrations of profilin may bind the barbed end of the actin filaments and compete with other barbed - end binding proteins , affecting branch assembly and filament elongation ( Carlier and Shekhar , 2017 ; Pernier et al . , 2016 ) . Recent quantification of profilin : : actin concentrations in animal cells suggest the amount of free profilin in the cell is not high enough ( > 10 μM ) for profilin to competitively bind the barbed end of actin filaments ( Funk et al . , 2019 ) . Another alternative considers the cellular profilin pool to be finite and lower than the total actin concentration . In experimental conditions where transient network disassembly is induced , the released actin monomers may overwhelm profilin’s capacity to bind actin monomers ( Funk et al . , 2019 ) . The observed ectopic actin nucleation could be caused by excess free actin monomers that trigger assembly through spontaneous nucleation and formin - specific nucleation pathways ( Higashida et al . , 2013 ) . This proposed effect does not consider results where an increase in profilin concentration via overexpression or injection can promote linear networks ( formin , Ena / VASP , or Cobl ) over Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated networks . Nevertheless , development of techniques that allow for quantification of monomer and filamentous actin states in vivo during assembly , disassembly , and reorganization are needed to understand their effect on local F - actin network dynamics ( Isogai and Danuser , 2018 ; Skruber et al . , 2018 ) . These tools will be vital to future studies investigating in more detail how cells respond to changes in Kadzik et al . Page 8 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t actin expression , how robustly they can maintain homeostasis or changes in actin levels , and whether they can actively control actin expression to regulate network competition . Recent work modeling the limiting - pool mechanism found evidence that both supports ( Antkowiak et al . , 2019 ) and questions ( Mohapatra et al . , 2017 ) this mechanism , depending on the assumptions upon which the models are built . Modeling competing networks of similar sizes with differing assembly rates ( Mohapatra et al . , 2017 ) , the authors found the network with the faster assembly rate will consume all the building blocks . But , F - actin networks of similar size could be generated if the network lifetime is of the same order as the time required to construct the network , which is likely the case in the cell ( Suarez et al . , 2017 ) . In combined in vitro / in silico work that lends support to the limiting - pool mechanism ( Antkowiak et al . , 2019 ) , Antkowiak et al . found that when evaluating the effect of profilin , capping protein , and ADF / cofilin on network assembly rates that profilin had the most profound effect , in agreement with Suarez et al . ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ) and Rotty et al . ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) . Pairing modeling with in vitro and in vivo work has been a powerful method to uncover principles governing actin assembly in motility and cytokinesis and will continue to inform our understanding of inter - network competition . The role of capping protein and disassembly factors in monomer availability An important aspect of F - actin network competition and regulation is how the dimensions of networks are established and maintained . While F - actin network size is partially dictated by the activity of actin assembly factors and competition for actin monomers , the restriction of barbed - end elongation and disassembly of networks also play important roles . Filament nucleation and elongation rates are directly proportional to the concentration of polymerization competent monomers , as such , the rate that F - actin is recycled into G - actin likely affects subsequent network assembly ( Pollard , 2016 ) . The activities of capping protein and disassembly factors are crucial for regeneration of polymerization competent monomers , therefore these factors can directly affect the competition for actin monomers detailed above ( Carlier and Shekhar , 2017 ; Suarez et al . , 2017 ) . A role for capping protein in F - actin network homeostasis One mechanism to modulate F - actin network size is to restrict the elongation of filament barbed ends by barbed - end cappers . Capping protein is the major player in this process and binds tightly to F - actin barbed ends ( Kd ~ 0 . 1nM ) ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . In Arp2 / 3 complex - generated networks , most barbed ends are rapidly capped by capping protein , generating a dense dendritic network of short filaments needed for generating protrusive force ( Akin and Mullins , 2008 ) . In linear networks generated by barbed - end associated proteins such as formins and Ena / VASP , capping protein is in competition with these factors for the barbed end ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Capping protein can be regulated by a number of factors that inhibit its interaction with the barbed end either via steric ( myostrophin ( V1 ) and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ) or allosteric mechanisms ( CARMIL / LRRC16A ) ( Edwards et al . , 2014 ) . A positive regulator of capping protein is twinfilin , which binds competitively with CARMIL , protecting capping protein from barbed end displacement by CARMIL , and can also relieve the inhibition by V1 ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . The various mechanisms that modify capping protein’s association with the barbed ends can Kadzik et al . Page 9 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t affect monomeric G - actin availability , affecting competition between networks based on the specific proteins associated with each distinct network . There is evidence for a role for capping protein in mediating competition between linear and branched F - actin networks , but this competition appears to be context dependent . Loss of capping protein might cause unrestricted growth from filament barbed ends in Arp2 / 3 complex - generated networks and rapidly deplete the monomer pool , affecting the availability of G - actin for linear filament assembly . Supporting this model , deletion of capping protein in budding and fission yeast increases actin incorporation into Arp2 / 3 complex - generated patches by at least 35 % and decreases the number of formin - mediated actin cables ( Amatruda et al . , 1990 ; Berro and Pollard , 2014 ; Kovar et al . , 2005 ; Sizonenko et al . , 1996 ) . The evidence for capping protein mediating competition between networks is less clear in mammalian cells , possibly due to more complex F - actin networks . Depletion of capping protein in melanoma cells and neurons decreases F - actin in Arp2 / 3 complex assembled lamellipodia and increases filopodia number five - fold ( Mejillano et al . , n . d . ; Sinnar et al . , 2014 ) . As described above , lamellipodia and filopodia of mammalian cells are in close association , which may cause these observed results . It is possible that loss of capping protein facilitates filament elongation , further assisted by Ena / VASP and formins , which would then be rapidly bundled by fascin , generating filopodial - like structures . These results demonstrate a role for capping protein in inter - network competition , but also highlight that this role depends on network organization . Disassembly Factors Affect Actin Monomer Availability The assembly of new F - actin networks requires the disassembly of previous networks in order to preserve the cellular pool of unpolymerized G - actin ( Carlier and Shekhar , 2017 ; Suarez et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , it would be expected that the rate of filament disassembly would affect the availability of actin monomers , and as such , affect the rate of filament assembly in the cell . Members of the ADF / Cofilin family have been identified as major contributors to actin filament turnover in cells ( Bamburg , 1999 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ; Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ; Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ) ; acting by severing and depolymerizing actin filaments , thereby generating ADP - actin monomers . ADF / Cofilin localizes both to branched F - actin networks in cells ( Theriot , 1997 ) as well as linear networks such as the filopodia in mammalian cells ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2011 ) and the cytokinetic ring in yeast ( Chen and Pollard , 2011 ) . While ADF / Cofilin is required at both branched and linear networks in the cell , the rate of disassembly is highly dependent on the ABPs localized to each network . In vitro , cofilin alone has a low rate of severing and depolymerization , which does not match rates observed in vivo ( Miyoshi and Watanabe , 2013 ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ; Wioland et al . , 2017 ) . Work from many labs over the last 20 years has highlighted cooperation between actin disassembly factors that promotes actin filament severing and depolymerization . ADF / Cofilin often acts in synergy with actin - interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) ( Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) , coronin ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) , twinfilin , and Srv2 / adenylyl cyclase - associated protein ( Hilton et al . , 2018 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ) . One suite of proteins that enhances ADF / cofilin severing activity includes coronin ( Gandhi et al . , 2009 ) , which Kadzik et al . Page 10 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t promotes cofilin binding to actin filaments , and AIP1 ( Balcer et al . , 2003 ; Kueh et al . , 2008 ) , which cooperates with cofilin and coronin to sever filaments ( Jansen et al . , 2015 ) . Recently , the mechanism underlying cooperation between cofilin and Srv2 / adenylyl cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) to promote depolymerization from the actin filament pointed end was shown by structural ( Kotila et al . , 2019 ) and biochemical ( Shekhar et al . , 2019 ) methods . These mechanisms for F - actin disassembly have primarily been characterized on linear actin filaments in vitro , but there is evidence that these factors may have differential preference on dendritic networks . For example , networks consisting of linear filaments require ADF / cofilin and AIP1 for disassembly , whereas Arp2 / 3 networks don’t appear to require AIP1 ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , the ADF / cofilin family member GMF ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ) and coronin ( Sirotkin et al . , 2010 ) are found specifically in arborized networks to promote debranching , which may represent an early step in network disassembly . The cooperation of these factors and the unique makeup of the actin disassembly factors in each network could modify the local availability of G - actin and allow for rapid remodeling of individual networks . In addition to cooperative interactions that promote severing and depolymerization , there is evidence for competitive interactions between ADF / cofilin and ABPs that affect filament depolymerization . Myosin can bind to actin filaments and compete with cofilin for binding ( Wiggan et al . , 2012 ) and in some cases displace cofilin ( Elam et al . , 2013 ) , generating boundaries of cofilin - bound versus bare actin filaments that promote severing . In contrast to an increase in severing with myosin , non - muscle myosin - bundled stress fibers made up of linear actin filaments are protected from disassembly ( Lomakin et al . , 2015 ) . Inhibition of myosin via blebbistatin resulted in rapid disassembly of stress fibers , liberation of actin monomers , and assembly of actin into dendritic networks at the leading edge . Other competitive and cooperative interactions with proteins such as tropomyosin and fimbrin that affect binding of cofilin to actin will be further discussed below . The net rate of F - actin disassembly is also affected by the density and architecture of the network as well as the local concentration of F - actin and ADF / cofilin . ADF / cofilin can be locally depleted from solution by binding to F - actin , resulting in denser networks having greater depletion of ADF / cofilin , but sparser networks will exhibit faster filament turnover and disassembly ( Manhart et al . , 2019 ) . Network architecture affects disassembly rate , with ADF / cofilin binding more sparsely to branched networks , and promoting increased disassembly as compared to linear networks ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ) . Bundled linear actin networks appear to be resistant to severing by cofilin ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ) , but subsequent work evaluating F - actin bundled by fascin found that cofilin - mediated disassembly was enhanced ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2011 ) , indicating a cooperation between an actin filament bundling factor and cofilin . Furthermore , mechanical stress in highly cross - linked actin networks can enhance the rate of ADF / cofilin severing of actin filaments ( Wioland et al . , 2019 ) . These interacting networks of proteins and conditions that mediate the activity of ADF / cofilin highlight the numerous and complicated array of mechanisms available in the cell that allow for regulation of F - actin network disassembly . Specific proteins needed to promote filament disassembly could affect the rate of turnover in different regions , Kadzik et al . Page 11 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t thereby affecting the local actin monomer concentration . The question remains as to if these conditions cause local enrichment of monomers or if diffusion is fast enough to render the effect of network - specific turnover moot in the cell . Supporting rapid monomer diffusion upon network disassembly , Higashida et al . found that when F - actin networks are disrupted by microneedle manipulation , cytoplasmic G - actin levels increase ( Higashida et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , it remains unclear if there is any degree of crosstalk between networks to regulate F - actin disassembly to maintain actin monomer levels ( Carlier and Shekhar , 2017 ) . As we gain a better understanding of the cooperative and competitive milieu in which ADF / cofilin operates , it will be important to incorporate the effect of these interactions on homeostatic maintenance of F - actin network size and organization . Competition and cooperation between actin binding proteins Activation of specific actin assembly factors and subsequent recruitment of specific sets of ABPs leads to the formation of F - actin networks with the correct size , density and architectures to carry out distinct cellular processes . However , multiple different F - actin networks are assembled simultaneously within a common cytoplasm . Thus , the mechanisms that govern how specific sets of ABPs localize to the correct F - actin network are unclear . To explain how ABPs sort to the appropriate network at the right time and place , several non - mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed that can be grouped into two categories : extrinsic and intrinsic factors . Extrinsic vs . Intrinsic regulation Extrinsic factors that contribute to ABP sorting include external signals that act on an ABP . Just as upstream signals activate actin assembly factors , models of extrinsic regulation postulate that upstream signals regulate ABP localization to distinct cellular regions and F - actin networks . Examples of upstream signals include post - translational modifications ( PTMs ) or ion - binding that influence ABP activity in different cell cycle stages or subcellular compartments . For example , villin proteins mediate a calcium - dependent remodeling of F - actin by severing and bundling F - actin in A . thaliana pollen tubes responding to self - incompatibility . Budding yeast fimbrin Sac6 is phosphorylated in a cell cycle - dependent manner , enhancing its ability to associate with actin filaments ( Miao et al . , 2016 ) , but how this phosphorylation promotes Sac6’s localization to endocytic actin patches is unclear . Conversely , the intrinsic model of ABP sorting relies on qualities inherent to ABPs themselves that influence how , when , or where they associate with actin filaments . As all ABPs associated with actin networks bind F - actin , important intrinsic features that could affect ABP sorting include the number , type , orientation , or spacing of actin - binding modules . For example , the actin - binding domains alone of α - actinin and filamin are sufficient to localize to the proper cellular actin networks in Dictyostelium ( Washington and Knecht , 2008 ) . These intrinsic features could alter 1 ) an ABP’s preference for a specific F - actin architecture ( branched vs . straight filaments ) , 2 ) an ABP’s affinity for a specific type of actin ( ATP vs ADP - associated , length ) , or 3 ) the cooperative binding or kinetics of an ABP’s association with F - actin . Additionally , intrinsic factors could modify actin filaments by changing the twist and / or flexibility of individual filaments or altering characteristics Kadzik et al . Page 12 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t of higher - order F - actin networks , such as the spacing , orientation , or density of filaments within the network , thereby making these filaments more amenable for ABP - binding . Competition and cooperation between actin binding proteins Recent evidence suggests that competition between ABPs for binding F - actin is a major factor that helps drive their sorting to different F - actin networks ( Figure 2 ) . For example , competition between capping protein and formin ( or Ena / VASP ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) ) , barbed end - binding proteins , has been well - characterized in vitro ( Bombardier et al . , 2015 ; Harris et al . , 2004 ; Kovar et al . , 2003 ; Moseley et al . , 2004 ; Shekhar et al . , 2015 ; Zigmond et al . , 2003 ) . It was previously thought that once either capping protein or formin associate with a barbed end , it prevents the other from influencing polymerization . However , more recent evidence suggests that formin and capping proteins may bind the barbed end simultaneously , creating a “decision complex” that allows fine - tuning of filament length ( Bombardier et al . , 2015 ; Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . In fission yeast cells , capping protein associates with Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated filaments , preserving the identity of branched networks and confining formin to other actin networks ( Billault - Chaumartin and Martin , 2019 ) . Further study will elucidate how cells balance formin and capping protein activities to promote F - actin assembly at the proper time and place . Intrinsic factors also mediate the sorting of ABPs to distinct stretches of bundled filaments . Two crosslinking proteins , fascin and α - actinin , sort themselves into mutually exclusive domains on the same bundle in vitro ( Winkelman et al . , 2016 ) . Fascin generates F - actin bundles with a narrow 8 nm spacing , while α - actinin creates more widely spaced bundles with filaments ~ 40 nm apart . Importantly , espin and fimbrin , also compact crosslinking proteins , sort to fascin - coated domain of the bundle , which suggests that filament spacing may be a key structural mechanism of ABP sorting in bundled networks ( Winkelman et al . , 2016 ) . The ability to reconstitute this ABP sorting from purified proteins highlights the importance of intrinsic regulation , as no extrinsic signaling is required to generate mutually exclusive domains of fascin and α - actinin . Another example of competition between specific ABPs involves fission yeast fimbrin Fim1 , a crosslinking protein that localizes primarily to endocytic actin patches , and the contractile ring - associated tropomyosin Cdc8 . Fim1 inhibits Cdc8’s association with actin filaments in vitro and actin patches in fission yeast cells ( Christensen et al . , 2017 ; Skau and Kovar , 2010 ) . Cdc8 , as well as other tropomyosins , also protects F - actin from cofilin Adf1 - mediated severing ( Gateva et al . , 2017 ; Nishida et al . , 1984 ; Skau and Kovar , 2010 ) , so another important role for Fim1 is to promote F - actin turnover by preventing Cdc8’s association with actin patches . Furthermore , Cdc8 differentially regulates three fission yeast myosins : Myo1 ( a class I myosin that serves as an Arp2 / 3 complex NPF in actin patches ) , Myo51 , and Myo52 ( class V myosins that localize to the contractile ring and actin cables , respectively ) ( Clayton et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , different mammalian tropomyosin isoforms sort to different actin filament populations and differentially regulate how ABPs access F - actin , with some isoforms activating myosin activity , and others protecting filaments from severing by ADF / cofilin ( Gateva et al . , 2017 ) . While fission yeast Cdc8 promotes motor activity of Myo51 and Myo52 at formin - mediated F - actin Kadzik et al . Page 13 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t networks and blocks Myo1 - binding at actin patches , Fim1 restores Myo1 association with Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated filaments in actin patches by antagonizing Cdc8 ( Clayton et al . , 2010 ) . Further study in fission yeast revealed a complicated web of interactions that leads to sorting of fission yeast Fim1 , Cdc8 , Adf1 , and α - actinin Ain1 to the proper F - actin networks ( Figure 2 ) . Multi - color TIRF microscopy with fluorescently - labeled ABPs showed that while Cdc8 readily associates with single actin filaments , Fim1 can actively displace Cdc8 from actin filaments as it bundles them ( Christensen et al . , 2017 ) . Supporting previous findings ( Skau and Kovar , 2010 ) , it was shown that Cdc8 , like some mammalian tropomyosin isoforms ( Gateva et al . , 2017 ) , also competes with Adf1 by inhibiting its initial association with F - actin , but Adf1 displaces Cdc8 from older stretches of F - actin at later time points ( Christensen et al . , 2017 ) . Interestingly , Fim1 also displays a mutually exclusive binding pattern with Adf1 , despite both being actin patch - associated proteins in fission yeast . The competitive interaction between Fim1 and Adf1 actually leads to a more densely bundled actin network , as Adf1 - mediated severing of actin bundles rapidly generates new , elongating barbed ends . The synergistic interaction between Adf1 and Fim1 allows them to compete with Cdc8 , as Cdc8 is completely prevented from associating with F - actin in the presence of both Adf1 and Fim1 ( Christensen et al . , 2017 ) ( Figure 2 ) . These results suggest that competitive , pairwise interactions between ABPs could mediate their own sorting to distinct actin networks or influence how other ABPs associate with F - actin . What are the molecular mechanisms that govern these competitive interactions ? One intrinsic property that contributes to ABP sorting is cooperative association with actin filaments , which occurs when the binding of one molecule increases the likelihood that another will bind . For example , cooperative binding by crosslinking proteins like fascin and α - actinin contributes to the formation of F - actin bundles with a specific spacing that is optimal for recruiting other crosslinkers that maintain that spacing ( Winkelman et al . , 2016 ) . Tropomyosin Cdc8 exhibits a high degree of end - to - end cooperativity that promotes its polymerization along actin filaments as well as indirect cooperativity via the actin filament that enhances its association with F - actin ( Christensen et al . , 2017 ) . Cdc8’s cooperative binding makes it a great “gatekeeping” protein that rapidly coats F - actin to influence how other ABPs can access actin filaments . However , Cdc8’s cooperativity also promotes its rapid removal from F - actin , which likely explains its inability to compete with Fim1 . Once Fim1 crosslinks actin filaments , Cdc8 is unable to displace it , leading to Cdc8’s exclusion from Fim1 - associated actin networks like actin patches . However , if Fim1 outcompetes Cdc8 for binding F - actin , why is Cdc8 abundant at the fission yeast contractile ring , while Fim1 is practically absent ? Subsequent work revealed that Cdc8 collaborates with other contractile ring proteins to better compete against Fim1 . α - Actinin Ain1 , the ABP primarily responsible for bundling F - actin in the fission yeast contractile ring ( Wu et al . , 2001 ) , also competes with Fim1 for binding F - actin both in vitro and in fission yeast cells . Fim1 outcompetes Ain1 and prevents it from associating with actin filaments , likely because Fim1 is a more stable bundler , while Ain1 generates dynamic bundles due to its shorter residence time on F - actin ( Christensen et al . , 2019 ; Li et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , in contrast to Fim1 , Cdc8 actually enhances Ain1’s ability to bundle F - actin by increasing the number of Ain1 binding events along actin Kadzik et al . Page 14 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t bundles ( Christensen et al . , 2019 ) . As a result , the combination of Cdc8 and Ain1 is better able to compete against Fim1 , as they synergize to increase the amount of Cdc8 present on bundles and decrease Fim1’s association with actin filaments ( Figure 2 ) . This synergy could explain why Fim1 associates poorly with the contractile ring in fission yeast cells and hints at a large , complex network of interactions between ABPs that ensures their sorting to specific F - actin networks . While Cdc8 and Ain1 combine to more effectively compete with Fim1 , they only reduce Fim1 association with F - actin bundles by 40 % in vitro ( Christensen et al . , 2019 ) . Furthermore , there is a higher cellular concentration of Fim1 than Ain1 or Cdc8 ( Wu and Pollard , 2005 ) . Thus , a reasonable assumption is that Ain1 and Cdc8 only prevent a portion of Fim1 molecules from associating with the contractile ring in vivo . Thus , there are likely a variety of different mechanisms that contribute to ABP sorting . One possibility is that Fim1 activity is regulated by post - translational modifications ( PTMs ) . It is known that budding yeast fimbrin Sac6 is phosphorylated by Cdk1 at different stages of the cell cycle , increasing its ability to bind F - actin ( Miao et al . , 2016 ) . Many fission yeast ABPs , including Fim1 , are thought to be similarly post - translationally modified , which could affect the degree of activity of cytoplasmic Fim1 ( Kettenbach et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , phosphorylation of Cdc8 weakens its association with F - actin , promoting filament disassembly by allowing cofilin - mediated severing ( Palani et al . , 2019 ) . Thus , phosphorylation serves as an important mode of regulating multiple fission yeast ABPs and is likely important for regulating ABP activity and localization in higher eukaryotes as well ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Elam et al . , 2017 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . Another possibility is that mechanical stresses , such as those applied to actin filaments by type - II myosins during contractile ring assembly and constriction , can affect how ABPs association with actin filaments . Some ABPs , including mammalian α - actinin 4 , act as mechanosensors that are recruited more strongly to actin filaments under tension ( Schiffhauer et al . , 2016 ) . Furthermore , because actin filaments in fission yeast actin patches are short and branched , while those in the contractile ring are longer and straight , it is also possible that different actin filament architectures in competing F - actin networks contribute to ABP sorting by promoting recruitment of specific ABPs . These competitive and cooperative interactions suggest a potential ABP hierarchy , where upstream gatekeeper proteins associate with specific F - actin networks and recruit some downstream ABPs while inhibiting the association of others , ultimately resulting in the association of the correct subset of ABPs with each network . However , these competitive interactions could also occur as a web of interactions , where various small interactions between ABPs combine with other biases toward particular F - actin networks , perhaps due to an affinity toward actin filaments in networks of different architectures and / or generated by a specific assembly factor . Future work will determine how the interplay between these non - mutually exclusive mechanisms promotes ABP association with the proper F - actin network at the correct time and place in different cell types . Assembly Factors A relatively under - investigated aspect of F - actin network self - organization is the effect of the specific assembly factor on recruitment of downstream ABPs . It has been proposed that Kadzik et al . Page 15 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t a particular assembly factor could impart structural information such as a specific twist or conformational change upon the assembled actin filament that promotes subsequent ABP association ( Kovar et al . , 2011 ; Michelot and Drubin , 2011 ) . Support for this mechanism was first appreciated in early experiments using the Arp2 / 3 complex activator , ActA from the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . Beads coated with ActA incubated in cellular extract could generate F - actin networks with the appropriate suite of ABPs needed for motility ( Cameron et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , incubating beads with the budding yeast Arp2 / 3 complex activator Las17 in yeast cellular extracts gnerates Arp2 / 3 complex generated networks with ABPs specific to actin patches ( Michelot et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , incubating beads with the formin Bni1 in mitotic yeast cell extracts generates cable - like actin networks containing cable - specific ABPs ( Johnson et al . , 2014 ; Miao et al . , 2013 ; Yonetani and Chang , 2010 ) . These results suggest that activation of the appropriate assembly factor is all that is required for recruitment of appropriate ABPs to specific networks . In fission yeast , the ABP tropomyosin ( Cdc8 ) localizes to the filaments in the contractile ring nucleated by the formin Cdc12 , or to actin cables assembled by the formin For3 depending on the acetylation status of Cdc8 ( Coulton et al . , 2010 ) . If the localization of the assembly factor is switched , the localization of the acetylated or unacetylated Cdc8 likewise follows the appropriate assembly factor , suggesting that localization of post - translationally modified Cdc8 is dependent on the formin assembling the actin filaments ( Johnson et al . , 2014 ) . What might be the mechanism by which a difference in actin filament structure could be conferred by different assembly factors ? Many formins , including mDia and budding yeast Bni1 rotate along the long - pitch helix of F - actin ( Mizuno et al . , 2011 ) . If the rotational freedom of either the growing filament ( Mizuno et al . , 2011 ; Yu et al . , 2018 , 2017 ) or the movement of the formin is limited ( Mizuno et al . , 2011 ; Suzuki et al . , 2020 ) , processivity of the formin is affected . In the cell , where formins can be anchored to the lipid membrane , or filaments can be bundled by ABPs , restriction of this rotation may cause under - twisting of the actin filament ( Jegou and Romet - Lemonne , 2019 ) , which could affect the binding of ABPs such as cofilin ( Mizuno et al . , 2018 ) . Conversely , Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated F - actin networks might present an architecture that is slightly preferred by upstream ABPs , providing a mechanism for the initial bias of fission yeast fimbrin ( Fim1 ) for actin patches described above ( Figure 2 ) . The field has recently begun to appreciate that differences in actin filament helicity can have effects on the organization of actin networks ( Jegou and Romet - Lemonne , 2019 ; Watanabe et al . , 2018 ) , and we expect this to be an exciting area of future investigation . Conclusions The actin cytoskeleton in the cell consists of numerous F - actin networks with distinct architectures and dynamics tailored to specific functions as diverse as cell motility , cytokinesis , endocytosis , and polarization . F - actin networks were historically evaluated in isolation , providing detailed information about the protein interactions needed to build and remodel each network . As a more complete picture of the components that make up these networks is established , the field has started to examine how cross - talk and competition between networks affect network size , molecular composition , dynamics and function in the cell . In this review , we have highlighted recent work focused on how different types Kadzik et al . Page 16 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t of self - organization at the level of actin monomers , actin filaments , and ABPs converge to generate the many distinct cellular F - actin networks . With increasingly complex in vitro reconstitution of F - actin networks with large ensembles of ABPs , paired with in vivo manipulation and quantitative visualization of ABP dynamics in a range of model systems and modeling , we expect further insights into the complicated web of mechanisms that give rise to diverse networks needed for basic cellular functions . Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Acknowledgments We thank members of the Kovar lab for helpful comments and discussions , including Caitlin Anderson and Cristian Suarez . Our work on actin cytoskeleton self - organization is supported by National Institute for Health Grant R01 GM079265 ( to D . R . K . ) and the Department of Defense Army Research Office’s MURI grant W911NF1410403 ( to D . R . K . ) . Abbreviations : ABP actin - binding protein F - actin filamentous actin G - actin globular actin References Akamatsu M , Vasan R , Serwas D , Ferrin MA , Rangamani P , Drubin DG . 2020 . Principles of self - organization and load adaptation by the actin cytoskeleton during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . eLife 9 : e49840 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 49840 [ PubMed : 31951196 ] Akin O , Mullins RD . 2008 . Capping Protein Increases the Rate of Actin - Based Motility by Promoting Filament Nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 Complex . Cell 133 : 841 – 851 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 04 . 011 [ PubMed : 18510928 ] Amatruda JF , Cannon JF , Tatchell K , Hug C , Cooper JA . 1990 . Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton in yeast capping protein mutants . Nature 344 : 352 – 354 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 344352a0 [ PubMed : 2179733 ] Anderson KL , Page C , Swift MF , Suraneni P , Janssen MEW , Pollard TD , Li R , Volkmann N , Hanein D . 2017 . Nano - scale actin - network characterization of fibroblast cells lacking functional Arp2 / 3 complex . Journal of Structural Biology 197 : 312 – 321 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 12 . 010 [ PubMed : 28013022 ] Antkowiak A , Guillotin A , Sanders MB , Colombo J , Vincentelli R , Michelot A . 2019 . Sizes of actin networks sharing a common environment are determined by the relative rates of assembly . PLOS Biology 17 : e3000317 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 3000317 [ PubMed : 31181075 ] Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , Caroni P . 1998 . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 809 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31729 [ PubMed : 9655397 ] Balasubramanian MK , Bi E , Glotzer M . 2004 . Comparative analysis of cytokinesis in budding yeast , fission yeast and animal cells . Curr Biol 14 : R806 – 818 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 09 . 022 [ PubMed : 15380095 ] Balasubramanian MK , Feoktistova A , McCollum D , Gould KL . 1996 . Fission yeast Sop2p : a novel and evolutionarily conserved protein that interacts with Arp3p and modulates profilin function . EMBO J 15 : 6426 – 6437 . [ PubMed : 8978670 ] Kadzik et al . Page 17 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Balcer HI , Goodman AL , Rodal AA , Smith E , Kugler J , Heuser JE , Goode BL . 2003 . Coordinated Regulation of Actin Filament Turnover by a High - Molecular - Weight Srv2 / CAP Complex , Cofilin , Profilin , and Aip1 . Current Biology 13 : 2159 – 2169 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2003 . 11 . 051 [ PubMed : 14680631 ] Bamburg JR . 1999 . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 15 : 185 – 230 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 15 . 1 . 185 [ PubMed : 10611961 ] Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , Gertler FB . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00731 - 6 [ PubMed : 12086607 ] Bentley D , Toroian - Raymond A . 1986 . Disoriented pathfinding by pioneer neurone growth cones deprived of filopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature 323 : 712 – 715 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 323712a0 [ PubMed : 3773996 ] Berro J , Pollard TD . 2014 . Local and global analysis of endocytic patch dynamics in fission yeast using a new “temporal superresolution” realignment method . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 3501 – 3514 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 01 - 0004 [ PubMed : 25143395 ] Bieling P , Hansen SD , Akin O , Li T - D , Hayden CC , Fletcher DA , Mullins RD . 2018 . WH2 and proline - rich domains of WASP - family proteins collaborate to accelerate actin filament elongation . EMBO J 37 : 102 – 121 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201797039 [ PubMed : 29141912 ] Billault - Chaumartin I , Martin SG . 2019 . Capping Protein Insulates Arp2 / 3 - Assembled Actin Patches from Formins . Current Biology 29 : 3165 – 3176 . e6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2019 . 07 . 088 [ PubMed : 31495586 ] Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Sykes C , Plastino J . 2014 . Actin Dynamics , Architecture , and Mechanics in Cell Motility . Physiological Reviews 94 : 235 – 263 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00018 . 2013 [ PubMed : 24382887 ] Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Cofilin ) with actin filaments . J Biol Chem 274 : 15538 – 15546 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 22 . 15538 [ PubMed : 10336448 ] Bombardier JP , Eskin JA , Jaiswal R , Corrêa IR , Xu M - Q , Goode BL , Gelles J . 2015 . Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein ‘decision complex” at the actin filament barbed end . ’ Nat Commun 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9707 Boujemaa - Paterski R , Suarez C , Klar T , Zhu J , Guérin C , Mogilner A , Théry M , Blanchoin L . 2017 . Network heterogeneity regulates steering in actin - based motility . Nat Commun 8 : 655 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 00455 - 1 [ PubMed : 28935896 ] Bovellan M , Romeo Y , Biro M , Boden A , Chugh P , Yonis A , Vaghela M , Fritzsche M , Moulding D , Thorogate R , Jégou A , Thrasher AJ , Romet - Lemonne G , Roux PP , Paluch EK , Charras G . 2014 . Cellular Control of Cortical Actin Nucleation . Current Biology 24 : 1628 – 1635 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 069 [ PubMed : 25017211 ] Breitsprecher D , Koestler SA , Chizhov I , Nemethova M , Mueller J , Goode BL , Small JV , Rottner K , Faix J . 2011 . Cofilin cooperates with fascin to disassemble filopodial actin filaments . Journal of Cell Science 124 : 3305 – 3318 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 086934 [ PubMed : 21940796 ] Brieher WM , Kueh HY , Ballif BA , Mitchison TJ . 2006 . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 . J Cell Biol 175 : 315 – 324 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603149 [ PubMed : 17060499 ] Burke TA , Christensen JR , Barone E , Suarez C , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR . 2014 . Homeostatic Actin Cytoskeleton Networks Are Regulated by Assembly Factor Competition for Monomers . Current Biology 24 : 579 – 585 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 01 . 072 [ PubMed : 24560576 ] Cameron LA , Footer MJ , van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA . 1999 . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 : 4908 – 4913 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 9 . 4908 Campellone KG , Welch MD . 2010 . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 237 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2867 [ PubMed : 20237478 ] Kadzik et al . Page 18 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . 1997 . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 136 : 1307 – 1322 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 136 . 6 . 1307 [ PubMed : 9087445 ] Carlier M - F , Shekhar S . 2017 . Global treadmilling coordinates actin turnover and controls the size of actin networks . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 : 389 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 172 [ PubMed : 28248322 ] Chan F - Y , Silva AM , Saramago J , Pereira - Sousa J , Brighton HE , Pereira M , Oegema K , Gassmann R , Carvalho AX . 2019 . The ARP2 / 3 complex prevents excessive formin activity during cytokinesis . MBoC 30 : 96 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E18 - 07 - 0471 [ PubMed : 30403552 ] Chen Q , Pollard TD . 2011 . Actin filament severing by cofilin is more important for assembly than constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . J Cell Biol 195 : 485 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201103067 [ PubMed : 22024167 ] Chesarone MA , Goode BL . 2009 . Actin nucleation and elongation factors : mechanisms and interplay . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 28 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2008 . 12 . 001 [ PubMed : 19168341 ] Chhabra ES , Higgs HN . 2007 . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1110 – 1121 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1007 - 1110 [ PubMed : 17909522 ] Christensen JR , Hocky GM , Homa KE , Morganthaler AN , Hitchcock - DeGregori SE , Voth GA , Kovar DR . 2017 . Competition between Tropomyosin , Fimbrin , and ADF / Cofilin drives their sorting to distinct actin filament networks . Elife 6 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 23152 Christensen JR , Homa KE , Morganthaler AN , Brown RR , Suarez C , Harker AJ , O’Connell ME , Kovar DR . 2019 . Cooperation between tropomyosin and α - actinin inhibits fimbrin association with actin filament networks in fission yeast . eLife 8 : e47279 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 47279 [ PubMed : 31180322 ] Clayton JE , Sammons MR , Stark BC , Hodges AR , Lord M . 2010 . Differential regulation of unconventional fission yeast myosins via the actin track . Curr Biol 20 : 1423 – 1431 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 07 . 026 [ PubMed : 20705471 ] Coffman VC , Nile AH , Lee I - J , Liu H , Wu J - Q . 2009 . Roles of formin nodes and myosin motor activity in Mid1p - dependent contractile - ring assembly during fission yeast cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 5195 – 5210 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e09 - 05 - 0428 [ PubMed : 19864459 ] Coulton AT , East DA , Galinska - Rakoczy A , Lehman W , Mulvihill DP . 2010 . The recruitment of acetylated and unacetylated tropomyosin to distinct actin polymers permits the discrete regulation of specific myosins in fission yeast . Journal of Cell Science 123 : 3235 – 3243 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 069971 [ PubMed : 20807799 ] Davidson AJ , Amato C , Thomason PA , Insall RH . 2018 . WASP family proteins and formins compete in pseudopod - and bleb - based migration . J Cell Biol 217 : 701 – 714 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201705160 [ PubMed : 29191847 ] Davies T , Jordan SN , Chand V , Sees JA , Laband K , Carvalho AX , Shirasu - Hiza M , Kovar DR , Dumont J , Canman JC . 2014 . High - Resolution Temporal Analysis Reveals a Functional Timeline for the Molecular Regulation of Cytokinesis . Developmental Cell 30 : 209 – 223 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 05 . 009 [ PubMed : 25073157 ] Dimchev G , Steffen A , Kage F , Dimchev V , Pernier J , Carlier M - F , Rottner K . 2017 . Efficiency of lamellipodia protrusion is determined by the extent of cytosolic actin assembly . MBoC 28 : 1311 – 1325 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e16 - 05 - 0334 [ PubMed : 28331069 ] Dundr M , Misteli T , Olson MO . 2000 . The dynamics of postmitotic reassembly of the nucleolus . J Cell Biol 150 : 433 – 446 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 3 . 433 [ PubMed : 10931858 ] Edwards M , Zwolak A , Schafer DA , Sept D , Dominguez R , Cooper JA . 2014 . Capping protein regulators fine - tune actin assembly dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 : 677 – 689 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3869 [ PubMed : 25207437 ] Elam WA , Cao W , Kang H , Huehn A , Hocky GM , Prochniewicz E , Schramm AC , Negrón K , Garcia J , Bonello TT , Gunning PW , Thomas DD , Voth GA , Sindelar CV , De La Cruz EM . 2017 . Phosphomimetic S3D cofilin binds but only weakly severs actin filaments . J Biol Chem 292 : 19565 – 19579 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M117 . 808378 [ PubMed : 28939776 ] Elam WA , Kang H , De la Cruz EM . 2013 . Biophysics of actin filament severing by cofilin . FEBS Lett 587 : 1215 – 1219 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2013 . 01 . 062 [ PubMed : 23395798 ] Kadzik et al . Page 19 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Faust JJ , Millis BA , Tyska MJ . 2019 . Profilin - Mediated Actin Allocation Regulates the Growth of Epithelial Microvilli . Current Biology 29 : 3457 – 3465 . e3 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2019 . 08 . 051 [ PubMed : 31607529 ] Feierbach B , Chang F . 2001 . Roles of the fission yeast formin for3p in cell polarity , actin cable formation and symmetric cell division . Curr Biol 11 : 1656 – 1665 . [ PubMed : 11696322 ] Funk J , Merino F , Venkova L , Heydenreich L , Kierfeld J , Vargas P , Raunser S , Piel M , Bieling P . 2019 . Profilin and formin constitute a pacemaker system for robust actin filament growth . eLife 8 : e50963 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 50963 [ PubMed : 31647411 ] Gachet Y , Hyams JS . 2005 . Endocytosis in fission yeast is spatially associated with the actin cytoskeleton during polarised cell growth and cytokinesis . J Cell Sci 118 : 4231 – 4242 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02530 [ PubMed : 16141239 ] Gandhi M , Achard V , Blanchoin L , Goode BL . 2009 . Coronin switches roles in actin disassembly depending on the nucleotide state of actin . Mol Cell 34 : 364 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 02 . 029 [ PubMed : 19450534 ] Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M , Paavilainen V , Daugherty - Clarke K , Gelles J , Lappalainen P , Goode BL . 2010 . GMF is a cofilin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate filament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol 20 : 861 – 867 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 03 . 026 [ PubMed : 20362448 ] Gao L , Bretscher A . 2008 . Analysis of Unregulated Formin Activity Reveals How Yeast Can Balance F - Actin Assembly between Different Microfilament - based Organizations . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 1474 – 1484 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 05 - 0520 [ PubMed : 18234843 ] Gateva G , Kremneva E , Reindl T , Kotila T , Kogan K , Gressin L , Gunning PW , Manstein DJ , Michelot A , Lappalainen P . 2017 . Tropomyosin Isoforms Specify Functionally Distinct Actin Filament Populations In Vitro . Curr Biol 27 : 705 – 713 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 01 . 018 [ PubMed : 28216317 ] Glick BS . 2002 . Can the Golgi form de novo ? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 615 – 619 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm877 [ PubMed : 12154372 ] Gressin L , Guillotin A , Guérin C , Blanchoin L , Michelot A . 2015 . Architecture Dependence of Actin Filament Network Disassembly . Current Biology 25 : 1437 – 1447 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 04 . 011 [ PubMed : 25913406 ] Harris ES , Li F , Higgs HN . 2004 . The Mouse Formin , FRL α , Slows Actin Filament Barbed End Elongation , Competes with Capping Protein , Accelerates Polymerization from Monomers , and Severs Filaments . J Biol Chem 279 : 20076 – 20087 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M312718200 [ PubMed : 14990563 ] Heald R , Tournebize R , Blank T , Sandaltzopoulos R , Becker P , Hyman A , Karsenti E . 1996 . Self - organization of microtubules into bipolar spindles around artificial chromosomes in Xenopus egg extracts . Nature 382 : 420 – 425 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 382420a0 [ PubMed : 8684481 ] Higashida C , Kiuchi T , Akiba Y , Mizuno H , Maruoka M , Narumiya S , Mizuno K , Watanabe N . 2013 . F - and G - actin homeostasis regulates mechanosensitive actin nucleation by formins . Nat Cell Biol 15 : 395 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2693 [ PubMed : 23455479 ] Hilton DM , Aguilar RM , Johnston AB , Goode BL . 2018 . Species - Specific Functions of Twinfilin in Actin Filament Depolymerization . J Mol Biol 430 : 3323 – 3336 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 06 . 025 [ PubMed : 29928893 ] Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P . 2006 . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 – 394 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511093 [ PubMed : 16651381 ] Isogai T , Danuser G . 2018 . Discovery of functional interactions among actin regulators by analysis of image fluctuations in an unperturbed motile cell system . Philos Trans R Soc Lond , B , Biol Sci 373 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2017 . 0110 Jansen S , Collins A , Chin SM , Ydenberg CA , Gelles J , Goode BL . 2015 . Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat Commun 6 : 7202 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8202 [ PubMed : 25995115 ] Jansen S , Collins A , Yang C , Rebowski G , Svitkina T , Dominguez R . 2011 . Mechanism of actin filament bundling by fascin . J Biol Chem 286 : 30087 – 30096 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 251439 [ PubMed : 21685497 ] Kadzik et al . Page 20 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G . 2019 . The many implications of actin filament helicity . Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology S1084952118303069 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2019 . 10 . 018 Johnson M , East DA , Mulvihill DP . 2014 . Formins determine the functional properties of actin filaments in yeast . Curr Biol 24 : 1525 – 1530 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 034 [ PubMed : 24954052 ] Johnston AB , Collins A , Goode BL . 2015 . High - speed depolymerization at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by Twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1504 – 1511 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3252 [ PubMed : 26458246 ] Johnston AB , Hilton DM , McConnell P , Johnson B , Harris MT , Simone A , Amarasinghe GK , Cooper JA , Goode BL . 2018 . A novel mode of capping protein - regulation by twinfilin . Elife 7 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 41313 Kage F , Winterhoff M , Dimchev V , Mueller J , Thalheim T , Freise A , Brühmann S , Kollasser J , Block J , Dimchev G , Geyer M , Schnittler H - J , Brakebusch C , Stradal TEB , Carlier M - F , Sixt M , Käs J , Faix J , Rottner K . 2017 . FMNL formins boost lamellipodial force generation . Nat Commun 8 : 14832 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms14832 [ PubMed : 28327544 ] Kaiser DA , Vinson VK , Murphy DB , Pollard TD . 1999 . Profilin is predominantly associated with monomeric actin in Acanthamoeba . J Cell Sci 112 ( Pt 21 ) : 3779 – 3790 . [ PubMed : 10523513 ] Kamasaki T , Arai R , Osumi M , Mabuchi I . 2005 . Directionality of F - actin cables changes during the fission yeast cell cycle . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 916 – 917 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1295 [ PubMed : 16136186 ] Karsenti E 2008 . Self - organization in cell biology : a brief history . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 255 – 262 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2357 [ PubMed : 18292780 ] Karsenti E , Vernos I . 2001 . The Mitotic Spindle : A Self - Made Machine . Science 294 : 543 – 547 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1063488 [ PubMed : 11641489 ] Kettenbach AN , Deng L , Wu Y , Baldissard S , Adamo ME , Gerber SA , Moseley JB . 2015 . Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveals pathways for coordination of cell growth and division by the conserved fission yeast kinase pom1 . Mol Cell Proteomics 14 : 1275 – 1287 . doi : 10 . 1074 / mcp . M114 . 045245 [ PubMed : 25720772 ] Kotila T , Wioland H , Enkavi G , Kogan K , Vattulainen I , Jégou A , Romet - Lemonne G , Lappalainen P . 2019 . Mechanism of synergistic actin filament pointed end depolymerization by cyclase - associated protein and cofilin . Nat Commun 10 : 5320 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13213 - 2 [ PubMed : 31757941 ] Kovar DR , Kuhn JR , Tichy AL , Pollard TD . 2003 . The fission yeast cytokinesis formin Cdc12p is a barbed end actin filament capping protein gated by profilin . J Cell Biol 161 : 875 – 887 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200211078 [ PubMed : 12796476 ] Kovar DR , Sirotkin V , Lord M . 2011 . Three’s company : the fission yeast actin cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol 21 : 177 – 187 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2010 . 11 . 001 [ PubMed : 21145239 ] Kovar DR , Wu J - Q , Pollard TD . 2005 . Profilin - mediated Competition between Capping Protein and Formin Cdc12p during Cytokinesis in Fission Yeast . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 2313 – 2324 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 09 - 0781 [ PubMed : 15743909 ] Kueh HY , Brieher WM , Mitchison TJ . 2008 . Dynamic stabilization of actin filaments . PNAS 105 : 16531 – 16536 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807394105 [ PubMed : 18931306 ] Kumari R , Jiu Y , Carman PJ , Tojkander S , Kogan K , Varjosalo M , Gunning PW , Dominguez R , Lappalainen P . 2020 . Tropomodulins Control the Balance between Protrusive and Contractile Structures by Stabilizing Actin - Tropomyosin Filaments . Current Biology 30 : 767 – 778 . e5 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2019 . 12 . 049 [ PubMed : 32037094 ] Lacy MM , Baddeley D , Berro J . 2019 . Single - molecule turnover dynamics of actin and membrane coat proteins in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . eLife 8 : e52355 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 52355 [ PubMed : 31855180 ] Laporte D , Coffman VC , Lee I - J , Wu J - Q . 2011 . Assembly and architecture of precursor nodes during fission yeast cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 192 : 1005 – 1021 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201008171 [ PubMed : 21422229 ] Lappalainen P , Drubin DG . 1997 . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 : 78 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 40418 [ PubMed : 9214506 ] Li Y , Christensen JR , Homa KE , Hocky GM , Fok A , Sees JA , Voth GA , Kovar DR . 2016 . The F - actin bundler α - actinin Ain1 is tailored for ring assembly and constriction during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell 27 : 1821 – 1833 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 01 - 0010 [ PubMed : 27075176 ] Kadzik et al . Page 21 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Lomakin AJ , Lee K - C , Han SJ , Bui DA , Davidson M , Mogilner A , Danuser G . 2015 . Competition of two distinct actin networks for actin defines a bistable switch for cell polarization . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1435 – 1445 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3246 [ PubMed : 26414403 ] Machesky LM , Mullins RD , Higgs HN , Kaiser DA , Blanchoin L , May RC , Hall ME , Pollard TD . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 3739 – 3744 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 7 . 3739 [ PubMed : 10097107 ] Manhart A , Icheva TA , Guerin C , Klar T , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Thery M , Blanchoin L , Mogilner A . 2019 . Quantitative regulation of the dynamic steady state of actin networks . eLife 8 : e42413 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 42413 [ PubMed : 30869077 ] Mejillano MR , Kojima S , Applewhite DA , Gertler FB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . n . d . Lamellipodial Versus Filopodial Mode of the Actin Nanomachinery : Pivotal Role of the Filament Barbed End 11 . Miao Y , Han X , Zheng L , Xie Y , Mu Y , Yates JR , Drubin DG . 2016 . Fimbrin phosphorylation by metaphase Cdk1 regulates actin cable dynamics in budding yeast . Nat Commun 7 : 11265 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms11265 [ PubMed : 27068241 ] Miao Y , Wong CCL , Mennella V , Michelot A , Agard DA , Holt LJ , Yates JR , Drubin DG . 2013 . Cell - cycle regulation of formin - mediated actin cable assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : E4446 – 4455 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1314000110 [ PubMed : 24133141 ] Michelot A , Berro J , Guérin C , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Staiger CJ , Martiel J - L , Blanchoin L . 2007 . Actin - Filament Stochastic Dynamics Mediated by ADF / Cofilin . Current Biology 17 : 825 – 833 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 04 . 037 [ PubMed : 17493813 ] Michelot A , Costanzo M , Sarkeshik A , Boone C , Yates JR , Drubin DG . 2010 . Reconstitution and protein composition analysis of endocytic actin patches . Curr Biol 20 : 1890 – 1899 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 10 . 016 [ PubMed : 21035341 ] Michelot A , Drubin DG . 2011 . Building Distinct Actin Filament Networks in a Common Cytoplasm . Curr Biol 21 : R560 – R569 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 06 . 019 [ PubMed : 21783039 ] Mishra M , Huang J , Balasubramanian MK . 2014 . The yeast actin cytoskeleton . FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 : 213 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1574 - 6976 . 12064 [ PubMed : 24467403 ] Misteli T 2001 . The concept of self - organization in cellular architecture . J Cell Biol 155 : 181 – 186 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200108110 [ PubMed : 11604416 ] Miyoshi T , Watanabe N . 2013 . Can filament treadmilling alone account for the F - actin turnover in lamellipodia ? : Treadmilling and Alternative Mechanisms Regulating F - actin Turnover . Cytoskeleton 70 : 179 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21098 [ PubMed : 23341338 ] Mizuno H , Higashida C , Yuan Y , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Watanabe N . 2011 . Rotational movement of the formin mDia1 along the double helical strand of an actin filament . Science 331 : 80 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1197692 [ PubMed : 21148346 ] Mizuno H , Tanaka K , Yamashiro S , Narita A , Watanabe N . 2018 . Helical rotation of the diaphanous - related formin mDia1 generates actin filaments resistant to cofilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115 : E5000 – E5007 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1803415115 [ PubMed : 29760064 ] Mohapatra L , Lagny TJ , Harbage D , Jelenkovic PR , Kondev J . 2017 . The Limiting - Pool Mechanism Fails to Control the Size of Multiple Organelles . Cell Systems 4 : 559 – 567 . e14 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2017 . 04 . 011 [ PubMed : 28544883 ] Moseley JB , Sagot I , Manning AL , Xu Y , Eck MJ , Pellman D , Goode BL . 2004 . A conserved mechanism for Bni1 - and mDia1 - induced actin assembly and dual regulation of Bni1 by Bud6 and profilin . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 896 – 907 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 08 - 0621 [ PubMed : 14657240 ] Nakano K , Imai J , Arai R , Toh - E A , Matsui Y , Mabuchi I . 2002 . The small GTPase Rho3 and the diaphanous / formin For3 function in polarized cell growth in fission yeast . J Cell Sci 115 : 4629 – 4639 . [ PubMed : 12415007 ] Nakano K , Mabuchi I . 2006 . Actin - depolymerizing protein Adf1 is required for formation and maintenance of the contractile ring during cytokinesis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 1933 – 1945 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 09 - 0900 [ PubMed : 16467379 ] Neidt EM , Scott BJ , Kovar DR . 2009 . Formin differentially utilizes profilin isoforms to rapidly assemble actin filaments . J Biol Chem 284 : 673 – 684 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M804201200 [ PubMed : 18978356 ] Kadzik et al . Page 22 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Nicholson - Dykstra SM , Higgs HN . 2008 . Arp2 depletion inhibits sheet - like protrusions but not linear protrusions of fibroblasts and lymphocytes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 65 : 904 – 922 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20312 [ PubMed : 18720401 ] Nishida E , Maekawa S , Sakai H . 1984 . Cofilin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry 23 : 5307 – 5313 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00317a032 [ PubMed : 6509022 ] Okada K , Obinata T , Abe H . 1999 . XAIP1 : a Xenopus homologue of yeast actin interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) , which induces disassembly of actin filaments cooperatively with ADF / cofilin family proteins . J Cell Sci 112 ( Pt 10 ) : 1553 – 1565 . [ PubMed : 10212149 ] Palani S , Köster DV , Hatano T , Kamnev A , Kanamaru T , Brooker HR , Hernandez - Fernaud JR , Jones AME , Millar JBA , Mulvihill DP , Balasubramanian MK . 2019 . Phosphoregulation of tropomyosin is crucial for actin cable turnover and division site placement . J Cell Biol 218 : 3548 – 3559 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201809089 [ PubMed : 31597679 ] Pernier J , Shekhar S , Jegou A , Guichard B , Carlier M - F . 2016 . Profilin Interaction with Actin Filament Barbed End Controls Dynamic Instability , Capping , Branching , and Motility . Dev Cell 36 : 201 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 12 . 024 [ PubMed : 26812019 ] Pollard TD . 2016 . Actin and Actin - Binding Proteins . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8 : a018226 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018226 [ PubMed : 26988969 ] Reymann A - C , Martiel J - L , Cambier T , Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Théry M . 2010 . Nucleation geometry governs ordered actin networks structures . Nat Mater 9 : 827 – 832 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat2855 [ PubMed : 20852617 ] Rodal AA , Tetreault JW , Lappalainen P , Drubin DG , Amberg DC . 1999 . Aip1p interacts with cofilin to disassemble actin filaments . J Cell Biol 145 : 1251 – 1264 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 145 . 6 . 1251 [ PubMed : 10366597 ] Rotty JD , Wu C , Haynes EM , Suarez C , Winkelman JD , Johnson HE , Haugh JM , Kovar DR , Bear JE . 2015 . Profilin - 1 Serves as a Gatekeeper for Actin Assembly by Arp2 / 3 - Dependent and - Independent Pathways . Developmental Cell 32 : 54 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 026 [ PubMed : 25543281 ] Sagot I , Rodal AA , Moseley J , Goode BL , Pellman D . 2002 . An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and profilin . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 626 – 631 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb834 [ PubMed : 12134165 ] Sarmiento C , Wang W , Dovas A , Yamaguchi H , Sidani M , El - Sibai M , DesMarais V , Holman HA , Kitchen S , Backer JM , Alberts A , Condeelis J . 2008 . WASP family members and formin proteins coordinate regulation of cell protrusions in carcinoma cells . The Journal of Cell Biology 180 : 1245 – 1260 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200708123 [ PubMed : 18362183 ] Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA . 1996 . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 : 169 – 179 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 135 . 1 . 169 [ PubMed : 8858171 ] Schiffhauer ES , Luo T , Mohan K , Srivastava V , Qian X , Griffis ER , Iglesias PA , Robinson DN . 2016 . Mechanoaccumulative Elements of the Mammalian Actin Cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 26 : 1473 – 1479 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2016 . 04 . 007 [ PubMed : 27185555 ] Shekhar S , Chung J , Kondev J , Gelles J , Goode BL . 2019 . Synergy between Cyclase - associated protein and Cofilin accelerates actin filament depolymerization by two orders of magnitude . Nat Commun 10 : 5319 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13268 - 1 [ PubMed : 31757952 ] Shekhar S , Kerleau M , Kühn S , Pernier J , Romet - Lemonne G , Jégou A , Carlier M - F . 2015 . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin filament in a ménage à trois . Nat Commun 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9730 Sinnar SA , Antoku S , Saffin J - M , Cooper JA , Halpain S . 2014 . Capping protein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for filopodial morphology and dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 2152 – 2160 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 12 - 0749 [ PubMed : 24829386 ] Sirotkin V , Berro J , Macmillan K , Zhao L , Pollard TD . 2010 . Quantitative Analysis of the Mechanism of Endocytic Actin Patch Assembly and Disassembly in Fission Yeast . MBoC 21 : 2894 – 2904 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e10 - 02 - 0157 [ PubMed : 20587778 ] Kadzik et al . Page 23 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Sizonenko GI , Karpova TS , Gattermeir DJ , Cooper JA . 1996 . Mutational analysis of capping protein function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 7 : 1 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 7 . 1 . 1 [ PubMed : 8741835 ] Skau CT , Kovar DR . 2010 . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regulates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in fission yeast . Curr Biol 20 : 1415 – 1422 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 06 . 020 [ PubMed : 20705466 ] Skruber K , Read T - A , Vitriol EA . 2018 . Reconsidering an active role for G - actin in cytoskeletal regulation . J Cell Sci 131 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 203760 Suarez C , Carroll RT , Burke TA , Christensen JR , Bestul AJ , Sees JA , James ML , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR . 2015 . Profilin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev Cell 32 : 43 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 027 [ PubMed : 25543282 ] Suarez C , Kovar DR . 2016 . Internetwork competition for monomers governs actin cytoskeleton organization . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17 : 799 – 810 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 106 [ PubMed : 27625321 ] Suarez C , McCall PM , Gardel ML , Kovar DR . 2017 . When Is “Enough” Enough ? Cell Systems 4 : 480 – 482 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2017 . 05 . 007 [ PubMed : 28544879 ] Suarez C , Roland J , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Kang H , McCullough BR , Reymann A - C , Guérin C , Martiel J - L , De la Cruz EM , Blanchoin L . 2011 . Cofilin tunes the nucleotide state of actin filaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr Biol 21 : 862 – 868 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 064 [ PubMed : 21530260 ] Suraneni P , Rubinstein B , Unruh JR , Durnin M , Hanein D , Li R . 2012 . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional fibroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 : 239 – 251 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201112113 [ PubMed : 22492726 ] Suzuki EL , Chikireddy J , Dmitrieff S , Guichard B , Romet - Lemonne G , Jégou A . 2020 . Geometrical Constraints Greatly Hinder Formin mDia1 Activity . Nano Lett 20 : 22 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acs . nanolett . 9b02241 [ PubMed : 31797667 ] Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 145 : 1009 – 1026 . [ PubMed : 10352018 ] Theriot JA . 1997 . Accelerating on a treadmill : ADF / cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in the dynamic cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol 136 : 1165 – 1168 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 136 . 6 . 1165 [ PubMed : 9087434 ] Tilney LG , Tilney MS . 1984 . Observations on how actin filaments become organized in cells . The Journal of Cell Biology 99 : 76s – 82s . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 99 . 1 . 76s [ PubMed : 6540266 ] Vavylonis D , Wu J - Q , Hao S , O’Shaughnessy B , Pollard TD . 2008 . Assembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by fission yeast . Science 319 : 97 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1151086 [ PubMed : 18079366 ] Velarde N , Gunsalus KC , Piano F . 2007 . Diverse roles of actin in C . elegans early embryogenesis . BMC Dev Biol 7 : 142 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 213X - 7 - 142 [ PubMed : 18157918 ] Vignjevic D , Kojima S , Aratyn Y , Danciu O , Svitkina T , Borisy GG . 2006 . Role of fascin in filopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 : 863 – 875 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603013 [ PubMed : 16966425 ] Wang H , Vavylonis D . 2008 . Model of For3p - mediated actin cable assembly in fission yeast . PLoS ONE 3 : e4078 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0004078 [ PubMed : 19116660 ] Washington RW , Knecht DA . 2008 . Actin binding domains direct actin - binding proteins to different cytoskeletal locations . BMC Cell Biology 9 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2121 - 9 - 10 Watanabe N , Tohyama K , Yamashiro S . 2018 . Mechanostress resistance involving formin homology proteins : G - and F - actin homeostasis - driven filament nucleation and helical polymerization - mediated actin polymer stabilization . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 506 : 323 – 329 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2018 . 09 . 189 [ PubMed : 30309655 ] Wedlich - Söldner R , Betz T . 2018 . Self - organization : the fundament of cell biology . Philos Trans R Soc Lond , B , Biol Sci 373 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2017 . 0103 Wiggan O , Shaw AE , DeLuca JG , Bamburg JR . 2012 . ADF / Cofilin Regulates Actomyosin Assembly through Competitive Inhibition of Myosin II Binding to F - Actin . Developmental Cell 22 : 530 – 543 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 12 . 026 [ PubMed : 22421043 ] Kadzik et al . Page 24 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Willis JH , Munro E , Lyczak R , Bowerman B . 2006 . Conditional dominant mutations in the Caenorhabditis elegans gene act - 2 identify cytoplasmic and muscle roles for a redundant actin isoform . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 1051 – 1064 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 09 - 0886 [ PubMed : 16407404 ] Winkelman JD , Suarez C , Hocky GM , Harker AJ , Morganthaler AN , Christensen JR , Voth GA , Bartles JR , Kovar DR . 2016 . Fascin - and α - Actinin - Bundled Networks Contain Intrinsic Structural Features that Drive Protein Sorting . Current Biology 26 : 2697 – 2706 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2016 . 07 . 080 [ PubMed : 27666967 ] Wioland H , Guichard B , Senju Y , Myram S , Lappalainen P , Jégou A , Romet - Lemonne G . 2017 . ADF / Cofilin Accelerates Actin Dynamics by Severing Filaments and Promoting Their Depolymerization at Both Ends . Current Biology 27 : 1956 – 1967 . e7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 05 . 048 [ PubMed : 28625781 ] Wioland H , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G . 2019 . Torsional stress generated by ADF / cofilin on cross - linked actin filaments boosts their severing . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116 : 2595 – 2602 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1812053116 [ PubMed : 30692249 ] Wu C , Asokan SB , Berginski ME , Haynes EM , Sharpless NE , Griffith JD , Gomez SM , Bear JE . 2012 . Arp2 / 3 Is Critical for Lamellipodia and Response to Extracellular Matrix Cues but Is Dispensable for Chemotaxis . Cell 148 : 973 – 987 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 034 [ PubMed : 22385962 ] Wu JQ , Bähler J , Pringle JR . 2001 . Roles of a fimbrin and an alpha - actinin - like protein in fission yeast cell polarization and cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1061 – 1077 . [ PubMed : 11294907 ] Wu J - Q , Kuhn JR , Kovar DR , Pollard TD . 2003 . Spatial and temporal pathway for assembly and constriction of the contractile ring in fission yeast cytokinesis . Dev Cell 5 : 723 – 734 . [ PubMed : 14602073 ] Wu J - Q , Pollard TD . 2005 . Counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in fission yeast . Science 310 : 310 – 314 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1113230 [ PubMed : 16224022 ] Yang N , Higuchi O , Ohashi K , Nagata K , Wada A , Kangawa K , Nishida E , Mizuno K . 1998 . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 : 809 – 812 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31735 [ PubMed : 9655398 ] Yonetani A , Chang F . 2010 . Regulation of cytokinesis by the formin cdc12p . Curr Biol 20 : 561 – 566 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 01 . 061 [ PubMed : 20226666 ] Yu M , Le S , Efremov AK , Zeng X , Bershadsky A , Yan J . 2018 . Effects of Mechanical Stimuli on Profilin - and Formin - Mediated Actin Polymerization . Nano Lett 18 : 5239 – 5247 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acs . nanolett . 8b02211 [ PubMed : 29976069 ] Yu M , Yuan X , Lu C , Le S , Kawamura R , Efremov AK , Zhao Z , Kozlov MM , Sheetz M , Bershadsky A , Yan J . 2017 . mDia1 senses both force and torque during F - actin filament polymerization . Nat Commun 8 : 1650 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01745 - 4 [ PubMed : 29162803 ] Zigmond SH , Evangelista M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , Sicheri F , Forkey J , Pring M . 2003 . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 13 : 1820 – 1823 . [ PubMed : 14561409 ] Kadzik et al . Page 25 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . Diverse F - Actin Networks in Animal and Fission Yeast Cells : Distinct cell types assemble dendritic and linear F - actin networks for distinct fundamental processes . Animal cells have many F - actin networks , with linear networks found in filopodia and stress fibers and branched networks in lamellipodia and endocytic patches . Yeast have three prominent networks , with linear actin filaments making up polarizing actin cables and the cytokinetic contractile ring , and arborized networks composing the endocytic actin patches . Similarly , the early C . Elegans one - cell embryo has linear filaments that make up the cytokinetic ring , as well as both linear and branched F - actin networks at the cell cortex . Furthermore , actin comets are likely made of branched actin networks . Kadzik et al . Page 26 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . Cooperative and Competitive Interactions in F - Actin Networks in Animal and Fission Yeast : To self - organize multiple functionally diverse F - actin networks simultaneously from a common pool of components , both animal and fission yeast cells must ( A ) properly allocate actin monomers between competing networks , and ( B ) sort unique subsets of actin - binding proteins , which establish the structure and dynamics of each network . ( C ) ABPs compete and cooperate with each other , leading to a potential ABP hierarchy , where upstream proteins either recruit or inhibit the access of downstream proteins to specific F - actin networks . Kadzik et al . Page 27 Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2021 December 16 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t