Directing osteogenic and myogenic differentiation of MSCs : interplay of stiffness and adhesive ligand presentation Andrew S . Rowlands , * Peter A . George , * and Justin J . Cooper - White Tissue Engineering and Microﬂuidics Laboratory , Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology , The University of Queensland , Brisbane , Queensland , Australia Submitted 7 February 2008 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 24 August 2008 Rowlands AS , George PA , Cooper - White JJ . Directing osteo - genic and myogenic differentiation of MSCs : interplay of stiffness and adhesive ligand presentation . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C1037 – C1044 , 2008 . First published August 27 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 67 . 2008 . —The mechanical properties of the ex - tracellular matrix ( ECM ) can exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence in determin - ing cell fate . Human mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) grown on substrates with varying stiffness have been shown to express various cell lineage markers , without the use of toxic DNA demethylation agents or complex cocktails of expensive growth factors . Here we investigated the myogenic and osteogenic potential of various poly - acrylamide gel substrates that were coated with covalently bound tissue - speciﬁc ECM proteins ( collagen I , collagen IV , laminin , or ﬁbronectin ) . The gel - protein substrates were shown to support the growth and proliferation of MSCs in a stiffness - dependent manner . Higher stiffness substrates encouraged up to a 10 - fold increase in cell number over lower stiffness gels . There appears to be deﬁnitive interplay between substrate stiffness and ECM protein with regard to the expression of both osteogenic and myogenic transcription factors by MSCs . Of the 16 gel - protein combinations investigated , osteogenic differentiation was found to occur signiﬁcantly only on collagen I - coated gels with the highest modulus gel tested ( 80 kPa ) . Myogenic differentiation occurred on all gel - protein combinations that had stiffnesses (cid:1) 9 kPa but to varying extents as ascertained by MyoD1 expression . Peak MyoD1 expression was seen on gels with a modulus of 25 kPa coated in ﬁbronectin , with similar levels of expression observed on 80 - kPa collagen I - coated gels . The modulation of myo - genic and osteogenic transcription factors by various ECM proteins demonstrates that substrate stiffness alone does not direct stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . This has important implications in the develop - ment of tailored biomaterial systems that more closely mimic the microenvironment found in native tissues . mesenchymal stem cells ; extracellular matrix proteins ; substrate elasticity BONE MARROW - DERIVED mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) are an optimal cell source for cellular therapy and tissue engineering applications ; they can be autologously derived , expanded ex vivo to clinically relevant cell numbers , and directed to differentiate into multiple cell types . MSCs are capable of signiﬁcant expansion and can be directed toward adipogenic , chondrogenic , neurogenic , myogenic , and osteogenic lineages ( 1 , 18 , 22 , 27 ) . In vivo MSCs are known to migrate to sites of inﬂammation and engraft in a variety of tissues where they appear to play an active role in tissue repair and regeneration through secretion of chemokines as well as differentiation into “mature” cell types ( 1 , 4 , 25 ) . This differentiation is likely to be initiated and directed by the MSC sensing changes in its local microenvironment as it engrafts in the tissue . The microenvironment in which the MSCs reside has been shown to be deterministic of their behavior . This complex environment consists of soluble factors , cell - cell interactions , and cell - extracellular matrix ( ECM ) interactions . The micro - environment provides three major categories of physicochem - ical signaling : chemical , topographical , and mechanical ( 29 ) . Cell - ECM interactions are incredibly complex and have been shown to regulate many cellular processes , including prolifer - ation and differentiation ( 10 ) . Cell - ECM and cell - cell signaling is mediated by transmembrane proteins , predominantly inte - grins , but also cadherins , cell adhesion molecules , and selec - tins , that link the cell to the proteins of the ECM and to other cells ( 10 , 20 ) . Integrins are a family of calcium - dependent heterodimeric transmembrane receptors found in all mammalian cells . Inte - grins are composed of an (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - chain having large extra - cellular and mostly short cytoplasmic domains . Currently , there are at least 24 known receptor combinations , each of which has some speciﬁcity for particular binding sites on ECM proteins ( 14 , 24 ) . Integrin binding to the ECM and the gener - ation of cytoskeletal tension through actin - myosin - driven con - traction initiate the formation of a focal adhesion complex , which involves more than 50 proteins that generate a submem - brane plaque mediating the interaction between the ECM and cytoskeleton ( 2 , 11 ) . It is well established that cell - matrix interactions play a crucial role in the development of the differentiated phenotype . In the mouse mammary gland , (cid:3) 1 - integrin - mediated interac - tions with the ECM induce synthesis of the milk protein (cid:3) - casein . In human mammary epithelial cell lines , (cid:2) 2 (cid:3) 1 - inte - grin modulates epithelial differentiation and glandular morpho - genesis ( 16 ) . In basal keratinocytes , (cid:2) 6 (cid:3) 4 - integrins have been shown to be critical in establishing cell polarity ( 16 ) . Further - more , knockout mice studies have shown the explicit role of integrins in establishing and maintaining tissue function ( see Ref . 15 for a review ) . These studies indicate that the charac - teristics of a cell are largely deﬁned by its expression proﬁle of integrin receptors . Engler et al . ( 8 ) recently showed that during ex vivo culture of MSCs , lineage speciﬁcation could be directed by the elas - ticity of the matrix on which the cells are grown . By tuning the elastic modulus of collagen I - coated polyacrylamide to that of brain ( 0 . 1 – 1 kPa ) , muscle ( 8 – 17 kPa ) , and collagenous bone ( (cid:1) 34 kPa ) , the authors rudimentarily simulated the environ - * A . S . Rowlands and P . A . George contributed equally to this work . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : J . J . Cooper - White , Tissue Engineering and Microﬂuidics Laboratory , Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology , The Univ . of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia ( e - mail : j . cooperwhite @ uq . edu . au ) . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C1037 – C1044 , 2008 . First published August 27 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 67 . 2008 . 0363 - 6143 / 08 $ 8 . 00 Copyright © 2008 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C1037 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ment that cells “feel” in these tissues . Using this approach , the authors demonstrated that MSCs differentiate into neurogenic , myogenic , and osteogenic precursors when cultured on gels of varying elasticity . The MSCs sense and respond to the matrix stiffness by sampling their pericellular environment through integrin adhesions that link the ECM to the cytoskeleton through focal adhesion complexes , a process known as mech - anotransduction . Integrins are not only responsible for cellular adhesion and mechanosensitivity , but they also have a direct role as cell signaling molecules . Each integrin receptor combination has afﬁnity for a single , or a few speciﬁc ligand sequences found in different ECM molecules ; e . g . , (cid:3) 1 (cid:2) 5 / V / 8 - integrin combina - tions bind speciﬁcally to the RGD amino acid sequence found in ﬁbronectin . In the present study we used a polyacrylamide gel system with surface coatings of four prominent , but distinct , ECM molecules : collagen I , collagen IV , laminin , and ﬁbronectin . This system permitted us to simultaneously investigate the interplay of integrin signaling and mechanotransduction on the growth and myogenic and osteogenic differentiation of MSCs . We show that there is signiﬁcant interplay between the partic - ular matrix molecule presented to MSCs and the underlying substrate elasticity that affects myogenic or osteogenic differ - entiation . For example , we show that particular proteins , such as collagen IV and laminin I , present at only very low levels in bone , do not result in osteogenic marker expression despite the substrate stiffness matching that which has previously been described as being conducive to osteogenic differentiation of MSCs . From these results we suggest that these substrates that incorporate physiologically relevant elastic moduli in combi - nation with relevant ECM molecules better simulate the mi - croenvironments encountered by MSCs in vivo . Analysis of cellular behavior under environments more representative of those encountered in vivo , such as discussed in the present work , will provide new insights into several key cellular processes , including differentiation , mechanotransduction , and wound healing , and will allow for the development of better disease models and new generation biomaterials for directed tissue organization from multipotent stem cells . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Materials N , N (cid:4) - methylene - bis - acrylamide and N , N , N (cid:4) , N (cid:4) - tetramethylethyl - enediamine ( TEMED ) were sourced from Bio - Rad ( Regents Park , Australia ) . The extended chain length , photoactivatable cross - linker N - succinimidyl - 6 - [ 4 (cid:4) - azido - 2 (cid:4) - nitrophenylamino ] hexanoate ( SANPAH ) was obtained from Pierce ( Rockford , IL ) . Collagen I was extracted from rat tail , human placenta collagen IV was sourced from Sigma - Aldrich ( Sydney , Australia ) , natural mouse laminin type I was sup - plied by Invitrogen ( Melbourne , Australia ) , and ﬁbronectin was sourced from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , MN ) . Hoechst and Alexa Fluor phalloidin were obtained from Invitrogen . Antibodies for MyoD1 myogenic marker were obtained from Abcam ( Cambridge , UK ) . Antibodies for the transcription factor Runx2 bone marker were sourced from Alpha Diagnostic International ( San Antonio , TX ) . All other chemicals were used as purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Fabrication of Protein - Coated Gel Substrate Polyacrylamide gels ( (cid:5) 300 (cid:6) m thick ) of a range of stiffness were prepared from solutions of various ratios of acrylamide : bis - acryl - amide , ammonium persulfate and TEMED in an asceptic , oxygen - free environment . Four physiologically relevant stiffness values were se - lected ( 0 . 7 , 10 , 30 , and 80 kPa ) and subsequently coated with ECM proteins ( collagen I , collagen IV , laminin , and ﬁbronectin ) . After gelation , the surfaces were rinsed with PBS to remove any unpoly - merized monomer . A uniform coating of adhesive protein was co - valently bound to gel surfaces using SANPAH . Brieﬂy , using aseptic techniques , a thin layer of 1 mg / ml SANPAH solution was placed on top of the gels , which were then exposed to ultraviolet light for 10 min to bind the SANPAH to the surface of the gels . Protein binding to the surface was subsequently carried out for 18 h at 4°C . Following protein binding , gels were rinsed with PBS prior to cell seeding . Characterization of Gel Substrates The compressive Young’s modulus of the gels was characterized using a Bio - DMA ( Enduratec ELF 3200 , Bose ) under contact load at a strain rate of 0 . 5 mm / s . Veriﬁcation of the presence of proteins cross - linked to the surface of the gels and the penetration depth was carried out by immunoﬂuorescent staining and subsequent ﬂuorescent imaging . Cell Culture Human bone marrow - derived MSCs ( isolated from volunteers’ hips using commonly employed techniques ) were kindly donated by Dr . Gary Brooke ( Mater Medical Research Institute , Brisbane , Aus - tralia ) . MSCs were puriﬁed by selecting for adherent cells on tissue culture plastic after two passages and were conﬁrmed to be CD90 (cid:7) and CD105 (cid:7) by FACS analysis . The MSCs were maintained in an incubator at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Cultures used for experiments were passage 4 and were grown in low - glucose Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 50 (cid:6) g / ml streptomycin , and 50 U / ml penicillin for 4 , 7 , or 14 days . Medium was changed every 4 days . Cells were seeded at low density ( 2 , 500 cells / cm 2 ) onto protein - coated gels in serum - free media and were allowed to attach for 4 h before medium supplemented with serum was introduced into the culture . This was to ensure that the cells bound to the surface - presented ECM molecule and not to adsorbed serum proteins . This step allows us to be sure that the responses noted are due to the prescribed ligand and not a cocktail of proteins nonspeciﬁcally bound to the surface of the gel . MSC Multipotency Controls : Conﬁrming Adipo / Myo / Osteogenicity A sample of the donated MSCs was taken and tested to ensure multipotency by culturing in various conditioned media that induced the MSCs to differentiate along either adipogenic , myogenic , or osteogenic lineages . Adipogenic culture conditions . MSCs were cultured to conﬂuence in normal growth medium . The medium was then exchanged with adipocyte differentiation medium consisting of high - glucose DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 0 . 2 mM indomethacin , 1 (cid:6) M dexa - methasone , 0 . 5 mM IBMX , and 10 (cid:6) g / ml insulin . This same differ - entiation medium was exchanged 3 days later . After a week of culture in differentiation medium , the medium was replaced with high - glucose DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS and 10 (cid:6) g / ml insulin and was exchanged every 3 – 4 days thereafter . Two weeks after the induction of differentiation , the MSCs were ﬁxed and stained for intracellular lipid inclusions using Oil Red O . Myogenic culture conditions . MSCs were plated at low density in normal growth medium . Twenty - four hours after seeding , the medium was changed to myogenic induction medium consisting of low - glucose DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 10 (cid:6) M 5 - azacytidine , and 10 ng / ml basic FGF . After 24 h , the myogenic induction medium was replaced with normal growth medium supplemented with 10 ng / ml basic FGF . This medium was exchanged every 3 days for the remainder of the culture . Two weeks after the induction of myogenic C1038 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m differentiation , cells were ﬁxed , stained for skeletal heavy chain myosin , and their morphological characteristics , especially the pres - ence of myotube - like organization , identiﬁed . Osteogenic culture conditions . MSCs were cultured to conﬂuence in normal growth medium . The medium was then exchanged with osteogenic differentiation medium consisting of low - glucose DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 2 mM L - glutamine , 01 mM dexameth - asone , 50 (cid:6) M ascorbate - 2 - phosphate , and 10 mM (cid:3) - glycerophos - phate . This medium was exchanged every 3 days for the remainder of the culture . Two weeks after induction of osteogenic differentiation , cells were ﬁxed and stained for mineralization using Alizarin Red . Immunocytochemistry : Cell Morphology , Proliferation , and Differentiation Primary antibodies for MyoD1 and Runx2 were conjugated to various amide reactive ﬂuorescent Alexa Fluor dyes via commonly employed protocols . To ascertain conjugated antibody efﬁcacy , pos - itive controls for the immunoﬂuorescence staining of Runx2 and MyoD1 were conducted on SaOS 2 osteoblasts and C 2 C 12 myoblasts , respectively . After culture , cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformalde - hyde for 20 min at room temperature . Cell membranes were perme - abilized using 1 % Triton X - 100 and were then incubated with the conjugated antibodies in a 3 % BSA PBS solution for 4 h and subsequently imaged . Cell morphology was visualized by using Alexa Fluor phalloidin to stain for F - actin . Nuclei were visualized by staining with Hoechst . Proliferation was ascertained through multiple cell counts . The relative expression of various differentiation markers between different stiffness gels was determined using ﬂuorescence intensity measurements . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Gel Properties The mechanical properties of polyacrylamide can be easily tuned by altering the density of cross - links in the gel . Increas - ing the quantity of either the amount of acrylamide monomer or bis - acrylamide cross - linker results in a gel with a higher Young’s modulus after polymerization ( Fig . 1 ) . The Young’s modulus indicates the stiffness of a material and is related to shear modulus via Poisson’s ratio . The shear modulus of a material quantiﬁes the materials resistance to deformation due to a shearing strain such as those exerted by cells on surfaces . In the present study , a gel with a Young’s modulus of 0 . 7 kPa and corresponding shear modulus of 0 . 25 kPa is referred to as soft or compliant , while a material with a Young’s modulus of 80 kPa ( shear modulus of 28 kPa ) is referred to as stiff . To ensure that differential cell behavior is in response to substrate stiffness , the density of adhesive ligand presented must be consistent across the different stiffness gels . Previous studies have shown , by removal and Western blot analysis , that the density of the adhesive ligand ( collagen I ) bound to the gel surface is independent of substrate stiffness ( 9 ) . Fluorescent imaging and intensity analysis ( data not shown ) of the adhesive ligands tested in the present work conﬁrmed that ligands were consistent in density and also only located on the surface of the gel ( Fig . 2 shows representative ﬂuorescent images ) . Isolated MSC Multipotency Controls The isolated MSCs displayed the potential to differentiate along adipo , myo , and osteogenic lineages after treatment with the respective differentiation protocols described in EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES ( Fig . 3 ) . Lipid globules were observed in the adipogenic MSCs at the end of 2 wk . Dense cell packing and calcium deposits were found in osteogenic MSCs . A reduction in size and acquisition of myoblast and myotube - like morphol - ogies was seen in myogenic MSCs . These results demonstrate Fig . 1 . Young’s modulus vs . cross - linker fraction as determined by mechan - ical testing . Fig . 2 . Fluorescence images of polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels . A : 30 - kPa plain PA gel treated with 50 (cid:6) g / ml collagen I ( Col 1 ) solution and rinsed thoroughly with PBS . Gel shows no protein adsorption . B : N - succinimidyl - 6 - [ 4 (cid:4) - azido - 2 (cid:4) - nitrophenylamino ] hexanoate ( SANPAH ) - treated 30 - kPa PA gel subse - quently incubated with 50 (cid:6) g / ml collagen I solution and rinsed thoroughly with PBS . Gel shows positive staining of covalently cross - linked collagen I . C : cross - sectional image of gel in B showing that collagen I is principally only on the surface of the gel . Fig . 3 . Mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) after treatment with differentiation protocols . Fluorescent images show osteogenic potential : nuclei stained with Hoechst ( A ) and calcium deposits visualized with Alizarin Red ( B ) ; adipogenic potential : nuclei stained with Hoechst ( C ) and fat vacuoles visualized with Oil Red O ( D ) ; and myogenic potential : phase contrast images ( E and F ) . C1039 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m that the MSCs used in the present study were indeed multipo - tent and responsive to differential stimuli . Cell - Gel Interactions Cell attachment , spread area , morphology , and prolifera - tion . Cells were allowed to attach to the gels in serum - free conditions , as described in EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES . Over the 14 days , no changes in the proliferation or the morphology were observed between cells that were incubated in serum - free conditions for the 4 - h attachment period versus those that were allowed to attach in the presence of serum ( data not shown ) . The attachment of MSCs to the gels was found to be dependent both on the stiffness and on the particular ECM molecules presented on the surface of the gel . Figure 4 A shows the attachment of MSCs to the various substrates investigated after 24 h . In general , stiffer substrates facilitated higher attachment over soft substrates . Furthermore , on higher stiff - ness substrates , variability in cell attachment between the proteins was greater . At 0 . 7 kPa , the number of cells attached was approximately the same , regardless of the protein . At 9 kPa , collagen I - and collagen IV - coated gels had slightly higher numbers of attached cells than ﬁbronectin - or laminin - coated gels . At 25 kPa , the trend observed in terms of numbers of cells attached was ﬁbronectin (cid:1) collagen I (cid:1) laminin (cid:1) collagen IV , whereas at 80 kPa , the trend observed was ﬁbronectin (cid:1) collagen IV (cid:1) collagen I (cid:1) laminin . Further to differences in the attachment of MSCs across the various substrates , variations in cell spread area ( Fig . 4 B ) and morphology were observed . In general , cells on softer sub - strates tended to be round and occupy a much smaller footprint on the surface of the gel , whereas stiffer substrates encouraged greater cell spreading—an observation that corroborates with other published results ( 6 – 8 , 12 , 30 ) . Interestingly , the stiff - ness that facilitated the greatest cell attachment for a given protein did not necessarily result in the greatest spread area and vice versa . The development of actin stress ﬁlaments can be clearly seen on substrates with stiffnesses (cid:1) 5 kPa ( Fig . 5 ) . As with the attachment results , MSC spread area on gels with a stiffness of 0 . 7 kPa and 9 kPa varied only slightly across the different proteins . At 25 kPa , the trend observed in terms of spread area of MSCs was collagen IV (cid:1) collagen I (cid:1) ﬁbronec - tin (cid:1) laminin , whereas at 80 kPa , collagen I (cid:8) ﬁbronectin (cid:1) collagen IV (cid:1) laminin . Of the four proteins investigated , laminin - coated substrates demonstrated the least variability in spread area across the range of stiffnesses . Aside from the aforementioned increased roundness of cells on softer substrates , the morphology of the cells on stiffer gels was largely quantitatively comparable across the proteins , except for cells cultured on laminin . On gels of stiffnesses (cid:1) 0 . 7 kPa , these cells possessed a more elongated and spiny morphology than cells cultured on the other proteins . The differences observed in morphology , spread area , and attach - ment demonstrate that both the protein and the stiffness mod - ulate MSC behavior and that attachment is not solely a function of substrate stiffness or the adhesive ligand alone , but rather a combination of the two . Similar to these stiffness - protein combinatorial effects that we observe in MSC behavior , the peak migration rates of smooth muscle cells have been shown to be biphasic , depending on both the stiffness of the substrate and the surface density of ﬁbronectin ( 21 ) . The MSC proliferation rate also followed a general trend of increasing proliferation with increasing substrate rigidity ; how - ever , on higher stiffness substrates , the proliferation rates were similar ( Fig . 6 ) . While cell growth was observed on gels with a stiffness (cid:1) 9 kPa , the cell number on the softest gels stayed virtually the same over the 14 days . The differences in behav - ior of the cells on different stiffness gels can be attributed to integrin signaling through focal adhesion complexes . On stiff gels , phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase will be high , resulting in growth factor activation of ERKs to promote proliferation ( 23 ) . Cell differentiation . The multilineage potential of the puri - ﬁed MSC population used in the present study was determined using well - characterized and reproducible induction protocols ( as described above in MSC Multipotency Controls : Conﬁrm - ing Adipo / Myo / Osteogenicity ) . The MSCs demonstrated the potential to differentiate toward adipocytes , osteoblasts , and myo - blasts . The ability of the various stiffness gels , in combination with different adhesive proteins , to direct MSC lineage speciﬁcation toward myogenic or osteogenic precursors was determined by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy against lineage - speciﬁc tran - scription factors MyoD1 ( myogenic ) and Runx2 ( osteogenic ) . The ﬂuorescent images were analyzed using Adobe Photoshop to measure the ﬂuorescence intensity of the positively stained nuclei . All images were taken using the same exposure settings for each transcription factor , and measured intensities were normalized to background ﬂuorescence . Representative ﬂuo - rescent images of the cells are shown in Fig . 7 , and results of the ﬂuorescence intensity analysis for the expression of both Fig . 4 . MSC attachment ( A ) and spread area ( B ) on the gel - protein substrates after 24 h . C1040 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m transcription factors on the various substrates investigated are presented in Fig . 8 . The results indicate that MSC differentiation is responsive to both the substrate stiffness as well as the adhesive ligand presented on the surface of the gel . Certain speciﬁc combina - tions of substrate stiffness and ECM molecule appear to have provided a strongly directive microenvironment for MSC lin - eage speciﬁcation into both osteogenic and myogenic lineages . Differentiation of MSCs toward osteogenic precursors oc - curred predominately on the stiffest substrate gel ( 80 kPa ) , with the strongest expression of Runx2 being observed on the 80 kPa collagen I - coated gel . At 80 kPa , expression of Runx2 by MSCs cultured on ﬁbronectin - , laminin - , and collagen IV - coated gels was lower than those cultured on collagen I - coated gels by (cid:5) 2 (cid:9) , (cid:5) 7 (cid:9) , and (cid:5) 14 (cid:9) , respectively . The strong osteogenic response of the MSCs to the 80 - kPa collagen I - coated gel may be attributed to the fact that this combination best mimics the natural microenvironment of bone . Type I collagen comprises 80 % of the total protein present in bone , and the stiffness of trabecular bone is (cid:5) 80 kPa ( 8 , 28 ) . Interestingly , similar levels of expression of Runx2 were ob - served on both the 80 - kPa and 25 - kPa ﬁbronectin - coated gels , in stark contrast to the much reduced expression of Runx2 on the 25 - kPa collagen I - coated gel . Ignoring for a moment the differences in the underlying substrate stiffness , the peak levels of Runx2 expression were signiﬁcantly different between pro - teins , with collagen I having a (cid:5) 2 (cid:9) higher readout than ﬁbronectin , (cid:5) 4 . 5 (cid:9) higher readout than laminin , and (cid:5) 7 (cid:9) higher expression than collagen IV . Of particular note are the very low values of Runx2 expression on both collagen IV - and laminin - coated gels , regardless of gel stiffness . These results suggest that substrate stiffness alone is not sufﬁcient to insti - gate osteogenic differentiation of MSCs , at least within the range of stiffness investigated , and that the differentiation process appears to be modulated , for a given substrate stiffness , Fig . 6 . Average fold expansion over all ligands investigated on different stiffness substrates , normalized for initial cell attachment . Negligible prolifer - ation occurs on very compliant gels , and proliferation rates of stiffer gels are similar . Fig . 5 . Human MSC cell spreading and morphology after 24 h on various stiffness protein - coated gels . C1041 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m by the type of ECM molecule present . Cells sense matrix elasticity by anchoring via integrin adhesions to ECM mole - cules and pulling via cytoskeletal contractions . As shown in Fig . 5 , cells on soft substrates spread less , behavior that can likely be attributed to the cells having more mobile , less permanent , anchors ( 6 ) . Cells on stiff substrates develop per - manent anchors through focal adhesions and generate high cytoskeletal tension , which is evidenced by enhanced actin stress ﬁbers and large spread area . Figure 8 thus also suggests that below a compressive modulus of 25 kPa , independent of the adhesive ligand presented , there is not enough cytoskeletal tension to ultimately result in differentiation toward an osteo - genic lineage ( 19 ) . On the basis of these results we postulate that unless a cell develops cytoskeletal tension exceeding a certain threshold stiffness ( such as is generated on substrates with moduli of (cid:1) 25 kPa ) , then 1 ) osteogenic differentiation will not occur and 2 ) if this requirement is satisﬁed , then the cell must also ﬁnd itself in the presence of an osteogenic ligand for Runx2 expression ( and , presumably , further differentiation ) to take place . MyoD1 expression , on the other hand , showed less ECM - dependence compared with Runx2 , being expressed in detect - able amounts in cells cultured on all gels with stiffnesses higher than 9 kPa , regardless of protein coating . Maximum expression of MyoD1 occurred on ﬁbronectin - coated 25 - kPa gels , which was (cid:5) 2 (cid:9) higher than either collagen I or IV and 4 (cid:9) higher than on laminin . There was a noticeable shift between peak expression of MyoD1 between proteins for a given stiffness . While collagen I - and laminin - coated gels gave rise to the highest expression at a stiffness of 80 kPa , cells cultured on ﬁbronectin - and collagen IV - coated gels had peak expression at a gel stiffness of 25 kPa . Furthermore , while maximum expression was observed on 25 - kPa ﬁbronectin - coated gels , similarly high levels of MyoD1 were expressed in cells cultured on 80 - kPa collagen I - coated gels . At 80 kPa , the expression of MyoD1 from MSCs on ﬁbronectin is (cid:5) 1 . 7 (cid:9) lower than either the 80 - kPa gel coated with collagen I or the 25 - kPa gel coated with ﬁbronectin . This result is interesting because comparably high expression was obtained from two different substrate stiffnesses by changing the adhesive ligand , lending credence to our argument that there is interplay be - tween these two extracellular environmental factors . From a physiological perspective , it is perhaps of little surprise that the presence of collagen I and ﬁbronectin encour - ages myogenic differentiation—both play fundamental struc - tural roles in muscle . Perimysial ECM contains (cid:5) 90 % colla - gen I , while the endomysium , which supports skeletal muscle ﬁbers , contains (cid:5) 40 % collagen ( 17 ) . Membranous endomysial Fig . 7 . Representative images of MSCs stained for MyoD1 and Runx2 cultured on gels of various stiffness and protein coating . Runx2 expression was highest on stiff gels coated in collagen I , whereas MyoD1 was expressed in varying amounts on substrates with a stiffness (cid:1) 9 kPa , regardless of protein coating . C1042 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m sheets are composed of ﬁne collagen ﬁbers that make up the reticular layer of the endomysium that directly links cells together . Fibronectin plays a similarly important role and is present throughout the different ECM layers in muscle , extend - ing to the reticular layer of the basement membrane , connect - ing the cell surface to the intercellular matrix ( 13 ) . Given the lower ECM / stiffness - dependent expression of MyoD1 , the re - sults seem to suggest that MSCs have a predisposition to myogenic differentiation in comparison to osteogenic lineages when cultured on these substrates . There is considerable evidence in the literature that the functional activity of cells , including differentiation , is strongly related to cell morphology and spread area ( 3 , 5 , 26 ) . Indeed , cell spread area ( controlled via the micropatterning of ﬁbronec - tin islands on a nonadhesive silicon substrate ) and the associ - ated changes in cytoskeletal tension have been shown to be a potent modulator of functional cell fate . MSCs permitted to spread out on a large area ( 10 , 000 (cid:6) m 2 ) have been shown to become highly osteogenic compared with those constrained to a small area ( 1 , 024 (cid:6) m 2 ) , which instead become highly adipogenic ( 19 ) . Cells restricted to a small attachment area cannot form geometrically separated adhesions that act as anchors to allow tensioning of the cytoskeleton , whereas cells allowed to spread over a large area can form numerous geometrically opposed focal adhesion complexes and can generate signiﬁcant cy - toskeletal tension . However , on unrestricted ( in terms of avail - able area for attachment ) elastic substrates , the cytoskeletal tension is determined not by the available adhesive area but by the substrate elasticity . For the same adhesive ligand , the net effect of increasing the stiffness of the substrate is thus to cause a corresponding increase in the cytoskeletal tension , as shown by the development of actin stress ﬁbers in Fig . 4 and the measured spread area in Fig . 6 , where increases in gel stiffness from 0 . 7 to 80 kPa in our study increased MSC spreading area from (cid:5) 5 , 000 to 45 , 000 (cid:6) m 2 , respectively . However , we also note that on different ligand - coated substrates , different spread areas were observed on gels of the same stiffness . For example , MSCs bound to an 80 - kPa laminin - coated gel had spread areas of approximately half of those bound to an 80 - kPa ﬁbronectin - coated gel ( P (cid:10) 0 . 05 ) , and yet , the level of MyoD1 expression on both was similar ( P (cid:1) 0 . 05 ) . On gels of 25 - kPa stiffness , these two ligands resulted in MSCs displaying similar spread areas ( P (cid:1) 0 . 05 ) but vastly different MyoD1 expression ( P (cid:10) 0 . 05 ) , by a factor of (cid:5) 5 (cid:9) . A similarly signiﬁcant difference in Runx2 expression is noted on the 80 - kPa gel coated with collagen I and collagen IV , even though the observed MSC spread area is very similar ( P (cid:1) 0 . 05 ) . It is clear from these observations that the known effect of cytoskeletal tension on differentiation is signiﬁcantly modulated by the ligand to which the MSC is bound , and not simply the elasticity of the underlying substrate alone . While the presence and modulation of both transcription factors under various conditions are certainly encouraging , care must be exercised when attempting to cross - compare the myogenic or osteogenic induction capacity of the various substrates . The presence of a particular transcription factor within the nucleus does not necessarily mean a cell is commit - ted to a particular lineage . Furthermore , the relative abundance of each transcription factor required to trigger further gene transcription and differentiation cascades is not known . While we can certainly infer outcomes based on the results discussed above , tissue physiology , and previously published data , the immunoﬂuorescence analysis performed does not permit the conclusive establishment of which conditions are “more myo - genic” over those that are “more osteogenic . ” Rather , they give independent insight for each of the transcription factors and together demonstrate the signiﬁcant interplay between sub - strate stiffness and adhesive ligand . Thus , while collagen I - coated 80 - kPa gels gave high readouts for both Runx2 and MyoD1 expression , it would be incorrect to conclude that this stiffness - protein combination is equally myogenic as it is osteogenic without ﬁrst investigating other transcription factors or cofactors that are crucial to the myogenic differentiation process , e . g . , Myf5 , myogenin , and Myf6 . The expression results from both transcription factors indi - cate that there is signiﬁcant interplay between mechanotrans - Fig . 8 . Relative intensity data for the expression of MyoD1 and Runx2 by MSCs cultured on substrates of varying stiffness and ligand . C1043 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m duction and classical integrin signaling . Furthermore , we note that mechanotransduction is obviously modulated by speciﬁc integrin adhesions and thus is responsive to adhesive ligand presentation . The elucidation of how cells respond to substrate stiffness via mechanotransduction is still a much - debated topic . Critical to this debate is the determination of the exact interplay between the type of integrin receptor that is able to engage with the microenvironment and how that affects / interacts with the mechanotransduction cascade . Although the two - dimensional mechanical environment in which a stem cell ﬁnds itself has been shown to play a signiﬁcant initial role in determining its fate , it would appear to be a primary or developmental step in the MSC differentiation process . Whether these phenotypes are maintained once conﬂuence is achieved or when such micro - environments are presented in three dimensions should be a topic of future investigations . Conclusion Current protocols use either toxic DNA demethylation agents or complex cocktails of expensive growth factors to direct stem cell differentiation . The use of demethylation agents could potentially result in genetic abnormalities thereby precluding their use in clinical applications . In the present study , we demonstrate that MSCs can be directed to differen - tiate along a more osteogenic or myogenic path depending on discrete combinations of substrate stiffness and the ECM protein presented to the cell . The ability to direct stem cell fate via a tissue microenvironment mimic alleviates the necessity of using these mutagenic reagents ; the gel - protein system pre - sented here , while perhaps not being suitable for large - scale use itself , demonstrates the potential of such tissue - mimic systems . The results presented furthermore highlight the role that integrins play in determining cell fate through both mechano - sensing and ligand - binding phenomenon . They also highlight the fact that designing a representative artiﬁcial in vitro envi - ronment may be key to providing insights into how stem cells behave in vivo . Everyday tissue culture is practiced on stiff plastic or glass substrates , environments never found in vivo and that perhaps compromise the analysis of cell behavior in these contexts . Generating artiﬁcial environments that more closely mimic those found in natural tissues will provide insights into fundamental cellular processes like differentia - tion , proliferation , wound healing , and disease modeling . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge Dr . Gary Brooke for donation of human MSCs , Sean Barker for assistance in preliminary studies , and Dr . Sharon Clark for assistance in MSC lineage testing . GRANTS This study was supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Grants Scheme , The University of Queensland and the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology . REFERENCES 1 . Arnold IC . Adult mesenchymal stem cells for tissue engineering versus regenerative medicine . J Cell Physiol 213 : 341 – 347 , 2007 . 2 . Bershadsky AD , Balaban NQ , Geiger B . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 : 677 – 695 , 2003 . 3 . Bhadriraju K , Yang M , Ruiz SA , Pirone D , Tan J , Chen CS . Activa - tion of ROCK by RhoA is regulated by cell adhesion , shape , and cytoskel - etal tension . Exp Cell Res 313 : 3616 – 3623 , 2007 . 4 . Brooke G , Cook M , Blair C , Han R , Heazlewood C , Jones B , Kam - bouris M , Kollar K , McTaggart S , Pelekanos R , Rice A , Rossetti T , Atkinson K . Therapeutic applications of mesenchymal stromal cells . Semin Cell Dev Biol 18 : 846 – 858 , 2007 . 5 . Chen CS , Mrksich M , Huang S , Whitesides GM , Ingber DE . Geomet - ric control of cell life and death . Science 276 : 1425 – 1428 , 1997 . 6 . Discher DE , Janmey P , Wang Yl . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 : 1139 – 1143 , 2005 . 7 . Engler A , Bacakova L , Newman C , Hategan A , Grifﬁn M , Discher D . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys J 86 : 617 – 628 , 2004 . 8 . Engler AJ , Sen S , Sweeney HL , Discher DE . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . Cell 126 : 677 – 689 , 2006 . 9 . Flanagan LACA , Ju YE , Marg B , Osterﬁeld M , Janmey PA . Neurite branching on deformable substrates . Neuroreport 13 : 2411 – 2415 , 2002 . 10 . Geiger B , Bershadsky A , Pankov R , Yamada KM . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 793 – 805 , 2001 . 11 . Gumbiner BM . Proteins associated with cytoplasmic surface of adhesion molecules . Neuron 11 : 551 – 564 , 1993 . 12 . Guo WH , Frey MT , Burnham NA , Wang YL . Substrate rigidity regulates the formation and maintenance of tissues . Biophys J 90 : 2213 – 2220 , 2006 . 13 . Hantaı¨ D , Gautron J , Labat - Robert J . Immunolocalization of ﬁbronec - tin and other macromolecules of the intercellular matrix in the striated muscle ﬁber of the adult rat . Coll Relat Res 3 : 381 – 391 , 1983 . 14 . Humphries MJ , Travis MA , Clark K , Mould AP . Mechanisms of integration of cells and extracellular matrices by integrins . Biochem Soc Trans 32 : 822 – 825 , 2004 . 15 . Hynes RO . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 : 673 – 687 , 2002 . 16 . Jones JL , Walker RA . Integrins : a role as cell signalling molecules . Mol Pathol 52 : 208 – 213 , 1999 . 17 . Light N , Champion AE . Characterization of muscle epimysium , perimy - sium and endomysium collagens . Biochem J 219 : 1017 – 1010 , 1984 . 18 . Magne D , Vinatier C , Julien M , Weiss P , Guicheux J . Mesenchymal stem cell therapy to rebuild cartilage . Trends Mol Med 11 : 519 – 526 , 2005 . 19 . McBeath R , Pirone DM , Nelson CM , Bhadriraju K , Chen CS . Cell Shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commit - ment . Dev Cell 6 : 483 – 495 , 2004 . 20 . Palsson BØ , Bhatia SN . Tissue Engineering . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall , 2004 . 21 . Peyton SR , Putnam AJ . Extracellular matrix rigidity governs smooth muscle cell motility in a biphasic fashion . J Cell Physiol 204 : 198 – 209 , 2005 . 22 . Pittenger MF , Mackay AM , Beck SC , Jaiswal RK , Douglas R , Mosca JD , Moorman MA , Simonetti DW , Craig S , Marshak DR . Multilineage po - tential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells . Science 284 : 143 – 147 , 1999 . 23 . Schwartz MA , Ginsberg MH . Networks and crosstalk : integrin signal - ling spreads . Nat Cell Biol 4 : E65 – E68 , 2002 . 24 . Schwartz MA , Schaller MD , Ginsberg MH . Integrins : emerging para - digms of signal transduction . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 11 : 549 – 599 , 1995 . 25 . Segers VF , Van Riet I , Andries LJ , Lemmens K , Demolder MJ , De Becker AJ , Kockx MM , De Keulenaer GW . Mesenchymal stem cell adhesion to cardiac microvascular endothelium : activators and mecha - nisms . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 290 : H1370 – H1377 , 2006 . 26 . Semler EJ , Lancin PA , Dasgupta A , Moghe PV . Engineering hepato - cellular morphogenesis and function via ligand - presenting hydrogels with graded mechanical compliance . Biotechnol Bioeng 89 : 296 – 307 , 2005 . 27 . Tao H , Rao R , Ma DD . Cytokine - induced stable neuronal differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in a serum / feeder cell - free condition . Dev Growth Differ 47 : 423 – 433 , 2005 . 28 . Viguet - Carrin S , Garnero P , Delmas P . The role of collagen in bone strength . Osteoporos Int 17 : 319 – 336 , 2006 . 29 . Wong J , Leach J , Brown X . Balance of chemistry , topography , and mechanics at the cell - biomaterial interface : issues and challenges for assessing the role of substrate mechanics on cell response . Surface Sci : 119 – 133 , 2004 . 30 . Yeung T , Georges P , Flanagan L , Marg B , Ortiz M , Funaki M , Zahir N , Ming W , Weaver V , Janmey P . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 60 : 24 – 34 , 2005 . C1044 SUBSTRATE STIFFNESS / PROTEIN - DIRECTED MSC LINEAGE CHOICE AJP - Cell Physiol • VOL 295 • OCTOBER 2008 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 1 on J u l y 8 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m