How to be Systematic with Mood Boards ? Alejandra Maria Velasquez - Posada Department of Product Design Engineering Universidad EAFIT Medellin , Colombia alvelas @ eafit . edu . co Abstract — This Innovative Practice Work in Progress Paper presents a strategy of how product design engineering students use mood boards in a systematic way , as a tool to enhance creativity and to gather visual coherence and aesthetic consistency during the concept design stage . In educational practice , mood boards help and improve an engineer’s visual thinking . Currently there appears to be a very limited understanding by students on how to incorporate in their design , product features from visual theme boards ; and students complain of the lack of precise instructions by teachers , making it difficult to conduct the design process . Being inspired by a perfume bottle for example helps create a systematic approach to mood boards by defining a visual framework to determine the styling outcomes . The findings suggested that the use of an inspiring element facilitates visual and aesthetic connections , resulting in a significantly more motivating process for students , as well as an encouraging guiding process for teachers that seek to achieve design accuracy . Keywords— Mood boards , product styling , aesthetics , inspiring element , design process I . I NTRODUCTION The use of mood boards in the early stages of the design process is a common practice for designers and they are a useful tool for inspiration and for developing visual thinking as they are created to share a common visual language [ 1 ] [ 2 ] . They play an important role in design thinking : helping to demarcate context , triggering idea generation , and providing an anchor for structuring mental representations [ 3 ] . Note that designers tend to be ‘imagers’ rather than ‘verbalizers’ [ 4 ] . According to McDonagh , D . and Denton , H . the two functions of the boards are inspiration and communication [ 5 ] . Mike Baxter [ 6 ] refers to three types of boards : ( 1 ) lifestyle board , represents the target’s personal and social values ; ( 2 ) mood board , reflects the emotion or feeling the product should symbolizes ; and ( 3 ) visual theme board , has a collection of different products that convey the target’ mood . Nevertheless , “mood boards are not easy to make and sometimes students can respond to the requirement to produce them at a superficial level rather than deep learning” [ 7 ] . Mood boards per se do not guarantee either ( 1 ) achieving visual coherence , ( 2 ) communicating an emotion , or ( 3 ) finding the style with aesthetic consistency required for the new product . Currently there appears to be not only a very limited understanding by students on how to create accurate mood boards but also the lack of precise instructions on how to choose the right images , turning this into a subjective activity . Students suffer from distraction in this digital era and it becomes more important to teach with clarity . Therefore , a step - by - step approach is a priority . This Innovative Practice Work in Progress Paper presents a strategy of how product design engineering students use mood boards in a systematic way , as a tool to enhance creativity and to gather visual coherence and aesthetic consistency during the concept design stage . Teaching with mood boards is addressed at section II , while section III explains the methodology of the systematic approach . Section IV presents the results and describes the limitations , while section V ends with conclusions . II . T EACHING WITH MOOD BOARDS The five main parts of the mood - board making process are described as follows : image collection , image browsing , image piling , building mood board and expanding mood board . “Designers start looking for images that will help them build a story or say something about the target audience , product or company they are designing for” [ 8 ] . Again , for undergraduate students the most difficult part is the image piling where they categorize their collection of images . “Strong mood boards should have many similar looking but different images , to find the underline similarities within the repeating or common elements” [ 9 ] . For Lucero , A . first , mood boards play a framing role by defining the limits of the design task , which includes both problem setting and problem solving . Second , mood boards assist in the transmission of a mindset or vision by aligning the different stakeholders and getting them on the same wavelength . Third , mood boards support designers in visually researching apparently conflicting or contradicting ideas or paradoxing . Fourth , mood boards play an abstracting role by allowing designers to juxtapose both concrete and abstract imagery depending on the project and client . Finally , mood boards play a directing role by setting a trajectory for future design efforts [ 10 ] . Teaching mood boards is not an easy task because to develop a theory and practice is a complex issue , especially inside product design engineering education where no art background 978 - 1 - 7281 - 1746 - 1 / 19 / $ 31 . 00 ©2019 IEEE or visual training exists . It has also been observed that mood boards are not a standardized practice and the evaluation varies among teachers and their personal interpretations , leading to a subjective activity , as mentioned before . In the experience of the author most students only present mood boards as a requirement or as an activity to be graded , while others struggle in finding the passion that will guide their conceptual and creative process . To find meaning of the task they must accomplish , students and teachers must motivate , inspire and connect . III . T HE SYSTEMATIC APPROACH A . Making mood boards Mood boards are particularly useful to students because they can provide direction and insight , they also have the potential for stimulation . Design education could do much more to improve the exploitation of this under - valued tool [ 11 ] . During teaching and learning process , mood boards had proven to induce a higher emotional impact on students and helped early decisions regarding the products’ style [ 12 ] . The process of making the three boards are the same as Baxter , M . addresses : lifestyle , mood and visual theme . B . The inspiring element Since there is difficulty in achieving visual coherence in the style and the aesthetics between those three boards , the proposal of the teaching methodology is based on choosing one product as an inspiring element . Because perception , interpretation and meaning of a collection of images is a very challenging activity for young students , the use of one product has proven to be an effective approach . As in reverse engineering , this teaching strategy proposes to do a kind of “reverse visualization” by choosing an inspiring element before making the three boards : A perfume bottle . A perfume has a brand , tells a story and has a clearly defined user . The name , shapes , silhouettes , graphic design , colors , textures , packaging , etc . , everything around it is encouraging . Students must reinterpret it , understand the user’s lifestyle , tastes and preferences , as well as , search for other products that share similar styling features . C . Design and inspiration Since tracing the influence of mood boards in the generated design concept is so difficult and sometimes ambiguous or unspecific , this step - by - step method seeks to reduce the gap . In Design Project 3 , a second - year course of Product Design Engineering , students must design a small vending machine using mood boards and defining a visual framework to determine the styling outcomes . This systematic approach is not only a guide for students to design and incorporate the same product features as ones in the visual theme board ; but also , a guide for teachers to conduct the design process . To inspire the creative process for designing a product the designer must gather information in the early design phase called Exploration [ 12 ] , so the style should be perceived as a whole : “the design space” as some authors call it . Starting with one product , in this case a perfume bottle , students extract styling properties , find aesthetic similarities and make product feature relationships , to create a shared language between the three boards ( Figure 1 ) . Fig . 1 . The teaching model with the inspiring element in the center D . Methodology : procedure and participants Each student is assigned with a different bottle of perfume . Its appearance creates an impression or sensation when it is first seen , so students are asked to choose one word to define the feeling about the perfume’s bottle . By making associations and finding connections , they choose keywords such as : mysterious , sweet , sophisticated , happy , explosive , playful , serious , rebellious . As the saying goes “a picture is worth a thousand words” , the design of the perfume bottle communicates a message . With the analysis of the perfume visual key elements , style features and aesthetics , the creation of the three boards starts and students tend to be more accurate by connecting them to the perfume . Students from second - year course were requested to produce the following three items for the given perfume bottle : ( 1 ) a lifestyle board for the perfume user , ( 2 ) a mood board with the word that best relates to the perfume bottle and ( 3 ) a visual theme board with products of the target mood . Figure 2 presents an example of three boards created for Oh , Lola ! ® perfume by Marc Jacobs among the “cheerful” keyword . Fig . 2 . Perfume + keyword + mood boards Continuing with the analysis , Figure 3 shows the perfume bottle as the inspiring element , through drawings and sketches of 2D shapes , 3D volumes , graphic elements and details ; so students must make visual connections and represent the keyword that supports the design concept . Fig . 3 . Formal analysis of the perfume bottle and design concepts The design process starts with making multiple design alternatives for a vending machine and choosing the one that best suits the keywords . Figure 4 presents final renders . Fig . 4 . Final design concept of a vending machine that evokes “cheerful” E . Outcomes Students handed a functional scale 1 : 1 model of the vending machine ; built out of MDF with a realistic appearance through simulating materials , and showing the surfaces finished by using techniques such as sanding and painting the models outside . Figure 5 presents an example of the accomplished task : a vending machine that communicates the keyword “cheerful” inspired in the Oh , Lola ! ® Perfume by Marc Jacobs . “Lalá” dispenses little chewing gum candy in small glass tubes . Fig . 5 . “Lalá” : Functional model of a cheerful vending machine IV . R ESULTS AND LIMITATIONS To assist in the concept design stage , this approach has proven to be a stimulating teaching strategy and has helped expand the design process ; not only because the aesthetic features are translated into the shapes of the new product but also because it has supported the activity of teaching styling coherence , by establishing a product language frame from the beginning of design process . This design exercise also has a different interpretation from the students’ point of view by allowing them to organize the design elements in various compositions and how it relates to the technical and functional requirements of the vending machine . Through a questionnaire and a series of focus groups with undergraduate students , the findings suggested that mood boards with this new approach ( the use of an inspiring element ) facilitates visual and aesthetic connections ; resulting into a significantly more effective tool and helping students to create ideas with higher styling accuracy . Students declare also that they felt more comfortable during the design process because mood boards inspired them throughout the creative phase . The study was conducted over a period of one year and a half with a survey of 107 second - year students . The answers were set in a scale from 1 to 5 , where 5 means “totally agree” , and 1 means “totally disagree” . The three next figures presents the results obtained at 2017 - 2 , 2018 - 1 and 2018 - 2 semesters . • Question # 1 : Did you feel comfortable and happy designing with the methodology of the three boards and the perfume bottle ? Figure 6 shows 48 , 6 % as the average of students who totally agree feeling comfortable during design process . Fig . 6 . Felt comfortable during design process • Question # 2 : Do you consider that the methodology is inspiring and facilitates the generating of design alternatives in a fluid way ? Figure 7 shows 33 , 2 % as the average of students who totally agree in finding the methodology inspiring , as well as it helps for generating design alternatives . Fig . 7 . Inspiring and helped fluidity • Question # 3 : Would you use this methodology again - as a visual thinking tool - to design another product for other semesters ? Figure 8 shows 45 , 3 % as the average of students who totally agree for using the methodology again . Fig . 8 . Will use it again Other findings suggested that 58 % of students agree that the inspiring element allowed them to make a connection between the vending machine style and the products from the visual theme board . In addition , 67 % affirmed that this systematic approach assisted them to capture and visualize the mood in a more tangible way with the keyword . Generating multiple design alternatives remains the most challenging part of the process , 44 % of students stated the inspiring element was helpful . One of the limitations is the student’s difficulty to choose a word to express an emotion and to make that keyword tangible and visual through product design . Getting the perfect match between the perfume bottle , the mood board , the keyword and the final product language is a complex task ; especially linking the end of the design process with the beginning . For further work , the author suggests to interview teachers form second - year program to have a feedback in relation to the methodology and to discover if the inspiring element also helps them for guiding and grading a design process . V . C ONCLUSIONS • This first study of using three boards with a perfume bottle shows an improvement on the design process by : ( 1 ) fitting correctly into a lifestyle , ( 2 ) communicating an accurate emotion , ( 3 ) creating diverse design concepts , ( 4 ) combining a precise color scheme , ( 5 ) applying style inside a frame , and ( 6 ) achieving visual correspondence and coherence . • McDonagh , D . and Storer , I . indicates that mood boards are a ‘love it or hate it’ issue . “Some claim mood boards can inspire creativity and aid communication . Others dismiss them as of no value . The literature is curiously limited on the subject , possible due to the subjective nature of the issue” [ 13 ] . This Innovative Practice Work in Progress Paper explores the potential of mood boards as a designing tool , in a systematic way . It goes beyond the three boards by Baxter and proposes the use of an inspiring element . • Nevertheless , students gain confidence and the design process was carried out in a responsible and sequential manner during the implementation of this teaching strategy . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] S . Garner , and D . McDonagh - Philp , “Problem Interpretation and Resolution via Visual Stimuli : The Use of ' Mood Boards ' in Design Education” , International Journal of Art & Design Education , 20 ( 1 ) , 2001 , pp . 57 - 64 . [ 2 ] I . Keller , For Inspiration Only : Designer interaction with informal collections of visual material , PhD thesis , Delft University of Technology , 2005 . [ 3 ] Eckert , C and Stacey , M ( 2000 ) Sources of inspiration : a language of design Design Studies Vol 21 No 5 pp . 523 - 538 . [ 4 ] Riding , R J and Rayner , S ( 1998 ) Cognitive styles and learning strategies Fulton , London . [ 5 ] McDonagh , D . and Denton , H . ( 2004 ) Exploring the degree to which individual students share a common perception of specific mood boards : observations relating to teaching , learning and team - based design . [ 6 ] Baxter , M . ( 1995 ) , Product Design : A practical guide to systematic methods of new product development . Design Research Centre , Brunel University , UK . Published by Chapman & Hall , England , pp . 217 - 228 . [ 7 ] Entwistle , N J and Ramsden , P ( 1983 ) Understanding student learning Croom Helm , London . [ 8 ] Lucero , A . Aliakseyeu , D . and Martens , J - B . Augmenting Mood Boards : Flexible and Intuitive Interaction in the Context of the Design Studio . Second Annual IEEE International Workshop on Horizontal Interactive Human - Computer System , 2007 , pp . 147 - 154 . [ 9 ] Müstak Cobanli , O . Design DNA approach for defining “styles” . M . A . Furniture Design and B . A . Economics . OMC Design Studios , Como , Italy . [ 10 ] Lucero , A . Framing , Aligning , Paradoxing , Abstracting , and Directing : How Design Mood Boards Work . DIS 2012 In the Wild , june 11 - 15 , 2012 , Newcastle , UK . [ 11 ] Garner , S . & McDonagh - Philp , D . 2001 . Problem Interpretation and Resolution via Visual Stimuli : The Use of ‘Mood Boards’ in Design Education . pp . 57 - 64 . JADE 20 . 1 ©NSEAD 2001 . [ 12 ] Rieuf , V . , Bouchard , C . and Aoussat , A . Immersive moodboards , a comparative study of industrial design inspiration material . Journal of Design Research , pp . 1 - 29 , 2016 . [ 13 ] McDonagh , D . and Storer , I . Mood boards as a design catalyst and resource : researching an under - researched area . The Design Journal , Volume 7 , Issue 3 , pp . 16 - 31 . 2004 .