Giving Ideas an Equal Chance : Inclusion and Representation in Participatory Design with Children Janet C Read University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK PR1 2HE + 44 ( 0 ) 1772 893285 jcread @ uclan . ac . uk Daniel Fitton University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK PR1 2HE + 44 ( 0 ) 1772 893277 dbfitton @ uclan . ac . uk Matthew Horton University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK PR1 2HE + 44 ( 0 ) 1772 895151 mplhorton @ uclan . ac . uk ABSTRACT Participatory Design ( PD ) in various guises is a popular approach with the Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) community . In studying it as a method very little work has considered the funda - mentals of participation , namely how children choose to partici - pate and how their ideas are included and represented . This paper highlights ethical concerns about PD with children within the context of information needed to consent . In helping children understand participation in PD , a central aspect is the necessity to help children understand how their design ideas are used which itself challenges researchers to seek a fair and equitable process that is describable and defensible . The TRAck ( tracking , repre - senting and acknowledging ) Method , is described as an initial process that could meet this need . This is evaluated , in two forms , in a PD study with 84 children . The TRAck Method encouraged careful scrutiny of designs and allowed the researchers to distil useful design ideas although these were maybe not the most imag - inative . There is a trade off between the limitations of applying such a process to PD against the benefits of ensuring full - informed involvement of children . Categories and Subject Descriptors H5 . 2 [ User Interfaces ] : Prototyping , User - centred design General Terms Design , Human Factors , Theory , Keywords Participatory Design , Child Computer Interaction , Ethics 1 . INTRODUCTION The Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) community considers Participatory Design ( PD ) as an accepted , and often preferred , method for engaging with children in activities where new tech - nologies for children are being developed . Since its inception in 2002 , of the 195 long papers published at the annual IDC confer - ence , 35 have included at least some aspects of participatory de - sign ( e . g . [ 16 ] [ 31 ] ) ( http : / / www . chici . org / resources ) . Many other papers on PD have been published at the annual CHI conference ( e . g . [ 21 ] , [ 7 ] ) . Participatory design is predated by the ideal of inclusion of chil - dren as participants in research that has its roots in sociology . Hart’s model of participation [ 13 ] , describes a continuum that shows the deepening involvement of children as a factor that af - fects participation in the context of empowerment ; thus at the extremes children are essentially not empowered at all ( Rung 1 – Adult - led activities , in which a youth does as directed without understanding ) or are fully empowered ( Rung 8 – Youth - led ac - tivities , in which decision making is shared with youth and adults working as equal partners ) . In research settings , when children act as participants , it is com - mon practice to seek consent to gather data and to hold infor - mation about the study . This consent assumes that children are fully aware of the potential , and possibilities , for the data they will contribute . The extent to which a child can understand what he or she is consenting to is always a concern when researching with children . Many refer to children as not being able to give consent and typically assume that consent for their participation must be drawn from adults ; this view is based on the belief that children cannot be “fully informed” so cannot give consent [ 24 ] . Fill in - formation is , of course , never possible as one can never be sure where a piece of research will lead or what its effects may be . When children participate with ideas for design within ICT set - tings , there might appear to be few concerns about data and the gathering of consent is often simply about gathering assent to take part . This is a result of the marrying of concerns about informed consent to the ‘value’ of the data gathered . Having full infor - mation about a study is also about an individual being empowered to understand what is going on , where the information gathered may be used and where the results and findings will be used . In - clusion of ideas , and the extent to which each child’s contribution is collected , valued and used is also an important aspect . To date , in reported PD sessions , the IDC community , whilst typically paying attention to reporting the number of children , and their gender , has not been always clear about how children are in - formed to consent to participate and how each idea is included . This paper adds understanding to this space by presenting an analysis method ( TRAck ) for the outcomes of participatory design sessions that could be described to children so they would under - stand how their ideas are used and that can therefore provide a starting point for moving the participation of children in PD ses - sions from Hart’s Rung 3—where children are consulted but have limited means to feedback—to Rung 5 where they can know how and where their inputs go . TRAck is described in two forms and is considered most useful in large studies where many children from different places may contribute design ideas as it can be used to both ensure that all the ideas are considered in an equal way and it presents a defensible strategy , which could be explained to Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . IDC’14 , June 17 – 20 , 2014 , Aarhus , Denmark . Copyright © 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2272 - 0 / 14 / 06… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2593968 . 2593986 105 children , for the reduction from many ideas to a few ideas whilst ensuring fair representation . The analysis method , TRAck ( tracking , representing and ac - knowledging ) is examined and demonstrated in the context of a PD case study of the design of a mobile product for teenagers that encouraged better use of electrical and other energy . The study involved 84 children aged between 11 and 15 from two different schools . TRAck was applied firstly as 1 design 1 idea ( v1 ) and secondly as n designs n ideas ( v2 ) and the results are compared and discussed . The paper critiques TRAck for its ability to identi - fy ideas for future use and in the context of ensuring the most ethical and most high - level participation of children in PD work . 2 . BACKGROUND 2 . 1 History and Origins of PD Participatory design is a broad term that , in HCI , refers to the involvement of end users as informants in the design of technolo - gy . Participatory design has its roots in the participatory ap - proaches to decision making that go back as far as Plato and the Athenian democracies . The principle was , and still is , that if peo - ple were given a voice then a ) they would be more likely to be happy with a decision and b ) that the people’s voices had a value . Participatory design emerged in various forms from two different needs The first , coming mainly from the US , was the need for technological rationalization where IBM and others sought to engage with users to ensure efficient design of systems with initia - tives like joint application design . The second was the social and humanist approaches that considered user participation necessary for collective security and individual autonomy . This latter movement had support in the UK and Scandinavia with key con - tributions being socio - technical [ 23 ] , and contributions from the Tavistock institution and Norwegian work experiments [ 29 ] . Par - ticipatory design in HCI has had several pioneers and has been used in several high profile projects [ 1 ] , [ 22 ] , 2 . 2 PD with Children PD with children became fashionable in the late 1980s with influ - ential work by Scaife et al . [ 28 ] and Druin et al . [ 10 ] . Different traditions of participation evolved along axes that partially mimic the two underlying principles , these being , children contributing to make better technology and children contributing their voices for empowerment . In the former model , the work on co - design by Druin [ 10 ] has been highly influential . The research lab at Mary - land pioneered a co - design practice where small teams of children worked for several weeks on design projects with adult partici - pants . In this model the children develop skills as designers and participate in a collaborative incremental process that leads ideas into a single design brief [ 35 ] . An alternative view , which is pos - sibly more in line with what is understood as the Scandinavian approach , is lauded by Mazzone et al . [ 18 ] and others . This prac - tice engages with large numbers of children in short bursts , often in a single event , and seeks to spread a broad net to capture many ideas as inspirations to be later used by an adult design team . Studies of participatory design with children tend to focus on the philosophical arguments around the involvement of children in the practice , on the examination of methods to facilitate children’s involvement , and on the quality of the products and ideas that are generated during PD . Philosophical debate focuses on the role of the children and on the extent to which they can participate in meaningful design activi - ties . Early discussion has been outside the IDC community and has come from the social sciences where participation of children has provoked discussion on the value of one - off participation of children as opposed to more sustained involvement with the con - cern being about empowerment [ 30 ] . The ethical commentator , Christensen , [ 4 ] , voiced concerns about participation highlighting that although there cannot always be a symmetry of power with children , there should be great care taken to ensure ethical sym - metry as a minimal requirement . Ethical symmetry assumes that children are treated with the same knowledge and ability to con - sent as adults would be rather than being considered a special case . In HCI , the Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ) commu - nity has begun dialogue on some of these themes . The roles of children as participants in HCI work has been modelled by Druin et al . [ 9 ] , and participatory power imbalances were discussed by Read et al . [ 26 ] who delineated participatory design activities with children along an axis from informant through balanced to facili - tated design The ethics of children’s participation in design activi - ties has also been examined by Read et al . [ 25 ] who made a case for children being given full information about the potential use of , and the funding for , the designs that they contribute . In terms of methods for participatory design with children , several meta - methods have been described including co - design [ 5 ] , de - sign partners [ 8 ] and informant design . Each of these approaches varies in its motivations and focus but the core aspect of all is the engagement with the user group and the facilitation of design activities by research teams who deliberately seek to delegate the design activity and power to the participating user team . The effectiveness of participatory design in terms of gathering ideas and inspirations from children has also been discussed with - in the IDC community . Here research seeks to explore the idea generation process [ 20 ] or to consider how PD can be used with specific user groups or specific design challenges [ 32 ] . User groups that have been shown to be able to participate in design activities include very young children [ 17 ] and teenagers [ 19 ] . 2 . 3 Ideas , values and ethics In the IDC literature very few researchers have documented how they have concerned themselves with the rights and feelings of children within the context of research using participatory design . Three studies stand out ; one that is concerned with how ideas are seen to filter through the process , a second that foregrounds the values of the research team in the PD process and a third that challenges the research team to be especially honest and candid in their explanations to the children ahead of a PD event . The first is the work by Guha et al . from 2004 , entitled ‘Mixing Ideas’ [ 12 ] . This paper described how the authors adapted co - design methods for use in a single session with a young age group ( aged 4 – 6 ) . The central theme of this paper is that the children wanted to understand how their ideas were used . Tellingly the authors write that children were ‘visibly upset’ that their ideas were not being used and that children were ‘not speaking and not contributing’ when they perceived that their ideas were not being listened to . The use of the children’s ideas was the main feature of this work and the authors proposed a method by which ideas were mixed up , in small groups , and then mixed again and again until only one ‘big idea’ remained . The process took place in a consensus discussion with the participating children . The process was reported as having sparked imagination and ideas . The second influential paper is by Iversen et al . in 2012 [ 16 ] . This paper , describing a design session for teenagers , deliberately put democratic behaviours and democracy at the front of the design session . In particular the researchers who were facilitating the design session are reported to have ‘presented their interests’ to 106 the teenagers ahead of the activity taking place . This action , of clearly letting the design participants know what the ‘values’ of the research team were , and the emphasis on the teenage designers being as informed as possible as to the nature of the task , is the only evidence found of such practice in participatory design stud - ies with children . This is an example of value - centred design which explains itself as ‘frontloaded ethics’ [ 33 ; 34 ] and promotes an early look at the values that are incorporated in design . As written by Friedman et al . [ 11 ] , ‘Human values and ethical con - siderations no longer stand apart from the HCI community but are fundamentally part of our practice . This shift reflects , at least in part , the increasing impact and visibility that computer tech - nologies have had on human lives’ . The third work is from 2013 and is by Read et al . [ 27 ] , in which the ethics of participation of children is examined . This paper suggests an approach in which the research team deliberately and critically examine why they are engaging with children and then ensure that the children have as much knowledge as possible in order to decide whether or not to participate . This process , when applied to design , implies that children should be informed about how their ideas will be used , where they might gain attribution for them , and what might happen should their idea ultimately result in monetary gains . Theoretically this takes a view of as ‘ethical symmetry’ [ 4 ] , where children are not considered as any different to adults in terms of participation . It suggests that in all participa - tory work due consideration be given to ethical balances and to informed consent It is generally considered that the more mean - ingful participation is for children the more beneficial the activity is across all aspects [ 30 ] , The IDC community has sought to re - port methods and approaches that value participation [ 15 ] . Collectively , these three papers spell out a research agenda for the IDC community suggesting three concerns that need attention . These concerns can be captured as follows :  From Guha – Ideas need to be Accounted for - IA  From Iversen – Participants need to be Told – PT  From Read – Consent requires Information - IC The remainder of this paper describes the implementation of a process that accounts for ideas ( IA ) in such a way that participants can be clearly advised ( PT ) about how their ideas are dealt with in order that they can give fully informed consent ( IC ) to participa - tion . The following sections describe this process , show its appli - cation in a PD session and then discuss its potential . 3 . DEMOCRATIC DESIGN PRACTICE Democracies typically fall into two styles ; one is a direct democ - racy where all participants have an equal and a direct say in deci - sion - making , the second is a representative democracy in which all eligible citizens contribute by electing representatives who then carry their voices forward . This second model of democracy came about by necessity as populations became too large to allow each member a voice in each instance . The way individuals are represented is key to democratic action , and is one of the three practices ( deliberation , participation and representation ) that de - nominate democracy [ 6 ] . Representation is the creation of proxies to impersonate the desires of a participating population . 3 . 1 TRAck Method The TRAck Method is described here as a means to ensure repre - sentation of ideas and tracking of ideas for PD sessions . A set of assumptions underpin the descriptions that follow . These are that : i ) There is a need to be able to articulate to children a method that satisfies them that their ideas are being considered ii ) There may often be too many children participating in a design session for there to be a simple amal - gam of ideas iii ) The design team are able to agree , in advance , on a maximum number of key ideas that they are look - ing to take forward and identify as having come from the design session iv ) There are available a team of experienced individ - uals who can examine the children’s designs v ) Any designs offered are sufficiently mature to con - vey at least one idea that can be taken forward The method is described in two versions ( v1 and v2 ) – and these are each then examined in the case study that follows . 3 . 1 . 1 Terminology In the narrative that follows an idea is considered to be something that could potentially be included in a final design specification prior to build . One design could have many ideas embedded in it and a design could be the work of one child , or of a group of chil - dren . A design can exist as a single image , or prototype , or could exist as a series of linked images or prototypes . For the purposes of discussion a group refers to a collection of individuals whose designs are linked in so much as they come from a single cohort of children , e . g . one school class and so merit representation . A design activity may be repeated with several groups to inform a single final product specification . 3 . 1 . 2 Stage 1 – Setting the Parameters Having planned a design activity and having carried it out with a large enough cohort of children to make the merging and tracking of ideas problematic , the evaluators determine approximately how many ideas they are aiming to have at the end of the process , ( in the example below , this number is ten ) and also the approximate ‘size’ of competing teams ( in the example described below this is between 3 and 5 – ideally these would be very similar or all the same ) . The designs from all the participating children are then placed into teams within the groups , with the number of teams dictating the number of ideas that will be present at the finish . 3 . 1 . 3 Stage 2 – Reporting Candidate Ideas A set of reporting sheets are developed , one for each team , and each with as many spaces for candidate ideas , alongside each design , as there are designs in the team . Thus , if there are three designs in a team , each design has a space for three candidate ideas to be recorded , if there are five designs in a team , each has space for five candidate ideas to be reported ( see figure 1 ) . Evaluators are then recruited to inspect the children’s designs ( this is situated in the work from Horn et al . [ 14 ] who stress the need for all ideas to be fairly considered and for consensual opinions ) . This group of evaluators individually inspects every design and lists as many candidate ideas as there is space to write ideas in the spaces on the reporting sheets . Once all the reporting sheets have been completed , the activity changes according to whether the 1 : 1 ( v1 ) or n : n ( v2 ) analysis method is being applied 3 . 1 . 4 Analysis using TRAck v1 - 1 : 1 Each evaluator selects one candidate idea from each design to take forward ( in figure 1 this can be seen as a tick in the column headed individual ) . These ideas are then referred to as ( that single evaluators ) selected ideas . Note that there will always be as many selected ideas as there are individual designs coming into the pro - cess . The different evaluators then come together and consider 107 each others selected ideas choosing from those the most popular ideas ( based on how many evaluators chose that idea as their se - lected idea ) and bring that idea forward as the ‘winner’ for that team of designs . At this stage there will be as many ‘winners’ as there are teams , and each winning idea will represent a team ( which in turn will represent a group ) . Figure 1 - Completed reporting sheet showing how 5 candidate ideas were transcribed and how 5 individual ( 1 : 1 ) and 5 group ( n : n ) were chosen to take forward . 3 . 1 . 5 Analysis using TRAck v1 - n : n In this version instead of the individual evaluator bringing for - ward one idea from each and every design , each evaluator brings forward as many ideas from the ‘team’ as there are individual designs in the team – thus , if there are five designs in the team then five ideas are brought forward to become the selected ideas . Theoretically these could all come from one design ( whereas in v1 they have to come equally with one from each design ) . In figure 1 above it can be seen that designs 2 and 4 both contributed two ideas in this case . After each evaluator has determined his or her selected ideas ( and again there will be as many selected ideas as there were designs coming into the process ) the activity continues in the same way as in v1 with evaluators coming together and agreeing ‘winners’ with one winning idea coming from each team . Both methods ensure that each design is considered and is only competing with ideas from similar groups and thus makes sure that each different ‘group’ of children is represented in the final design discussion space . It could be argued that v1 is more inclu - sive as every team brings an idea through to the ‘vote off’ but v2 has the advantage of possibly ensuring that should one design have all the great ideas , these ideas are not lost . Theoretically , v2 should result in better ideas than v1 but can still be considered to be representative . 3 . 2 Evaluating the TRAck Method Three questions arise from the possible use of this method ; these are ; a ) Inclusivity : To what extent does this method ensure that all the children’s ideas are acknowledged / considered ? b ) Representation : How do the two models ( v1 , v2 ) , for representation , differ ? c ) Process - From the point of view of a design team , used to a more holistic approach , what is the effect of using this process by which ideas can be tracked ? These questions are examined in the case study that follows . 4 . CASE STUDY A participatory design study that took place over four days with four different groups of children in two different schools is de - scribed . The PD session aimed to gather designs for conveying energy use and was part of a three - year research project . The case study is written up in three parts , the first describes how the con - text was set for the pupils , the second describes what happened during the design session and describes the instruments used , and the third describes the use of TRAck to analyse the outputs . 4 . 1 Obstructed Theatre The first stage in the design journey required the design team to understand what it was that they wanted from the pupils and to create a means by which these requirements could be conveyed without constraining design thinking . It is worth noting that the design team needed to create a successful usable product and so foremost in their thinking was the need to gather design ideas . Probe questions that the design team explored were : 1 . What is the team aiming to build ? 2 . What are the uncertainties of the design space ? 3 . What are the constraints that pupils will need to know ? 4 . What are the key functional requirements ? Having answered these questions the team determined to use the obstructed theatre [ 28 ] approach in order to ensure a consistent , inclusive , informative and open introduction to the design activi - ties . This was considered important as the team were seeking to repeat the same design session with four different groups . Ob - structed theatre is a method based on work by Briggs et al . [ 3 ] who took their inspiration from the use of pastiche scenarios in design [ 2 ] . It has been shown to work with children . A script for the obstructed theatre was made as shown in Figure 2 . This script conveyed the key responses to the probe questions : 1 . The product will be a mobile / portable device that in - forms about energy use and is suited to teenagers . 2 . The uncertainties are the shape , form and affordances of the product and how it should be interacted with . 3 . The constraints are that it should be unobtrusive . 4 . The key functional requirements are that the product alerts the owner to excessive energy use , conveys ener - gy used , informs about energy uses of different things , and communicates with other similar devices . In accordance with the practice , the theatre script was recorded by a teenage informant and accompanied with a Flash animation with stick figures that demonstrated the dramatic action . 4 . 2 Progressive Design Activities Designs were gathered over four days in two different schools with two different year groups in each school . Each instance is referred to as a design session , thus there were four sessions ( A , B , C and D ) . These are referenced in Table 2 . 4 . 2 . 1 Participants The two schools that participated in the study were standard gov - ernment funded high schools and were typical of most such schools in the UK . One was partially sponsored by the Catholic Church ( as are about 10 % of all UK state funded schools ) and the other had no religious affiliation . For the benefit of international readers of this paper it is very common for there to be Catholic High Schools in UK cities and larger towns – these schools take a small amount of funding from the Catholic Church and as such are able to include religious attendance / behaviour as part of their admissions criteria . 108 Figure 2 - Obstructed Theatre Script for the design session As a result these schools typically gather pupils in from a slightly larger catchment area than secular schools and typically do slight - ly better ( on average ) in academic achievement . They also tend to have a slightly more ethnically diverse pupil base . For this study , 84 ( 48 boys and 36 girls ) children and teenagers from two schools and two - year groups in the UK contributed towards design ideas . These were pupils from design and technology and science clas - ses . There was nothing extraordinary or out of the ordinary about the participating children . 4 . 2 . 2 Apparatus ( Progressive Design Activities ) The design sessions were facilitated with the use of a pre printed A4 ( roughly letter sized ) design product made up of seven por - trait - oriented pages with a small title on each page . It was not expected that all the pupils would complete all the pages but , hav - ing had experience in many school based design sessions , the research team had constructed this ‘booklet’ in order to ensure that the participating pupils were kept busy for the whole time that the study was being carried out ( approximately one hour ) . The headings on the pages are detailed in Table 1 below and Figure 4 shows an example of three completed pages . At the top of page 1 it also said ‘Use the spaces below to draw your designs’ . Table 1 - The prompts as written on the design booklet Page Heading Purpose 1 This is what the device is To get a view of what the device looks like and some of its properties 2 This is how it tells me I’m doing well To capture some ideas for the visualizations of ‘doing well and doing bad’ 3 This is how I check how I am doing To gather some ideas about input and control aspects 4 This is how it looks when I use it to find out more information To capture some ideas about how the information aspect might look 5 This is how it tells me I’m doing badly To capture some ideas for the visualizations of ‘doing well and doing bad’ 6 This is how it looks when I meet my friends and com - pare how we are all doing This was intended to cap - ture some connectivity ideas 7 Anything else… For any other points of interest 4 . 2 . 3 Procedure At the start of each design activity , which took place in a sched - uled lesson , the research team began by ensuring that the pupils were aware of the aspects of the work . Pupils were told who was funding the study and were told that the findings from this design activity would feed into a research product . They were then told what that product would ( potentially ) ultimately be used for . Without having carried out the TRAck process , it was not possible at that point to assure the pupils that all their ideas would be used but it was pointed out that the intention was to examine a fair way of looking at all the ideas created . Pupils consented verbally to contribute their design ideas and were also advised that they could withhold them at the end if they so wished ( no one did this ) . Fol - lowing that , one of the facilitating team outlined the scope for the work by playing the obstructed theatre script so no examples were shown . Pupils were asked to annotate their drawings as appropri - ate so that the research team could understand them . The designs were created collaboratively in self - organized design groups ( DGs ) using the pre - printed design booklets . The DGs were made up of two or three ( occasionally four ) pupils working together on a single output . There was no intention to control or manipulate gender therefore the DGs could be either single or SCRIPT Scene : Two hoodies in the garden – one ( A ) playing banjo , the other ( B ) on his phone Shot : Of upper bodies { opens to quiet activity – banjo and texting… . A suddenly twitches his leg – in a surprised fashion ) Teen B : what’s up ? Teen A : s’okay – just my Oreo – hang on while I take a look… . ( Teen A leans forward – out of vision a touch ) Teen B : Oreo – as in biscuit ? Teen A : ( still messing around out of shot ) ha – nope it’s summut me an Dee got given for the energy project… it’s just let me know my energy use for the last couple of hours…… Organic energy object I think they call it ! Teen B : ( peering over ) it looks weird … . ( peering further ) what is it ? Teen A : it’s some sort of new computer thing that moves and wibbles and what not …… ( leans forward ) see you can squeeze it and fold it and that………… . Teen B : Sound… . . what else does it do ? Teen A : well , when I do this it shows me how much gas , lekky and water I’ve used …… . . ( moves his arms about ) and……… …… . I can see what Dee has used as well ! Teen B : cool ( Teen A picks up his banjo again and plays a bit more ) Teen B : you going out with Dee then ? ( Teen A doesn’t respond ) Teen B : are you ? Teen A : no ! ( Teen A picks up his banjo again and plays a bit more ) Teen B : lookin’ at your doofer seems she uses tons more lekky than you… . Teen A : yeah… . I think she’s got a Jacuzzi or something . . Teen B : hey we should go try it out …… . . do Jacuzzi’s use a lot of lekky ? ( Teen B reaches to his phone as if to go to Google ) Teen B : how d’you spell Jacuzzi ? Teen A : Jacuz Teen B : slow down Teen A : ( leaning towards his doofer again ) here – it’s on here – I can put in the hours and the device and……………… Teen B : ( moving his phone away and leaning in ) that is something else… ( Teen A carries on banjo playing……… ) Teen B : shall we go chippy… 109 mixed sex . Each session was facilitated by two or three academ - ics from the research team and in each case the teacher was pre - sent , but not involved , for most of the session . The facilitators simply explained aspects of the task and ensured that the pupils stayed on task . They did not influence the design ideas and did not comment during the activity on any designs that were created . At the end of the sessions designs were collected up and marked with the makeup of the DG ( boys and girls ) and coded so they could be associated back to the session from which they originated . 4 . 3 Analysis of Designs The analysis of the designs took place on a single afternoon in the university in a large room set aside for that purpose . 4 . 3 . 1 Participants In the examination of the designs , four evaluators each inde - pendently examined every design for ideas . These evaluators comprised one professor of child computer interaction , one lectur - er in interaction design , one research assistant in child computer interaction and one PhD student of human computer interaction . The evaluators were two males and two females . All four had experience of working in PD studies . Three of the four had been present at all or some of the design activities ; the fourth had the procedure , purpose , and context of the design activity explained . 4 . 3 . 2 Apparatus Pre - printed reporting sheets , one for each evaluator , were pre - pared ; for an example see Figure 1 . Also available for this activi - ty were the 41 designs that had been created during the design sessions . These were identified with labels showing the team ( 1 – 10 ) and the identifier of the DG within that team ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , or 5 ) . 4 . 3 . 3 Procedure Before any analysis took place , the children’s designs were grouped in batches keeping the schools and year groups together . Table 2 shows how these four groups represented each school / year and shows the number of designs in each group . Each group was then subdivided so that there were ten teams created . This aligned to the idea of there being a desire to have ten ideas at the end of the process but also ensured that the teams were a sensible size , each comprising 3 , 4 or 5 designs with 4 being the norm . In table 2 , the figures in brackets after the team numbers show how many were in that team ( e . g . team 6 had 5 designs , team 3 had 4 ) . Table 2 - How the designs were grouped for analysis Year 7 ( ages 11 – 12 ) Year 10 ( ages14 - 15 ) School 1 A . Teams 1 ( 4 ) , 2 ( 4 ) B . Teams 3 ( 4 ) , 4 ( 4 ) , 5 ( 3 ) School 2 C . Teams 6 ( 5 ) , 7 ( 5 ) , 8 ( 5 ) D . Teams 9 ( ( 4 ) , 10 ( 3 ) As outlined earlier in this paper , the evaluators worked through the designs in stages . In stage one each evaluator looked at one design at a time and listed three , four or five ( depending on the size of the team that that design belonged to ) c andidate design ideas . Each evaluator began looking at a different team’s designs but all the teams were evaluated in order ; thus evaluator R1 looked at team 1 through to 10 , whilst R4 began with team 8 then did 9 and 10 before working through 1 to 7 . Once all the designs had been looked at in this way the evaluators went through the teams and selected ideas from their candidate lists to take through as the best individual ( 1 : 1 ) choices ( v1 ) and as the best group ( n : n ) choices ( v2 ) following the process as described in section 3 . It is worth noting that two of the four ( R2 and R3 ) did v2 then v1 and the other two ( R1 and R4 ) did v1 then v2 . Finally the four evaluators came together and determined the winning ideas from the selected ideas for , firstly v . 1 , and then v2 . 5 . RESULTS T he results are presented in two sections . The first section , gath - ering designs , describes the variety and the essence of the pupils’ designs and includes data that gives an overview of the ideas gen - erated across each team and reports some ‘success’ parameters of the PD session . This overview is taken from a synthesis of the ideas recorded by the four evaluators during the first stages of the analysis . The second section , evaluators choosing representatives , considers the results by comparing TRAck v1 and TRAck v2 . 5 . 1 Gathering Designs Each DG was able to create some designs for the device and all pupils completed page 1 of the design sheet . An example for page 1 is given in Figure 3 showing the detail and attention that was relatively typical in this design activity . Figure 3 – Design 6 / 3 that ended up including one of the ‘win - ning’ ideas with its stickers . Most of the designs were adequately annotated but some had to have some small explanations added at the point of them being handed in . Figure 3 , for example , shows ‘available in many dif - ferent colours’ that was added in at the close of the session . 5 . 1 . 1 Progress through the task All the teams completed at least the first three pages in the design booklet . Most of the teams completed five pages although not all the pages were completed consecutively ( Figure 4 shows how one idea was developed ) . Several missed page four but went on to complete page five . There was some evidence to suggest that some pupils had hastily added content to the latter pages in order to ‘finish the task’ . Table 3 shows the progress through the activi - ties ( recorded as number of pages attempted ) and the average 110 number of candidate ideas noted by the evaluators for each of the four groups ( A , B , C , D ) . Figure 4 – Design 5 / 2 showing how a design could be carried across the first three pages of the progressive design booklet . This was also a ‘winner’ with the idea of shaking the device being carried through to the end . Note that in Table 3 , A and B were from one school , C and D from another and groups B and D were the older age groups . This table shows that the three design sessions produced roughly simi - lar outputs ; no one session was particularly poor in terms of com - pletion of task or of idea generation . Table 3 The progress made during the four different design sessions - Group Average Progress through pages ( where 7 implies all pages done ) ) Percentage of Candi - date ideas recorded by evaluators A 6 . 5 83 B 5 . 5 81 C 4 . 9 77 D 5 . 2 91 5 . 1 . 2 Counting Candidate Design Ideas The principles of inclusion and representation within TRAck de - termined that for each design within a team , the evaluators could potentially list as many candidate ideas as there were designs in that particular team . Thus in a team with three design groups ( DGs ) , as in team 10 , a maximum of three ideas could be identi - fied for each design . Thus a metric was designed as : (cid:1868)(cid:1857)(cid:1870)(cid:1855)(cid:1857)(cid:1866)(cid:1872)(cid:1853)(cid:1859)(cid:1857) (cid:1867)(cid:1858) (cid:1855)(cid:1853)(cid:1866)(cid:1856)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1853)(cid:1872)(cid:1857) (cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1857)(cid:1853)(cid:1871) = 100 (cid:1866) − (cid:1861) (cid:1866) where i = the number of ideas identified by the evalua - tor and n is the number of design teams in the group . This percentage is applied as an average across all evaluators and all designs within a team in Table 3 , and is further applied as a percentage across a team for an individual evaluator in table 4 . For team 6 , shown in figure 1 , this percentage would be 76 % for that evaluator as there were 19 candidate ideas listed against an allowable maximum of 25 ( 5 design groups in the team so poten - tially 5 candidate ideas from each = 25 ) . 5 . 2 Evaluators Choosing Representatives The TRAck process depends on the ability of the evaluators to identify ideas ( see metric in 5 . 1 . 2 ) . With the exception of one design , in the evaluation by R1 , every evaluator was able to iden - tify at least one idea from every design . 5 . 2 . 1 Stage 1 – Inclusion in Action Table 4 shows the performance ( shown as percentage of candidate ideas ) of the four evaluators in terms of locating candidate ideas from the designs during the first stage of the process . The num - bers in brackets next to the team number identify how many de - signs were in that team . The letter after the bracket identifies the group to which that team belonged . Table 4 - The performance of locating ideas Team R1 R2 R3 R4 1 ( 4 ) A 75 88 94 56 2 ( 4 ) A 81 100 100 69 3 ( 4 ) B 50 75 88 56 4 ( 4 ) B 81 81 94 94 5 ( 3 ) B 100 89 100 100 6 ( 5 ) C 76 72 80 84 7 ( 5 ) C 76 60 84 56 8 ( 5 ) C 72 100 92 68 9 ( 4 ) D 81 88 100 69 10 ( 3 ) D 100 100 100 89 mean 79 85 93 74 Although not significant , it is noted that the mean percentage of candidate ideas recorded aligned to the experience of the each evaluator in participatory design sessions . R3 was the most expe - rienced and R4 the least experienced both at facilitating and inter - preting design sessions . R2 was the second most experienced in the group . The high numbers in this table show that all the evalu - ators put considerable effort into gathering as many design ideas as possible from the pupils’ drawings indicating a high level of inclusion of ideas . 5 . 2 . 2 Stage 2 – Representation in Action In the individual scenario ( v1 ) , it is clear that after the evaluator selected the ideas to go forward then each DG would be repre - sented . . Table 5 - Percentages of Ideas Team Representation in TRAck v2 R1 R2 R3 R4 1 ( 4 ) A 50 75 75 75 2 ( 4 ) A 75 100 75 50 3 ( 4 ) B 75 50 50 50 4 ( 4 ) B 75 75 75 100 5 ( 3 ) B 66 66 66 66 6 ( 5 ) C 60 60 60 60 7 ( 5 ) C 100 80 80 60 8 ( 5 ) C 80 80 60 80 9 ( 4 ) D 75 75 75 75 10 ( 3 ) D 66 100 100 66 mean 69 76 72 68 111 Intifrrdhintathw Tin R R R R R I1fr9Tcw 5 TAafsv 5 Rq 5ea Itctencinac Toati n the second sc ion would be si from one team c epresentation w design groups lo how many desig ndividual evalu able , for exampl he four designs t were represented The individual D nto TRAck v2 ) a Table Rater Teams R1 1 / 3 , 1 / 4 R2 1 / 3 , 3 / 2 R3 1 / 4 , 2 / 3 R4 1 / 1 , 2 / 1 10 / 2 deas from 1 / 2 , 3 10 / 3 ( 13 designs from 1 / 1 , 2 / 1 , 2 / 2 9 / 1 , 10 / 1 and 10 This suggested t chance of being r were rejected by 5 . 2 . 3 Stage 3 The four evalua After this analysi and v2 and 11 t forward across th selected a single v2 derived idea . 5 . 3 Underst Reflecting on th questions , posed 5 . 3 . 1 Inclusiv ensure that al and valued ? t is clear that in children’s design ematically scrut noticed and that can be attributed nterpreter canno already extracted couraging deeper The team that ca ously taken a le agreed that the ime and more ef enario , ( v2 ) it w gnificantly dimi ame from one d was not evidence ost their voice w gns were repres ators made thei le from R1 , team that came into th d when the TRAc DGs that were ‘d are listed in table e 6 – Teams ide dropped ( Team 4 , 2 / 4 , 3 / 2 , 4 / 1 , 5 2 , 3 / 4 , 4 / 2 , 5 / 1 , 6 3 , 3 / 2 , 3 / 4 , 4 / 2 , 5 1 , 2 / 2 , 3 / 2 , 3 / 3 , 3 / 1 , 3 / 3 , 4 / 3 , 4 / 4 ) were retained 2 , 2 / 3 , 2 / 4 , 3 / 3 , 4 0 / 2 ( 17 designs ) that 30 of the represented in th all four evaluato 3 – Democrac ators agreed two is there were 30 that were differe he ten teams . Fr ‘winning’ v1 de These ideas are tanding TR he evaluation o earlier in the pa vity - To what ll the children this process , wh ns were at least l tinized . It is po some were lost d to either a poo ot see what it is d 3 , 4 or 5 ideas r investigation . arried out the stu ss rigorous appr process of TRA ffort in consideri would be possibl inished , especial design group . Th ed in the results with this analysis ented , from eac ir group ( v2 ) se m 1 ( 4 ) A have 50 % his consideration ck v2 analysis w dropped’ ( i . e . had e 6 . eas that were dr and DG sub iden 5 / 3 , 6 / 3 , 6 / 5 , 8 / 2 , 6 / 1 , 6 / 5 , 7 / 2 , 8 / 5 , 5 / 1 , 6 / 1 , 6 / 5 , 7 / 5 , 5 / 3 , 6 / 3 , 6 / 5 , 7 4 , 5 / 2 , 6 / 2 , 6 / 4 , by all of the ev 4 / 1 , 7 / 1 , 7 / 2 , 7 / 4 were all kept by designs would he final idea list ; ors . cy in Action o sets of ideas ideas that were ent – thus 41 id rom each team th erived idea and a listed in table 5 RAck f the TRAck M aper , are discusse t extent does n’s ideas are c hich was relative looked at as eac ossible that som , that will alway or articulation of about ) or by the s and the TRAc udies in this pap roach to looking Ack had them a ing the children’ le that represent lly if all the ide his extreme loss but clearly som s . Table 5 show ch team , after th elections . In th % showing that n , only two grou was applied . d no contributio ropped ntifier ) , 9 / 1 , 10 / 1 , 9 / 4 , , 8 / 2 , 8 / 4 , 9 / 4 , 7 / 1 , 7 / 4 , 8 / 3 , 9 / 7 / 3 , 8 / 1 , 9 / 2 , 9 / aluators and ide 4 , 7 / 5 , 8 / 3 , 8 / 4 , 8 y three evaluato still have a goo ; only two desig to take forwar the same from v deas were broug he evaluators the a single ‘winnin . Method , the thr ed here . this method considered ely lengthy , all th ch design was sy me ideas were n ys be the case an f the idea ( i . e . th e evaluator havin ck method not e per , having prev g at design idea all spending mo ’s work . ta - eas of me ws he his of ps ns / 4 , / 3 , eas 8 / 5 ors od ns rd . v1 ght en ng’ ree he ys - not nd he ng en - vi - as , ore Group 1 ( 4 ) 2 ( 4 ) 3 ( 4 ) 4 ( 4 ) 5 ( 3 ) 6 ( 5 ) 7 ( 5 ) 8 ( 5 ) 9 ( 4 ) 10 ( 3 ) By gro ensuredgo forw ( commdesign and up them d attemptboth co its com for incl Figure 5 . 3 . 2 v2 ) fo As can child / one ide going f 1 httpwork Tab p v1 ‘winne Shows gre ( 1 / 1 ) A locket d The produ your phon Uses hypn behavior ( Shake the feedback Uses stick that want The whol red or gre Automatioff other d * not able tween fou ideas * not able tween two ideas ouping ideas acr d that each team ward . Figure 5 mon features of booklets conve to 692 potential down to 41 then ts to be highly onsidered ( by 4 mponents ( candid lusion . e 5 - Convergenc Representatir representat n be seen in Tab one set of child ea to the final ‘ forward . The ide p : / / www . designc k / The - design - pro ble 7 - ' Winnin er’ een and red design ( 2 / 1 ) uct bugs you on ne ( 3 / 1 ) nosis to change ( 4 / 1 ) e device to get ( 5 / 2 ) kers on things tracking ( 6 / 3 ) le device turns een ( 7 / 5 ) cally switches devices ( 8 / 1 ) to select be - ur tied design to select be - o tied design ross the small t m was represente 5 shows the co design processe eying the partic l candidate idea further down to inclusive in tha evaluators ) and date design idea ce and Divergen ion - How do tion differ ? ble 7 , the secon dren could poten ‘round’ resulted ea of the t - shirt , council . org . uk / ab ocess / g ' Ideas v2 ‘winner’ Display on a ( 1 / 2 ) A locket desi The product b your phone ( 3 Uses hypnosi behavior ( 4 / 1 Shake the dev feedback ( 5 / 2 Uses stickers that want trac The whole de red or green ( Can spend po from device i ( 8 / 1 ) Energy reduc are shown on ( 8 / 2 ) Looks like a w ( 10 / 1 ) teams , the TRA d in the final lis onvergence and es 1 ) whilst each cipants’ ideas w s extracted , befo 10 . This structu at every design b actively decons as ) before being nce within RAM the two mod nd version ( v2 ) , ntially contribut d in a different getting points to bout - design / How tea shirt ign ( 2 / 1 ) bugs you on 3 / 1 ) is to change 1 ) vice to get 2 ) s on things cking ( 6 / 3 ) evice turns ( 7 / 5 ) oints earned in shops ction targets n the device watch Ack Method st of ideas to divergence h of the 41 were studied ore reducing ured process booklet was structed into g considered M dels ( v1 , , where one e more than set of ideas o spend , and w - designers - 112 the use of a watch would all have been lost given only the one idea per group . The case of team 8 is especially interesting as when judged individually ( v1 ) , the winning idea from 8 / 1 was that the device would ‘switch off other things’ but when multiple ideas were allowed from one design , a second idea from the same group ‘to get points to spend in shops’ emerged as a winner . In more general terms , the process of ensuring representation in this way by using the TRAck Method did seem to lose something . Often the goal of design is to conceive a new and innovative solu - tion and after completing the TRAck process the four evaluators reflected that they felt some of the most innovative ideas had been lost . This is particularly interesting as if all 4 evaluators had been in agreement on which these were they would , of course , have been the winning ideas . The TRAck Method therefore had a ‘normalizing’ effect whereby the most innovative ideas ( as judged by individuals ) may not have been carried forwards but those judged to have a high level of innovation by all researchers were . 5 . 3 . 3 Process - From the point of view of a design team , used to taking a much more holistic approach , does this method make any sense ? All members of the research team were able to go through the process . During the merging and agreement process there was much debate on what was being valued . It was evident that some interpretation was being applied but the discussion of this was in itself valuable and insightful . The team agreed that the TRAck Method ensured that every design had a chance of being in the final list of ideas and they also agreed that the method had them look very hard at some of the more farfetched ideas in order to get to some understanding . The design ideas that were eventually filtered through were all useful . Specifically some of these have been incorporated into a functional product that is now in use . However , at the point of the evaluation taking place the design team also revisited each of the 41 design booklets to see what had been lost . The team discussed what would inspire design thinking from the sets of design ideas they had met . Three designs were highlighted as being particular - ly inspirational . Note that inspirational in this sense means they would possibly not be taken literally so for example 4 / 1 ( violence ) would not imply designing violence but the meta - idea of punish - ment was possibly a theme to take forward . 4 / 1 – which comprised a subliminal communicator , a walking tent , and violent punishment for bad behaviour . 9 / 2 – which incorporated room status controls , room control states , and always - visible data . 2 / 3 – a product on the underside of a shoe with a wristband con - trol and a wired UI . In thinking about ‘lost’ ideas the research team agreed that the process of listing ideas may have reduced designs to bullet points rather than allowing holistic thinking . It is interesting to note that from these three ‘inspiring’ designs , only one of these ( 9 / 2 ) was retained by all four evaluators ( see table 6 ) but the other two were retained by three which does suggest some consistent thinking . 6 . CONCLUSION The TRAck Method allowed the research team to document how each child’s ideas had been considered and also allowed represen - tation of ideas from four different groups ( two ages and two schools ) into a single design brief . In those regards , TRAck sup - ports a more inclusive and hence a more ethical approach to PD with children in so far as it makes defensible the process of idea use and also provides a means by which designs can be consid - ered when many different children , with different ideas and abili - ties , are contributing . The TRAck method did generate some useful ideas and these could be incorporated into a final product . The Scandinavian approach to PD , the empowerment of children , and the North American approach , the design of a product are thus both considered . TRAck provided a mechanism to help children ‘climb the ladder of participation’ by promoting inclusive and representative participation and will allow children to have more information in order that their consent could be more meaningful . The TRAck Method , as a first attempt to provide for the tracking , representation and acknowledgement of children as idea genera - tors in PD , enabled divergent and convergent consideration of all ideas through two democratic processes ( v1 and v2 ) to begin an investigation of the impact of different forms of inclusion . The TRAck Method specifically sought to ensure ideas taken away from design sessions ( for inclusion in later stages of a design pro - cess ) were representative of all groups of participants and could be traced directly to a child’s contribution . This traceability is important if , for example , a child wishes to withdraw consent from participation ( and good practice for research governance ) . Through this work some interesting trade - offs were explored , such as reducing the influence of the designer in order to ensure a more inclusive participatory design process where the designs that come through are those from the majority rather than those that are especially odd , and increasing the number of researchers in - volved in the design process to ensure a more democratic decision process . It is hoped that the documentation of the case study presented here in its completeness will encourage researchers in IDC to consider how each stage of a PD process , the initial setting up , the use of materials , and the tracking of ideas can be reported . Further work aims to apply TRAck with more unequal groups than in the present study and to further study the effects on the design process . To better understand children’s empowerment , the research team will examine how the TRAck process can be easily conveyed to children and will seek to create tools that eval - uate this effect on their understanding of participation . Compara - tive studies using TRAck methods and holistic design ideation will be considered in order to study what is lost from the design field when these democratic design processes are employed 7 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks to pupils from our two participating schools and their teachers , thanks also to EPSRC and the UK Funding Councils for supporting this research with grant EP / I000720 / 1 . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , and Kyng , M . , 1987 . Computers and democracy : A Scandinavian challenge Avebury , Aldershot . [ 2 ] Blythe , M . A . and Wright , P . C . , 2006 . Pastiche scenarios : Fiction as a resource for user centred design . Interacting with Computers 18 , 5 , 1139 - 1164 . [ 3 ] Briggs , P . and Oliver , P . L . , 2008 . Biometric daemons : Au - thentication via electronic pets . In Proc . CHI 2008 ACM Press , Florence , Italy , 2423 - 2432 [ 4 ] Christensen , P . and Prout , A . , 2002 . Working with ethical symmetry in social research with children . Childhood 9 , 4 , 477 - 497 . [ 5 ] Churchman , C . W . , 1968 . The systems approach . Delaconte Press , New York . 113 [ 6 ] Davies , G . W . P . and Jegu , P . , 1995 . Ovide and teledemocra - cy . Journal of Information Science 21 , 5 , 383 - 389 . [ 7 ] Dindler , C . , Iversen , O . S . , Smith , R . , and Veerasawmy , R . , 2010 . Participatory design at the museum : Inquiring into children ' s everyday engagement in cultural heritage . In Proc . OZCHI ' 10 , ACM , 1952239 , 72 - 79 . [ 8 ] Druin , A . , 1999 . Cooperative inquiry : Developing new tech - nologies for children with children . In CHI99 ACM Press , 592 - 599 . [ 9 ] Druin , A . , 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 , 1 - 25 . [ 10 ] Druin , A . , Bederson , B . , Boltman , A . , Miura , A . , Knotts - Callaghan , D . , and Platt , M . , 1999 . Children as our technolo - gy design partners . In The design of children ' s technology , A . Druin Ed . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA , 51 - 72 . [ 11 ] Friedman , B . , 2004 . Value sesnitive design . In Berkshire encyclopedia of human computer interaction , W . S . Bain - bridge Ed . Berkshire Publishing Group , Great Barringham . [ 12 ] Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , Chipman , G . , A , F . J . , Simms , S . , and Farber , A . , 2004 . Mixing ideas : A new technique for working with young children as design partners . In Proc . IDC 2004 ACM Press , College Park . Maryland , 35 - 42 . [ 13 ] Hart , R . , 1997 . Children ' s participation : The theory and practice of involving young citizens in community develop - ment and environmental care . UNICEF . [ 14 ] Horn , D . and Salvendy , G . , 2006 . Consumer - based assess - ment of product creativity : A review and reappraisal . Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing 16 , 2 , 155 - 175 . [ 15 ] Horton , M . , Read , J . C . , Mazzone , E . , Sim , G . , and Fitton , D . , 2012 . School friendly participatory research activities with children . In Proc . CHI2012 , ACM Press . [ 16 ] Iversen , O . S . and Smith , R . S . , 2012 . Scandinavian participa - tory design : Dialogic curation with teenagers . In Proc . IDC ' 12 , ACM , 106 - 115 . [ 17 ] Marco , J . , Cerezo , E . , Baldasarri , S . , Mazzone , E . , and Read , J . C . , 2009 . User - oriented design and tangible interaction for kindergarten children . . In Proc . IDC ' 09 , ACM Press , Como , Italy , 190 - 193 . [ 18 ] Mazzone , E . , Ivari , N . , Tikkanen , R . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , 2010 . Considering context , content , management , and engagement in design activities with children . In Proc . IDC2010 ACM Press , Barcelona , 108 - 117 . [ 19 ] Mazzone , E . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , 2008 . Design with and for disaffected teenagers . In Proc . Nordichi 2008 ACM Press , Lund , Sweden 290 - 297 . [ 20 ] Mazzone , E . , Read , J . C . , and Beale , R . , 2008 . Understanding children ' s contributions during informant design . In Proc . BCS - HCI ' 08 BCS , 61 - 64 . [ 21 ] Moraveji , N . , Li , J . , Ding , J . , O ' kelley , P . , and Woolf , S . , 2007 . Comicboarding : Using comics as proxies for participa - tory design with children . In Proc . CHI 2007 ACM Press , San Jose , CA , 1371 - 1372 . [ 22 ] Muller , M . J . , 2003 . Participatory design : The third space in hci . In The human - computer interaction handbook , A . J . Julie and S . Andrew Eds . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , 1051 - 1068 . [ 23 ] Mumford , E . , 1993 . The ethics approach . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 , 82 . [ 24 ] Posch , I . and Fitzpatrick , G . , 2012 . First steps in the fablab : Experiences engaging children . In Proc . OZCHI ' 12 ACM , 497 - 500 . [ 25 ] Read , J . C . and Fredrikson , M . , 2011 . What do we take ? What do we keep ? What do we tell ? Ethical concerns in the design of inclusive socially connected technology for children . In Proc . Ethicomp 2011 . [ 26 ] Read , J . C . , Gregory , P . , Macfarlane , S . J . , Mcmanus , B . , Gray , P . , and Patel , R . , 2002 . An investigation of participa - tory design with children - informant , balanced and facilitat - ed design . In IProc . IDC ' 02 Shaker Publishing , Eindhoven , 53 - 64 . [ 27 ] Read , J . C . , Horton , M . , Sim , G . , Gregory , P . , Fitton , D . , and Cassidy , B . , 2013 . Check : A tool to inform and encourage ethical practice in participatory design with children . In Proc . CHI2014 ACM , 2468391 , 187 - 192 . . [ 28 ] Read , J . C . , Fitton , D . , and Mazzone , E . , 2010 . Using ob - structed theatre with child designers to convey requirements . In Proc . CHI2010 ACM Press , Atlanta , GA . [ 29 ] Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . , 1993 . Participatory design : Principles and practices Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . [ 30 ] Sinclair , R . , 2004 . Participation in practice : Making it mean - ingful , effective and sustainable . Children and Society 18 , 106 - 118 . [ 31 ] Thang , B . , Sluis - Thiescheffer , W . , Bekker , T . , Eggen , B . , Vermeeren , A . , and De Ridder , H . , 2008 . Comparing the cre - ativity of children ' s design solutions based on expert assess - ment . In Proc . IDC 2008 ACM Press , Chicago . IL , 266 - 273 . [ 32 ] Theng , Y . L . , Nasir , N . M . , Thimbleby , H . , Buchanan , G . , Jones , M . , Bainbridge , D . , and Cassidy , N . , 2000 . Children as design partners and testers for a children ' s digital library . In Proc . ECDL2000 Springer Verlag , 249 - 253 . [ 33 ] Van Den Hoven , J . , 2005 . Design for values and values for design . Information age , 7 ( 2 ) 4 - 7 . [ 34 ] Van Den Hoven , J . , 2008 . Moral methodology and infor - mation technology . In The handbook of information and computer ethics , K . E . Himma and H . T . Tavani Eds . Wiley , New York , 49 - 69 . [ 35 ] Yip , J . , Clegg , T . , Bonsignore , E . , Gelderblom , H . , Rhodes , E . , and Druin , A . , 2013 . Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? Domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . In Proc . IDC2013 . ACM Press , 201 - 210 . 114