15 December 1961 , Volume 134 , Number 3494 The Competitive World of the Pure Scientist The quest for prestige can cause conflict between the goals of science and the goals of the scientist . F . Reif The " pure scientist " is likely to be pictured as a person who devotes him - self to the study of natural phenomena without regard to their possible practi - cal or technological applications . Moti - vated by intellectual curiosity and im - mersed in his abstract work , he tends to be oblivious of the more mundane con - cerns of ordinary men . Although a few older scientists have become active in public affairs in recent years , the large majority who remain at work in their university laboratories lead peaceful lives , aloof from the competitive busi - ness practices or political manipula - tions of the outside world . Stereotype versus Reality There is some truth in this stereo - typed portrait . But if a young student took its apparent serenity too seriously , he would be forced to revise his per - spective very early in his scientific career . The work situation of the sci - entist is not just a quiet haven for scholarly activity , ideally suited to those of introverted temperament . The pure scientist , like the businessman or law - yer , works in a social setting , and like them , he is subject to appreciable social and competitive pressures . The institu - tional framework within which he func - tions is distinctive ; it is basically the The author is associate professor of physics , University of California , Berkeley . 15 DECEMBER 1961 SCIENCE tween submission of a manuscript and its appearance in print was approxi - mately 5 months for a regular paper and 2 or 3 months for a " letter . " But in a period of rapid growth and develop - ment the pressure to publish fast and to establish priority claims became suffi - ciently great to make the Physical Review appear an inordinately slow medium of communication . Three years ago , therefore , its editors decided to eliminate the " Letters " section and to found a separate bimonthly journal , the Physical Review Letters , devoted en - tirely to the fastest possible publication of short notes on important discoveries . The time between submission of a manuscript and its appearance in print has been reduced to as little as 4 weeks ! Not only is the existence of such a journal a significant phenomenon in itself ; it has also necessitated the formu - lation of new editorial policies . As a result , although editorials in scientific periodicals are ordinarily very rare , some illuminating examples have found their way into issues of the Physical Review Letters . In one of these ( 1 ) the editor com - ments that a large number of manu - scripts are submitted whose importance and meagre content are not adequate to justify publication in the Letters . He goes on to say : " When a ' hot ' subject breaks there is a deluge of follow - up contributions . . . . With the rapid exploitation of new ideas , priority ques - tions become serious problems . Possibly important technical applications often lurk in the background . . . . " After explaining that he feels compelled to reject as unworthy of publication more than 40 percent of the manuscripts received , he concludes : " We do not take kindly to attempts to pressure us into accepting letters by misrepresenta - tion , gamesmanship , and jungle tactics , which we have experienced to some ( fortunately small ) extent . " From the foregoing comments it is apparent that scientists seem most eager to see their work appear in print as soon as practicable . But to achieve that purpose , even the Letters can appear unduly slow . Certainly , the daily press is even faster ; and though it may be less 1957 university system . Furthermore , his competition does not resolve primarily around money ; there is no very direct relationship between the quality of the scientist ' s professional performance and the economic rewards he receives . But competition need not be confined to the acquisition of wealth or political power . It is , therefore , of particular interest to discover how intense competition can become in an area as remote as pure science . In recent years rapid expansion has occurred in many branches of sci - ence . More scientists are active in many fields , more laboratories ( including some in industry and government ) engage in pure research activities , and more dollars are spent on such research . While this expansion has given the scientist a more prominent social role , it has also intensified the competitive pressures under which he works . A few examples will illustrate how such competition can manifest itself . I shall take these illustrations from the field of physics , because physics is a well - developed pure science and be - cause this is the field with which I am most familiar . In this country research work in physics has traditionally been published in a bimonthly journal called the Physical Review . In addition to full - length research reports , this journal used to publish " Letters to the editor , " short notes whereby scientists could briefly communicate important new developments . The time elapsed be - suitable for erudite publication , it is more effective for publicity and no less effective for establishing priority . Con - sequently , there have been several in - stances in recent years when important discoveries in physics were first an - nounced in the New York Times . This procedure is not , by traditional values of the scientific community , considered to be very ethical . Nor is it , as the Letters editor points out in another editorial , an activity to be confused with the well - developed public information and publicity activities carried out by his own office and by such agencies as the American Institute of Physics . The editor expresses himself quite force - fully ( 2 ) : " As a matter of courtesy to fellow physicists , it is customary for authors to see to it that releases to the public do not occur before the article appears in the scientific journal . Scienti - fic discoveries are not the proper sub - ject for newspaper scoops , and all media of mass communication should have equal opportunity for simultaneous access to the information . In the future , we may reject papers whose main content has been published previously in the daily press . " In the passages quoted , the editor of the official journal of American phys - icists makes some revealing comments about the behavior of his fellow sci - entists . What are some of the factors responsible for such behavior ? Why should there be this exorbitant desire to publish and to do so ahead of others ? The following discussion will focus at - tention on some of these questions in an attempt to clarify the conditions of modern science which contribute to this behavior . We shall first examine the great importance of prestige to the scientist . It will become apparent that the scientist carries out his work in a setting where he is extraordinarily de - pendent on the good opinion of others , and where his reputation becomes trans - lated into many concrete consequences for him . Personal recognition thus as - sumes even more importance for the scientist than for most other people , and he competes persistently to achieve maximum prestige . I shall illustrate how this competition takes place and how it affects the manner in which sci - entific research is carried on . Finally , we shall ask how the existence of such competition serves to advance or im - pede scientific activity . This question will reveal the existence of some con - flicts between these competitive pres - sures and scientific work proper . 1958 Throughout this discussion it should be borne in mind that the situation is not static and that the rapid expansion of science has made many of these prob - lems more conspicuous than they were a few years ago . Prestige and Success The scientist is not different from others in his desire to be successful , but his definition of " success " has some distinctive features . The work of the pure scientist is abstract ; it consists essentially only in gathering new data and formulating new concepts . To con - stitute scientific knowledge , these must be verifiable by other scientists and usable by them as the basis for further exploration . Thus , the very nature of scientific activity implies the need for recognition of the value of one ' s work by others in the field . Furthermore , success in such activities is not readily measurable in quantitative terms recog - nized by all . It does not revolve around tangible things such as amount of money earned or number of factories owned . Only other scientists in his field can understand the scientist ' s work and judge its merits . Indeed , throughout his life the scientist is dependent on the good opinion of significant other sci - entists for practically everything he does or hopes to attain . A review of the scientist ' s professional career will illus - trate the truth of this statement . While still in high school , the sci - entist - to - be becomes aware that com - petition and prestige will affect his future success . He must strive for good grades in order to be admitted to col - lege and later to graduate school . He realizes the importance of attending a college of high reputation , not only be - cause it will provide him with a better education but also because it will facili - tate his later admission to a good grad - uate school . Finally , he must earn the good opinion of his teachers to secure the letters of recommendation which will help him enter college and gain scholarship grants or prizes . After the student obtains his Ph . D . degree , his dependence on the good opinion of others is by no means ended . His first task is to find a suitable posi - tion . Characteristically , jobs in the better universities or in top industrial research laboratories are practically never advertised but are handled by personal communication between well - established scientists , who inquire in - formally whether their colleagues hap - pen to know of some candidates for a given position or have an opening in their organization for a particular can - didate . The job - seeking scientist is clear - ly in a more advantageous situation if he comes from a well - known institution and has been associated with a scientist of reputation . Invariably it is essential to him that there should be prominent scientists in the world who are willing to comment favorably upon the quality of his work . In most cases , before an appointment is decided upon , the hiring institution formally requests letters of recommendation concerning the candi - date from several such prominent sci - entists . It is thus very important for the scientist to create , either through per - sonal contact or through published work , a favorable impression among as many key scientists as possible . Professional mobility of the scientist depends , therefore , in an essential way on the reputation he has acquired among prominent people in his field . This is true when he is securing his first job and true in his subsequent moves from one position to another . ( In this connection it may be remarked that to move from an institution of high pres - tige to one of lower prestige is signifi - cantly easier than to move in the reverse direction . ) Promotion to higher aca - demic rank is subject to similar criteria . Again the university requests letters of recommendation from outside scientists and in some cases may appoint review - ing committees before deciding to pro - mote someone to a tenure position . Even when the scientist has obtained a full professorship he has not reached the end of possible advancement based on his reputation . Within the academic hierarchy there are still some " name " professorships , or ultimately some ad - ministrative posts such as dean or uni - versity president . In these days of in - creasing importance of science in world affairs there are also potential oppor - tunities in government - for example , advisory positions to the President or appointments to some such agency as the Atomic Energy Commission . In - dustrial organizations , as well , may offer key positions , such as the directorship of a research laboratory . Needless to say , the academic promotions which the scientist achieves carry with them in - creased financial rewards and , at the higher ranks , the security of a perma - nent position . To carry on his work , the scientist needs money and adequate research SCIENCE , VOL . 134 facilities . Since World War II the financial expenditures required to per - form the increasingly complex research of modern science have become so great that universities can provide only a very small fraction of the necessary funds . The remainder must come from outside sources - some of them private foundations but by far the greatest number government agencies such as the National Science Foundation , the Atomic Energy Commission , or the Office of Naval Research . On what basis do all these groups award their availa - ble funds to individual investigators ? The usual procedure is to send the re - search proposal of the investigator to some prominent scientists for review . These scientists then make appropriate recommendations based on their eval - uation of the specific proposal and their opinion of the merits of the scientist submitting it . The scientist today is thus increasingly dependent upon the reputa - tion he has established among his col - leagues to obtain the very means neces - sary for carrying out his work : funds for buying equipment and supplies and for paying the salaries of the personnel in his research group . In addition , the scientist ' s prestige helps him attract good and numerous students and post - doctoral fellows who can be of signifi - cant assistance in furthering his re - search program . At times the scientist may be inter - ested in obtaining a fellowship or grant - for example , a Guggenheim or Na - tional Science Foundation senior post - doctoral fellowship . Grants of this nature permit him to travel abroad for a year ; or spend some time at a differ - ent university , where he can learn new techniques ; or gain temporary relief from teaching duties to devote himself full time to his research . In applying for such a fellowship , the scientist will again be judged by some select promi - nent scientists , and once more his reputation among these scientists deter - mines whether the award will be made to him . The prestige acquired by the scientist very directly influences the likelihood of his nomination by fellow scientists for special honors or distinctions . Examples are the award of a Nobel prize or selec - tion to membership in the National Academy of Sciences . Selection to serve as an officer of the national scientific organization is another recognition of distinction . The scientist ' s prestige may also lead to special invitations to attend scientific conferences as guest speaker 15 DECEMBER 1961 or to join another university as visit - ing professor ; finally , it may result in offers of remunerative consultantships in industry . I think it is worth while , before leaving this discussion of the prestige system , to remark on a few of its peculiarities . One of these is the " posi - tive feedback " involved - the fact that the possession of prestige tends to facili - tate the acquisition of further prestige . For example , a person of prestige is likely to be affiliated with one of the better - known institutions , likely to ob - tain more funds to do effective research , and likely to attract better students - all of which circumstances , of course , tend to enhance his prestige even fur - ther . There is a similar relation between the prestige of individuals and the pres - tige of institutions . Institutions of good reputation can attract individuals of distinction whose presence , in turn , lends increased prestige to the institu - tion . Another feature of interest concerns the people who set the standards against which the individual scientist appraises himself and whose opinion determines his general reputation in the field . It is mainly the well - established scientists in the major universities of the world who set these standards . Since the institution with which the individual scientist is affiliated tends to evaluate him chiefly on the basis of his reputation , it be - comes of greater concern to the indi - vidual to seek the good opinion of people on the national or international scene than to strive for accomplish - ments which attract only local atten - tion . The scientist thus tends to have stronger loyalty to his field than to the specific institution of which he is a member . This is particularly true in the present days of expansion , when there is great mobility between different posi - tions . The trend , in the major univer - sities of this country , to minimize the importance attached to the teaching functions of the faculty reflects the situation . Teaching undergraduates is a local activity which may be ap - preciated by the students but does not serve to enhance the scientist ' s inter - national prestige , on the basis of which the university will decide whether he is worthy of promotion . " Research and the training of graduate students are valued highly by the faculty ; teaching , bycontrast , is second - class . . . It is a more usual , and probably a more real - istic , view that time taken for teaching is time stolen from research , and that the road to academic heaven is paved with publications " ( 3 ) . The growing importance of science has also led to a proliferation of in - dustrial research laboratories . The oldest and most distinguished of these are active in pure research and are staffed by some very competent persons who might readily have joined a university had opportunities in industry not been available . These people are eager not to be considered inferior by the rest of the scientific community , despite their industrial affiliation . Hence , they adopt for themselves standards very similar to those prevalent in the univer - sities and compete within the same pres - tige system . This also preserves their mobility and leaves open the road back into some university position . Since the pure scientist ' s reputation , irrespective of the particular institution to which he belongs , is determined by the same ref - erence group of prominent scientists , there exists a common prestige system which cuts across purely organizational lines . Thus , more prestige may be attached to a good position at a major university than to one in an industrial laboratory , but a position in a top industrial or government laboratory carries more prestige than one in a smaller university . Publishing " Fustest and Mostest " Because the social context within which the scientist receives his training and does his research is one where the possession of prestige is highly re - warded , competition among scientists is largely directed toward the acquisi - tion of prestige . The particular forms assumed by this competition are deter - mined by the nature of the scientific discipline and the character of the insti - tution where the scientist carries out his work . A scientist strives to do re - search which he considers important . But intrinsic satisfaction and interest are not his only reasons . This becomes ap - parent when one observes what happens if the scientist discovers that someone else has just published a conclusion which he was about to reach as a result of his own research . Almost invariably he feels upset by this occurrence , al - though the intrinsic interest of his work has certainly not been affected . The scientist wants his work to be not only interesting to himself but also impor - tant to others . He wants it to attract the maximum attention from other 1959 people , and in this quest priority is a crucial factor . An important discovery becomes intimately associated with the name of the scientist responsible for it . If somebody else makes this same dis - covery at about the same time , several names become attached to it and the contribution to his own prestige is cor - respondingly diluted . The chances of receiving a Nobel prize or a promotion are similarly decreased . Finally , if someone else succeeds in making this discovery a few months or weeks before he does , almost all of the scientist ' s efforts on the problem have come to naught . He may not even be able to publish his own results , since they may then represent only uninteresting dupli - cation of work already in the scientific literature . Under the circumstances , it is not surprising if the scientist sometimes works at feverish speed under constant fear that he may be " scooped . " Even a couple of weeks ' delay can some - times make a difference ! Being the first to make an important scientific contribution is , of course , only one way of obtaining recognition . For a scientist to be on the verge of making some discovery of far - reaching implications is relatively rare . Most of the time he is engaged in the less spectacular task of doing useful work leading gradually to increased knowl - edge . In this situation the most effec - tive way to attract the continuing atten - tion of other scientists is to publish as many papers as possible , to attend nu - merous scientific meetings , and to give many talks on one ' s research . The great emphasis on publishing copiously is exemplified by a motto familiar to all young faculty members - " publish or perish " - a phrase that well illustrates how the young scientist feels about the competitive pressures to which he is subject . Under the " up - or - out " rule , common in large universities , instruc - tors and assistant professors are al - lowed only a fixed maximum number of years within their academic rank . If they are not promoted before the end of this time , their dismissal from the university is automatic . Whether or not an individual is promoted depends , of course , on the reputation he has achieved as a result of his publications . Some of these competitive pressures have been familiar features of academic life for a long time . The expansion of scientific activity since World War II , has , however , significantly changed the conditions under which the scientist does his work . One consequence has 1960 been the emergence of new and intensi - fied patterns of competition as the num - ber of scientists at work in many areas has multiplied . Not only are more uni - versities engaged in active research ; more industry and government labora - tories are also carrying out pure re - search of a type nearly indistinguishable from its academic counterpart . Many people in different institutions are thus likely to be working along fairly similar lines . Furthermore , the time lag be - tween advances in basic science and the associated technological developments has become increasingly small . Some - times new ideas or techniques arising in the work of the pure scientist may be such as to warrant patenting without further exploration . Even when poten - tial technological applications are not immediately apparent , there are well - equipped industrial laboratories con - stantly poised to exploit all possible con - sequences of a basic advance . In addi - tion , research has become an activity which involves the expenditure of large sums of money and which has come to attract attention even from the general public . Under these circumstances it is easy to understand why the scientist finds increasing difficulty in carrying out his work immune from outside pressures . Rapid publication of results and questions of priority assume , therefore , great importance ; nor is the need for a journal such as Physical Review Letters too surprising . No longer does a scientist study a topic at some length before publishing his findings in a paper or monograph . Instead , he tries to publish a note on a subject as soon as he obtains any result worth mention - ing - and occasionally even before . The threat of someone else ' s getting there first is too great . At times a scientist may publish just a proposal for an experiment , merely pointing out that such an experiment might be inter - esting and feasible . To obtain prelimi - nary experimental results before pub - lishing anything may take too much time - time during which the scientist might " get scooped " by someone else . For similar reasons scientists may be led to engage in various practices which the editor of Physical Review Letters finds reason to discuss . In his words ( 4 ) , there is the " author who uses the Letters merely to announce a later paper and whose Letter is incomprehensible by itself " ; the " author who submits many Letters hoping that statistics rather than quality will cause one to be accepted " ; or the " author who tries to sneak a Letter in to ' scoop ' a competitor who has already submitted an Article . " The emergence of rapidly changing " fashionable areas " of scientific activity is still another consequence of the expansion of science . In a highly de - veloped discipline such as physics , genuinely new ideas or unexpected breakthroughs are not really very com - mon . When such a discovery does occur , many people are eager to drop more routine work in order to explore the potentially important consequences of the new development . Present condi - tions are also such as to permit a sub - stantial number of scientists to shift their field of research quite rapidly . One reason is that the major university and industrial laboratories provide the flexi - bility of a large variety of experimental facilities and adequate manpower re - sources . Moreover , since work is often proceeding along similar lines in a num - ber of different laboratories , scientists active in areas related to the discovery are in a particularly good position to turn their attention to an investigation of its consequences . Every new dis - covery , therefore , results in a burst of intense and very competitive activity . In physics there ensues a profusion of " Letters , " until the editor decides that the subject has become sufficiently old to be routine . Since so many people concentrate their efforts in one area , the road from the novel to the routine is often traveled in a few months . The preceding discussion illustrates the increasingly important role played in modern science by large - scale re - search organizations . This is true not only in industrial and government lab - oratories but also in the universities , where specialized research institutes have become quite common . Here the scientist is usually a member of some group organized around a particular project or a special research facility , such as a high - energy accelerator , and work is often done jointly by several people . An experiment was recently re - ported in a " Letter " by no less than 24 coauthors ! Working under these condi - tions is appreciably different from the individualistic endeavors prevalent 10 or 20 years ago , and the scientist must compete in some novel ways . He must establish an individual reputation even though he works as a member of a larger group . He also has to compete in a setting which tends to be organized along hierarchical lines , where scientists in the top positions determine policy SCIENCE , VOL . 134 and the direction of research . Finally , many members of research institutes constitute a " secondary faculty " of re - search associates . They do not teach or belong to a department , nor do they have permanent positions . If they hope to gain the security of a tenure position they must strive for sufficient eminence to be appointed to regular academic rank . Conflicting Values After this description of the existing conditions in pure science , let us con - sider some of the consequences of com - petition in this area . This competition certainly affects the functioning of sci - entific research in several beneficial ways . The prestige system helps to maintain high standards of accomplish - ment which reflect the collective judg - ment of important scientists and are therefore fairly uniform throughout the world . Prestige accrues predominantly to those whose discoveries prove fruit - ful as a basis for further work by other scientists . Specific areas of activity in science thus become fashionable not just because they are novel and different but because they are likely to lead to scientific contributions of permanent value . Even when current fashion leads to duplication of work by different in - vestigators , the resulting critical check - ing of results may occasionally help in avoiding mistakes and oversights . Com - petition under these conditions en - courages continuing active exploration as well as rapid and thorough exploita - tion of all new discoveries . Research institutions have become well adapted to carry out these functions . Not only are they well equipped and staffed but they are capable of using their resources with considerable flexibility . On the other hand , the competitive atmosphere has results which are less desirable . It subjects the individual sci - entist to appreciable strains , thus in - creasing further the demands made upon him by an already rigorous sci - entific discipline . But apart from such psychological effects , there are possible deleterious consequences affecting his research activity itself . These are usually the result of conflicts between the re - quirements of the scientific work proper and the pressures of competition . To the individual scientists they may appear as conflicts between the values inherent in science and more selfish personal values . 15 DECEMBER 1961 One such conflict is that of reflection versus production . The scientist may desire to take some time to think and speculate ; he may want to get a fresh point of view by reading about develop - ments outside his special field and to discover suggestive analogies worth pursuing ; or he may be tempted to undertake an experiment sufficiently novel in character for him to be un - certain about its ultimate feasibility . Activities of this kind are potentially fruitful precisely because they focus attention upon lines of investigation off the beaten track . But , by the same token , they are also risky , since in many cases they may lead to no results at all . In order to make his reputation with a steady stream of publications , it is safer for the scientist to work along more conventional and familiar lines , where he has greater assurance of ob - taining results . Young scientists are in a particularly vulnerable situation . Since they must establish their reputation in a relatively short period of time to achieve a permanent academic position , undertaking risky projects during this period is dangerous . Interesting in this connection are instances where a funda - mental discovery is made by someone in a small laboratory in an out - of - the - way place . As soon as the result is published , many big laboratories em - ploy their superior facilities to exploit the consequences of the discovery so effectively that the scientist originally responsible for it finds it difficult to compete with them . People in the big laboratories had available , of course , all the resources necessary to make the original discovery themselves , but they used them less imaginatively . Organiza - tions well adapted to the exploitation of a field in which the direction of ap - proach has become clear are not neces - sarily the best for stimulating explora - tion of the genuinely unknown . A further conflict , which may lead to slipshod work when competitive pres - sures are pronounced , is that of careful versus fast work . Another Letters edi - torial describes the dilemma succinctly ( 5 ) . " One of our most ticklish prob - lems concerns the large number of con - tributions that pour into our office when a ' hot ' subject breaks and many groups initiate related work . . . Because of the rapid development , and the intense competition , we have found it neces - sary to relax our standards and accept some papers that present new ideas without full analysis , relatively crude experiments that indicate how one can obtain valuable results by more careful and complete work , etc . - in short , papers which under less hot conditions would be returned to authors with the recommendation that further work be done before publication . . . . Such in - complete papers have been accepted reluctantly since we realize that thereby we penalize some physicists who , work - ing along the same lines , want to do a more complete job before publishing . " Another conflict is that of communi - cation versus secrecy . It is intrinsic in scientific activity that knowledge and ideas are common property , to be shared and used by all scientists . But if scientist A has an interesting idea and describes it to scientist B , the latter may exploit it before scientist A himself can do so . It may then be better for A not to disclose his ideas before they are published and before his claim to priority is safely established . Closely related to this conflict is that of co - operation versus rivalry . Should scientist A tell scientist B about some new tech - nique he has developed if B may use it in his own work to compete more effec - tively against A ? Lack of full communi - cation can , of course , slow down sci - entific progress . A significant amount of energy is diverted from struggling with the subject matter of science to fighting other people in the field . There exist other conflicts , such as that between research and teaching . But instead of elaborating further , I might better give a specific example illustrat - ing how the pursuit of a purely sci - entific problem can give rise to the competitive pressures described . A few years ago Mossbauer , a young German physicist , discovered that the radiation emitted by certain atomic nuclei in solids is characterized by an exceed - ingly well defined frequency . This ob - servation suggested to several people , in particular to two scientists , X and Y ( 6 ) , that such nuclei might be used as extremely accurate clocks well suited for checking a consequence of Einstein ' s general theory of relativity . This theory predicts that the rates of two identical clocks should be minutely different if they are located at different heights in a gravitational field . Both X and Y undertook to check this prediction ex - perimentally . Scientist X , however , first published a " Letter " outlining his pro - posal for the experiment , long before he was ready to obtain actual data . A few weeks later , again before either X or Y had published any preliminary results in the scientific literature , the 1961 front page of the New York Times carried a picture of scientist X , together with an article describing the experi - ment he was undertaking . When X discussed his experiment at a scientific meeting 6 weeks later he reported re - luctantly that , despite hard work at great speed , he had not yet been able to reach any conclusions . At the same meeting Y announced that he had suc - cessfully carried out the experiment and obtained results in agreement with the theory ; shortly thereafter Y published his findings . It was not until some 2 months later that X , in a " Letter , " was able to report his own experiment , which also confirmed the theoretical ex - pectation . He pointed out , however , the necessity of controlling the temperature front page of the New York Times carried a picture of scientist X , together with an article describing the experi - ment he was undertaking . When X discussed his experiment at a scientific meeting 6 weeks later he reported re - luctantly that , despite hard work at great speed , he had not yet been able to reach any conclusions . At the same meeting Y announced that he had suc - cessfully carried out the experiment and obtained results in agreement with the theory ; shortly thereafter Y published his findings . It was not until some 2 months later that X , in a " Letter , " was able to report his own experiment , which also confirmed the theoretical ex - pectation . He pointed out , however , the necessity of controlling the temperature of the experiment quite carefully to avoid introducing large extraneous ef - fects ; indeed , since Y had not taken such precautions , his findings lacked significance . In this instance an im - portant experiment was performed in a short time and ultimately in a reliable way . But the example shows vividly the actual circumstances under which the experiment was carried out - the an - nouncement of an experiment before it was undertaken , the newspaper pub - licity , the hurried activity of two sci - entists working under pressure to be the first to publish - and the lack of suffi - ciently careful work which may result from these conditions . While much more could be said about the differing patterns of competition in of the experiment quite carefully to avoid introducing large extraneous ef - fects ; indeed , since Y had not taken such precautions , his findings lacked significance . In this instance an im - portant experiment was performed in a short time and ultimately in a reliable way . But the example shows vividly the actual circumstances under which the experiment was carried out - the an - nouncement of an experiment before it was undertaken , the newspaper pub - licity , the hurried activity of two sci - entists working under pressure to be the first to publish - and the lack of suffi - ciently careful work which may result from these conditions . While much more could be said about the differing patterns of competition in various sciences and about the rapid changes taking place in many of these disciplines , my aim has not been to treat the topic exhaustively . It is sufficient if the perspectives of the outside observer have been broadened , to make him aware that the scientist is not just some - body concerned with new ideas and techniques , but that he carries out his work in a human , and sometimes all too human , context . References and Notes 1 . S . Pasternack , Phys . Rev . Letters 4 , 109 ( 1960 ) . 2 . S . A . Goudsmit , ibid . 4 , 1 ( 1960 ) . 3 . Science 134 , 159 ( 1961 ) . 4 . S . A . Goudsmit , Phys . Rev . Letters 6 , 587 ( 1961 ) . 5 . - , ibid . 4 , 395 ( 1960 ) . 6 . R . V . Pound and J . P . Schiffer . various sciences and about the rapid changes taking place in many of these disciplines , my aim has not been to treat the topic exhaustively . It is sufficient if the perspectives of the outside observer have been broadened , to make him aware that the scientist is not just some - body concerned with new ideas and techniques , but that he carries out his work in a human , and sometimes all too human , context . References and Notes 1 . S . Pasternack , Phys . Rev . Letters 4 , 109 ( 1960 ) . 2 . S . A . Goudsmit , ibid . 4 , 1 ( 1960 ) . 3 . Science 134 , 159 ( 1961 ) . 4 . S . A . Goudsmit , Phys . Rev . Letters 6 , 587 ( 1961 ) . 5 . - , ibid . 4 , 395 ( 1960 ) . 6 . R . V . Pound and J . P . Schiffer . Chemical Factors Controlling Nerve Activity Analysis reveals the underlying chemical system that generates the currents responsible for nerve impulses . David Nachmansohn Chemical Factors Controlling Nerve Activity Analysis reveals the underlying chemical system that generates the currents responsible for nerve impulses . David Nachmansohn One of the characteristic features of living cells is their high potassium ion ( K + ) concentration in contrast to the low K + concentration in the outer en - vironment . The reverse is true for the sodium ion ( Na + ) concentration . How - ever , only conducting cells , nerve fibers , and muscle fibers make use of these concentration gradients for generating the electric currents which propagate impulses . These currents are carried by ions . During activity , Na + moves into the interior , and this movement is fol - lowed by an outflow of an equivalent amount of K + ( 1 ) . There is a strong and rapid rise of sodium conductance and an equally rapid return to the ini - tial stage . Subsequently , potassium con - One of the characteristic features of living cells is their high potassium ion ( K + ) concentration in contrast to the low K + concentration in the outer en - vironment . The reverse is true for the sodium ion ( Na + ) concentration . How - ever , only conducting cells , nerve fibers , and muscle fibers make use of these concentration gradients for generating the electric currents which propagate impulses . These currents are carried by ions . During activity , Na + moves into the interior , and this movement is fol - lowed by an outflow of an equivalent amount of K + ( 1 ) . There is a strong and rapid rise of sodium conductance and an equally rapid return to the ini - tial stage . Subsequently , potassium con - The author is professor of biochemistry , Col - lege of Physicians and Surgeons , Columbia Uni - versity , New York . This article is based on the Christian A . Herter lecture given at the New York University School of Medicine , 5 April 1961 . 1962 The author is professor of biochemistry , Col - lege of Physicians and Surgeons , Columbia Uni - versity , New York . This article is based on the Christian A . Herter lecture given at the New York University School of Medicine , 5 April 1961 . 1962 ductance , already high in the resting state , increases but slightly , and the changes are relatively slow ( 2 ) . These facts raise immediately the fundamental question : What is the special mecha - nism which enables conducting cells to use ionic concentration gradients , the source of electromotive force , for the generation of electricity ? It is difficult to see how electricity in a fluid system such as the living cell can be generated without chemical reactions . Conducting cells must be endowed with a special chemical system controlling the movements of ions in a specific way . Any doubt as to the chemical nature of this process has been removed by the recent heat - production measurements of A . V . Hill and his associates ( 3 ) . They found that the initial heat can be sepa - rated into two phases : a strong positive heat , coinciding with electrical activity , ductance , already high in the resting state , increases but slightly , and the changes are relatively slow ( 2 ) . These facts raise immediately the fundamental question : What is the special mecha - nism which enables conducting cells to use ionic concentration gradients , the source of electromotive force , for the generation of electricity ? It is difficult to see how electricity in a fluid system such as the living cell can be generated without chemical reactions . Conducting cells must be endowed with a special chemical system controlling the movements of ions in a specific way . Any doubt as to the chemical nature of this process has been removed by the recent heat - production measurements of A . V . Hill and his associates ( 3 ) . They found that the initial heat can be sepa - rated into two phases : a strong positive heat , coinciding with electrical activity , followed by a negative heat during re - covery . The conducting membrane is only 50 to 100 angstroms thick . Per gram of active material , the positive heat amounts to about 3 millicalories . This is about the same amount of heat as that produced per gram of muscle during a twitch . What is the chemical reaction ? About 30 years ago , acetylcholine was linked to a special phase of nerve activity . It was assumed to be released from nerve endings and to act as a neurohumoral transmitter on the effector cell , nerve or muscle . The observations were based on classical methods of pharmacology . However , the idea of a special mecha - nism at nerve endings which is basically different from that in axons was op - posed by many electrophysiologists . The facts were not questioned , but the in - terpretation was . A new approach ap - peared imperative . The rapid development of biochemis - try , especially the spectacular rise of protein and enzyme chemistry during the last few decades , has provided pow - erful tools for analyzing cellular func - tion in terms of physics and chemistry . An approach with biochemical methods was initiated 25 years ago . The enzymes effecting hydrolysis and the formation of acetylcholine were analyzed , the se - quence of energy transformations was established , and a number of chemical reactions were correlated with physical events . Central to these studies have always been the proteins and enzymes , especially those linked specifically to the action of acetylcholine . They have been isolated and purified from the SCIENCE , VOL . 134 followed by a negative heat during re - covery . The conducting membrane is only 50 to 100 angstroms thick . Per gram of active material , the positive heat amounts to about 3 millicalories . This is about the same amount of heat as that produced per gram of muscle during a twitch . What is the chemical reaction ? About 30 years ago , acetylcholine was linked to a special phase of nerve activity . It was assumed to be released from nerve endings and to act as a neurohumoral transmitter on the effector cell , nerve or muscle . The observations were based on classical methods of pharmacology . However , the idea of a special mecha - nism at nerve endings which is basically different from that in axons was op - posed by many electrophysiologists . The facts were not questioned , but the in - terpretation was . A new approach ap - peared imperative . The rapid development of biochemis - try , especially the spectacular rise of protein and enzyme chemistry during the last few decades , has provided pow - erful tools for analyzing cellular func - tion in terms of physics and chemistry . An approach with biochemical methods was initiated 25 years ago . The enzymes effecting hydrolysis and the formation of acetylcholine were analyzed , the se - quence of energy transformations was established , and a number of chemical reactions were correlated with physical events . Central to these studies have always been the proteins and enzymes , especially those linked specifically to the action of acetylcholine . They have been isolated and purified from the SCIENCE , VOL . 134