1 An essential host dietary fatty acid stimulates TcpH inhibition of TcpP proteolysis enabling virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae Lucas M . Demey 1 , Ritam Sinha 1 , and Victor J . DiRita 1 * 1 Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics , Michigan State University , East Lansing , Michigan , 48824 ; USA . * Address corresponding to Victor J . DiRita Email : diritavi @ msu . edu Author Contributions : Conceptualization : Lucas Demey and Victor DiRita ; Methodology : Lucas Demey ; Investigation : Lucas Demey and Ritam Shina ; Writing – Original Draft : Lucas Demey ; Writing – Review & Editing : Lucas Demey , Ritam Shina , and Victor DiRita ; Visualization : Lucas Demey ; Project Administration : Victor DiRita ; Funding Acquisition : Victor DiRita . Competing Interest Statement : The authors declare no conflict of interest Classification : Biological Sciences , Microbiology Keywords : virulence , regulated intramembrane proteolysis , α - linolenic acid , detergent resistant membrane . Abstract Vibrio cholerae is a Gram - negative gastrointestinal pathogen responsible for the diarrheal disease cholera . Expression of key virulence factors , cholera toxin and toxin - coregulated pilus , is regulated indirectly by two single - pass membrane - localized transcription regulators ( MLTR ) , ToxR and TcpP , that promote expression of the transcription activator toxT . TcpP abundance and activity are controlled by TcpH , a single - pass transmembrane protein , which protects TcpP from a two - step proteolytic process known as regulated intramembrane proteolysis ( RIP ) . The mechanism of TcpH mediated protection of TcpP represents a major gap in our understanding of V . cholerae pathogenesis . Absence of tcpH leads to unimpeded degradation of TcpP in vitro and a colonization defect in a neonate mouse model of V . cholerae colonization . Here , we show that TcpH protects TcpP from RIP via direct interaction . We also demonstrate that a dietary fatty acid , α - linolenic acid , promotes TcpH - dependent inhibition of RIP via co - association of TcpP and TcpH molecules within detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ; also known as lipid rafts ) in a mechanism requiring the TcpH transmembrane domain . Taken together our data support a model where V . cholerae cells use exogenous α - linolenic acid to remodel the phospholipid bilayer in vivo , leading to co - association of TcpP and TcpH within DRMs where RIP of TcpP is inhibited by TcpH , thereby promoting V . cholerae pathogenicity . 2 Significance Statement V . cholerae continues to pose a significant global burden on health infection millions of people every year resulting in ~ 100 , 000 deaths annually . The importance of toxT gene expression in V . cholerae pathogenesis has been well established . Our results show that TcpP , one of the major regulators of toxT gene expression , is protected from proteolysis by TcpH , via direct interaction , in the presence of α - linolenic acid , an essential dietary fatty acid . Here we identify a physiological relevant host factor that stimulates V . cholerae pathogenicity via TcpH - dependent antagonism of TcpP proteolysis . Introduction V . cholerae tightly regulates expression of its virulence factors , such as cholera toxin ( CtxAB ) and the toxin co - regulated pilus ( TcpA - F ) to reach the optimal site of infection , the crypt of intestinal villi ( 1 – 6 ) . Transcription of these essential virulence factors is regulated by ToxT , an AraC - like transcription factor ( 7 – 10 ) . Similarly , transcription of toxT is highly regulated and positively stimulated by TcpP and ToxR , two membrane - localized transcription regulators ( MLTRs ) ( 11 – 14 ) . TcpP and ToxR are bitopic membrane proteins that each contain a cytoplasmic DNA - binding domain , a single transmembrane domain , and a periplasmic domain . Both ToxR and TcpP directly bind to the promoter region of toxT , at - 180 to - 60 and - 55 to - 37 , respectively ( 9 , 15 , 16 ) . While ToxR directly binds to the toxT promoter , ToxR alone is unable to directly stimulate toxT expression ( 9 ) . However , TcpP is required for toxT expression , presumably because TcpP facilitates transcription through direct interaction with RNA polymerase due to its binding sequence being near the - 35 site ( 9 , 15 ) . Unlike ToxR , transcription of tcpP is tightly regulated by multiple transcription factors , further demonstrating the critical importance of TcpP ( 17 – 24 ) . TcpP is also post - translationally regulated by two proteases , Tail - specific protease ( Tsp ) and YaeL , through a process known as Regulated Intramembrane Proteolysis ( RIP ) ( 25 – 27 ) . RIP is a form of gene regulation conserved across all domains of life that allows organisms to rapidly respond to extracellular cues , commonly by liberating a transcription factor or a sigma factor , from membrane sequestration ( 28 ) . Two well - characterized systems controlled by RIP mechanisms are the extracytoplasmic stress response in E . coli and sporulation in Bacillus subtilis . These systems require RIP of RseA and SpoIVFB , respectively , to release their respective sigma factors ( σ E and pro - σ K ) from the membrane and activate gene expression ( 29 – 35 ) . Similarly , both systems have their respective TcpH analog , RseB and BofA , which function to prevent RIP of RseA and SpoIVFB via different mechanisms ( 30 , 36 – 41 ) . Regulation of TcpP by this mechanism diverges from these systems because transcription activity of TcpP is not activated by RIP but is rather inactivated by RIP , removing TcpP from the cytoplasmic membrane and thereby decreasing toxT transcription ( 25 – 27 ) . Our current understanding of RIP of TcpP is limited . Under RIP - permissive conditions in vitro ( e . g . LB pH 8 . 5 , 37°C ) , TcpP is sensitive to proteolysis by tail - specific protease ( Tsp ; site - 1 protease ) , and subsequently by YaeL protease ( site - 2 protease ) ( 25 – 27 ) . RIP of TcpP is inhibited by its associated protein , TcpH , under specific in vitro conditions ( e . g . LB pH 6 . 5 , 30˚ C ) ( 25 – 27 ) . In cells lacking TcpH , TcpP is constitutively sensitive to RIP ( 25 – 27 ) . However , the mechanism by which TcpH inhibits RIP and how TcpH - dependent RIP inhibition is modulated by extracellular stimuli remains unknown . Detergent - resistant and detergent - soluble membranes ( DRM and DSM , respectively ) ( i . e . , lipid - ordered and lipid - disordered membrane domains ) are known to form in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms ( 42 – 48 ) . In prokaryotes , lipid - ordered membrane domains are small phospholipid domains that exist within both inner and outer membranes ( 43 , 44 , 48 ) . They are composed of saturated phospholipids and hopanoids ( or cholesterol in eukaryotic cells ) that tightly 3 interact , resulting in a structured membrane region with low fluidity . Conversely , lipid - disordered membrane domains are enriched in unsaturated phospholipids resulting in high fluidity ( 42 – 44 , 46 – 55 ) . Due to these differences lipid - ordered and lipid - disordered membrane domains can be separated based on solubility in non - ionic detergents , and we refer to them as detergent - resistant membranes ( DRM ) and detergent - soluble membranes ( DSM ) , respectively . In this report we provide evidence that TcpH protects TcpP from RIP via direct interaction . Furthermore , we explore the role of the membrane , specifically lipid - ordered and disordered domains , in regulating TcpP - TcpH association . Our data suggest that in vivo TcpP and TcpH preferentially associate with DRMs . This leads to enhanced inhibition of RIP by TcpH , thereby resulting in elevated TcpP levels , and toxT transcription . We also show that utilization of exogenous α - linolenic acid , a long chain poly - unsaturated fatty acid present in vivo , stimulates TcpP and TcpH association within DRMs . Data generated here support a model where , once V . cholerae cells enter the gastrointestinal tract , cellular uptake of α - linolenic acid results in modification of the phospholipid profile and leads to an increase the abundance of TcpP and TcpH molecules within DRMs thereby stimulating inhibition of RIP . Results Altering the transmembrane and periplasmic domains does not disrupt TcpH in vitro activity To identify regions within TcpH critical for its role in protecting TcpP from RIP we constructed chimeric transmembrane domain fusions ( TM ) and periplasmic TcpH deletion constructs ( Peri ) . Two TM and one Peri constructs [ ToxS TcpH , EpsM TcpH , and TcpH ∆ 103 - 119 , respectively ] were constructed , and the allele encoding each was recombined into the V . cholerae genome so as not disrupt the tcpP coding sequence , and under normal tcpPH transcriptional control ( Figure 1A ) . Growth of the resulting strains was unaffected in comparison with wild - type V . cholerae in virulence inducing ( Vir Ind ) conditions ( Figure S1A ) . We evaluated the constructs also by measuring TcpP levels , toxT transcription , and TcpA and CtxB production in vitro ( Figure 1B - D and Figure S1B ) . All TcpH constructs protected TcpP , supported toxT transcription , and regulated virulence factor production similar to WT TcpH and better than Δ tcpH ( Figure 1B - D ) . While the TM TcpH complement a ∆ tcpH mutant by supporting higher levels of TcpP in vitro , we sought to determine if the TM TcpH constructs specifically inhibited RIP of TcpP . In the absence of TcpH , TcpP is sensitive to degradation and undergoes RIP . Loss of both tcpH and yaeL leads to accumulation of TcpP * , an ( functional ) intermediate degradation product formed by cleavage of TcpP by Tsp alone and which serves as the substrate for YaeL ( 56 ) . TcpP * lacks most of its periplasmic domain and therefore has a lower molecular weight ( ~ 17 KDa ) compared to TcpP ( ~ 29 KDa ) , thus enabling us to determine the RIP status of TcpP via western blot . When TcpH is active and RIP is thereby inhibited , we observe full - length TcpP and no TcpP * . When TcpH , ToxS TcpH , or EpsM TcpH constructs were ectopically expressed in a ∆tcpH / ∆yaeL we observed only full - length TcpP and no TcpP * ( Figure 1E ) . Taken together , our data indicate that replacing the transmembrane domain does not disrupt TcpH function in vitro . TcpH TM domain is critical for colonization of infant mice The TM and Peri domain of TcpH can withstand considerable modifications and maintain function in V . cholerae as determined by in vitro experiments . To test whether this was the case in vivo , we infected infant mice with strains expressing TcpH TM and Peri constructs ( Figure 2A ) . Despite their wild - type activity in vitro , strains expressing ToxS TcpH , and EpsM TcpH colonized infant mice to levels significantly lower than did wild type , more closely resembling those of the Δ tcpH strain ( Figure 2A ) . TcpH ∆ 103 - 119 supported the same level of TcpH - dependent virulence gene expression in vitro 4 as both ToxS TcpH and EpsM TcpH , but colonized infant mice to a similar degree as wild type ( Figure 2A ) . The inocula of ToxS TcpH and EpsM TcpH used to infect infant mice produced similar levels of TcpA compared to wild type ( Figure S2A ) . We hypothesized that the colonization defects of the TM TcpH constructs were likely due to an inability of strains lacking the natural TcpH transmembrane domain to express colonization factors – particularly TcpA – in vivo . To test this we measured disease signs , such as fluid accumulation , which requires a higher infectious dose compared to colonization experiments ( e . g . , 1 * 10 ^ 8 vs . 1 * 10 ^ 6 ) . Mice infected with EpsM TcpH exhibited lower fluid accumulation compared to those infected with wild type V . cholerae and , despite a higher infectious dose , EpsM TcpH still was unable to colonize infant mice to wild type levels ( Figure 2BC ) . These data support our hypothesis that EpsM TcpH is unable to colonize infant mice due to an inability to support virulence factor production – both TcpA and CtxAB – in vivo . To determine whether the presence of other microbes in the gastrointestinal tract might influence the ability of strains expressing TcpH with altered TM domains to support virulence gene expression , we cultured wild type and the TcpH constructs ( TM and Peri ) aerobically in both filter - sterilized and non - filtered mouse fecal media for 21 hrs at 37°C ( Figure S2BC ) . All strains exhibited similar growth rates and final cell densities in both filtered and non - filtered fecal media ( Figure S2BC ) . We quantified TcpA levels in cell lysates after 21 hours of growth in sterile mouse fecal media . While the growth rates were very similar between wild type and strains expressing altered TcpH proteins , the strains expressing ToxS TcpH and EpsM TcpH produced TcpA levels below that of wild type ( Figure 2D ) . The strain expressing the TcpH protein with a periplasmic deletion was unaffected for TcpA expression ( Figure 2D ) . Taken together , these data suggest that the TcpH transmembrane domain is critical for TcpH in the gastrointestinal tract to protect TcpP from RIP , thereby supporting downstream virulence factor production . Due to their wild type levels of colonization and ability to support wild type levels of TcpA synthesis in mouse fecal media we excluded the TcpH Peri construct from further experiments . toxT transcription is enhanced with crude bile and is dependent on the TcpH transmembrane domain Data presented here and elsewhere indicate that TcpH - dependent RIP inhibition is affected by different in vitro and in vivo environmental signals and that the transmembrane domain of TcpH is critical for that function ( 25 – 27 ) . Vibrio species can use exogenous fatty acids present in bile via the VolA and FadL / FadD pathways ( 57 – 61 ) , resulting in modification of membrane phospholipid composition ( 61 , 62 ) . Phospholipid remodeling in V . cholerae can influence growth rate , biofilm formation , and motility ( 61 , 62 ) . Given that TcpH and TcpP require membrane localization , we sought to determine whether phospholipid changes , perhaps stimulated by fatty acids present in the gastrointestinal tract , would influence TcpH - dependent inhibition of TcpP RIP . We measured toxT expression from a transcription reporter ( pBH6119 - toxT : : GFP ) in cells grown in media supplemented with Bovine Crude Bile ( 0 . 4 % ) , which contains various fatty acids that can be incorporated into the bacterial membrane ( 61 ) , Transcription of toxT from this reporter was elevated in the presence of crude bile in cells expressing wild type TcpH , but not in cells expressing TcpH constructs with transmembrane domains from EpsM or ToxS ( Figure S3A ) . This suggested that native TcpH responds to changes in phospholipid composition to inhibit RIP , and that TcpH with the altered transmembrane domain is unable to sense and / or respond to the same change . As a negative control , we measured toxT transcription under non - inducing conditions known to stimulate RIP of TcpP ( 25 – 27 ) , and in these conditions toxT expression was indeed reduced ( Figure S3A ) . In addition , we measured toxT expression in ∆ tcpP and ∆ tcpH cells with and without crude bile present , observing no increase in toxT expression ( Figure S3A ) . This confirms that the conditions used here do not simply promote TcpP function in the absence of TcpH . 5 We also measured toxT transcript levels directly via RT - qPCR with RNA isolated from wild type cells grown in the presence of crude bile ( Figure S3B ) , and observed a similar increase in toxT transcription . Lastly , we found that cells expressing native TcpH or TcpH with altered TM domains grew with similar rates in crude bile - supplemented media used for these experiments ( Figure S1C ) . Taken together , these data support a model that TcpH responds to host stimuli , specifically fatty acids or constituents of crude bile , through a mechanism requiring its native TM , and antagonizes RIP of TcpP , leading to increased toxT transcription . α - Linolenic acid enhances toxT expression by promoting TcpH dependent enhanced RIP inhibition Crude bile is a mixture of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids , as well as bile salts ( e . g . , cholate and deoxycholate ) . To determine whether bile salts or fatty acids in crude bile were responsible for elevated toxT transcription in WT , we supplemented virulence - inducing media with cholate / deoxycholate ( Purified Bile ) ( 100µM of each ) , palmitic acid ( 500µM ) , stearic acid ( 500µM ) , linoleic ( 500µM ) , α - linolenic acid ( 500µM ) , arachidonic acid ( 500µM ) , and docosahexaenoic acid ( 500µM ) . Using the toxT : : GFP transcription reporter plasmid , we observed elevated toxT transcription in wild type cells with only crude bile or α - linolenic acid present ( Figure 3A and Figure S3A ) . Increased toxT expression with crude bile or α - linolenic acid was not observed in ∆ tcpH or ∆ tcpP cells ( Figure S3A ) , demonstrating that TcpH is still needed to inhibit RIP and TcpP is necessary to promote toxT transcription in the presence of these compounds . None of the purified components of crude bile resulted in statistically significant increased levels of toxT expression in cells expressing EpsM TcpH or ToxS TcpH ( Figure S3A ) . Expression of toxT responds in dose - dependent fashion to the presence of α - linolenic acid ( Figure S3C ) . In addition to the results obtained with the toxT : : GFP reporter , we measured toxT mRNA levels using RT - PCR in WT cells grown under the same conditions . Consistent with the reporter plasmid data , we observed elevated toxT mRNA in the presence of α - linolenic acid ( ~ 2 . 5 fold ) ( Figure S3B ) . There was no difference in growth rate in cells expressing either native TcpH or the TcpH TM constructs when cultured with purified bile or α - linolenic acid ( Figure S1DE ) . We reasoned that enhanced toxT transcription in the presence of crude bile or α - linolenic acid was due to enhanced inhibition of RIP , leading in turn to elevated levels of TcpP . Thus , we quantified TcpP levels under virulence inducing conditions supplemented with crude bile or α - linolenic acid ( Figure 3B ) . TcpP levels in wild type cells were significantly elevated in the presence of crude bile or α - linolenic acid ( Figure 3B ) . In contrast , growth in α - linolenic acid had no effect on TcpP levels in cells expressing EpsM TcpH grown ( Figure 3B ) . Loss of TcpH led to degradation of TcpP under all conditions indicating that Tsp and YaeL activity is not inhibited by the addition of crude bile or α - linolenic acid ( data not shown ) . We conclude that i ) elevated toxT transcription in the presence of crude bile or α - linolenic acid is due to enhanced inhibition of RIP via TcpH and ii ) altering the phospholipid composition of the cells with exogenous crude bile or α - linolenic acid enhances TcpH function in RIP inhibition through a mechanism that requires the native transmembrane domain . As TcpP levels are elevated upon supplementation of crude bile or α - linolenic acid , we considered it possible that elevated tcpP transcription could contribute to elevated TcpP levels . One possible mechanism is that tcpP transcr iption is directly influenced by α - linolenic within the cytoplasm . Prior studies have shown that linoleic acid can rapidly diffuse into the cytoplasm of V . cholerae where we reasoned it might influence tcpP gene expression ( 63 , 64 ) . To determine if tcpP transcription is influenced by crude bile or α - linolenic acid we measured tcpP transcription in wild type V . cholerae cells using both RT - qPCR and a transcription reporter , tcpP : : lacZ . Neither crude bile nor α - linolenic acid supplementation led to increased tcpP transcription ( Figure 3C and Figure S4A ) . These data indicate that crude bile and α - linolenic acid influence TcpP levels post - transcriptionally supporting the hypothesis that these conditions lead to elevated TcpP by enhanced TcpH - dependent RIP inhibition . 6 V . cholerae can use exogenous fatty acids , including α - linolenic acid , for de novo phospholipid biosynthesis , thereby modifying its phospholipid composition ( 61 , 62 ) . To determine whether V . cholerae cells incorporate α - linolenic acid into the cytoplasmic membrane as phospholipids under our growth conditions , we analyzed the fatty acid profile of phospholipids from V . cholerae cells cultured with and without α - linolenic acid ( Figure S4B ) . In the presence of α - linolenic acid more than 80 % of acyl chains within V . cholerae were 18 : 3 . This is consistent with prior published data ( 61 , 62 ) and demonstrates that under our conditions V . cholerae cells are remodeling the fatty acid content of their phospholipids . Given that the vast majority of fatty acids detected are 18 : 3 and prior studies indicate that V . cholerae does not synthesize 18 : 3 fatty acids under standard laboratory conditions ( 65 , 66 ) , these data suggest that V . cholerae cells are utilizing exogenous α - linolenic acid for phospholipid synthesis ( Figure S4B ) . We next assessed whether cells expressing native TcpH or EpsM TcpH were equally capable of using exogenous fatty acids . This is to rule out any unforeseen , and unlikely , issue with fatty acid metabolism in cells expressing non - native TcpH that might mislead our conclusions about the importance of the native TcpH transmembrane domain in regulating TcpH function . We cultured cells with cerulenin , an inhibitor of de novo fatty acid synthesis , or with cerulenin plus exogenous fatty acids ( 67 – 70 ) . Cerulenin alone led to a growth defect of cells irrespective of which form of TcpH was being expressed ( Figure S4C ) . Inclusion of unsaturated fatty acids restored partial growth of both ( Figure S4C ) . These data indicate that incorporation of fatty acids into the phospholipid bilayer is unaltered in cells expressing EpsM TcpH , supporting our conclusion that the defect of this protein in protecting against RIP is due to its altered transmembrane domain . Co - Association of TcpP and TcpH with detergent resistant membranes is required for enhanced RIP inhibition Our work demonstrates that under conditions that modify phospholipid composition , TcpP levels are enhanced , and toxT transcription is increased . Elevated levels of TcpP are likely due to enhanced inhibition of RIP by TcpH rather than increased tcpP transcription , and this inhibitory function requires the native TcpH TM domain . In addition to α - linolenic acid , arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid modify phospholipid composition in V . cholerae ( 61 ) . Despite causing similar changes to the phospholipid profile , these polyunsaturated fatty acids do not have a significant effect on toxT transcription ( Figure 3A and Figure S3A ) . These data indicate the phospholipid profile does not predict TcpH - dependent inhibition of RIP . Exogenous fatty acids can be utilized directly as acyl chains in de novo phospholipid synthesis ( 71 , 72 ) . Thus , while gross phospholipid composition can remain similar with suppleme ntation of α - linolenic , arachidonic , and docosahexaenoic acid , ( i . e . , relative abundance of cardiolipin , phosphatidylglycerol , and phosphatidylethanolamine ) the overall biophysical properties of the cytoplasmic membrane ( i . e . , membrane fluidity ) can differ due to differences in acyl chain composition . We reasoned that the differences in observed TcpH - dependent enhanced RIP inhibition could be due to differences in the biophysical properties of the cytoplasmic membrane ( e . g . , membrane fluidity ) . To test this , we quantified membrane fluidity in cells expressing either native TcpH or EpsM TcpH with and without α - linolenic acid using a fluorescent lipophilic pyrene - based probe ( Figure S4D ) . Cells cultured with α - linolenic acid demonstrated elevated membrane fluidity , observed as a higher ratio of dimeric to monomeric pyrene probe ( Figure S4D ) . We did not observe a change in membrane fluidity in WT cells cultured with linoleic acid ( data not shown ) . These data demonstrate that the α - linolenic acid alters the biophysical properties of the membrane . Poly - unsaturated fatty acids ( PUFA ) , such as omega - 3 fatty acids , influence lipid - ordered membrane domains within the cytoplasmic membrane of T - cells ( 73 , 74 ) . Lipid - ordered membrane domains , also called lipid rafts , are regions of the membrane enriched in saturated fatty acids , cholesterol ( or , in some bacterial species , hopanoids ) , and proteins with specific TM domain qualities ( typically long TM domain ( s ) and low surface area ) ( 47 , 55 , 75 ) . As a result , lipid ordered membrane domains tend to be thicker and less fluid than other areas of the membrane ( 47 ) . n3 - 7 PUFA ( i . e . , omega - 3 fatty acids ) increase the size and stability of lipid - ordered membrane domains ( 47 , 73 , 74 ) . We hypothesized that TcpP and TcpH molecules can associate within lipid - ordered membrane domains and that α - linolenic acid supplementation increases association of TcpP and TcpH molecules with the lipid - ordered membrane domain . Lipid ordered membrane domains , also known as detergent resistant membranes ( DRMs ) , were discovered due to their insolubility in Triton X - 100 ( 52 , 76 ) . Triton X - 100 has been used in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms to isolate lipid ordered and disordered membrane domains ( 42 – 47 ) . Thus , to test our hypotheses we used Triton X - 100 to separate lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains from cellular lysates . Under Vir Ind conditions , TcpP and TcpH associate with Triton X - 100 insoluble ( TI ; considered to be enriched with lipid ordered membrane domains ) and Triton X - 100 soluble membrane fractions ( TS ; considered to be enriched with lipid disordered membrane domains ) ( Figure 4AB ) . Supplementation with α - linolenic acid resulted in increases of both TcpP and TcpH in the TI fraction ( Figure 4AB ) . Like TcpH , EpsM TcpH also associated with both the TI and TS membrane fractions ( Figure 4CD ) . In contrast to native TcpH , there was no observable increase in EpsM TcpH levels in the TI fraction upon growth with α - linolenic acid ( Figure 4CD ) . These data suggest that the native transmembrane domain of TcpH enables enhanced association with TI fractions ( lipid ordered domains ) , and with the TcpP also in these fractions , after growth in α - linolenic acid . Prior studies revealed that studying lipid ordered membrane domains with this biochemical method can yield dramatically different results with changes in detergent concentration and temperature ( 77 ) . We thus performed similar experiments but used an alternative biochemical method to extract lipid ordered membrane domains . By altering the lysis method and the temperature at which cell lysis occurs , we observed the same trend of TI and TS association for TcpH and EpsM TcpH with and without α - linolenic acid present ( Figure 4BC ) . We observed a shift in the percentage of TcpP molecules present in the TI and TS fraction ( ~ 40 % of TcpP molecules were present in the TI fraction and the remaining ~ 60 % was present in the TS ) under Vir Ind conditions ( Figure S4E ) . However , upon supplementation of α - linolenic acid to Vir Ind conditions , TcpP molecules maintained their higher localization to the TI fraction despite the change in our extraction method ( Figure S4E ) . All told , these data suggest that enhanced RIP inhibition occurs due to increased association of both TcpP and TcpH with the TI fraction , and that the TM domain of TcpH drives this association with the TI fraction upon α - linolenic acid supplementation . Excluding EpsM TcpH , it remained unclear if α - linolenic acid supplementation induced a general association of membrane proteins to the TI fraction . To test this , we quantified levels of a 19KDa non - specific membrane protein in TI and TS f ractions with and without α - linolenic acid ( Figure S4F ) . We observed no change in TI or TS abundance of this protein with α - linolenic acid supplementation ( Figure S4F ) . These data indicate that α - linolenic acid supplementation does not induce a general ass ociation of proteins with the TI fraction . Furthermore , we also observed that with α - linolenic acid supplementation the TI fraction had a higher association of 16 : 0 fatty acids and lower association of 18 : 3 fatty acids than the TS fraction ( Figure S4G ) . This is consistent with prior studies indicating that lipid ordered membrane domains are enriched with saturated fatty acids ( 53 ) . TcpP and TcpH Interaction is critical for inhibition of RIP Our data indicate that increased association of TcpP and TcpH molecules in the TI fraction results in enhanced RIP inhibition . The mechanism underlying this RIP inhibition remains unclear . Lipid - ordered membrane domains ( which are also Triton insoluble ) function as protein concentrators and thereby promote interaction between membrane localized proteins ( 49 ) . We hypothesized that enhanced co - association within the TI fraction increased RIP inhibition due to direct interaction between TcpP and TcpH . 8 To test direct TcpP - TcpH interaction , we used a co - affinity precipitation approach . We genetically fused a His ( 6x ) - Hsv or Hsv - His ( 6x ) tag to the C - terminus and N - terminus , respectively , of TcpP , resulting in tcpP - His - Hsv and Hsv - His - tcpP . We could then extract TcpP from membrane fractions using NTA - Ni beads and identify TcpH and TcpP in elution fractions with ɑ - TcpH and ɑ - Hsv antibody . Proteins tagged at the amino - terminus are described with the tag noted first ( e . g . , Hsv - His - TcpP ) , while those tagged at the carboxy - terminus are described with the tag noted second ( e . g . , TcpP - His - Hsv ) . First , we tested if both the N - and C - terminally - tagged proteins ( Hsv - His - TcpP and TcpP - His - Hsv , respectively ) function like native TcpP by measuring CtxB production after induction of the fusion proteins with arabinose under Vir Ind conditions . CtxB production was similar to that from cells expressing native TcpP , irrespective of which terminus the tag was placed ( Figure S5 ) . Co - precipitation experiments indicated that the C - terminally - tagged TcpP could associate with TcpH , while the N - terminally - tagged TcpP could not ( Figure 5AB ) . Physical interaction between the C - terminally tagged TcpP and TcpH also correlated to protection from RIP , as determined by assessing stability of the tagged proteins in cells expressing the first - site RIP protease Tsp but lacking the second protease YaeL . In such cells , the product of Tsp action on TcpP accumulates because the second - site protease YaeL is not present to eliminate it ( 26 , 27 ) . We observed greater accumulation of TcpP degradation intermediates ( between 24KDa and 19KDa ) in cells expressing N - terminally - tagged - TcpP compared to those expressing C - terminally - tagged TcpP ( Figure 5C ) . The 24 kDa TcpP degradation intermediate from N - terminally - tagged TcpP is also observed in cells expressing native TcpP in the absence of TcpH ( Figure 5CD ) . Considering that the N - terminally - tagged TcpP is sensitive to RIP even with TcpH present suggests a defect in its association with TcpH and its recognition by the RIP proteases . Despite this defect , N - terminally - tagged TcpP is capable of supporting WT CtxB production ( Figure S5 ) . We conclude this is the result of overexpression of N - terminally - tagged TcpP . Native expression of tcpP leads to accumulation of only TcpP * in a Δ tcpH Δ yaeL background ( Figure 1E ) , but overexpression of tcpP in a Δ tcpP Δ tcpH Δ yaeL background yields both full length and TcpP * ( Figure 5D ) . These data indicate that artificial elevation of TcpP levels , via overexpression , can outpace RIP . Our data indicate that TcpP - His - Hsv is less sensitive to RIP in the presence of TcpH . Prior studies have demonstrated that modification of the C - terminus of TcpP can lead to TcpH - independent resistance to RIP ( 78 ) . To determine if the addition of His - Hsv to the C - terminus of TcpP promotes resistance to RIP independent of TcpH we expressed tcpP - His - Hsv and tcpP in a Δ tcpP Δ tcpH Δ yaeL background . We observe TcpP * accumulation in both tcpP or tcpP - His - Hsv expressing cells ( ~ 17KDa ) ( Figure 5D ) . These data show that addition of His ( 6x ) - Hsv to the C - terminus of TcpP does abrogate the need for TcpH to protect TcpP - His - Hsv from RIP ( Figure 5D ) . In summary , our data indicates that TcpP and TcpH interact and that this interaction is important for inhibition of RIP of TcpP . It remains unclear why Hsv - His - TcpP is unable to interact with TcpH . Single - molecule tracking studies indicate that TcpP may be sensitive to RIP while interacting with the toxT promoter ( 78 ) . The Hsv tag is enriched with negatively charged amino acids ( Hsv amino acid sequence : QP E LAP ED P ED ) . Given that DNA has an intrinsic negative charge , addition of Hsv - His ( 6x ) to the N - terminus of TcpP may promote a conformation similar to the conformation that TcpP molecules adopt when actively interacting with DNA . This hypothesis requires additional experiments to test . Miltefosine , a lipid raft busting drug , functions synergistically with α - linolenic acid Staphylococcus aureus relies on lipid ordered membrane domains to recruit and promote oligomerization of flotillin , which in turn promotes antibiotic resistance ( 45 ) . Miltefosine , a drug used to treat Leishmaniasis and certain types of cancers , inhibited flotillin association with lipid ordered membrane domains in S . aureus ( 45 , 79 ) . Our data indicate that α - linolenic acid enhances toxT 9 expression by promoting association of TcpP and TcpH molecules within lipid ordered membrane domains . We hypothesized that miltefosine treatment would inhibit TcpH dependent enhanced RIP inhibition in the presence of α - linolenic acid . Instead , we observed that miltefosine alone functioned like α - linolenic acid ( Figure S6A ) . Treatment with both miltefosine and α - linolenic acid resulted in a ~ 7 - fold increase in TcpP levels relative to Vir Ind conditions ( Figure S6B ) . Our data also demonstrate that miltefosine also promoted association of TcpP molecules with the TI fraction like α - linolenic acid ( Figure S6C ) . Miltefosine did not promote toxT transcription in Δ tcpH and EpsM TcpH cells ( Figure S6A ) . Taken together , these data indicate that miltefosine functions synergistically with α - linolenic acid to increase levels of TcpP in V . cholerae and is not effective at inhibiting lipid ordered domain formation in V . cholerae . Miltefosine is known to associate with lipid ordered domains and requires lipid ordered domains to enter cells ( 80 , 81 ) . Also , miltefosine increases membrane fluidity ( 82 ) . Other n3 - polyunsaturated fatty acids , like α - linolenic acid , are also capable of increasing membrane fluidity , and they have been shown to drive aggregation and stabilization of lipid ordered membrane domains ( 47 , 73 , 74 ) . Given that miltefosine and α - linolenic acid function synergistically to promote TcpH - dependent antagonism of RIP , these data suggest that α - linolenic acid promotes lipid ordered domain aggregation , and thereby increases lipid ordered domain size in V . cholerae cells . Discussion Canonical RIP systems act by releasing an anti - sigma factor from the cytoplasmic membrane to influence gene expression ( 28 , 83 ) . Membrane localized transcription regulators ( MLTRs ) , in addition to TcpP and ToxR , are sensitive to RIP ( e . g . , CadC ) ( 84 ) . However , RIP of MLTRs , such as TcpP , results in their inactivation , typically leading to decreased gene expression . The fundamental mechanisms of RIP for TcpP are understood , in terms of the primary proteases that work in the two - step pathway ( 26 , 27 ) , but the regulatory mechanisms influencing these activities have been less well studied . It is clear that TcpH is essential to inhibit RIP of TcpP , and that its ability to protect TcpP from RIP changes in response to temperature and pH ( 25 – 27 ) . ToxR is a well - studied MLTR , similar to TcpP and is sensitive to RIP ( 85 , 86 ) . ToxR is protected from RIP by ToxS , a single pass transmembrane protein analogous to TcpH , via direct interaction ( 12 , 87 ) . Prior work indicates that : i ) ToxR undergoes RIP during late stationary phase ( i . e . , alkaline pH and nutrient limiting conditions ) ; ii ) ToxS antagonizes RIP of ToxR via direct interaction ; and iii ) deoxycholate increases interaction between ToxR and ToxS ( 88 - 91 ) . As is understood about ToxR , our data indicate that RIP of TcpP is inhibited by direct interaction with TcpH . Our data indicate that α - linolenic acid , a host dietary fatty acid , plays a role in inhibiting RIP by increasing the local concentration of TcpP and TcpH within detergent resistant membranes ( DRM ) ( i . e . , lipid ordered membrane domains ) . Whether this fatty acid plays any role in ToxR RIP inhibition remains to be examined . α - Linolenic acid is an essential omega - 3 fatty acid used to synthesize arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid humans and mice ( 92 , 93 ) . α - Linolenic acid is acquired via dietary supplementation and is present in milk , meats , dairy products , soybean oil , and plant seeds ( 94 - 100 ) . It is considered a beneficial dietary fatty acid as it is a precursor to omega - 3 , omega - 6 , and conjugated α - linolenic acids , and has health benefits ranging from anti - carcinogenic , anti - atherogenic , anti - inflammatory , improved memory , and anti - diabetic activity ( 101 - 109 ) . V . cholerae uses exogenous long - chain fatty acids , such as α - linolenic acid , to remodel its phospholipid composition ( 61 , 62 ) . Long - chain fatty acids are transported across the outer membrane by FadL into the periplasmic space where FadD covalently modifies the fatty acids by adding an acyl - CoA group , resulting in formation of long - chain fatty acyl - CoA ( LCFA - CoA ) ( 57 – 60 ) . LCFA - CoAs then bind to FadR , the principal regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in V . cholerae , resulting in a conformational change inhibiting FadR from binding to DNA ( 110 - 112 ) . This leads to decreased 10 biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids ( i . e . , decrease in fabAB expression ) and increased expression , due to a lack of repression by FadR , of genes required for transport , activation , and beta - oxidation of long - chain fatty acids ( i . e , fadL , fadD , fadBA , fadE , and fadH ) ( 110 - 112 ) . FadL into the periplasmic space where FadD covalently modifies the fatty acids by adding an acyl - CoA group , resulting in formation of long - chain fatty acyl - CoA ( LCFA - CoA ) ( 57 – 60 ) . LCFA - CoAs then bind to FadR , the principal regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in V . cholerae , resulting in a conformational change inhibiting FadR from binding to DNA ( 110 - 112 ) . This leads to decreased biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids ( i . e . , decrease in fabAB expression ) and increased expression , due to a lack of repression by FadR , of genes required for transport , activation , and beta - oxidation of long - chain fatty acids ( i . e , fadL , fadD , fadBA , fadE , and fadH ) ( 110 - 112 ) . FadL into the periplasmic space where FadD covalently modifies the fatty acids by adding an acyl - CoA group , resulting in formation of long - chain fatty acyl - CoA ( LCFA - CoA ) ( 57 – 60 ) . LCFA - CoAs then bind to FadR , the principal regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in V . cholerae , resulting in a conformational change inhibiting FadR from binding to DNA ( 110 - 112 ) . This leads to decreased biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids ( i . e . , decrease in fabAB expression ) and increased expression , due to a lack of repression by FadR , of genes required for transport , activation , and beta - oxidation of long - chain fatty acids ( i . e , fadL , fadD , fadBA , fadE , and fadH ) ( 110 - 112 ) . Utilization of exogenous fatty acids remodels the phospholipid bilayer in Vibrio spp . ( 61 , 62 , 113 ) and has an impact on pathogenicity , motility , and antibiotic resistance via unknown mechanisms ( 62 ) . Our work demonstrates that : i ) toxT expression is enhanced in the presenc e of α - linolenic acid ; ii ) TcpP levels are significantly elevated in the presence of α - linolenic acid ; iii ) the tcpP transcript level is not increased with exogenous α - linolenic acid ; iiiv ) TcpP and TcpH avidly associate within detergent resistant membranes ( DRM ; hypothesized to be lipid - ordered domains ) in the presence of α - linolenic acid ; v ) TcpP - TcpH interaction is important for inhibition of RIP ; and vi ) enhanced toxT expression in the presence of α - linolenic acid is dependent on co - association of TcpP and TcpH in the DRM membrane fraction . Our data support a model where , once present in the gastrointestinal tract ( GI ) , V . cholerae cells take up and incorporate α - linolenic acid , present in the GI tract of infant mice ( 114 ) , into phospholipids , thereby altering the composition of the cytoplasmic membrane . This influences TcpH and TcpP molecules to increase their association with lipid ordered membrane domains via an unknown mechanism . n - 3 polyunsaturated lipids ( i . e . , omega - 3 fatty acids ) are known to increase lipid ordered domain size in eukaryotes by promoting aggregation of existing lipid ordered membrane microdomains ( 73 , 74 ) . As lipid ordered membrane domains are known to be relatively small in size ( 6 - 200 nm ) ( 49 , 51 ) , we hypothesize that this leads to an increase in the local concentration of TcpP and TcpH molecules thereby allowing TcpH to enhance RIP inhibition of TcpP via increased interactions with TcpP ( Figure 6 ) . Previous studies have investigated the role of exogenous fatty acids on the pathogenesis of V . cholerae . These concluded that FadD is required for wild - type toxT expression through a mechanism involving its effect on TcpP levels ( 115 , 116 ) . These prior publications support our model as accumulation of α - linolenic acid in the periplasmic space or within the cytoplasmic membrane , due to loss of fadD , results in a reduction in TcpP levels , rather than an increase ( 115 , 116 ) . This work indicates that free α - linolenic acid ( I . e . , not incorporated in phospholipids ) within the periplasmic space , cytoplasm , or within the cytoplasmic membrane , does not promote TcpH mediated inhibition of RIP . In conjunction with the data presented here , this indicates that α - linolenic acid needs to be incorporated into the cytoplasmic membrane as a phospholipid to have an effect on TcpH function . Lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains were discovered due to the insolubility of the lipid ordered membrane domain ( initially referred to as detergent resistant membranes ) in Triton X - 100 and other non - ionic detergents ( 52 , 76 ) . This biochemical property has been used to separate lipid ordered ( DRM ) and lipid disordered ( DSM ) membrane domains in many Eukarya and Bacteria , including Gram - negative and Gram - positive bacteria ( 42 – 47 ) . Data generated from the 11 biochemical - based separation of lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains has been verified by alternative methods ( e . g . , fluorescent microscopy , single - molecule tracking , and synthetic membrane vesicles ) ( 117 ) . Due to a lack of literature on lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains in V . cholerae , we performed additional experiments to determine if our biochemical extraction method faithfully enriched for lipid ordered membrane domains and lipid disordered membrane domains within the DRM and DSM ( I . e . , TI and TS ) respectively . In the presence of α - linolenic acid , we found that the TI fraction had a higher association of 16 : 0 fatty acids and a lower association of 18 : 3 fatty acids compared to the TS fraction ( Figure S4F ) . These characteristics are consistent with lipid ordered membrane domain and suggest that the TI and TS fractions presented here are enriched in lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains respectively . Transmembrane domain length and surface area are major factors in determining the preference of a protein for lipid ordered ( enriched with proteins having longer TM domain and low surface area ) or lipid disordered ( enriched with proteins having shorter TM domain and high surface area ) membrane domains ( 118 ) . We demonstrated that TcpH and TcpP increase localization within DRM domains in the presence of α - linolenic acid while EpsM TcpH does not ( Figure 4 ) . EpsM TcpH has a shorter TM domain than TcpH ( 20 amino acids vs 22 amino acids ) and a higher overall surface area ( 108 Å 2 vs 92 Å 2 ) . Thus , we hypothesize that the TM domain properties of EpsM TcpH molecules inhibit its transition from the TS fraction to the TI fraction in the presence of α - linolenic acid . Alternatively , it is also possible that TcpH , and not EpsM TcpH , undergoes post - translational modification ( e . g . , palmitoylation ) within its TM domain . We view this as unlikely as TcpH is not predicted to have a palmitoylation site within its TM domain . In addition , it also appears that the surface area of the transmembrane domain of TcpP influences its function . Prior analysis of TcpP transmembrane domain revealed that mutation of L152 and W162 / S163 with alanine ( which reduces the overall surface area of the transmembrane domain ) increased toxT expression ( 119 ) . It remains unclear why these mutations increase TcpP function , but given the data presented here , it is possible that TcpPL152A and TcpP W162A / S163A may have a greater propensity than TcpP , in the absence of ⍺ - linolenic acid , to associate within DRMs ( i . e . , lipid ordered membrane domain ) . Based on our data here and other literature , we hypothesize that phospholipid remodeling of V . cholerae occurs in the lumen during the initial stages of infection . Our data suggests that this remodeling promotes TcpH mediated inhibition of RIP and promotes toxT transcription . However , unsaturated fatty acids can also inhibit degradation and activity of ToxT ( 63 , 64 , 120 ) . This likely prevents premature expression of TCP which is known to stimulate microcolony formation and thereby could inhibit penetration of the mucus layer ( 121 ) . Bicarbonate present at high concentrations at the surface of epithelial cells , competes with unsaturated fatty acids to activate ToxT once V . cholerae reaches the surface of epithelial cells , its primary site of infection ( 122 – 124 ) . There is also evidence that bicarbonate represses toxT transcription ( 123 ) . This indicates that expression of toxT , stimulated by enhanced RIP antagonism , during early infection ( i . e . , the lumen ) is critical for V . cholerae to cause disease . This adds a new level of regulation to the ToxR regulon and another dietary host factor that modulates toxT expression in V . cholerae . α - Linolenic acid represents the first in vivo signal that modulates RIP of TcpP , and , to the best of our knowledge , the first evidence that lipid ordered and lipid disordered membrane domains exist in V . cholerae . The data presented here further expands our knowledge of the complex virulence regulatory cascade in V . cholerae . Materials and Methods Bacterial culture conditions 12 All V . cholerae strains used in this study were of the classical biotype ( 0395 ) ( See Table S1 for a complete list of bacterial strains ) . Unless otherwise stated Escherichia coli and V . cholerae were grown at 37ºC in Luria - Bertani ( LB ; 10 g tryptone , 5 g yeast extract , and 5 g NaCl per liter ) with vigorous shaking ( 210 rpm ) . LB was prepared as previously described ( 125 ) . To stimulate virulence factor production , V . cholerae strains were subcultured , to an O . D . of 0 . 01 , from an overnight LB culture and grown under virulence inducing conditions ( Vir Ind ; 30ºC , LB pH 6 . 5 ∓ 0 . 5 , and 110 rpm ) or non - virulence inducing conditions ( non - Vir Ind ; 37ºC , LB pH 8 . 5 ∓ 0 . 5 , and 210 rpm ) . Media used for both Vir Ind and non - Vir Ind were sterilized using 1L 0 . 22 µm vacuum filtration units ( Sigma ) after pH adjustment . ex - vivo mouse fecal experiments with sterile and non - sterile mouse fecal media were conducted aerobically at 37°C in 48 well plates ( Sigma ) with shaking ( 210 rpms ) . Sterile mice fecal samples were collected from C57 Black female mice on 4 separate days and stored at - 80°C . After collection mice fecal samples were homogenized , via mortar and pestle , and then suspended in M9 minimal media . The final concentration of mice fecal media was 9 % w / v . The mice fecal media was then spun down ( 2450xg for 10 min ) to remove insoluble material . The supernatant was collected , and filter sterilized using a 0 . 45 µM syringe filter ( Sigma ) . Non - sterile mice fecal samples were collected from C57 Black female mice on three separate days . Mice fecal matter was directly resuspended in M9 media to a final concentration of 9 % w / v . Mice fecal media was then incubated at room temperature for 1 hour while shaking on a table top shaker . Mice fecal media was spun down ( 2450xg for 10 min ) . The supernatant was collected and used directly for the growth curve . V . cholerae cell density was determined by counting CFU’s on LB agar plates supplemented with streptomycin . Microbiota in mice fecal matter were not found to be resistant to streptomycin . To test if crude bile ( Ox gal , Sigma Aldrich ) , as well as components of crude bile , we opted to pretreat all V . cholerae strains under Vir Ind conditions before exposing cells to these additional factors . V . cholerae cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 100 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 in a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask . V . cholerae strains were grown for 4 hours under Vir Ind conditions , centrifuged ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) , resuspended in 0 . 8 ml LB . 200 µl of resuspended cells were transferred to 50 ml of fresh Vir Ind media in 125 ml erlenmeyer flasks . The remaining 200 µl of cells were lysed and analyzed via western blot . A maximum of 4 different conditions were tested per strain per biological replicate due to limited incubator space . The following w ere supplemented to Vir Ind media : crude bile ( CB ; final concentration 0 . 4 % v / v ) , α - linolenic acid ( LA ; final concentration 500µM - 500nM ) , palmitic acid ( PA ; final concentration 500µM ) , stearic acid ( SA ; final concentration 500µM ) , purified bile salts cholate and deoxycholate ( PB ; final concentration 100µM ) . All compounds were purchased from Sigma Aldrich . CB and PB were solubilized in Vir Ind media and filter sterilized ( 0 . 22 µM ; Sigma ) before addition to Vir Ind . LA and PA were dissolved in Dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) and then added to Vir Ind media . LA and PA sterility were confirmed by spreading 100µl of DMSO solubilized LA and PA on LB agar plates ( data not shown ) . Unless otherwise stated , antibiotics were used at the following concentrations : ampicillin ( 100 µg / ml ) , chloramphenicol ( 30 µg / ml ) , streptomycin ( 100 µg / ml ) , and cerulenin ( 10 µg / ml ) . Overexpression of constructs by pBAD18 was induced by culturing strains in LB containing 0 . 1 % arabinose . Plasmid construction Briefly , DNA fragments 500 bp upstream and downstream of the target gene were amplified using Phusion high - fidelity polymerase ( Thermo Scientific ) ( see Table S2 for list of primers used ) . Insert fragments containing desired mutations were connected by splicing via overlap extension PCR . Plasmid vectors ( pKAS32 and pBAD18 ) were isolated from bacterial strains using the Qiagen Miniprep kit . Plasmid vectors were then digested with KpnI - HiFi and XbaI ( New England BioLabs ) at 37ºC for 2 hours . Insert and vector fragments were then added to Gibson assembly master mix 13 ( New England BioLabs ) and incubated at 50ºC for 30 minutes . Plasmids were then introduced to E . coli ET12567 ∆ dapA ( λpir + ) by electroporation . pKAS32 plasmids were then transferred to V . cholerae strains via mating on LB agar plates at 30ºC overnight . pBAD18 plasmids were introduced into V . cholerae strains via electroporation . Mutant construction Mutants were constructed as previously described ( 126 ) . V . cholerae harboring pKAS32 derivatives were grown in 2 ml LB for 2 hours at 37ºC . Streptomycin was then added to cultures to a final concentration of 2500 µg / ml and incubated for an additional 2 hours . After a total of 4 hours of incubation , 20 µl of culture was spread on LB agar plates containing streptomycin ( 2500 µg / ml ) and incubated at 37ºC overnight . Colonies that were resistant to streptomycin were screened via colony PCR to confirm presence of the desired mutation . Genomic DNA was then isolated from potential mutants and the region of interest was then amplified via PCR and validated by sequencing ( GeneWiz ) . ) . Growth curves V . cholerae strains were subcultured from an overnight culture to a final optical density ( 600 nm ) of 0 . 01 in 200 µl of virulence inducing media , LB , or M9 minimal media ( supplemented with 0 . 05 % glucose ) per well of a 96 well plate . The plate was then incubated at 30ºC or 37ºC in a SPECTROstar Omega plate reader ( BMG LABTECH ) , with shaking and optical density measurements every 30 minutes . Western blots After whole cell lysis , the total protein concentration of each sample was measured via Bradford assay ( Sigma Aldrich ) . Samples were subsequently diluted to a final concentration of 0 . 5 µg total protein / µl . All SDS page gels contained 12 . 5 % acrylamide and were run at 90 - 120 volts for 1 . 5 hours . Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes using a semi dry electroblotter ( Fisher Scientific ) overnight at 35 mA or for 2 hours at 200mA . Membranes were blocked with 15 ml of blocking buffer ( 5 % non - fat milk , 2 % bovine serum albumin , 0 . 5 % Tween - 20 , in Tris - buffered saline ) for 1 hour at room temperature . Primary antibodies were diluted in 5 % non - fat milk and Tris - buffered saline ( α - TcpH 1 : 500 , α - TcpP 1 : 1 , 000 , and α - TcpA 1 : 100 , 000 ) and incubated with the membranes for 1 hour at room temperature . Membranes were washed three times for 5 - 15 minutes with Tris - buffered saline . Secondary antibodies ( Sigma Aldrich ) were diluted in 5 % non - fat milk in Tris - buffered saline ( Goat anti - Rabbit IgG - HRP 1 : 2 , 000 ) and incubated as before . Membranes were washed three times for 5 - 15 minutes with Tris - buffered saline and then incubated with SuperSignal HRP Chemiluminescence substrate ( Thermo Fisher ) . Membranes were imaged with an Amersham Imager 600 . Enzyme Linked - Immunosorbent Assay ( ELISA ) ELISAs were performed as previously described ( 127 ) . V . cholerae cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 10 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 . Cultures were incubated at 30ºC for a total of 24 hours . Cells were collected by centrifugation at 2450X g for 15 minutes . 1 ml of culture supernatant was collected and the remaining supernatant was discarded . All steps of EILSA were performed at room temperature . 10 µl of culture supernatant was added to 140 µl PBS - T ( phosphate buffered saline , 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 , 0 . 1 % BSA ) in row A of plates coated with GM1 ( monosialotetrahexosylganglioside ) . Samples were diluted ( 1 : 3 ) down each column and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour . Plates were then washed with PBS - T three times . Primary ( α - CtxB 1 : 8000 , Sigma Aldrich ) and secondary antibody ( Goat anti - Rabbit IgG - HRP 1 : 5 , 000 , Sigma Aldrich ) were diluted in PBS - T . 100 µl of diluted antibody was added to each well and incubated for 1 hour 14 at room temperature . Plates were again washed with PBS - T as before . 100 ul of TMB ( 3 , 3 ' , 5 , 5 ' - tetramentylbenzidine , Sigma ) was added to each well and incubated for 5 - 10 minutes . The reaction stopped by addition of 100 µl of 2M sulfuric acid and the optical density ( 450 nm ) was measured for each well using SPECTROstar Omega plate reader ( BMG LABTECH ) . Infant Mouse Colonization Infant mouse colonization experiments were performed as previously described ( 128 , 129 ) . The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Michigan State University approved all animal experiments ( PROTO201900421 ) . 3 - 6 day old male and female Infant mice ( CD1 , catalog # : 022CD1 ) were purchased from Charles River ( Wilmington , MA ) . Infant mice were transported with a female adult mouse . Upon arrival , infant mice were separated from the adult female mouse , 2 hours prior to infection , and all adult female mice were euthanized . Infant mice were randomly assigned into infection groups . 70 % ethanol was used to sterilize gloves , tubing , and surfaces between groups . The number of mice used per group is indicated in the figure or figure legend . Briefly , three - to six - day old CD - 1 mice were orogastrically inoculated with ~ 1x10 6 or ~ 1x10 8 bacterial cells after 2 hours of separation from their mothers . Infant mice were kept at 30ºC in sterile bedding and euthanized either 18 hours or 21 hours after infection . Mouse intestines ( small and large ) were weighed in 3 ml PBS and homogenized . For fluid accumulation studies , infant mice were weighed prior to collection of mouse intestine , and mouse intestines were weighed after blotting on absorbent paper . Homogenates were then serially diluted in PBS , spread on LB plates containing streptomycin , and incubated at 37ºC overnight . Real - time quantitative PCR ( RT - qPCR ) RT - qPCR experiments were performed as previously described ( 130 ) . RNA was preserved by resuspending V . cholerae cells in 1 ml of Trizol ( Sigma Aldrich ) and then extracted from cells using an RNEasy kit ( Qiagen ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . RNA was then treated with Turbo DNase for 30 minutes at 37ºC . After DNase treatment , RNA quality was determined by detection of large and small ribosomal subunits via 2 % agarose gel . RNA quantity was then measured using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer ( Thermo Scientific ) . cDNA was generated from DNase treated RNA using Superscript III reverse transcriptase ( Thermo Scientific ) as previously described ( 130 ) . 5 ng of cDNA was used with SYBR green master mix ( Applied Biosystems ) to perform the RT - qPCR . recA was used as a housekeeping gene of reference to calculate the threshold values ( ΔΔC T ) ( 131 ) . See Table S2 for primers . β - Galactosidase activity assay V . cholerae cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 50 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 . V . cholerae strains were grown for 4 hours under Vir Ind conditions . Following incubation cultures were centrifuged ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) , resuspended in 1 ml LB , and then 200 µl of the culture resuspension was transferred to fresh media ( Vir Ind , Vir Ind supplemented with crude bile / cholate and deoxycholate ( purified bile ) / α - linolenic acid , or non - Vir Ind ) . Cultures were grown for an additional 4 hours under their indicated condition . At the indicated time point ( 4 hours or 8 hours ) 1 . 5 ml of culture was removed , centrifuged ( 4000 X g 15 minutes ) , and resuspended in 1 ml of Z - buffer ( Na 2 HPO 4 60mM , NaH 2 PO 4 40mM , KCl 10mM , MgSO 4 1mM , β - mercaptoethanol 50mM , pH7 . 0 ) . β - galactosidase activity and Miller units were determined as previously described ( 132 ) . Subcellular Fractionation Cells were fractionated following the Tris - sucrose - EDTA method ( 200mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 5 , 500mM sucrose , 1mM EDTA , pH 8 . 0 ) ( 133 ) . V . cholerae cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 50 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 . After 2 hours of incubation , plasmids were induced by the addition of arabinose ( final concentration of 0 . 1 % ) at 30ºC with mild shaking ( 110 rpm ) , and 15 then cultured for an additional 5 hours . All steps of the fractionation procedure were performed on ice as follows ( 133 ) . Spheroplast fractions ( i . e . , cytoplasm and the cytoplasmic membrane ) were resuspended in 500 µl 0 . 45 % NaCl . To lyse the spheroplasts 50 µl of 10 % SDS were added and samples were then boiled for 5 - 10 minutes . Periplasmic fractions were concentrated using trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) ( 133 , 134 ) . Pelleted whole cells were resuspended in 50 - 200 µl of resuspension buffer ( 50mM Tris - HCl , 50mM EDTA , pH 8 . 0 ) . Cells were then lysed by the addition of lysis buffer ( 10mM Tris - HCl , 1 % SDS ) and boiled for 5 - 10 minutes . All fractions were stored at - 20 ºC until use . Soluble and insoluble fractionation of V . cholerae cells was performed as described by Miller et . al . , with modifications ( 11 ) . Initial steps of the Tris - sucrose - EDTA extraction were followed regarding growth and collection of V . cholerae cells . Following collection , cells were resuspended in 10 ml of lysis buffer ( 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8 . 0 , 750mM sucrose , EDTA - free protease inhibitor , 2mM EDTA , 50 µg / ml lysozyme , 10 U / ml DNase 1 ) and incubated on ice for 20 minutes . Cells underwent two rounds of lysis via French press ( 7 , 000 - 10 , 000 psi ) . Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation ( 1200 X g for 10 minutes ) and supernatant was retained . Insoluble ( i . e . , the inner and outer membrane ) and soluble fractions were separated by ultracentrifugation ( 100 , 000 x g for 2 hours at 4ºC ) . The pellet , containing the membrane fraction , was collected and resuspended in 500 µl 5mM EDTA and 25 % sucrose . The insoluble membrane fraction underwent a second round of ultracentrifugation and was then collected . All samples were stored at - 80ºC until further use . Fatty Acyl Methylester ( FAME ) analysis Analysis of fatty acids from whole V . cholerae cells was done as previously described ( 135 ) . Briefly , V . cholerae cells were grown with and without linolenic acid ( 500 µM ) as described in the section below . Cells were collected by centrifugation ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) and then washed with PBS . Cells were then lysed via addition of 300 μl of extraction solvent ( composed of methanol , chloroform and formic acid [ 20 : 10 : 1 , v / v / v ] ) . After lipids were extracted the Fatty Acyl Methylester ( FAME ) reactions were carried out as described ( 135 ) . After the FAME reactions , fatty acid content was measured via Gas - Liquid Chromatography using a DB - 23 column ( agilent , part number : 122 - 2332 ) . Molar values of each peak were then normalized to an internal standard ( 15 : 0 ) to calculate the total molar percentage of each fatty acid detected . Membrane Fluidity Membrane fluidity was measured as previously described ( 136 ) using a membrane fluidity kit that quantifies the fluorescence of a lipophilic dye ( Pyrenedecanoic acid ) ( Abcam ) . Pyrene decanoic acid exists in monomeric and dimeric states within membranes . Dimerization of pyrene decanoic acid occurs in areas of low fluidity ( or low viscosity ) and results in a change in its emission spectra . Thus , the ratio of dimeric ( excimer state ) and monomeric pyrene decanoic acid can be used to quantify membrane fluidity . Briefly , WT and EpsM TcpH cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 100 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 in a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask . V . cholerae strains were grown for 4 hours under Vir Ind conditions , centrifuged ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) , resuspended in 0 . 8 ml LB . 200 µl of resuspended cells were transferred to 50 ml of fresh Vir Ind media supplemented with ethanol ( 3 % w / v ) , benzyl alcohol ( 20mM ) , DMSO ( 1 % w / v ) , or α - linolenic acid ( 500 µM ) in 125 ml erlenmeyer flasks . Cultures were incubated for an additional 4 hours under Vir Ind or Non - Vir Ind conditions . After incubation cells were collected from 1 ml of culture via centrifugation ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) and resuspended in 500 µl LB . Cells were incubated with the fluorescent lipid reagent ( 10 µM final concentration ) for 30 minutes at room temperature ( ~ 23ºC ) while shaking . Cells were then washed twice with LB and fluorescence ( excitation , 350 nm , and emission , 400 nm and 470 nm ) was quantified for each sample . After subtracting the background fluorescence , the fluorescence ratio was calculated for each sample by dividing the excimer ( 470 nm ) by the monomer ( 400 nm ) fluorescence . Unlabeled cells and non - Vir ind conditions were used as negative controls . Ethanol and benzyl alcohol were used as positive controls ( 137 , 138 ) . 16 Triton X - 100 Subcellular Fractionation V . cholerae cells were subcultured from overnight cultures to an optical density of 0 . 01 in 50 ml of LB pH 6 . 5 and grown under Vir Ind for 6 - 8 hours . Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) , and resuspended in 500 µl of phosphate buffered saline ( pH 7 . 4 ) . Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) . For spheroplast fractionation , cells were resuspended in 100 µl of 200mM Tris HCl . After resuspension , components were added sequentially to each sample : 200 µl of 200mM Tris HCl and 1M sucrose , 20 µl of 10mM EDTA , 20 µl of lysozyme ( 10mg / ml ) , 10 µl of protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma ) , and 600 µl of H 2 O . Samples were then incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes . After room temperature incubation 700 µl of 2 % Triton X - 100 , 50mM Tris HCl , and 10mM MgCl 2 was added . For gentle cell lysis , pelleted cells were resuspended in 5 ml of Triton X - 100 buffer ( 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10mM imidazole , 500mM HEPES , 10 % glycerol , 2M MgCl 2 ) . Samples then underwent three rounds of freeze - thaw lysis in 180 proof ethanol at - 80ºC . Triton X - 100 soluble and insoluble membrane fractions were then separated by ultracentrifugation ( 100 , 000 X g 1 hour ) . The supernatant ( i . e . , the Triton X - 100 soluble fraction ; TS ) and the pellet ( i . e . , the Triton X - 100 insoluble fraction ; TI ) were collected . The TI fraction was resuspended in 500µl of 2 % SDS and 10mM imidazole . The TS fraction was concentrated using Amicon protein concentrators with a 10KDa cutoff ( Sigma ) . Co - affinity precipitation For co - affinity precipitation experiments V . cholerae cells were grown as described in the Triton X - 100 Subcellular Fractionation section . After cells were suspended in PBS , proteins were cross linked by adding 1mM Dithiobis ( succinimidyl propionate ) ( DPS ) to cell suspensions and samples were incubated on ice for 30 minutes . DPS was quenched by adding Tris HCl pH 8 . 5 to final concentration of 1M and incubating cells on ice for an additional 15 minutes . Cells were then pelleted by centrifugation ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) and TI and TS fractions were collected via the gentle cell lysis method discussed in the Triton X - 100 Subcellular Fractionation section . TI fractions were resuspended in 5ml of 2 % sodium dodecyl - sulfate and 10mM imidazole . After collection of TI and TS fractions 100 µl of His - affinity gel ( i . e . , Ni - NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads ) ( ZYMO Research ) and 10 µl of protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma ) was added to the TI and TS fractions and samples were incubated on a rocking platform overnight at 4ºC . TI samples were then incubated at 40ºC for 20 minutes to completely solubilize the sample . Samples were then centrifuged ( 2450 X g 15 minutes ) and Ni - NTA agarose beads were washed three times with either Triton X - 100 buffer or 2 % sodium dodecyl - sulfate and 10mM imidazole . between wash steps TI Ni - NTA agarose beads were incubated at 40ºC for 5 minutes . Equal volume of laemmli buffer was added to each sample ( BIO - RAD ) and then boiled for 5 minutes . Boiled samples were then used directly for western blot analysis . Quantification and statistical analysis Data presented here are arithmetic mean and error bars represent the standard error of the mean , unless otherwise stated . The data were not converted ( i . e . , log - transformed ) prior to statistical analysis . A Shapiro – Wilk test was used to determine if data were normally distributed . Mann - Whitney test was used to measure statistical significance in non - normally distributed data sets . Student’s t - test , one tailed or two tailed , was used to make pairwise comparisons of normally distributed data sets . A P - value ≤0 . 05 was considered statistically significant . Statistical tests are indicated in each figure legend . Unless otherwise stated , averages represent three or more biological replicates . 17 Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Rudolph Hugh Endowment at Michigan State University ( V . J . D . ) , the Wentworth fellowship , the Rudolph Hugh fellowship , the Michigan State University College of Natural Science Dissertation Continuation and Completion fellowships , and the Integrated Pharmacological Sciences Training Program at MSU ( 2T32 GM092715 ) , L . M . D . was a trainee . We thank Ron Cook and Dr . Christoph Benning for conducting the FAME analysis of the TI and TS membrane fractions . We thank Dr . Andrew Van Alst , Beth Ottosen , and Rhiannon Leveque for critical review of this manuscript . References 1 . Angelichio MJ , Spector J , Waldor MK , Camilli A . 1999 . Vibrio cholerae Intestinal Population Dynamics in the Suckling Mouse Model of Infection . Infection and Immunity https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / iai . 67 . 8 . 3733 - 3739 . 1999 . 2 . Millet YA , Alvarez D , Ringgaard S , von Andrian UH , Davis BM , Waldor MK . 2014 . Insights into Vibrio cholerae intestinal colonization from monitoring fluorescently labeled bacteria . PLoS Pathog 10 : e1004405 . 3 . Taylor RK , Miller VL , Furlong DB , Mekalanos JJ . 1987 . Use of phoA gene fusions to identify a pilus colonization factor coordinately regulated with cholera toxin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 84 : 2833 – 2837 . 4 . Nelson EJ , Harris JB , Glenn Morris J , Calderwood SB , Camilli A . 2009 . Cholera transmission : the host , pathogen and bacteriophage dynamic . Nature Reviews Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2204 . 5 . Camilli A , Beattie DT , Mekalanos JJ . 1994 . Use of genetic recombination as a reporter of gene expression . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 : 2634 – 2638 . 6 . Nielsen AT , Dolganov NA , Rasmussen T , Otto G , Miller MC , Felt SA , Torreilles S , Schoolnik GK . 2010 . A bistable switch and anatomical site control Vibrio cholerae virulence gene expression in the intestine . PLoS Pathog 6 : e1001102 . 7 . Higgins DE , Nazareno E , DiRita VJ . 1992 . The virulence gene activator ToxT from Vibrio cholerae is a member of the AraC family of transcriptional activators . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 174 . 21 . 6974 - 6980 . 1992 . 8 . Higgins DE , DiRita VJ . 1994 . Transcriptional control of toxT , a regulatory gene in the ToxR regulon of Vibrio cholerae . Mol Microbiol 14 : 17 – 29 . 9 . Krukonis ES , Yu RR , Dirita VJ . 2000 . The Vibrio cholerae ToxR / TcpP / ToxT virulence cascade : distinct roles for two membrane - localized transcriptional activators on a single promoter . Mol Microbiol 38 : 67 – 84 . 10 . DiRita VJ , Parsot C , Jander G , Mekalanos JJ . 1991 . Regulatory cascade controls virulence in Vibrio cholerae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88 : 5403 – 5407 . 11 . Miller VL , Taylor RK , Mekalanos JJ . 1987 . Cholera toxin transcriptional activator toxR is a transmembrane DNA binding protein . Cell 48 : 271 – 279 . 18 12 . Crawford JA , Krukonis ES , DiRita VJ . 2003 . Membrane localization of the ToxR winged - helix domain is required for TcpP - mediated virulence gene activation in Vibrio cholerae . Mol Microbiol 47 : 1459 – 1473 . 13 . Hase CC , Mekalanos JJ . 1998 . TcpP protein is a positive regulator of virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 95 . 2 . 730 . 14 . Carroll PA , Tashima KT , Rogers MB , DiRita VJ , Calderwood SB . 1997 . Phase variation in tcpH modulates expression of the ToxR regulon in Vibrio cholerae . Mol Microbiol 25 : 1099 – 1111 . 15 . Krukonis ES , DiRita VJ . 2003 . DNA binding and ToxR responsiveness by the wing domain of TcpP , an activator of virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae . Mol Cell 12 : 157 – 165 . 16 . Goss TJ , Seaborn CP , Gray MD , Krukonis ES . 2010 . Identification of the TcpP - Binding Site in the toxT Promoter of Vibrio cholerae and the Role of ToxR in TcpP - Mediated Activation . Infection and Immunity https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / iai . 00566 - 10 . 17 . Kovacikova G , Skorupski K . 2002 . Regulation of virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae by quorum sensing : HapR functions at the aphA promoter . Mol Microbiol 46 : 1135 – 1147 . 18 . Kovacikova G , Lin W , Skorupski K . 2010 . The LysR - Type Virulence Activator AphB Regulates the Expression of Genes in Vibrio cholerae in Response to Low pH and Anaerobiosis . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 00193 - 10 . 19 . Liu Z , Yang M , Peterfreund GL , Tsou AM , Selamoglu N , Daldal F , Zhong Z , Kan B , Zhu J . 2011 . Vibrio cholerae anaerobic induction of virulence gene expression is controlled by thiol - based switches of virulence regulator AphB . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 810 – 815 . 20 . Liu Z , Wang H , Zhou Z , Naseer N , Xiang F , Kan B , Goulian M , Zhu J . 2016 . Differential Thiol - Based Switches Jump - Start Vibrio cholerae Pathogenesis . Cell Rep 14 : 347 – 354 . 21 . Zhu J , Miller MB , Vance RE , Dziejman M , Bassler BL , Mekalanos JJ . 2002 . Quorum - sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 3129 – 3134 . 22 . Behari J , Stagon L , Calderwood SB . 2001 . pepA , a Gene Mediating pH Regulation of Virulence Genes in Vibrio cholerae . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 183 . 1 . 178 - 188 . 2001 . 23 . Skorupski K , Taylor RK . 1997 . Cyclic AMP and its receptor protein negatively regulate the coordinate expression of cholera toxin and toxin - coregulated pilus in Vibrio cholerae . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 1 . 265 . 24 . Kovacikova G , Skorupski K . 2001 . Overlapping binding sites for the virulence gene regulators AphA , AphB and cAMP - CRP at the Vibrio cholerae tcpPH promoter . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2001 . 02518 . x . 25 . Beck NA , Krukonis ES , DiRita VJ . 2004 . TcpH influences virulence gene expression in Vibrio cholerae by inhibiting degradation of the transcription activator TcpP . J Bacteriol 186 : 8309 – 8316 . 26 . Teoh WP , Matson JS , DiRita VJ . 2015 . Regulated intramembrane proteolysis of the virulence activator TcpP in Vibrio cholerae is initiated by the tail - specific protease ( Tsp ) . Mol Microbiol 97 : 822 – 831 . 19 27 . Matson JS , DiRita VJ . 2005 . Degradation of the membrane - localized virulence activator TcpP by the YaeL protease in Vibrio cholerae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 16403 – 16408 . 28 . Brown MS , Ye J , Rawson RB , Goldstein JL . 2000 . Regulated intramembrane proteolysis : a control mechanism conserved from bacteria to humans . Cell 100 : 391 – 398 . 29 . Peñas ADL , De Las Peñas A , Connolly L , Gross CA . 1997 . The σ E ‐ mediated response to extracytoplasmic stress in Escherichia coli is transduced by RseA and RseB , two negative regulators of σ E . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 1997 . 3611718 . x . 30 . Alba BM . 2002 . DegS and YaeL participate sequentially in the cleavage of RseA to activate the sigma E - dependent extracytoplasmic stress response . Genes & Development https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1008902 . 31 . Dartigalongue C , Missiakas D , Raina S . 2001 . Characterization of theEscherichia coliςERegulon . J ournal of Biological Chemistry https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . m100464200 . 32 . Rhodius VA , Suh WC , Nonaka G , West J , Gross CA . 2005 . Conserved and Variable Functions of the σE Stress Response in Related Geno mes . PLoS Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0040002 . 33 . Zhou R , Kroos L . 2005 . Serine proteases from two cell types target different components of a complex that governs regulated intramembrane proteolysis of pro - sigmaK during Bacillus subtilis development . Mol Microbiol 58 : 835 – 846 . 34 . Wakeley PR , Dorazi R , Hoa NT , Bowyer JR , Cutting SM . 2002 . Proteolysis of SpoIVB is a critical determinant in signalling of Pro - σK processing in Bacillus subt ilis . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2000 . 01946 . x . 35 . Kroos L , Yu YT . 2000 . Regulation of sigma factor activity during Bacillus subtilis development . Curr Opin Microbiol 3 : 553 – 560 . 36 . Cezairliyan BO , Sauer RT . 2007 . Inhibition of regulated proteolysis by RseB . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 3771 – 3776 . 37 . Wollmann P , Zeth K . 2007 . The structure of RseB : a sensor in periplasmic stress response of E . coli . J Mol Biol 372 : 927 – 941 . 38 . Wilken C , Kitzing K , Kurzbauer R , Ehrmann M , Clausen T . 2004 . Crystal structure of the DegS stress sensor : How a PDZ domain recognizes misfolded protein and activates a protease . Cell 117 : 483 – 494 . 39 . Zhou R , Kroos L . 2004 . BofA protein inhibits intramembrane proteolysis of pro - sigmaK in an intercompartmental signaling pathway during Bacillus subtilis sporulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 : 6385 – 6390 . 40 . Resnekov O . 1999 . Role of the sporulation protein BofA in regulating activation of the Bacillus subtilis developmental transcription factor sigmaK . J Bacteriol 181 : 5384 – 5388 . 41 . Ricca E , Cutting S , Losick R . 1992 . Characterization of bofA , a gene involved in intercompartmental regulation of pro - sigma K processing during sporulation in Bacillus subtilis . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 174 . 10 . 3177 - 3184 . 1992 . 42 . Bramkamp M , Lopez D . 2015 . Exploring the existence of lipid rafts in bacteria . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 79 : 81 – 100 . 20 43 . Toledo A , Huang Z , Coleman JL , London E , Benach JL . 2018 . Lipid rafts can form in the inner and outer membranes of Borrelia burgdorferi and have different properties and associated proteins . Mol Microbiol 108 : 63 – 76 . 44 . Huang Z , Zhang X - S , Blaser MJ , London E . 2019 . Helicobacter pylori lipids can form ordered membrane domains ( rafts ) . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 1861 : 183050 . 45 . Koch G , Wermser C , Acosta IC , Kricks L , Stengel ST , Yepes A , Lopez D . 2017 . Attenuating Staphylococcus aureus Virulence by Targeting Flotillin Protein Scaffold Activity . Cell Chem Biol 24 : 845 – 857 . e6 . 46 . Lopez D , Kolter R . 2010 . Functional microdomains in bacterial membranes . Genes & Development https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1945010 . 47 . Sezgin E , Levental I , Mayor S , Eggeling C . 2017 . The mystery of membrane organization : composition , regulation and roles of lipid rafts . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 : 361 – 374 . 48 . Nickels JD , Chatterjee S , Stanley CB , Qian S , Cheng X , Myles DAA , Standaert RF , Elkins JG , Katsaras J . 2017 . The in vivo structure of biological membranes and evidence for lipid domains . PLoS Biol 15 : e2002214 . 49 . Nicolau DV , Burrage K , Parton RG , Hancock JF . 2006 . Identifying Optimal Lipid Raft Characteristics Required To Promote Nanoscale Protein - Protein Interactions on the Plasma Membrane . Molecular and Cellular Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 26 . 1 . 313 - 323 . 2006 . 50 . Simons K , Vaz WLC . 2004 . Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 33 : 269 – 295 . 51 . Pike LJ . 2006 . Rafts defined : a report on the Keystone Symposium on Lipid Rafts and Cell Function . J Lipid Res 47 : 1597 – 1598 . 52 . Yu J , Fischman DA , Steck TL . 1973 . Selective solubilization of proteins and phospholipids from red blood cell membranes by nonionic detergents . Journal of Supramolecular Structure https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jss . 400010308 . 53 . Simons K , Ikonen E . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 . 54 . Ourisson G , Rohmer M . 1992 . Hopanoids . 2 . Biohopanoids : a novel class of bacterial lipids . Accounts of Chemical Research https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ar00021a004 . 55 . Sáenz JP , Grosser D , Bradley AS , Lagny TJ , Lavrynenko O , Broda M , Simons K . 2015 . Hopanoids as functional analogues of cholesterol in bacterial membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 : 11971 – 11976 . 56 . Matson JS , DiRita VJ . 2005 . Degradation of the membrane - localized virulence activator TcpP by the YaeL protease in Vibrio cholerae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 : 16403 – 16408 . 57 . Kameda K , Nunn WD . 1981 . Purification and characterization of acyl coenzyme A synthetase from Escherichia coli . J Biol Chem 256 : 5702 – 5707 . 58 . Klein K , Steinberg R , Fiethen B , Overath P . 1971 . Fatty acid degradation in Escherichia coli . An inducible system for the uptake of fatty acids and further characterization of old mutants . Eur J Biochem 19 : 442 – 450 . 21 59 . Nunn WD , Simons RW . 1978 . Transport of long - chain fatty acids by Escherichia coli : mapping and characterization of mutants in the fadL gene . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 75 : 3377 – 3381 . 60 . Nunn WD , Colburn RW , Black PN . 1986 . Transport of long - chain fatty acids in Escherichia coli . Evidence for role of fadL gene product as long - chain fatty acid receptor . J Biol Chem 261 : 167 – 171 . 61 . Giles DK , Hankins JV , Guan Z , Trent MS . 2011 . Remodeling of the Vibrio cholerae membrane by incorporation of exogenous fatty acids from host and aquatic environments . Mol Microbiol 79 : 716 – 728 . 62 . Moravec AR , Siv AW , Hobby CR , Lindsay EN , Norbash LV , Shults DJ , Symes SJK , Giles DK . 2017 . Exogenous Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Impact Membrane Remodeling and Affect Virulence Phenotypes among Pathogenic Vibrio Species . Appl Environ Microbiol 83 . 63 . Plecha SC , Withey JH . 2015 . Mechanism for Inhibition of Vibrio cholerae ToxT Activity by the Unsaturated Fatty Acid Components of Bile . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 02409 - 14 . 64 . Withey JH , Nag D , Plecha SC , Sinha R , Koley H . 2015 . Conjugated Linoleic Acid Reduces Cholera Toxin Production In Vitro and In Vivo by Inhibiting Vibrio cholerae ToxT Activity . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 59 : 7471 – 7476 . 65 . Brian BL , Gardner EW . 1968 . A simple procedure for detecting the presence of cyclopropane fatty acids in bacterial lipids . Appl Microbiol 16 : 549 – 552 . 66 . Guckert JB , Hood MA , White DC . 1986 . Phospholipid ester - linked fatty acid profile changes during nutrient deprivation of Vibrio cholerae : increases in the trans / cis ratio and proportions of cyclopropyl fatty acids . Appl Environ Microbiol 52 : 794 – 801 . 67 . Trajtenberg F , Altabe S , Larrieux N , Ficarra F , de Mendoza D , Buschiazzo A , Schujman GE . 2014 . Structural insights into bacterial resistance to cerulenin . FEBS J 281 : 2324 – 2338 . 68 . Porrini L , Cybulski LE , Altabe SG , Mansilla MC , de Mendoza D . 2014 . Cerulenin inhibits unsaturated fatty acids synthesis in Bacillus subtilis by modifying the input signal of DesK thermosensor . Microbiologyopen 3 : 213 – 224 . 69 . Buttke TM , Ingram LO . 1978 . Inhibition of unsaturated fatty acid synthesis in Escherichia coli by the antibiotic cerulenin . Biochemistry 17 : 5282 – 5286 . 70 . Goldberg I , Walker JR , Bloch K . 1973 . Inhibition of lipid synthesis in Escherichia coli cells by the antibiotic cerulenin . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 3 : 549 – 554 . 71 . Jiang Y , Morgan - Kiss RM , Campbell JW , Chan CH , Cronan JE . 2010 . Expression of Vibrio harveyi acyl - ACP synthetase allows efficient entry of exogenous fatty acids into the Escherichia coli fatty acid and lipid A synthetic pathways . Biochemistry 49 : 718 – 726 . 72 . Yao J , Rock CO . 2017 . Exogenous fatty acid metabolism in bacteria . Biochimie https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biochi . 2017 . 06 . 015 . 73 . Kim W , Fan Y - Y , Barhoumi R , Smith R , McMurray DN , Chapkin RS . 2008 . n - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Suppress the Localization and Activation of Signaling Proteins at the Immunological Synapse in Murine CD4 T Cells by Affecting Lipid Raft Formation . The Journal of Immunology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 181 . 9 . 6236 . 22 74 . Chapkin RS , Wang N , Fan Y - Y , Lupton JR , Prior IA . 2008 . Docosahexaenoic acid alters the size and distribution of cell surface microdomains . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Biomembranes https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2007 . 11 . 003 . 75 . Lorent JH , Diaz - Rohrer B , Lin X , Spring K , Gorfe AA , Levental KR , Levental I . 2017 . Structural determinants and functional consequences of protein affinity for membrane rafts . Nature Communications https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01328 - 3 . 76 . Schuck S , Honsho M , Ekroos K , Shevchenko A , Simons K . 2003 . Resistance of cell membranes to different detergents . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0631579100 . 77 . Lichtenberg D , Goñi FM , Heerklotz H . 2005 . Detergent - resistant membranes should not be identified with membrane rafts . Trends in Biochemical Sciences https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2005 . 06 . 004 . 78 . Calkins AL , Demey LM , Karslake JD , Donarski ED , Biteen JS , DiRita VJ . 2021 . Independent Promoter Recognition by TcpP Precedes Cooperative Promoter Activation by TcpP and ToxR . MBio 12 : e0221321 . 79 . Dorlo TPC , Balasegaram M , Beijnen JH , de Vries PJ . 2012 . Miltefosine : a review of its pharmacology and therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of leishmaniasis . J Antimicrob Chemother 67 : 2576 – 2597 . 80 . Luit AH van der , van der Luit AH , Budde M , Ruurs P , Verheij M , van Blitterswijk WJ . 2002 . Alkyl - lysophospholipid Accumulates in Lipid Rafts and Induces Apoptosis via Raft - dependent Endocytosis and Inhibition of Phosphatidylcholine Synthesis . Journal of Biological Chemistry https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . m203176200 . 81 . de Sá MM , Sresht V , Rangel - Yagui CO , Blankschtein D . 2015 . Understanding Miltefosine - Membrane Interactions Using Molecular Dynamics Simulations . Langmuir 31 : 4503 – 4512 . 82 . Castro BM , Fedorov A , Hornillos V , Delgado J , Acuña AU , Mollinedo F , Prieto M . 2013 . Edelfosine and miltefosine effects on lipid raft properties : membrane biophysics in cell death by antitumor lipids . J Phys Chem B 117 : 7929 – 7940 . 83 . Heinrich J , Wiegert T . 2009 . Regulated intramembrane proteolysis in the control of extracytoplasmic function sigma factors . Res Microbiol 160 : 696 – 703 . 84 . Lee YH , Kim JH , Bang IS , Park YK . 2008 . The membrane - bound transcriptional regulator CadC is activated by proteolytic cleavage in response to acid stress . J Bacteriol 190 : 5120 – 5126 . 85 . Miller VL , DiRita VJ , Mekalanos JJ . 1989 . Identification of toxS , a regulatory gene whose product enhances toxR - mediated activation of the cholera toxin promoter . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 171 . 3 . 1288 - 1293 . 1989 . 86 . Almagro - Moreno S , Root MZ , Taylor RK . 2015 . Role of ToxS in the proteolytic cascade of virulence regulator ToxR in Vibrio cholerae . Mol Microbiol 98 : 963 – 976 . 87 . Almagro - Moreno S , Kim TK , Skorupski K , Taylor RK . 2015 . Proteolysis of virulence regulator ToxR is associated with entry of Vibrio cholerae into a dormant state . PLoS Genet 11 : e1005145 . 88 . Lembke M , Höfler T , Walter A , Tutz S , Fengler V , Schild S , Reidl J . 2020 . Host stimuli and operator binding sites controlling protein interactions between virulence master regulator 23 ToxR and ToxS in Vibrio cholerae . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / mmi . 14510 . 89 . Lembke M , Pennetzdorfer N , Tutz S , Koller M , Vorkapic D , Zhu J , Schild S , Reidl J . 2018 . Proteolysis of ToxR is controlled by cysteine - thiol redox state and bile salts inVibrio cholerae . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / mmi . 14125 . 90 . Midgett CR , Swindell RA , Pellegrini M , Jon Kull F . 2020 . A disulfide constrains the ToxR periplasmic domain structure , altering its interactions with ToxS and bile - salts . Scientific Reports https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 66050 - 5 . 91 . Midgett CR , Almagro - Moreno S , Pellegrini M , Taylor RK , Skorupski K , Jon Kull F . 2017 . Bile salts and alkaline pH reciprocally modulate the interaction between the periplasmic domains ofVibrio choleraeToxR and ToxS . Molecular Microbiology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / mmi . 13699 . 92 . Burdge GC . 2006 . Metabolism of α - linolenic acid in humans . Prostaglandins , Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . plefa . 2006 . 05 . 013 . 93 . Aluko RE . 2012 . Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals . Springer Science & Business Media . 94 . Destaillats F , Trottier JP , Galvez JMG , Angers P . 2005 . Analysis of α - Linolenic Acid Biohydrogenation Intermediates in Milk Fat with Emphasis on Conjugated Linolenic Acids . Journal of Dairy Science https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3168 / jds . s0022 - 0302 ( 05 ) 73006 - x . 95 . Plourde M , Destaillats F , Chouinard PY , Angers P . 2007 . Conjugated α - Linolenic Acid Isomers in Bovine Milk and Muscle . Journal of Dairy Science https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3168 / jds . 2007 - 0157 . 96 . Bu DP , Wang JQ , Dhiman TR , Liu SJ . 2007 . Effectiveness of Oils Rich in Linoleic and Linolenic Acids to Enhance Conjugated Linoleic Acid in Milk from Dairy Cows . Journal of Dairy Science https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3168 / jds . s0022 - 0302 ( 07 ) 71585 - 0 . 97 . Burdge GC , Calder PC . 2005 . Conversion of α - linolenic acid to longer - chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in human adults . Reproduction Nutrition Development https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1051 / rnd : 2005047 . 98 . Yang B , Chen H , Stanton C , Chen YQ , Zhang H , Chen W . 2017 . Mining bifidobacteria from the neonatal gastrointestinal tract for conjugated linolenic acid production . Bioengineered 8 : 232 – 238 . 99 . Valenzuela R , Bascuñán K , Chamorro R , Barrera C , Sandoval J , Puigrredon C , Parraguez G , Orellana P , Gonzalez V , Valenzuela A . 2015 . Modification of Docosahexaenoic Acid Composition of Milk from Nursing Women Who Received Alpha Linolenic Acid from Chia Oil during Gestation and Nursing . Nutrients 7 : 6405 – 6424 . 100 . Oosting A , Verkade HJ , Kegler D , van de Heijning BJM , van der Beek EM . 2015 . Rapid and selective manipulation of milk fatty acid composition in mice through the maternal diet during lactation . J Nutr Sci 4 : e19 . 101 . Dupertuis YM , Meguid MM , Pichard C . 2007 . Colon cancer therapy : new perspectives of nutritional manipulations using polyunsaturated fatty acids . Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / mco . 0b013e3281e2c9d4 . 102 . Larsson SC , Kumlin M , Ingelman - Sundberg M , Wolk A . 2004 . Dietary long - chain n−3 fatty acids for the prevention of cancer : a review of potential mechanisms . The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ajcn / 79 . 6 . 935 . 24 103 . Coakley M , Banni S , Johnson MC , Mills S , Devery R , Fitzgerald G , Paul Ross R , Stanton C . 2009 . Inhibitory Effect of Conjugated α - Linolenic Acid from Bifidobacteria of Intestinal Origin on SW480 Cancer Cells . Lipids https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11745 - 008 - 3269 - z . 104 . Suzuki R , Noguchi R , Ota T , Abe M , Miyashita K , Kawada T . 2001 . Cytotoxic effect of conjugated trienoic fatty acids on mouse tumor and human monocytic leukemia cells . Lipids https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11745 - 001 - 0746 - 0 . 105 . Wahle KWJ , Heys SD , Rotondo D . 2004 . Conjugated linoleic acids : are they beneficial or detrimental to health ? Progress in Lipid Research https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . plipres . 2004 . 08 . 002 . 106 . Tricon S , Burdge GC , Williams CM , Calder PC , Yaqoob P . 2005 . The effects of conjugated linoleic acid on human health - related outcomes . Proceedings of the Nutrition Society https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1079 / pns2005418 . 107 . Bhattacharya A , Banu J , Rahman M , Causey J , Fernandes G . 2006 . Biological effects of conjugated linoleic acids in health and disease . The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jnutbio . 2006 . 02 . 009 . 108 . Leikin - Frenkel A , Liraz - Zaltsman S , Hollander KS , Atrakchi D , Ravid O , Rand D , Kandel - Kfir M , Israelov H , Cohen H , Kamari Y , Shaish A , Harats D , Schnaider - Beeri M , Cooper I . 2021 . Dietary alpha linolenic acid in pregnant mice and during weaning increases brain docosahexaenoic acid and improves recognition memory in the offspring . J Nutr Biochem 91 : 108597 . 109 . Zhuang P , Shou Q , Wang W , He L , Wang J , Chen J , Zhang Y , Jiao J . 2018 . Essential Fatty Acids Linoleic Acid and α - Linolenic Acid Sex - Dependently Regulate Glucose Homeostasis in Obesity . Mol Nutr Food Res 62 : e1800448 . 110 . Kovacikova G , Lin W , Taylor RK , Skorupski K . 2017 . The Fatty Acid Regulator FadR Influences the Expression of the Virulence Cascade in the El Tor Biotype of Vibrio cholerae by Modulating the Levels of ToxT via Two Different Mechanisms . J Bacteriol 199 . 111 . Shi W , Kovacikova G , Lin W , Taylor RK , Skorupski K , Kull FJ . 2015 . The 40 - residue insertion in Vibrio cholerae FadR facilitates binding of an additional fatty acyl - CoA ligand . Nat Commun 6 : 6032 . 112 . Feng Y , Cronan JE . 2011 . The Vibrio cholerae fatty acid regulatory protein , FadR , represses transcription of plsB , the gene encoding the first enzyme of membrane phospholipid biosynthesis . Mol Microbiol 81 : 1020 – 1033 . 113 . Yang S , Xi D , Wang X , Li Y , Li Y , Yan J , Cao B . 2020 . Vibrio cholerae VC1741 ( PsrA ) enhances the colonization of the pathogen in infant mice intestines in the presence of the long - chain fatty acid , oleic acid . Microb Pathog 147 : 104443 . 114 . VanDussen KL , Funkhouser - Jones LJ , Akey ME , Schaefer DA , Ackman K , Riggs MW , Stappenbeck TS , Sibley LD . 2020 . Neonatal Mouse Gut Metabolites Influence Cryptosporidium parvum Infection in Intestinal Epithelial Cells . MBio 11 . 115 . Chatterjee E , Chowdhury R . 2013 . Reduced virulence of the Vibrio cholerae fadD mutant is due to induction of the extracytoplasmic stress response . Infect Immun 81 : 3935 – 3941 . 116 . Ray S , Chatterjee E , Chatterjee A , Paul K , Chowdhury R . 2011 . A fadD mutant of Vibrio cholerae is impaired in the production of virulence factors and membrane localization of the virulence regulatory protein TcpP . Infect Immun 79 : 258 – 266 . 25 117 . Komura N , Suzuki KGN , Ando H , Konishi M , Koikeda M , Imamura A , Chadda R , Fujiwara TK , Tsuboi H , Sheng R , Cho W , Furukawa K , Furukawa K , Yamauchi Y , Ishida H , Kusumi A , Kiso M . 2016 . Raft - based interactions of gangliosides with a GPI - anchored receptor . Nat Chem Biol 12 : 402 – 410 . 118 . Lorent J , Diaz - Rohrer BB , Lin X , Gorfe A , Levental KR , Levental I . 2018 . Structural Determinants and Functional Consequences of Protein Association with Membrane Domains . Biophysical Journal https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2017 . 11 . 2103 . 119 . Li N , Zheng Y , Shi M , Xue Y , Zhang T , Ji S , Yang M . 2019 . TcpP L152A Constitutively Activating Virulence Gene Expression in Vibrio cholerae . Curr Microbiol 76 : 583 – 589 . 120 . Chatterjee A , Dutta PK , Chowdhury R . 2007 . Effect of fatty acids and cholesterol present in bile on expression of virulence factors and motility of Vibrio cholerae . Infect Immun 75 : 1946 – 1953 . 121 . Lim MS , Ng D , Zong Z , Arvai AS , Taylor RK , Tainer JA , Craig L . 2010 . Vibrio cholerae El Tor TcpA crystal structure and mechanism for pilus - mediated microcolony formation . Mol Microbiol 77 : 755 – 770 . 122 . Thomson JJ , Withey JH . 2014 . Bicarbonate increases binding affinity of Vibrio cholerae ToxT to virulence gene promoters . J Bacteriol 196 : 3872 – 3880 . 123 . Abuaita BH , Withey JH . 2009 . Bicarbonate Induces Vibrio cholerae virulence gene expression by enhancing ToxT activity . Infect Immun 77 : 4111 – 4120 . 124 . Thomson JJ , Plecha SC , Withey JH . 2015 . A small unstructured region in Vibrio cholerae ToxT mediates the response to positive and negative effectors and ToxT proteolysis . J Bacteriol 197 : 654 – 668 . 125 . 2016 . LB Liquid Medium . Cold Spring Harbor Protocols https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . rec090928 . 126 . Skorupski K , Taylor RK . 1996 . Positive selection vectors for allelic exchange . Gene https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0378 - 1119 ( 95 ) 00793 - 8 . 127 . Lycke N , Tsuji T , Holmgren J . 1992 . The adjuvant effect ofVibrio cholerae andEscherichia coli heat - labile enterotoxins is linked to their ADP - ribosyltransferase activity . European Journal of Immunology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / eji . 1830220915 . 128 . Anthouard R , DiRita VJ . 2013 . Small - molecule inhibitors of toxT expression in Vibrio cholerae . MBio 4 . 129 . Baselski V , Briggs R , Parker C . 1977 . Intestinal fluid accumulation induced by oral challenge with Vibrio cholerae or cholera toxin in infant mice . Infect Immun 15 : 704 – 712 . 130 . Schmittgen TD , Livak KJ . 2008 . Analyzing real - time PCR data by the comparative CT method . Nature Protocols https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2008 . 73 . 131 . Amin Marashi SM , Rajabnia R , Imani Fooladi AA , Hojati Z , Moghim S , Nasr Esfahani B . 2013 . Determination of ctxAB expression in Vibrio cholerae Classical and El Tor strains using Real - Time PCR . Int J Mol Cell Med 2 : 9 – 13 . 132 . Miller JH , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . 1974 . Experiments in Molecular Genetics . 26 133 . Quan S , Hiniker A , Collet J - F , Bardwell JCA . 2013 . Isolation of Bacteria Envelope Proteins . Methods in Molecular Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 245 - 2 _ 22 . 134 . Jiang L , He L , Fountoulakis M . 2004 . Comparison of protein precipitation methods for sample preparation prior to proteomic analysis . Journal of Chromatography A https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chroma . 2003 . 10 . 029 . 135 . Wang Z , Benning C . 2011 . Arabidopsis thaliana polar glycerolipid profiling by thin layer chromatography ( TLC ) coupled with gas - liquid chromatography ( GLC ) . J Vis Exp https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 2518 . 136 . Bryant JA , Morris FC , Knowles TJ , Maderbocus R , Heinz E , Boelter G , Alodaini D , Colyer A , Wotherspoon PJ , Staunton KA , Jeeves M , Browning DF , Sevastsyanovich YR , Wells TJ , Rossiter AE , Bavro VN , Sridhar P , Ward DG , Chong Z - S , Goodall EC , Icke C , Teo AC , Chng S - S , Roper DI , Lithgow T , Cunningham AF , Banzhaf M , Overduin M , Henderson IR . 2020 . Structure of dual BON - domain protein DolP identifies phospholipid binding as a new mechanism for protein localisation . Elife 9 . 137 . Dombek KM , Ingram LO . 1984 . Effects of ethanol on the Escherichia coli plasma membrane . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 157 . 1 . 233 - 239 . 1984 . 138 . Shigapova N , Török Z , Balogh G , Goloubinoff P , Vígh L , Horváth I . 2005 . Membrane fluidization triggers membrane remodeling which affects the thermotolerance in Escherichia coli . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 328 : 1216 – 1223 . 139 . DiRita VJ , Mekalanos JJ . 1991 . Periplasmic interaction between two membrane regulatory proteins , ToxR and ToxS , results in signal transduction and transcriptional activation . Cell https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90206 - e . 140 . Sandkvist M , Hough LP , Bagdasarian MM , Bagdasarian M . 1999 . Direct Interaction of the EpsL and EpsM Proteins of the General Secretion Apparatus in Vibrio cholerae . Journal of Bacteriology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / jb . 181 . 10 . 3129 - 3135 . 1999 . 27 Figures and Tables Figure 1 : TcpH transmembrane and periplasmic constructs protect TcpP , support toxT expression , and virulence factor production . A ) Diagram of TcpH transmembrane constructs ( EpsM TcpH and ToxS TcpH ) and periplasmic construct ( TcpH ∆ 119 - 103 ) . TcpH has a single transmembrane domain ( also a Sec signal sequence ) , at its N - terminus , and two periplasmic cysteine residues ( C114 and C132 ) , represented by “s” . The transmembrane domain of TcpH was 28 replaced with the transmembrane domain of ToxS ( ToxS TcpH ) and EpsM ( EpsM TcpH ) as both ToxS and EpsM are known to be localized to the cytoplasmic membrane with similar domain topology as TcpH ( 139 , 140 ) . In - frame deletion of periplasmic residues are indicated by a dashed line . B - D ) in vitro characterization of TcpH transmembrane and periplasmic chromosomal constructs grown under virulence inducing conditions . B ) Western blots of whole - cell lysates probed with α - TcpP ( top ) , α - TcpH ( middle ) , and α - TcpA ( bottom ) . C ) Average toxT transcription of three biological replicates , determined via ∆∆CT method . toxT fold change is relative to WT V . cholerae . B ) CtxB levels , measured via ELISA , in culture supernatants collected from cultures incubated with V . cholerae cells cultured in virulence inducing conditions for 24hrs . Error bars represent standard error of the mean . See Figure S1B for the unmodified western blots in panel B . E ) Western blots of spheroplast fractions ( cytoplasm and cytoplasmic membrane fractions ) . TcpH transmembrane constructs ( ToxS TcpH and EpsM TcpH ) and native TcpH were expressed from pBAD18 in Δ tcpH Δ yaeL background under virulence inducing conditions for 6hrs . All strains , excluding WT , are Δ tcpH Δ yaeL . Δ tcpH * harbors pBAD18 ( empty vector ) . 29 Figure 2 : TcpH transmembrane domain is critical in vivo . A ) Colony forming units ( CFU’s ) per gram of 3 - 6 day old infant mouse intestine 21hrs post infection ( 1x10 ^ 6 inoculum dose ) . The horizontal line indicates the average CFU / gm of intestine and is an average of 5 - 11biological replicates . B and C ) Fluid accumulation and CFU’s per gram of infant mouse intestine 18 hrs after infection ( 1x10 ^ 8 inoculum dose ) . D ) Relative TcpA levels after 21hrs of aerobic growth in sterile adult mice fecal media ( 9 % w / v ) . TcpA levels were determined via densitometry , calculated using ImageJ . Averages represent three or more biological replicates . Error bars represent standard error of the mean in panels A - C and standard deviation of the mean in panel D . A mann - whitney U test was used to determine statistical significance in panel A . A two - tailed Student’s t - test was used to determine statistical significance in panel B and C . A one - tailed Student’s t - test was used to determine statistical significance in panel D . * Indicates a p - value less than 0 . 05 . 30 Figure 3 : α - Linolenic acid stimulates a TcpH transmembrane dependent increase in toxT transcription , elevated TcpP levels , and does not increase tcpP expression . A ) toxT expression in WT ( black bars ) and EpsM TcpH ( gray bars ) was determined using a plasmid based toxT : : GFP transcription reporter . toxT transcription was determined by measuring GFP fluorescence ( excitation 488 nm and emission 515 nm ) and optical density ( 600 nm ) . The data here are an average of three or more biological replicates , and error bars represent the standard error of the mean . B ) TcpP levels in WT ( black bars ) and EpsM TcpH ( gray bars ) relative to WT cells cultured under virulence inducing conditions . Densitometry , calculated by ImageJ , was used to determine relative abundance of TcpP . Error bars represent standard error of the mean . A and B ) Two - tailed Student’s t - test was used to determine statistical significance . * indicates a p - value of less than 0 . 05 . C ) tcpP transcription in WT V . cholerae cells using RT - qPCR , determined via ∆∆C T method . tcpP transcription is relative to WT Vir Ind . Error bars represent standard error of the mean . 31 Figure 4 : TcpP and TcpH abundance increases in detergent resistant membranes in the presence of α - linolenic acid . A ) Percentage of total TcpP molecules within the Triton soluble ( i . e . , TS ; lipid disordered ) and Triton insoluble ( i . e . , TI ; lipid ordered ) fractions in WT cells . Percentage of TcpP within the TI and TS fractions was calculated by normalizing to the total amount TcpP in both the TI and TS fractions . B and C ) Relative levels of TcpH and EpsM TcpH within the TI and TS membrane fractions . A - C ) TcpP and TcpH levels were measured via densitometry using ImageJ . B and C ) Black bars indicate TI and TS membrane fractions collected by spheroplast lysis , and gray bars indicate TI and TS samples collected using a gentle freeze thaw lysis . Cells that were cultured in α - linolenic acid ( LA , 500µM ) are indicated by + . TcpH and EpsM TcpH levels were normalized to a non - specific band ( 19KDa ) that is equally distributed within TI and TS fractions ( Figure S4E ) . D ) Representative western blots of EpsM TcpH TI and TS membrane fractions . Black arrows mark the TcpH bands , and red arrows mark the non - specific band that serves as a loading control . Error bars represent the standard error of the mean . A two - tailed student ' s T - test was used to determine statistical significance . * indicates a p - value less than 0 . 05 , and ns indicates a lack of statistical significance . 32 Figure 5 : TcpP and TcpH interaction is critical for TcpH - dependent inhibition of RIP . A and B ) Co - affinity precipitation of ectopically expressed tcpP - His - HsV ( A ) , Hsv - His - tcpP ( B ) . The data here represent three biological replicates . Triton soluble ( TS ) . C ) Ectopic expression of Hsv - His - tcpP and tcpP - His - HsV in Δ yaeL cells under virulence inducing conditions . Hsv - His - TcpP is more sensitive to RIP than TcpP - His - Hsv , as seen by accumulation of TcpP degradation intermediates between 26 and 19 kDa . A - C ) tcpP constructs were all ectopically expressed from pBAD18 using arabinose ( Ara 0 . 1 % w / v ) . + indicates arabinose was added to the culture . Samples presented here represent three biological replicates . 33 Figure 6 : α - Linolenic acid stimulates co - association of TcpP and TcpH within detergent resistant membranes promoting TcpH - dependent inhibition of RIP . A ) Under virulence inducing ( Vir Ind ) conditions TcpP and TcpH molecules are associated within Triton insoluble ( blue ; TI ) and Triton soluble ( red ; TS ) membrane domains . B ) In the presence of exogenous α - linolenic acid , V . cholerae cells uptake α - linolenic acid ( via VolA , FadL ) and utilize it directly for phospholipid remodeling via addition of coenzyme A ( CoA ) , via FadD ( 57 – 60 ) . This leads to changes in the overall phospholipid profile of V . cholerae , indicated by the blue and orange phospholipids ( 58 – 61 ) . Under these conditions , a majority of TcpP and TcpH molecules transition to the TI membranes leading to enhanced in hibition of RIP by TcpH . The net result of α - linolenic acid supplementation is an increase in toxT transcription , indicated by an increase in red toxT mRNA . C ) In the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract , ToxT activity is thought to be inhibited by unsaturated fatty acids , and thus inhibits ToxT - dependent virulence factor expression ( 63 , 64 , 116 , 122 – 124 ) . D ) Near the surface of epithelial cells , bicarbonate is actively secreted from intestinal epithelial cells and , as such , the concentration of bicarbonate is elevated , including the crypt of intestinal villi ( 122 – 124 ) . As Bicarbonate is known to stimulate ToxT activity , ToxT - dependent virulence gene expression is thought to be stimulated near epithelial cells ( 122 - 124 ) .