For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us The Art of Problem Solving : Accompanied by Ackoff ' s Fables Russell L . Ackoff Paperback ISBN : 978 - 0 - 471 - 85808 - 9 March 1987 $ 47 . 00 DESCRIPTION " A witty , literate and , most of all , convincing reflection . [ Ackoff ] shines an often bright light into corners where problems hide , showing the manager how to understand the consequences of his own behavior ; identify real , rather than supposed , elements of problems ; perceive another ' s aims ; determine what is controllable ; and deal with other nettlesome factors . " - - Inc . The Art of Problem Solving Russ Ackoff - - author , consultant , and teacher extraordinaire . During his long career , he has shown thousands of managers , architects , engineers , attorneys , advertising people , software developers , and scientists the way to more creative , artful problem solving . This new paper edition of The Art of Problem Solving is perhaps the best example of Ackoff in action . Step by step , this practical guide shows you how to develop an understanding of the art of creative thinking and the design of creative solutions . Using " Ackoff ' s Fables " - - humorous yet eminently practical parables , based on real problems by real managers - - you ' ll see why solving a problem seldom solves the problem , but why approaching it from a new , unorthodox angle often does . The result is vintage Ackoff - - controversial , funny , and always on target . If you like to dig beyond simple solutions - - to imaginative solutions that work - - this book is for you . ABOUT THE AUTHOR RUSSELL L . ACKOFF is the author of Management in Small Doses , Creating the Corporate Future , Redesigning the Future , and many other books . He recently founded INTERACT : The Institute for Interactive Management , a non - profit consulting company . Formerly , he taught at the University of Pennsylvania ' s Wharton School . For additional product details , please visit https : / / www . wiley . com / en - us