International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology , Volume 302 ISSN 1937 - 6448 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 407699 - 0 . 00003 - 0 187 © 2013 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . CHAPTER THREE Dynamin : Expanding Its Scope to the Cytoskeleton Manisha Menon * , Dorothy A . Schafer * , † , 1 * Department of Biology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA , USA † Department of Cell Biology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA , USA 1 Corresponding author : E - mail : das9w @ virginia . edu Contents 1 . Introduction 188 2 . Dynamin—AMembraneRemodelingGTPase 188 2 . 1 . DynaminStructureandBiochemistry 190 2 . 1 . 1 . Dynamin GTPase Cycle 191 2 . 1 . 2 . Dynamin’s Pleckstrin Homology ( PH ) Domain Mediates Interactions with Phospholipids 191 2 . 1 . 3 . C - terminal , Proline - Rich Domain 192 2 . 2 . ExperimentalApproachestoExploreNovelDynaminFunctions 193 3 . ActionsofDynaminandActinFilamentsduringEndocytosis 194 4 . BeyondEndocytosis : DynaminasaCytoskeletalRegulator 197 4 . 1 . DynaminandMicrotubules 198 4 . 2 . LinksbetweenDynaminandF - actinNetworks 199 4 . 2 . 1 . Podosomes and Invadopodia 200 4 . 2 . 2 . F - actin Comets and Pedestals 201 4 . 2 . 3 . Dynamin and Other Dendritic Actin Networks : Lamellipodia , Cortical Ruffles and Phagocytic Cups 203 4 . 2 . 4 . Dynamin and Actomyosin Networks 203 4 . 2 . 5 . Neurites , Growth Cones and Dendritic Spines 204 4 . 2 . 6 . Dynamin Action during Whole - Cell Migration and Tumor - Cell Invasion 205 4 . 3 . MolecularMechanismsofActinFilamentRegulationbyDynamin 206 4 . 3 . 1 . Dynamin and Cortactin 207 4 . 3 . 2 . Direct Binding of Actin Filaments by Dynamin 208 5 . DynaminMutations , CytoskeletonandHumanDisease 209 6 . ConcludingRemarks 210 References 211 Abstract ThelargeGTPasedynaminiswellknownforitsactionsonbuddedcellularmem - branes to generate vesicles ,  most often ,  clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . The scopeofcellularprocessesinwhichdynamin - mediatedvesicleformationoccurs ,  has expanded to include secretory vesicle formation at the Golgi ,  from other ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 188 endosomes and nonclathrin structures ,  such as caveolae ,  as well as membrane remodeling during exocytosis and vesicle fusion .  An intriguing new facet of dynamin’ssphereofinfluenceisthecytoskeleton . Cytoskeletalfilamentnetworks maintaincellshape , providecellmovement , executecelldivisionandorchestrate vesicletrafficking . Recentevidencesupportsthehypothesisthatdynamininflu - encesactinfilamentsandmicrotubulesviamechanismsthatareindependentof itsmembrane - remodelingactivities . Thischapterdiscussesthisemergingevidence andconsiderspossiblemechanismsofaction . 1 . INTRODUCTION The cytoskeleton forms a dynamic structural framework that works in concert with cellular membranes and the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) to maintain cell shape and tissue integrity , execute migration , morphogenesis and cell division , and orchestrate protein and membrane trafficking . Several hun - dred proteins regulate the dynamic interactions of cytoskeletal filaments and membranes during fundamental cellular processes . The large GTPase dynamin , which is best known for its activities that remodel membranes , is emerging as a regulator of cytoskeletal filaments . Whereas dynamin is soundly established to generate vesicles during endocytosis ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ; Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ; Ramachandran , 2011 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) , its original discovery as a microtubule - binding pro - tein ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) , together with early observations of defective neurite extension and growth cone migration by cultured neurons from Drosophila carrying a defective dynamin gene ( Kim and Wu , 1987 ) , provided early hints that dynamins may also influence processes that depend on cytoskel - etal filaments . Over subsequent decades , insights into the abilities of dynamin to influence the dynamics of select actin filament networks and microtubules , and of its possible molecular mechanisms of action , have emerged . In this chapter , we highlight those actin - and microtubule - dependent processes in which a regulatory role for dynamin is supported . An outstanding challenge is to demonstrate unequivocally that dynamin influences cytoskeletal networks independently from its well - characterized functions in endocytosis . To provide a contextual framework , we begin with a succinct review of the membrane - remodeling activities of dynamin during endocytosis and exocytosis . 2 . DYNAMIN—A MEMBRANE REMODELING GTPase Endocytosis is the process whereby contents of the plasma membrane and extracellular fluids are delivered to the intracellular milieu via vesicles DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 189 formed at the plasma membrane ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ) . Endocytosis occurs by many different mechanisms , including clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , clathrin - independent endocytosis , macropinocytosis , phagocytosis and caveolin - dependent endo - cytosis . Of these many different routes , the mechanisms by which clathrin mediates endocytosis is best understood . During CME , adapter proteins bind and cluster membrane receptors and , together with assembled clath - rin lattices , initiate the inward budding of the plasma membrane ; as the membrane invaginates more deeply , it remains tethered via a thin , tubular membrane neck . Finally , dynamin - mediated scission of the thin , tubular tether releases a vesicle containing the internalized membrane and fluid components to the cytoplasm ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ; Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ; Schmid and Frolov , 2011 ) . Several nonmutually exclusive models for the mechanisms by which dynamin catalyzes scission have been proposed . A common feature of all models is the assembly of dynamin as a helical polymer around the thin , tubular necks that tether deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits to the plasma membrane . Some models invoke GTP hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes within the assembled dynamin polymer that mechanically constricts , extends or twists the membrane necks , leading to scission and vesicle forma - tion ( Danino et al . , 2004 ; Roux et al . , 2006 ; Stowell et al . , 1999 ; Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ) . Recent evidence from structural studies supports the idea that a mechanochemical powerstroke may be involved ( Chappie et al . , 2011 ) . Another model suggests that GTP hydrolysis - dependent cycles of assembly and disassembly of dynamin oligomers on thin necks subsequently lead to membrane scission , perhaps by locally destabilizing structure at membrane interfaces of the neck ( Bashkirov et al . , 2008 ; Pucadyil and Schmid , 2008 ) . An outstanding question is how GTP hydrolysis , the associated conforma - tional changes within the dynamin collar or its cycles of assembly and disas - sembly are linked to membrane scission . More recently , dynamin was implicated in membrane remodeling dur - ing exocytosis ( Anantharam et al . , 2011 ; Fulop et al . , 2008 ; Gonzalez - Jamett et al . , 2010 ; Holroyd et al . , 2002 ; Jaiswal et al . , 2009 ) . During chromaffin granule secretion , the rate of dynamin GTPase activity controlled the rate of fusion pore expansion and thereby , regulated the kinetics and amount of released secretory vesicle content ( Anantharam et al . , 2011 ) . Mutant dyna - min with an accelerated rate of GTP hydrolysis increased the rate of fusion pore expansion and the frequency of full fusion with the plasma membrane , whereas mutant dynamin with decreased rates of GTP hydrolysis stabilized ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 190 fusion pores and delayed expansion to full fusion . How the GTPase cycle modulates fusion pore expansion is not known . The GTPase cycle may control interactions of dynamin with other components of the fusion machinery , such as synaptophysin ( Gonzalez - Jamett et al . , 2010 ) . Alterna - tively , a ssembled dynamin oligomers may restrict fusion pore expansion with cycles of GTP hydrolysis regulating the half - life of assembled dynamin at the fusion pore and , thereby , fusion pore dynamics ( Anantharam et al . , 2011 ) . The cortical actin network also modulates fusion pore dynamics ( Jaiswal et al . , 2009 ) and a function for dynamin in regulating actin filaments at sites of exocytosis has not been ruled out . The ability of dynamin to regulate fusion pores during exocytosis expands the repertoire of cellular processes influenced by this versatile , membrane - remodeling GTPase . 2 . 1 . Dynamin Structure and Biochemistry Dynamin is a large GTPase composed of 100 kDa subunits that asso - ciate as tetramers . Tetrameric dynamin further oligomerizes to form a helical polymer around tubular templates , such as the necks of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits . Interestingly , dynamin also forms heli - cal polymers around other structures with the appropriate electrostatic charge and diameter , such as microtubules and bundles of actin fila - ments ( Gu et al . , 2010 ; Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) . Dynamin also assem - bles as stable ring - like structures in the absence of tubular templates ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) . Recent X - ray crystallographic studies of nearly full - length dynamin1 revealed a dimeric structure composed of two extended , antiparallel dynamin polypeptides with a subunit – subunit interface situated near the base of the central “stalk” domain and the globular , N - terminal GTP - binding G - domains oriented at opposite ends of the extended dimer ( Faelber et al . , 2011 ; Ford et al . , 2011 ) . A pleck - strin homology ( PH ) domain was situated in a foot - like globular struc - ture at the base of each stalk , creating the membrane - binding face of the extended dimer . Not yet examined is the structure of the C - terminal proline - rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin , however , it is expected to proj - ect toward the G - domain surface , opposite the membrane - binding sur - face . Through these major domains ( G - domain , stalk , PH domain and PRD ) , dynamin executes several activities , including hydrolysis of GTP , self - assembly via interactions between dynamin stalk regions , binding to anionic lipids via the PH domain , and interactions with a growing list of proteins that bind primarily via the PRD . Each of these domains and activities is required for vesicle scission by dynamin . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 191 2 . 1 . 1 . Dynamin GTPase Cycle Unassembled dynamin binds GTP with low affinity and exhibits a low basal rate of GTP hydrolysis that is stimulated upon self - assembly as oligo - mers ( Stowell et al . , 1999 ; Warnock and Schmid , 1996 ) . Recent biochemical and structural studies indicated that assembly - stimulated GTP hydrolysis results from interactions of G - domains between adjacent rungs of the heli - cal dynamin polymer assembled around a tubular template ( Chappie et al . , 2010 , 2011 ) . Several PRD - interacting proteins , including Grb2 ( Barylko et al . , 1998 ) , cortactin ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) and SNX9 ( Soulet et al . , 2005 ) stimulate the basal rate of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin . The importance of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin for membrane remodeling was first highlighted by electron microscopic images of synaptic membrane preparations incubated in the presence of GTP γ S , a nonhydrolyzable GTP analog ( Takei et al . , 1995 ) . Elongated mem - brane tubules decorated by electron - dense ring - like structures formed in such preparations ; the tubules also labeled with anti - dynamin antibod - ies . Subsequent characterization of mutant dynamin proteins defective in GTP binding , the GTP hydrolysis catalytic rate or assembly - stimulated GTPase activity supported the hypothesis that GTP hydrolysis by dyna - min powered membrane scission during CME ( Marks et al . , 2001 ; Song et al . , 2004a , 2004b ) . Cryo - electron microscopy of dynamin assembled on lipid tubules suggested that GTP hydrolysis - dependent conformational changes within the assembled dynamin polymer were coupled to con - striction of membrane tubules , leading ultimately to membrane scission ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ; Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ) . Indeed , recent structures of a dynamin1 fusion protein obtained in the presence of either nonhydrolyzable or transition - state guanine nucleotides provides evidence of a GTPase - dependent powerstroke ( Chappie et al . , 2009 , 2011 ) . Whether the putative powerstroke exerts forces that drive scission is not yet known . 2 . 1 . 2 . Dynamin’s Pleckstrin Homology ( PH ) Domain Mediates Interactions with Phospholipids Positively charged amino acids within the dynamin PH domain mediate binding to acidic phospholipids , particularly phosphoinositides ( Ferguson et al . , 1994 ; Zheng et al . , 1996 ) . While the affinity of a single PH domain for anionic lipids is low , cooperative binding by oligomeric dynamin increases the avidity ( Klein et al . , 1998 ) . Additionally , the PH domain appears to play an active role in vesicle scission . Dynamin binding to liposomes was cou - pled to partial insertion into the membrane of a hydrophobic variable loop , ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 192 VL1 , of the PH domain ( Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ; Ramachandran and Schmid , 2008 ) . Membrane insertion by VL1 may sense or generate mem - brane curvature along tubular membranes or destabilize bilayer structure to promote membrane scission ( Bethoney et al . , 2009 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2009 ) . Whereas the primary structure of the PH domains of dynamin1 and dynamin2 are quite similar , these dynamin isoforms exhibit distinct abilities to assemble and generate curvature on lipid templates ( Liu et al . , 2011b ) . The differential activities of dynamin1 and dynamin2 were attributed to a single amino acid residue in a different variable loop , VL3 , of the PH domain . Switching one amino acid in dynamin2 VL3 to tyrosine , which exists at that position in dynamin1 , was sufficient to confer dynamin1 - like membrane scission and curvature - generating properties to dynamin2 ( Liu et al . , 2011b ) . In neurons , dynamin1 drives rapid recycling of synaptic vesicle membranes , whereas dynamin2 is the workhorse for slow endocytic events that require clustering of membrane receptors , adapter proteins and the assembly of clathrin lattices . Thus , distinct modes of membrane remodeling may be gov - erned by differential interactions of dynamin isoforms with membranes . 2 . 1 . 3 . C - terminal , Proline - Rich Domain More than 30 proteins interact directly with dynamin , the majority of which bind the C - terminal PRD ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; Schafer , 2004 ) . The PRD contains several PXXP motifs that interact with SH3 - domain - containing proteins , but the specific binding sites within the PRD for most dynamin - binding partners have not been determined . Dur - ing endocytosis , the PRD targets dynamin to clathrin - coated structures ( CCS ) through interactions with amphiphysin and endophilin ( David et al . , 1996 ; Ringstad et al . , 1999 ; Sundborger et al . , 2011 ; Takei et al . , 1999 ) . Dynamin is targeted to select F - actin networks via PRD - mediated interac - tions with cortactin or Abp1 ( Kessels et al . , 2001 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , a region of the PRD restricts dynamin interactions with microtubules during interphase but phosphorylation within the PRD by mitotic kinase activity permits dynamin interactions with microtubules during mitosis ( Morita et al . , 2010 ; Shpetner et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , given such a diverse array of PRD - interacting partners and coupled with GTPase - regulated self - assembly , dynamin is positioned to function as a multidi - mensional scaffold capable of acting in different cellular processes through a complex array of dynamic protein – protein interactions . Identifying how these interactions are regulated in time and space to govern different dyna - min - dependent functions remains an important goal . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 193 2 . 2 . Experimental Approaches to Explore Novel Dynamin Functions Inhibiting dynamin has proven a useful strategy to explore its contribu - tions and mechanisms of action during cellular processes , particularly endocytosis . Several mutant dynamin proteins that negatively impact membrane receptor internalization have been characterized , including those that alter GTP binding and / or hydrolysis , block self - assembly as oligomers and decrease interactions with phospholipids or interacting pro - teins . A common tool used to disrupt dynamin - dependent endocytosis is dynamin - K44A , a mutant defective in binding GTP ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Since dynamin - K44A potently blocks endocytosis , identifying cytoskel - etal - related functions for dynamin is challenged if decreased endocytic activity impacts surface receptors or signaling pathways that impinge on the cytoskeleton . Moreover , gain - of - function effects of dynamin - K44A on actin filaments , such as actin filament cross - linking ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) , further confound interpretations of dynamin actions on cytoskeletal fila - ments . Overexpressed dynamin proteins may indirectly perturb cellular processes by sequestering dynamin - binding partners or inducing cytotoxic effects ( Liu et al . , 2011a ) . Thus , strategies that monitor endocytosis activ - ity and control the level of dynamin protein expression must be employed when using exogenously expressed dynamin proteins . Genetic ablation or “knockout” of dynamin genes in mice or approaches that conditionally deplete dynamin genes within specific cells or tissues can reveal roles for dynamin in cellular processes ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Liu et al . , 2008 ) . Transient , RNAi - mediated knockdown typically achieves up to 90 % depletion of dynamin proteins ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ; Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . As with some mutant dynamin proteins , discerning novel functions for dyna - min using gene knockout or siRNA - mediated depletion is complicated if endocytosis is grossly perturbed . Thus , quantitative assessment of endocytic activity and of potential downstream signals should be carried out in con - cert with studies of novel functions for dynamin . However , when coupled with experiments in which expressed mutant dynamin proteins selectively restore endocytosis but not other processes , knockdown or genetic ablation approaches may reveal novel functions for dynamin . New pharmacological agents that acutely block GTP hydrolysis by dyna - min are frequently used to disrupt endocytosis ( Macia et al . , 2006 ; Yamada et al . , 2009 ) . However , the specificity , mechanism of action and selectivity of the available dynamin - blocking drugs are not sufficiently characterized to ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 194 be useful probes of novel , endocytosis - independent activities for dynamins . Finally , injected dynamin antibodies were used to inhibit dynamin function in some studies ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Jones et al . , 1998 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . 3 . ACTIONS OF DYNAMIN AND ACTIN FILAMENTS DURING ENDOCYTOSIS Both dynamin and actin filaments support CME and other forms of endocytosis in mammalian cells , including phagocytosis , macropinocytosis and caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( Di et al . , 2003 ; Galletta et al . , 2010 ; Gold et al . , 1999 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ; Lamaze et al . , 1997 ; Lanzetti , 2007 ; Liu et al . , 2008 ; Merrifield et al . , 1999 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ; Schlunck et al . , 2004 ; Shajahan et al . , 2004 ; Tse et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast in yeast , actin filaments together with other factors that induce membrane curvature , execute vesicle scission for endocytosis ( Aghamohammadzadeh and Ayscough , 2009 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ) . In mammalian cells , actin filaments facilitate vesicle scis - sion but are not absolutely required ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . Actin filaments were also implicated in supporting other steps of the endocytic process , including membrane invagination , formation or stabilization of deeply invaginated CCS or movement of newly formed vesicles away from the plasma membrane ( Girao et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2010 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ; Qualmann et al . , 2000 ) . Before considering how dyna - min regulates cytoskeletal filaments outside the realm of endocytosis , we discuss emerging evidence supporting interdependent actions of dynamin and actin filaments during CME . Both actin filaments and dynamin are recruited to CCS at the plasma membrane . Low amounts of dynamin , but little actin , associated with nascent CCS when they first formed ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Just prior to scission , dynamin accumulated rapidly at CCS ; recruitment of actin , presumably from de novo assembly , preceded the rapid burst of dynamin recruitment and scission by ∼ 20 s ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . Factors that promote actin assembly ( Arp2 / 3 complex , N - WASP and cortactin ) were recruited to CCS prior to the scission event , whereas factors that promote F - actin disassembly ( cofilin and coronin ) appeared later , suggesting that F - actin turnover at CCS is tem - porally coupled to vesicle scission ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . A role for dynamin in F - actin turnover at CCS was also s upported from studies of fibroblasts from conditional dynamin1 / dynamin2 double - knockout mice . F - actin was highly enriched at deeply invaginated CCS in DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 195 fibroblasts lacking both dynamin isoforms ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex , an actin - nucleating factor that induces actin assembly ( Pollard , 2007 ) , was also enriched at CCS , indicating that dynamin was not required to recruit or activate the machinery for F - actin assembly . In contrast , dyna - min likely functions to limit actin assembly or promote its turnover at CCS ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) . The transient appearance of small patches of dendritic filament networks closely associated with invaginated CCS is consistent with this idea ( Collins et al . , 2011 ) . Dynamin and actin appear to function interdependently at CCS to power vesicle scission . Disrupting the actin cytoskeleton in cells lacking dynamin with pharmacologic agents increased the number of shallow , wide - necked , CCS at the expense of deeply invaginated CCS , supporting a role for actin filaments in membrane invagination and in stabilizing the thin necks that link CCS to membranes ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . More - over , an intact actin cytoskeleton greatly enhanced dynamin recruitment and the efficiency of scission ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , actin filaments facilitate endocytosis by stabilizing invaginated membranes , promoting the formation of deeply invaginated CCS with thin tubular necks and reinforcing recruitment of dynamin . The thin tubular necks may be ideal templates for assembly of dynamin collars . Actin filaments also could pro - vide additional binding sites for dynamin at CCS via direct interactions ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) or indirect interactions with the F - actin - and dynamin - binding proteins , cortactin or Abp1 ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ) . Whether or not dynamin influences actin filament turnover or filament organization for efficient vesicle formation remains to be explored . Whereas actin filaments facilitated dynamin recruitment at CCS , the dynamin GTPase cycle also influenced F - actin assembly and disassembly at CCS , lending additional support for interdependent roles for dynamin and actin filaments during endocytosis ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . Mutant dynamin proteins with impaired rates of GTP hydrolysis decreased the rate of actin recruitment and increased the rate of F - actin disassembly at CCS ( Taylor et al . , 2012 ) . However , mutant dynamin proteins with increased rates of GTP hydrolysis had no effect on actin dynamics at CCS , suggesting that a threshold level of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin was sufficient to influence actin filaments . Dynamin also may catalyze scission in coordination with actin fila - ments during some clathrin - independent processes . The cytokine recep - tor γ c is internalized via a clathrin - independent pathway that requires ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 196 dynamin2 and its binding partner , cortactin , which also binds actin filaments ( Sauvonnet et al . , 2005 ) . As will be discussed in detail below , cortactin may be an important biochemical link between dynamin and actin filament net - works for endocytosis and other cellular processes . Figure 3 . 1 Dynamin influences cytoskeletal networks via a variety of mechanisms , includ - ing recruiting actin assembly factors , bundling and cross - linking actin filaments , remod - eling actin filaments , promoting actin filament turnover and influencing microtubule dynamics and centrosome cohesion . During endocytosis , dynamin modulates actin fila - ment turnover as clathrin - coated structures separate from the plasma membrane ( Fergu - son et al . , 2009 ) . Dynamin contributes to phagosome formation for phagocytosis ( Di et al . , 2003 ; Gold et al . , 1999 ) and influences microtubule dynamics and centrosome cohesion via unknown mechanisms ( Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . Dynamin is involved in formation and stability of podosomes and invadopodia , actin - rich structures that promote migration and ECM degradation in some cells ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ; Oser et al . , 2009 ) . Dynamin is enriched on the F - actin comet tails elaborated by intracellular bacterial pathogens ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) ; the function of dynamin for bacterial motility is not known , but indirect effects arising from the influence of dynamin on microtubule stability are not ruled out ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ) . F - actin assembly at pedestal structures elaborated by pathogenic E . coli depends on dynamin recruitment to bacterial attachment sites ( Unsworth et al . , 2007 ) . As a component of the dendritic actin networks of lamellipodia and ruffles , dynamin remodels actin filaments to support filament turnover and actomyosin formation ( Chua et al . , 2009 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Actin filament uncapping by dynamin is implicated in maintain - ing the actomyosin - containing stress fibers in podocytes ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . ( For color version of this figure , the reader is referred to the online version of this book ) . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 197 Phagocytosis , an endocytic process in which cells engulf particles , depends on F - actin - rich protrusions of the plasma membrane . In cells in which dynamin2 was perturbed either by injecting anti - dynamin antibodies or by expressing mutant dynamin2 - K44A , actin - rich protrusions extended around internalizing particles but the protrusions arrested before engulf - ment was complete ( Di et al . , 2003 ; Gold et al . , 1999 ; Tse et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , dynamin2 may remodel actin filaments within protrusive structures to complete phagosome formation ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) . Similar to phagocytosis , inter - nalization of extracellular fluid via macropinocytosis depends on dynamic actin filaments that support sheet - like ruffles that collapse rearward to encapsulate extracellular fluid ( Kerr and Teasdale , 2009 ; Lim and Gleeson , 2011 ) and on dynamin ( Liu et al . , 2008 ; Schlunck et al . , 2004 ) . Whether or not dynamin remodels membranes , modulates actin filaments , or both during macropinocytosis and the late stages of phagocytosis has not been examined . In summary , considerable evidence supports the view that dynamin and actin filaments play interdependent roles during clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytic processes in mammalian cells . Although not universally required for CME , a functional actin cytoskeleton promotes formation and stability of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits and facili - tates efficient vesicle scission . Cortactin , which interacts with actin filaments and with dynamin , is likely to link dynamin and actin filaments during many forms of endocytosis . However , other dynamin - interacting proteins may coordinate the concerted actions of dynamin and actin filaments in a site - specific manner . 4 . BEYOND ENDOCYTOSIS : DYNAMIN AS A CYTOSKELETAL REGULATOR Dynamin was first discovered as a nucleotide - sensitive microtubule - binding and - bundling protein ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) . Dynamin ( or in Greek , force or power ) was so named based on speculations that it generated nucleotide hydrolysis - dependent force - producing interactions between bundled microtubules . Subsequent work showed dynamin hydro - lyzed GTP , an activity that was stimulated by microtubules ( Maeda et al . , 1992 ; Shpetner and Vallee , 1992 ) . When dynamin was identified as the prod - uct of the shibire gene in Drosophila melanogaster ( Chen et al . , 1991 ; van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) , together with observations that dynamin dec - orated thin membrane tubules with clathrin - capped tips in GTP γ S - treated ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 198 synaptic membrane preparations ( Takei et al . , 1995 ) , its destiny as a key regulator of vesicle scission was solidified . Understanding alternate func - tions and mechanisms of action of dynamin , particularly those that involve cytoskeletal dynamics , only recently returned to the forefront . In the sec - tions that follow , we discuss evidence that implicates dynamin in regulating the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . 4 . 1 . Dynamin and Microtubules Since its discovery as a microtubule - binding protein , dynamin was impli - cated in several microtubule - dependent processes in animal cells , including efficient mitosis , maintenance of centrosome structure and for microtu - bule dynamic instability ( Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 , 2002 ) . Dynamin did not localize with microtubules in interphase cells but was localized with γ - tubulin of interphase and mitotic centrosomes ( Chircop et al . , 2011 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . Dynamin was strikingly enriched along the bundled microtubules of the mid - zone spindle and mid - body during late stages of mitosis and cytokinesis ( Hamao et al . , 2009 ; Thompson et al . , 2002 ) . Although early events in mitosis and mid - zone microtubules appeared normal in mitotic fibroblastoid cells lacking dynamin2 , the time required to complete cytokinesis was longer com - pared with control cells ( Liu et al . , 2008 ) . Similarly , decreasing the expres - sion of the single dynamin protein expressed in Caenorhabditis elegans or activating a temperature - sensitive mutant dynamin blocked cytokinesis at a late stage ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ) . Whether or not increased genomic instability results from decreased levels of endogenous dynamin2 remains to be explored . Taken together , these findings indicate that dynamin acts directly on bundled microtubules of the mid - body to promote cell divi - sion . Depleting dynamin2 also caused individual centrosomes to separate by as much as 3 µm , without apparent gross perturbations to overall micro - tubule organization ( Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , dynamin2 maintains centrosome cohesion in interphase cells but how this activity contributes to microtubule organization , polarized morphology or cell migration is not known . The dynamin PRD negatively regulates interactions of dynamin with microtubules . A mutant form of dynamin lacking the C - terminal portion of the PRD strongly decorated microtubules of interphase cells and con - ferred resistance to cold - induced microtubule disassembly ( Hamao et al . , 2009 ) . During mitosis , association of dynamin with mid - zone microtubules required phosphorylation within the PRD by cyclin - dependent kinase1 , DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 199 which presumably overrides the intrinsic block for binding microtubules ( Chircop et al . , 2011 ; Morita et al . , 2010 ) . The actions of dynamin on inter - phase centrosomes and on mitotic microtubules provide evidence sup - porting a bona fide physiologic function for dynamin in regulating select microtubule - dependent processes ( Ishida et al . , 2011 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . Investigations of interphase cells depleted of dynamin2 revealed increased numbers of stable microtubules containing high levels of acety - lated tubulin , a marker of stable microtubules ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ; Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ) . The increased stable microtubules were coupled to defects in transport of Golgi - derived vesicles , perhaps as a result of inefficient vesicle capture by stable , as opposed to dynamic , microtubules ( Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ) . Thus , through its effects on micro - tubule dynamics , dynamin2 may indirectly influence vesicle transport at the Golgi and mid - body . Stable microtubules in dynamin2 - depleted cells may also negatively impact cell migration through effects on focal adhe - sion disassembly ( Kaverina et al . , 1999 ) . 4 . 2 . Links between Dynamin and F - actin Networks Identifying functional links between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton is an area of intense investigation . Early evidence implicating dynamin in actin - related functions came from studies of neurons from D . melanogaster carrying temperature - sensitive mutations in the shibire gene , which encodes fly dynamin . Shibire flies become paralyzed at restrictive temperatures due to defects in synaptic transmission ( Kim and Wu , 1987 ; Poodry and Edgar , 1979 ; van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . Cultured neurons from shibire flies also exhibit defective neuritogenesis at restrictive tempera - tures , including stunted neurite extension and decreased growth cone motility ( Kim and Wu , 1987 ) . Subsequent studies implicated dynamin in other actin - dependent processes , including cell migration ( Kruchten and McNiven , 2006 ) , invasion through ECM ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) , api - cal constriction in epithelial cells ( Chua et al . , 2009 ) and select forms of actin - dependent bacterial pathogenesis ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ; Unsworth et al . , 2007 ) . Because dynamin action in endocytosis may influence signaling pathways that impinge on actin filaments , clarifying the relationship between dynamin regulation of actin filament networks and its endocytic functions is the primary challenge toward gaining a full understanding of the scope of dynamin activities . In the following section , we discuss emerging evidence supporting the hypothesis that dynamin is a ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 200 multifunctional protein that directly influences actin filament networks in addition to its membrane - remodeling activities . Dynamin , particularly the ubiquitously expressed dynamin2 , was found associated with several actin filament networks , including the F - actin networks of protrusive structures , such as lamellipodia , dorsal ruffles and phagocytic cups , the actin networks of podosomes and inva - dopodia , Listeria comet tails and with actomyosin “belts” at the apical surface of epithelial cells ( Chua et al . , 2009 ; Gold et al . , 1999 ; Gray et al . , 2005 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; Kurklinsky et al . , 2011 ; Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) . One feature shared by most of these actin net - works is that they exist as dendritic networks of branched actin filaments formed through the action of the actin nucleator , Arp2 / 3 complex . Many dynamin - interacting partners link dynamin to nucleation - promoting fac - tors for Arp2 / 3 complex , such as N - WASP ( Salazar et al . , 2003 ; Schmitz et al . , 2004 ; Soulet et al . , 2005 ) , WAVE ( Cestra et al . , 2005 ) and cortac - tin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weed et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , dynamin2 associates primarily with dendritic actin filament networks that typically undergo rapid turnover . 4 . 2 . 1 . Podosomes and Invadopodia Podosomes are dynamic cell – ECM adhesive structures formed at the ven - tral surface of macrophages , osteoclasts and in Rous sarcoma virus - infected cells ( Buccione et al . , 2004 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . Actin filaments of podo - somes are highly dynamic and arranged in a radial array surrounding a core of bundled filaments ( Luxenburg et al . , 2007 ) . ECM degradation occurs at the ventral cell surface in close association with podosomes . Invadopodia are longer lived than podosomes , possess robust ECM degradation activity and are typically elaborated by invasive tumor cells to enhance metastatic migration of through tissues ( Artym et al . , 2011 ; Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ; Linder , 2009 ; Linder et al . , 2011 ) . Dynamin2 was implicated in regulating actin dynamics and / or ECM - degrading activity at podosomes and invadopodia via a mechanism that depends on GTP binding and hydrolysis ( Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ; Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . Whereas podosomes formed in cells expressing the domi - nant mutant protein , dynamin2 - K44A , F - actin turnover at podosomes was decreased , suggesting that dynamin2 GTPase activity regulated F - actin turn - over at podosomes ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . Exogenous dynamin2 - K44A could act in a dominant manner to stabilize filaments by cross - linking ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . On the other hand , podosomes and invadopodia failed to form in DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 201 cells expressing a truncated mutant form of dynamin2 lacking the C - terminal PRD , suggesting a role for full - length dynamin2 in formation or stabilization of these structures ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Baldassarre et al . , 2003 ) . In osteoclasts , a complex of dynamin2 and the adapter protein , Cbl , which binds the dynamin2 PRD , may coordinate recruitment of F - actin regulators or acti - vators at podosomes to control osteoclast migration on bone . Phosphorylation by c - Src kinase destabilized the dynamin2 – Cbl complex , suggesting a link between adhesion signaling , migration and dynamin2 - mediated regulation of actin dynamics at podosomes ( Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ) . Dynamin2 may stabilize F - actin networks of invadopodia in concert with its interacting partner , cortactin , which also binds F - actin ( Oser et al . , 2009 ) ; however , the actions of dynamin2 and cortactin for efficient vesicle trafficking or secretion of ECM - degrading metalloproteases have not been ruled out . In this regard , dynamin2 and cortactin were implicated in for - mation of secretory vesicles at the trans - Golgi ( Cao et al . , 2005 ; Salvarezza et al . , 2009 ; Weller et al . , 2010 ) and cortactin - promoted secretion of metal - loproteases and ECM degradation at invadopodia ( Clark and Weaver , 2008 ) . 4 . 2 . 2 . F - actin Comets and Pedestals Many bacterial pathogens of mammalian cells commandeer the host - cell actin filaments and their regulatory machinery to promote infection ( Haglund and Welch , 2011 ) . Dynamin2 is associated with F - actin struc - tures elaborated by two such bacterial pathogens , the F - actin tails of Liste - ria monocytogenes and the F - actin pedestals elaborated by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) . Actin tails induced by Listeria propel the bacteria through the cytoplasm , eventually guiding them into protrusions that become engulfed by adjacent neighbor cells . Using this mechanism , Listeria spreads from cell to cell , evading immune detection . Since motility of Listeria via actin tails does not involve vesicle budding or endocyto - sis , the presence of dynamin2 along the F - actin tails provided compelling evidence for an actin - dependent and endocytosis - independent function for dynamin2 ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ; Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) . Although dynamin2 was not required for Listeria motility in recon - stituted systems ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) , dynamin2 may organize actin filaments of comet tails for optimal bacterial movement in the cellular milieu or effi - cient cell - to - cell spread of Listeria via F - actin - rich projections that drill into neighboring cells . The PRD was critical for targeting dynamin2 to F - actin tails ( Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) . Experimentally induced F - actin tails generated by expression of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate , ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 202 5 - kinase ( PIP5K ) were similarly decorated by dynamin ( Orth et al . , 2002 ) . Whereas F - actin tails formed in Listeria - infected cells depleted of dyna - min2 , the tails were shorter and Listeria moved more slowly compared to bacteria in infected control cells ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ) . Expression of dynamin mutant proteins defective in GTPase activity also decreased F - actin tail number , tail length and rate of movement of Listeria and PI5K - induced comet tails ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ; Lee and De Camilli , 2002 ; Orth et al . , 2002 ) . Exogenously expressed mutant dynamin pro - teins might indirectly influence motility of PIP5K - induced vesicular compartments if , as a result of decreased membrane scission activity in cells expressing mutant dynamins , PI5K - generated vesicles formed less frequently or were larger in size , creating different templates for F - actin tail formation ( Cameron et al . , 2004 ) . An intriguing link between dynamin2 , Listeria motility and microtubules was recently uncovered . As discussed above , microtubule stability , the con - tent of acetylated tubulin in microtubules and the rate of Listeria motility all depended on the cellular concentration of dynamin2 ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ; Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ) . These apparently unrelated findings prompted the suggestion that increased stable microtubules in dynamin2 - depleted cells might hinder bacterial movement ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Henmi et al . , 2011 ) . In sup - port of this idea , addition of agents that alter the global organization or abundance of cellular microtubules restored normal Listeria movement to dynamin2 - depleted cells . These agents may create a cellular milieu that allows maximal propulsion . In contrast with Listeria invasion of the cytoplasm in infected cells , EPEC remain bound to the outside of infected cells , anchored at the plasma membrane via an F - actin structure called a pedestal ( Goosney et al . , 2001 ) . EPEC attach to cells via the bacterial protein , Tir , which then recruits the adapter protein Nck to the intracellular membrane face . Subsequent recruitment of actin polymerizing factors lead to formation of F - actin pedestals ( Wunderlich et al . , 1999 ) . Depletion of dynamin2 or expression of mutant dynamin proteins decreased the accumulation of F - actin at EPEC pedestals , implicating dynamin2 in pedestal formation and / or maintenance ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Unsworth et al . , 2007 ) . Since dynamin2 appeared at sites of EPEC binding in concert with N - WASP but before Arp2 / 3 complex , dynamin2 may create a multiprotein scaffold that recruits factors required for de novo F - actin assembly at pedestals . Alternatively , or in addition , dynamin2 may orchestrate local rearrangements in cortical F - actin at bacterial DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 203 attachment sites to establish a filament architecture conducive for ped - estal formation . 4 . 2 . 3 . Dynamin and Other Dendritic Actin Networks : Lamellipodia , Cortical Ruffles and Phagocytic Cups Dynamin was found associated with dendritic actin networks of lamel - lipodia ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) , transient cortical ruffles elaborated on the dorsal surface of PDGF - stimulated and - unstimulated cells ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ) and protrusions extended by macrophages dur - ing phagocytosis ( Gold et al . , 1999 ) . Recruitment of dynamin to some of these actin networks depended on the PRD , most likely via interactions with the PRD - and F - actin - interacting protein , cortactin , which is also enriched in these networks ( Gray et al . , 2005 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Expression of mutant dynamin proteins lacking the PRD or having defective GTPase activity , or microinjection of anti - dynamin antibodies , perturbed dynamics of many of these networks ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) . For example , in macrophage - like cells in which dynamin func - tion was perturbed with injected antibodies or by expressing dynamin2 - K44A , protrusions still extended around incoming IgG - coated particles , but arrested before engulfment was complete ( Di et al . , 2003 ; Gold et al . , 1999 ; Tse et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , dynamin2 may remodel actin filament networks within phagocytic cups to complete phagosome closure . However , a role for dynamin2 in modulating exocytic vesicles and their fusion at nascent phagosomes has not been ruled out ( Di et al . , 2003 ) . 4 . 2 . 4 . Dynamin and Actomyosin Networks The participation of dynamin2 in regulating actomyosin networks was recently uncovered ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Chua et al . , 2009 ; Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Con - tractile actomyosin networks at the apical junctions maintain the organization of epithelial sheets and drive morphogenesis that shapes developing tissues and organisms ( Hartsock and Nelson , 2008 ; Lecuit and Wieschaus , 2002 ) . Actomyosin networks also comprise a key component of the cell migration machinery ( Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2009 ) . Expressed mutant dynamin2 - K44A proteins having decreased GTP hydrolysis activity induced constric - tion at apical junctions of epithelial cells ; importantly , perturbing endocytic activity via alternate mechanisms did not induce apical constriction ( Chua et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , the effects of dynamin2 - K44A on contractility did not result solely from decreased endocytosis . Apical constriction by dynamin2 - K44A depended on Rho - ROCK signaling and the dynamin2 - interacting ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 204 protein , cortactin . Additionally , depleting dynamin2 in epithelial cells dis - rupted cell – cell adherens junctions ( Chua et al . , 2009 ) . Loss of adherens junction integrity in dynamin - depleted epithelial cells may result from altered recycling of E - cadherin , which initiates and maintains dynamic junctions ( Ivanov et al . , 2005 ) . Dynamin2 may have dual roles at adherens junctions : recycling cell – cell adhesion molecules and modulating contrac - tility via pathways that influence actomyosin function . Although dynamin2 was not associated with actomyosin networks in nonepithelial cells , it might influence contractility through effects on the dendritic actin networks that form and maintain actomyosin networks ( Ehrlich et al . , 2002 ; Kovacs et al . , 2002 ; Verma et al . , 2004 ) . Consistent with this idea , the organization of select actomyosin networks comprising transverse arcs was perturbed in dynamin2 - depleted U2 - OS cells ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . 4 . 2 . 5 . Neurites , Growth Cones and Dendritic Spines Paralysis of the Drosophila mutant shibire - ts1 led investigators to ultimately establish a role for dynamin in recycling synaptic membrane that controls synaptic transmission ( van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) . However , cultured neurons from shibire - ts1 flies also exhibited defects in neurite extension , suggesting that dynamin also influenced actin - dependent pro - cesses ( Kim and Wu , 1987 ; Torre et al . , 1994 ) . At that time , little was known about the mechanisms by which neuronal growth cones migrated to extend neurites , aside from the general participation of actin fila - ments and microtubules ( Letourneau et al . , 1986 ; Marsh and Letourneau , 1984 ) . Renewed interest in investigating a role for dynamin in regulating actin - dependent processes in neurons came with the identification of alternatively spliced isoforms of dynamin3 , a dynamin family member that , with dynamin1 , was enriched in neuronal tissue . Whereas some splice variants of dynamin3 worked cooperatively with dynamin1 to support synaptic transmission ( Raimondi et al . , 2011 ) , other dynamin3 isoforms were highly enriched at the tips of dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neurons ( Gray et al . , 2005 ) . When expressed in neurons , one splice variant of dynamin3 ( dynamin3 - baa ) altered the morphology of spine - like protrusions along neurites from short , mushroom - shaped structures to elongated filopodia characteristic of immature dendritic spines ( Gray et al . , 2003 , 2005 ) . The ability of dynamin3 - baa to influence spine morphology depended on its interaction with cortactin , implicat - ing dynamin3 - baa and cortactin in regulating F - actin - based structures in developing neurons ( Gray et al . , 2005 ) . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 205 A complex of dynamin2 and cortactin was also implicated in regulating another neuronal appendage , the growth cone ( Kurklinsky et al . , 2011 ) . Growth cones are dynamic structures at the tips of axons that guide elongat - ing axons during neuronal development . Lamellipodia and filopodia , com - posed of branched actin filaments and actin filament bundles , respectively , comprise the growth cone periphery . These F - actin networks , together with microtubules in the central body of growth cones , respond to guid - ance cues and orchestrate the direction and rate of growth cone advance . Cortactin and dynamin2 , but not dynamin1 or dynamin3 , were localized with adhesion proteins at the transition zone between the peripheral and central regions of growth cones . When overexpressed , cortactin or dyna - min2 enhanced growth cone spreading and the recruitment of the F - actin cross - linking protein , α - actinin , to the transition zone ( Kurklinsky et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , dynamin2 and cortactin appear to influence the architecture of F - actin networks of growth cones , which in turn , may regulate adhesion to the ECM and the rate of neurite outgrowth . 4 . 2 . 6 . Dynamin Action during Whole - Cell Migration and Tumor - Cell Invasion Cell migration requires the concerted actions of many cellular processes : actin filament and microtubule dynamics , formation of adhesive structures , integ - rin receptor cycling , contractility , and controlled directionality . Dynamin may contribute to cell migration via several nonmutually exclusive mechanisms : by recycling integrin receptors to influence cell - substrate adhesion ( Chao and Kunz , 2009 ; Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) , by regulating secretion of degradative enzymes involved in ECM invasion ( Cao et al . , 2005 ) , by recruiting actin assembly factors through its PRD - interacting partners to drive protrusive behavior ( Kruchten and McNiven , 2006 ) , by generating signaling molecules associated with internalized receptors that regulate the cytoskeleton down - stream of endocytic activity ( Feng et al . , 2012 ) , or by maintaining microtu - bule organization and dynamics required to maintain cell polarity and focal adhesion disassembly ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ; Kaverina et al . , 1999 ; Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ; Thompson et al . , 2004 ) . As discussed above , dynamin2 is a com - ponent of lamellipodia and of growth factor - induced circular ruffles on the plasma membrane , both of which are associated with advancing the leading edge of migrating cells ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ) . Through dynamin’s direct interactions with signaling enzymes , such as the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate kinase ( PI3K ) ( Feng et al . , 2012 ) , Src ( Cao et al . , 2010 ; Foster - Barber and Bishop , 1998 ) , or ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 206 FAK ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ) , dynamin could organize signal - ing complexes that fine - tune the migration machinery for efficient motil - ity . A future challenge is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which dynamin regulates these many different elements that , together , move a cell . The contributions of dynamin to metastatic tumor progression may be tumor - specific . Dynamin2 expression was elevated in tissues of patients with aggressive , metastatic pancreatic cancer ( Eppinga et al . , 2012 ) . In cul - tured pancreatic cancer cells , cellular levels of dynamin2 correlated directly with whole - cell migration rate , ECM invasion and metastatic potential in vivo . The ability of dynamin2 to promote migration of pancreatic can - cer cells depended on phosphorylation by c - Src kinase , which together with interactions of dynamin and FAK , may contribute to focal adhesion disassembly and migration ( Ahn et al . , 2002 ; Cao et al . , 2010 ; Ezratty et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ; Weller et al . , 2010 ) . Cellular levels of dyna - min2 similarly correlated directly with cell growth and invasion in an experimental model of glioblastoma , however , in this system , interactions of dynamin2 with PI3K and the phosphatase , SHP - 2 , were involved ( Feng et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , in two different model systems , dynamin2 supported metastatic behavior via mechanisms that involve complexes with signaling proteins . Whereas the studies cited above point to a promigratory function for dynamin2 in tumor - cell invasion , metastatic progression of cervical squamous cell carcinoma and expression of the ECM - degrading metal - loprotease , MMP - 2 , were inversely correlated with dynamin2 expression ( Lee et al . , 2010 ) . 4 . 3 . Molecular Mechanisms of Actin Filament Regulation by Dynamin Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which dynamin regulates cytoskeletal filaments is an active goal . Initial clues that dynamin might regulate cytoskeletal filaments arose from identifying its direct interactions with microtubules ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) and actin regulatory proteins ( Ferguson and De Camilli , 2012 ; Kruchten and McNiven , 2006 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Schafer , 2004 ) . The list of dynamin - interacting proteins contin - ues to expand , with dynamin now recognized as a versatile molecular scaf - fold that could assemble a myriad of different protein complexes , including actin assembly factors ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weed et al . , 2000 ) , scaffolds and enzymes involved in signal transduction ( Cao et al . , 2010 ; Lai et al . , 1999 ; Okamoto et al . , 1999 ; Salazar et al . , 2003 ) and membrane curvature sensing and generating proteins ( Anggono and DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 207 Robinson , 2007 ; David et al . , 1996 ; Grabs et al . , 1997 ) . Most often , interac - tions with binding partners occur between the dynamin PRD and SH3 domain ( s ) of the partner protein . Indeed , a mutant form of dynamin lack - ing the PRD rarely functions in cells . Among dynamin isoforms , the PRD varies most in primary amino acid sequence ( Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) . The potential for dynamin family members to participate in a complex array of activities as specified by the diverse interactions of its PRD is vast . In this section , we review recent research that provides mechanistic insight for how dynamin regulates actin filaments . 4 . 3 . 1 . Dynamin and Cortactin The F - actin - binding protein cortactin appears to mediate many actin - dependent processes in which dynamin is implicated to participate . Cortac - tin binds the dynamin PRD and , like dynamin , is enriched in lamellipodia ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weed et al . , 2000 ) , dorsal ruffles ( Krueger et al . , 2003 ) , invadopodia ( Clark et al . , 2007 ) , podosomes ( Tehrani et al . , 2006 ) , actin comets ( Barroso et al . , 2006 ) and at the trans - Golgi network ( Cao et al . , 2005 ) . Other activities of cortactin , specifically its ability to bind and activate the actin - nucleating activity of Arp2 / 3 complex and to stabi - lize branched F - actin junctions ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) , highlight cortactin as a key bridge between dynamin and dynamic actin filament networks . Although dynamin was recently found to directly bind actin filaments with sub - micromolar affinity ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) , cortactin greatly potentiates the association of dynamin with actin filaments in vitro ( Gray et al . , 2005 ; Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Several different complexes of dynamin and cortactin , together with other actin regulators or signaling molecules , have been identified ( Cao et al . , 2005 ; Chua et al . , 2009 ; Gray et al . , 2005 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; Kurklinsky et al . , 2011 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ) . Cortactin also stimulated the basal GTPase activity of dynamin2 in vitro , but the biological significance of this activation is unknown ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Biochemical experiments performed with purified proteins in vitro have provided intriguing clues of molecular mechanisms by which dyna - min might influence actin filament dynamics and organization . An ongo - ing challenge will be to validate these mechanisms in living cells and identify how each may be executed in space and time to influence actin - dependent processes . It is likely that dynamin exploits many of the intrin - sic activities required for membrane remodeling and scission in its actions on actin filaments . Dynamin2 and cortactin , which together potentiate ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 208 multivalent actin filament cross - linking , tightly bundled actin filaments in vitro ; importantly , GTP hydrolysis by dynamin2 remodeled the bundled filaments from tight to loosely associated ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . When viewed in real time using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy , filaments in bundles actively unraveled upon addition of GTP ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . GTP hydrolysis by dynamin2 also influenced the organization of actin filaments associated with PI - 4 , 5 - P 2 - containing liposomes ( Scha - fer et al . , 2002 ) . GTPase - dependent changes in the relative orientations of filaments within bundled networks could influence access and bind - ing to filaments of other actin regulatory factors , such as cofilin ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) . Moreover , actin filament severing was observed as a result of dynamin2 - mediated GTP hydrolysis ( Mooren et al . , 2009 ) ; filament sever - ing could influence filament dynamics either by promoting F - actin turn - over or by promoting de novo actin assembly , depending on the cellular context . Thus , GTP hydrolysis by dynamin2 and cortactin may influence actin filaments via a broad range of mechanisms , including promoting actin assembly , promoting actin filament turnover or remodeling filament architecture . 4 . 3 . 2 . Direct Binding of Actin Filaments by Dynamin The recent discovery that dynamin directly binds actin filaments brought a novel twist to the scope of mechanisms by which dynamin might regulate actin filaments . Dynamin bundled actin filaments in vitro via interactions of filaments with conserved basic residues within an α - helix of the dyna - min stalk ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , ring - shaped dynamin oligomers preferentially associated with short actin filaments , which also maximally stimulated GTP hydrolysis by dynamin . Unexpectedly , dynamin rings pro - moted “uncapping” of filaments capped at their barbed end by gelsolin ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . GTP hydrolysis was not required to uncap filaments , which occurred in the presence of the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog , GTP γ S ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . Like filament severing , dynamin - mediated filament uncapping could promote either actin assembly or filament disassembly , depending on the local conditions . Support for the hypothesis that dynamin - mediated filament uncapping promoted actin assembly came from studies of cultured podocytes depleted of dynamin2 , in which actomyosin - containing stress fibers were disrupted and the accessibility of actin filament barbed ends was reduced ( Fig . 3 . 1 ) ( Gu et al . , 2010 ) . In summary , a growing body of evidence supports the hypothesis that proteins of the dynamin family act directly , or indirectly via PRD - binding DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 209 partners , on actin filaments . The GTP hydrolysis - dependent activities of dynamin on actin filaments identified in in vitro experiments could mod - ulate cellular actin networks via several different mechanisms , including stimulating local F - actin assembly , promoting F - actin turnover and remod - eling actin filament architecture . Additionally , dynamin may modulate actin networks by acting as a dynamic molecular scaffold that recruits factors for de novo actin assembly ( Cestra et al . , 2005 ; Feng et al . , 2012 ; Gomez et al . , 2005 ; Salazar et al . , 2003 ; Soulet et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ; Xin et al . , 2009 ) . 5 . DYNAMIN MUTATIONS , CYTOSKELETON AND HUMAN DISEASE Mutations in the gene encoding dynamin2 have been linked to two diseases that affect muscle and peripheral nerve function : centronuclear myopathy ( CNM ) , a disorder resulting in muscle degeneration ( Bohm et al . , 2012 ; Durieux et al . , 2010 ) , and Charcot – Marie – Tooth ( CMT ) disease , a neuropathy of peripheral nerves ( Zuchner et al . , 2005 ) . Clus - tered mutations in the dynamin2 stalk and PH domain , along with a few others , have been linked to CNM and CMT ( Bitoun et al . , 2005 ; Zuchner et al . , 2005 ) . Some disease - associated mutant dynamin proteins are associated with microtubules . For example , exogenously expressed dynamin2 - Δ 3 , a CMT - related dynamin with a small deletion within the PH domain , prominently decorated microtubules and induced increased levels of acetylated tubulin along microtubules of cultured COS - 1 cells ( Tanabe and Takei , 2009 ) . In other studies , however , cellular levels of acetylated tubulin appeared normal when dynamin2 - Δ 3 was expressed at near endogenous levels in fibroblastoid cells lacking wild - type dynamin2 ( Liu et al . , 2011a ) . Surprisingly , CME was not perturbed in fibroblastoid cells expressing some common mutant dynamin2 proteins associated with CNM or CMT ; rather , slight defects in selected secretory pathways and in non - clathrin - dependent endocytic pathways were noted ( Liu et al . , 2011a ) . To the extent that disease - associated mutant dynamin2 proteins have been studied , none perturbed PDGF - stimulated macropinocyto - sis , an actin - dependent endocytic process ( Liu et al . , 2011a ) . A recently developed mouse model of CNM in which a common human mutation , dynamin2 - R465W , was expressed in skeletal muscle highlights a role for dynamin2 in several aspects of muscle tissue homeostasis , including sarco - mere assembly , contractility and myofiber integrity . ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 210 6 . CONCLUDING REMARKS The spectrum of cellular activities , in which dynamin is implicated to participate , is expanding rapidly . Evidence collected in the years 2000 – 2010 bolsters hypotheses that dynamin may broadly influences cytoskeletal actin and microtubule networks via a diverse repertoire of molecular mecha - nisms . Future work will focus on clarifying the relationship between dyna - min’s actions during endocytosis or other membrane - remodeling events and its actions on cytoskeletal filaments . During endocytosis and exocytosis , dynamin may execute membrane remodeling in concert with actin fila - ment remodeling to maximize efficiency . New mutant dynamin proteins that allow investigators to separate dynamin’s activities on membranes and cytoskeletal filaments will be needed to clarify this relationship . Moreover , because the scope of cellular processes in which dynamin modulates the cytoskeleton is broad , it will be necessary to investigate the physiological significance of its actions in different cellular contexts . Clearly , the focus of most investigations to date has centered on the actin - related functions of dynamin . In this regard , biochemical experi - ments have offered intriguing clues of potential molecular mechanisms that must now be examined in living cells . Despite its discovery as a microtubule - bundling protein , very little is known about the molecu - lar mechanisms by which dynamin influences microtubules . This aspect of dynamin action is particularly mysterious because dynamin does not associate prominently with microtubules in interphase cells yet deplet - ing dynamin impacts microtubule dynamics globally . Identifying how dynamin influences microtubule dynamic instability remains an impor - tant focus for future investigations . With respect to actin filaments , GTP hydrolysis by dynamin , in combination with its myriad of direct and indirect interactions with actin filaments and their regulators , provides a diverse array of mechanisms by which dynamin could modulate actin filament networks . In keeping with the restricted distribution of dyna - min within most networks , dynamin’s actions are likely to be local , rather than global . Site - specific actions of dynamin may serve to coordinate local reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton at other cellular structures , such as at clathrin - coated pits , EPEC pedestals , actin comets and podosomes . However , local actin filament remodeling by dynamin within lamellipodia or adherens junctions may ultimately influence actin networks required for contractility and whole - cell migration . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 211 REFERENCES Aghamohammadzadeh , S . , Ayscough , K . R . , 2009 . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 – 1042 . Ahn , S . , Kim , J . , Lucaveche , C . L . , Reedy , M . C . , Luttrell , L . M . , Lefkowitz , R . J . , Daaka , Y . , 2002 . Src - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation regulates dynamin self - assembly and ligand - induced endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 26642 – 26651 . Anantharam , A . , Bittner , M . A . , Aikman , R . L . , Stuenkel , E . L . , Schmid , S . L . , Axelrod , D . , Holz , R . W . , 2011 . A new role for the dynamin GTPase in the regulation of fusion pore expansion . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1907 – 1918 . Anggono , V . , Robinson , P . J . , 2007 . Syndapin I and endophilin I bind overlapping proline - rich regions of dynamin I : role in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J . Neurochem . 102 , 931 – 943 . Artym , V . V . , Matsumoto , K . , Mueller , S . C . , Yamada , K . M . , 2011 . Dynamic membrane remod - eling at invadopodia differentiates invadopodia from podosomes . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 90 , 172 – 180 . Baldassarre , M . , Pompeo , A . , Beznoussenko , G . , Castaldi , C . , Cortellino , S . , McNiven , M . A . , Luini , A . , Buccione , R . , 2003 . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degra - dation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1074 – 1084 . Barroso , C . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Welch , M . D . , Drubin , D . G . , 2006 . A role for cortactin in Listeria monocytogenes invasion of NIH 3T3 cells , but not in its intracellular motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 231 – 243 . Barylko , B . , Binns , D . , Lin , K . M . , Atkinson , M . A . , Jameson , D . M . , Yin , H . L . , Albanesi , J . P . , 1998 . Synergistic activation of dynamin GTPase by Grb2 and phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 3791 – 3797 . Bashkirov , P . V . , Akimov , S . A . , Evseev , A . I . , Schmid , S . L . , Zimmerberg , J . , Frolov , V . A . , 2008 . GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spon - taneous fission . Cell 135 , 1276 – 1286 . Bethoney , K . A . , King , M . C . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Ostap , E . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , 2009 . A possible effector role for the pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain of dynamin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 13359 – 13364 . Bitoun , M . , Maugenre , S . , Jeannet , P . Y . , Lacene , E . , Ferrer , X . , Laforet , P . , Martin , J . J . , Laporte , J . , Lochmuller , H . , Beggs , A . H . , et al . , 2005 . Mutations in dynamin 2 cause dominant centronuclear myopathy . Nat . Genet . 37 , 1207 – 1209 . Bohm , J . , Biancalana , V . , Dechene , E . T . , Bitoun , M . , Pierson , C . R . , Schaefer , E . , Karasoy , H . , Dempsey , M . A . , Klein , F . , Dondaine , N . , et al . , 2012 . Mutation spectrum in the large GTPase dynamin 2 , and genotype - phenotype correlation in autosomal dominant cen - tronuclear myopathy . Hum . Mutat . 33 , 949 – 959 . Bruzzaniti , A . , Neff , L . , Sanjay , A . , Horne , W . C . , De Camilli , P . , Baron , R . , 2005 . Dynamin forms a Src kinase - sensitive complex with Cbl and regulates podosomes and osteoclast activity . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3301 – 3313 . Buccione , R . , Orth , J . D . , McNiven , M . A . , 2004 . Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 657 . Cameron , L . A . , Robbins , J . R . , Footer , M . J . , Theriot , J . A . , 2004 . Biophysical parameters influ - ence actin - based movement , trajectory , and initiation in a cell - free system . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 2312 – 2323 . Cao , H . , Weller , S . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . L . , Stamnes , M . , McNiven , M . A . , 2005 . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 483 – 492 . Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Krueger , E . W . , McNiven , M . A . , 2010 . SRC - mediated phosphorylation of dynamin and cortactin regulates the “constitutive” endocytosis of transferrin . Mol . Cell . Biol . 30 , 781 – 792 . ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 212 Cestra , G . , Kwiatkowski , A . , Salazar , M . , Gertler , F . , De Camilli , P . , 2005 . Tuba , a GEF for CDC42 , links dynamin to actin regulatory proteins . Methods Enzymol . 404 , 537 – 545 . Chao , W . T . , Kunz , J . , 2009 . Focal adhesion disassembly requires clathrin - dependent endocy - tosis of integrins . FEBS Lett . 583 , 1337 – 1343 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Liu , Y . W . , Leonard , M . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Schmid , S . L . , 2009 . An intra - molecular signaling element that modulates dynamin function in vitro and in vivo . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 3561 – 3571 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Dyda , F . , 2010 . G domain dimerization controls dynamin’s assembly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 , 435 – 440 . Chappie , J . S . , Mears , J . A . , Fang , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Milligan , R . A . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Dyda , F . , 2011 . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 . Chen , M . S . , Obar , R . A . , Schroeder , C . C . , Austin , T . W . , Poodry , C . A . , Wadsworth , S . C . , Vallee , R . B . , 1991 . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 351 , 583 – 586 . Chircop , M . , Sarcevic , B . , Larsen , M . R . , Malladi , C . S . , Chau , N . , Zavortink , M . , Smith , C . M . , Quan , A . , Anggono , V . , Hains , P . G . , et al . , 2011 . Phosphorylation of dynamin II at ser - ine - 764 is associated with cytokinesis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1813 , 1689 – 1699 . Chua , J . , Rikhy , R . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , 2009 . Dynamin 2 orchestrates the global acto - myosin cytoskeleton for epithelial maintenance and apical constriction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 20770 – 20775 . Clark , E . S . , Weaver , A . M . , 2008 . A new role for cortactin in invadopodia : regulation of pro - tease secretion . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 581 – 590 . Clark , E . S . , Whigham , A . S . , Yarbrough , W . G . , Weaver , A . M . , 2007 . Cortactin is an essential regulator of matrix metalloproteinase secretion and extracellular matrix degradation in invadopodia . Cancer Res . 67 , 4227 – 4235 . Collins , A . , Warrington , A . , Taylor , K . A . , Svitkina , T . , 2011 . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 – 1175 . Conner , S . D . , Schmid , S . L . , 2003 . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 , 37 – 44 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , Schmid , S . L . , 1994 . Induction of mutant dynamin spe - cifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 . Danino , D . , Moon , K . H . , Hinshaw , J . E . , 2004 . Rapid constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . J . Struct . Biol . 147 , 259 – 267 . David , C . , McPherson , P . S . , Mundigl , O . , de Camilli , P . , 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in syn - aptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 331 – 335 . Di , A . , Nelson , D . J . , Bindokas , V . , Brown , M . E . , Libunao , F . , Palfrey , H . C . , 2003 . Dynamin regulates focal exocytosis in phagocytosing macrophages . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 2016 – 2028 . Doherty , G . J . , McMahon , H . T . , 2009 . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 . Durieux , A . C . , Vignaud , A . , Prudhon , B . , Viou , M . T . , Beuvin , M . , Vassilopoulos , S . , Fraysse , B . , Ferry , A . , Laine , J . , Romero , N . B . , et al . , 2010 . A centronuclear myopathy - dynamin 2 mutation impairs skeletal muscle structure and function in mice . Hum . Mol . Genet . 19 , 4820 – 4836 . Ehrlich , J . S . , Hansen , M . D . , Nelson , W . J . , 2002 . Spatio - temporal regulation of Rac1 localiza - tion and lamellipodia dynamics during epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Dev . Cell 3 , 259 – 270 . Eppinga , R . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Weller , S . G . , Zhang , L . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . , 2012 . Increased expression of the large GTPase dynamin 2 potentiates metastatic migration and invasion of pancreatic ductal carcinoma . Oncogene 31 , 1228 – 1241 . Ezratty , E . J . , Partridge , M . A . , Gundersen , G . G . , 2005 . Microtubule - induced focal adhe - sion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 581 – 590 . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 213 Faelber , K . , Posor , Y . , Gao , S . , Held , M . , Roske , Y . , Schulze , D . , Haucke , V . , Noe , F . , Daumke , O . , 2011 . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature 477 , 556 – 560 . Feng , H . , Liu , K . W . , Guo , P . , Zhang , P . , Cheng , T . , McNiven , M . A . , Johnson , G . R . , Hu , B . , Cheng , S . Y . , 2012 . Dynamin 2 mediates PDGFRalpha - SHP - 2 - promoted glioblastoma growth and invasion . Oncogene 31 , 2691 – 2702 . Ferguson , S . M . , De Camilli , P . , 2012 . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 75 – 88 . Ferguson , K . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Schlessinger , J . , Sigler , P . B . , 1994 . Crystal structure at 2 . 2 A resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin . Cell 79 , 199 – 209 . Ferguson , S . M . , Raimondi , A . , Paradise , S . , Shen , H . , Mesaki , K . , Ferguson , A . , Destaing , O . , Ko , G . , Takasaki , J . , Cremona , O . , et al . , 2009 . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 , 811 – 822 . Ford , M . G . , Jenni , S . , Nunnari , J . , 2011 . The crystal structure of dynamin . Nature 477 , 561 – 566 . Foster - Barber , A . , Bishop , J . M . , 1998 . Src interacts with dynamin and synapsin in neuronal cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 4673 – 4677 . Fulop , T . , Doreian , B . , Smith , C . , 2008 . Dynamin I plays dual roles in the activity - dependent shift in exocytic mode in mouse adrenal chromaffin cells . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 477 , 146 – 154 . Galletta , B . J . , Mooren , O . L . , Cooper , J . A . , 2010 . Actin dynamics and endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 21 , 604 – 610 . Girao , H . , Geli , M . I . , Idrissi , F . Z . , 2008 . Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mam - mals . FEBS Lett . 582 , 2112 – 2119 . Gold , E . S . , Underhill , D . M . , Morrissette , N . S . , Guo , J . , McNiven , M . A . , Aderem , A . , 1999 . Dynamin 2 is required for phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 . Gomez , T . S . , Hamann , M . J . , McCarney , S . , Savoy , D . N . , Lubking , C . M . , Heldebrant , M . P . , Labno , C . M . , McKean , D . J . , McNiven , M . A . , Burkhardt , J . K . , et al . , 2005 . Dynamin 2 regulates T cell activation by controlling actin polymerization at the immunological synapse . Nat . Immunol . 6 , 261 – 270 . Gonzalez - Jamett , A . M . , Baez - Matus , X . , Hevia , M . A . , Guerra , M . J . , Olivares , M . J . , Martinez , A . D . , Neely , A . , Cardenas , A . M . , 2010 . The association of dynamin with syn - aptophysin regulates quantal size and duration of exocytotic events in chromaffin cells . J . Neurosci . 30 , 10683 – 10691 . Goosney , D . L . , DeVinney , R . , Finlay , B . B . , 2001 . Recruitment of cytoskeletal and signaling proteins to enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli pedestals . Infect . Immun . 69 , 3315 – 3322 . Grabs , D . , Slepnev , V . I . , Songyang , Z . , David , C . , Lynch , M . , Cantley , L . C . , De Camilli , P . , 1997 . The SH3 domain of amphiphysin binds the proline - rich domain of dynamin at a single site that defines a new SH3 binding consensus sequence . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13419 – 13425 . Gray , N . W . , Fourgeaud , L . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . , Cao , H . , Oswald , B . J . , Hemar , A . , McNiven , M . A . , 2003 . Dynamin 3 is a component of the postsynapse , where it interacts with mGluR5 and Homer . Curr . Biol . 13 , 510 – 515 . Gray , N . W . , Kruchten , A . E . , Chen , J . , McNiven , M . A . , 2005 . A dynamin - 3 spliced variant modulates the actin / cortactin - dependent morphogenesis of dendritic spines . J . Cell . Sci . 118 , 1279 – 1290 . Gu , C . , Yaddanapudi , S . , Weins , A . , Osborn , T . , Reiser , J . , Pollak , M . , Hartwig , J . , Sever , S . , 2010 . Direct dynamin - actin interactions regulate the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 29 , 3593 – 3606 . Haglund , C . M . , Welch , M . D . , 2011 . Pathogens and polymers : microbe – host interactions illu - minate the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 7 – 17 . ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 214 Hamao , K . , Morita , M . , Hosoya , H . , 2009 . New function of the proline rich domain in dynamin - 2 to negatively regulate its interaction with microtubules in mammalian cells . Exp . Cell Res . 315 , 1336 – 1345 . Hartsock , A . , Nelson , W . J . , 2008 . Adherens and tight junctions : structure , function and con - nections to the actin cytoskeleton . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1778 , 660 – 669 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , McNiven , M . A . , 1998 . Dynamin - mediated inter - nalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Henmi , Y . , Tanabe , K . , Takei , K . , 2011 . Disruption of microtubule network rescues aberrant actin comets in dynamin2 - depleted cells . PLoS One 6 , e28603 . Hinshaw , J . E . , Schmid , S . L . , 1995 . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 . Holroyd , P . , Lang , T . , Wenzel , D . , De Camilli , P . , Jahn , R . , 2002 . Imaging direct , dynamin - dependent recapture of fusing secretory granules on plasma membrane lawns from PC12 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 16806 – 16811 . Ishida , N . , Nakamura , Y . , Tanabe , K . , Li , S . A . , Takei , K . , 2011 . Dynamin 2 associates with microtubules at mitosis and regulates cell cycle progression . Cell Struct . Funct . 36 , 145 – 154 . Itoh , T . , Erdmann , K . S . , Roux , A . , Habermann , B . , Werner , H . , De Camilli , P . , 2005 . Dyna - min and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Ivanov , A . I . , Nusrat , A . , Parkos , C . A . , 2005 . Endocytosis of the apical junctional complex : mechanisms and possible roles in regulation of epithelial barriers . Bioessays 27 , 356 – 365 . Jaiswal , J . K . , Rivera , V . M . , Simon , S . M . , 2009 . Exocytosis of post - Golgi vesicles is regulated by components of the endocytic machinery . Cell 137 , 1308 – 1319 . Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . , 1998 . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 , 573 – 577 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , Rauvala , H . , 2000 . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 ( Pt 24 ) , 4421 – 4426 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . , Drubin , D . G . , 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , Drubin , D . G . , 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 . Kaverina , I . , Krylyshkina , O . , Small , J . V . , 1999 . Microtubule targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and dissociation . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1033 – 1044 . Kerr , M . C . , Teasdale , R . D . , 2009 . Defining macropinocytosis . Traffic 10 , 364 – 371 . Kessels , M . M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Drubin , D . G . , Qualmann , B . , 2001 . Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endo - cytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 351 – 366 . Kim , Y . T . , Wu , C . F . , 1987 . Reversible blockage of neurite development and growth cone formation in neuronal cultures of a temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 7 , 3245 – 3255 . Klein , D . E . , Lee , A . , Frank , D . W . , Marks , M . S . , Lemmon , M . A . , 1998 . The pleckstrin homol - ogy domains of dynamin isoforms require oligomerization for high affinity phos - phoinositide binding . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 27725 – 27733 . Kovacs , E . M . , Goodwin , M . , Ali , R . G . , Paterson , A . D . , Yap , A . S . , 2002 . Cadherin - directed actin assembly : E - cadherin physically associates with the Arp2 / 3 complex to direct actin assembly in nascent adhesive contacts . Curr . Biol . 12 , 379 – 382 . Kruchten , A . E . , McNiven , M . A . , 2006 . Dynamin as a mover and pincher during cell migra - tion and invasion . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1683 – 1690 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . , 2003 . A dynamin – cortactin – Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 215 Kurklinsky , S . , Chen , J . , McNiven , M . A . , 2011 . Growth cone morphology and spreading are regulated by a dynamin – cortactin complex at point contacts in hippocampal neurons . J . Neurochem . 117 , 48 – 60 . Lai , M . M . , Hong , J . J . , Ruggiero , A . M . , Burnett , P . E . , Slepnev , V . I . , De Camilli , P . , Snyder , S . H . , 1999 . The calcineurin - dynamin 1 complex as a calcium sensor for synaptic vesicle endo - cytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25963 – 25966 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . , Schmid , S . L . , 1997 . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 – 20335 . Lanzetti , L . , 2007 . Actin in membrane trafficking . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 453 – 458 . Lecuit , T . , Wieschaus , E . , 2002 . Junctions as organizing centers in epithelial cells ? A fly per - spective . Traffic 3 , 92 – 97 . Lee , E . , De Camilli , P . , 2002 . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 161 – 166 . Lee , Y . Y . , Do , I . G . , Park , Y . A . , Choi , J . J . , Song , S . Y . , Kim , C . J . , Kim , M . K . , Song , T . J . , Park , H . S . , Choi , C . H . , et al . , 2010 . Low dynamin 2 expression is associated with tumor inva - sion and metastasis in invasive squamous cell carcinoma of cervix . Cancer Biol . Ther . 10 , 329 – 335 . Letourneau , P . C . , Shattuck , T . A . , Ressler , A . H . , 1986 . Branching of sensory and sympathetic neurites in vitro is inhibited by treatment with taxol . J . Neurosci . 6 , 1912 – 1917 . Lim , J . P . , Gleeson , P . A . , 2011 . Macropinocytosis : an endocytic pathway for internalising large gulps . Immunol . Cell Biol . 89 , 836 – 843 . Linder , S . , Wiesner , C . , Himmel , M . , 2011 . Degrading devices : invadosomes in proteolytic cell invasion . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 185 – 211 . Linder , S . , 2009 . Invadosomes at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3009 – 3013 . Liu , Y . W . , Surka , M . C . , Schroeter , T . , Lukiyanchuk , V . , Schmid , S . L . , 2008 . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 5347 – 5359 . Liu , J . , Sun , Y . , Oster , G . F . , Drubin , D . G . , 2010 . Mechanochemical crosstalk during endocytic vesicle formation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 36 – 43 . Liu , Y . W . , Lukiyanchuk , V . , Schmid , S . L . , 2011a . Common membrane trafficking defects of disease - associated dynamin 2 mutations . Traffic 12 , 1620 – 1633 . Liu , Y . W . , Neumann , S . , Ramachandran , R . , Ferguson , S . M . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Schmid , S . L . , 2011b . Differential curvature sensing and generating activities of dynamin isoforms provide opportunities for tissue - specific regulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , E234 – E242 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Carlier , M . F . , 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Luxenburg , C . , Geblinger , D . , Klein , E . , Anderson , K . , Hanein , D . , Geiger , B . , Addadi , L . , 2007 . The architecture of the adhesive apparatus of cultured osteoclasts : from podosome formation to sealing zone assembly . PLoS One 2 , e179 . Macia , E . , Ehrlich , M . , Massol , R . , Boucrot , E . , Brunner , C . , Kirchhausen , T . , 2006 . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 , 839 – 850 . Maeda , K . , Nakata , T . , Noda , Y . , Sato - Yoshitake , R . , Hirokawa , N . , 1992 . Interaction of dyna - min with microtubules : its structure and GTPase activity investigated by using highly purified dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 , 1181 – 1194 . Marks , B . , Stowell , M . H . , Vallis , Y . , Mills , I . G . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , McMahon , H . T . , 2001 . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 . Marsh , L . , Letourneau , P . C . , 1984 . Growth of neurites without filopodial or lamellipodial activity in the presence of cytochalasin B . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 2041 – 2047 . McMahon , H . T . , Boucrot , E . , 2011 . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 – 533 . ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 216 McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , Wong , T . W . , 2000 . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Wunderlich , I . , Almers , W . , 1999 . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , Almers , W . , 2002 . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . , Zenisek , D . , 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagi - nation , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Mooren , O . L . , Kotova , T . I . , Moore , A . J . , Schafer , D . A . , 2009 . Dynamin2 GTPase and cortac - tin remodel actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 23995 – 24005 . Mooren , O . L . , Galletta , B . J . , Cooper , J . A . , 2012 . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 81 , 661 – 686 . Morita , M . , Hamao , K . , Izumi , S . , Okumura , E . , Tanaka , K . , Kishimoto , T . , Hosoya , H . , 2010 . Proline - rich domain in dynamin - 2 has a low microtubule - binding activity : how is this activity controlled during mitosis in HeLa cells ? J . Biochem . 148 , 533 – 538 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . , et al . , 2000 . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 . Okamoto , M . , Schoch , S . , Sudhof , T . C . , 1999 . EHSH1 / intersectin , a protein that contains EH and SH3 domains and binds to dynamin and SNAP - 25 . A protein connection between exocytosis and endocytosis ? J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 18446 – 18454 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . , 2002 . The large GTPase dynamin regu - lates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 167 – 172 . Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mader , C . C . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Arias , M . , Chen , X . , Desmarais , V . , van Rheenen , J . , Koleske , A . J . , Condeelis , J . , 2009 . Cortactin regulates cofilin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 571 – 587 . Pollard , T . D . , 2007 . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 . Poodry , C . A . , Edgar , L . , 1979 . Reversible alteration in the neuromuscular junctions of Drosophila melanogaster bearing a temperature - sensitive mutation , shibire . J . Cell Biol . 81 , 520 – 527 . Praefcke , G . J . , McMahon , H . T . , 2004 . The dynamin superfamily : universal membrane tubu - lation and fission molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 133 – 147 . Pucadyil , T . J . , Schmid , S . L . , 2008 . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission and vesicle release . Cell 135 , 1263 – 1275 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , Kelly , R . B . , 2000 . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 . Raimondi , A . , Ferguson , S . M . , Lou , X . , Armbruster , M . , Paradise , S . , Giovedi , S . , Messa , M . , Kono , N . , Takasaki , J . , Cappello , V . , et al . , 2011 . Overlapping role of dynamin isoforms in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 70 , 1100 – 1114 . Ramachandran , R . , Schmid , S . L . , 2008 . Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J . 27 , 27 – 37 . Ramachandran , R . , Pucadyil , T . J . , Liu , Y . W . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Lukiyanchuk , V . , Schmid , S . L . , 2009 . Membrane insertion of the pleckstrin homology domain variable loop 1 is critical for dynamin - catalyzed vesicle scission . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4630 – 4639 . Ramachandran , R . , 2011 . Vesicle scission : dynamin . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 , 10 – 17 . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 217 Ringstad , N . , Gad , H . , Low , P . , Di Paolo , G . , Brodin , L . , Shupliakov , O . , De Camilli , P . , 1999 . Endophilin / SH3p4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 24 , 143 – 154 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , De Camilli , P . , 2006 . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 . Salazar , M . A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Pellegrini , L . , Cestra , G . , Butler , M . H . , Rossman , K . L . , Serna , D . M . , Sondek , J . , Gertler , F . B . , De Camilli , P . , 2003 . Tuba , a novel protein contain - ing bin / amphiphysin / Rvs and Dbl homology domains , links dynamin to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 49031 – 49043 . Salvarezza , S . B . , Deborde , S . , Schreiner , R . , Campagne , F . , Kessels , M . M . , Qualmann , B . , Caceres , A . , Kreitzer , G . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , 2009 . LIM kinase 1 and cofilin regulate actin filament population required for dynamin - dependent apical carrier fission from the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 438 – 451 . Sauvonnet , N . , Dujeancourt , A . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , 2005 . Cortactin and dynamin are required for the clathrin - independent endocytosis of gamma cytokine receptor . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 155 – 163 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , Cooper , J . A . , 2002 . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and filament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 . Schafer , D . A . , 2004 . Regulating actin dynamics at membranes : a focus on dynamin . Traffic 5 , 463 – 469 . Schlunck , G . , Damke , H . , Kiosses , W . B . , Rusk , N . , Symons , M . H . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Schmid , S . L . , Schwartz , M . A . , 2004 . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 . Schmid , S . L . , Frolov , V . A . , 2011 . Dynamin : functional design of a membrane fission catalyst . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 79 – 105 . Schmitz , U . , Thommes , K . , Beier , I . , Dusing , R . , Vetter , H . , 2004 . Identification of Nck inter - acting proteins in vascular smooth muscle cells . Clin . Exp . Hypertens . 26 , 267 – 275 . Shajahan , A . N . , Timblin , B . K . , Sandoval , R . , Tiruppathi , C . , Malik , A . B . , Minshall , R . D . , 2004 . Role of Src - induced dynamin - 2 phosphorylation in caveolae - mediated endocy - tosis in endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20392 – 20400 . Shpetner , H . S . , Vallee , R . B . , 1989 . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 . Shpetner , H . S . , Vallee , R . B . , 1992 . Dynamin is a GTPase stimulated to high levels of activity by microtubules . Nature 355 , 733 – 735 . Shpetner , H . S . , Herskovits , J . S . , Vallee , R . B . , 1996 . A binding site for SH3 domains targets dynamin to coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 13 – 16 . Song , B . D . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , 2004a . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants that dif - ferentially affect GTP binding , GTP hydrolysis , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 40431 – 40436 . Song , B . D . , Yarar , D . , Schmid , S . L . , 2004b . An assembly - incompetent mutant establishes a requirement for dynamin self - assembly in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 2243 – 2252 . Soulet , F . , Yarar , D . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . , 2005 . SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efficient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2058 – 2067 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . , McMahon , H . T . , 1999 . Nucleotide - dependent confor - mational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 . Sundborger , A . , Soderblom , C . , Vorontsova , O . , Evergren , E . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Shupliakov , O . , 2011 . An endophilin - dynamin complex promotes budding of clathrin - coated vesicles during synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 133 – 143 . Sweitzer , S . M . , Hinshaw , J . E . , 1998 . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 . ManishaMenonandDorothyA . Schafer 218 Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . , De Camilli , P . , 1995 . Tubular membrane invagina - tions coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . , De Camilli , P . , 1999 . Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 . Tanabe , K . , Takei , K . , 2009 . Dynamic instability of microtubules requires dynamin 2 and is impaired in a Charcot – Marie – Tooth mutant . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 939 – 948 . Taylor , M . J . , Lampe , M . , Merrifield , C . J . , 2012 . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 10 , e1001302 . Tehrani , S . , Faccio , R . , Chandrasekar , I . , Ross , F . P . , Cooper , J . A . , 2006 . Cortactin has an essential and specific role in osteoclast actin assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2882 – 2895 . Thompson , H . M . , Skop , A . R . , Euteneuer , U . , Meyer , B . J . , McNiven , M . A . , 2002 . The large GTPase dynamin associates with the spindle midzone and is required for cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2111 – 2117 . Thompson , H . M . , Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Euteneuer , U . , McNiven , M . A . , 2004 . Dynamin 2 binds gamma - tubulin and participates in centrosome cohesion . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 335 – 342 . Torre , E . , McNiven , M . A . , Urrutia , R . , 1994 . Dynamin 1 antisense oligonucleotide treat - ment prevents neurite formation in cultured hippocampal neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 32411 – 32417 . Tse , S . M . , Furuya , W . , Gold , E . , Schreiber , A . D . , Sandvig , K . , Inman , R . D . , Grinstein , S . , 2003 . Differential role of actin , clathrin , and dynamin in Fc gamma receptor - mediated endo - cytosis and phagocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 3331 – 3338 . Unsworth , K . E . , Mazurkiewicz , P . , Senf , F . , Zettl , M . , McNiven , M . , Way , M . , Holden , D . W . , 2007 . Dynamin is required for F - actin assembly and pedestal formation by enteropatho - genic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 438 – 449 . Urrutia , R . , Henley , J . R . , Cook , T . , McNiven , M . A . , 1997 . The dynamins : redundant or dis - tinct functions for an expanding family of related GTPases ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 , 377 – 384 . van der Bliek , A . M . , Meyerowitz , E . M . , 1991 . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature 351 , 411 – 414 . Verma , S . , Shewan , A . M . , Scott , J . A . , Helwani , F . M . , den Elzen , N . R . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , Yap , A . S . , 2004 . Arp2 / 3 activity is necessary for efficient formation of E - cadherin adhesive contacts . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 34062 – 34070 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ma , X . , Adelstein , R . S . , Horwitz , A . R . , 2009 . Non - muscle myo - sin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 778 – 790 . Wang , Y . , Cao , H . , Chen , J . , McNiven , M . A . , 2011 . A direct interaction between the large GTPase dynamin - 2 and FAK regulates focal adhesion dynamics in response to active Src . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1529 – 1538 . Warnock , D . E . , Schmid , S . L . , 1996 . Dynamin GTPase , a force - generating molecular switch . Bioessays 18 , 885 – 893 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , Cooper , J . A . , 2001 . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network forma - tion . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , Parsons , J . T . , 2000 . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires inter - actions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . Weinberg , J . , Drubin , D . G . , 2012 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 1 – 13 . Weller , S . G . , Capitani , M . , Cao , H . , Micaroni , M . , Luini , A . , Sallese , M . , McNiven , M . A . , 2010 . Src kinase regulates the integrity and function of the Golgi apparatus via activa - tion of dynamin 2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 5863 – 5868 . DynaminandtheCytoskeleton 219 Wunderlich , L . , Farago , A . , Buday , L . , 1999 . Characterization of interactions of Nck with Sos and dynamin . Cell Signal . 11 , 25 – 29 . Xin , X . , Rabiner , C . A . , Mains , R . E . , Eipper , B . A . , 2009 . Kalirin12 interacts with dynamin . BMC Neurosci . 10 , 61 . Yamada , H . , Abe , T . , Li , S . A . , Masuoka , Y . , Isoda , M . , Watanabe , M . , Nasu , Y . , Kumon , H . , Asai , A . , Takei , K . , 2009 . Dynasore , a dynamin inhibitor , suppresses lamellipodia formation and cancer cell invasion by destabilizing actin filaments . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Com - mun . 390 , 1142 – 1148 . Zheng , J . , Cahill , S . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Fushman , D . , Schlessinger , J . , Cowburn , D . , 1996 . Identification of the binding site for acidic phospholipids on the pH domain of dyna - min : implications for stimulation of GTPase activity . J . Mol . Biol . 255 , 14 – 21 . Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Hao , J . J . , Liu , J . , Smith , N . , Zhan , X . , 2005 . Regulation of cortactin / dyna - min interaction by actin polymerization during the fission of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 807 – 817 . Zuchner , S . , Noureddine , M . , Kennerson , M . , Verhoeven , K . , Claeys , K . , De Jonghe , P . , Merory , J . , Oliveira , S . A . , Speer , M . C . , Stenger , J . E . , et al . , 2005 . Mutations in the pleck - strin homology domain of dynamin 2 cause dominant intermediate Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease . Nat . Genet . 37 , 289 – 294 .