Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect International Journal of Information Management journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / ijinfomgt Adaptive use of social networking applications in contemporary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts Anuragini Shirish a , Imed Boughzala a , ∗ , Shirish C . Srivastava b a Smart 2 Research Team , Department of Information Systems , Telecom Ecole de Management , France b Department of Operations Management and Information Technology , HEC Paris , France a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 27 May 2014 Received in revised form 30 March 2016 Accepted 1 April 2016 Available online xxx Keywords : Corporate social networking Adaptive use intention Technology adoption Collaboration Innovation Generation Y Motivation a b s t r a c t With the entry of the contemporary generation ( Gen Y ) into the workforce , organizations are interested in leveraging Gen Y’s technological preferences when designing their information systems . Speciﬁcally , motivated by Gen Y’s dependence on Social Networking Applications ( SNAs ) in their private lives , orga - nizations have initiated the implementation of Corporate Social Networks ( CSNs ) to facilitate closer collaboration and knowledge sharing within organizations . However , these initiatives have not been received with the expected enthusiasm from Gen Y employees . To better understand this apparent anomaly , the current study explores the Gen Y cohort’s intended adaptive use of SNAs in organizational settings , as CSNs . This study uses an enriched Delphi technique to examine the perceptions and concerns of members of Gen Y regarding use of CSNs . In addition , employing a structured qualitative approach and contextualizing the needs hierarchy theory to the speciﬁc case of Gen Y employees , this study identiﬁes six organizational requirements for successfully implementing CSNs . This work extends the literature on adaptive use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems and delineates a set of useful implications for managers intending to implement such systems for Gen Y employees . © 2016 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Science and technology revolutionize our lives , but memory , tradi - tion and myth frame our response . Arthur Schlesinger ( Historian ) The emergence of numerous Web 2 . 0 tools is enabling users to organize , share , and collaborate on a continual basis ( Nabil , 2013 ) . Social Networking Applications ( SNAs ) , which facilitate online social network communities for sharing user - created contents , are perhaps the most popular of these tools ( Kim , Kim , & Nam , 2010 ) . SNAs are deﬁned as “web - based services that allow individuals to ( 1 ) construct a public or a semi - public proﬁle within a bounded system , ( 2 ) articulate a list of other users with whom they share a connection , and ( 3 ) view and traverse their list of connections and those made by others within the system” ( Boyd & Ellison , 2007 ; p . 8 ) . SNAs not only offer users functionalities for identity man - agement but also help them keep in touch with others ( Richter & Koch , 2008 ) . When SNAs are incorporated within the organiza - tional fabric , they are termed Corporate Social Networks ( CSNs ) ∗ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : anuragini . shirish @ telecom - em . eu ( A . Shirish ) , imed . boughzala @ telecom - em . eu ( I . Boughzala ) , srivastava @ hec . fr ( S . C . Srivastava ) . and fall under the generic classiﬁcation of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems ( Anderson , 2007 ; Leidner , Koch , & Gonzalez , 2010 ) . Despite the emergence of SNAs as CSNs , their adoption and use within orga - nizations is still in a nascent stage . Hence , an examination of issues related to the use of SNAs within organizations as CSNs will cer - tainly be of value to both research and practice . A recent study found that the U . S . labor market is currently dom - inated by Gen Y employees 1 and that two - thirds of these employees expressed a desire to leave their organization by 2020 , primar - ily because of a misalignment between their personal preferences and the organizational strategies ( Deloitte , 2016 ) . To minimize employee attrition and create an encouraging climate for their employees , organizations need to better understand Gen Y’s moti - vations so that they can closely align the personal preferences of this majority employee segment with the goals of the organization . It is widely known that Gen Y is heavily dependent on SNAs ( such as different social networking websites , platforms , and mobile apps ) for their routine social interactions . Generational Cohort Theory ( GCT ) suggests that an individual’s values , beliefs , atti - tudes , and inclinations are impacted and shaped by major historical events and changes in the society ( Inglehart , 1997 ) . Leveraging GCT , 1 These are employees born in 1980 or later . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 0268 - 4012 / © 2016 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 2 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx researchers predicted that for contemporary technology - savvy dig - ital natives , SNAs such as Facebook , Twitter , and Pinterest would serve as natural extensions to their social lives ( see Aral , Dellarocas , & Godes , 2013 ; Dudezert , Boughzala , & Mounoud , 2009 ; He , Zha , & Ling , 2013 ) . Because of their familiarity with the use of SNAs in their personal lives , members of Gen Y are also expected to use such tools in their professional lives . This use is , in turn , expected to contribute to organizational productivity through better knowl - edge ﬂows for open collaboration and innovation ( see Chesbrough & Appleyard , 2007 ; Constant , Keisler , & Sproull , 1994 ; Cramton , 2001 ; De Hertogh , Viaene , & Dedene , 2011 ; Kaplan & Haenlein , 2010 ) , and it can be a means to unlock tremendous ﬁnancial value ( Chui , Dewhurst , & Pollak 2013 ) . In view of these expectations , organizations are increasingly incorporating SNAs as the preferred medium for professional interactions to better suit the needs of the Gen Y workforce . However , recent studies show that the anticipated workplace enthusiasm for CSNs has not been seen among employ - ees , including the Gen Yers ( members of Gen Y ) , which raises practical concerns about their implementation , adaptation , and consequent use within organizations ( see De Hertogh et al . , 2011 ; Leidner et al . , 2010 ; Li , 2015 ) . Hence , from a business standpoint , it is important to understand the contextual factors surrounding Gen Y’s intentions to use CSNs . Studies in this area can help man - agers design better strategies for successfully implementing CSN projects , thereby contributing to the performance of these imple - mentations . From a research perspective , despite a wealth of studies devoted to understanding technology adoption and its use , it is unclear why Gen Yers , who regularly use SNAs in their personal social lives , are less enthusiastic about using CSNs in their professional lives . This apparent anamoly calls for a nuanced theoretical understanding of Gen Y’s beliefs and motivations regarding use of such systems ( Kietzmann , Hermkens , McCarthy , & Silvestre , 2011 ) . Recent lit - erature on adaptive use intention ( AUI ) offers some insights for understanding this phenomenon ( Chandra , Srivastava , & Theng , 2012 ) . AUI is the intention to use a technology in a setting differ - ent from the one for which it was initially designed . 2 However , our understanding of AUI has not yet been sufﬁciently developed in the information management literature . In contrast , generational literature shows that it is useful to look at speciﬁc generational attributes as a means to examine associated phenomenon . Thus , the integration of generational diversity with the phenomenon of adaptive use of technology adoption should be theorized to better inform theories related to technology adoption and use for emerg - ing contexts such as CSNs . It is plausible that speciﬁc attributes of Gen Y inﬂuence their AUI ( or lack thereof ) to use CSNs ( see Chandra et al . , 2012 ) . According to the generational literature , Gen Y has very differ - ent work beliefs and value systems than baby boomers and Gen X ( Hershatter & Epstein , 2010 ) , and generational cohorts can inﬂu - ence the ways in which organizations handle work – life fusion issues related to the use of new technologies ( Haeger & Lingham , 2014 ) . We posit that these differences need to be suitably fac - tored into Enterprise 2 . 0 technology implementations for them to be successful ( Boughzala , 2012 ; Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ; Gorman , Nelson , & Glassman , 2004 ) . Thus , integration of contextual factors associated with CSN technology and the generational speci - ﬁcity of the users requires an exploratory lens to obtain a richer understanding of the consequent use of the CSNs by such users ( see Johns , 2006 ) . Clearly , deciphering the factors that inﬂuence Gen Y’s AUI for Enterprise 2 . 0 technology is crucial for businesses and will 2 In the context of this research , corporate use of social networking tools , as CSNs , provides a very different context for SNAs , which were initially designed to be used by individuals for personal communication and messaging . also advance technology adoption research . Hence , grounding our exploratory study in generational cohort theory ( GCT ) and taking an adaptive use perspective , we seek to identify some of the key con - siderations for successfully implementing Enterprise 2 . 0 systems , speciﬁcally , CSNs . Further , we situate the adaptive use perspective in the needs hierarchy theory to better appreciate the motivations of Gen Y users . Because this is one of the ﬁrst qualitative exploratory studies on the subject , we employ an enriched Delphi technique to examine the following two broad research questions : RQ1 : How does Gen Y perceive the use of CSN applications in a corporate scenario ? RQ2 : What are Gen Y ’s key concerns regarding use of CSN applica - tions in a corporate scenario ? We expect that this study will contribute to the literature on the adaptive use of technology by contextualizing it to Gen Y users , thereby addressing the call for context - speciﬁc theorizing ( see Bamberger , 2008 ; Johns , 2006 ) . We also expect that the ﬁndings from this study will provide practical guidelines for organizational managers who are implementing Enterprise 2 . 0 systems such as CSNs , which are a major challenge in the current socially networked environment ( see Aral et al . , 2013 ; He et al . , 2013 ) . The rest of the paper is structured as follows . In Section 2 , we describe the background theory and literature , and in Section 3 , we describe the research method we employed . In Section 4 , the results and discussion section , we propose a framework for the adaptive use of Enterprise 2 . 0 by Gen Y users . Finally , in Section 5 , we discuss some limitations and implications of this research . Fig . 1 depicts the research framework for this study , highlighting the practical and theoretical gaps it addresses . 2 . Background literature 2 . 1 . Gen Y use and work values regarding Enterprise 2 . 0 systems In a recent study examining the ﬁnancial contribution of CSN solution implementations in 60 leading global organizations , SelectMinds ( 2008 ) 3 found that private , secure CSNs can provide substantial savings through a better connected workforce ( Sena & Sena , 2008 ) . CSNs are an efﬁcient way to link remotely located people with speciﬁc competency domains in large organizations to create and maintain sustainable relationships . Several companies , including IBM , Disney , Accenture , and Redbull , are currently exper - imenting with CSNs . The social aspect of CSN applications makes them an attractive option for knowledge - intensive organizations ( Richter & Riemer , 2009 ) . However , despite the anticipated gains , a few recent studies have reported that the expected workplace enthusiasm for CSNs is not to be found among Gen Y employees , which raises concerns about the implementation , adaptation , and consequent use of CSNs within organizations ( see De Hertogh et al . , 2011 ; Leidner et al . , 2010 ) . To better understand such implementa - tions , we ground our study in GCT in order to accurately incorporate the motivations of Gen Y users . The two major factors that distinguish generations are birth rates and the speciﬁc events of the times ( Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ) . GCT maintains that historical incidents of national / global signiﬁcance shake the foundations of existing social orders and value systems and give birth to new generational cohorts ( Inglehart , 1997 ) . A generational cohort can be character - ized as a group of people born during the same period and having experienced similar historical events at critical stages of their development ( Kupperschmidt , 2000 ; Ryder , 1965 ) . Each genera - tion is known to be affected by several contextual factors , including 3 SelectMinds is a leading provider of Corporate Social Networking ( CSN ) solutions that was recently acquired by Oracle Corporation . Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 3 Fig . 1 . Research framework : exploring the problems and perceptions associated with Gen Yers’ intentions to use SNAs as CSNs . social , economic , political , and technological factors , in relation to their values and beliefs regarding work ( Real , Mitnick , & Maloney , 2010 ) . The Generation Y ( or Gen Y ) cohort ( also termed as Gener - ation Me , Millennials , Generation Net , Yers , and Digital Natives ) is the group of individuals born in or after 1980 ( see Dudezert et al . , 2009 ; Gorman et al . , 2004 ) . Several studies further subdivide Gen Y into Gen Y and Gen Z ( i . e . , those born in the 1990s or later ) , due to accelerated technological advancements that have been radically different in the latter period ( Tulgan , 2013 ) . However , for the pur - pose of this study , we use the broader categorization of Gen Y as all those who were born in or after 1980 . The most striking historical development that has shaped this generation is the accessibility and utilization of the ever - developing , ubiquitous , and pervasive information and com - munication technologies ( ICTs ) . Hence , Gen Y is considered to be the most digitally advanced generation , comprised of technolog - ically savvy and avid users of Web 2 . 0 tools for self - organizing , sharing , and collaboration ( Puybaraud , Russel , McEwan , Luessink , & Beck , 2010 ) . Web 2 . 0 tools such as blogs , wikis , Really Simple Syn - dication ( RSS ) feeds , SNAs , folksonomy , podcasting , tagging , and mashups are a part of everyday life for Gen Y ( Boughzala , 2012 ; Han & Su , 2011 ; Leidner et al . , 2010 ) . Gen Y users are not only keen on tapping the collective intelligence of the masses ( Malone , Laubacher , & Dellarocas , 2009 ) ; they also choose the tools and devices they deem ﬁt to use , symbolizing the notion of self - care ( Bitner , Ostrom , & Meuter , 2002 ) . This has led to the development of larger organizational interventions such as BYOD ( Bring Your Own Device ) , BYOA ( Bring Your Own Application ) , and even BYOB ( Bring Your Own Behavior ) to address users’ technical comfort at the workplace ( see Ballagas , Rohs , Sheridan , & Borchers , 2004 ) . Because Gen Y has grown up with computers and the Internet , they are expected to be more dependent as well as more savvy than previous generations regarding use of new technologies . Recent studies have found that Gen Yers prefer work environments that include greater use of technology ( Boughzala , 2012 ; Deal , Altman , David , & Rogelberg , 2010 ; Dudezert et al . , 2009 ; Gorman et al . , 2004 ; Puybaraud et al . , 2010 ; Sox , Kline , & Crews , 2014 ) . Yet Gen Y users are generally skeptical about leveraging media and social networking sites to streamline the information ﬂow ( Miller , 2006 ) . Importantly , Gen Y’s work values and beliefs are also known to be different from those of other generations such as Gen X and baby boomers ( Boughzala , 2012 ; Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ; Rawlins , Indvik , & Johnson , 2008 ) . Table 1 provides a snapshot of the work values and beliefs of Gen Y employees . From Table 1 , we observe that Gen Y likes to socialize and prefers to use electronic media for connecting with others . Owing to Gen Y’s familiarity with and preference for using online social networking , many organizations are incorporating CSNs for interaction within the organization with a view to increasing productivity through open collaboration and innovation . De Hertogh et al . ( 2011 ) delin - eate several ways to implement governance of Web 2 . 0 within an organizational context in order to achieve open collaboration and collective creativity . Tools such as CSNs that are used for connect - ing the different organizational stakeholders fall under the broad classiﬁcation of Enterprise 2 . 0 or Web 2 . 0 systems , and the social aspects of these applications are considered an important oppor - tunity for knowledge - intensive organizations ( see McAfee , 2006 ; Richter & Riemer , 2009 ) , and they enable smart working . Smart working involves organizational systems that are designed to be good for both the business and the people . It emphasizes the cre - ation of engaging , meaningful work that can maximize employees’ self - determination and choices and banks on effective collabora - tion and innovation as process outcomes ( McEwan , 2013 ) . Smart working appears to align with many of the dominant work val - ues of Gen Y employees . Although Gen Y is known to be initiating behavioral trends that are inﬂuencing other generations , recent studies have highlighted concerns about their use of Enterprise 2 . 0 technologies in the organizational context ( Leidner et al . , 2010 ) . Stark differences seem to surface between their personal and pro - fessional uses of social networking technologies , which make the beneﬁts that organizations can derive through Enterprise 2 . 0 tools questionable ( De Hertogh et al . , 2011 ; Sena & Sena , 2008 ) . Thus , in this context , the deployment and implementation of Enterprise 2 . 0 tools such as CSNs are an important issue that needs deeper examination . Although an inﬂuence of generational cohort characteristics on technology use and adoption seems plausible , not many informa - tion systems ( IS ) studies have examined this important issue ( see Anandarajan , Zaman , Dai , & Arinze , 2010 ; Leidner et al . , 2010 ) . The broader domain of management studies , ranging from nursing to Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 4 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Table 1 Work values and beliefs of Gen Y . Values and beliefs Description Dominant values Stimulation , self - direction , hedonism Stereotypes Spoiled , technology dependent , scatterbrained Work ethics Multitasking , group oriented , explain why Communication E - mail / voice mail , instant messaging / social media Feedback Instantaneous , seek approval / praise Authority Lines are blurred , why must I follow ? Family and work Work – life balance , if I must choose I will select family and friends Rewards Appreciate the opportunity to provide input , technical wiz Source : adapted from Crumpacker and Crumpacker ( 2007 ) . hospitality industry , acknowledges the signiﬁcant role of gener - ational perspectives in inﬂuencing organizational issues such as motivation , recruitment , and retention of organizational employ - ees ( Gursoy , Maier , & Chi , 2008 ; Nusair , Bilgihan , Okumus , & Cobanoglu , 2013 ; Pardue & Morgan , 2008 ) and teachers ( Lee , Hung , & Ling , 2012 ) , leadership preferences , and marketing strategies ( Dulin , 2008 ; Lunsford & Burnett , 1992 ) , yet theoretical insights regarding the speciﬁc context of Gen Y are rather limited ( see De Hauw & De Vos , 2010 ; Rawlins et al . , 2008 ) . Moreover , a few stud - ies have reported that the integration of Gen Y employees into the organizational fabric is one of the core issues that current human resource managers seem to be facing ( see , for example , Han & Su , 2011 ) . It is expected that the growing population of retirees from other generations will invariably be replaced by Gen Y employ - ees ; hence integration of their work expectations and behaviors into organizational procedures cannot be ignored , as this will have an important bearing on the functioning of future organizations ( Tulgan , 2013 ) . However , despite the importance of this issue , to the best of our knowledge , no study has yet examined the Enter - prise 2 . 0 system adoption behaviors of Gen Y employees in light of their unique work - related values and beliefs . To better understand Gen Y’s speciﬁc motivations for using Enterprise 2 . 0 systems in the workplace , we situate our arguments in the literature on AUI for technologies and explore some of the basic questions related to the subject . 2 . 2 . Adaptive use intention for technologies and the needs hierarchy theory How to assess the acceptance and use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems is one of the prime questions that plague organizational managers today . Prior IS literature has well - developed frameworks for assess - ing both initial technology adoption intention ( e . g . , Davis , 1989 ; Venkatesh & Davis , 2000 ) and continued use intention for technolo - gies ( Bhattacherjee , 2001 ; Teo , Srivastava , & Jiang , 2009 ) . However , the use of an existing technology with a different and new utility perspective in unrelated areas has not been adequately researched ( see Chandra et al . , 2012 ; Po - An Hsieh & Wang , 2007 ) . In a recent study , Chandra et al . ( 2012 ) developed the concept of adaptive use intention ( AUI ) to describe a user’s intention to employ a particu - lar technology in a setting different from the one for which it was originally designed . The study examined how Virtual World ( VW ) technology , which was initially intended for recreational purposes , can be utilized in a work - related professional context . Although the study developed a framework based on cognitive absorption and user trust as important determinants in the context of VWs , it acknowledged that in other contexts there could be different sit - uational factors that should be incorporated into the AUI model . Moreover , there have been calls to study system usage from a mul - tilevel approach in order to obtain richer insights into the nature and use of IS in organizations ( Burton - Jones & Gallivan , 2007 ) . Hence , in the current context of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems , it is critical to examine the factors facilitating Gen Y’s AUI to use SNAs in their modiﬁed organizational avatars as CSNs . This is especially important because prior studies have shown that the motivations for using a technology can vary based on the initial design context for that technology , for example , as a recreational social tool versus a workplace collaboration tool ( Szalma , 2014 ) . In accordance with GCT , it could be argued that Gen Y employees may have differ - ent motivations when it comes to implementation and use of SNAs within an organizational context . Given the fact that Gen Yers have speciﬁc work preferences and are considered digital natives , their expectations regarding the use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems within organizational contexts will have a bearing on the success of such technologies in the future . To better understand the adaptive use motivations of Gen Y employees in a structured way , we leveraged Maslow’s needs hierarchy theory ( Maslow , 1954 ) to categorize the data after collecting it . This theory has been used extensively in the organi - zational literature to study the motivational aspects of employees . Maslow’s theory states that in general , there are ﬁve classiﬁcations of the needs that motivate people , and these form a hierarchy . The classiﬁcations are , in hierarchical order : physiological needs , safety and security needs , social and belongingness needs ( social needs ) , ego , status , and self - esteem needs ( esteem needs ) , and self - actualization needs . Maslow also hypothesized a gratiﬁca - tion / activation proposition stating that once a need has been at least relatively satisﬁed , that need submerges , allowing the next hierarchical level of need to be activated . The most basic needs to be fulﬁlled are the physiological needs , followed by more com - plex ones such as social needs and ﬁnally self - actualization needs . The basic assumption of this theory is that unsatisﬁed needs trig - ger behaviors while satisﬁed needs are no longer motivators . Prior studies have used this theory to study employee motivation in different contexts ( e . g . , Berl , Williamson , & Powell , 1984 ; Sandri & Bowen , 2011 ) and have found that the physiological needs of employees are generally met by most of today’s organizations , while the other needs are only partially satisﬁed in most instances ( Rajagopal & Abraham , 2009 ) . Integrating this hierarchy of needs with the speciﬁc motivations of Gen Y , we propose that for the context of Gen Y employees , the needs hierarchy model should be modiﬁed by grouping social , esteem , and self - actualization needs together , as these are of equal importance for Gen Y employees after their safety and physiologi - cal needs have been met ( see Section 4 for more details ) . Thus , for the purpose of this study , we reclassify Gen Y employees’ needs as shown in Fig . 2 . Integrating prior GCT literature with considerations regarding AUI and the needs hierarchy theory , the current study aims to identify the key themes that designers of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems should take into consideration in order to address Gen Y’s perspective . The results of this study will provide theoretical and practical guidelines for Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 5 Fig . 2 . Hierarchy of needs for Gen Y employees . Enterprise 2 . 0 implementations from a Gen Y perspective and can stimulate further research on the subject . 3 . Research method In order to address the identiﬁed research gaps and explore the broad research objectives elaborated above , we carried out a qual - itative exploratory study based on a Delphi approach , enriched by the use of ThinkLet - based modeling ( Briggs , de Vreede , & Nunamaker , 2003 ) . Twenty - four Gen Y graduate management stu - dents from a French business school participated in electronic brainstorming to collect their thoughts about the key question of “their motivations and use of SNAs as CSNs within a corporate envi - ronment” . The ﬁve subquestions posed to the respondents during the brainstorming process were : 1 . To what extent can CSN applications be used in an organization ? 2 . What beneﬁts do you perceive for yourself and for the organiza - tion in using CSN applications ? 3 . What are the dos and do nots for making CSN deployments suc - cessful ? 4 . How would you like to use CSNs as organizational employees ( dos and do nots ) ? 5 . How should managers use CSNs in organizations ( dos and do nots ) ? Delphi studies have regularly been used in IS research when a consensus needs to be achieved among domain experts on a topic requiring idea generation ( Keil , Tiwana , & Bush , 2002 ) . While Del - phi studies are generally survey - based , we used a Group Support System ( GSS ) with a structured facilitation process based on the use of ThinkLets ( Briggs et al . , 2003 ; Schmidt , Montoya Weiss , & Massey , 2001 ) . GSS is a suite of software tools designed to sup - port collective problem solving , including the generation of ideas and reducing , organizing , and evaluating idea sets ( Fjermestad & Hiltz , 1999 ) . ThinkLets are prepackaged thinking activities ( facil - itation techniques ) that create predictable , repeatable patterns of collaboration among people working towards a common goal . They facilitate the emergence and sharing of information among par - ticipants , and they help facilitators control the reﬂection process in order to converge on relevant proposals . ThinkLets are used to streamline collaboration during brainstorming sessions for rapid but creative decision - making ( de Vreede , Briggs , & Massey , 2009 ) . Each participant in a GSS session uses a computer to submit ideas and vote on ideas submitted by other members of the group , allow - ing them to make selections , organize ideas , and ﬁnally to write draft texts . Through the use of GSS , participants can simultaneously generate , contribute , and evaluate ideas anonymously while par - Table 2 Demographics of participants in the Delphi study . Attribute Description Total number of participants 24 Nationality 16 French , 2Chinese , 2 Italian , 1 German , 1 Tunisian , 1 Moroccan , 1 Indian Education MBA students Minimum participant age 23 years Maximum participant age 29 years Male : Female Ratio 15 : 9 Minimum organizational experience 6 months ticipating in a well - structured deliberation process ( Briggs et al . , 2003 ) . The use of GSS in our data collection allowed us to put together extensive data in the form of well - organized group collab - oration results . The tool also helped us synthesize and summarize the results of the exploratory brainstorming process . 3 . 1 . The participants Students from a French business school MBA program were invited to participate in the study . In order to motivate them , stu - dents who volunteered to participate in the study received extra credit . The participants were asked to answer the questions enu - merated above through electronic brainstorming . Demographics for the study participants are shown in Table 2 . The brainstorming process consisted of several activities in which the participants were asked to engage for an initial 180 min period followed by 90 min of open discussion . The details of the activities are summarized in the following section and are also presented in Table 3 . 3 . 2 . The brainstorming process After an initial introductory presentation by the study facilitator on Enterprise 2 . 0 systems and CSN applications and a descrip - tion of the scope of the brainstorming , participants were asked to anonymously generate ideas around the key question and the ﬁve subquestions listed above . This process continued for about 40 min . Next , the participants were assigned to six subgroups , with one question per group , and were asked to reduce , clarify , and organize the collectively generated ideas into unique statements around the key theme and the subquestions . The time allotted to this process was also about 40 min , and the goal was to converge on similar ideas , remove unrelated ones , and reword those that were insufﬁciently clear . The subgroups for the main theme and the ﬁrst subquestion ordered responses in the form of statements in a single list . The subgroup for the second subquestion classiﬁed the state - ments around two themes : beneﬁts of using CSNs for organizations and beneﬁts of using CSNs for the participants . The subgroups for the other three subquestions classiﬁed statements in terms of dos and do nots . The participants were then reorganized as a single group , and each of the 6 subgroups presented and explained to the uniﬁed group their selection of statements for their question . The allo - cated time for this process was again about 40 min . Subsequently , participants were asked to individually and anonymously rate the relevance of each of the statements related to each question on a 5 - point Likert - type scale , with ‘5 (cid:3) representing a very relevant statement and ‘1 (cid:3) representing the least relevant statement . For this step , they were given 20 min . During the next 40 min , the voting scores were presented to all of the participants ( statement by state - ment ) in a raw format to stimulate further discussion on the results and to allow for the reformulation of statements wherever neces - Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 6 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Table 3 Delphi method : procedure employed . Stage Content Duration Round 1 • Introduction , brainstorming session 40 min Round 2 • Participants were encouraged to organize into six subgroups . • Collective reduction , clariﬁcation , organization of generated ideas into unique statements around key theme and subquestions . 40 min Round 3 • Participants were reorganized into a single group . • Each subgroup’s selection of statements was presented to the uniﬁed group in order to create a single uniﬁed list of relevant statements . 40 min Round 4 • Participants assessed ( on a 5 - point Likert scale ) the importance of each statement from the uniﬁed list of statements for the key theme . 20 min Round 5 • Voting scores were presented to all . • Discussion was restimulated . • The importance of each generated statement was reexamined ( re - rated ) . • The agreement level among the participants was veriﬁed in order to arrive at a ﬁnal consensus on the signiﬁcance of each statement generated . 40 min Break – 15 min Round 6 • Open discussion . • Conclusion of brainstorming session . 90 min sary in order to clarify ratings and build a consensus . Finally , after a 15 - min break , the participants reassembled to conclude the brain - storming process ; here we conducted an open discussion of about 90 min with the participants to further deepen our understanding about the practices that would make for successful deployment of CSN applications in organizations . Based on the brainstorming pro - cess and a reﬁnement of the lists , we subsequently generated a set of guidelines for facilitating adaptive use of CSNs in organizations . Throughout the process , a research assistant audio recorded the sessions and took detailed notes . In addition , participants docu - mented their key contributions on post - it notes and gave these to the research team at the end of the session . The research facilita - tor also made detailed notes immediately following each step of the brainstorming process . These notes and all of the data collected during the brainstorming process formed part of the data that we used in arriving at the abstracted ﬁndings . Table 3 summarizes the procedure employed for the Delphi method in this research . 4 . Results and discussion From the process described in the previous section and the state - ments that were generated , it was clear that Gen Y does recognize and acknowledge the usefulness of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems ( specif - ically , CSNs ) for an organization , which partially addresses the ﬁrst research question regarding the perceptions of Gen Y users con - cerning the use of CSN applications in a corporate scenario . Some of the major advantages of CSNs as perceived by the respondents that emerged from the brainstorming process are listed in Table 4 . Despite the identiﬁed advantages of CSNs for organizations , the study participants acknowledged the multifarious challenges in such an implementation . With a view to answering our sec - ond research question relating to the key concerns about using a CSN application within a corporate scenario ( and how they can be overcome ) , we coded the data generated from the brainstorming process in a structured way , using the needs hierarchy model ; this enabled us to arrive at abstracted themes regarding Gen Y employ - ees’ views about organizational requirements for successful CSN implementation . The results of this study can be summarized in terms of Gen Y’s motivations for using CSNs stemming from Safety , Social , and Esteem needs and Self - actualization needs . The data does not make any references to their Physiological needs , presum - ably because the respondents assumed that these needs would be taken care of by their employer and that CSNs would not have a role to play in their fulﬁllment , in alignment with prior literature on this aspect . In Table 5 , we present the results and provide details about the six organizational requirement themes that emerged from the data . We also provide the dos and do nots along with relevant respon - dent quotations leading to the identiﬁcation of each theme . In the last column we situate the abstracted organizational requirement theme into two higher - order needs classiﬁed according to the hier - archy model as Safety Needs and Social , Esteem , and Self - actualization Needs . We further reduced the needs from three ( Fig . 2 ) to two , as physiological needs were not mentioned in the data . In the fol - lowing section , we discuss each of the six emergent organizational requirement themes in greater detail while situating them within the relevant literature . 4 . 1 . Safety needs Safety needs represent the desire for security , stability , and pro - tection from any kind of fear or insecurity ( Maslow , 1954 ) . In the context of work , safety needs can be broadly classiﬁed into two cat - egories : needs related to job security and needs related to fringe beneﬁts ( Berl et al . , 1984 ; Churchill , 1976 ; Ivancevich , 1977 ) . In addition to these two broad safety need categories , several other aspects have also been identiﬁed in the literature . The results of this study suggest that safety needs are a prime concern for Gen Y employees in the context of using CSNs and Enterprise 2 . 0 systems . The following three organizational requirements falling under the broad umbrella of safety needs can be abstracted from the study . 4 . 1 . 1 . Keep it strictly professional From the results of the study , it can be gathered that Gen Y views their profession as something that needs to be kept separate from their personal lives . CSNs are often viewed as an extension of SNAs , which may be seen as breaching this boundary . Gen Yers either completely reject the idea of using CNSs for work or want to restrict their usage to professional activites ( please see Table 5 for additional evidence ) : My private social network is sufﬁcient for me . Don’t confuse professional space with private space . Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 7 Table 4 Key emergent themes highlighting the usefulness of CSNs for organizations . Sl . no . Emergent theme 1 Convey a better image outside the organization 2 Surf on a new fashion for advertising and display 3 Communicate the organization’s objectives , products , and services in a better way 4 Disseminate information internally within the organization 5 Distribute job offers and recruit 6 Provoke buzz around targeted activities 7 Stimulate collaborative open innovation among coworkers 8 Promote cohesion among employees and help new employees integrate better Do not associate your professional proﬁle with the private one or vice versa . Don’t ridicule the enterprise , your manager / business unit , col - leagues , clients , or future internal employers . Gen Y thus clearly sees a demarcation between their pro - fessional and personal lives in terms of communication and collaboration . They appear to not only respect the structural poli - cies of the organization , such as the extant privacy and security policies , but also demand similar adherence to these policies on the part of their colleagues and managers in the context of CSN utilization . It can be deciphered that Gen Y perceives Enterprise 2 . 0 systems and their features as possibly intrusive and hence sees these as a threat to their work values and beliefs . Providing safe usage environments in Enterprise 2 . 0 systems such as CSNs within the work context is a prime requisite for Gen Y that organizations certainly need to fulﬁll for the successful implementation of these systems . The study results indicate that the Gen Y cohort values maintaining a work – life balance but opposes the notions of nonpro - fessionalism and technology dependence . Although prior studies have shown Gen Y to be slacking in professionalism at the work - place ( Twenge & Campbell , 2008 ) and to mix professional and personal spheres in the work environment ( Kowske , Rasch , & Wiley , 2010 ) , in the current study we observe a clear requirement of separation between professional and personal lives in the context of CSN usage . Work – life balance is a clear priority for this genera - tion , and they do not want to mix work goals with personal goals ( Wey Smola & Sutton , 2002 ) . Although Gen Y is known to be depen - dent on technology ( Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ) , the results of this study suggest that technology dependence can be traded off for a work – life balance that separates their professional and per - sonal lives—which appears to be the dominant requirement . This trust in the system’s nonintrusiveness appears to be crucial for their AUI for Enterprise 2 . 0 systems ( Chandra et al . , 2012 ) . Hence , organizations implementing Enterprise 2 . 0 systems should restrict their usage to seeking professional collaboration and should avoid incorporating any intrusive features that Gen Y might view as a threat to their personal space / family life . If organi - zations must incorporate certain intrusive features / elements , they should only do so after having shaped their organizational culture to reﬂect a familial culture , i . e . , one that is cohesive and trusting ( Hershatter & Epstein , 2010 ) . This could reverse the rigidity of Gen Y’s view regarding the use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems – albeit slowly – as they may come to delineate the distinction between profes - sional and personal spheres less strictly . Orchestration of such a change would favorably fashion Gen Y’s work engagement as more natural and forthcoming , leading to their utilization of their natural abilities and resources for the beneﬁt of the organization . 4 . 1 . 2 . Provide distributive justice The results of this study clearly demonstrate that Gen Y ﬁrmly believes in distributive justice in the context of CSN implementa - tion , that is , they value fairness , equality , and clarity in procedural matters regarding the conditions of use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems . In addition , distributive justice also includes the equitable distri - bution of rewards accrued through the use of CSNs . Gen Y do not want the opinions they air on CSNs to be used to segregate them in the organization . For example , one of the respondents said : I’m afraid of opinion - based discrimination . Other Gen Y respondents mandated the creation of a mentoring system for new employees so that they would not be compelled to use CSNs , underlining their need for safety . It is also clear that they prefer to be governed democratically : Make CSNs an instrument for participative management such as debates , referenda , contests , voting . . . . Do not compel people to use them [ CSNs ] . Moreover , it can be said that Gen Y does not want managers to assess their creative performance based on their adaptive use of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems . In other words , contingent rewards are not an attractive option for this generation . Mandates such as Do not monitor the duration of CSN use to assess employees’ abilities or performance support this conclusion ( refer to Table 5 above ) . The results support the Gen Y cohort’s work belief that they want to trust institutions and rely on an equitable system , where meritocracy is promoted . However , they also express a need for a supportive environment with clear systems and structures in place to fulﬁll this need , which is often viewed as one of the biggest challenges for organizations ( Hershatter & Epstein , 2010 ) . It is important to take these issues into consideration when implement - ing Enterprise 2 . 0 systems . Prior organizational studies have shown that employees’ perceptions of distributive justice have a signif - icant relationship to organizational citizenship behavior : these perceptions increase creative collaboration , comradeship , knowl - edge sharing , and cooperation within the organization ( Shore & Wayne , 1993 ; Wayne , Shore , Bommer , & Tetrick , 2002 ) . From this result , it can also be deduced that a participative style of IS manage - ment will appeal to Gen Y employees and result in their increased adoption of CSNs . However , it is important to note that lack of a rigid structure , which is often deemed to be an effort towards equality , may adversely affect the adoption of Enterprise 2 . 0 technologies because such a context can be viewed as insecure and unstable . Hence , organizations must provide distributive justice by design , and if Gen Y employees see CSNs as furthering this aim of enhanced distributive justice , their adaptive use may be facilitated . 4 . 1 . 3 . Ensure privacy for participants From the data , we observe that one of the prime concerns of Gen Y relates to threats to privacy and security . Members of Gen Y will use Enterprise 2 . 0 systems only when they see adequate structural assurances of information privacy and security . Organizations need to demonstrate that measures have been undertaken to ensure that employees’ privacy will not be compromised by outsiders or by the company itself . For example ( as seen in Table 5 ) , one of the respondents unambiguously stated , Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 8 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx Table 5 Results : the emergent themes regarding Gen Y organizational requirements for successful CSN implementations . Illustrative Quotes Dos & Do nots from the Brainstorming Data Emergent Themes for Organizational Requirements Classiﬁcation according to Needs Hierarchy Model “ I don’t want to have my colleagues among my friends contacts . ” “My private social network is sufﬁcient for me . ” Dos – Always remain professional in communications . Do nots – Associate professional proﬁles with private ones or vice versa . – Talk about conﬁdential matters , including those of customers . – Ridicule the enterprise , managers / business units , colleagues , clients , or future internal employers . – Use CSNs in the private arena . – Share compromising content ( photos , videos , etc ) . – Confuse professional space with private space . Keep it Strictly Professional Safety Needs “I’m afraid of opinion - based discrimination . ” Dos – Allow creation of extraprofessional groups and keep them informal . – Make use of CSNs as instruments for participative management ( debates , referenda , contests , voting , etc . ) . – Create a mentoring system for new employees Do nots – Think only about proﬁtability and amortization . – Use it to assess employee skills . – Observe without participating . – Compel people to use the CSN . – Predict time for collaborations . Provide Distributive Justice Safety Needs “I’m afraid to speak freely about thorny issues within a corporate environment , unless it is anonymous . ” “I want to use my personal PC / mobile device and my own tools . ” Dos – Control abusive participation of collaborators . – Ensure data security and compliance with privacy . Do nots – Predict time for collaborations . – Use it to assess employee skills . – Keep track of employees’ usage and analyze it without their knowledge . Provide Privacy for Participants Safety Needs “To keep participation going , facilitation efforts should be provided . . . otherwise people will lose their motivation and engagement within the network . ” “ . . . these places should remain spontaneous rather than formal . . . to encourage sharing and connections . ” Dos – Shorten the hierarchical distance ( direct access , more trust , more empowerment , and democracy in governance ) . – Encourage and reward collaborators . – Enhance cross - functional competence . – Animate / seek collaboration and use without requiring participation . Do nots – Generate a false spontaneity amongst users ( self - censorship , continuous picture control , fear of opening up , fear of being judged ) . – Absence of community management . Lead by Example Social , Esteem , & Self - actualization Needs Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 9 Table 5 ( Continued ) Illustrative Quotes Dos & Do nots from the Brainstorming Data Emergent Themes for Organizational Requirements Classiﬁcation according to Needs Hierarchy Model “I want to be trained ﬁrst and know the usage charter . ” Dos – Create a mentoring system for new employees . – Provide multi - device applications with the same quality as those available for private use ( Facebook , MySpace , etc . ) . – Associate a skills search engine . – Create an internal reputation index ( e . g . , R - index ) and an endorsement system . Do nots – Overload with information . Ensure Quality Assurance and Provide Training Social , Esteem , & Self - actualization Needs “I use them [ CSN applications ] if I see a beneﬁt or personal value . ” Dos – Fully specify professional proﬁles ( skills , experience , interests ) . – Get noticed by the hierarchy and other employees . – Have followers . – Choose the right interest groups and communities . – Meet various other pertinent social and esteem needs that the employee has ( see Table 4 for more details ) . Do nots – Ignore provision of a reward system . Satisfy Higher - Order Needs in Equal Measures Social , Esteem , & Self - actualization Needs Do not track usage and analyze it without their [ employees’ ] knowledge . There was also a categorical assertion to Ensure data security and compliance with privacy . The results regarding the safety requirement of privacy and security also complement the Gen Y cohort’s work value of work – life balance as discussed in the previous subsection . CSNs should be secure and private and must also be isolated from employees’ personal lives . The literature shows that Gen Yers are highly susceptible to criticism and the opinions of others ( Twenge & Campbell , 2008 ) , and this can be intensiﬁed when their pri - vacy is violated and their performance or actions can be monitored through CSN surveillance features . We conclude that a lack of adequate privacy and security poli - cies can adversely affect Gen Y employees’ AUI for Enterprise 2 . 0 systems . Hence organizations must have clear CSN privacy policies in place that protect the interests of employees . It is clear that Gen Y will not participate in making CSNs a success if Enterprise 2 . 0 systems are used as monitoring / surveillance tools . 4 . 2 . Social , esteem , and self - actualization needs According to Maslow ( 1954 ) , individuals’ social needs include the desire for love , affection , and belongingness ; esteem needs include achievement , adequacy , autonomy , and competence ; and self - actualization needs reﬂect the desires of individuals to make maximal use of their skills and abilities , thus leading to a sense of fulﬁlment . Together , these are viewed as higher - order needs in contrast to the lower - order physiological and safety needs . In the workplace setting , afﬁnity , job titles , responsibility , recogni - tion , promotion , and rewards can be considered as esteem needs , whereas a challenging job , creativity , and achievement can be cat - egorized as self - actualization needs ( Berl et al . , 1984 ; Churchill , 1976 ; Ivancevich , 1977 ) . The results of this study suggest that in the context of Enterprise 2 . 0 system use among Gen Y employees , social , esteem , and self - actualization needs are equally salient and next only to their safety needs . Based on the data we collected , three organizational requirements classiﬁed under the broad cate - gory of social , esteem , and self - actualization can be abstracted . In the following subsections , we discuss each of these requirements in greater detail and situate them within the relevant literature . 4 . 2 . 1 . Lead by example This study’s results demonstrate that the respondents prefer a leadership style in which there is less of a hierarchical order and more freedom to interact without the fear of being judged . The respondents cautioned against the generation of a false sense of spontaneity and preferred to have a trusting environment that is offered by transformational leadership : Do not generate a false spontaneity amongst users as it will encour - age self - censorship , fear of opening up or fear of being judged . Instead , the respondents highlighted that for using CSNs , the organization should Shorten the hierarchical distance—direct access , more trust , more empowerment , and democracy in governance . These statements along with other evidence from the data show that Gen Y employees prefer transformational leadership rather than a transactional leadership style if Enterprise 2 . 0 systems are to be successful . The Gen Y cohort’s work values and desire for instantaneous feedback and approval corroborate this preference . Moreover , as past studies have established , lines of authority are rather blurred for Gen Y ; they do not wish to simply follow but pre - fer to be considered as partners contributing to the success of their organization ( Crumpacker & Crumpacker , 2007 ) . This notion of the Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 10 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx absence of a hierarchy and the presence of open communication needs to be embedded in the design of CSNs and other Enterprise 2 . 0 systems directed at Gen Y employees . Broadly , as already men - tioned , Gen Y prefers a transformational leadership style , which is characterized by idealized inﬂuence , inspirational motivation , indi - vidualized consideration , and intellectual stimulation . Prior studies have shown that such a leadership style signiﬁcantly inﬂuences IS use – by affecting users’ perceptions of usefulness , knowledge sharing , and IS success – through organizational support and sys - tem efﬁcacy ( Cho , Park , & Michel , 2011 ; Shao , Feng , & Liu , 2012 ) . This , in turn , would help empower employees , thereby inﬂuenc - ing their creative output ( Pieterse , Van Knippenberg , Schippers , & Stam , 2010 ; Sun , Zhang , Qi , & Chen , 2012 ) . Hence , organizations implementing CSNs and other Enterprise 2 . 0 systems , especially in the context of Gen Y employees , need to embed the basic tenets of transformational leadership in their transaction processes in order to tap into the collective intelligence of their employees for gen - erating business value and to make implementation and adaptive use of CSNs a success . 4 . 2 . 2 . Ensure quality assurance and provide training The ﬁfth theme that emerges from the data for successful adap - tive use of CSNs is the need for and appreciation of quality in the CSNs as well as a belief that technical training should be provided before utilization of such a technology . In contrast to the popular notion that Gen Y users are aware of new technologies and may not need to be trained in the use of CSNs , as they have already used SNAs in their personal lives , the data shows that they do desire formal training for using such technical tools , for example , I want to be trained ﬁrst and know the usage charter . In addition , Gen Y employees expect high quality CSN applica - tions that have multiple functionalities in the workplace . This is evidenced by respondent statements such as : Provide multi - device applications with the same quality and at a par with those available for private use , such as Facebook and MySpace . But they are not in favor of information bombardment due to such technologies ( please see Table 5 ) : Do not overload us with information . The results of this study thus provide mixed support regard - ing Gen Y work values and beliefs . For example , although Gen Yers are known to be technology savvy , these employees would like to have speciﬁc training programs for the use of Enterprise 2 . 0 sys - tems to maximize the opportunity they provide . This also points to a need for “ease of use” and “usefulness” of the technology and computer self - efﬁcacy before CSNs are adopted in the work context ( see Chandra et al . , 2012 ; Venkatesh & Davis , 2000 ) . More - over , some prior studies have reported that Gen Y employees value training and consider it as an important incentive for work , even more important than extrinsic rewards or compensation ( Han & Su , 2011 ) . Further , Gen Y’s work value of technology dependency com - plements their need for high - quality CSN applications at work , and they would like to have the best in the industry . This is largely due to their dominant need for hedonism and stimulation even in the work context ( refer to Table 1 ) . Hence , providing high - quality CSN tools will enhance their usability and foster Gen Y employee’s AUI for such technologies , while organizations can indirectly address Gen Y employees’ social , esteem , and self - actualization needs by providing better training and high quality assurance in the delivery of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems and thus encourage use of these systems by Gen Y employees . Fig . 3 . Aggregated results evidencing social , esteem , and self - actualization needs of Gen Y employees in the context of Enterprise 2 . 0 system usage . 4 . 2 . 3 . Satisfy higher - order needs in equal measures The sixth theme that emerges from the data relates to the sat - isfaction of Gen Y employees’ higher - order needs – social , esteem , and self - actualization – in equal measures . Unlike previous gen - eration cohorts who assigned different levels of importance to different needs , depending on the context , Gen Y users prefer orga - nizations to pay equal attention to all three higher - order needs . If organization - wide networking technologies such as CSNs address these three higher - order needs in a balanced manner , adaptive use of these technologies is plausible , whereas failure to address any one of these needs may lead to implementation failure or sub - optimal utilization of Enterprise 2 . 0 systems in the work context . Moreover , it is clear that Gen Y employees will only use CSNs if they see value for themselves personally : I will use them [ CSNs ] if I see a beneﬁt or personal value . Do not ignore the provision of a reward system [ for the user of CSNs ] . This also relates to the needs of the Gen Y employees that fall under their three higher - order needs . Fig . 3 shows the results gathered from the study classiﬁed in terms of social , esteem , and self - actualization needs as asserted by the Gen Y employees in the context of CSN use . The most important uses of such technologies from the Gen Y perspective include satisfaction of their social needs for collabo - ration , establishing contact , sharing their opinions with others at work , and getting to know their coworkers more closely . In a similar vein , they are concerned about being able to use these technologies to enhance their reputation and for job prospects , solving problems more easily and quickly , and securing greater autonomy at work . This again shows Gen Ys’ strong need for esteem factors . Finally , in terms of their self - actualization needs , Gen Y users are willing to use CSNs if this helps them express their creativity and produce collaborative work that requires utilization of their full abilities and resources . This ﬁnding supports the Gen Y cohort’s work value of looking for meaning in their work and searching for purpose - ful work environments that adequately satisfy both their intrinsic and extrinsic needs ( Hershatter & Esptein , 2010 ; Ng , Schweitzer , & Lyons , 2010 ) . From the results and the six abstracted organizational require - ments it is clear that because Gen Y views CSNs in a speciﬁc way , it is imperative to govern the use of CSNs in an appropriate fash - Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 11 ion to facilitate their adaptive use . It is thus strongly suggested that instead of looking at higher - order needs in a hierarchical manner , as is usually done in traditional organizations ( Berl et al . , 1984 ) , Gen Y organizations should look at fulﬁlling the three higher - order needs in a nonhierarchical manner where there is an equal opportunity to focus on any of these needs . Such a fulﬁllment of all three higher - order needs – social , esteem , and self - actualization – seems to be the optimal approach for encouraging Gen Y employees’ adaptive use of CSNs . 5 . Contributions and implications Our exploratory research makes several theoretical contribu - tions and has several practical implications . First , despite the professed familiarity of Gen Y users with SNAs , their adoption of these technologies in the organizational context continues to remain a challenge ( Haeﬂiger , Monteiro , Foray , & von Krogh , 2011 ; Kaplan & Haenlein , 2010 ) . A few recent studies have shown that the expected workplace enthusiasm for CSNs is not to be seen amongst Gen Y employees—which raises concerns about their implementa - tion , adaptation , and consequent use within organizations ( see De Hertogh et al . , 2011 ; Leidner et al . , 2010 ; Sena & Sena , 2008 ) . Our study is one of the ﬁrst that seeks to offer a preliminary theoreti - cal understanding for such an anomaly and is aimed at examining the concerns of Gen Y about using such Enterprise 2 . 0 interventions involving social networks . The study is one of the ﬁrst to empirically explore Gen Y users’ AUI for Enterprise 2 . 0 systems , speciﬁcally , CSNs . Second , situated in generational cohort theory and taking an adaptive use perspective , this study employs an enriched Delphi technique to identify some of the key considerations for suc - cessfully implementing organizational CSNs . Further , viewing the ﬁndings through the needs hierarchy theory lens , the study abstracts six organizational requirements for successfully implementing an Enterprise 2 . 0 system . By following a systematic qualitative research approach , this study furthers our understanding about the implementation of CSNs , especially in the current workplace sce - nario , and offers answers to many of the contradictions surrounding the use and adoption of Enterprise 2 . 0 technology implementa - tions . The study also shows that many of the taken - for - granted assumptions about Gen Y users in relation to new technology adop - tion and use may not be true . The six organizational requirements for successfully implementing Enterprise 2 . 0 systems identiﬁed in this research , namely , Keep It Strictly Professional , Provide Dis - tributive Justice , Provide Privacy for Participants , Lead by Example , Ensure Quality Assurance and Provide Training , and Satisfy Higher - Order Needs in Equal Measures , can be examined in detail by future research to gain a nuanced understanding about Gen Y users’ adap - tive technology use . The study thus contributes to the literature on adaptive technology use by contextualizing it to Gen Y users , thereby addressing the call for context - speciﬁc theorizing ( see Bamberger , 2008 ; Johns , 2006 ) . Third , the study enriches the classical needs hierarchy theory by delineating the boundaries for its application to the Gen Y tech - nology usage context . In particular , the data analysis shows that physiological need fulﬁllment is not a concern for such technol - ogy implementation but that safety and security needs do play a signiﬁcant role . Interestingly , the study exhibits a ﬂattening of the hierarchy of needs beyond the safety and security needs , implying that the three higher - level needs—social , esteem , and self - actualization needs—do not follow the usual hierarchy . Instead , Gen Y perceives the three to be equally important , so that all three must be addressed in equal measure to foster their adaptive use of CSNs . There is thus a need to examine the limits of Maslow’s ( 1954 ) traditional content motivation theories for emerging technology use contexts . Consequently , such theories , which have been widely used in organizational science , may not be universally applicable to all contexts , and certain technological factors and generation cohorts may signiﬁcantly alter their relevance . As this study has shown , motivating Gen Y employees in the context of CSN use may involve viewing safety needs as a priority and then giving equal importance to social , esteem , and self - actualization needs instead of necessarily following a hierarchical structure , and this may well be applicable when motivating employees in certain routine work - related contexts . Fourth , this is the ﬁrst study to also qualitatively explore gener - ational cohort theory in the context of adaptive use of technologies . By doing so , the study shows ( contrary to popular assumption ) that Gen Y work values may be different in the context of technologi - cal use in the organizational context . Hence , the values that Gen Y employees have regarding IT do not necessarily have to align with their work values or beliefs . The study attempts to address the calls made by the IS community to enrich their understanding of IS use and implementation from an organizational perspective . The results clearly show the salience of dimensions of system use other than those that have been examined in prior literature . For example , this study moves beyond dimensions such as user trust , cognitive absorption , perceived ease of use , and usefulness to iden - tify factors such as user perceptions of leadership styles , structural assurances , empowerment , organizational justice , and privacy as some of the novel factors affecting adaptive use of new technologies ( see Chandra et al . , 2012 ; Davis , 1989 ) . Given that the technological context is fast evolving , the factors affecting the use of new tech - nologies will also be context dependent and need to be suitably incorporated into the speciﬁc nomological networks surrounding speciﬁc technology usage . Lastly , in terms of contributions to practice , the study offers concrete guidelines to organizations aspiring to implement Enter - prise 2 . 0 systems , especially with regard to the six organizational requirements that need to be fostered for such implementations to be successful . Further , the results of our study show that examining and assessing the different values of Gen Y in the context of IT usage can have ramiﬁcations that may affect their career satisfaction and affective commitment to organizations due to nonfulﬁllment of their motivational needs . Hence policies on training , development , and retention need to be formulated with a view to better aligning Gen Y’s goals and interests with those of the organization and with the technology . Viewed from an organizational behavior stand - point , the idea is to better accommodate employee cohorts with different values , preferences , and notions about career success , and this can be linked to the person – organization / technology ﬁt . In par - ticular , skills pertaining to leadership and motivation will become inevitable for leading a dynamic workforce in a fast - changing tech - nological environment . Finally , knowledge about user preferences regarding speciﬁc IS applications such as Enterprise 2 . 0 systems and CSNs within the organization will help organizations ( in particular , the IS innovators ) to frame better IS strategies ( bottom - up ) that provide a shared understanding across the organization for guid - ing subsequent IT investment and deployment decisions , including functional aspects of IS , such as the design of IS applications ( Chen , Mocker , Preston , & Teubner , 2010 ) . 6 . Limitations and conclusions Despite the enumerated implications , this study has several lim - itations that can possibly be addressed by future studies on the subject . Although this study uses an enriched technology - enabled Delphi technique that guarantees the anonymity of participants , the sample was drawn from a previously known pool of people . Thus , social desirability issues might possibly affect the reliability Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 12 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx of the results obtained . This can be controlled for in future studies by seeking responses from diverse sets of samples that go beyond the student population . The current study is based on adaptive use , for which the student population contemplating use of CSNs in the future might be appropriate , but future studies can sample actual users of CSNs and examine the factors inhibiting their actual use . It is also possible to enrich the present results by seeking responses from samples of other generations in order to further support the validity of the results that are currently contextualized for Gen Y . Thus , future studies can explore the topic more deeply using alter - native research methods and also by sampling mixed generations of actual users to ascertain robust results . Despite these limitations , the current study is one of the ﬁrst to explore the adaptive use of CSNs by the Gen Y cohort . Our study is a modest , albeit signiﬁ - cant , ﬁrst step towards formulating contextualized technological solutions for different user groups to facilitate better utilization of these solutions . References Anandarajan , M . , Zaman , M . , Dai , Q . , & Arinze , B . ( 2010 ) . Generation Y adoption of instant messaging : an examination of the impact of social usefulness and media richness on use richness . IEEE Trans . Professional Communication , 53 ( 2 ) , 132 – 143 . Anderson , P . ( 2007 ) . What is web 2 . 0 ? Ideas , technologies and implications for education . JISC Technology and Standards Watch , 60 ( 1 ) , 1 – 64 . Aral , S . , Dellarocas , C . , & Godes , D . ( 2013 ) . Social media and business transformation : a framework for research . Information Systems Research , 24 ( 1 ) , 3 – 13 . Ballagas , R . , Rohs , M . , Sheridan , J . G . , & Borchers , J . ( 2004 ) . BYOD : bring your own device . Proceedings of the Workshop on Ubiquitous Display Environments ( UbiComp 2004 ) , Nottingham , UK . http : / / www . vs . inf . ethz . ch / publ / papers / rohs - byod - 2004 . pdf Accessed 23 . 03 . 16 . Bamberger , P . ( 2008 ) . Beyond contextualization : using context theories to narrow the micro - macro gap in management research . Academy of Management Journal , 51 ( 5 ) , 839 – 846 . Berl , R . L . , Williamson , N . C . , & Powell , T . ( 1984 ) . Industrial salesforce motivation : a critique and test of Maslow’s hierarchy of need . Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management , 4 ( 1 ) , 32 – 39 . Bhattacherjee , A . ( 2001 ) . Understanding information systems continuance : an expectatio conﬁrmation model . MIS Quarterly , 25 ( 3 ) , 351 – 370 . Bitner , M . J . , Ostrom , A . L . , & Meuter , M . L . ( 2002 ) . Implementing successful self - service technologies . The Academy of Management Executive , 16 ( 4 ) , 96 – 108 . Boughzala , I . ( 2012 ) . Collaboration engineering : a contribution to its foundations through the 2 . 0 era . Saarbrücken , Germany : Lambert Academic Publishing . Boyd , D . , & Ellison , N . ( 2007 ) . Social network sites : deﬁnition , history : and scholarship . Journal of Computer Mediated Communication , 13 , 210 – 230 . Briggs , R . O . , de Vreede , G . J . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 2003 ) . Collaboration engineering with thinklets to pursue sustained success with group support systems . Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ( 4 ) , 31 – 64 . Burton - Jones , A . , & Gallivan , M . J . ( 2007 ) . Toward a deeper understanding of system usage in organizations : a multilevel perspective . MIS Quarterly , 31 ( 4 ) , 657 – 679 . Chandra , S . , Srivastava , S . C . , & Theng , Y . L . ( 2012 ) . Cognitive absorption and trust for workplace collaboration in virtual worlds : an information processing decision making perspective . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 13 ( 10 ) , 797 – 835 . Chen , D . Q . , Mocker , M . , Preston , D . S . , & Teubner , A . ( 2010 ) . Information systems strategy : reconceptualization , measurement , and implications . MIS Quarterly , 34 ( 2 ) , 233 – 259 . Chesbrough , H . W . , & Appleyard , M . M . ( 2007 ) . Open innovation and strategy . California Management Review , 50 ( 1 ) , 57 – 77 . Cho , J . , Park , I . , & Michel , J . W . ( 2011 ) . How does leadership affect information systems success ? The role of transformational leadership . Information & Management , 48 ( 7 ) , 270 – 277 . Chui , M . , Dewhurst , M . , & Pollak , L . ( 2013 ) . Building the social enterprise . McKinsey Quarterly , 4 , 8 – 11 . Churchill , G . A . , Jr . ( 1976 ) . Marketing research : methodology foundations . Hinsdale , IL : Dryden Press . Constant , D . , Keisler , S . , & Sproull , L . ( 1994 ) . What’s mine is ours , or is it ? A study of attitudes about information sharing . Information Systems Research ( Informs ) , 5 ( 4 ) , 400 – 421 . Cramton , C . D . ( 2001 ) . The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences for dispersed collaboration . Organization Science , 12 ( 3 ) , 346 – 371 . Crumpacker , M . , & Crumpacker , J . ( 2007 ) . Succession planning and generational stereotypes : should HR consider age - based values and attitudes a relevant factor or a passing fad ? Public Personnel Management , 36 ( 4 ) , 349 – 369 . Davis , F . ( 1989 ) . Perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use and user acceptance of information technology . MIS Quarterly , 13 ( 13 ) , 318 – 340 . De Hauw , S . , & De Vos , A . ( 2010 ) . Millennials’ career perspective and psychological contract expectations : does the recession lead to lowered expectations ? Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 293 – 302 . De Hertogh , S . , Viaene , S . , & Dedene , G . ( 2011 ) . Governing web 2 . 0 . Communications of the ACM , 54 ( 3 ) , 124 – 130 . Deloitte . ( 2016 ) . Deloitte Millennial Survey . http : / / www2 . deloitte . com / global / en / pages / about - deloitte / articles / millennialsurvey . html Accessed 21 . 03 . 16 . de Vreede , G . J . , Briggs , R . , & Massey , A . ( 2009 ) . Collaboration engineering : foundations and opportunities . Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 10 ( 3 ) , 121 – 137 . Deal , J . , Altman , J . , David , G . , & Rogelberg , S . ( 2010 ) . Millennials at work : what we know and what we need to do ( if anything ) . Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 , 191 – 199 . Dudezert , A . , Boughzala , I . , & Mounoud , E . ( 2009 ) . Comment intégrer la génération millennials à l’entreprise ? management : enjeux de demain . Paris : Vuibert : Collection FNEGE . , pp . 323 – 334 Dulin , L . ( 2008 ) . Leadership preferences of a generation Y cohort : a mixed - methods investigation . Journal of Leadership Studies , 2 ( 1 ) , 43 – 59 . Fjermestad , J . , & Hiltz , S . R . ( 1999 ) . An assessment of group support systems experimental research : methodology and results . Journal of Management Information Systems , 15 ( 3 ) , 7 – 150 . Gorman , P . , Nelson , T . , & Glassman , A . ( 2004 ) . The millenial generation : a strategic opportunity . Organizational Analysis , 12 ( 3 ) , 255 – 270 . Gursoy , D . , Maier , T . A . , & Chi , C . G . ( 2008 ) . Generational differences : an examination of work values and generational gaps in the hospitality workforce . International Journal of Hospitality Management , 27 ( 3 ) , 448 – 458 . Haeﬂiger , S . , Monteiro , E . , Foray , D . , & von Krogh , G . ( 2011 ) . Social software and strategy . Long Range Planning , 44 , 297 – 316 . Haeger , D . L . , & Lingham , T . ( 2014 ) . A trend toward work – life fusion : a multi - generational shift in technology use at work . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 89 , 316 – 325 . Han , D . , & Su , X . ( 2011 ) . Managing generation Y : recruiting and motivating . In 2011 international conference on management and service science ( MASS ) . He , W . , Zha , S . , & Li , L . ( 2013 ) . Social media competitive analysis and text mining : a case study in the pizza industry . International Journal of Information Management , 33 ( 3 ) , 464 – 472 . Hershatter , A . , & Epstein , M . ( 2010 ) . Millennials and the world of work : an organization and management perspective . Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 , 211 – 223 . Inglehart , R . ( 1997 ) . . Modernization and postmodernization : cultural , economic and political change in 43 societies ( Vol . 19 ) Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Ivancevich , J . M . ( 1977 ) . Different goal setting treatments and their effects on performance and job satisfaction . Academy of Management Journal , 20 , 406 – 419 . Johns , G . ( 2006 ) . The essential impact of context on organizational behavior . Academy of Management Review , 31 ( 2 ) , 386 – 408 . Kaplan , A . M . , & Haenlein , M . ( 2010 ) . Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of social media . Business Horizons , 53 ( 1 ) , 59 – 68 . Keil , M . , Tiwana , A . , & Bush , A . ( 2002 ) . Reconciling user and project manager perceptions of IT project risk : a Delphi study . Information Systems Journal , 2 ( 2 ) , 103 – 119 . Kietzmann , J . H . , Hermkens , K . , McCarthy , I . P . , & Silvestre , B . S . ( 2011 ) . Social media ? Get serious ! Understanding the functional building blocks of social media . Business Horizons , 54 ( 3 ) , 241 – 251 . Kim , J . H . , Kim , M . , & Nam , Y . ( 2010 ) . An analysis of self - construals , motivations , Facebook use , and user satisfaction . International Journal of Human Computer Interaction , 26 ( 11 – 12 ) , 1077 – 1099 . Kowske , B . , Rasch , R . , & Wiley , J . ( 2010 ) . Millennials’ ( lack of ) attitude problem : an empirical examination of generational effects on work attitudes . Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 , 265 – 279 . Kupperschmidt , B . R . ( 2000 ) . Multigeneration employees : strategies for effective management . The Health Care Manager , 19 ( 1 ) , 65 – 76 . Lee , C . S . , Hung , D . K . M . , & Ling , T . C . ( 2012 ) . Work values of generation Y preservice teachers in Malaysia . Procedia : Social and Behavioral Sciences , 65 , 704 – 710 . Leidner , D . , Koch , H . , & Gonzalez , E . ( 2010 ) . Assimilating generation Y IT new hires into USAA’s workforce : the role of an enterprise 2 . 0 system . MIS Quarterly Executive , 9 ( 4 ) , 229 – 242 . Li , Charlene . ( 2015 ) . Why no one uses corporate social networks . Harvard Business Review . https : / / hbr . org / 2015 / 04 / why - no - one - uses - the - corporate - social - network Accessed 25 . 10 . 15 . Lunsford , D . A . , & Burnett , M . S . ( 1992 ) . Marketing product innovations to the elderly : understanding the barriers to adoption . Journal of Consumer Marketing , 9 ( 4 ) , 53 – 62 . Malone , T . W . , Laubacher , R . , & Dellarocas , C . ( 2009 ) . Harnessing crowds : Mapping the genome of collective intelligence . MIT Center for Collective Intelligence , Working Paper No . 2009 – 001 . Maslow , A . H . ( 1954 ) . Motivation and personality . New York : Harper . McAfee , A . P . ( 2006 ) . Enterprise 2 . 0 : the dawn of emergent collaboration . Sloan Management Review , 47 ( 3 ) , 21 – 28 . McEwan , A . M . ( 2013 ) . Smart working : creating the next wave . Surrey , England : Gower Publishing . Miller , J . ( 2006 ) . Catching generation Y . CMA Management , 80 , 13 – 14 . Nabil , S . ( 2013 ) . Knowledge management in the age of cloud computing and web 2 . 0 : experiencing the power of disruptive innovations . International Journal of Information Management , 33 ( 1 ) , 160 – 165 . Please cite this article in press as : Shirish , A . , et al . Adaptive use of social networking applications in contempo - rary organizations : Examining the motivations of Gen Y cohorts . International Journal of Information Management ( 2016 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijinfomgt . 2016 . 04 . 002 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model JJIM - 1511 ; No . of Pages 13 A . Shirish et al . / International Journal of Information Management xxx ( 2016 ) xxx – xxx 13 Ng , E . S . , Schweitzer , L . , & Lyons , S . T . ( 2010 ) . New generation , great expectations : a ﬁeld study of the millennial generation . Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 281 – 292 . Nusair , K . , Bilgihan , A . , Okumus , F . , & Cobanoglu , C . ( 2013 ) . Generation Y travelers’ commitment to online social network websites . Tourism Management , 35 , 13 – 22 . Pardue , K . T . , & Morgan , P . ( 2008 ) . Millennials considered : a new generation , new approaches , and implications for nursing education . Nursing Education Perspectives , 29 ( 2 ) , 74 – 79 . Pieterse , A . N . , Van Knippenberg , D . , Schippers , M . , & Stam , D . ( 2010 ) . Transformational and transactional leadership and innovative behavior : the moderating role of psychological empowerment . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 31 ( 4 ) , 609 – 623 . Po - An Hsieh , J . J . , & Wang , W . ( 2007 ) . Explaining employees’ extended use of complex information systems . European Journal of Information Systems , 16 ( 3 ) , 216 – 227 . Puybaraud , M . , Russel , S . , McEwan , A . M . , Luessink , E . , & Beck , L . ( 2010 ) . Generation Y and the workplace annual report 2010 . Johnson Controls , Haworth and IDEA . Rajagopal , N . , & Abraham , S . ( 2009 ) . Prominence of higher order needs : an Indian IT sector experience . Vilakshan : The XIMB Journal of Management , 6 ( 2 ) , 15 – 23 . Rawlins , C . , Indvik , J . , & Johnson , P . R . ( 2008 ) . Understanding the new generation : what the millennial cohort absolutely , positively must have at work . Journal of Organizational Culture Communications & Conﬂict , 12 ( 2 ) , 1 – 9 . Real , K . , Mitnick , A . D . , & Maloney , W . F . ( 2010 ) . More similar than different : Millennials in the US building trades . Journal of Business and Psychology , 25 ( 2 ) , 303 – 313 . Richter , A . , & Koch , M . ( 2008 ) . Functions of social networking services . In 8th international conference on the design of cooperative systems Richter , A . , & Riemer , K . ( 2009 ) . Corporate social networking sites : modes of use and appropriation through co - evolution . In 20th australasian conference on information systems . Ryder , N . B . ( 1965 ) . The cohort as a concept in the study of social change . American Sociological Review , 843 – 861 . Sandri , G . , & Bowen , C . R . ( 2011 ) . Meeting employee requirements . Industrial Engineer , 43 , 44 – 48 . Schmidt , J . B . , Montoya Weiss , M . M . , & Massey , A . P . ( 2001 ) . New product development decision making effectiveness : comparing individuals , face - to - face teams , and virtual teams . Decision Sciences , 32 ( 4 ) , 575 – 600 . SelectMinds . ( 2008 ) . Corporate social networking . SelectMinds benchmarking study . www . selectminds . com Accessed 25 . 07 . 08 . Sena , J . , & Sena , M . ( 2008 ) . Corporate social networking . Issues in Information Systems , 9 ( 2 ) , 227 – 231 . Shao , Z . , Feng , Y . , & Liu , L . ( 2012 ) . The mediating effect of organizational culture and knowledge sharing on transformational leadership and enterprise resource planning systems success : an empirical study in China . Computers in Human Behavior , 28 ( 6 ) , 2400 – 2413 . Shore , L . M . , & Wayne , S . J . ( 1993 ) . Commitment and employee behavior : comparison of affective commitment and continuance commitment with perceived organizational support . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 ( 5 ) , 774 – 780 . Sox , C . B . , Kline , S . F . , & Crews , T . B . ( 2014 ) . Identifying best practices : opportunities and barriers in meeting planning for Generation Y . International Journal of Hospitality Management , 36 , 244 – 254 . Sun , L . Y . , Zhang , Z . , Qi , J . , & Chen , Z . X . ( 2012 ) . Empowerment and creativity : a cross - level investigation . The Leadership Quarterly , 23 ( 1 ) , 55 – 65 . Szalma , J . L . ( 2014 ) . On the application of motivation theory to human factors / ergonomics : motivational design principles for human – technology interaction . Human Factors , 56 ( 8 ) , 1453 – 1471 . Teo , T . S . H . , Srivastava , S . C . , & Jiang , L . ( 2009 ) . Trust and electronic government success : an empirical study . Journal of Management Information Systems , 25 ( 3 ) , 103 – 137 . Tulgan , B . ( 2013 ) . Meet generation Z : the second generation within the giant Millennial cohort . Rainmaker Thinking Inc . http : / / rainmakerthinking . com / assets / uploads / 2013 / 10 / Gen - Z - Whitepaper . pdf Accessed 03 . 23 . 15 Twenge , J . M . , & Campbell , S . M . ( 2008 ) . Generational differences in psychological traits and their impact on the workplace . Journal of Managerial Psychology , 23 ( 8 ) , 862 – 877 . Venkatesh , V . , & Davis , F . D . ( 2000 ) . A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model : four longitudinal ﬁeld studies . Management Science , 46 ( 2 ) , 186 – 204 . Wayne , S . J . , Shore , L . M . , Bommer , W . H . , & Tetrick , L . E . ( 2002 ) . The role of fair treatment and rewards in perceptions of organizational support and leader – member exchange . Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 ( 3 ) , 590 – 598 . Wey Smola , K . , & Sutton , C . D . ( 2002 ) . Generational differences : revisiting generational work values for the new Millennium . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 23 ( 4 ) , 363 – 382 .