Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Firms as knowledge brokers : Lessons in pursuing continuous innovation Andrew B Hargadon California Management Review ; Spring 1998 ; 40 , 3 ; ABI / INFORM Global pg . 209 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission . Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner . Further reproduction prohibited without permission .