REVIEW published : 05 May 2017 doi : 10 . 3389 / fcimb . 2017 . 00165 Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 1 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Edited by : Rey Carabeo , Washington State University , USA Reviewed by : Eric Ghigo , Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , France Christopher Thompson , Imperial College London , UK * Correspondence : Stacey D . Gilk sgilk @ iupui . edu Received : 06 January 2017 Accepted : 18 April 2017 Published : 05 May 2017 Citation : Samanta D , Mulye M , Clemente TM , Justis AV and Gilk SD ( 2017 ) Manipulation of Host Cholesterol by Obligate Intracellular Bacteria . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 7 : 165 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcimb . 2017 . 00165 Manipulation of Host Cholesterol by Obligate Intracellular Bacteria Dhritiman Samanta , Minal Mulye , Tatiana M . Clemente , Anna V . Justis and Stacey D . Gilk * Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Indiana University School of Medicine , Indianapolis , IN , USA Cholesterol is a multifunctional lipid that plays important metabolic and structural roles in the eukaryotic cell . Despite having diverse lifestyles , the obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens Chlamydia , Coxiella , Anaplasma , Ehrlichia , and Rickettsia all target cholesterol during host cell colonization as a potential source of membrane , as well as a means to manipulate host cell signaling and trafﬁcking . To promote host cell entry , these pathogens utilize cholesterol - rich microdomains known as lipid rafts , which serve as organizational and functional platforms for host signaling pathways involved in phagocytosis . Once a pathogen gains entrance to the intracellular space , it can manipulate host cholesterol trafﬁcking pathways to access nutrient - rich vesicles or acquire membrane components for the bacteria or bacteria - containing vacuole . To acquire cholesterol , these pathogens speciﬁcally target host cholesterol metabolism , uptake , efﬂux , and storage . In this review , we examine the strategies obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens employ to manipulate cholesterol during host cell colonization . Understanding how obligate intracellular pathogens target and use host cholesterol provides critical insight into the host - pathogen relationship . Keywords : cholesterol , lipid raft , Chlamydia , Coxiella , Rickettsia , Anaplasma , lipid droplet INTRODUCTION To establish the intracellular niche , obligate intracellular pathogens must overcome numerous obstacles . First , the pathogen must recognize and bind to their target host cell . Second , they must penetrate the host cell plasma membrane , most often by tricking the host cell into engulﬁng the pathogen through phagocytosis . Once inside the target cell , the pathogen initially resides in a membrane - bound compartment called the phagosome that , under normal conditions , progressively acidiﬁes to a mature phagolysosome . While some bacteria can thrive in this environment , others prevent fusion between the phagosome and lysosome , or escape the phagosome and replicate in the host cytosol . For vacuolar pathogens , the pathogen - containing vacuole must protect from the host innate immune the bacteria system , while at the same time allowing access to nutrients required for bacterial growth . In order to establish these highly specialized intracellular niche , pathogens manipulate host gene expression , metabolism , or traﬃcking pathways . In contrast to facultative intracellular or extracellular pathogens , obligate intracellular pathogens rely on the host cell for a large percentage of their growth requirements . As a result , obligate intracellular pathogens have sophisticated mechanism to manipulate the host cell to obtain essential nutrients . One of the targeted host cell factors is cholesterol , a major lipid component of eukaryotic membranes that strongly inﬂuences membrane structure and function . Structurally , cholesterol aﬀects membrane ﬂuidity and permeability , with higher cholesterol levels increasing membrane rigidity . Cholesterol concentrates in membrane microdomains known as lipid rafts , Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens which are specialized signaling platforms involved in signal transduction ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ) . Further , intracellular cholesterol is a critical player in Golgi traﬃcking ( Stüven et al . , 2003 ) , endocytic traﬃcking ( van der Kant et al . , 2013 ) , and intra - organelle membrane contact sites ( Eden et al . , 2016 ) . Pathogenic bacteria target cholesterol not only to gain entry to host cells but also to hijack host cell signaling pathways favorable for intracellular survival . This review discusses the role of cholesterol in host - pathogen interactions , from the perspective of obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens that reside in membrane - bound compartments ( Chlamydia , Coxiella , Anaplasma , and Ehrlichia ) or in the host cell cytoplasm ( Rickettsia ) . INTRACELLULAR LIFESTYLES Chlamydia spp . Chlamydia are obligate intracellular bacteria that cause trachoma ( C . trachomatis serovars Ab , B , Ba , C ) , urogenital tract infections ( C . trachomatis serovars D - K ) , lymphogranuloma venereum ( C . trachomatis serovar L1 , L2 , L3 ) and pneumonia ( C . pneumoniae and C . psittaci ) . Chlamydia have a biphasic life cycle , alternating between the infectious elementary body ( EB ) and the replicative reticulate body ( RB ) . Following EB attachment to the host cell , the Chlamydia Type III secretion system ( T3SS ) injects proteins into the host cell cytosol , inducing actin rearrangement and bacterial uptake ( Clifton et al . , 2004 ) . Once internalized , the bacteria block phagosome maturation and reside in a membrane - bound compartment known as the inclusion . The inclusion membrane contains both host and bacterial proteins and is non - fusogenic with endosomes and lysosomes , but intercepts nutrient - rich Golgi - derived vesicles and multivesicular bodies in the recycling pathway ( Hackstadt et al . , 1995 , 1996 ; Heinzen et al . , 1996 ; Beatty , 2006 ) . Within the inclusion , EBs diﬀerentiate into RBs , which replicate and eventually diﬀerentiate back to EBs prior to host cell egress and reinfection . During this infectious cycle , Chlamydia T3SS eﬀector proteins are translocated across the inclusion membrane and into the host cytosol , where they manipulate host pathways to divert nutrients such as amino acids , lipids , and iron to the inclusion ( reviewed in Bastidas et al . , 2013 ) . Coxiella burnetii Coxiella burnetii is the causative agent of human Q fever , an aerosol - borne zoonotic disease characterized by ﬂu - like symptoms during acute infection and endocarditis in chronically infected patients . Following phagocytosis of the environmentally stable C . burnetii small cell variant ( SCV ) , the C . burnetii - containing phagosome matures through the endocytic pathway to a phagolysosome ( Howe and Mallavia , 2000 ; Howe et al . , 2003 ) . The acidic pH of the phagolysosome activates C . burnetii metabolism and diﬀerentiation to the replicative form known as the large cell variant ( LCV ) ( Hackstadt and Williams , 1981 ) . At this point , fusion between the C . burnetii parasitophorous vacuole ( PV ) and host endosomes , lysosomes , and autophagosomes creates a large , phagolysosome - like vacuole that promotes bacterial replication ( reviewed in Voth and Heinzen , 2007 ) . C . burnetii actively manipulates host cell functions such as apoptosis and vesicular traﬃcking by secreting eﬀector proteins into the cytoplasm through the Dot / Icm Type IV secretion system ( T4SS ) ( reviewed in Moﬀatt et al . , 2015 ) . Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Ehrlichia chaffeensis Anaplasma phagocytophilum and Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis are tick - borne obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens belonging to the family Anaplasmataceae . A . phagocytophilum , the causative agent of human granulocytic anaplasmosis , infects human neutrophils and multiplies within vacuoles called inclusions or morulae . The A . phagocytophilum inclusion does not contain endosomal or lysosomal markers , although it interacts with the nutrient - rich endocytic and autophagic pathways ( Webster et al . , 1998 ; Mott et al . , 1999 ; Niu et al . , 2006 ) . Like C . burnetii , the A . phagocytophilum T4SS eﬀector proteins modulate host cell processes including autophagosome formation and SUMOylation ( Niu et al . , 2010 ; Al - Khedery et al . , 2012 ; Beyer et al . , 2015 ) . Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis exclusively infects human monocytes and macrophages and causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis . Similar to A . phagocytophilum inclusions , E . chaﬀeensis inclusions do not contain late endosomal markers and only weakly stain for lysosomal vacuolar ATPase ( Barnewall et al . , 1997 ) . However , in contrast to A . phagocytophilum , E . chaﬀeensis inclusions are labeled with early endosomal markers , suggesting the E . chaﬀeensis resides in a vacuolar niche similar to an early endosome ( Mott et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , the E . chaﬀeensis T4SS eﬀector protein Etf - 1 induces autophagy and redirects nutrients to the inclusion to support E . chaﬀeensis intracellular growth ( Lin et al . , 2016 ) . Rickettsia spp . Rickettsia spp . are small coccobacilli and the causative agents of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever ( R . rickettsia ) , Mediterranean spotted fever ( R . conorii ) , louse - borne typhus ( R . prowazekii ) , and scrub typhus ( Orientia tsutsugamushi ) . Most commonly transmitted to humans by arthropods , Rickettsia spp . infect and replicate in the endothelial cells of blood vessels and major organs . Following uptake by the host cell , rickettsial phospholipase degrades the phagosomal membrane , releasing the bacteria into the cytoplasm where they replicate freely ( Walker et al . , 2001 ) . Several species of Rickettsia spread from cell to cell by reorganizing and mobilizing host cell actin ( Heinzen et al . , 1993 ) , while O . tsutsugamushi escapes the host cell through a process similar to viral budding ( Ogawa et al . , 2014 ) . ROLE OF CHOLESTEROL IN BACTERIAL ENTRY AND EXIT Cholesterol - rich microdomains in the plasma membrane , known as lipid rafts , play a key role during pathogen attachment and entry into host cells . Lipid rafts are enriched in cholesterol , with 3 - to 5 - fold more cholesterol than the surrounding membrane ( Pike , 2003 ) . Lipid rafts also have higher concentrations of sphingolipids and signal transduction proteins such as integrins , kinases , phosphatases , and G protein - coupled receptors ( Brown Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 2 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens and Rose , 1992 ; Sargiacomo et al . , 1993 ; Chun et al . , 1994 ; Lisanti et al . , 1994 ; Gorodinsky and Harris , 1995 ; Liu et al . , 1996 ; Mineo et al . , 1996 ; Bickel et al . , 1997 ) . Caveolae , a morphologically distinct subset of lipid rafts with a ﬂask - shaped structure , contain cholesterol - binding caveolin proteins involved in clathrin - independent endocytosis ( Chang et al . , 1992 ; Stang et al . , 1997 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Schubert et al . , 2001 ; Lai , 2003 ) . As lipid rafts are key components of cell signaling and endocytosis , bacterial pathogens often target lipid rafts during host cell entry . Hijacking raft - associated signaling proteins promotes internalization of intracellular bacteria and subsequent development of the intracellular niche . Chlamydia spp . The role of lipid rafts during Chlamydia host cell entry has been controversial . Early studies found that C . trachomatis serovar L2 and C . psittaci strain GPIC was associated with lipid rafts during infection of HeLa cells , and cholesterol depletion using methyl - beta - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) inhibited bacterial entry in a dose - dependent manner ( Jutras et al . , 2003 ) . Disrupting lipid rafts with the cholesterol - binding compounds ﬁlipin and nystatin impaired entry of C . pneumoniae , C . psittaci , and C . trachomatis serovars E , F , and K ( but not A , B , and C ) into HeLa cells ( Stuart et al . , 2003 ) and serovar K into J774 macrophages ( Norkin et al . , 2001 ) . Further , although caveolin was not necessary for entry , these strains co - localized with the major caveolae protein caveolin - 1 ( Norkin et al . , 2001 ; Stuart et al . , 2003 ) . Recent work suggests C . pneumoniae uptake by HL cells , but not attachment , also involves lipid rafts ( Korhonen et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , Gabel reported that M β CD cholesterol extraction inhibited entry of C . trachomatis serovars D , E , K , and L2 into HeLa cells ( Gabel et al . , 2004 ) . However , disrupting lipid raft function with ﬁlipin , nystatin , or antibodies against cholera toxin B bound to lipid raft GM1 ganglioside had no eﬀect on infection ( Gabel et al . , 2004 ) . This study also did not ﬁnd bacteria associated with lipid rafts or caveolin . Further , GPI - anchored proteins , which are enriched in lipid rafts , were not required for C . trachomatis entry into CHO cells ( Jutras et al . , 2003 ) . In support of these ﬁndings , C . trachomatis serovar L2 entry into cholesterol - free DHCR24 − / − mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts was identical to cholesterol supplemented cells ( Gilk et al . , 2013 ) . The discrepancies between these studies may be attributed to diﬀerences in bacterial isolates , host cell type , or pleotropic eﬀects on membrane function by M β CD ( Zidovetzki and Levitan , 2007 ) . It is also possible that multiple , redundant entry pathways exist using diﬀerent host cell receptors . Recent studies have shown that two C . pneumoniae proteins , adhesin CPn0473 and invasin Pmp21 , bind to host epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and trigger lipid raft - mediated uptake ( Mölleken et al . , 2013 ; Fechtner et al . , 2016 ) . C . trachomatis also adhered to the lipid raft protein EphrinA2 receptor ( EphA2 ) ( Chakraborty et al . , 2012 ; Subbarayal et al . , 2015 ) , and the C . trachomatis invasin protein Ctad1 bound to β 1 integrin in lipid rafts during internalization ( Stallmann and Hegemann , 2016 ) . Targeting multiple host cell lipid raft receptors may broaden host cell tropism and increase the potential for successful host cell colonization . C . burnetii During host cell entry , C . burnetii utilizes α V β 3 integrin ( Capo et al . , 1999 ) , a transmembrane protein found in lipid rafts ( Triantaﬁlou and Triantaﬁlou , 2003 ) . In cholesterol - free DHCR24 − / − ﬁbroblasts , C . burnetii internalization decreased almost 90 % compared to DHCR24 − / − ﬁbroblasts supplemented with exogenous cholesterol ( Gilk et al . , 2013 ) . Blocking α V β 3 with antibodies or the α V β 3 ligand vitronectin further reduced internalization in DHCR24 − / − ﬁbroblasts , reinforcing the signiﬁcance of lipid rafts in C . burnetii internalization . Targeting the α V β 3 pathway may be a strategy employed by C . burnetii to evade the host immune response . α V β 3 normally functions during macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic cells ( Wu et al . , 2005 ) , a process that suppresses the immune response by inhibiting macrophage production of interleukin ( IL ) - 1 β , IL - 8 , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) - α , leukotriene C 4 , and thromboxane B2 ( Fadok et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , the α V β 3 - dependent pathway may enable C . burnetii to enter host cells without eliciting an inﬂammatory response . A . phagocytophilum and E . chaffeensis A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis have also been reported to utilize lipid rafts or caveolae for host cell entry ( Lin and Rikihisa , 2003b ) . Similar to Chlamydia spp . , cholesterol depletion using M β CD , or lipid raft disruption with nystatin or NBD - cholesterol , blocked infection by both A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis ( Lin and Rikihisa , 2003b ) . Removing host surface GPI - anchored proteins with phosphoinositide phospholipase C ( PI - PLC ) also inhibited entry of both bacterial species , suggesting lipid raft - associated GPI - anchored proteins are necessary for infection . Depletion of plasma membrane caveolae with cholera toxin B reduced A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis entry by 90 % , and both GM1 and caveolin - 1 localized to early inclusions ( Lin and Rikihisa , 2003b ) . These data suggest that A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis utilize caveolae - mediated endocytosis for host cell entry . Rickettsia spp . Lipid rafts are involved in both host cell entry and exit of diﬀerent Rickettsia spp . M β CD extraction of plasma membrane cholesterol blocked R . conorii uptake ( Martinez et al . , 2005 ) . Further , the R . conorii outer membrane protein OmpB bound the host protein Ku70 , a subunit of DNA - dependent protein kinase ( DNA - PK ) which is found in the nucleus and plasma membrane lipid rafts ( Koike , 2002 ; Lucero et al . , 2003 ; Martinez et al . , 2005 ) . Ku70 co - localized with R . conorii attached to Vero or HeLa cells , and an antibody directed against the extracellular N - terminus of Ku70 decreased R . conorii entry ( Martinez et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , R . conorii OmpB facilitates host cell entry by binding to the lipid raft - associated host protein Ku70 . In addition to OmpB , R . conorii OmpA bound the lipid raft integrins α 2 and β 1 on the cell surface ( Upla et al . , 2004 ; Hillman et al . , 2013 ) . While the signaling cascade triggered by Ku70 is not known , it may mimic integrin signaling and lead to actin - mediated phagocytosis ( Martinez et al . , 2005 ) . O . tsutsugamushi was found in lipid rafts of infected cells , suggesting the bacteria associate with lipid rafts ( Kim et al . , Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 3 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens 2013 ) . However , the inability of M β CD or ﬁlipin to impair O . tsutsugamushi host cell entry indicates that cholesterol or lipid rafts are not involved ( Kim et al . , 2013 ) . While caveolin did not associate directly with the bacteria , the O . tsutsugamushi protein HtrA co - localized with caveolin during host cell exit , a process where the bacteria causes the plasma membrane to bulge out similar to viral budding ( Kim et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , it appears that plasma membrane cholesterol is not involved in O . tsutsugamushi entry but plays a key role during bacterial egress from host cells . Targeting lipid rafts is clearly an important strategy by obligate intracellular pathogens , with Chlamydia spp . , C . burnetii , A . phagocytophilum , E . chaﬀeensis , and R . conorii all utilizing lipid rafts during host cell entry . Lipid rafts serve as signaling platforms to trigger host cell actin rearrangement and phagocytosis , thus allowing the bacteria to subvert host cell machinery to gain entry . Further , caveolin - mediated entry may facilitate development of the intracellular niche for vacuolar pathogens . For example , Chlamydia inclusion membrane caveolin may facilitate direct interception of Golgi - derived exocytic vesicles that are rich in sphingolipids and other nutrients essential for Chlamydia growth ( Hackstadt et al . , 1996 ; Van Ooij et al . , 2000 ) . While the presence of caveolin on the C . burnetii PV has not been explored , caveolin most likely plays an important role during host cell colonization by Chlamydia spp . , A . phagocytophilum , and E . chaﬀeensis . CHOLESTEROL - RICH MICRODOMAINS ON PATHOGEN - CONTAINING VACUOLES While the functions are less understood , cholesterol - rich microdomains are also found on the membrane of bacteria - containing vacuoles . Chlamydia spp . Filipin labeling of C . trachomatis - infected HeLa cells revealed cholesterol - rich microdomains on the inclusion membrane ( Carabeo et al . , 2003 ; Mital et al . , 2010 ) . These microdomains co - localized with four chlamydial inclusion membrane proteins ( IncB , Inc101 , Inc222 , and Inc850 ) and active host Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) ( Mital et al . , 2010 ) . SFKs were not required for Inc microdomain formation , leaving the relationship between SFKs and Inc proteins unclear ( Mital and Hackstadt , 2011 ) . It is not known whether the Incs are recruited to these inclusion microdomains , or if the Inc proteins themselves trigger microdomain formation . Inc222 and Inc850 stably interact with one another and may form a complex within the inclusion microdomains . While the functions of IncB , Inc101 , and Inc222 are unknown , Inc850 may play a critical role during inclusion development by mediating microtubule - dependent traﬃcking of the nascent chlamydial inclusion to the perinuclear microtubule organizing center ( MTOC ) ( Campbell et al . , 1989a , b ; Grieshaber et al . , 2003 ) . Inc850 was found to bind dynein light chain , DYNLT1 , thus facilitating interactions between the inclusion and the host microtubule network that are required for traﬃcking to the MTOC ( Mital et al . , 2010 , 2015 ) . Inclusion traﬃcking to the MTOC is thought to promote homotypic fusion between inclusions , which serves as a potential mechanism to share nutrients or exchange genetic material ( Richards et al . , 2013 ) . Chlamydia clinical strains that cannot undergo homotypic fusion cause less severe disease with fewer recoverable bacteria , suggesting this is an important virulence factor ( Geisler et al . , 2001 ) . With the recent development of genetic tools in Chlamydia , the role of Inc850 in inclusion traﬃcking and virulence can now be tested . In addition to the Incs , the host SFKs Fyn and Src localized to cholesterol - rich microdomains of C . trachomatis and C . pneumoniae inclusions but not the rodent species C . caviae and C . muridarum ( Mital et al . , 2010 ; Mital and Hackstadt , 2011 ) . The SFKs are non - receptor membrane - associated tyrosine kinases that regulate microtubule - dependent traﬃcking by phosphorylating tubulin and binding to dynein - associated proteins ( Macurek et al . , 2008 ; Colello et al . , 2010 ; Levi and Shalgi , 2010 ) . SFK activity was necessary for dynein - dependent traﬃcking of the nascent C . trachomatis inclusion to the MTOC ( Mital et al . , 2010 ) . In addition , Fyn was involved in sphingomyelin acquisition by Chlamydia , most likely through microtubule - dependent traﬃcking ( Mital and Hackstadt , 2011 ) . Chlamydia species that do not recruit SFKs to their inclusion membranes do not traﬃc to the MTOC but have increased inclusion development and bacterial growth in SFK - deﬁcient cells , suggesting SFKs restrict growth of some Chlamydia species ( Mital et al . , 2010 ; Mital and Hackstadt , 2011 ) . C . burnetii The C . burnetii PV membrane is sterol - rich and contains the lipid raft proteins ﬂotillin - 1 and ﬂotillin - 2 ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) . It is not known , however , if there are organized microdomains on the PV membrane , or if these proteins play a role during C . burnetii infection . Like C . trachomatis , multiple C . burnetii PVs in a host cell will fuse , though there is no evidence for microtubule - dependent traﬃcking of the PV and the role of homotypic fusion in pathogenesis is not known . Cholesterol - rich microdomains have been found on the pathogen - containing vacuoles of both C . trachomatis and C . burnetii , though the function has only been explored in C . trachomatis . Cholesterol or other sterols are also enriched in the A . phagocytophilum inclusion ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . In addition to mediating microtubule - dependent traﬃcking as in the case of C . trachomatis inclusion , cholesterol may play a structural role in the membranes of pathogen - containing vacuoles . For example , high cholesterol membranes are more rigid and may create a stronger physical barrier between the pathogen and host cell defenses . Further , cholesterol regulates proteins involved in endosomal traﬃcking and fusion , and could facilitate recruitment of nutrient - rich endosomes to support bacterial growth . CHOLESTEROL TRAFFICKING TO PATHOGEN - CONTAINING VACUOLES Endogenous cholesterol is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and traﬃcked to the plasma membrane before distribution throughout the cell . The major source of exogenous cholesterol is through receptor - mediated uptake of cholesterol Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 4 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens bound to low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) . LDL particles are internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis and transported through the endocytic pathway to lysosomes , where cholesterol esters are hydrolyzed to free cholesterol for cellular use . Regardless of the source , cholesterol is transported throughout the cell by both vesicular and non - vesicular ( e . g . , cholesterol transport proteins and membrane contact sites ) traﬃcking pathways . Chlamydia spp . While the bacteria lack the machinery to synthesize cholesterol , it is found in the C . trachomatis membrane in addition to inclusion microdomains ( Wylie et al . , 1997 ; Hatch and McClarty , 1998 ; Stephens et al . , 1998 ; Carabeo et al . , 2003 ) . Chlamydia appears to actively acquire host cholesterol , as inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis with chloramphenicol drastically decreased inclusion cholesterol levels ( Carabeo et al . , 2003 ) . This suggests that bacterial proteins , possibly secreted into the host cytoplasm , directly manipulate host cholesterol traﬃcking pathways . Both de novo synthesized and exogenous LDL - derived cholesterol traﬃcked to C . trachomatis inclusion through a microtubule - dependent process and involved transit through the Golgi apparatus before delivery to the inclusion membrane ( Carabeo et al . , 2003 ) . However , Golgi - dependent cholesterol traﬃcking was not essential for Chlamydia replication , and cholesterol - rich multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) also deliver cholesterol to the inclusion ( Carabeo et al . , 2003 ; Beatty , 2006 , 2008 ) . The MVB pathway may be essential , as disruption of the MVB traﬃcking decreased cholesterol in the C . trachomatis inclusion , delayed inclusion maturation , and reduced bacterial growth ( Beatty , 2006 , 2008 ) . Interestingly , C . trachomatis inclusion formation and bacterial growth was unaﬀected in cholesterol - free DHCR24 − / − mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts , suggesting cholesterol precursors may be suﬃcient for C . trachomati s infection ( Gilk et al . , 2013 ) . In addition to Golgi - dependent and MVB traﬃcking , a third mechanism of cholesterol transport to the inclusion utilizes the high - density lipoprotein ( HDL ) biogenesis machinery involved in cholesterol eﬄux . HDL is formed when cholesterol and phospholipids are transported to extracellular ApoA - 1 by the lipid binding proteins ATP - binding cassette transporters A1 and G1 ( ABCA1 , ABCG1 ) , and CLA1 . Intriguingly , while ABCA1 , CLA1 , and ApoA - 1 localized to the inclusion membrane , both CLA1 and ApoA - 1 were also found in discrete foci within the inclusion lumen ( Cox et al . , 2012 ) . siRNA knockdown of ABCA1 or pharmaceutical inhibitors of ABCA1 and CLA1 transporter activity signiﬁcantly reduced C . trachomatis growth ( Cox et al . , 2012 ) . While the mechanism is not clear , it is possible that C . trachomatis diverts these proteins to the inclusion as a mechanism to obtain cholesterol . C . burnetii The C . burnetii PV is sterol - rich , although ﬁlipin labeling does not indicate that cholesterol or other sterols are present in the C . burnetii envelope ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) . Despite encoding two unique eukaryote - like sterol reductase homologs ( Seshadri et al . , 2003 ; Beare et al . , 2009 ; Gilk et al . , 2013 ) , C . burnetii does not appear to synthesize cholesterol and instead obtains cholesterol from the host cell . Cholesterol - rich MVBs fuse with the PV ( Gilk et al . , 2013 ) and both endogenous and LDL - derived cholesterol traﬃc to the PV through unknown pathways ( Mulye et al . , 2017 ) . C . burnetii also interacts with host cholesterol traﬃcking by recruiting the host cholesterol - binding protein ORP1L ( oxysterol binding protein related protein 1 long ) to the PV in a T4SS - dependent manner ( Justis et al . , 2017 ) . ORP1L is an endosome / lysosome - localized Rab7 eﬀector protein that serves two conformation - dependent functions in host cells ( Rocha et al . , 2009 ) . When bound to cholesterol , ORP1L takes on a compact conformation , allowing Rab7 - RILP to interact with dynein motors and direct minus - end transport of endosomes along microtubules . Alternately , when not bound to cholesterol , ORP1L is in an extended conformation and binds to the VAP proteins on the ER , participating in endosome / lysosome - ER membrane contact sites ( Rocha et al . , 2009 ; van der Kant et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , while the C . burnetii PV membrane is sterol - rich , ﬂuorescent co - localization and electron microscopy suggest that ORP1L participates in PV - ER contact sites and is likely not binding cholesterol on the PV membrane ( Justis et al . , 2017 ) . ORP1L was required for optimal C . burnetii PV expansion possibly through ORP1L - dependent traﬃcking to the PV ( Justis et al . , 2017 ) . ORP1L may also be involved in transfer of cholesterol from the PV to the ER , similar to the proposed role of ORP1L during adenovirus infection ( Cianciola et al . , 2013 ) . Inhibiting host cell cholesterol metabolism disrupted PV morphology and bacterial replication , demonstrating that cholesterol and other sterols play an important role in C . burnetii infection ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) . Although cholesterol itself was not essential for C . burnetii infection of cholesterol - free DHCR24 − / − ﬁbroblasts ( Gilk et al . , 2013 ) , increasing PV cholesterol through cholesterol supplementation or pharmacological inhibitors was bactericidal ( Mulye et al . , 2017 ) . Intriguingly , C . burnetii death was due to increased PV acidiﬁcation when PV cholesterol levels were elevated ( Mulye et al . , 2017 ) . The proton pump vATPase plays a key role in lysosomal acidiﬁcation and has been localized to the C . burnetii PV ( Heinzen et al . , 1996 ) . vATPase activity is aﬀected by lysosomal membrane cholesterol ( Cox et al . , 2007 ) , leading to the possibility that cholesterol levels regulate PV pH through vATPase . A . phagocytophilum Cholesterol is an important component of the A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis cell envelopes , providing physical integrity in the absence of typical bacterial lipid A and peptidoglycan ( Lin and Rikihisa , 2003b ) . Cholesterol is also enriched on the A . phagocytophilum inclusion membrane and lumen ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . Like Chlamydia and C . burnetii , A . phagocytophilum lacks genes for cholesterol biosynthesis and recruits host cholesterol by targeting cholesterol traﬃcking ( Lin and Rikihisa , 2003a ) . A . phagocytophilum - infected cells have increased LDL uptake , resulting in 2 - fold more cholesterol than uninfected cells ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . LDL - derived cholesterol was traﬃcked to the A . phagocytophilum inclusion by the host cell Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 5 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens protein NPC1 ( Niemann - Pick disease , type C1 ) , a cholesterol - binding membrane protein required for cholesterol transfer from endosomes and lysosomes to the ER ( Karten et al . , 2009 ) . Within 24 h of infection , A . phagocytophilum recruited NPC1 to the inclusion membrane via NPC1 - positive , LAMP1 / 2 - negative vesicles ( Xiong and Rikihisa , 2012 ) . Bacterial protein synthesis was required for NPC1 recruitment , and bacterial growth was signiﬁcantly impaired in NPC1 - deﬁcient cells ( Xiong and Rikihisa , 2012 ) . Furthermore , vesicle - associated membrane protein 4 ( VAMP4 ) and syntaxin 16 , which participate in LDL - cholesterol transport from NPC1 vesicles to the Golgi network , were also recruited to the A . phagocytophilum inclusion ( Xiong and Rikihisa , 2012 ) . Thus , A . phagocytophilum hijacks NPC1 - mediated LDL traﬃcking as a method to divert cholesterol to the bacterial inclusion for incorporation into the bacterial envelope and inclusion membrane . Given that cholesterol plays important roles in both the bacteria and vacuole membranes , it is no surprise that obligate intracellular pathogens have devised multiple ways to recruit host cell cholesterol . Cholesterol binding proteins , which serve to move cholesterol between membranes , localize to the vacuoles of both C . trachomatis and C . burnetii . Cholesterol - rich MVBs also fuse with the C . trachomatis and C . burnetii vacuoles , and LDL traﬃcking of internalized extracellular cholesterol is important for C . trachomatis , C . burnetii , and A . phagocytophilum . In the case of A . phagocytophilum , the bacteria target a speciﬁc subset of LDL - positive vesicles , while the underlying mechanism of LDL traﬃcking to the C . trachomatis inclusion is not known . Finally , the promiscuous fusogenicity of the C . burnetii PV may account for LDL delivery to this vacuole . Most likely , other undiscovered pathways also deliver cholesterol to the bacteria , all serving to provide this important resource to the intracellular niche . BACTERIAL MODIFICATION OF CHOLESTEROL While not possessing the full biosynthetic machinery to generate cholesterol de novo , both C . trachomatis and C . burnetii express cholesterol - modifying enzymes which may modify host cell cholesterol or cholesterol precursors . C . trachomatis The C . trachomatis gene CT149 is a putative carboxylic esterase containing a cholesterol recognition consensus sequence and two GXSXG cholesterol esterase motifs ( Peters et al . , 2012 ) . Further , recombinant CT149 exhibited cholesterol esterase activity in vitro , and CT149 ectopic expression in HeLa cells decreased cholesterol ester levels , with a corresponding increase in free cholesterol ( Peters et al . , 2012 ) . Antibodies generated against CT149 localized this protein to the bacteria and not the host cytoplasm , suggesting CT149 functions inside the inclusion ( Peters et al . , 2012 ) . Interestingly , lipid droplets ( LDs ) , which store cholesterol esters , were observed inside the chlamydial inclusion ( Cocchiaro et al . , 2008 ) , presenting the possibility that CT149 liberates cholesterol from LDs for use by the bacteria . C . burnetii C . burnetii expresses two eukaryotic - like sterol reductase enzymes , CBU1158 and CBU1206 ( Seshadri et al . , 2003 ; Beare et al . , 2009 ) . CBU1206 has homology to 1 24 sterol reductases , which function in the ﬁnal step of mammalian cholesterol or yeast ergosterol synthesis ( Beare et al . , 2009 ) . Heterologous expression of CBU1206 in Saccharomyces cerevisae functionally complements deletion of the yeast 1 24 sterol reductase erg4 , indicating CBU1206 can modify sterols ( Gilk et al . , 2010 ) . However , if CBU1206 modiﬁes cholesterol in C . burnetii or host cells is unknown . Further , CBU1206 contains nine predicted transmembrane domains and is most likely in the C . burnetii cell envelope , which raises interesting questions about when and where CBU1206 might modify host sterols ( Gilk et al . , 2010 ) . The enzymatic capability for the putative C . burnetii 1 7 sterol reductase CBU1158 remains unexplored . Determining the importance of the C . burnetii putative sterol reductases during infection , along with their substrate speciﬁcity and location of action , will be critical to understanding the role of cholesterol and other sterols during C . burnetii infection . MANIPULATING CHOLESTEROL HOMEOSTASIS Eukaryotic cells tightly regulate cholesterol levels by balancing metabolism ( biosynthesis and breakdown ) , uptake , eﬄux , and storage . De novo biosynthesis occurs in the ER , with the conversion of HMG - CoA to mevalonate by HMG - CoA reductase ( HMGR ) being the rate - limiting step . Cellular cholesterol levels can also be increased through uptake of cholesterol bound to LDL via the LDL receptor ( LDLR ) . Both biosynthesis and uptake are regulated at the expression level by sterol regulatory element - binding protein ( SREBP ) or liver X receptor ( LXR ) transcription factors , which increase transcription of HMGR and LDLR under low cholesterol conditions . When cellular cholesterol levels are high , cholesterol can be transported out of the cell ( i . e . , eﬄuxed ) , broken down into bile acids or steroids , or esteriﬁed and stored in LDs . Chlamydia spp . , C . burnetii , and A . phagocytophilum all target host cholesterol homeostasis , particularly at the level of gene transcription . Cholesterol Metabolism and Uptake Chlamydia spp . C . pneumoniae has been linked to atherosclerosis , a disease that results from dyslipidemia , or increased levels of circulating lipids . In mice , peripheral blood monocytes can spread C . pneumoniae from the lung to the liver , a key site of lipid metabolism ( Moazed et al . , 1998 ; Marangoni et al . , 2006 ) . A recent in vivo study found that C . pneumoniae - infected mice had decreased hepatic bile acid levels and increased serum cholesterol levels , as compared to uninfected or C . trachomatis - infected mice ( Marangoni et al . , 2015 ) . These changes have been linked to Cyp7a1 ( cholesterol 7 α - hydroxylase ) , a host enzyme that catalyzes cholesterol breakdown into bile acids . Along with two transcription factors involved in regulating Cyp7a1 expression , Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 6 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens lxr - α and srebp1c , cyp7a1 was downregulated in C . pneumoniae - infected liver cells ( Marangoni et al . , 2015 ) . A separate study reported a dose - dependent decrease in cyp7a1 promoter activity in C . pneumoniae - infected human hepatocytes ( Michelini et al . , 2012 ) . Together , these data suggest that through Cyp7a1 , C . pneumoniae downregulates cholesterol catabolism in liver cells . C . pneumoniae also altered uptake of serum cholesterol in the mouse liver , by downregulating ldlr expression and upregulating expression of idol ( inducible degrader of the LDLR ) ( Marangoni et al . , 2015 ) . By decreasing cholesterol catabolism in the liver , while also decreasing cholesterol uptake , C . pneumoniae infection may lead to increased circulating cholesterol and promote atherosclerosis . In contrast to liver cells , C . pneumoniae increased LDL uptake in infected human monocyte - derived macrophages ( Kalayoglu and Byrne , 1998 ) . This led to formation of foam cells , which are lipid - laden cells important in atherosclerosis progression . LDL uptake also increased approximately 2 . 5 - fold in C . pneumoniae - infected human monocytes and human umbilical vein epithelial ( HUVEC ) cells ( Yoshida et al . , 2006 ; Evani and Ramasubramanian , 2016 ) . In HUVEC cells , this was partially due to increased expression of cholesterol uptake receptors , including scavenger receptor A , LOX - 1 , and CD36 , which all internalize oxidized low density lipoprotein ( oxLDL ) ( Yoshida et al . , 2006 ; Campbell et al . , 2013 ; Sun et al . , 2014 ) . Interestingly , glycan from C . pneumoniae , but not C . trachomatis , bound and activated LOX - 1 ( Campbell et al . , 2013 ) . Recombinant C . pneumoniae Hsp60 also increased LOX - 1 expression in endothelial cells of hypercholesterolemic rabbits , further suggesting that the bacteria actively interact with the LOX - 1 pathway to increase LDL uptake ( Lin et al . , 2011 ) . Less is known about C . trachomatis manipulation of cholesterol metabolism . In human trophoblasts , C . trachomatis downregulated hmgr , leading to lower levels of cholesterol and the cholesterol - derived steroids estrogen and progesterone ; this is hypothesized to impair trophoblast implantation and placentation during pregnancy ( Azenabor et al . , 2007 ) . Although not the primary target organ , C . trachomatis has been found in mouse liver lesions and can cause perihepatitis in humans ( Barteneva et al . , 1996 ) . Gene expression proﬁles in C . trachomatis - infected mouse livers reported upregulation of lxr α , lxr β , and cyp7a1 , suggesting cholesterol catabolism is elevated ( Marangoni et al . , 2015 ) . C . trachomatis downregulated ldlr in human HepG2 hepatocellular cells , suggesting the bacteria decreases cholesterol uptake ( Bashmakov et al . , 2010 ) . Cholesterol biosynthesis appears to be critical for C . trachomatis infection , as the HMGR inhibitor mevastatin reduced C . trachomatis growth ( Bashmakov et al . , 2010 ) . The requirement for de novo host synthesized cholesterol would suggest sterol intermediates or cholesterol metabolites are important for C . trachomatis infection of liver cells . C . burnetii C . burnetii - infected Vero cells had a 73 % increase in cellular cholesterol at 6 days post - infection , as compared to mock infected cells ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) . Pharmaceutical inhibitors of either HMGR or LDL uptake blocked PV formation and bacterial growth , and both hmgr and ldlr were upregulated during C . burnetii infection of Vero cells ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) . Intriguingly , this upregulation was not observed until 4 days post - infection , when the C . burnetii PV is large and the bacteria are in logarithmic growth . However , at 6 days post - infection the expression levels returned to the same level as mock - infected cells ( Howe and Heinzen , 2006 ) indicating a temporal regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis and uptake . Supporting this hypothesis , C . burnetii PV size and growth were found most sensitive to cholesterol levels only during the ﬁrst 2 days of infection ( Mulye et al . , 2017 ) . As elevated cholesterol in the PV is bacteriolytic , it is possible that C . burnetii reduces PV cholesterol during early stages of infection and increases PV cholesterol later during PV maintenance . Given the role cholesterol plays in PV fusion with endosomes , as well as PV pH , C . burnetii most likely tightly regulates PV membrane cholesterol during the infectious cycle . A . phagocytophilum Infection of human premyelocytic leukemia cell line ( HL - 60 ) with A . phagocytophilum resulted in a 2 - fold increase in total host cell cholesterol level ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . Inhibitor studies and gene expression analyses revealed that A . phagocytophilum does not require de novo cholesterol synthesis but acquires cholesterol by upregulating LDLR at both the mRNA and the protein level ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . Interestingly , A . phagocytophilum does not target SREBP , the primary transcription factor regulating ldlr expression . Instead , the 3 ′ end of the ldlr mRNA transcript is stabilized through an unknown mechanism ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . However , the extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) pathway appears to be involved , as ERK was upregulated during A . phagocytophilum infection , and inhibiting the upstream kinase MEK lowered ldlr expression levels and reduced bacterial infection ( Xiong et al . , 2009 ) . How the bacterium targets this process still remains unknown , though it is clear that LDL uptake is essential for A . phagocytophilum pathogenesis . Cholesterol Efﬂux Excess cholesterol can be exported out of the cell by the ATP - binding cassette transporters ABCA1 and ABCG1 . ABCG1 is found primarily in endosomes , while ABCA1 cycles between endosomes and the plasma membrane ( Neufeld et al . , 2001 ; Tarling and Edwards , 2011 ) . While both ABCA1 and ABCG1 transfer cholesterol to a number of extracellular particles , ABCA1 promotes HDL assembly at the plasma membrane through binding ApoA - 1 , a main component of HDL ( Phillips , 2013 ) . By targeting host cholesterol eﬄux pathways , intracellular pathogens can further ﬁne - tune host cholesterol to beneﬁt bacterial growth . Chlamydia spp . C . pneumoniae infection decreased cholesterol eﬄux by downregulating expression of ABCA1 in multiple cell types including A549 lung epithelial cell lines ( Korhonen et al . , 2013 ) , LDL - treated HUVEC cells ( Sun et al . , 2014 ) , and THP - 1 macrophage - derived foam cells ( Zhao et al . , 2014 ) . ABCG1 was also downregulated in C . pneumoniae - infected HUVECs ( Sun Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 7 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens et al . , 2014 ) . Experimental measurement of cholesterol eﬄux to ApoA - 1 showed a 50 % decrease in C . pneumoniae - infected THP - 1 macrophage - like foam cells compared to uninfected or heat - killed bacteria - infected cells ( Zhao et al . , 2014 ) . Further , C . pneumoniae appeared to downregulate host cholesterol eﬄux by increasing microRNA miR - 33 levels , which is produced from the SREBP intron and downregulates ABCA1 ( Zhao et al . , 2014 ) . Upregulation of miR - 33 was triggered by the innate immune pattern recognition receptor TLR2 ( toll like receptor 2 ) which activates NF - kB - mediated upregulation of miR - 33 upon bacterial recognition ( Zhao et al . , 2014 ) . While viable organisms were required for this process , it is unknown if the bacteria are directly activating TLR2 or if this is strictly a host immune response . However , these data collectively indicate that C . pneumoniae targets eﬄux as a mechanism to further increase the levels of intracellular cholesterol . C . burnetii C . burnetii diﬀerentially regulated apoE and apoC gene expression in THP - 1 macrophages ( Ren et al . , 2003 ; Mahapatra et al . , 2010 ) . In addition , a genome - wide RNA interference screen in HeLa cells revealed that siRNA depletion of apolipoproteins involved in lipid transport , including ApoA2 , ApoC4 , ApoL1 , ApoL2 , and ApoL5 , aﬀected the total number of C . burnetii PVs ( McDonough et al . , 2013 ) . This suggests that cholesterol eﬄux may play an important role during C . burnetii infection , although the precise mechanisms and purpose are unknown . Cholesterol Storage Eukaryotic cells store excess cholesterol in lipid droplets ( LD ) , specialized organelles comprised of a phospholipid monolayer surrounding a neutral lipid core of esteriﬁed cholesterol and triacylglycerols . Prior to packaging in ER - derived LDs , excess cholesterol is esteriﬁed by acyl CoA transferase ( ACAT ) . LDs are coated by a special class of proteins called perilipins , which help prevent LD breakdown ( Listenberger et al . , 2007 ) . LDs serve as an important source of lipids for membrane synthesis or energy metabolism , as well as immune modulators . Finally , LD accumulation leads to foam cell formation , a hallmark of atherosclerosis . Chlamydia spp . Atherosclerosis and foam cell formation play a signiﬁcant role in C . pneumoniae pathogenesis . C . pneumoniae infection increased ACAT1 expression , and therefore esteriﬁed cholesterol , in THP - 1 cells ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) . Along with the decreased cholesterol eﬄux discussed earlier , this resulted in cholesterol accumulation within the host cell and promoted foam cell formation . The transcription factors LXR and the peroxisome proliferator - activated receptors PPAR α and PPAR γ , which regulate the expression of acat1 and other cholesterol homeostasis genes such as abca1 and abcg1 , have been implicated in C . pneumoniae - induced foam cell formation ( Chen et al . , 2008 ; Naiki et al . , 2008 ; Mei et al . , 2009 ; Liu et al . , 2010 ) . For example , C . pneumoniae downregulated PPAR α and PPAR γ by targeting the c - Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) branch of the MAP kinase pathway , leading to increased expression of acat1 , abca1 and abcg1 and promoting foam cell formation ( Mei et al . , 2009 ; Liu et al . , 2010 ) . Treatment with PPAR α and PPAR γ agonists reversed this eﬀect . Thus , C . pneumoniae induces foam cell formation by manipulating a signal transduction pathway that regulates both LD formation ( ACAT1 ) as well as cholesterol eﬄux ( ABCA1 / G1 ) . During C . trachomatis infection , LDs were found inside the inclusion and the number of cytoplasmic LDs increased ( Cocchiaro et al . , 2008 ; Saka et al . , 2015 ) . LDs co - localized with the C . trachomatis inclusion protein IncA at the inclusion membrane and the lumen , suggesting that IncA participates in LD translocation into the inclusion ( Cocchiaro et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , three C . trachomatis LD - associated proteins were identiﬁed : Lda1 , Lda2 , and Lda3 ( Kumar et al . , 2006 ) . While the role of Lda1 and Lda2 have yet to be elucidated , Lda3 was localized to the inclusion , cytoplasmic LDs , and LDs within the inclusion ( Cocchiaro et al . , 2008 ) . Lda3 overexpression decreased PLIN2 association with LDs , suggesting Lda3 replaces PLIN2 on LDs to promote LD translocation into the inclusion . While the role of LD translocation into the inclusion lumen is not clear , LDs could serve as a source of energy or membrane for intracellular C . trachomatis ( Cocchiaro et al . , 2008 ) . As discussed earlier , the putative C . trachomatis cholesterol esterase ( CT149 ) may hydrolyze cholesterol esters , freeing cholesterol for bacterial use ( Peters et al . , 2012 ) . Further supporting the importance of LDs during C . trachomatis infection , inhibiting LD formation with either pharmaceutical inhibitors or gene knockouts signiﬁcantly blocked C . trachomatis growth in epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts ( Kumar et al . , 2006 ; Peters and Byrne , 2015 ; Saka et al . , 2015 ; Recuero - Checa et al . , 2016 ) . A recent proteomic analysis discovered that the LD proteome was altered during infection with C . trachomatis , with an enrichment of host lipid metabolism and biosynthesis proteins ( Saka et al . , 2015 ) . Three additional bacterial inclusion proteins , Cap1 , CTL0882 , and IncG , were also found in the LDs . Together , these studies indicate that C . trachomatis actively manipulates LD formation , composition , and traﬃcking , potentially as a source of energy or lipids . C . burnetii C . burnetii - containing foam cells have been found in heart valves of an infected patient ( Brouqui et al . , 1994 ) , and LDs were observed in vitro in the C . burnetii PV lumen of infected human alveolar macrophages ( Graham et al . , 2013 ) . LD formation may increase during infection , as the expression levels of the LD coat protein PLIN2 and fatty acid binding protein FABP4 , which transfers fatty acids to the ER for packaging in LDs , were upregulated in infected THP - 1 cells ( Ren et al . , 2003 ; Mahapatra et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , siRNA depletion of patatin - like phospholipase domain - containing protein 2 ( PNPLA2 ) , the phospholipase involved in LD breakdown , led to an increased number of C . burnetii PVs in HeLa cells ( McDonough et al . , 2013 ) . A similar observation was made following depletion of the long chain fatty acyl - CoA ligase ACSL6 , which is important in neutral lipid synthesis ( McDonough et al . , 2013 ; Teodoro et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , treatment of monkey kidney epithelial cells ( Vero cells ) with an LD - localized broad spectrum antiviral molecule ST699 inhibited C . burnetii intracellular growth ( Sandoz et al . , 2014 ) . These data Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 8 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens point to a role for LD homeostasis during infection , though it has not been determined if LDs are indeed targeted by C . burnetii or if C . burnetii growth is altered when LD formation is blocked . A . phagocytophilum A gene expression proﬁling study in A . phagocytophilum - infected HL - 60 cells revealed increased expression of the major LD protein PLIN1 ( de la Fuente et al . , 2005 ; Manzano - Roman et al . , 2008 ) . Further studies revealed PLIN1 expression increased with bacterial replication , and siRNA knockdown of PLIN1 led to a 50 % decrease in A . phagocytophilum replication ( Manzano - Roman et al . , 2008 ) . As PLIN proteins are critical for LD formation , LDs most likely play an important role during A . phagocytophilim infection ( Tansey et al . , 2004 ; Brasaemle , 2007 ) . Rickettsia spp . O . tsutsugamushi induced LD formation in mouse L - 929 ﬁbroblast cells ( Ogawa et al . , 2014 ) . Although the diﬀerence in cholesterol ester levels was not determined , lipid composition analysis revealed O . tsutugamushi - induced LDs were enriched in triacylglycerols and could serve as an energy source for the bacteria . While these studies suggest that O . tsutsugamushi induce LD accumulation , their contribution to bacterial intracellular growth is yet to be determined . CONCLUSION For obligate intracellular bacteria , entry into the host cell and subsequent formation and maintenance of a vacuolar or cytoplasmic niche is essential for pathogen growth and survival . Due to cholesterol’s multiple cellular functions , intracellular pathogens target cholesterol to obtain nutrients , membrane , or manipulate cellular signaling . This bacteria - host cholesterol interaction occurs at various stages of infection including host cell binding and internalization , niche formation , intracellular replication , and dissemination . The pathogens discussed in this review have appreciably diﬀerent lifestyles with unique ways to manipulate host cell cholesterol ( Figure 1 ) . Chlamydia spp . initially interact with cholesterol - rich lipid rafts during host cell entry , followed by targeting multiple host cholesterol traﬃcking pathways in order to establish the intracellular niche . Cholesterol is required in both the Chlamydia envelope and the inclusion membrane . While it has not been deﬁnitively demonstrated , cholesterol most likely plays a structural role in the bacterial envelope . FIGURE 1 | Overview of host cholesterol - pathogen interactions . For Rickettsia , Coxiella , Anaplasma , and Ehrlichia , attachment to the host cell plasma membrane and subsequent host cell entry involves cholesterol - rich lipid rafts ( red bars ) . The role of lipid rafts for Chlamydia is unclear , and may be species - or host cell - speciﬁc , while Orientia utilizes lipid rafts for exit . Cholesterol ( shown as red circles ) is found in the pathogen - containing vacuoles , as well as the bacterial membrane of Chlamydia , Anaplasma , and Ehrlichia . Golgi - derived vesicles , multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) , and lipid droplets trafﬁc to the Chlamydia inclusion and serve as source of cholesterol . The source of cholesterol in the Coxiella vacuole is not clear , but may involve MVBs , while Anaplasma and Ehrlichia intercept LDL - derived cholesterol . Chlamydia , Coxiella , and Anaplasma target host gene expression to manipulate cholesterol homeostasis ( Dotted arrow pointing to the nucleus ) . Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 9 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens TABLE 1 | Summary of manipulation of host cholesterol by obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens . Bacteria Utilize lipid raft / caveolae for entry or exit Cholesterol - rich microdomains on vacuole membrane Cholesterol trafﬁcking to vacuole Bacterial manipulation of host cholesterol homeostasis Uptake Efﬂux Storage Chlamydia spp . Controversial Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Coxiella burnetii Yes ( entry ) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Anaplasma phagocytophilum Yes ( entry ) Unknown Yes Yes Unknown Yes Ehrlichia chaffeensis Yes ( entry ) Unknown Yes Unknown Unknown Unknown Rickettsia conorii Yes ( entry ) N / A N / A Unknown Unknown Unknown Orientia tsutsugamushi Yes ( exit ) N / A N / A Unknown Unknown Yes Inclusion membrane cholesterol serves at least two purposes . First , inclusion cholesterol - rich microdomains contain both bacterial and host proteins involved in microtubule - dependent traﬃcking of the inclusion . Second , the cholesterol - binding protein caveolin may facilitate interactions between the inclusion and nutrient - rich endosomes and vesicles . In order to increase cholesterol availability , Chlamydia manipulates host cell cholesterol homeostasis . Both C . trachomatis and C . pneumoniae induce LD accumulation , which potentially provides lipids for bacterial growth . LDs appear particularly important to C . trachomatis , with bacterial proteins possibly facilitating translocation and breakdown of LDs in the inclusion lumen . C . pneumoniae reprograms cholesterol metabolism , increasing cholesterol levels that contribute to C . pneumoniae - mediated atherosclerosis and foam cell formation . While Chlamydia spp . inclusions divert from the endocytic pathway , the C . burnetii niche is phagolysosome - like and highly fusogenic with host endosomes and autophagosomes . C . burnetii requires lipid rafts for entry into non - phagocytic cells , although the role of lipid rafts in macrophages has not been determined . Once inside the cell , the cholesterol requirement of C . burnetii appears complex and time - dependent . Due to the fusogenicity of the PV , it is likely that multiple sources of cholesterol traﬃc to the PV , though it is unknown how cholesterol traﬃcking or cholesterol levels change during PV development and maintenance . The bacteria are most sensitive to cholesterol during the initial stages of infection , before the PV is fully established . One possibility is that cholesterol regulates the C . burnetii T4SS , which secretes bacterial eﬀector proteins necessary for PV expansion . Cholesterol also clearly inﬂuences PV pH , which is known to play an important role in C . burnetii metabolism . C . burnetii appears to have multiple mechanisms to manipulate host cholesterol levels , including targeting cholesterol eﬄux and storage . Further , C . burnetii may enzymatically modify cholesterol , or use membrane contact sites to transfer cholesterol from the PV to the host ER . Finally , our current knowledge of C . burnetii manipulation of host cholesterol is based on experiments with an avirulent strain , which contains truncated LPS compared to virulent bacteria . Studies with virulent bacteria will enable us to link host cholesterol to disease outcome during C . burnetii infection . The importance of cholesterol during A . phagocytophilum , E . chaﬀeensis , and Rickettsia spp . infection is comparatively understudied . A . phagocytophilum and E . chaﬀeensis utilize lipid rafts during host cell entry . While A . phagocytophilum obtains cholesterol by hijacking the host LDL uptake and NPC1 traﬃcking , not much is known about E . chaﬀeensis and its eﬀect on host cholesterol metabolism . Unlike the other discussed pathogens , Rickettsia spp . replicate freely in the cytoplasm and therefore have diﬀerent cholesterol requirements than vacuolar pathogens . R . conorii targets cholesterol during entry , whereas O . tsutsugamushi requires it during egress from the host cell . Although O . tsutsugamushi infection increases LD accumulation , if and how these Rickettsia spp . target host cholesterol metabolism remains unknown . Regardless of diﬀerent bacterial life cycles and host pathways targeted , host cholesterol manipulation at varying stages of these intracellular life cycles seems to be the unifying theme ( Table 1 ) . Pathogen - mediated manipulation of host cell cholesterol metabolism still remains understudied , with a focus on gene expression analysis and little functional data . An additional limitation is a lack of in vivo data , which will be critical to fully understanding the role of cholesterol during infection . Finally , several questions still remain unanswered : ( 1 ) Is cholesterol manipulation cell type - dependent ? ( 2 ) Can other sterols substitute for cholesterol ? ( 3 ) What is the advantage of incorporating host cholesterol in the bacterial membrane ? ( 4 ) What are the bacterial proteins responsible for manipulating host cholesterol ? ( 5 ) Is disease outcome inﬂuenced by the patient cholesterol levels ? Answering these and other questions will provide signiﬁcant insight into the role of cholesterol during pathogenesis of obligate intracellular bacteria . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors listed have made substantial , direct and intellectual contribution to the work , and approved it for publication . Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 10 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Seth Winfree for critical reading of this manuscript . This work was supported by the American Heart Association ( 14SDG18420034 to SG and 16POST27250157 to MM ) , the National Institutes of Health ( AI121786 to SG and T32AI060519 to AJ ) , and the Showalter Trust ( SG ) . REFERENCES Al - Khedery , B . , Lundgren , A . M . , Stuen , S . , Granquist , E . G . , Munderloh , U . G . , Nelson , C . M . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Structure of the type IV secretion system in diﬀerent strains of Anaplasma phagocytophilum . BMC Genomics 13 : 678 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2164 - 13 - 678 Azenabor , A . A . , Kennedy , P . , and Balistreri , S . ( 2007 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis infection of human trophoblast alters estrogen and progesterone biosynthesis : an insight into role of infection in pregnancy sequelae . Int . J . Med . Sci . 4 , 223 – 231 . doi : 10 . 7150 / ijms . 4 . 223 Barnewall , R . E . , Rikihisa , Y . , and Lee , E . H . ( 1997 ) . Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis inclusions are early endosomes which selectively accumulate transferrin receptor . Infect . Immun . 65 , 1455 – 1461 . Barteneva , N . , Theodor , I . , Peterson , E . M . , and de la Maza , L . M . ( 1996 ) . Role of neutrophils in controlling early stages of a Chlamydia trachomatis infection . Infect . Immun . 64 , 4830 – 4833 . Bashmakov , Y . K . , Zigangirova , N . A . , Pashko , Y . P . , Kapotina , L . N . , and Petyaev , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis growth inhibition and restoration of LDL - receptor level in HepG2 cells treated with mevastatin . Comp . Hepatol . 9 : 3 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1476 - 5926 - 9 - 3 Bastidas , R . J . , Elwell , C . A . , Engel , J . N . , and Valdivia , R . H . ( 2013 ) . Chlamydial intracellular survival strategies . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Med . 3 : a010256 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a010256 Beare , P . A . , Unsworth , N . , Andoh , M . , Voth , D . E . , Omsland , A . , Gilk , S . D . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Comparative genomics reveal extensive transposon - mediated genomic plasticity and diversity among potential eﬀector proteins within the genus Coxiella . Infect . Immun . 77 , 642 – 656 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 01141 - 08 Beatty , W . L . ( 2006 ) . Traﬃcking from CD63 - positive late endocytic multivesicular bodies is essential for intracellular development of Chlamydia trachomatis . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 350 – 359 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02733 Beatty , W . L . ( 2008 ) . Late endocytic multivesicular bodies intersect the chlamydial inclusion in the absence of CD63 . Infect . Immun . 76 , 2872 – 2881 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 00129 - 08 Beyer , A . R . , Truchan , H . K . , May , L . J . , Walker , N . J . , Borjesson , D . L . , andCarlyon , J . A . ( 2015 ) . The Anaplasma phagocytophilum eﬀector AmpA hijacks host cell SUMOylation . Cell . Microbiol . 17 , 504 – 519 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12380 Bickel , P . E . , Scherer , P . E . , Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Lisanti , M . P . , and Lodish , H . F . ( 1997 ) . Flotillin and epidermal surface antigen deﬁne a new family of caveolae - associated integral membrane proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13793 – 13802 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 272 . 21 . 13793 Brasaemle , D . L . ( 2007 ) . Thematic review series : adipocyte biology . The perilipin family of structural lipid droplet proteins : stabilization of lipid droplets and control of lipolysis . J . Lipid Res . 48 , 2547 – 2559 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . R700014 - JLR200 Brouqui , P . , Dumler , J . S . , andRaoult , D . ( 1994 ) . Immunohistologicdemonstration of Coxiella burnetii in the valves of patients with Q fever endocarditis . Am . J . Med . 97 , 451 – 458 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0002 - 9343 ( 94 ) 90325 - 5 Brown , D . A . , and Rose , J . K . ( 1992 ) . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 68 , 533 – 544 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 92 ) 90189 - J Campbell , L . A . , Lee , A . W . , Rosenfeld , M . E . , and Kuo , C . C . ( 2013 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae induces expression of pro - atherogenic factors through activation of the lectin - like oxidized LDL receptor - 1 . Pathog . Dis . 69 , 1 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 2049 - 632X . 12058 Campbell , S . , Richmond , S . J . , and Yates , P . ( 1989a ) . The development of Chlamydia trachomatis inclusions within the host eukaryotic cell during interphase and mitosis . J . Gen . Microbiol . 135 , 1153 – 1165 . doi : 10 . 1099 / 00221287 - 135 - 5 - 1153 Campbell , S . , Richmond , S . J . , and Yates , P . S . ( 1989b ) . The eﬀect of Chlamydia trachomatis infection on the host cell cytoskeleton and membrane compartments . J . Gen . Microbiol . 135 , 2379 – 2386 . doi : 10 . 1099 / 00221287 - 135 - 9 - 2379 Capo , C . , Lindberg , F . P . , Meconi , S . , Zaﬀran , Y . , Tardei , G . , Brown , E . J . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Subversion of monocyte functions by Coxiella burnetii : impairment of the cross - talk between alphavbeta3 integrin and CR3 . J . Immunol . 163 , 6078 – 6085 . Carabeo , R . A . , Mead , D . J . , andHackstadt , T . ( 2003 ) . Golgi - dependenttransportof cholesteroltothe Chlamydiatrachomatis inclusion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 6771 – 6776 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1131289100 Chakraborty , S . , Veettil , M . V . , Bottero , V . , and Chandran , B . ( 2012 ) . Kaposi’s sarcoma - associated herpesvirus interacts with EphrinA2 receptor to amplify signaling essential for productive infection . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , E1163 – E1172 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1119592109 Chang , W . J . , Rothberg , K . G . , Kamen , B . A . , andAnderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) . Lowering the cholesterol content of MA104 cells inhibits receptor - mediated transport of folate . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 63 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 118 . 1 . 63 Chen , S . , Sorrentino , R . , Shimada , K . , Bulut , Y . , Doherty , T . M . , Crother , T . R . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae - induced foam cell formation requires MyD88 - dependent and - independent signaling and is reciprocally modulated by liver X receptor activation . J . Immunol . 181 , 7186 – 7193 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 181 . 10 . 7186 Chun , M . , Liyanage , U . K . , Lisanti , M . P . , and Lodish , H . F . ( 1994 ) . Signal transduction of a G protein - coupled receptor in caveolae : colocalization of endothelin and its receptor with caveolin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 11728 – 11732 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 91 . 24 . 11728 Cianciola , N . L . , Greene , D . J . , Morton , R . E . , and Carlin , C . R . ( 2013 ) . Adenovirus RID α uncovers a novel pathway requiring ORP1L for lipid droplet formation independent of NPC1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 3309 – 3325 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 10 - 0760 Clifton , D . R . , Fields , K . A . , Grieshaber , S . S . , Dooley , C . A . , Fischer , E . R . , Mead , D . J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A chlamydial type III translocated protein is tyrosine - phosphorylated at the site of entry and associated with recruitment of actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 10166 – 10171 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0402829101 Cocchiaro , J . L . , Kumar , Y . , Fischer , E . R . , Hackstadt , T . , and Valdivia , R . H . ( 2008 ) . Cytoplasmic lipid droplets are translocated into the lumen of the Chlamydia trachomatis parasitophorous vacuole . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 9379 – 9384 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0712241105 Colello , D . , Reverte , C . G . , Ward , R . , Jones , C . W . , Magidson , V . , Khodjakov , A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Androgen and Src signaling regulate centrosome activity . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 2094 – 2102 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 057505 Cox , B . E . , Griﬃn , E . E . , Ullery , J . C . , and Jerome , W . G . ( 2007 ) . Eﬀects of cellular cholesterol loading on macrophage foam cell lysosome acidiﬁcation . J . Lipid Res . 48 , 1012 – 1021 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . M600390 - JLR200 Cox , J . V . , Naher , N . , Abdelrahman , Y . M . , and Belland , R . J . ( 2012 ) . Host HDL biogenesis machinery is recruited to the inclusion of Chlamydia trachomatis - infected cells and regulates chlamydial growth . Cell . Microbiol . 14 , 1497 – 1512 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2012 . 01823 . x de la Fuente , J . , Ayoubi , P . , Blouin , E . F . , Almazán , C . , Naranjo , V . , and Kocan , K . M . ( 2005 ) . Gene expression proﬁling of human promyelocytic cells in response to infection with Anaplasma phagocytophilum . Cell . Microbiol . 7 , 549 – 559 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2004 . 00485 . x Eden , E . R . , Sanchez - Heras , E . , Tsapara , A . , Sobota , A . , Levine , T . P . , and Futter , C . E . ( 2016 ) . Annexin A1 tethers membrane contact sites that mediate ER to endosome cholesterol transport . Dev . Cell 37 , 473 – 483 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 05 . 005 Evani , S . J . , and Ramasubramanian , A . K . ( 2016 ) . Biophysical regulation of Chlamydia pneumoniae - infected monocyte recruitment to atherosclerotic foci . Sci . Rep . 6 : 19058 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep19058 Fadok , V . A . , Bratton , D . L . , Konowal , A . , Freed , P . W . , Westcott , J . Y . , and Henson , P . M . ( 1998 ) . Macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 11 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens inhibit proinﬂammatory cytokine production through autocrine / paracrine mechanisms involving TGF - β , PGE2 , and PAF . J . Clin . Invest . 101 , 890 – 898 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI1112 Fechtner , T . , Galle , J . N . , and Hegemann , J . H . ( 2016 ) . The novel chlamydial adhesin CPn0473 mediates the lipid raft - dependent uptake of Chlamydia pneumoniae . Cell . Microbiol . 18 , 1094 – 1105 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12569 Gabel , B . R . , Elwell , C . , van Ijzendoorn , S . C . D . , and Engel , J . N . ( 2004 ) . Lipid raft - mediated entry is not required for Chlamydia trachomatis infection of cultured epithelial . Cells 72 , 7367 – 7373 . doi : 10 . 1128 / iai . 72 . 12 . 7367 - 7373 . 2004 Geisler , W . M . , Suchland , R . J . , Rockey , D . D . , and Stamm , W . E . ( 2001 ) . Epidemiology and clinical manifestations of unique Chlamydia trachomatis isolates that occupy nonfusogenic inclusions . J . Infect . Dis . 184 , 879 – 884 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 323340 Gilk , S . D . , Beare , P . A . , and Heinzen , R . A . ( 2010 ) . Coxiella burnetii expresses a functional ∆ 24 sterol reductase . J . Bacteriol . 192 , 6154 – 6159 . doi : 10 . 1128 / JB . 00818 - 10 Gilk , S . D . , Cockrell , D . C . , Luterbach , C . , Hansen , B . , Knodler , L . A . , Ibarra , J . A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Bacterial colonization of host cells in the absence of cholesterol . PLoS Pathog . 9 : e1003107 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1003107 Gorodinsky , A . , and Harris , D . A . ( 1995 ) . Glycolipid - anchored proteins in neuroblastoma cells form detergent - resistant complexes without caveolin . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 619 – 627 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 129 . 3 . 619 Graham , J . G . , Macdonald , L . J . , Hussain , S . K . , Sharma , U . M . , Kurten , R . C . , and Voth , D . E . ( 2013 ) . Virulent Coxiella burnetii pathotypes productively infect primary human alveolar macrophages . Cell . Microbiol . 15 , 1012 – 1025 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12096 Grieshaber , S . S . , Grieshaber , N . A . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 2003 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis uses host cell dynein to traﬃc to the microtubule - organizing center in a p50 dynamitin - independent process . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 3793 – 3802 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00695 Hackstadt , T . , Rockey , D . D . , Heinzen , R . A . , and Scidmore , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Chlamydiatrachomatis interruptsanexocyticpathwaytoacquireendogenously synthesized sphingomyelin in transit from the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 15 , 964 – 977 . Hackstadt , T . , Scidmore , M . A . , and Rockey , D . D . ( 1995 ) . Lipid metabolism in Chlamydia trachomatis - infected cells : directed traﬃcking of Golgi - derived sphingolipids to the chlamydial inclusion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 4877 – 4881 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 92 . 11 . 4877 Hackstadt , T . , and Williams , J . C . ( 1981 ) . Biochemical stratagem for obligate parasitism of eukaryotic cells by Coxiella burnetii . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 , 3240 – 3244 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 5 . 3240 Hatch , G . M . , and McClarty , G . ( 1998 ) . Phospholipid composition of puriﬁed Chlamydia trachomatis mimics that of the eucaryotic host cell . Infect . Immun . 66 , 3727 – 3735 . Heinzen , R . A . , Scidmore , M . A . , Rockey , D . D . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 1996 ) . Diﬀerential interaction with endocytic and exocytic pathways distinguish parasitophorous vacuoles of Coxiella burnetii and Chlamydia trachomatis . Infect . Immun . 64 , 796 – 809 . Heinzen , R . , A . , Hayes , S . F . , Peacock , M . G . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 1993 ) . Directional actin polymerization associated with spotted fever group Rickettsia infection of vero cells . Infect Immun 61 , 1926 – 1935 . Hillman , R . D . Jr . , Baktash , Y . M . , and Martinez , J . J . ( 2013 ) . OmpA - mediated rickettsial adherence to and invasion of human endothelial cells is dependent upon interaction with α 2 β 1 integrin . Cell . Microbiol . 15 , 727 – 741 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12068 Howe , D . , and Heinzen , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Coxiella burnetii inhabits a cholesterol - rich vacuole and inﬂuences cellular cholesterol metabolism . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 496 – 507 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2005 . 00641 . x Howe , D . , and Mallavia , L . P . ( 2000 ) . Coxiella burnetii exhibits morphological change and delays phagolysosomal fusion after internalization by J774A . 1 cells . Infect . Immun . 68 , 3815 – 3821 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 68 . 7 . 3815 - 3821 . 2000 Howe , D . , Melnicákova , J . , Barák , I . , andHeinzen , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Fusogenicityofthe Coxiella burnetii parasitophorous vacuole . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 990 , 556 – 562 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2003 . tb07426 . x Justis , A . V . , Hansen , B . , Beare , P . A . , King , K . B . , Heinzen , R . A . , and Gilk , S . D . ( 2017 ) . Interactions between the Coxiella burnetii parasitophorous vacuole andtheendoplasmicreticuluminvolvethehostproteinORP1L . Cell . Microbiol . 19 : e12637 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12637 Jutras , I . , Abrami , L . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2003 ) . Entry of the Lymphogranuloma Venereum strain of Chlamydia trachomatis into host cells involves cholesterol - rich membrane domains . Infect . Immun . 71 , 260 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 71 . 1 . 260 - 266 . 2003 Kalayoglu , M . V . , and Byrne , G . I . ( 1998 ) . Induction of macrophage foam cell formation by Chlamydia pneumoniae . J . Infect . Dis . 177 , 725 – 729 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 514241 Karten , B . , Peake , K . B . , and Vance , J . E . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms and consequences of impaired lipid traﬃcking in Niemann - Pick type C1 - deﬁcient mammalian cells . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Mol . Cell Biol . Lipids 1791 , 659 – 670 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbalip . 2009 . 01 . 025 Kim , M . J . , Kim , M . K . , and Kang , J . S . ( 2013 ) . Involvement of lipid rafts in the budding - like exit of Orientia tsutsugamushi . Microb . Pathog . 63 , 37 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micpath . 2013 . 06 . 002 Koike , M . ( 2002 ) . Dimerization , translocation and localization of Ku70 and Ku80 proteins . J . Radiat . Res . 43 , 223 – 236 . doi : 10 . 1269 / jrr . 43 . 223 Korhonen , J . T . , Olkkonen , V . M . , Lahesmaa , R . , and Puolakkainen , M . ( 2013 ) . ABC - cassette transporter 1 ( ABCA1 ) expression in epithelial cells in Chlamydia pneumoniae infection . Microb . Pathog . 61 – 62 , 57 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micpath . 2013 . 05 . 006 Korhonen , J . T . , Puolakkainen , M . , Haveri , A . , Tammiruusu , A . , Sarvas , M . , and Lahesmaa , R . ( 2012 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae entry into epithelial cells by clathrin - independent endocytosis . Microb . Pathog . 52 , 157 – 164 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micpath . 2011 . 12 . 002 Kumar , Y . , Cocchiaro , J . , and Valdivia , R . H . ( 2006 ) . The obligate intracellular pathogen Chlamydia trachomatis targets host lipid droplets . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1646 – 1651 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 06 . 060 Lai , E . C . ( 2003 ) . Lipid rafts make for slippery platforms . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 365 – 370 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200307087 Levi , M . , and Shalgi , R . ( 2010 ) . The role of Fyn kinase in the release from metaphase in mammalian oocytes . Mol . Cell . Endocrinol . 314 , 228 – 233 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mce . 2009 . 08 . 027 Lin , F . Y . , Lin , Y . W . , Huang , C . Y . , Chang , Y . J . , Tsao , N . W . , Chang , N . C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . GroEL1 , a heat shock protein 60 of Chlamydia pneumoniae , induces lectin - likeoxidizedlow - densitylipoproteinreceptor1expressioninendothelial cells and enhances atherogenesis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits . J . Immunol . 186 , 4405 – 4414 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1003116 Lin , M . , Liu , H . , Xiong , Q . , Niu , H . , Cheng , Z . , Yamamoto , A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Ehrlichia secretes Etf - 1 to induce autophagy and capture nutrients for its growth through RAB5 and class III phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . Autophagy 12 , 2145 – 2166 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15548627 . 2016 . 1217369 Lin , M . , and Rikihisa , Y . ( 2003a ) . Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum lack genes for lipid A biosynthesis and incorporate cholesterol for their survival . Infect . Immun . 71 , 5324 – 5331 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 71 . 9 . 5324 - 5331 . 2003 Lin , M . , and Rikihisa , Y . ( 2003b ) . Obligatory intracellular parasitism by Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis and Anaplasma phagocytophilum involves caveolae and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins . Cell . Microbiol . 5 , 809 – 820 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2003 . 00322 . x Lisanti , M . P . , Scherer , P . E . , Vidugiriene , J . , Tang , Z . , Hermanowski - Vosatka , A . , Tu , Y . H . , et al . ( 1994 ) . Characterization of caveolin - rich membrane domains isolatedfromanendothelial - richsource : implicationsforhumandisease . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 111 – 126 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 126 . 1 . 111 Listenberger , L . L . , Ostermeyer - Fay , A . G . , Goldberg , E . B . , Brown , W . J . , and Brown , D . , A . ( 2007 ) . Adipocyte diﬀerentiation - related protein reduces the lipid droplet association of adipose triglyceride lipase and slows triacylglycerol turnover . J . Lipid Res . 48 , 2751 – 2761 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . M700359 - JLR200 Liu , P . , Ying , Y . , Ko , Y . G . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1996 ) . Localization of platelet - derived growth factor - stimulated phosphorylation cascade to caveolae . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 10299 – 10303 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 271 . 17 . 10299 Liu , W . , He , P . , Cheng , B . , Mei , C . L . , Wang , Y . F . , andWan , J . J . ( 2010 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae disturbs cholesterol homeostasis in human THP - 1 macrophages via JNK - PPAR ? Dependent signal transduction pathways . Microbes Infect . 12 , 1226 – 1235 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micinf . 2010 . 09 . 004 Lucero , H . , Gae , D . , and Taccioli , G . E . ( 2003 ) . Novel localization of the DNA - PK complex in lipid rafts . A putative role in the signal transduction pathway of the ionizing radiation response . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 22136 – 22143 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M301579200 Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 12 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens Macurek , L . , Dráberová , E . , Richterová , V . , Sulimenko , V . , Sulimenko , T . , Dráberová , L . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of microtubule nucleation from membranes by complexes of membrane - bound gamma - tubulin with Fyn kinase and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Biochem . J . 416 , 421 – 430 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20080909 Mahapatra , S . , Ayoubi , P . , and Shaw , E . I . ( 2010 ) . Coxiella burnetii Nine Mile II proteins modulate gene expression of monocytic host cells during infection . BMC Microbiol . 10 : 244 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2180 - 10 - 244 Manzano - Roman , R . , Almazán , C . , Naranjo , V . , Blouin , E . F . , Kocan , K . M . , and De La Fuente , J . ( 2008 ) . Expression of perilipin in human promyelocytic cells in response to Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection results in modiﬁed lipid metabolism . J . Med . Microbiol . 57 , 159 – 163 . doi : 10 . 1099 / jmm . 0 . 47504 - 0 Marangoni , A . , Donati , M . , Cavrini , F . , Aldini , R . , Accardo , S . , Sambri , V . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae replicates in Kupﬀer cells in mouse model of liver infection . World J . Gastroenterol . 12 , 6453 – 6457 . doi : 10 . 3748 / wjg . v12 . i40 . 6453 Marangoni , A . , Fiorino , E . , Gilardi , F . , Aldini , R . , Scotti , E . , Nardini , P . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae acute liver infection aﬀects hepatic cholesterol and triglyceride metabolism in mice . Atherosclerosis 241 , 471 – 479 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . atherosclerosis . 2015 . 05 . 023 Martinez , J . J . , Seveau , S . , Veiga , E . , Matsuyama , S . , and Cossart , P . ( 2005 ) . Ku70 , a component of DNA - dependent protein kinase , is a mammalian receptor for Rickettsia conorii . Cell 123 , 1013 – 1023 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 08 . 046 McDonough , J . A . , Newton , H . J . , Klum , S . , Swiss , R . , Agaisse , H . , and Roy , C . R . ( 2013 ) . Host pathways important for Coxiella burnetii infection revealed by genome - wide RNA interference screening . MBio 4 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mBio . 00606 - 12 Mei , C . , He , P . , Cheng , B . , Liu , W . , Wang , Y . F . , and Wan , J . J . ( 2009 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae induces macrophage - derived foam cell formation via PPARalphaandPPARgamma - dependentpathways . CellBiol . Int . 33 , 301 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellbi . 2008 . 12 . 002 Michelini , E . , Donati , M . , Aldini , R . , Cevenini , L . , Mezzanotte , L . , Nardini , P . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Dual - color bioluminescent assay using infected HepG2 cells sheds new light on Chlamydia pneumoniae and human cytomegalovirus eﬀects on human cholesterol 7 α - hydroxylase ( CYP7A1 ) transcription . Anal . Biochem . 430 , 92 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ab . 2012 . 08 . 003 Mineo , C . , James , G . L . , Smart , E . J . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1996 ) . Localization of epidermal growth factor - stimulated Ras / Raf - 1 interaction to caveolae membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 11930 – 11935 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 271 . 20 . 11930 Mital , J . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 2011 ) . Diverse requirements for Src - family tyrosine kinases distinguish chlamydial species . mBio 2 : e00031 - 11 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mBio . 00031 - 11 Mital , J . , Lutter , E . I . , Barger , A . C . , Dooley , C . A . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 2015 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis inclusion membrane protein CT850 interacts with the dynein light chain DYNLT1 ( Tctex1 ) . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 462 , 165 – 170 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2015 . 04 . 116 Mital , J . , Miller , N . J . , Fischer , E . R . , and Hackstadt , T . ( 2010 ) . Speciﬁc chlamydial inclusion membrane proteins associate with active Src family kinases in microdomains that interact with the host microtubule network . Cell . Microbiol . 12 , 1235 – 1249 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2010 . 01465 . x Moazed , T . C . , Kuo , C . C . , Grayston , J . T . , and Campbell , L . A . ( 1998 ) . Evidence of systemic dissemination of Chlamydia pneumoniae via macrophages in the mouse . J . Infect . Dis . 177 , 1322 – 1325 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 515280 Moﬀatt , J . H . , Newton , P . , and Newton , H . J . ( 2015 ) . Coxiella burnetii : turning hostility into a home . Cell . Microbiol . 17 , 621 – 631 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12432 Mölleken , K . , Becker , E . , and Hegemann , J . H . ( 2013 ) . The Chlamydia pneumoniae invasin protein Pmp21 recruits the EGF receptor for host cell entry . PLoS Pathog . 9 : e1003325 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1003325 Mott , J . , Barnewall , R . E . , andRikihisa , Y . ( 1999 ) . HumangranulocyticEhrlichiosis agent and Ehrlichia chaﬀeensis reside in diﬀerent cytoplasmic compartments in HL - 60 cells . Infect . Immun . 67 , 1368 – 1378 . Mulye , M . , Samanta , D . , Winfree , S . , Heinzen , R . A . , and Gilk , S . D . ( 2017 ) . Elevated cholesterol in the Coxiella burnetii intracellular niche is bacteriolytic . MBio 8 , e02313 - 16 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mbio . 02313 - 16 Naiki , Y . , Sorrentino , R . , Wong , M . H . , Michelsen , K . S . , Shimada , K . , Chen , S . , etal . ( 2008 ) . TLR / MyD88 and liver X receptor alpha signaling pathways reciprocally control Chlamydia pneumoniae - induced acceleration of atherosclerosis . J . Immunol . 181 , 7176 – 7185 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 181 . 10 . 7176 Neufeld , E . B . , Remaley , A . T . , Demosky , S . J . , Stonik , J . A . , Cooney , A . M . , Comly , M . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Cellular localization and traﬃcking of the human ABCA1 transporter . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 27584 – 27590 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M103264200 Niu , H . , Kozjak - Pavlovic , V . , Rudel , T . , and Rikihisa , Y . ( 2010 ) . Anaplasma phagocytophilum Ats - 1 Is imported into host cell mitochondria and interferes with apoptosis induction . PLoS Pathog . 6 : e1000774 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000774 Niu , H . , Rikihisa , Y . , Yamaguchi , M . , and Ohashi , N . ( 2006 ) . Diﬀerential expression of VirB9 and VirB6 during the life cycle of Anaplasma phagocytophilum in human leucocytes is associated with diﬀerential binding and avoidance of lysosome pathway . Cell . Microbiol . 8 , 523 – 534 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2005 . 00643 . x Norkin , L . C . , Wolfrom , S . A . , and Stuart , E . S . ( 2001 ) . Association of caveolin with Chlamydia trachomatis inclusions at early and late stages of infection . Exp . Cell Res . 266 , 229 – 238 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 2001 . 5202 Ogawa , M . , Fukasawa , M . , Satoh , M . , Hanada , K . , Saijo , M . , Uchiyama , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Theintracellularpathogen Orientiatsutsugamushi responsibleforscrub typhusinduceslipiddropletformationinmouseﬁbroblasts . MicrobesInfect . 16 , 962 – 966 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micinf . 2014 . 09 . 004 Orlandi , P . A . , and Fishman , P . H . ( 1998 ) . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 905 – 915 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 141 . 4 . 905 Peters , J . , and Byrne , G . I . ( 2015 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis growth depends on eukaryotic cholesterol esteriﬁcation and is aﬀected by Acyl - CoA : cholesterol acyltransferase inhibition . Pathog . Dis . 73 : ftv028 . doi : 10 . 1093 / femspd / ftv028 Peters , J . , Onguri , V . , Nishimoto , S . K . , Marion , T . N . , and Byrne , G . I . ( 2012 ) . The Chlamydiatrachomatis CT149proteinexhibitsesteraseactivity invitro and catalyzes cholesteryl ester hydrolysis when expressed in HeLa cells . Microbes Infect . 14 , 1196 – 1204 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . micinf . 2012 . 07 . 020 Phillips , M . C . ( 2013 ) . New insights into the determination of HDL structure by apolipoproteins : thematic review series : high density lipoprotein structure , function , and metabolism . J . Lipid Res . 54 , 2034 – 2048 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . R034025 Pike , L . J . ( 2003 ) . Lipid rafts : bringing order to chaos . J . Lipid Res . 44 , 655 – 667 . doi : 10 . 1194 / jlr . R200021 - JLR200 Recuero - Checa , M . A . , Sharma , M . , Lau , C . , Watkins , P . A . , Gaydos , C . A . , and Dean , D . ( 2016 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis growth and development requires the activity of host Long - chain Acyl - CoA Synthetases ( ACSLs ) . Sci . Rep . 6 : 23148 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep23148 Ren , Q . , Robertson , S . J . , Howe , D . , Barrows , L . F . , and Heinzen , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Comparative DNA microarray analysis of host cell transcriptional responses to infection by Coxiella burnetii or Chlamydia trachomatis . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 990 , 701 – 713 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2003 . tb07447 . x Richards , T . S . , Knowlton , A . E . , and Grieshaber , S . S . ( 2013 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis homotypic inclusion fusion is promoted by host microtubule traﬃcking . BMC Microbiol . 13 : 185 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2180 - 13 - 185 Rocha , N . , Kuijl , C . , Van Der Kant , R . , Janssen , L . , Houben , D . , Janssen , H . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Cholesterol sensor ORP1L contacts the ER protein VAP to control Rab7 - RILP - p150Glued and late endosome positioning . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 1209 – 1225 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200811005 Saka , H . A . , Thompson , J . W . , Chen , Y . S . , Dubois , L . G . , Haas , J . T . , Moseley , A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Chlamydia trachomatis infection leads to deﬁned alterations to the lipid droplet proteome in epithelial cells . PLoS ONE 10 : e0124630 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0124630 Sandoz , K . M . , Valiant , W . G . , Eriksen , S . G . , Hruby , D . E . , Allen , R . D . , and Rockey , D . D . ( 2014 ) . Thebroad - spectrumantiviralcompoundST - 669restricts chlamydial inclusion development and bacterial growth and localizes to host cell lipid droplets within treated cells . Antimicrob . Agents Chemother . 58 , 3860 – 3866 . doi : 10 . 1128 / AAC . 02064 - 13 Sargiacomo , M . , Sudol , M . , Tang , Z . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1993 ) . Signal transducing molecules and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 789 – 807 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 122 . 4 . 789 Schubert , W . , Frank , P . G . , Razani , B . , Park , D . S . , Chow , C . W . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) . Caveolae - deﬁcient endothelial cells show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 48619 – 48622 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . C100613200 Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 13 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165 Samanta et al . Cholesterol and Intracellular Pathogens Seshadri , R . , Paulsen , I . T . , Eisen , J . A . , Read , T . D . , Nelson , K . E . , Nelson , W . C . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Complete genome sequence of the Q - fever pathogen Coxiella burnetii . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 5455 – 5460 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0931379100 Simons , K . , and Toomre , D . ( 2000 ) . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 31 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35036052 Stallmann , S . , and Hegemann , J . H . ( 2016 ) . The Chlamydia trachomatis Ctad1 invasin exploits the human integrin β 1 receptor for host cell entry . Cell . Microbiol . 18 , 761 – 775 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12549 Stang , E . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1997 ) . Major histocompatibility complex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 47 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 8 . 1 . 47 Stephens , R . S . , Kalman , S . , Lammel , C . , Fan , J . , Marathe , R . , Aravind , L . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Genome sequence of an obligate intracellular pathogen of humans : Chlamydia trachomatis . Science 282 , 754 – 759 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 282 . 5389 . 754 Stuart , E . S . , Webley , W . C . , and Norkin , L . C . ( 2003 ) . Lipid rafts , caveolae , caveolin - 1 , and entry by Chlamydiae into host cells . Exp . Cell Res . 287 , 67 – 78 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0014 - 4827 ( 03 ) 00059 - 4 Stüven , E . , Porat , A . , Shimron , F . , Fass , E . , Kaloyanova , D . , Brügger , B . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Intra - golgi protein transport depends on a cholesterol balance in the lipid membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 53112 – 53122 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M300 402200 Subbarayal , P . , Karunakaran , K . , Winkler , A . , and Rother , M . ( 2015 ) . EphrinA2 receptor ( EphA2 ) is an invasion and intracellular signaling receptor for Chlamydia trachomatis . PLoS Pathog . 11 : e1004846 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1004846 Sun , S . , Cheng , B . , Wu , X . , Wu , Q . , Qi , B . , Wu , J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae disrupts lipid metabolism in human umbilical vein endothelial cells . Mol . Med . Rep . 10 , 1150 – 1156 . doi : 10 . 3892 / mmr . 2014 . 2295 Tansey , J . , Sztalryd , C . , Hlavin , E . , Kimmel , A . , and Londos , C . ( 2004 ) . The central role of perilipin a in lipid metabolism and adipocyte lipolysis . IUBMB Life 56 , 379 – 385 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15216540400009968 Tarling , E . J . , and Edwards , P . A . ( 2011 ) . ATP binding cassette transporter G1 ( ABCG1 ) is an intracellular sterol transporter . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 19719 – 19724 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1113021108 Teodoro , B . G . , Sampaio , I . H . , Bomﬁm , L . H . M . , Queiroz , A . L . , Silveira , L . R . , Souza , A . O . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Long - Chain Acyl - CoA Synthetase 6 regulates lipid synthesis and mitochondrial oxidative capacity in human and rat skeletal muscle . J . Physiol . 595 , 677 – 693 . doi : 10 . 1113 / JP272962 Triantaﬁlou , K . , and Triantaﬁlou , M . ( 2003 ) . Lipid raft microdomains : key sites for Coxsackievirus A9 infectious cycle . Virology 317 , 128 – 135 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . virol . 2003 . 08 . 036 Upla , P . , Marjomaki , V . , Kankaanpaa , P . , Ivaska , J . , Hyypia , T . , van der Goot , F . G . et al . ( 2004 ) . Clustering Induces a Lateral Redistribution of α 2 β 1 Integrin from Membrane Rafts to Caveolae and Subsequent Protein Kinase C - dependent Internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 08 - 0588 van der Kant , R . , Fish , A . , Janssen , L . , Janssen , H . , Krom , S . , Ho , N . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Late endosomal transport and tethering are coupled processes controlled by RILP and the cholesterol sensor ORP1L . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 3462 – 3474 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 129270 Van Ooij , C . , Kalman , L . , Van Ijzendoorn , S . , Nishijima , M . , Hanada , K . , Mostov , K . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Host cell - derived sphingolipids are required for the intracellular growth of Chlamydia trachomatis . Cell . Microbiol . 2 , 627 – 637 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2000 . 00077 . x Voth , D . E . , and Heinzen , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Lounging in a lysosome : the intracellular lifestyle of Coxiella burnetii . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 829 – 840 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2007 . 00901 . x Walker , D . H . , Feng , H . M . , and Popov , V . L . ( 2001 ) . Rickettsial phospholipase a2 as a pathogenic mechanism in a model of cell injury by typhus and spotted fever group rickettsiae . Am . J . Trop . Med . Hyg . 65 , 936 – 942 . doi : 10 . 4269 / ajtmh . 2001 . 65 . 936 Webster , P . , IJdo , J . W . , Chicoine , L . M . , and Fikrig , E . ( 1998 ) . The agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis resides in an endosomal compartment . J . Clin . Invest . 101 , 1932 – 1941 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI1544 Wu , Y . , Singh , S . , Georgescu , M . M . , andBirge , R . B . ( 2005 ) . AroleforMertyrosine kinasein α v β 5 integrin - mediatedphagocytosisofapoptoticcells . J . CellSci . 118 , 539 – 553 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01632 Wylie , J . L . , Hatch , G . M . , and McClarty , G . ( 1997 ) . Host cell phospholipids are traﬃcked to and then modiﬁed by Chlamydia trachomatis . J . Bacteriol . 179 , 7233 – 7242 . doi : 10 . 1128 / jb . 179 . 23 . 7233 - 7242 . 1997 Xiong , Q . , Lin , M . , and Rikihisa , Y . ( 2009 ) . Cholesterol - dependent Anaplasma phagocytophilum exploits the low - density lipoprotein uptake pathway . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e10 00329 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1000329 Xiong , Q . , and Rikihisa , Y . ( 2012 ) . Subversion of NPC1 pathway of cholesterol transport by Anaplasma phagocytophilum . Cell . Microbiol . 14 , 560 – 576 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2011 . 01742 . x Yoshida , T . , Koide , N . , Mori , I . , Ito , H . , and Yokochi , T . ( 2006 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae infection enhances lectin - like oxidized low - density lipoprotein receptor ( LOX - 1 ) expressiononhumanendothelial cells . FEMSMicrobiol . Lett . 260 , 17 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6968 . 2006 . 00286 . x Zhao , G . , Mo , Z . C . , Tang , S . L . , Ouyang , X . P . , He , P . , Lv , Y . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Chlamydia pneumoniae negatively regulates ABCA1 expression via TLR2 - Nuclear factor - kappa B and miR - 33 pathways in THP - 1 macrophage - derived foam cells . Atherosclerosis 235 , 519 – 525 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . atherosclerosis . 2014 . 05 . 943 Zidovetzki , R . , and Levitan , I . ( 2007 ) . Use of cyclodextrins to manipulate plasma membrane cholesterol content : evidence , misconceptions and control strategies . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 1768 , 1311 – 1324 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2007 . 03 . 026 Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2017 Samanta , Mulye , Clemente , Justis and Gilk . This is an open - access articledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www . frontiersin . org 14 May 2017 | Volume 7 | Article 165