Engineering asymmetric vesicles Sophie Pautot * † , Barbara J . Frisken ‡ , and D . A . Weitz * § * Department of Physics and Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 ; † Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Materials Science Division , Berkeley , CA 94720 ; and ‡ Department of Physics , Simon Fraser University , Burnaby , BC , Canada V5A 1S6 Edited by Tom C . Lubensky , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , and approved July 1 , 2003 ( received for review February 20 , 2003 ) Vesicles are bilayers of lipid molecules enclosing a ﬁxed volume of aqueous solution . Ubiquitous in cells , they can be produced in vitro to study the physical properties of biological membranes and for use in drug delivery and cosmetics . Biological membranes are , in fact , a ﬂuid mosaic of lipids and other molecules ; the richness of their chemical and mechanical properties in vivo is often dictated by an asymmetric distribution of these molecules . Techniques for vesicle preparation have been based on the spontaneous assembly of lipid bilayers , precluding the formation of such asymmetric structures . Partial asymmetry has been achieved only with chem - ical methods greatly restricting the study of the physical and chemical properties of asymmetric vesicles and their use in poten - tial applications for drug delivery . Here we describe the systematic engineering of unilamellar vesicles assembled with two indepen - dently prepared monolayers ; this process produces asymmetries as high as 95 % . We demonstrate the versatility of our method by investigating the stability of the asymmetry . We also use it to engineer hybrid structures comprised of an inner leaﬂet of diblock copolymer and an independent lipid outer leaﬂet . V esicles are produced in the laboratory by a variety of methods including sonication ( 1 ) , extrusion ( 2 ) , swelling ( 3 ) , electroformation ( 4 ) , and reverse evaporation ( 5 ) ; all methods rely on self - assembly and lead to a symmetric distribution of lipids on the inner and outer leaflets of the bilayer . Realistic models of biological membranes must incorporate lipid asym - metry ( 6 , 7 ) ; moreover , asymmetric vesicles consisting of com - pletely different types of molecules on the inner and outer leaflets would greatly increase the flexibility of vesicle drug delivery systems . Partial asymmetry can be achieved by altering the distribution of specific phospholipids using pH gradients , osmotic pressure , or molecules that promote lipid redistribution ( 8 ) . However , the chemical constraints of these methods severely limit the applicability of such systems . In this article , we describe a method for systematically engi - neering vesicles with asymmetric bilayers where each leaflet is assembled independently . A schematic of the process is shown in Fig . 1 . We begin with an inverted emulsion of water droplets dispersed in dodecane and stabilized by the lipids intended for the inner leaflet . This phase is placed over an intermediate phase of the same oil containing the lipids for the outer leaflet . The intermediate phase is placed over the final aqueous phase , and a monolayer of the second lipid forms at the interface . The water droplets in the emulsion are heavier than the oil and thus sediment , pulling the second monolayer from the interface to complete the bilayer , resulting in the formation of asymmetric vesicles in the final aqueous phase . A similar strategy for making vesicles was first demonstrated using a benzene : water : egg - phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) emulsion ( 9 ) . The uniqueness of our method lies in the introduction of this distinct intermediate phase that allows us to control the composition of each leaflet independently , thereby engineering asymmetric vesicles . Here we describe experiments in which we used two phos - pholipids with the same aliphatic chains but different hydrophilic headgroups to demonstrate the construction of asymmetric vesicles . We used a fluorescence quenching assay ( 10 , 11 ) to identify the location of the molecules in the bilayers to confirm that we have formed unilamellar asymmetric vesicles . We dem - onstrate the versatility of our method by investigating the stability of the asymmetry , even after vesicles are produced with lipid distributions that are not favored by molecular shape constraints . We demonstrate the power of our method by using it to engineer hybrid structures comprised of diblock copolymer inner leaflets and lipid outer leaflets . Methods Sample Preparation . Asymmetric bilayers were prepared with two monolayers , one consisting of lipids with phosphocholine heads and one consisting of lipids with phosphoserine heads . The lipids used were 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( POPC ) and 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine ( POPS ) . To determine the distribution of the lipid type we added 0 . 5 mol % of 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - { 6 - [ ( 7 - nitro2 – 1 , 3 - benzoxadiazol - 4 - yl ) amino caproyl ] - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine } ( NBD - PC ) or 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - { 6 - [ ( 7 - nitro2 – 1 , 3 - benzoxadiazol - 4 - yl ) amino ] ca - proyl } - sn - glycero - 3 - ( phospho - L - serine ) ( NBD - PS ) to our lipid solutions . These correspond to POPC and POPS molecules for which the oleoyl acyl chain has been truncated and a fluorescent group inserted , preserving the head group and the volume of the hydrophobic tails and retaining the same packing properties . All of the lipids used were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids as 99 % pure chloroform stock solution and were used without further purification . To prepare the lipid suspension for the inner leaflet , 100 (cid:1) l of a 25 mg (cid:1) ml stock solution was placed in a 100 - ml glass bottle . The chloroform was evaporated under nitrogen to obtain a dry , thin lipid film . After adding 50 ml of anhydrous dodecane ( (cid:1) 99 % ) to reach a final lipid concentration of 0 . 05 mg (cid:1) ml , the suspension was sonicated in a cleaning sonic bath for 30 min and left overnight at 25°C to ensure that the lipid molecules were fully dispersed in oil before emulsifying the aqueous solution . The emulsion was prepared by adding 250 (cid:1) l of an aqueous solution consisting of 100 mM NaCl and 5 mM Tris buffer at pH 7 . 4 to the lipid suspension and gently stirring the mixture with a magnetic stir bar for 3 hours . This technique produces a bimodal population of small droplets with a mean size of (cid:2) 0 . 5 (cid:1) m and larger droplets with a mean size of a few micrometers . Because emulsion droplets (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) m maximize the vesicle yield and our control over the size distribution , the largest droplets were separated out by sedimentation , and only the smaller droplets were used for vesicle preparation ( 12 ) . The interface and aqueous phases were prepared by placing 2 ml of lipid dispersion over 3 ml of the aqueous solution that would host the final vesicles in a 1 - inch - diameter centrifuge tube . The interface phase consisted of the lipid molecules for the outer leaflet dispersed at a concentration of 0 . 05 mg (cid:1) ml in a 99 : 1 dodecane : silicone oil solution . After the interface phase was placed over the aqueous phase , it took 2 – 3 h for lipids to achieve the coverage required for optimal vesicle formation and for the This paper was submitted directly ( Track II ) to the PNAS ofﬁce . Abbreviations : NBD - PC , 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - { 6 - [ ( 7 - nitro2 – 1 , 3 - benzoxadiazol - 4 - yl ) amino ca - proyl ] - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine } ; NBD - PS , 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - { 6 - [ ( 7 - nitro2 – 1 , 3 - benzoxadia - zol - 4 - yl ) amino ] caproyl } - sn - glycero - 3 - ( phospho - L - serine ) ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; POPC , 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ; POPS , 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine . § To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : weitz @ deas . harvard . edu . © 2003 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA 10718 – 10721 (cid:2) PNAS (cid:2) September 16 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 19 www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 1931005100 preservation of the outer monolayer composition ( 12 ) . Once the interface had equilibrated , 100 (cid:1) l of the inverted emulsion was poured over the interface phase . The silicone oil ( specific density 1 . 05 ) makes the intermediate phase slightly denser than the emulsion so that it is possible to assemble two distinct oil layers ; it also modifies the chemical potential of the intermediate phase , slowing the intermixing of the two lipids to preserve their separation and allowing the engineering of asymmetric vesicles . Then the sample was centrifuged at 120 (cid:4) g for 10 min to transfer the water droplets through the oil (cid:1) water interface and into the lower aqueous phase . After centrifugation , the vesicles were collected using a 5 - ml syringe with a long 16 - gauge stainless steel needle containing some of the final aqueous solution . With the tip of the needle in the aqueous phase , the buffer contained in the syringe was gently expelled . This has two effects : it allows us to remove oil that might have entered the needle when it crossed the oil phase , and it creates a flow in the aqueous phase that detaches the vesicles from the interface . After recirculating the buffer several times , most of the solution was aspirated and the needle was removed . Finally , the tip of the needle was wiped clean before unloading the vesicle suspension into its final container . After preparation and before using the vesicles for the fluorescence quenching assay , we used optical microscopy to check that the vesicles obtained were not deformed or aggregated . Hybrid vesicles were prepared using a diblock copolymer , polystyrene - polyacrylic - acid ( Rhodia , Cranbury , NJ ) , composed of a hydrophobic polystyrene block and a hydrophilic poly - acrylic - acid block , both of molecular weight 8 , 000 g (cid:1) mol for the inner leaflet and egg - PC containing 1 mol % of rhodamine - phosphatidylethanolamine lipids for the outer leaflet . Because dodecane is a poor solvent for the polystyrene block , we used decalin as the continuous phase for the preparation of the inverted emulsion . The polymer was first dissolved in a 100 mM sodium chloride , 5 mM Tris buffer at pH 7 . 4 and a concentration of 1 wt % . The emulsion was produced by sonicating 0 . 5 % by volume of the aqueous solution in decalin . The emulsion droplets produced were a few micrometers in size and had polydispersities (cid:5) 20 % . The rest of the protocol was unchanged . Fluorescence Quenching Assay . We used a fluorescence quenching assay ( 10 , 11 ) to measure the distribution of tagged lipids between inner and outer monolayers . A suspension of vesicles was prepared with 0 . 5 % of a fluorescently labeled lipid on either the inner or outer monolayer . The fluorescence of the vesicle solution was measured before and after addition of a quenching solution of sodium hydrosulfite ( 1 M Na 2 S 2 O 4 in 5 mM TES at pH 9 , prepared daily ) . When in the vicinity of the fluorophore , the sodium hydrosulfite extinguishes the fluorescence by reduc - ing the dye . Because this molecule does not diffuse across the Fig . 1 . Schematic illustration of the technique used to engineer asymmetric vesicles . The sample is composed of three parts : an inverted emulsion where water droplets in lipid - saturated oil are stabilized by lipid molecules destined fortheinnerleaﬂet ; anintermediatephaseoflipid - saturatedoilheavierthan the inverted emulsion phase , and whose lipids form a monolayer at the oil (cid:1) water interface ; and the bottom aqueous phase , which receives the ﬁnal asymmetric vesicles . The lipids in the intermediate phase are completely differentfromthoseintheinvertedemulsionandformtheouterleaﬂetofthebilayer ; the ﬁnal structure is an asymmetric vesicle . Fig . 2 . The ﬂuorescence intensity of vesicles engineered with a POPS inner leaﬂet and a POPC outer leaﬂet . The addition of sodium hydrosulﬁte is signaled by arrow 1 , and the addition of Triton X - 100 reduced is signaled by arrow2 . ( a ) NBD - PSisaddedtotheinnerleaﬂetandisprotectedbythebilayer , because (cid:5) 80 % of the ﬂuorescence intensity remains on addition of the quencher . ( b ) NBD - PC is added to the outer leaﬂet , and the ﬂuorescence intensity is reduced by 95 % on addition of the quencher . These data conﬁrm the production of asymmetric vesicles . The ﬁlled symbols are data taken 1 h afterformationofthevesicles ; theopensymbolsaredatataken24hlater ; the equivalence of the data reﬂects the stability of these asymmetric vesicles . Pautot et al . PNAS (cid:2) September 16 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 19 (cid:2) 10719 B I O P H Y S I C S lipid bilayer , the addition of the quencher to the vesicle suspen - sion results in the extinction of only the dye located on the outer leaflet of the bilayer . The dye on the inner leaflet was exposed by adding detergent ( Triton X - 100 reduced ) to lyse the bilayer . The excitation wavelength for these measurements was set at (cid:2) exc (cid:6) 470 nm , and the emission of fluorescence was measured at (cid:2) em (cid:6) 550 nm . Results and Discussion The high degree of asymmetry that is achieved by our technique is illustrated when NBD - PS is incorporated into the inner leaflet of vesicles constructed with a POPS inner leaflet and a POPC outer leaflet ; on addition of the quencher , the signal drops only 20 % but is then completely extinguished on addition of the detergent , as shown in Fig . 2 a . These results confirm that 80 % of the NBD - PS was on the inner leaflet . Even higher asymmetry is achieved when we use the same lipids , but label only the outer leaflet with NBD - PC ; on addition of the quencher , the fluores - cence drops dramatically , by 95 % , as shown in Fig . 2 b . These results further confirm the formation of asymmetric bilayers and indicate that the asymmetry is even better on the outer monolayer . The success of our method allows us to explore important physical properties of asymmetric vesicles , including the effect of spontaneous curvature on the ability to form asymmetric vesicles and their stability . The lipids used in these experiments have two different head groups ; POPS has a small anionic head group whereas POPC has a larger zwitterionic head group . The spon - taneous curvature of lipid monolayers depends on molecular shape resulting from both steric and electrostatic effects , which varies with pH , ionic strength , and solvent ( 13 – 18 ) . Although lipid molecules are basically cylindrical in shape , POPS mole - cules are slightly cone - shaped because of their smaller head group . In these experiments , the aqueous environment includes 100 mM NaCl , making the screening length (cid:2) 1 nm . We find that POPS forms an inverted emulsion much more easily than POPC does , suggesting that the steric effect dominates and that the POPS monolayer is characterized by a negative spontaneous radius of curvature , which can even affect structures with macroscopic length scales ( 13 , 14 ) . We can therefore exploit this to investigate the bilayer asymmetry when POPC is on the inner leaflet and POPS is on the outer leaflet , a packing that should result in a stress on the bilayer ( 18 – 20 ) . When NBD - PC is added to the inner leaflet , only 20 % of the total fluorescence intensity is lost on addition of the quencher , whereas all remaining fluorescence is quenched on addition of the detergent , as shown in Fig . 3 a . Similarly , when NBD - PS is added to the outer leaflet , 80 % of the total fluorescence intensity is lost on addition of the quencher and all remaining fluorescence is lost on addition of the detergent , as shown in Fig . 3 b . These results confirm that we are able to achieve an 80 % asymmetry despite the unfavorable spontaneous curvatures of the bilayer distribution . We can also investigate the stability of the asymmetry over time for vesicles with favorable and unfavorable spontaneous curvature . When labeled POPC is placed on the outer leaflet , the vesicles remain perfectly stable over 24 h as shown by open circles in Fig . 2 b . Moreover , even when the labeled POPC is placed on the inner leaflet , the vesicles still remain perfectly stable over 24 h as shown by the open circles in Fig . 3 a . Significantly , flip - flop is not observed , even in the doubly unfavorable situation of charge asymmetry and poor packing conditions . The flexibility of our technique extends beyond the assembly of asymmetric bilayers of lipid molecules ; it can also be used to engineer novel types of composite bilayers . To demonstrate this , Fig . 3 . The ﬂuorescence intensity of vesicles engineered with a POPC inner leaﬂet and a POPS outer leaﬂet . This conﬁguration is unfavorable for the spontaneous radii of curvatures of the two lipids . The addition of sodium hydrosulﬁte is signaled by arrow 1 , and the addition of Triton X - 100 reduced issignaledbyarrow2 . ( a ) NBD - PCisaddedtotheinnerleaﬂetandisprotected by the bilayer , as (cid:5) 80 % of the ﬂuorescence intensity remains on addition of the quencher . ( b ) NBD - PS is added to the outer leaﬂet , and the ﬂuorescence intensity is reduced by 80 % on addition of the quencher . These data conﬁrm the production of asymmetric vesicles with unfavorable radii of curvatures . Theﬁlledsymbolsaredatataken1hafterformationofthevesicles ; theopen symbols are data taken 24 h later ; the equivalence of the data reﬂects the stability of these asymmetric vesicles . Fig . 4 . Phase - contrast - microscope image ( (cid:4) 100 ) of an inverted emulsion stabilized with polystyrene - polyacrylic - acid diblock copolymer . A hybrid ves - iclestructurewasassembledbycompletingthebilayerwithegg - PCcontaining 1mol % ofrhodamine - phosphatidylethanolamine . ( Inset ) Animageofsucha vesicle obtained with a scanning laser - ﬂuorescence confocal microscope ; the outer lipid layer is visible . 10720 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 1931005100 Pautot et al . we combine the toughness of a polymer ( 21 ) with the function - ality and biocompatibility of lipids to form new hybrid structures . A PSt - polyacrylamide diblock copolymer was used to stabilize the inverted emulsion ; a phase - contrast - microscope image is shown in Fig . 4 . Egg - PC containing 1 mol % of rhodamine - phosphatidylethanolamine lipid was used to form the outer leaflet . An image of the thin outer layer of labeled lipid of the resulting hybrid structure as seen in a scanning laser - fluorescence confocal microscope is shown in the inset of Fig . 4 . In the absence of a means to break these bilayers without the use of an organic solvent , a fluorescence quenching assay cannot be performed on these vesicles . However , it seems likely that the lipids will remain on the outer leaflet because of the long times necessary for polymer rearrangement at an interface ( 22 ) . These hybrid structures significantly extend the utility and functionality of the vesicles produced ; here the polymer provides mechanical support for the bilayer , whereas the lipids provide biocompat - ibility and the possibility of labeling , which could be useful , for example , in targeting for drug delivery applications ( 23 , 24 ) . Our technique will also work with other diblock copolymers provided the inverted emulsion can be formed . Our technique provides a method for controlled assembly of highly asymmetric bilayers from amphiphilic molecules of dif - ferent chemical nature , charge , or spontaneous curvature , with - out the use of detergents or chemical gradients . Direct engi - neering of the molecules composing each leaflet leads to many possible applications , including design of immunoliposomes for drug delivery systems with specific binding ( 23 , 24 ) and a new generation of hybrid vesicles . It also allows us to investigate the effects of asymmetry on the mechanical and chemical resistance of the bilayer , the permeability of the bilayer , and the dynamics of flip - flop in the bilayer ; these effects are of critical importance in the complex structures that are biological membranes . We gratefully acknowledge Bradley Smith for suggesting the fluores - cence assay and for useful discussions . This work was supported by Kraft Foods , Rhodia , and National Science Foundation Grant DMR - 9971432 . 1 . Gregoriadis , G . ( 1984 ) Preparation of Liposomes ( CRC , Boca Raton , FL ) . 2 . Olson , F . , Hunt , C . A . , Szoka , F . C . , Vail , W . J . & Papahadjopoulos , D . ( 1979 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 557 , 9 – 23 . 3 . Needham , D . & Evans , E . ( 1988 ) Biochemistry 27 , 8261 – 8269 . 4 . Angelova , M . I . & Dimitrov , D . S . ( 1986 ) Faraday Discuss . 81 , 303 – 311 . 5 . Szoka , F . & Papahadjopoulos , D . ( 1978 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 4194 – 4198 . 6 . Devaux , P . F . ( 1991 ) Biochemistry 30 , 1163 – 1173 . 7 . Berndl , K . , Kas , J . , Lipowsky , R . , Sackmann , E . & Seifert , U . ( 1990 ) Europhys . Lett . 13 , 659 – 664 . 8 . Boon , J . M . & Smith , B . D . ( 2002 ) Med . Res . Rev . 1 , 251 – 281 . 9 . Trauble , H . & Grell , E . ( 1971 ) Neurosci . Res . Program Bull . 9 , 373 – 380 . 10 . McIntyre , J . C . & Sleight , R . G . ( 1991 ) Biochemistry 30 , 11819 – 11827 . 11 . Gruber , H . J . & Schindler , S . H . ( 1994 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1189 , 212 – 224 . 12 . Pautot , S . , Frisken , B . J . & Weitz , D . A . ( 2003 ) Langmuir 19 , 2870 – 2879 . 13 . Lee , J . B . , Petrov , P . G . & Dobereiner , H . ( 1999 ) Langmuir 15 , 8543 – 8546 . 14 . Dobereiner , H . G . , Selchow , O . & Lipowsky , R . ( 1999 ) Eur . Biophys . J . Biophys . Lett . 28 , 174 – 178 . 15 . Israelachvili , J . ( 1992 ) Intermolecular and Surface Forces ( Academic , London ) . 16 . Rand , R . P . , Fuller , N . L . , Gruner , S . M . & Parsegian , V . A . ( 1990 ) Biochemistry 29 , 76 – 87 . 17 . Kralchevsky , P . A . & Nagayama , K . ( 2001 ) Particles at Fluid Interfaces and Membranes ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) . 18 . Chou , T . , Jaric , M . V . & Siggia , E . D . ( 1997 ) Biophys . J . 72 , 2042 – 2055 . 19 . Winterhalter , M . & Helfrich , W . ( 1988 ) J . Phys . Chem . 92 , 6865 – 6867 . 20 . Winterhalter , M . & Helfrich , W . ( 1992 ) J . Phys . Chem . 96 , 327 – 330 . 21 . Discher , B . M . , Won , Y . Y . , Ege , D . S . , Lee , J . C . M . , Bates , F . S . , Discher , D . E . & Hammer , D . A . ( 1999 ) Science 284 , 1143 – 1146 . 22 . Munoz , M . G . , Monroy , F . , Ortega , F . , Rubio , R . G . & Langevin , D . ( 2000 ) Langmuir 16 , 1083 – 1093 . 23 . Szebeni , J . ( 1998 ) Crit . Rev . Ther . Drug Carrier Syst . 15 , 57 – 88 . 24 . Park , J . W . , Hong , K . , Kirpotin , D . B . , Papahadjopoulos , D . & Benz , C . C . ( 1997 ) Immunoliposomes for Cancer Treatment ( Academic , New York ) . Pautot et al . PNAS (cid:2) September 16 , 2003 (cid:2) vol . 100 (cid:2) no . 19 (cid:2) 10721 B I O P H Y S I C S