IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships Yanqi Jiang Xianghua Ding Xiaojuan Ma 20212010036 @ fudan . edu . cn xianghua . ding @ glasgow . ac . uk mxj @ ust . hk School of Computer Science , School of Computing Science Hong Kong University of Science and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data University of Glasgow Technology Science Glasgow , United Kingdom Hong Kong , China Fudan University Shanghai , China Zhida Sun Ning Gu zhida . sun @ connect . ust . hk ninggu @ fudan . edu . cn Hong Kong University of Science and School of Computer Science , Technology Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Hong Kong , China Science Fudan University Shanghai , China Figure 1 : IntimaSea is a shared stress display featuring illustrative , automatically sensed stress data in collective forms . By joining the same group , users can share stress data and interact with each other via customizable multi - media messages . ABSTRACT Automatic stress tracking has become increasingly available on Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed wearable devices . Research has investigated its use for individ - for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation ual stress management , largely within the traditional data - as - care on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or framing . However , its use for stress sharing in social relationships , republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission particularly close relationships , is still under explored . Inspired and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . by the idea of “ caring - through - data ” , which focuses on mediating CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany the social and emotional experiences of the collective “us” with © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 data , this paper presents a design study with a prototype called https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581000 CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu IntimaSea , a display featuring illustrative stress data in collective forms to be shared among close relationships . The feld trials with nine groups of intimately - connected users ( N = 19 ) highlight its po - tential on stress awareness , interpretation and management , as well as intimacy promotion . We end by discussing sharing stress for social ways of stress management , stress data as a meaningful social cue mediating relationships , as well as design implications for caring - through - data . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing ; Col - laborative and social computing systems and tools . KEYWORDS Stress , Stress Tracking , Shared Stress Display , Close Relationships , Intimacy , Caring - through - data ACM Reference Format : Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu . 2023 . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships . In Pro - ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’23 ) , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581000 1 INTRODUCTION Today , stress - tracking technologies have been made increasingly available for everyday use , such as smart bracelets and watches produced by Huawei [ 59 ] , Garmin [ 58 ] , and Samsung [ 60 ] . By au - tomatically detecting an individual’s stress level [ 9 , 80 ] , sometimes combined with features to help with relaxation [ 15 , 135 , 138 ] , they ofer the potential to increase people’s awareness of their stress levels and assist in daily stress management [ 127 ] . However , so far , stress - tracking is mainly explored for individual use , largely within the traditional data - as - care framing where self - tracking data is primarily utilized as a technical solution to wellness focusing on the “self” [ 26 , 65 ] . Rather than focusing on individual use , this paper explores col - lective sharing of stress - tracking data among close relationships , informed by the approach of caring - through - data [ 65 ] , which seeks to mediate the social and emotional experiences of the collective “us” through tracked personal data . After all , stress management is not merely a personal issue but also is deeply intertwined with social factors . Previous research has sought to provide informal so - cial support to relieve the stress experienced by the patient’s family [ 4 ] , and use online support groups as stress management tools for teachers [ 79 ] and family caregivers [ 20 , 27 ] . Although they focus on self - expressions , not digital inferences , of stress , it was found that , compared with the self - management of stress , this kind of more social and collaborative approach can mitigate psychological stress in a more efective and low - cost manner , as it can provide a sense of support , empathy , and encouragement [ 79 ] . We believe stress is a good indicator of when care and support are needed , and digital inferences of stress can potentially increase people’s cog - nitive awareness of stress and facilitate stress - related expressions , thus sharing digital inferences of stress in social relationships is a promising direction to explore caring - through - data . Among diferent social relationships , we are particularly inter - ested in investigating sharing stress data in close relationships . Existing work on social sharing of stress data is mainly limited to stress visualization in workplaces [ 121 , 131 – 133 ] , explored as a way to raise awareness of the collective stress level [ 75 , 97 , 110 ] . How - ever , as stress information is often associated with the impression of one’s workload and performance , researchers typically adopt design strategies such as anonymity [ 133 ] and aggregation [ 121 ] to address privacy issues , limiting the feasibility of efective social interactions to cope with stress . Close relationships , according to Kelley and Thibaut , are defned by the profound way in which the well - being and psychological processes of one individual resonate with , and are tied to , the same processes in another person [ 128 ] , and can play an important role in assisting each other with stress management through active engagement [ 22 ] , empathic responding [ 22 ] , mutual communication [ 8 ] , and conjoint coping strategies [ 8 ] . Meanwhile , privacy issues and peer pressure related to personal data disclosure are less sensitive in close relationships [ 16 , 86 , 115 ] . Therefore , when social sharing of stress data is concerned , close relationships provide an ideal context to achieve balance between the potential of social support and concerns of privacy . More specifcally , our study is conducted to explore research questions as follows . Will stress tracking and sharing technolo - gies be meaningfully incorporated into close relationships ? If yes , what roles can they play ? What design issues might arise , and how can we better design them ? To answer these questions , we frst explored new kinds of shared stress visualiza - tions among intimate relationships through a workshop involving both students with design background and end - users . The resulting design is a shared stress display called IntimaSea , which allows people to view the illustrative stress data in collective forms and leave customizable messages for each other . We then conducted two rounds of feld trials : a 2 - week pilot study [ 99 ] involving our own lab mates and their intimate partners ( N = 9 ) , and a 4 - week study with participants recruited from outside our lab , with more diversi - fed backgrounds ( N = 10 ) . Our study illustrates that IntimaSea was meaningfully leveraged for stress awareness , interpretation , and management in a more social way , as well as relationship enhance - ment . The contributions of this work are multi - fold : ( 1 ) to the best of the authors’ knowledge , this is the frst exploration of sharing digital inferences of stress in close relationships ; ( 2 ) we present IntimaSea , a shared stress display featuring illustrative stress data in collective forms as well as interactions through customizable multi - media messages ; ( 3 ) we provide novel and nuanced insights into how IntimaSea supports social ways of stress awareness , inter - pretation , and management , as well as its role in mediating close relationships ; and ( 4 ) we explore design implications and future directions for stress and intimacy research , including sharing stress for data engagement , sharing stress as a social cue , and supporting caring - through - data . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Stress , Stress Sharing , Stress Tracking and Stress Display There has never been a unifed defnition of the term “stress” , al - though people often talk about it in everyday life , referring to psychological feelings such as tension , anxiety , and fear . In psy - chology , stress is a subjective concept that occurs when “a person perceives the demands of environmental stimuli to be greater than their ability to meet , mitigate , or alter those demands” [ 76 ] , much similar to our common understandings . As such , stress is often detected through self - reporting in psychology [ 36 ] . Former research on stress sharing / disclosure mainly relies on this form of self - report or self - expression , such as verbal communication [ 32 , 103 ] , expressive writing [ 96 , 117 ] , status updates [ 91 , 101 , 137 ] , and human - robot communication [ 7 , 83 ] . However , they face var - ious challenges including lack of cognitive awareness of stress [ 78 ] , lack of motivation [ 78 ] , insufcient verbal abilities [ 93 ] , and self - critical perfectionism [ 107 ] . Sharing digital inferences of stress seems a promising approach to address these challenges . In particular , stress is medically de - fned as “the non - specifc responses of the body to any demand for change” [ 113 ] , which is often related to physiological reactions generated by the autonomic nervous system ( ANS ) , such as an increase in heart rate , respiration , and sweat gland activity [ 123 ] . When understood from this perspective , stress can be automati - cally detected and tracked using psychophysical measurements [ 30 , 77 , 118 , 130 ] . Commercially available stress - tracking devices [ 58 – 60 ] often rely on an analysis of heart rate variability ( HRV ) to automatically detect stress . HRV , defned as the variation of time periods between consecutive heartbeats [ 1 ] , has been confrmed as a reliable indicator of ANS activity [ 90 ] and an objective assess - ment of stress [ 70 ] . Many commercial wearable products use an embedded optical heart rate sensor to collect pulse rate variability ( PRV ) , a less invasive but efective substitution for HRV [ 81 ] , so that automatic stress tracking can be more easily taken into everyday settings . Based on stress - tracking technologies , diferent kinds of visual - izations have been employed to help people engage with quantifed stress data . On Huawei’s and Garmin’s stress - tracking products , the raw data of HRV is converted to stress values within a range , and shown as bars with corresponding colors [ 26 ] . Besides conven - tional statistical style , researchers also have proposed alternative visual design styles to foster data engagement and understanding . For instance , Sun et al . [ 124 ] proposed and assessed fve repre - sentative visual designs for guided stress management training , including raw numbers , bar charts , waves , butterfy drawings , and table lamps . Other visual metaphors [ 111 , 126 ] , artistic representa - tions [ 135 , 138 ] , and ambient manifestations [ 89 ] are also used to improve the interpretability of the abstract stress data . However , existing stress visualization approaches primarily fo - cus on supporting the individual’s mental cognitive process and stress management through biofeedback . Little attention has been paid to stress visualization / display in social relationships . Although there exist a few works focusing on the sharing of stress data , they are mainly limited to the workplace or controlled laboratory set - tings . For instance , Stepanovic et al . [ 121 ] developed a dashboard composed of aggregated visualizations of stress , but the primary purpose was to reduce health and safety risks rather than help with stress management . Other work along this line includes ClockViz [ 131 ] , a clock visually augmented by projections of collective stress , and AfectiveWall [ 133 ] , a shared display that provides a collective , anonymous visualization of individual HRV patterns . However , as they mostly set background in the workplace , researchers usually adopt design strategies such as anonymity [ 133 ] and aggregation [ 121 ] to relieve potential concerns about privacy and peer pres - sure , which limits the feasibility for meaningful interpretation and management of personal stress . Although extensive research on dyadic coping has conceptual - ized stress management as an interdependent process between close relationships [ 8 , 22 , 64 ] through active engagement [ 22 ] , empathic responding [ 22 ] , mutual communication [ 8 ] , and conjoint coping strategies [ 8 ] , to our knowledge , few studies have explored sharing stress data in close relationships , which may be a more suitable scenario for sharing sensitive personal data [ 35 ] , and hold potential for meaningful and efective social interactions to cope with stress . We address this gap by developing IntimaSea and conducting a feld study of it in real - world settings to understand the meanings of shared stress data in close relationships , as described in detail in later sections . 2 . 2 Biosignal Sharing for Communication and Social Connection While little has been done on sharing digital inferences of stress in particular , there has been extensive research on sharing biosignals , exploring issues of safety / privacy [ 46 ] , use in particular domains such as gaming [ 23 , 62 ] and sports [ 18 ] , and design for particular type of biosignal such as heart rate [ 52 , 87 , 115 ] , skin conductance [ 13 , 56 ] and breath [ 38 , 71 ] . Here we review the works of biosignal sharing that focus more specifcally on fostering communication and social interaction . Previous studies have mainly explored the social meanings of biosignal from two perspectives : biosignal - as - information and biosignal - as - connection [ 115 , 119 ] . Biosignal - as - information is when biosig - nals carry information about one’s physiological and psychological states . It typically involves sharing biosignal as a message , reveal - ing or clarifying information related to personal experience , a . k . a . afective self - disclosure [ 119 ] . For instance , Signifcant Otter [ 87 ] supports romantic partners sending heart rate - driven otter anima - tions to express their current physical and emotional states . Another example is Hint [ 56 ] , a dynamic t - shirt with patterns that change color according to skin conductance . Pairs of participants wearing it expressed that skin conductance displays “help validate their feelings and show emotional engagement with others” . The infor - mational value of shared biosignals can also enhance motivation , performance and coordinative efort in social tasks [ 94 ] . Another perspective , biosignal - as - connection , is when biosignals promote feelings of interpersonal connectedness [ 52 ] , presence [ 57 ] , and refection on humanity [ 119 ] . For example , the Heart Sounds Bench [ 57 ] can amplify , record , and playback the heart sounds of sitters , thus creating a feeling of connection to the social world . Another study of BreathingFrame [ 71 ] also showed the feeling of sentimen - tal connectedness and telepresence through remote breath signal CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu sharing over an infatable photo frame . In summary , these two per - spectives both illustrate the expressiveness of biosignals as a social cue [ 84 ] , due to its emotional and social nature [ 94 ] . However , there remain major challenges in sharing biosignals in a meaningful way . Sharing the accurate value of biosignal over text is often awkward and not understandable [ 86 ] , therefore recent works have leveraged ambiguity to support interpretations and construction of social meaning [ 35 ] , such as encoding heart rate into color of messages [ 52 ] or animated otter avatars [ 87 ] . However , too much ambiguity may cause confusion and even misunderstandings [ 56 ] . In addition , limited control over sharing discourages users from actively sharing biosignals , often due to concerns of privacy [ 86 , 115 ] and judgment [ 53 , 55 ] , especially among more distant relationships [ 119 ] . These challenges suggest the need for further explorations in terms of the scheme of sharing and visual design for diferent kinds of biosignals . In this paper , we explored the collective sharing of stress - related interpretations of biosignals , hoping to contribute understandings of how it can meaningfully foster communication and social interaction in close relationships , and how to design for it . 2 . 3 Technologies for Mediating Intimacy There has been a growing interest in designing technologies to mediate intimacy - a sense of relatedness - in close relationships . Hassenzahl et al . [ 51 ] reviewed artifacts intended for mediation of intimacy and summarized “six strategies to create a relatedness experience : awareness , expressivity , physicalness , gift - giving , joint action , and memories” . Here we review those works focusing on supporting awareness and expressivity , two strategies we also em - ployed in designing IntimaSea , to better ground our work . Maintaining awareness of intimate others is one of the most common design principles used in mediating intimacy . Aiming at creating a peripheral and unobtrusive experience , these works of - ten feature implicit communication and virtual presence . Examples of implicit communication are : ( 1 ) the feather , scent , and shaker that create “visual , olfactory , and tactile links” between separated partners [ 122 ] ; ( 2 ) pairs of remotely installed appliances that syn - chronize with each other to indicate daily activities [ 129 ] ; and ( 3 ) a touch - sensitive display that will vibrate and change color when the remote partner is composing a message [ 44 ] . Other works ex - plore transmitting a sense of presence . Former research utilizes everyday physical objects such as picture frames [ 12 , 39 ] , mirrors [ 24 ] , and jewelries [ 2 ] to convey presence . With the recent devel - opment of Information and Communication Technologies , video streams and audio records are also used to create the experience of being together [ 5 , 73 , 134 ] . For instance , Bedtime Window [ 73 ] uses a slow photo - stream and a real - time inking canvas to share presence in bedtime for long - distance couples . In addition , Ye et al . [ 134 ] attempted to support asynchronous co - dining between all family members through audio recordings . The emerging social virtual reality systems also provide new possibilities for immer - sive intimate experiences , such as embodied physical contacts and sense of co - presence [ 37 , 136 ] . However , as suggested by previous research [ 24 , 44 , 129 ] , this kind of awareness / telepresence technol - ogy should be carefully designed to strike balance between privacy and disclosure , and follow the design principle of ambiguity [ 40 ] , otherwise it may bring undesired feelings of being monitored and overwhelmed . While awareness represents a more implicit , ambient strategy of mediating intimacy , expressivity supports more explicit expression of afections , often incorporating enriched and playful communica - tion channels . Expressivity can be achieved either through simple on - of signals ( e . g . , ComTouch [ 11 ] , FeelLight [ 125 ] , and Virtual Intimate Object [ 63 ] ) , or richer messages in the form of text [ 114 ] , photos [ 17 , 19 ] , music [ 42 ] , biosignals [ 87 ] , tactile patterns [ 105 ] , and food [ 41 ] . Among the channels supporting intimacy expression , mobile messaging apps play an increasingly important role , where people can engage in continuous “small talks” to maintain connec - tion [ 100 ] and carefully craft messages to express afection for each other [ 66 ] . Intimacy is also embedded in secret codes and repur - posed meanings of certain emojis [ 67 ] and the co - customization of soft keyboard [ 48 ] shared between close relationships . In this paper , similar to Bedtime Window [ 73 ] , we combine the strategies of awareness ( shared stress data ) and expressivity ( mes - sage tapes ) . Nevertheless , what makes our work unique is that : ( 1 ) we explore a relatively new measurement of one’s state , stress , as implicit information to bring cognitive awareness of intimate others ; ( 2 ) we convey co - presence more symbolically and metaphor - ically , showing the avatars of intimate partners in a shared virtual space ( see section 3 . 2 ) , instead of directly using everyday physical objects or high - fdelity photos and audios . 3 THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF INTIMASEA In this section , we present the design and implementation of our prototype IntimaSea . As mentioned , we focus on sharing digital inferences rather than self - expression of stress as in conventional methods , and intend to explore new kinds of shared stress visualiza - tions in a close relationship context to support caring - through - data . 3 . 1 The Design Workshop To design shared - stress display for close relationships based on stress tracking technologies , we conducted a design workshop . Our aim is to explore novel shared stress visualizations to mediate social and emotional experiences with tracked stress data . Through the workshop , we engaged with both students with design backgrounds and end - users , generated design schemes , decided on key features , and refned the fnal design . The frst step was a brainstorming aiming to generate design ideas and schemes . Four students with design backgrounds ( N = 4 , 1 female and 3 males , aged 22 - 28 ) were recruited and partic - ipated in the session via video conferencing . We frst discussed diferent categories of visual representations , including statistical , illustrative , artistic and tangible . Participants then independently generated corresponding sketches for each style , and elaborated on the data encoding scheme to represent the variables available , including social members , stress data ( HRV / stress levels ) , and last update time of stress data . After that , we had a 90 - min group cri - tique session to explain design ideas , give feedback , and fnalize the data encoding scheme for each design candidate . At the end of the session , we asked the participants to vote for their favorite design , two for each category . The voting criteria were : ( 1 ) easy for IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany interpretation and understanding ; ( 2 ) highlighting the patterns of stress ; ( 3 ) not creating anxiety or judgmental experiences . Fig . 2 shows some representative candidates . Next , we run a small - scale session with end - users to collect feed - back and help us further refne the design . Four participants ( N = 4 , 3 females and 1 male , aged 23 - 29 ) were recruited via word - of - mouth from a local university . The 2 - hour session was conducted in - person in our lab , where participants reviewed our design candidates and gave feedback . Several key insights emerged . First , participants felt it necessary for the design to be “ intuitive and easy to interpret ” , and anticipated there to be “ a logical connection between the encoding scheme and the patterns of stress ” . Next , they hoped the design would not “ provoke extra stress and anxiety ” . They also suggested adding a channel for social interactions , as they envisioned that social inter - actions might further support stress management in the context of close relationships . Through discussions , the participants reached a consensus that the “sea world” of artistic style ( see Fig . 2 ( c ) ) may be the most suitable design , for several reasons : ( 1 ) The deeper under the sea , the greater the water pressure is , which represents stress in a straightforward way . ( 2 ) Representing users with diferent marine animals living in the same sea area brings a sense of togetherness . ( 3 ) The bright color and cartoon style can help relieve user’s possible anxiety . Based on their feedback and suggestions , we refned and imple - mented our fnal design for further explorations . 3 . 2 The Final Design and Implementation The resulting prototype is called IntimaSea , a shared stress display featuring illustrative stress data in collective forms as well as inter - actions through customizable multi - media messages . To illustrate the user fow , Fig . 3 shows a hypothetical scenario of how a couple use IntimaSea . 3 . 2 . 1 The Shared Stress Display . The idea of visualization is drawn from the sea world ( see Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . We hope to provide a glanceable and comprehensible way to show the statuses of diferent users , by adopting the following visual encoding scheme . The depth of a marine animal maps to the user’s stress level , in accordance with the variation of water pressure . The horizontal position of the animal encodes the last update time of stress data : the newly updated data appears on the rightmost side ; the animal will gradually move left as time goes by , and stay on the leftmost side if the user has not updated stress data for more than a day . Furthermore , the depth of the island correlates with the average stress level of the whole group . The whole interface is in cartoon style , with bright and lively colors to bring aesthetic experience and reduce possible anxiety or other negative feelings . Intimately connected users can share stress data by joining the same group , and choose their favorite marine animal to represent themselves ( see Fig . 4 ( c ) ) . At this stage , due to the time limit of im - plementation , each individual can only join one group by entering the group name in their profle page ( see Fig . 4 ( c ) ) . We will explore design to support users to join multiple groups in the future . 3 . 2 . 2 The Messaging System . We specially designed a messaging system , hoping the display can play a more active and playful role in supporting social interactions in intimate relationships . The interactive editor ( see Fig . 4 ( a ) ) allows users to add text , upload images , and create freehand drawing , following the design con - vention of popular online sketchpads . We provide some resources to further enrich users’ editing experience , e . g . , sending screen - shot of the “sea world” and stickers of marine animals to discuss stress - related issues , adding emojis and message bubbles to express internal feelings , as well as recommending jokes and poems and sharing multimedia content via QR code to cheer up others . Af - ter users have fnished creating the message , they can send it to their groupmates . At the current stage , no notifcation is sent to the receiver . We hope to derive understandings of how to balance between timely awareness and non - disturbance from the feld trial , so we leave notifcation settings for future explorations . To ensure the consistency of the overall style and increase its visual appeal , the unread messages are displayed as transparent bubbles foating in the sea ( see Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . When a user clicks on the bubble , the corresponding message will be opened ( see Fig . 1 ( b ) ) , and the bubble will burst and disappear . To avoid overlapping , the position of each bubble is random , but the receiver’s avatar appears in the center of the bubble to show whom this message is for . Users could access their past messages by simply clicking on their own avatars or going to their personal center ( see Fig . 4 ( b ) ) . 3 . 2 . 3 Implementation Details . For stress data collection , we de - cided to use Garmin products ( watches or bracelets ) , as commer - cially available devices can be more easily taken into users’ ev - eryday life and allow user studies to be conducted in real - world settings . Garmin wearables ofer all - day real - time stress tracking based on an analysis of HRV , which may be infuenced by both psychological feelings and physiological reactions [ 34 ] . Its feasibil - ity for stress measurement has been extensively investigated and approved [ 3 , 47 , 54 , 102 ] . Thus , we believe Garmin’s HRV - based Stress Score can provide a continuous and reliable measure of stress . In addition , the Garmin Health REST API makes it convenient to retrieve user’s data , with an authorization process ( see Fig . 4 ( b ) ) . The returned stress data is in the format of average stress value in three - minute intervals . The stress value ranges from 1 to 100 : 1 - 25 means rest , 26 - 50 means low - level stress , 51 - 75 means medium - level stress , and 76 - 100 means high - level stress . No stress data will be measured when the user is not wearing a watch or in the state of walking / running . We implemented a server to receive and save user’s stress data . Every time a user synchronizes health data with Garmin Connect ( Garmin’s mobile app ) through Bluetooth , the data will be automat - ically uploaded to the Garmin health server , which then sends a Ping notifcation to our server for data retrieval . This mechanism ensures the near - real - time consistency of the stress data . Users’ data is saved in a MySQL database for later processing . For the frontend of IntimaSea , we built a website so that users can access our system from diferent kinds of devices . The message editor was implemented using a JavaScript library called Fabric . js [ 33 ] . 3 . 2 . 4 Privacy Considerations . Given the sensitivity of stress data , we took privacy issues into careful considerations throughout the design process . First , we allow users to control when to share their tracked stress data , i . e . , only when the user clicks to synchronize CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu ( a ) Statistical style ( b ) Illustrative style ( c ) Artistic style ( d ) Tangible style Figure 2 : The representative candidates for each visual design style . They were later shown to end - users for further feedback and refnement . Figure 3 : A hypothetical scenario of how a couple use IntimaSea : ( a ) Alice took a glance at the watch and found her stress level had become lower than before , so she shared her current stress data with the display by clicking “sync” on Garmin’s mobile app . ( b ) When opening IntimaSea , Alice noticed Bob’s stress level was a little high and decided to send him a message . ( c ) Alice was composing a message tape to express her care for Bob . ( d ) Bob checked the display when he took a rest from work , and discovered the message ( the bubble with a dolphin avatar ) . ( e ) Bob was viewing the message from Alice . their stress data with Garmin’s mobile app will their stress data be uploaded to our server , and the latest stress data will be shown on the display . In other words , if users merely view the stress data on their wearables , no stress data will be uploaded and displayed to others . Therefore , although automatic stress tracking technologies are used , users still could have some control of how to share their stress data . Second , users have no access to the stress condition of people outside their group or the raw data of their groupmates . The historical stress data of others is also not displayed for privacy concerns . Finally , users can set whether they allow others to view their messages on the profle page ( see Fig . 4 ( c ) ) . 4 THE FIELD TRIAL The study is to explore the proposed design of a shared stress dis - play within groups of intimately connected users . We deployed IntimaSea in real - world settings to establish its practical viability in the wild and to explore users’ in - situ practices . Considering the sensitive nature of stress data , a two - week pilot study involving members of our research lab and their intimate relationships was conducted frst [ 99 ] , to develop initial understandings of whether our design of the shared stress display is acceptable and how it might be used in a close relationship context . Then , we run another round of four - week feld trial with participants outside of our lab with more diversifed backgrounds , to avoid potential bias and gain more generalizable fndings . Overall , 9 groups and 19 participants were involved in the study , and the close relationships include couples , cousins , or close friends , where members feel close and comfortable sharing stress related information within the group . The demographic information of our participants is shown in Ta - ble 1 . In the rest of this paper , we will designate participants by A | B | . . . | I - [ pseudonym ] , so as to give a sense of which group the participant is from . Below we will describe the user study in details . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany ( a ) Message editor ( b ) Personal center ( c ) Personal profle Figure 4 : The user interface design of IntimaSea : ( a ) message editor , ( b ) personal center , and ( c ) personal profle . 4 . 1 Participants In the pilot study , four groups of users ( Group A - D in Table 1 ) were recruited via word - of - mouth . Among them , A - Yvonne , B - Ficus , B - Amanda , B - Iris , C - Eve , and D - Zoey are from our own research lab . However , except B - Iris who is one of the authors and extensively involved in the design and implementation of the whole system , all other participants from our research lab and their intimate partners had no former experience of stress tracking or relevant expertise on this topic , and had never used the prototype or known the details of our study before the trial . This pilot study acted as the frst step to evaluate and understand the use of such a technology in everyday settings . We then conducted a second round of deployment study with par - ticipants from more diversifed backgrounds beyond connections with our own lab , to address any bias issues potentially introduced in the pilot study . We advertised our study by distributing recruit - ment fyers on WeChat 1 , Moments 2 , and WeiBo 3 , searching for those who were interested in stress tracking and willing to share stress data with their intimate ones . Findings from the pilot study informed our participant sampling strategy : participants were un - willing to share stress among intergenerational relationships ( see section 5 . 4 . 1 ) , so the recruitment mainly involved couples and close friends . Finally , fve groups of participants ( Group E - I in Table 1 ) voluntarily participated in the study . 1 A popular messaging App in China . 2 Similar to the Facebook Timeline or the Twitter News Feed . 3 A Chinese microblogging website . 4 . 2 Procedure The two rounds of user studies followed the same procedures de - tailed below : 4 . 2 . 1 Setup and initial interview . Out of ethical considerations , we explicitly stated to the participants that the data we would access and analyze only included the interview scripts and the application usage logs , where the stress data would be kept confdential . After we obtained the participants’ written consent , we provided them with an installation guide of IntimaSea , and ofered technical help for any problems they encountered . We invited the participants to wear the Garmin device and then try to synchronize their stress data with our application , and encouraged them to leave a message tape for their groupmates . These practices intended to help them become familiar with IntimaSea . After the setup , we conducted initial interviews with each group ( all members together ) for 40 - 60 minutes , either in person ( Group B & D ) or over WeChat voice calls at the participants’ convenience . The initial interview aimed to introduce IntimaSea to them and fnd out about their existing practices of stress tracking and manage - ment , and their willingness to share stress data in close relationships . We also asked about participants’ interpretations of the elements presented in the “sea world” of IntimaSea , to ensure they reached a consensus on how their stress data is encoded and displayed . Following our open - ended interview outline , participants in each group took turns to share their feelings and experiences with us , and they could add more details or discuss with each other before moving on to the next interview question . We concluded the initial interviews by consenting participants , including clarifying that all the recorded data would remain anony - mous and inaccessible to others outside the research team , and all CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu Table 1 : Participants . * denotes that the participant is from our research lab . The names of participants are pseudonyms . Participant Gender Age Education / Occupation Location Relationship A - Yvonne A - Alex F M 23 24 Graduate Student * Graduate Student Shanghai Shanghai Couple B - Ficus F 28 Graduate Student * Shanghai B - Amanda F 23 Graduate Student * Shanghai Close Friends B - Iris F 23 Graduate Student * Shanghai C - Eve C - Tao F M 31 32 Ph . D Candidate * Programmer in a Startup Shanghai Guangzhou Couple D - Zoey D - Wendy F F 22 23 Graduate Student * Graduate Student Shanghai Shanghai Close Friends E - Ning E - Bo M M 27 27 Software Engineer Operations Specialist Shanghai Shanghai Close Friends F - Yu F - Jia F F 34 33 Lecturer Technical Developer Shanghai Dongguan Close Friends G - Yi G - Xin F M 25 26 Ph . D Candidate Ph . D Candidate Shanghai Beijing Couple H - Kong H - Li F M 24 24 Salesperson Unemployed Hangzhou Xinjiang Close Friends I - Na I - Qing F F 29 27 Operations Specialist Data Analyst Shanghai Shanghai Cousins the participants could stop their participation at any time without consequence . 4 . 2 . 2 Field trial . During the trial period , we did not require any compulsory use , as we would like to learn about participants’ usage in natural settings . Users were free to use IntimaSea at any time , and could feedback any usability issues or their feelings with us . To collect experiences before they forgot , we scheduled in - study interviews . We examined their usage logs , contacted each group to check if everything was working , learned about the details of their use , and probed them to share specifc stories and experiences . 4 . 2 . 3 Exit interview . After the feld trial , we scheduled exit inter - views with the participants , following the previous joint manner . Each semi - structured interview lasted for approximately 1 . 5 hours . We used the usage logs and feedback we received during the trial period as cues to probe questions on participants’ practices . More specifcally , we leveraged the usage log to track participants’ opera - tions and investigated why they chose to use IntimaSea in that way . We also inquired into the participants’ perceptions of the diference between the shared - stress display and the statistical data or charts provided by Garmin . In addition , we encouraged participants to refect on their experience of managing stress with IntimaSea and the efects on building their relationships . In this process , some par - ticipants reviewed the message tapes or chat history on WeChat to help them recall the context and details . Finally , we asked whether they would continue using IntimaSea if possible and why , and what new features they would like it to have in the future . 4 . 3 Data Collection and Analysis IntimaSea collected usage logs from participants on two main events : ( 1 ) When a user checks the shared stress display , the ap - plication will record the timestamp and the user’s operations ( e . g . , refreshing the stress data ; clicking the bubble to view the mes - sage ) . ( 2 ) When a user sends a message tape , the application will also record the timestamp and the targeted receiver . We performed quantitative analysis over these logs to understand participants’ usages over time . We conducted interviews in Mandarin but translated all quotes presented in this paper into English . We audio - recorded the inter - views with the participants’ permission and transcribed them for data analysis . For privacy protection purposes , we anonymized the participants’ data . We performed thematic analysis [ 10 ] inductively on the interview transcripts and notes collected from the initial , in - study , and exit interviews of the two rounds of feld trials . The authors frst coded and analyzed the data independently , by reading the data and marking the ideas . Each then started compiling a list of codes . We then held meetings to discuss the ideas . Together we compared , refned , and consolidated the codes through iterative discussions of the most salient data , i . e . , recurring patterns and surprising behaviors . We eventually curated codes into a set of preliminary themes and arrived at the fndings as presented in the next section . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 5 FINDINGS As the fndings we derived from the pilot study and the main study share similar themes about how IntimaSea mediated stress manage - ment and relationship building , and how our participants managed social boundaries for stress sharing , we decided to report them in a combined form to present a holistic picture of the key insights . 5 . 1 Overview The log data showed that some groups ( Group A , B , C , E , G ) used IntimaSea more often - each person checked the shared stress dis - play about 12 times / week and sent an average of 4 message tapes throughout the trial , whereas others used it less frequently - each checked our App about 9 times during the frst week , and decreased to about 4 times / week afterward . As reported by participants , the reasons of their decreased use include the diminishing novelty , busy schedules ( D - Zoey & F - Yu & H - Kong ) , chatting with each other on WeChat all the time ( I - Na & I - Qing ) , and issues of critical mass [ 88 ] ( some members in the group was too busy to check the App often , which also led other members not to check it as often ) . We fnd that those who experienced a higher level of stress or were separated geographically from their intimate ones showed more interest in In - timaSea and exhibited a more dedicated use . The reason is probably that people with a higher level of stress tend to pay more attention to their stress conditions , and people in long - distance relationships have fewer clues to learn about each other’s stress , so this display becomes more valuable to them . According to interview results , participants generally found that IntimaSea was easy to use and understand . In particular , compared with the stress visualization on Garmin Connect , which shows fne - grained , all - day stress conditions on a bar chart , participants liked the simple and straightforward representation of stress value on the shared stress display , and seeing “avatar sinking” , not just an increased number , provided an extra push for them to take action and deal with the stress at the moment . In addition , they perceived the interface design of the shared stress display as beautiful and illustrative : the whole atmosphere was gentle and relaxing ; the marine animals they could choose as avatars were cute and repre - sentative ; the depths of the animals and the island were indicative of their stress conditions . The two rounds of feld trials yielded rich data on how IntimaSea might be meaningfully incorporated into close relationships for stress management and relationship enhancement . Below we will present more detailed accounts of how the shared stress display helped with social ways for stress awareness , interpretation and management , how it promoted social bonding and connection , and the social boundaries for stress sharing . 5 . 2 Mediating Stress Management This section will elaborate on how the display helped our par - ticipants develop social ways for awareness , interpretation , and management of stress in close relationships . 5 . 2 . 1 Social ways for stress awareness . The study suggests that the shared stress display provides more opportunities for intrapersonal , interpersonal and group - focused mindful awareness of stress . First , our participants acknowledged that the sharing behavior by itself increased their mindful self - awareness of personal stress levels , particularly because the sharing of stress data still requires manual operations at this stage , i . e . , synchronizing the data recorded by Garmin wearables with Garmin Connect mobile app . A - Alex put it this way : “ It is the sharing of stress by itself that makes me more aware of my current state . ” B - Ficus would make intentional choices of when to update and share her stress , so she followed the changes of her stress value closely . Similarly , G - Xin made it clear that his sensitivity to stress increased : “ The system strengthens the impression that you need to pay attention to your stress . . . and afects your behavior unconsciously . This sensitivity was most valuable to me . ” As such , the sharing behavior itself became a pull that drew people’s attention to their tracked stress , and more importantly , internalized their sensitivity to stress [ 94 ] . Moreover , the shared stress display also increased their aware - ness of intimate others’ stress and promoted mutual understanding . I - Na admitted that the high - stress value of I - Qing gave her a more intuitive experience of I - Qing’s feelings in quarantine , suggesting the value of shared stress data as a motivator of compassion and afective empathy [ 94 ] . Similarly , although A - Alex never expressed his stress explicitly in words , A - Yvonne found that once his stress value surged to 96 when studying for the National Judicial Examina - tion ( A - Yvonne knew in what particular periods of the day he was preparing for the examination ) . Therefore , A - Yvonne appreciated that the display provided another channel for her to understand A - Alex . Besides , the asynchronous nature of our system creates subliminal nudges for our participants to mindfully pay attention to each other’s stress issues , as G - Yi reported : For long - distance couples , it’s important to stay in touch and know each other’s emotional states . With the display , you know that your intimate one would share their stress data from time to time . This simple fact reminds you to keep an eye on any updates , and reach out to them when necessary . In addition , our design of the island , which indicates the overall stress condition of the whole group and also distinguishes our design from previous work on personal data sharing ( e . g . , [ 86 , 87 ] ) , becomes another factor in drawing our participants’ attention to their stress issues . The foating and sinking of the island often led to communications between group members or even taking action . For example , noticing the change in the island , G - Yi felt more strongly about the seriousness of their stress : We were both having anxious moments recently , and the island was almost totally submerged by rising sea water . . . Actually it was a little scary . . . It was then that we were aware of the seriousness of our stress . As such , this symbolic design made them quickly notice a high collective stress level , leading them to take the stress issues more seriously than just seeing individual high - stress values . 5 . 2 . 2 Social ways for stress data interpretation . Our study also shows that the shared display provides more social ways to interpret and make sense of the stress data . As shown in existing literature [ 26 ] , the mismatch between the physiological - signal - based stress the device measures and the psychological stress users perceive often causes confusion and difculty in interpretation , which would CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 5 : A sampling of the message tapes our participants sent during the trial . be a prevalent problem for automatic stress tracking technologies . Our study shows that sharing stress triggers conversations around the stress data and helps meaningful interpretations . Taking C - Eve as an example , she used to associate stress with mere psychological feelings such as tension and anxiety , so she was confused about her high - stress value once she felt relaxed after eating dinner . How - ever , after a period of use of IntimaSea together with C - Tao and discussion with him , C - Eve started to make sense of it : At frst , we were skeptical about the accuracy of the stress data , so we did some tests intentionally . We found that eat - ing meals or working out would make the stress value higher , so speculated that the device’s stress detection might also be correlated with bodily reactions through discussion . Later we discovered Garmin could also detect blood oxygen level ( which means it is physiologically related ) , and we paid attention to whether it had some relationship with stress value . According to my current understanding , stress is associated with three fac - tors : fatigue in the body , blood oxygen level , and psychological feelings . Our study found that such a practice of comparing , discussing , and experimenting with the stress display was commonly shared among participants within the same group . F - Jia even hoped that the display could show the user’s location or activity information besides the stress data , suggesting that contextual information could further support a social interpretation of stress . Although their understandings of the mechanism behind stress tracking technology were not all accurate , with other people’s stress conditions as a reference , as reported by H - Li , they started to realize that “ what is measured is not simply psychological but also physiological stress ” . It suggests that social sharing of stress has the potential to help people learn and form shared background knowledge for stress interpretation , providing social ways to address the challenges in meaningfully engaging with tracked personal data . 5 . 2 . 3 More informed and considerate social interventions . The shared stress display also enabled close relationships to play a more in - formed role in the ( co - ) management of stress , bringing more possi - bilities for stress intervention beyond self - management . As men - tioned , the display provided an opportunity for our participants to discover others’ stress when they were not staying together , and accordingly , they could take appropriate actions to support each other . The timing of stress data was a primary factor for users to decide what actions to take . Outdated stress data was considered less repre - sentative , therefore it usually would not trigger immediate actions so as to avoid unnecessary disturbance . For example , when F - Jia noticed that F - Yu’s high - stress value was updated last night , she decided to talk about it later when they both got of work . B - Ficus reported a similar case , where she adopted a less direct approach to express care by asking “ How’s it going recently ? ” instead of “ Why your stress value was so high then ? ” . In addition , after a period of use , I - Qing decided not to pay much attention to I - Na’s high - stress value at around 8 p . m . , because she knew I - Na would be exercising then . These cases revealed that among these close relationships , with their knowledge of each other’s routines , showing the timing of stress data on IntimaSea invited co - management of stress among intimate ones in a more informed and considerate manner . On the other hand , when they noticed that one’s stress value went high unexpectedly in real - time , other group members could often ofer timely help . For example , once G - Xin found G - Yi’s newly - updated stress value had surged to a very high level , so he asked her what had happened . Learning that G - Yi’s recordings of experi - mental data was accidentally lost , G - Xin decided to help her calm down frst , then shared his prior experience in such a circumstance : As she was very frustrated and kept blaming herself , I decided to comfort her frst . I told her : “ It is quite normal to lose exper - imental data due to unintentional mistakes . The same thing IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany also happened to me . What we can do is to adjust our mood and fnd a way to solve the problem . Now go home and get some sleep , and then look for possible backups . If there is no backup , take your time to repeat the experiment again . I will always be with you . ” G - Yi reported : “ I was so stressed to think efectively . . . G - Xin’s words gave me the courage to run away from those negative emotions and face the problem directly . ” This case showed that the timely help provided by the intimate partner is valuable not simply in its in - strumental value but also in it bringing back one’s calmness and rationality in the sudden burst of emotion . When one got so stressed that they were at a loss for solutions , the intimate other who was still calm could often ofer sensible solutions to the problem , thus could help intervene efectively . Interestingly , the study showed that our participants would adopt diferent communication channels for diferent purposes . As men - tioned , when the high - stress value was not up - to - date or could be expected ( e . g . , caused by concentration on work ) , a less disturbing way to help with stress intervention is preferred . Some participants appreciated the messaging functionality of IntimaSea as it did not send notifcations or require immediate response , which may avoid extra burden on the receiver but still have positive efects . A - Yvonne explained why she chose to leave a message ( see Fig . 5 ( a ) ) on Inti - maSea rather than sending an instant message to A - Alex , based on her knowledge of his current status : I did a bit of calculation of his update time based on the po - sition of his avatar and found he might be studying then . I knew his stress was related to his concentration , so I would not interfere with his study . In fact , I left him a message because no immediate notifcation would be sent to him , so his study would not be interrupted . Similarly , B - Iris chose to pass on positive feelings to B - Amanda but did not want to interfere with B - Amanda’s job interview , so she composed a message with scenery photos of West Lake 4 ( see Fig . 5 ( b ) ) , which brought B - Amanda a sense of relaxation when she discovered it later . Meanwhile , Instant Messaging ( IM ) apps or voice calls were pre - ferred to help address the issues , not merely to express care . These channels enabled them to reach out to their intimate ones promptly and have more in - depth conversations about the causes of stress , es - pecially when the high - stress value was unexpected . As mentioned above , when G - Yi was frustrated by the loss of her experimental data , G - Xin chose to communicate with her via voice call to learn about the details quickly and create a feeling of togetherness . E - Bo also explained why he seldom used message tapes : When I checked the display and found something unusual , I would send the screenshot of “sea world” to our group chat and ask what had happened directly . It was much more convenient than communicating by message tapes . Afterall , composing message tapes on the sketchpad - like interface was burdensome , especially when it takes many rounds of conversation to explain causes and efects of stress . As we can see here , while the communication channel on IntimaSea was often used to convey care , channels such as IM were handier for 4 A famous tourist attraction in China with natural beauty and historic relics . a discussion for practical solutions . Our participants suggested that the shared stress display could be better integrated into existing tools , e . g . , setting it as a chat background , so that it can become a part of the user’s daily practices and help with stress management more conveniently . Finally , the overall stress level shown in the display also fgured into the way for users to manage their stress collectively . When our participants discovered that their collective stress level went high , they would engage in co - management of stress by chatting or relaxing together if possible . For example , when C - Eve and C - Tao noticed that the island was almost totally submerged on display , they decided to leave their work aside for a while . Although distant , they went for a walk together remotely and chatted over voice calls for 50 minutes . They reported : We talked about our recent experiences and recognized we were just too busy working recently . We need to relax , and we have not met each other in person for a long time . So we planned a trip for the upcoming vacation . After the chat , we both felt much better and more motivated to balance our work and life . This quote suggested that intimate partners’ co - participation in some stress - relieving activities could be very valuable as a social intervention for stress , due to increased motivation , sense of re - sponsibility and coordinative eforts in dealing with stress issues . 5 . 3 Mediating Relationships Apart from assisting in stress management , IntimaSea was also leveraged to promote bonding and connections in close relation - ships , mainly through three mechanisms : some unusual stress val - ues provided our participants with a ticket to start conversations ; the island and animal avatars on display created a sense of to - getherness even when group members were apart ; the messaging functionality was utilized as a specialized channel to express in - timacy and prepare surprises . While this aspect could be related to the social way for stress management , we found it has its value for social bonding and connection per se beyond just for managing stress . 5 . 3 . 1 Ticket to talk . Similar to what is found on heart rate sharing [ 52 , 115 ] , our participants also treated stress sharing as an opportu - nity to convey their emotional and psychological states to others . For those who had always been willing to express their stress to others ( e . g . , A - Yvonne ) , the screenshot of the shared stress display acted as “ a hint or some kind of evidence ” of underlying feelings . For those who were not used to expressing their feelings explicitly in words ( e . g . , D - Zoey ) , sharing stress data , as a part of self - disclosure , implicitly signals that the sharer desires communication and care , thus providing others with a talk ticket : Actually it’s a bit awkward to actively initiate a conversation to share my feelings . However , with the display , it’s like to have the door open , waiting for someone to notice my stress and ask me what has happened . It always makes me warm and encourages me to talk about my stress and experiences . Indeed , stress data can “ save the labor of starting a conversation ” as commented by F - Jia , but E - Bo made it clear that “ social bonding and mutual understanding are things that really matter . ” CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu Although the conversation may be initiated with the stress value , it is not constrained to stress - related topics , as it also prompted other topics for bonding in general [ 31 ] . I - Na gave such an example : The stress value is a starting point for a series of questions . . . For example , why did you feel stressed today ? Is it due to busy work or poor sleep quality ? What happened at work ? Were you staying up late last night to watch the new tv show ? These small talks are a natural way to exchange our recent experiences and bring us closer . 5 . 3 . 2 Sense of virtual togetherness . Through the study , we found the marine animals representing groupmates and the island rep - resenting the overall stress condition created a sense of virtual togetherness . As similarly found in previous literature [ 98 ] , our participants developed an emotional attachment with their rep - resenting animal . When G - Yi had not updated her stress data for more than two days and found her avatar disappeared , she felt a little panicked : “ It’s like some connection has been broken . The two fshes ought to be together , but now one is gone . . . ” In addition , as a symbol of collective stress level , the island was seen as something to be protected and maintained jointly , as B - Amanda explained : The island belonged to all of us . . . If there was an obvious change in its depth , I would report the change in our group chat as soon as I discovered it . . . To some extent , it was similar to planting a tree together in Ant Forest 5 . We have to work together to maintain it . Our participants even envisioned future design improvements to promote the sense of togetherness more . G - Xin anticipated to learn about the backstory of the marine animals and unlock more plotline over long - term use . B - Ficus suggested changing the whole back - ground of IntimaSea to bring more visual salience on the collective stress level . The above cases show the value of joint representation of stress in promoting social connections . 5 . 3 . 3 A dedicated channel for intimacy . Compared to other more general communication channels , our participants took the display as a dedicated channel for intimacy . The non - disturbing nature of our messaging functionality made the communication process longer , but many participants drew an analogy between message tapes and letters or drift bottles , and utilized it as a channel dedi - cated to passing on intimacy and surprises . B - Ficus enjoyed it as it gave her something to expect , “ like discovering a treasure ” . More - over , our participants also emphasized that they liked IntimaSea because it was only for bonding and relaxing , not for other pur - poses . A - Yvonne considered communicating using IntimaSea was mainly for conveying care instead of information . G - Xin thought “ sending messages using IntimaSea more clearly exhibited my purpose of caring others . ” B - Ficus made a comparison between IntimaSea and WeChat to illustrate her impressions of IntimaSea as a place promoting moments of mental rest and refection [ 50 ] : We already have the stereotype of WeChat as an application that mixes work and life . . . Some serious , work - related topics would make me stressed , therefore I feel a little reluctant to 5 A project for climate protection where people are rewarded with “green energy points” each time they reduce carbon emissions . People use the green energy to raise a virtual tree together , and when the tree grows up , a real tree will be planted in a conservation area . view messages on WeChat . However , IntimaSea is a special place only belonging to me and my intimate ones . I know the messages on it are mainly about our life , or something interesting and relaxing , so I will open the application with a light heart . Also , the way to craft messages for their close relationships is also taken as appropriate to express intimacy and understanding . B - Ficus and B - Iris played Draw & Guess to test the tacit understand - ing between them using the free - hand drawing functionality ( see Fig . 5 ( d ) ) . H - Kong’s case is also a telling one . She specially designed the content of the message according to H - Li’s likes ( see Fig . 5 ( c ) ) : H - Li loves dog very much . When I discovered that he was stressed , I guessed seeing his pet dog would make him smile and forget about worries . So I added a sticker of frisbee to the picture of his dog , hoping to cheer him up . Through this kind of messaging practice , with the conscious will of commitment , the dedicated time spent in crafting the message , and the understandings of the recipient , IntimaSea is turned from a tool to share stress data into a place to express care and intimacy . 5 . 4 Social Boundaries for Stress Sharing The willingness to share often diferentiates between social groups [ 31 ] . While our study mainly focused on exploring shared stress display in close relationships , participants also discussed sharing stress data among other relationships , such as family and working relationships , which helped us identify the social boundaries for stress sharing . 5 . 4 . 1 Sharing stress data with whom . One kind of relationship our participants tried to avoid is the intergenerational relationship . Former research suggested that shared personal data can break the traditional power hierarchy in a family and create tensions that blur the boundary . Therefore families may face challenges in negotiating a new boundary between connectedness and autonomy / privacy [ 104 ] . This intergenerational tension was perceived as an imbalance of power and prevented our participants from sharing stress data with their parents . C - Eve was such an example : If my parents could see my stress value , they would call me to ask what was going on . Parents and children are not on an equal footing . . . If the child had a high - stress value , the parents would subconsciously cross the boundary , trying to help the child as people who have been down this road before but interfering with the child’s life . Some participants also worried that sharing stress with par - ents would not produce positive efects , as they do not share the same context , so the data will not be meaningful or useful . G - Xin complained that his parents would only say “ It’s no big deal . You shouldn’t have stress . ” without providing any concrete help . F - Yu expressed her concern of bringing extra emotional burden to her parents : I feel reluctant to share stress with my parents . If they saw a high - stress value , they would kept worrying about me , trying to understand what had happened . As we live in very diferent environments , it takes efort to explain things clearly . Replying to their messages was tiring , but if I didn’t reply , they would feel upset , or even lose sleep . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany For remote friends in relatively diferent environments who had not constantly shared recent experiences , our participants also considered sharing stress data less meaningful . B - Amanda , B - Ficus , and D - Wendy all reported such cases where it was too complex and demanding to provide the necessary background for in - depth discussions about stress with a remote friend . F - Jia also pointed out that it was difcult to strike a chord between people with very diferent roles and points of view . The shared stress data seemed less useful and even disturbing in this case . Working relations are even more sensitive . While heart rate sharing makes people concerned about others’ judgments about their physical state or ftness level [ 86 ] , stress sharing is even more tricky because stress is often interpreted as an indicator of work performance . Our participants were concerned about the critical interpretations from other colleagues and bosses . There seems to be an interesting dilemma , as E - Ning put it : If my stress value is high , others will think I’m unable to handle my workload and start to question my ability . If my stress value is low , others will say : “We are all busy , but you seem pretty relaxed . Are you messing around ? ” D - Wendy would like to maintain a clear boundary between her life and work , and for her , sharing stress with colleagues might break this boundary because the data might be used to infer other information about her private life . As such , the ideal relationship for sharing stress may have sev - eral characteristics : on a fair footing , sharing similar context , and intimate such as couple , close friends , and siblings , so that they can “ provide appropriate emotional and informational support for each other ” as C - Eve said . However , as shown below , even in the ideal relationship , sharers must strike a balance for data sharing not to afect privacy or bring extra burden while enabling social support [ 31 ] . 5 . 4 . 2 How to share stress data . Stress was considered very personal and sensitive , therefore our participants expressed their privacy concerns and additional burden if stress data was shared automati - cally or in a fne - grained form . C - Tao considered stress extremely sensitive and should not be shared with anyone unintentionally . A - Yvonne was afraid of “ the feeling of being monitored ” if stress was shared automatically . She was also worried about “ the addi - tional burden caused by other’s care ” when she was busy working . In addition , sharing real - time stress data was also considered unnec - essary , as H - Kong said , “ no one will check the display all the time ” . It echoed the fndings from other studies that the real - time stream of biosignal information could make people mentally overloaded and distracted [ 85 , 126 ] . Instead , our participants would want control in how to share stress data . They perceived the current scheme of sharing by syn - chronizing with the Garmin Connect App as suitable because it allowed them to choose when to share with the group . However , as the display only showed the latest stress value they had updated , some participants complained about the constraints imposed by this design . F - Yu and F - Jia expressed that they would “ easily miss other’s updates of meaningful stress values ” . I - Qing also considered that there was a certain degree of randomness in instantaneous , isolated stress values , but the long - term tendency in stress data might become valuable for friends to identify one’s signs of depres - sion . Based on this feedback , and for the purpose of providing users with the opportunity to track the changes , we may consider pro - viding an overview of historical stress data , and allowing people to subscribe to their intimate partner’s stress updates with the user’s permission . 6 DISCUSSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS In the preceding sections , we presented the design process and feld trial of our prototype , a shared stress display in close relationships . To our knowledge , this is the frst study to explore sharing digitally inferred stress data in close relationships . From our study , it is clear that automatic stress tracking , while typically approached from a personal health perspective , provides a lot of promising design opportunities to develop social ways for stress awareness , interpretation , and management in close relationships . The study also highlights that the meaning of stress data can be more social and expressive - as a hint of one’s underlying subjective feeling , and as an invitation for inter - personal communication and care . The feld study of IntimaSea yields rich implications for design , not only for stress management and relationship bonding but also to improve the practices of caring - through - data as a wider area of research , and we will discuss them in turn below . 6 . 1 Sharing Stress for Data Engagement and Stress Management Compared to other self - tracking data such as steps or sleep , stress is intrinsically more complex , involving not only physiological and bodily reactions [ 113 ] but also psychological and emotional responses [ 76 ] . As pointed out by Ding et al . [ 26 ] , the mismatch between the scientifc notion and everyday understandings of stress may present challenges for lay people to meaningfully interpret and engage in the digitally inferred stress data , including lack of immediate awareness , lack of pre - required knowledge , and lack of communal support [ 26 ] . These challenges not only add dif - culty to stress data interpretation , but also hinder efective stress management . The results from our study ( see section 5 . 2 ) suggest that sharing stress data in close relationships could be a potential solution to mitigating these challenges . Through the shared stress display , our participants clearly exhibited social ways of stress interpretation and management : they became more aware of their own , others’ and collective stress ; they better interpreted and made sense of the digitally inferred stress data through social comparisons and discussions ; they provided not only instrumental but also emotional support to help their partners manage stress . Our study suggests design ideas to further support social ways of stress interpretation and management ( see section 5 . 2 ) . For ex - ample , we could provide built - in support for social comparison ( e . g . , providing visualizations of personal stress trajectories of diferent members ) or recommend stress - relieving activities that require the joint participation of intimate ones . Moreover , especially among long - distance close relationships , the addition of contextual infor - mation might also help with social interpretation of stress [ 86 ] , via automatic integration of sensed location and activity data with icons beside user’s avatar ( e . g . , whether at home , workplace or CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu sport court ; whether reading , eating , or running ) , if users consent to share . Finally , the visual design and symbolic signs could be ef - fectively used to raise people’s awareness and attention than mere numbers ( such as the submerging of the island as in our case ) , and bring a sense of togetherness ( showing as marine animals in the same sea ) . Our study also shows that manual and automatic handling of stress data could have very distinct meanings for stress data en - gagement . While automatic tracking could save the labor of self - reporting and provide more objective cues [ 70 , 127 ] , manual track - ing indicates intentional or conscious engagement [ 26 ] . What our study suggests is that , we could combine the strengths of both by supporting automatic tracking and manual sharing . This approach can support more cost - efective , convenient stress tracking ; mean - while , the sharing behavior by itself indicates people’s conscious attention and internalizes their sensitivity to stress data . 6 . 2 Sharing Stress as a Social Cue to Mediate Relationships Our study reveals that shared stress data not only supports social ways of stress management , but also works as expressive social cues to mediate relationships ( see section 5 . 3 ) . Recent years have seen more research attention turned to “how data is situated and meaningfully engaged with” in social relationships beyond self - knowledge or behavioral change narratives [ 29 ] . Among them , expressive biosignals , or “biosignals displayed as a social cue” [ 87 ] , have been actively explored to facilitate digital communication [ 56 , 57 , 61 , 86 , 92 ] . As low - level , raw biosignals ( e . g . , skin conductance ) are “inherently ambiguous and open to multiple interpretations” [ 86 ] , increasing research attention has been paid to higher level interpretations of biosignals ( e . g . , interpreting heart rate as emotion avatars [ 87 ] ) . “Stress” , a commonly used concept containing rich psychological , physiological , and social - cultural meanings , and closely related to one’s well - being [ 21 , 106 ] , could be one such higher level interpretation of biosignals , evoking important and meaningful interpretations to mediate social relationships . At the same time , stress is easily associated with value judge - ment [ 124 ] , thus when leveraging stress data as social cues in digital communication , it is important to strike a balance between mean - ingful sharing and privacy concerns . It suggests that we should be more careful in terms of the context to deploy such a technol - ogy , e . g . , more cautious design in workplaces where performance is a key feature [ 108 ] . As shown in our study ( see section 5 . 4 . 1 ) , stress sharing is probably more acceptable among people who are intimate and on an equal footing , paralleling fndings from former research on location [ 16 ] and heart rate [ 86 ] sharing . In addition , an important consideration is to give users more control over their stress data . Our study shows that real - time automatic sharing in close relationships is still considered overwhelming and brings a sense of being monitored ( see section 5 . 4 . 2 ) . Therefore , being able to choose a group of users to comfortably share stress data with , selective sharing through manual clicking , allowing interactive data modifcation [ 31 ] , or at least providing options to control the time and frequency of stress sharing , may be more sensible approaches of sharing stress data as social cues while preserving privacy . It is worth noting that , this agency / autonomy in data sharing adds a layer of subjective and interpersonal depth [ 69 ] to the objective data . Former research has pointed out that people might adopt a scheme of selective sharing to ensure the shared data is interest - ing , meaningful or benefcial to others [ 28 , 31 , 56 , 69 ] . Our study revealed that stress sharing can be intentional and selective too due to reasons such as self - expression ( see section 5 . 3 . 1 ) . It suggests that while this type of tailored data might be less representative of one’s psychophysical state , selective sharing is socially meaningful for the informational and emotional value it conveys . Future work can further investigate the complexities of manual sharing of automati - cally tracked data and their implications for social understanding of personal data . The joint representation of biosignals as social cues is also an interesting topic to explore further . Previous research on combin - ing biometric data from several persons to produce a collective representation has explored visualizing synchronicity in breath [ 95 , 109 , 112 , 120 ] , arousal [ 116 ] , heart rate [ 43 ] , and even brain - waves [ 25 ] to foster the feeling of connection , relaxation and social play . These works show that the joint representation of biosignals acts as a real - time social cue to reveal shared experience [ 43 ] and triggers indirect coordination for a common goal [ 95 ] . This is sim - ilarly found in our study ( see section 5 . 2 . 3 ) , although we use the “island” to represent collective stress level instead of synchronicity in the underlying HRV data . It attracted our participants’ attention towards the group’s overall state , and motivated them to keep the island foating through co - management of stress . That is to say , the joint representation of biosignals elicits a sense of responsibility and provides another channel for people to feel socially connected [ 95 ] . We hope future work on stress management , team collabo - ration , mindfulness training , etc . could beneft from this form of design and uncover new interaction dynamics in diferent settings and user groups . Hall [ 49 ] distinguishes between high - context and low - context cultures to understand communications in diferent cultures . Bor - rowing Hall’s notion , we can probably conceptualize biosignals into high - context and low - context signals . As shown in our study , digi - tal inference of stress may be an example of high - context signals : close relationships with a highly shared context built upon daily information exchange seem to be a condition for users to meaning - fully engage with the data and understand the social cue behind the data [ 35 ] ( see section 5 . 2 . 3 ) , whereas relationships with relatively diferent contexts , such as family or remote friends , are considered less desirable for stress sharing ( see section 5 . 4 . 1 ) . High - context sig - nals , such as digital inference of stress , mean that interpretation of such signals relies on many shared contextual understandings , and the meaning is more dependent on the subtle or unspoken social cues behind them , especially when the signal is used to infer afec - tive state ; in contrast , low - context signals mean that information is communicated in a more straightforward way , as its meaning is already clear in and of itself , such as blood glucose level . Distin - guishing between high - context and low - context biosignals might help us better understand in what context biosignal sharing might be meaningful and how to design to support related practices . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 6 . 3 Designing for Caring - through - data As we have articulated in section 1 , our study is one such efort to explore caring - through - data based on a particular type of personal data - digital inferences of stress . Former research has investigated the social and emotional value of sharing infertility - related self - tracking data in online communities [ 72 ] , and how the remotely monitored blood glucose data brought about emotional complexi - ties and social tensions in the co - management of diabetes [ 65 ] . As similarly shown in our study , the shared stress display ofered new opportunities to promote empathy , compassion , care , and support in close relationships . It suggests to us that the value of sharing personal data not only lies in concrete suggestions or instrumen - tal actions , but also lies in mutual understanding and emotional support when needed , especially in long - distance relationships where people hardly have any clues about others’ status besides explicit verbal communication . Based on our study , we suggest design implications of sharing personal data to further support caring - through - data . One design implication is that efortful communication could be leveraged for expressing care . Kelly et al . [ 66 ] proposed that the investment of efort into communication is highly valued and meaningful for the mediation of close relationships . When design - ing systems for personal data sharing , sending notifcations can probably keep users informed of other’s updates in a more efortless way , and be of more instrumental value . However , in our study , although IntimaSea was not specifcally designed with efortful communication in mind , we found participants perceived others’ awareness of their stress conditions as a symbol of caring , mainly due to the investment of time and the special attention paid to it . Our participants also made efort in crafting the messages to express their care and intimacy . This is to say , we can design mechanisms that require meaningful efort to support caring - through - data , such as waiting for users to discover others’ updates and providing the channel and resources to craft their own elaborate messages . Another design implication is creating a balance between timely care and non - disturbing experience . Notifcations are often crit - icized for causing user interruptions [ 45 ] , leading to a decrease in work performance and a sense of burden and annoyance [ 68 ] . Apart from notifcations , real - time data sharing or broadcasting is also found to elicit anxiety and even more stress because people cannot help worrying about their own data or checking others’ data constantly [ 65 ] . Our study echoed these fndings : participants were very sensitive to the extra burden caused by sharing stress data in real time or receiving undesired notifcations , so many of them favored the current non - disturbing design of sharing and mes - saging . When designing personal data sharing systems to support caring - through - data , especially in non - urgent situations , avoiding extra disturbance is important . We do not mean that notifcation mechanisms should be totally removed ; instead , we argue for a better balance between timely awareness and avoidance of inter - ruptions , e . g . , by giving users more control of when and what kind of notifcations they would like to receive , taking the user’s stress condition , schedules and environmental information into account , and exploring context - aware [ 68 ] or sender - controlled [ 14 ] notif - cations . Also , recording the noteworthy and meaningful changes in user’s data and letting users decide whether to share or express they want others’ care , is another possible solution to helping balance between timely care and a non - disturbing experience . 7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK As an exploratory study , we have limits in terms of the stress track - ing approach , the number and diversity of our participants , rela - tionship with each other , stress condition , and the length of the study . Although the study is suggestive in terms of understanding the potential and design space of a shared stress display , we do not claim that our fndings are generalizable to stress sharing in all close relationships and in other variety of settings . With automatic stress tracking technologies becoming more available for everyday use , it would be helpful to investigate detailed usages of shared stress displays across diferent relationships , diverse populations and various settings . Here we mainly refect on two important directions for further exploration . Disentangle the complexities of stress . As is shown in our study , the complexity of stress – involving both psychological and physiological reactions – makes it challenging for lay people to engage with the shared stress data and make meaningful use of it . Future work can further explore the impacts of this complexity on users’ perceived accuracy and motivation to use , and we argue for more algorithm transparency / explainability to better support appropriate meaning - making of stress data in everyday settings . For example , we can make the underlying stress detection mech - anisms more visible to users , and acknowledge the limitations of automatic stress tracking products in diferentiating between phys - iological and psychological stress . We may also consider collecting contextual information ( e . g . , time and location ) or allowing users to record their activities , so that we can analyze and display the possible sources of stress . In addition , inspired by the social con - structivist theory of emotions [ 6 , 82 ] which perceives emotions as both a product of neurobiological mechanisms and cultural arte - facts evolving through social learning , future work may consider augmenting physiological measurement with introspective mea - surement or representation to explore the complexity of stress among diferent cultural groups . Make stress sharing an app - agnostic functionality and ft it into a larger ecosystem . Currently , IntimaSea is still a stan - dalone application . Although it brings convenience for research purposes , the shared stress display might face adoption challenges in real - world settings , considering the issue of critical mass ( see section 5 . 1 ) . Previous research [ 48 ] has pointed out that , by aug - menting existing messaging apps with new functionalities , users can experience innovative forms of personal expression while pre - serving their familiar communication places . Our participants also exhibited similar usage patterns , e . g . , sending screenshots of the shared stress display over WeChat ( see section 5 . 2 . 3 ) . It suggests to us that , by developing plugins and extensions to popular mes - saging apps , we can integrate the features of IntimaSea into larger app - ecosystems , e . g . , setting the shared stress display as chat back - ground and integrating message tapes into existing message chan - nels . This points to an opportunity to solve the common adoption challenge by utilizing the model of unplatformed design [ 74 ] , and CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu allow for observations on how stress sharing features might in - teract with other app functionalities and impact users’ real - world communication practices . 8 CONCLUSIONS In this paper , we contribute the frst design and empirical investiga - tion of sharing digitally inferred stress data in close relationships in everyday settings . With a feld trial of IntimaSea , a prototype we designed and developed based on stress tracking technologies , which allows users to view illustrative stress data in collective forms and interact with customizable messages , we illustrated the valu - able roles the shared stress display can play for stress awareness , interpretation and management , the instrumental and expressive support it can provide for relationship building , as well as the im - portance of maintaining related boundaries when stress sharing is concerned . Our study confrms that close relationships provide a promising context for stress sharing technologies to support caring - through - data practices , due to the important roles they play in individuals’ mental well - being and psychological processes , and suggests future research and design implications to further look into this direction . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our participants for sharing their experi - ences , and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive com - ments . This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( NSFC ) under the Grant No . 61932007 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] U Rajendra Acharya , K Paul Joseph , Natarajan Kannathal , Choo Min Lim , and Jasjit S Suri . 2006 . Heart rate variability : a review . Medical and biological engineering and computing 44 , 12 ( 2006 ) , 1031 – 1051 . [ 2 ] Petra Ahde and Jussi Mikkonen . 2008 . Hello : Bracelets Communicating Nearby Presence of Friends . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( Bloomington , Indiana ) ( PDC ’08 ) . Indiana University , USA , 324 – 325 . [ 3 ] Fatema Akbar . 2021 . Stress and Human - Computer Interaction at the Workplace : Unobtrusive Tracking With Wearable Sensors and Computer Logs . University of California , Irvine , Irvine , CA , USA . [ 4 ] Siham M Al - Momani . 2013 . Informal social support : a collaborative stress management initiative for mothers of cancer children . International Journal of Psychological Studies 5 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 19 . [ 5 ] Uddipana Baishya and Carman Neustaedter . 2017 . In Your Eyes : Anytime , Anywhere Video and Audio Streaming for Couples . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Portland , Oregon , USA ) ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 84 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998200 [ 6 ] Lisa Feldman Barrett and Christiana Westlin . 2021 . Navigating the science of emotion . In Emotion measurement . Elsevier , UK , 39 – 84 . [ 7 ] Elin A Björling , Honson Ling , Simran Bhatia , and Kimberly Dziubinski . 2020 . The Experience and Efect of Adolescent to Robot Stress Disclosure : A Mixed - Methods Exploration . In International Conference on Social Robotics . Springer , Springer - Verlag , Berlin , Heidelberg , 604 – 615 . [ 8 ] Guy Bodenmann . 1997 . Dyadic coping - a systematic - transactional view of stress and coping among couples : Theory and empirical fndings . European Review of Applied Psychology 47 ( 1997 ) , 137 – 140 . [ 9 ] Andrey Bogomolov , Bruno Lepri , Michela Ferron , Fabio Pianesi , and Alex ( Sandy ) Pentland . 2014 . Daily Stress Recognition from Mobile Phone Data , Weather Conditions and Individual Traits . In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia ( Orlando , Florida , USA ) ( MM ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 477 – 486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2647868 . 2654933 [ 10 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 11 ] Angela Chang , Sile O’Modhrain , Rob Jacob , Eric Gunther , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2002 . ComTouch : design of a vibrotactile communication device . In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 312 – 320 . [ 12 ] Angela Chang , Ben Resner , Brad Koerner , XingChen Wang , and Hiroshi Ishii . 2001 . LumiTouch : an emotional communication device . In CHI’01 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 313 – 314 . [ 13 ] Stephanie Cheung , Elizabeth Han , Azadeh Kushki , Evdokia Anagnostou , and Elaine Biddiss . 2016 . Biomusic : An auditory interface for detecting physiological indicators of anxiety in children . Frontiers in neuroscience 10 ( 2016 ) , 401 . [ 14 ] Hyunsung Cho , Jinyoung Oh , Juho Kim , and Sung - Ju Lee . 2020 . I share , you care : Private status sharing and sender - controlled notifcations in mobile instant messaging . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 15 ] Karen Anne Cochrane . 2019 . Reconnecting the Body and the Mind : Technology to Support Mindfulness for Stress . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . [ 16 ] Sunny Consolvo , Ian E Smith , Tara Matthews , Anthony LaMarca , Jason Tabert , and Pauline Powledge . 2005 . Location disclosure to social relations : why , when , & what people want to share . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 81 – 90 . [ 17 ] Scott Counts and Eric Fellheimer . 2004 . Supporting social presence through lightweight photo sharing on and of the desktop . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 599 – 606 . [ 18 ] Franco Curmi , Maria Angela Ferrario , Jen Southern , and Jon Whittle . 2013 . HeartLink : open broadcast of live biometric data to social networks . In Pro - ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1749 – 1758 . [ 19 ] Thomas Dalsgaard , Mikael B Skov , and Bo Ramsdahl Thomassen . 2007 . eKISS : sharing experiences in families through a picture blog . In Proceedings of HCI 2007 The 21st British HCI Group Annual Conference University of Lancaster , UK 21 . BCS Learning & Development Ltd . , Swindon , GBR , 1 – 10 . [ 20 ] Thecla Damianakis , Kimberley Wilson , and Elsa Marziali . 2018 . Family caregiver support groups : spiritual refections’ impact on stress management . Aging & mental health 22 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 70 – 76 . [ 21 ] Kevin Daniels and Andrew Guppy . 1994 . Occupational stress , social support , job control , and psychological well - being . Human Relations 47 , 12 ( 1994 ) , 1523 – 1544 . [ 22 ] Anita DeLongis and Tess O’Brien . 2018 . An interpersonal framework for stress and coping : An application to the families of Alzheimer’s patients . In Stress and coping in later - life families . Taylor & Francis , London , UK , 221 – 239 . [ 23 ] Arindam Dey , Thammathip Piumsomboon , Youngho Lee , and Mark Billinghurst . 2017 . Efects of sharing physiological states of players in a collaborative virtual reality gameplay . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 4045 – 4056 . [ 24 ] Anind K Dey and Ed de Guzman . 2006 . From awareness to connectedness : the design and deployment of presence displays . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 899 – 908 . [ 25 ] Suzanne Dikker , Sean Montgomery , and Suzan Tunca . 2019 . Using synchrony - based neurofeedback in search of human connectedness . In Brain art . Springer , Cham , 161 – 206 . [ 26 ] Xianghua Ding , Shuhan Wei , Xinning Gui , Ning Gu , and Peng Zhang . 2021 . Data Engagement Reconsidered : A Study of Automatic Stress Tracking Technology in Use . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . [ 27 ] Francine Ducharme , Véronique Dubé , Louise Lévesque , Diane Saulnier , and Francine Giroux . 2011 . An online stress management training program as a supportive nursing intervention for family caregivers of an elderly person . Canadian Journal of Nursing Informatics 6 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 19 . [ 28 ] Veera Ehrlén . 2021 . Tracking oneself for others : Communal and self - motivational value of sharing exercise data online . Leisure Studies 40 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 545 – 560 . [ 29 ] Chris Elsden , Aisling O’Kane , Paul Marshall , Abigail Durrant , Rowanne Fleck , John Rooksby , and Deborah Lupton . 2017 . Quantifed data & social relationships . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 644 – 651 . [ 30 ] Bernard T Engel and Ray A Chism . 1967 . Efect of increases and decreases in breathing rate on heart rate and fnger pulse volume . Psychophysiology 4 , 1 ( 1967 ) , 83 – 89 . [ 31 ] Daniel A Epstein , Alan Borning , and James Fogarty . 2013 . Fine - grained sharing of sensed physical activity : A value sensitive approach . In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 489 – 498 . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 32 ] Brian A Esterling , Michael H Antoni , Mary Ann Fletcher , Scott Margulies , and Neil Schneiderman . 1994 . Emotional disclosure through writing or speaking modulates latent Epstein - Barr virus antibody titers . Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 62 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 130 . [ 33 ] Fabric . js . 2023 . Fabric . js Javascript Canvas Library . http : / / fabricjs . com / . [ Last accessed : January 19 , 2023 ] . [ 34 ] Julien Fatisson , Victor Oswald , and François Lalonde . 2016 . Infuence diagram of physiological and environmental factors afecting heart rate variability : an extended literature overview . Heart international 11 , 1 ( 2016 ) , e32—e40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5301 / heartint . 5000232 [ 35 ] Milou A Feijt , Joyce HDM Westerink , Yvonne AW De Kort , and Wijnand A IJsselsteijn . 2021 . Sharing biosignals : An analysis of the experiential and com - munication properties of interpersonal psychophysiology . Human – Computer Interaction 38 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 36 ] Edna B Foa , Laurie Cashman , Lisa Jaycox , and Kevin Perry . 1997 . The validation of a self - report measure of posttraumatic stress disorder : the Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale . Psychological assessment 9 , 4 ( 1997 ) , 445 . [ 37 ] Guo Freeman and Dane Acena . 2021 . Hugging from A Distance : Building Interpersonal Relationships in Social Virtual Reality . In ACM International Conference on Interactive Media Experiences ( Virtual Event , USA ) ( IMX ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 84 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3452918 . 3458805 [ 38 ] Jérémy Frey , May Grabli , Ronit Slyper , and Jessica R Cauchard . 2018 . Breeze : Sharing biofeedback through wearable technologies . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Com - puting Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . [ 39 ] Kasper Garnæs , Olga Grünberger , Jesper Kjeldskov , and Mikael B Skov . 2007 . Designing technologies for presence - in - absence : illustrating the Cube and the Picture Frame . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 11 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 403 – 408 . [ 40 ] William W Gaver , Jacob Beaver , and Steve Benford . 2003 . Ambiguity as a resource for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 233 – 240 . [ 41 ] Tom Gayler , Corina Sas , and Vaiva Kalnikaite . 2020 . Material Food Probe : Personalized 3D Printed Flavors for Emotional Communication in Intimate Relationships . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 965 – 978 . [ 42 ] Steven Gelineck . 2015 . Evaluating Intimacy and Ludic Engagement with a Musi - cal Interactive Art Installation that Explores Remote Abstract Communication . In International Conference on Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , Springer International Publishing , Cham , 53 – 64 . [ 43 ] Renaud Gervais , Jérémy Frey , Alexis Gay , Fabien Lotte , and Martin Hachet . 2016 . Tobe : Tangible out - of - body experience . In Proceedings of the TEI’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 227 – 235 . [ 44 ] Martin R Gibbs , Frank Vetere , Marcus Bunyan , and Steve Howard . 2005 . Syn - chroMate : a phatic technology for mediating intimacy . In Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Designing for User eXperience . AIGA : American Institute of Graphic Arts , New York , NY , USA , 37 – es . [ 45 ] Ashish Godbole and Waleed W Smari . 2006 . A methodology and design process for system generated user interruption based on context , preferences , and situation awareness . In 2006 IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse & Integration . IEEE , IEEE , Waikoloa , HI , USA , 608 – 616 . [ 46 ] Vishwa Goudar and Miodrag Potkonjak . 2014 . Addressing biosignal data shar - ing security issues with robust watermarking . In 2014 Eleventh Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing , Communication , and Networking ( SECON ) . IEEE , IEEE , Singapore , 618 – 626 . [ 47 ] Stefan Gradl , Markus Wirth , Robert Richer , Nicolas Rohleder , and Bjoern M Eskofer . 2019 . An overview of the feasibility of permanent , real - time , unob - trusive stress measurement with current wearables . In Proceedings of the 13th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 360 – 365 . [ 48 ] Carla F Griggio , Arissa J Sato , Wendy E Mackay , and Koji Yatani . 2021 . Mediating Intimacy with DearBoard : a Co - Customizable Keyboard for Everyday Messaging . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . [ 49 ] Edward Twitchell Hall . 1976 . Beyond culture . Anchor , New York , NY , USA . [ 50 ] Lars Hallnäs and Johan Redström . 2001 . Slow technology – designing for refec - tion . Personal and ubiquitous computing 5 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 201 – 212 . [ 51 ] Marc Hassenzahl , Stephanie Heidecker , Kai Eckoldt , Sarah Diefenbach , and Uwe Hillmann . 2012 . All you need is love : Current strategies of mediating intimate relationships through technology . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 19 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 19 . [ 52 ] Mariam Hassib , Daniel Buschek , Paweł W Wozniak , and Florian Alt . 2017 . HeartChat : Heart rate augmented mobile chat to support empathy and aware - ness . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2239 – 2251 . [ 53 ] Mariam Hassib , Mohamed Khamis , Stefan Schneegass , Ali Sahami Shirazi , and Florian Alt . 2016 . Investigating user needs for bio - sensing and afective wear - ables . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1415 – 1422 . [ 54 ] Miriam I Hehlmann , Brian Schwartz , Teresa Lutz , Juan Martín Gómez Penedo , Julian A Rubel , and Wolfgang Lutz . 2021 . The use of digitally assessed stress levels to model change processes in CBT - a feasibility study on seven case examples . Frontiers in Psychiatry 12 ( 2021 ) , 258 . [ 55 ] Noura Howell , John Chuang , Abigail De Kosnik , Greg Niemeyer , and Kimiko Ryokai . 2018 . Emotional biosensing : Exploring critical alternatives . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 56 ] Noura Howell , Laura Devendorf , Rundong Tian , Tomás Vega Galvez , Nan - Wei Gong , Ivan Poupyrev , Eric Paulos , and Kimiko Ryokai . 2016 . Biosignals as social cues : Ambiguity and emotional interpretation in social displays of skin conductance . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 865 – 870 . [ 57 ] Noura Howell , Greg Niemeyer , and Kimiko Ryokai . 2019 . Life - afrming biosens - ing in public : Sounding heartbeats on a red bench . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . [ 58 ] Garmin Inc . 2023 . Garmin . https : / / www . garmin . com / . [ Last accessed : January 19 , 2023 ] . [ 59 ] Huawei Inc . 2023 . Huawei . https : / / consumer . huawei . com / en / wearables / . [ Last accessed : January 19 , 2023 ] . [ 60 ] Samsung Inc . 2023 . Samsung Galaxy Watch5 . https : / / www . samsung . com / global / galaxy / galaxy - watch5 / . [ Last accessed : January 19 , 2023 ] . [ 61 ] Joris H Janssen , Jeremy N Bailenson , Wijnand A IJsselsteijn , and Joyce HDM Westerink . 2010 . Intimate heartbeats : Opportunities for afective communication technology . IEEE Transactions on Afective Computing 1 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 72 – 80 . [ 62 ] Sukran Karaosmanoglu , Katja Rogers , Dennis Wolf , Enrico Rukzio , Frank Steinicke , and Lennart E . Nacke . 2021 . Feels like Team Spirit : Biometric and Strategic Interdependence in Asymmetric Multiplayer VR Games . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 443 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445492 [ 63 ] Joseph’Jofsh’ Kaye , Mariah K Levitt , Jefrey Nevins , Jessica Golden , and Vanessa Schmidt . 2005 . Communicating intimacy one bit at a time . In CHI’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1529 – 1532 . [ 64 ] Karen Kayser , Lisa E Watson , and Joel T Andrade . 2007 . Cancer as a " we - disease " : Examining the process of coping from a relational perspective . Families , Systems , & Health 25 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 404 . [ 65 ] Elizabeth Kaziunas , Mark S Ackerman , Silvia Lindtner , and Joyce M Lee . 2017 . Caring through data : Attending to the social and emotional experiences of health datafcation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2260 – 2272 . [ 66 ] Ryan Kelly , Daniel Gooch , Bhagyashree Patil , and Leon Watts . 2017 . Demand - ing by design : Supporting efortful communication practices in close personal relationships . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 70 – 83 . [ 67 ] Ryan Kelly and Leon Watts . 2015 . Characterising the inventive appropriation of emoji as relationally meaningful in mediated close personal relationships . Experiences of technology appropriation : Unanticipated users , usage , circumstances , and design 2 ( 2015 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 68 ] Nicky Kern and Bernt Schiele . 2003 . Context - Aware Notifcation for Wearable Computing . In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers ( ISWC ’03 ) . IEEE Computer Society , USA , 223 . [ 69 ] Elisabeth Kersten - van Dijk and Wijnand A IJsselsteijn . 2016 . Design Beyond the Numbers : Sharing , Comparing , Storytelling and the Need for a Quantifed Us . IxD & A 29 ( 2016 ) , 121 – 135 . [ 70 ] Hye - Geum Kim , Eun - Jin Cheon , Dai - Seg Bai , Young Hwan Lee , and Bon - Hoon Koo . 2018 . Stress and heart rate variability : a meta - analysis and review of the literature . Psychiatry investigation 15 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 235 . [ 71 ] Jina Kim , Young - Woo Park , and Tek - Jin Nam . 2015 . BreathingFrame : An in - fatable frame for remote breath signal sharing . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 109 – 112 . [ 72 ] Megan Knittel , Faye Kollig , Abrielle Mason , and Rick Wash . 2021 . Anyone else have this experience : Sharing the Emotional Labor of Tracking Data About Me . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 73 ] Jan Kučera , James Scott , Siân Lindley , and Patrick Olivier . 2021 . Bedtime Win - dow : A Field Study Connecting Bedrooms of Long - Distance Couples Using a Slow Photo - Stream and Shared Real - Time Inking . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Yanqi Jiang , Xianghua Ding , Xiaojuan Ma , Zhida Sun , and Ning Gu [ 74 ] Daniel Lambton - Howard , Patrick Olivier , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Hanna Celina , and Ahmed Kharrufa . 2020 . Unplatformed Design : A Model for Appropriating Social Media Technologies for Coordinated Participation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376179 [ 75 ] Hannakaisa Lansisalmi , Jose M Peiro , and Mika Kivimaki IV . 2000 . Collective stress and coping in the context of organizational culture . European journal of work and organizational psychology 9 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 527 – 559 . [ 76 ] Richard S Lazarus , Anita DeLongis , Susan Folkman , and Rand Gruen . 1985 . Stress and adaptational outcomes : The problem of confounded measures . American Psychologist 40 , 7 ( 1985 ) , 770 – 779 . [ 77 ] Paul M Lehrer , Evgeny Vaschillo , and Bronya Vaschillo . 2000 . Resonant fre - quency biofeedback training to increase cardiac variability : Rationale and man - ual for training . Applied psychophysiology and biofeedback 25 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 177 – 191 . [ 78 ] Stephen J Lepore and Joshua M Smyth . 2002 . The writing cure : How expressive writing promotes health and emotional well - being . American Psychological Association , Washington , DC , USA . [ 79 ] Sharron SK Leung , Vico CL Chiang , Ying - yu Chui , Angel CK Lee , and Yim - wah Mak . 2011 . Feasibility and potentials of online support for stress management among secondary school teachers . Stress and Health 27 , 3 ( 2011 ) , e282 – e286 . [ 80 ] Fenghua Li , Peida Xu , Shichun Zheng , Wenfeng Chen , Yang Yan , Suo Lu , and Zhengkui Liu . 2018 . Photoplethysmography based psychological stress detection with pulse rate variability feature diferences and elastic net . International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 14 , 9 ( 2018 ) , 1550147718803298 . [ 81 ] Wan - Hua Lin , Dan Wu , Chunyue Li , Heye Zhang , and Yuan - Ting Zhang . 2014 . Comparison of heart rate variability from PPG with that from ECG . In The international conference on health informatics . Springer , Springer , Cham , 213 – 215 . [ 82 ] Kristen A Lindquist , Joshua Conrad Jackson , Joseph Leshin , Ajay B Satpute , and Maria Gendron . 2022 . The cultural evolution of emotion . Nature Reviews Psychology 2022 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 83 ] Honson Ling and Elin Björling . 2020 . Sharing stress with a robot : what would a robot say ? Human - Machine Communication 1 ( 2020 ) , 133 – 159 . [ 84 ] Fannie Liu . 2019 . Expressive biosignals : Authentic social cues for social con - nection . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 5 . [ 85 ] Fannie Liu , Laura Dabbish , and Geof Kaufman . 2017 . Can biosignals be expres - sive ? how visualizations afect impression formation from shared brain activity . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 86 ] Fannie Liu , Laura Dabbish , and Geof Kaufman . 2017 . Supporting social interac - tions with an expressive heart rate sharing application . Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive , Mobile , Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 26 . [ 87 ] Fannie Liu , Chunjong Park , Yu Jiang Tham , Tsung - Yu Tsai , Laura Dabbish , Geof Kaufman , and Andrés Monroy - Hernández . 2021 . Signifcant Otter : Understand - ing the Role of Biosignals in Communication . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . [ 88 ] M Lynne Markus and Terry Connolly . 1990 . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 371 – 380 . [ 89 ] Diana MacLean , Asta Roseway , and Mary Czerwinski . 2013 . MoodWings : a wearable biofeedback device for real - time stress intervention . In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . [ 90 ] Marek Malik . 1996 . Heart rate variability : Standards of measurement , physio - logical interpretation , and clinical use : Task force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society for Pacing and Electrophysiology . Annals of Noninvasive Electrocardiology 1 , 2 ( 1996 ) , 151 – 181 . [ 91 ] Adriana M Manago , Tamara Taylor , and Patricia M Greenfeld . 2012 . Me and my 400 friends : The anatomy of college students’ Facebook networks , their communication patterns , and well - being . Developmental psychology 48 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 369 . [ 92 ] Nick Merrill and Coye Cheshire . 2017 . Trust your heart : Assessing cooperation and trust with biosignals in computer - mediated interactions . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2 – 12 . [ 93 ] Tina Marie Meyer . 2003 . Life stress and emotional regulation strategies during a personal disclosure task : Health implications for patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Wayne State University , Detroit , MI , USA . [ 94 ] Clara Moge , Katherine Wang , and Youngjun Cho . 2022 . Shared User Interfaces of Physiological Data : Systematic Review of Social Biofeedback Systems and Contexts in HCI . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . [ 95 ] Stuart Moran , Nils Jäger , Holger Schnädelbach , and Kevin Glover . 2016 . Exo - Pranayama : a biofeedback - driven actuated environment for supporting yoga breathing practices . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 20 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 261 – 275 . [ 96 ] Daphna Sabo Mordechay , Bracha Nir , and Zohar Eviatar . 2019 . Expressive writing - Who is it good for ? Individual diferences in the improvement of mental health resulting from expressive writing . Complementary therapies in clinical practice 37 ( 2019 ) , 115 – 121 . [ 97 ] Tuija Muhonen and Eva Torkelson . 2008 . Collective and individualistic coping with stress at work . Psychological reports 102 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 450 – 458 . [ 98 ] Elizabeth L Murnane , Xin Jiang , Anna Kong , Michelle Park , Weili Shi , Connor Soohoo , Luke Vink , Iris Xia , Xin Yu , John Yang - Sammataro , et al . 2020 . Designing ambient narrative - based interfaces to refect and motivate physical activity . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . [ 99 ] Carman Neustaedter and Phoebe Sengers . 2012 . Autobiographical design in HCI research : designing and learning through use - it - yourself . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 514 – 523 . [ 100 ] Kenton P O’Hara , Michael Massimi , Richard Harper , Simon Rubens , and Jessica Morris . 2014 . Everyday dwelling with WhatsApp . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1131 – 1143 . [ 101 ] Yaakov Ophir . 2017 . SOS on SNS : Adolescent distress on social network sites . Computers in Human Behavior 68 ( 2017 ) , 51 – 55 . [ 102 ] Olugbenga Oti , Iman Azimi , Arman Anzanpour , Amir M Rahmani , Anna Axelin , and Pasi Liljeberg . 2018 . IoT - based healthcare system for real - time maternal stress monitoring . In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE / ACM International Confer - ence on Connected Health : Applications , Systems and Engineering Technologies . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 57 – 62 . [ 103 ] James W Pennebaker . 1993 . Putting stress into words : Health , linguistic , and therapeutic implications . Behaviour research and therapy 31 , 6 ( 1993 ) , 539 – 548 . [ 104 ] Laura Pina , Sang - Wha Sien , Clarissa Song , Teresa M . Ward , James Fogarty , Sean A . Munson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2020 . DreamCatcher : Exploring How Parents and School - Age Children Can Track and Review Sleep Information Together . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW1 , Article 070 ( may 2020 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392882 [ 105 ] Sara Price , Nadia Bianchi - Berthouze , Carey Jewitt , Nikoleta Yiannoutsou , Kate - rina Fotopoulou , Svetlana Dajic , Juspreet Virdee , Yixin Zhao , Douglas Atkinson , and Frederik Brudy . 2022 . The Making of Meaning through Dyadic Haptic Afective Touch . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 29 , 3 , Article 21 ( jan 2022 ) , 42 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490494 [ 106 ] James Campbell Quick and Demetria F Henderson . 2016 . Occupational stress : Preventing sufering , enhancing wellbeing . International journal of environmen - tal research and public health 13 , 5 ( 2016 ) , 459 . [ 107 ] Clarissa ME Richardson and Kenneth G Rice . 2015 . Self - critical perfectionism , daily stress , and disclosure of daily emotional events . Journal of counseling psychology 62 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 694 . [ 108 ] Hugh Robertson . 2000 . Is stress a sign of weakness ? https : / / www . theguardian . com / society / 2000 / nov / 09 / publicsectorcareers . careers . [ Last accessed : January 19 , 2023 ] . [ 109 ] Raquel Breejon Robinson , Elizabeth Reid , James Collin Fey , Ansgar E Depping , Katherine Isbister , and Regan L Mandryk . 2020 . Designing and Evaluating’In the Same Boat’ , A Game of Embodied Synchronization for Enhancing Social Play . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . [ 110 ] Isabel Rodríguez , Malgorzata Wanda Kozusznik , José María Peiró , and Núria Tordera . 2019 . Individual , co - active and collective coping and organizational stress : A longitudinal study . European Management Journal 37 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 86 – 98 . [ 111 ] Pedro Sanches , Kristina Höök , Elsa Vaara , Claus Weymann , Markus Bylund , Pe - dro Ferreira , Nathalie Peira , and Marie Sjölinder . 2010 . Mind the body ! Designing a mobile stress management application encouraging personal refection . In Pro - ceedings of the 8th ACM conference on designing interactive systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 47 – 56 . [ 112 ] Thecla Schiphorst . 2006 . Breath , skin and clothing : Using wearable technologies as an interface into ourselves . International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media 2 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 171 – 186 . [ 113 ] Hans Selye . 1965 . The stress syndrome . The American Journal of Nursing 65 , 3 ( 1965 ) , 97 – 99 . [ 114 ] Richard B Slatcher and James W Pennebaker . 2006 . How do I love thee ? Let me count the words : The social efects of expressive writing . Psychological Science 17 , 8 ( 2006 ) , 660 – 664 . [ 115 ] Petr Slovák , Joris Janssen , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2012 . Understanding heart rate sharing : towards unpacking physiosocial space . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 859 – 868 . [ 116 ] Jaime Snyder , Mark Matthews , Jacqueline Chien , Pamara F Chang , Emily Sun , Saeed Abdullah , and Geri Gay . 2015 . Moodlight : Exploring personal and social implications of ambient display of biosensor data . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 153 . IntimaSea : Exploring Shared Stress Display in Close Relationships [ 117 ] Stefanie P Spera , Eric D Buhrfeind , and James W Pennebaker . 1994 . Expressive writing and coping with job loss . Academy of management journal 37 , 3 ( 1994 ) , 722 – 733 . [ 118 ] L Alan Sroufe . 1971 . Efects of depth and rate of breathing on heart rate and heart rate variability . Psychophysiology 8 , 5 ( 1971 ) , 648 – 655 . [ 119 ] Ekaterina R Stepanova , John Desnoyers - Stewart , Kristina Höök , and Bernhard E Riecke . 2022 . Strategies for Fostering a Genuine Feeling of Connection in Technologically Mediated Systems . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 26 . [ 120 ] Ekaterina R Stepanova , John Desnoyers - Stewart , Philippe Pasquier , and Bern - hard E Riecke . 2020 . JeL : breathing together to connect with others and nature . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Associ - ation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 641 – 654 . [ 121 ] Stefan Stepanovic , Vadym Mozgovoy , and Tobias Mettler . 2019 . Designing Visualizations for Workplace Stress Management : Results of a Pilot Study at a Swiss Municipality . In International Conference on Electronic Government . Springer , Springer , Cham , 94 – 104 . [ 122 ] Rob Strong , Bill Gaver , et al . 1996 . Feather , scent and shaker : supporting simple intimacy . In Proceedings of CSCW , Vol . 96 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 29 – 30 . [ 123 ] Feng - Tso Sun , Cynthia Kuo , Heng - Tze Cheng , Senaka Buthpitiya , Patricia Collins , and Martin Griss . 2010 . Activity - aware mental stress detection using physiological sensors . In International conference on Mobile computing , applica - tions , and services . Springer , Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 282 – 301 . [ 124 ] Zhida Sun , Manuele Reani , Quan Li , and Xiaojuan Ma . 2020 . Fostering en - gagement in technology - mediated stress management : A comparative study of biofeedback designs . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 140 ( 2020 ) , 102430 . [ 125 ] Kenji Suzuki and Shuji Hashimoto . 2004 . Feellight : a communication device for distant nonverbal exchange . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMM workshop on Efective telepresence . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 40 – 44 . [ 126 ] Chiew Seng Sean Tan , Johannes Schöning , Kris Luyten , and Karin Coninx . 2014 . Investigating the efects of using biofeedback as visual stress indicator during video - mediated collaboration . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 71 – 80 . [ 127 ] Himanshu Thapliyal , Vladislav Khalus , and Carson Labrado . 2017 . Stress de - tection and management : A survey of wearable smart health devices . IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 6 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 64 – 69 . [ 128 ] John W Thibaut and Harold H Kelley . 1959 . The social psychology of groups ( 1st ed . ) . Routledge , UK . [ 129 ] Hitomi Tsujita , Itiro Siio , and Koji Tsukada . 2007 . SyncDecor : appliances for sharing mutual awareness between lovers separated by distance . In CHI’07 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2699 – 2704 . [ 130 ] AV Turankar , S Jain , SB Patel , SR Sinha , AD Joshi , BN Vallish , PR Mane , and SA Turankar . 2013 . Efects of slow breathing exercise on cardiovascular functions , pulmonary functions & galvanic skin resistance in healthy human volunteers - a pilot study . The Indian journal of medical research 137 , 5 ( 2013 ) , 916 . [ 131 ] Mengru Xue , Rong - Hao Liang , Jun Hu , and Loe Feijs . 2017 . ClockViz : Designing public visualization for coping with collective stress in teamwork . In Proceedings of the Conference on Design and Semantics of Form and Movement - Sense and Sensitivity , DeSForM 2017 . IntechOpen , IntechOpen , Rijeka , 67 – 78 . [ 132 ] Mengru Xue , Rong - Hao Liang , Jun Hu , Bin Yu , and Loe Feijs . 2022 . Under - standing How Group Workers Refect on Organizational Stress with a Shared , Anonymous Heart Rate Variability Data Visualization . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI EA ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 27 , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3503576 [ 133 ] Mengru Xue , Rong - Hao Liang , Bin Yu , Mathias Funk , Jun Hu , and Loe Feijs . 2019 . AfectiveWall : Designing Collective Stress - Related Physiological Data Visualization for Refection . IEEE Access 7 ( 2019 ) , 131289 – 131303 . [ 134 ] Huizhong Ye , Zengrong Guo , and Rong - Hao Liang . 2021 . Asynchronous Co - Dining : Enhancing the Intimacy in Remote Co - Dining Experience Through Audio Recordings . In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . [ 135 ] Bin Yu , Mathias Funk , Jun Hu , and Loe Feijs . 2017 . StressTree : A metaphorical visualization for biofeedback - assisted stress management . In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on designing interactive systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 333 – 337 . [ 136 ] Samaneh Zamanifard and Guo Freeman . 2019 . " The Togetherness That We Crave " : Experiencing Social VR in Long Distance Relationships . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Austin , TX , USA ) ( CSCW ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 438 – 442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . CHI ’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany 3359453 [ 137 ] Renwen Zhang , Natalya N . Bazarova , and Madhu Reddy . 2021 . Distress disclo - sure across social media platforms during the COVID - 19 pandemic : Untangling the efects of platforms , afordances , and audiences . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Com - puting Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . [ 138 ] Bin Zhu , Anders Hedman , and Haibo Li . 2017 . Designing digital mindfulness : Presence - in and presence - with versus presence - through . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2685 – 2695 .