Inspiration and ﬁxation : Questions , methods , ﬁndings , and challenges Luis A . Vasconcelos , Engineering Design Centre , Department of Engineering , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1PZ , UK , CAPES Foundation , Ministry of Education of Brazil , Bras (cid:1) ılia e DF 70040 - 020 , Brazil Nathan Crilly , Engineering Design Centre , Department of Engineering , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1PZ , UK Research into inspiration and ﬁxation has produced a complex web of questions , methods , and ﬁndings , making it diﬃcult to know what has already been investigated and learnt , and what to investigate next and how . To address this , we review the literature , focussing on 25 studies that adopt a similar experimental approach . This reveals 14 manipulated variables , relating to properties of the inspiration source and features of the design process . However , whilst these studies follow a similar approach , when scrutinised and compared , they show great variety in the methods used and the results obtained . We discuss this diversity , oﬀering a methodological critique of inspiration and ﬁxation research and providing recommendations for how future studies might be conducted and reported . (cid:1) 2015 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Keywords : ﬁxation , creativity , design process , problem solving , design research C reativity is often associated with better designs in education and prac - tice ( Christiaans , 2002 ) and is considered a prerequisite for invention and innovation ( Sarkar & Chakrabarti , 2011 ) . This has motivated design researchers to conduct many empirical studies into creativity . In particular , a number of studies have focused on using external sources of inspiration to stimulate the idea generation stage of the design process . These external stimuli are introduced to the design process and are known to help designers arrive at new ideas that it would otherwise be very unlikely to emerge . As such , many studies highlight the positive outcomes and beneﬁts of using external stimuli during idea generation ( e . g . Dugosh , Paulus , Roland , & Yang , 2000 ; Dugosh & Paulus , 2005 ; Liikkanen & Perttula , 2008 ; Nijstad , Stroebe , & Lodewijkx , 2002 ; Perttula & Liikkanen , 2006a ) . However , when designers are provided with example solutions to the problem that they are considering , this may unfavourably interfere with the creative process , a phenomenon that has been called ‘design ﬁxation’ ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) . In researching this phenomenon , the negative eﬀects of external inspiration sources have been extensively discussed by many researchers ( e . g . Corresponding author : Luis A . Vasconcelos lal40 @ cam . ac . uk www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X Design Studies 42 ( 2016 ) 1 e 32 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2015 . 11 . 001 1 (cid:1) 2015 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Ltd . This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Perttula & Sipil € a , 2007 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ; Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ) . The prevalence of studies into inspiration and ﬁxation allows authors of such studies to frame their research with a review of other similar work . These studies have also recently been the subject of more extensive surveys , reviewing ﬁxation classiﬁcations and types ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) , and per - forming a meta - analysis of the results of a set of comparable studies ( Sio , Kotovsky , & Cagan , 2015 ) . These two reviews contribute to the literature in diﬀerent ways : the ﬁrst is qualitative and classiﬁcation - oriented , deﬁning what is being studied ; the second is quantitative and results - oriented , revealing what has been found . However , there has not yet been a thorough methodo - logical analysis of how the studies are conducted . This makes it diﬃcult to establish an overview of the experimental choices and setups adopted , and diﬃcult to interpret and compare the results obtained . To address this , the pre - sent paper reviews the relevant literature from a methods - oriented perspective , focussing on how the studies have been designed and implemented . Whilst the studies typically yield quantitative results , describing the methodology used to obtain such results ( and the ways in which it varies ) is largely a qualitative mat - ter . As such , we do not aim to integrate results and identify patterns in the literature , but to acknowledge the diversity of results in the ﬁeld and explain such variety based on methodological factors . We highlight where results conﬂict , provide some reasons that could explain this , and suggest what other concerns researchers should have about the literature . In doing so , the paper contributes towards a better understanding of the diﬀerent ways in which inspiration and ﬁxation can be studied , and how the results should be interpreted . Our objective is to help the ﬁeld to clarify some of its current issues and to plan its future directions . The rest of the paper is structured as follows . To establish a broader context for our analysis , Section 1 reviews the early psychological research related to ﬁxation and compares it to empirical design research , presenting an overview of how ﬁxation is interpreted and studied . Section 2 reviews the research questions asked in the literature , the variables manipulated to address those questions , what those experiments have found and where those ﬁndings conﬂict . The studies are grouped with respect to the aspects they examine , a grouping that is not obvious from the literature because the relevant variables by which the studies can be interrogated and compared are often only implicit . Section 3 reviews some challenges to interpreting the current research , especially methodological details that vary between experiments . These include potentially important variables that have not been systematically manipulated , diﬀerences in what is measured and how , and possible explana - tions for the measured eﬀects . Finally , Section 4 makes recommendations for how research into inspiration and ﬁxation could adopt a more consistent 2 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 approach to conducting and reporting experimental studies , whilst also incorporating non - experimental methods . The paper thus oﬀers useful information and perspectives for those new to the ﬁeld and also for those who are already expert . 1 What is design ﬁxation ? The term ﬁxation usually refers to an eﬀect originally described in the experimental psychology literature , an eﬀect in which an individual might unconsciously focus on certain aspects of an object or a task , whilst leaving others aside . For instance , the term functional ﬁxedness , ﬁrst introduced by Duncker ( 1945 ) , refers to the way an individual becomes ﬁxated on one particular function of a product ( also see earlier investigations by Maier ( 1931 ) ) , acting as a block to creatively reinterpreting the function of an object with which one is familiar ( e . g . thinking of pliers as a pendulum bob ) . Similarly , mental - set or the Einstellung eﬀect , proposed by Luchins ( 1942 ) , refers to the way an individual becomes ﬁxated on a particular process , acting as a block to ﬁnding diﬀerent ways to solve a problem ( e . g . ﬁnding a simpler path instead of repeating the one previously used ) . Originally , functional ﬁxedness was studied with respect to long - standing associations , whereas mental set was studied with respect to an experience immediately preceding the problem - solving attempt ( Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) . However , whether someone is ﬁxated on a function or a process might be independent of whether that ﬁxation is caused by long - term or short - term associations . The investigation of ﬁxation eﬀects in design activities followed on from more general investigations of functional ﬁxedness and mental - set . Jansson and Smith ( 1991 ) showed designers an example solution to a problem as part of the design brief and found that this reduced the designers’ propensity to move eﬀectively between the conceptual space ( of abstract ideas ) and the conﬁguration space ( of potential solutions ) . Jansson and Smith described design ﬁxation as the blind adherence to a limited set of ideas in the design process . According to them , ﬁxation occurred in their experiments when features from the example solution were incorporated into the participants’ own designs . These features were sometimes problematic ( e . g . contradicting the brief ) and this was taken as evidence that the repetition was blind and counterproductive . Since Jansson and Smith’s ﬁrst study , the idea of design ﬁxation has attracted many researchers from a variety of backgrounds . Whilst this diversity of backgrounds has brought a valuable range of perspectives to the ﬁeld , it has also led to diﬀerent understandings of what ﬁxation is and it is possible that diﬀerent types of ﬁxation are being discussed ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) . Consequently , the interpretation of design ﬁxation has sometimes been narrowed from its initial meaning and sometimes broadened . Narrower Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 3 interpretations of ﬁxation may focus on a designer’s overreliance on the features given in examples ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) or a tendency to structure new creations that conform to a familiar model ( Finke , 1996 ) . In contrast , broader interpretations may just consider any cognitive interference that guides the design work ( Perttula & Sipil € a , 2007 ) or any process that can interfere during creative acts ( Agogu (cid:1) e , Poirel , Pineau , Houd (cid:1) e , & Cassotti , 2014 ) . Perhaps even more broadly , it is also possible to understand design ﬁxation as a speciﬁc instance of low creativity levels ( Zahner , Nickerson , Tversky , Corter , & Ma , 2010 ) . As a result of this conceptual range , research into design ﬁxation has approached its subject from diﬀerent perspectives or has even been approaching diﬀerent subjects . However , what is quite consis - tent is that ﬁxation is framed as an unfavourable phenomenon , with most of the studies presenting ways to avoid , mitigate or overcome it . As with the interpretation of design ﬁxation , there is also some variation with the method applied in the experiments , although a common procedure might be observed . The studies typically require that a number of participants ( often students ) work individually to generate multiple solutions to a given problem in a controlled environment ( often in a class setting ) . Due to the limited time available in most of the experiments ( often an hour or less ) , the problem state - ments that are provided to participants are quite simple and so are and the design outputs that are required from them . The participants are divided into experimental groups , typically with only some of those groups being exposed to external stimuli , either before starting to generate solutions or when they are already engaged in generating solutions . The impacts of this stimulation are tested through metrics that are either relatively objective ( such as the number of ﬁnal concepts , the number of diﬀerent types of concepts and the repetition of key features from the stimuli ) or more subjective ( such as the novelty , feasibility and ease of use of the ﬁnal concepts ) . Lastly , the results are analysed and rated , comparing the design work of the diﬀerent treatment groups and control groups . Whilst typically following the experimental paradigm outlined above , the diﬀerent inspiration and ﬁxation experiments to date have explicitly manipu - lated a range of diﬀerent variables . The next section seeks to understand these variables by discussing the main ﬁndings of the studies that address them . 2 Variables manipulated in the studies Studies of inspiration and ﬁxation are mainly concerned with the idea gener - ation phase of the design process . They typically manipulate variables relating to the stimuli that are presented to the participants ( such as the novelty and quantity of the stimuli ) , but they also manipulate variables relating to the design process ( such as the characteristics of the participants , the size of the group and the time available ) . Recently , Sio et al . ( 2015 ) reviewed a set of 4 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 studies looking for commonality in the results , mapping and statistically analysing some of the manipulated variables ( namely ‘timing of presentation’ , ‘common - ness of the example’ , and ‘number of examples’ ) . Here we investigate a broader set of 14 variables found in the literature reviewing each of them qualitatively . We collect studies together according to the variables they manipulate , noting where there is agreement between them and highlighting where there are disagreements . Whilst we discuss a broad range of studies in this section , only a subset of pa - pers 25 are examined closely . This selection focuses only on studies that have used external stimuli as inspiration sources and provides an overview of the empirical research into external inspiration and design ﬁxation . The method - ological details of these studies are presented in summary tables , with each row corresponding to a publication . Where a publication refers to more than one experiment , all experiments within scope are considered for that publication . This basic table structure is repeated throughout the following sections of this paper . 2 . 1 External stimuli A large number of studies investigate how diﬀerent properties of external stim - uli aﬀect the design process and the outcomes that result . These properties may relate to the modality of representation used for the stimuli and the ﬁdelity of that representation , the quantity of stimuli and their proximity to the design problem , the diversity and novelty of the stimuli , and the timing of their pre - sentation . These variables are discussed in each of the subsections that follow , with each subsection summarised in a column of Table 1 . 2 . 1 . 1 Modality of representation External stimuli can be represented in many ways , such as real objects , pic - tures , words , and videos . Research has shown that textual stimuli can help par - ticipants increase their originality ( Goldschmidt & Sever , 2011 ) . It was also found that using general linguistic representations when learning about similar products plays a positive impact on designer’s ability to use them ( Linsey , Wood , & Markman , 2008 ) . However , research suggests that designers tend to prefer working visually ( Hanington , 2003 ) and that they are more inspired by visual stimuli ( Goldschmidt & Smolkov , 2006 ) but they are equally more susceptible to negative eﬀects from them ( Chrysikou & Weisberg , 2005 ) . Simi - larly , Sarkar and Chakrabarti ( 2008 ) provide evidence to support the claim that non - verbal representations ( image and video ) increases both the quantity and quality of designers’ solutions . Additionally , when comparing the use of 2D images and 3D objects , Toh and Miller ( 2014 ) found that images still yield better results , as physical objects reduced the novelty and variety of the ﬁnal concepts . In general , it is suggested that multimodal stimuli are particularly important for ideation . For instance , Sarkar and Chakrabarti ( 2008 ) claim Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 5 Table 1 External stimuli variables manipulated in inspiration and fixation studies . ‘X’ indicates where a given variable was assigned a particular value . ‘ ? ’ indicates where it was not possible to identify the value assigned to a variable . ‘IG’ stands for idea generation First author , year Modality of representation Fidelity Quantity Proximity Diversity Novelty Timing Text Picture Diagram Physicalobjects Abstract Concrete One More Within Between Self - similar Diverse Common Novel Beforebrief Alongbrief DuringIG Cardoso , 2011 X X X X X X X X Cheng , 2014 X X X X X X X X Chrysikou , 2005 X X X X X X X X Dahl , 2002 X X X X X X X X Fu , 2013 X X X X X X X X X X Goldschmidt , 2006 X X X X X X X X ? ? ? ? ? Gonc¸alves , 2012 X X X X X X X X X X X X Jansson , 1991 X X X X X X X X Liikkanen , 2008 X X X X X X X Linsey , 2010 X X X X X X X X Lujun , 2011 X X X X X X X X X Moreno , 2014 X X X X X ? ? ? ? X Nijstad , 2002 X X X X X X X X Perttula , 2006a X X X X X X X X Perttula , 2007 X X X X X X X X X Purcell , 1996 X X X X X X X X X Sarkar , 2008 X X X X X X X X X X Siangliulue , 2015 X X X X X X X Smith , 1993 X X X X X X X X Toh , 2014 X X X X X X X X Tseng , 2008 X X X X X X X X X X Viswanathan , 2014 X X X X X X X Yilmaz , 2010 X X X X X X X X X Youmans , 2011a X X X X X X X X Youmans , 2011b X X X X X X X 6 D e s i g n S t ud i e s V o l 42 N o . C M on t h 201 6 that although pictorial representations are probably better for providing speciﬁc information , diagrams are known to be more eﬀective for describing general information and making search and recognition easier . Thus , it is expected that a combination of modalities will result in more complete inspiration . Experimentation has shown , however , that even a single word , when introduced to participants prior to idea generation , can aﬀect the subsequent design work ( Liikkanen & Perttula , 2008 ) . According to the literature , diﬀerent modes of representation will aﬀect idea generation in diﬀerent ways , and it might be that the most appropriate modality to use depends on the task at hand . 2 . 1 . 2 Fidelity of the representation The solutions oﬀered to participants can be represented at diﬀerent levels of detail . For example , the stimuli might clearly resemble an actual product or only provide some clues of what that could be . Some research analysed the inﬂuence of the ﬁdelity or level of abstraction of both textual descriptions and pictorial representations on problem solving . For example , Gonc¸alves , Cardoso , and Badke - Schaub ( 2012 ) found that when industrial designers were exposed to a verbal description that only provided clues to a potential solution , their ideas were more numerous , and more diverse and original than the ideas of those who saw either a description of a solution itself or a description of a completely unrelated phenomenon . In a similar study , Cardoso and Badke - Schaub ( 2011 ) compared the design work of participants exposed to line drawings as visual stimuli ( abstract or low - ﬁdelity ) to that of participants exposed to real pictures of the mechanism and its parts ( concrete or high - ﬁdelity ) . Whilst no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found with respect to the repetition of key attributes , exposure to high - ﬁdelity iconic representations seemed to yield less novel ideas . Similarly , Cheng , Mugge , and Schoormans ( 2014 ) concluded that industrial designers who were shown only partial photographs of products developed more original solutions than those who saw the full photographs . Participants also reported that they paid more attention to details in the partial pictures condition . Overall , the studies indicate that changing the ﬁdelity of the representation of stimuli ( and possibly using low - ﬁdelity or more abstract stimuli ) may help in counteracting ﬁxation , although some ﬁxation is still likely to occur . 2 . 1 . 3 Quantity Inspiration in design can result from either a single stimulus or from many . In one study , Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006a ) observed the inﬂuences of presenting multiple stimuli to participants . Whilst some participants were presented with no stimuli prior to idea generation , others were presented with four designs based on diﬀerent principles . Perttula and Liikkanen found that , when compared to analogous studies into design inspiration and ﬁxation , participants in their experiment seldom included solutions from the categories Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 7 represented in the examples , which indicates the absence of ﬁxation . Thus , using several diﬀerent kinds of stimuli can be a means to avoid ﬁxation and increase the number of ﬁnal concepts . However , when comparing the work of the treatment and control groups , no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found , so the inﬂuence of the number of stimuli is not clear . Similar results were found in another study , in which the number of examples presented to the partici - pants had no inﬂuence on the solutions that they arrived at ( Perttula & Sipil € a , 2007 ) . In a similar fashion , Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 ) found that increasing the number of examples ( provided before idea generation ) did not increase the number of seemingly distant analogies that were drawn during the design process . The same held for the originality and perceived value of solutions . As a result , exposure to any concrete example e irrespective of their quantity e might inhibit the creativity of participants and aﬀect the potential of the concepts they create . In fact , it might be the case that providing several example solutions can actually further inhibit creativity instead of enhancing it ( Sio et al . , 2015 ) , and one possible explanation is that there are more concrete properties of the examples to attract the attention of the participants ( Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ) . However , this seems to be true only when examples that promote the use of near analogies are provided , thus it is expected that using examples from very diﬀerent domains helps to avoid ﬁxation in design and may increase creativity . Still , from the literature it is not clear how many stimuli to present to designers when trying to limit ﬁxation eﬀects . 2 . 1 . 4 Proximity to the problem Stimuli can be regarded as relatively ‘near’ or ‘far’ from the problem domain ( Fu et al . , 2013 ) Although research on stimuli proximity does not present clear boundaries for what could be considered near and far , there is good support for the idea that stimuli that are neither too near nor too far from the problem domain are more likely to produce creative insights and novel solutions ( Chan et al . , 2011 ; Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ; Fu et al . , 2013 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Gonc¸alves et al . , 2012 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ) . It was also found that providing participants with ( unfamiliar ) biological examples increased idea novelty when compared to no examples used , while ( familiar ) human - engineered examples will decrease the variety of ideas ( Wilson , Rosen , Nelson , & Yen , 2010 ) . However , related problem solving studies in psychology revealed that when there are no directive hints , analogous thought is not likely to be enhanced ( Anolli , Antonietti , Crisafulli , & Cantoia , 2001 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) , indicating that spontaneous analogical transfer is not simple . Still , if there is enough ‘surface similarity’ or ‘proximity’ between previous analogues and the current problem , designers are more likely to transfer information between the two cases ( Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Keane , 1987 ) . In that sense , it is likely that there is some optimal distance between the problem and the stimuli , but research has only oﬀered general suggestions for what this distance is . 8 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 2 . 1 . 5 Diversity When considering multiple stimuli and their domains , mechanisms , or structures , the stimuli may vary from being self - similar ( sharing many characteristics among themselves ) to diverse ( being diﬀerent from each other in some way ) . Nijstad et al . ( 2002 ) found that a diverse range of stimuli can activate diﬀerent aspects of a participant’s knowledge . In their experiment , this diversity generated a greater variety of solutions even if the exploration of any given solution was quite superﬁcial . In contrast , stimuli that were similar to each other only activated a single or narrower aspect of knowledge . Self - similar stimuli can therefore cause designers to explore fewer categories of solutions , but to explore those categories more deeply . The best scenario seems to happen when diverse stimuli are presented in a structured way , which enables diﬀerent categories to be covered as well as suﬃcient exploration of each category . Additionally , it was found that being exposed to diverse stimuli might reduce the response latency ( i . e . time between two ideas ) when participants change categories , at the same time that it does not aﬀect the response latency when they are ‘repeating’ solutions within the same category . As a result , participants can increase their productivity when category changes occur as fast as the repetition of similar ideas within a category ( Nijstad et al . , 2002 ) . Results from Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) also indicated that rich and diverse stimuli help designers be more original in design problems for which aesthetics and emotional appeal are very important . Overall , it seems that the stimuli diversity can aﬀect idea generation in diﬀerent ways , and the right diversiﬁcation will depend on what each brief requires from the designers . 2 . 1 . 6 Novelty Whether the stimuli are novel or not may be cause for diﬀerent levels of inspi - ration or ﬁxation in designers , and therefore ﬁxation research has been testing how participants respond to common and uncommon examples . Purcell and Gero ( 1996 ) analysed the inﬂuence of stimuli novelty . In the experiments they conducted , which in general found little evidence of ﬁxation , adopting a novel example as stimulus did not show any signiﬁcant impact with respect to ﬁxation in participants . However , they add that ﬁxation could be associated with the principles or mechanisms involved in the example design rather than just its external features . In contrast , Perttula and Sipil € a ( 2007 ) found a correlation between the novelty of the stimuli presented and a positive design outcome . They noted that common stimuli decreased the number of new solutions and increased the repetition of aspects from the examples provided . This happened even though participants were told to use the stimuli just as triggers and that they should aim at generating the largest variety of ideas . Dugosh and Paulus ( 2005 ) also found that when compared to novel examples , common examples tend to cause more ﬁxation . Considering these studies , the inspiration material should probably include both novel and common Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 9 examples but it is diﬃcult to tell exactly what inﬂuence the novelty or commonality of stimuli has on idea generation . 2 . 1 . 7 Timing of stimulation Stimuli can be presented to designers at diﬀerent moments during the design process , such as before they engage in the task , along with the design brief , when already engaged in idea generation , or perhaps when idea generation is ending . Sio et al . ( 2015 ) suggest that the moment when stimuli are provided to designers might also play an important role in idea generation , and that the earlier the examples are provided , the larger the positive impact on design so - lutions will be . However , Tseng , Moss , Cagan , and Kotovsky ( 2008 ) add that the nature of the impact is aﬀected by the proximity of the example to the problem . For instance , distantly related stimuli impact more positively the design process when it has already started while near ones have more eﬀect before any design activity takes place . Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006b ) also found that designers explore more categories when stimuli are presented in the middle of the process than when they are presented at the beginning . This idea is supported by the idea that new information is more eﬀective to de - signers when they eventually come to an impasse in problem solving ( Moss , Kotovsky , & Cagan , 2007 ) . However , Siangliulue , Chan , Gajos , and Dow ( 2015 ) add that reaching an impasse is not enough ; people should be aware that they are stuck in order to beneﬁt from external stimuli . They report that examples automatically shown to participants who had temporarily run out of ideas might lead to more ideas , but not necessarily better ones . Stimuli presented to participants on demand , however , were found to lead to more novel ideas . Thus , apart from considering properties of the stimuli , an equally important aspect to take into account when providing designers with stimuli is the timing for inspiration and what diﬀerence that could make to designers’ cognitive processes . 2 . 2 Design process In addition to manipulating properties of the stimuli , other aspects that inﬂu - ence the participants’ work in the experiments have also been investigated . These other variables are related to the design process in some way , including the characteristics of the participants ( i . e . level of experience , disciplinary background ) , the way in which the task is presented ( e . g . level of problem abstraction and instructions to prevent stimuli reproduction ) , and the context within which the design work is performed ( e . g . duration and group size ) . These variables are discussed in each of the subsections that follow , with each subsection summarised in a column of Table 2 . 2 . 2 . 1 Experience of the participants In design , experiments into inspiration and ﬁxation are most often conducted with university design students ( with varying levels of experience ) or 10 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 Table 2 Design process variables that have been manipulated in inspiration and fixation studies First author , year Experience Disciplinarybackground Problemabstraction Instructions for reproduction Time available ( up to ) Testing Groupsize Novicestudent Seniorstudent Novicedesigner Expertdesigner Mixed Unique Concrete Abstract None Cons - training 30 m 60 m 2 h Gap None Proto - type One Team Cardoso , 2011 X X X X X X X Cheng , 2014 X X X X X X X Chrysikou , 2005 ? ? X X X X X X X Dahl , 2002 X X X X X X X X Fu , 2013 X X X X X X X X Goldschmidt , 2006 X X X X X X X Gonc¸alves , 2012 X X X X X X X Jansson , 1991 X X X X X X X X Liikkanen , 2008 X X X X X X X Linsey , 2010 ? ? X X X X X X Lujun , 2011 X X X X X X X Moreno , 2014 X X X X X X X X Nijstad , 2002 ? ? ? ? X X X X X Perttula , 2006a X X X X X X X Perttula , 2007 X X X X X X X Purcell , 1996 X X X X X X X X X Sarkar , 2008 X X X X ? ? X X Siangliulue , 2015 ? ? X X X X X X Smith , 1993 ? ? ? ? X X X X X Toh , 2014 X X X X X X X Tseng , 2008 X X X X X X X Viswanathan , 2014 X X X X X X X X Yilmaz , 2010 X X X X X X X Youmans , 2011a ? ? X X X X X X Youmans , 2011b ? ? X X X X X X X I n s p i r a t i on a nd ﬁ xa t i on : a m e t hodo l o g i c a l r e v i e w 11 professional designers ( again with varying levels of experience ) . Wiley ( 1998 ) suggests that although experts might solve problems more eﬃciently than novices due to their structured knowledge , this knowledge can also limit their solution search to a known space in which the best solution may not reside . Accordingly , Kim and Ryu ( 2014 ) compared the design process of expert and novice designers and concluded that expert designers are more eﬀective at framing design problems as well as being more committed to their own previously developed design concepts , which means that they may exhibit more ﬁxation than novice designers . A similar relation was noted in a student context : it was found that graduating engineers are often less innovative than freshmen students ( Lai , Roan , Greenberg , & Yang , 2008 ) . These results , however , vary considerably in the presence of external stimuli . For instance , Linsey et al . ( 2010 ) report a study in which experienced academic designers produced a larger number of novel solutions after exposure to an example design when compared to novices in similar studies . According to Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 ) , experience might provide some immunity to ﬁxation derived from exposure to examples and help designers create potential problem spaces and explore them . However , it is noteworthy that experience can also limit an individual to conform too much to previous practical knowledge . As a result , it is not clear what level of experience allows designers to be most creative , but it is known that both experts and novices can make eﬀective use of external stimuli and visual analogies to improve their performance ( Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Disciplinary background of the participants As with the experience of individuals ( i . e . accumulated practical knowledge ) , their disciplinary background ( i . e . ﬁeld of practice or study ) also relates to inspiration and ﬁxation . Agogu (cid:1) e et al . , ( 2014 ) found that an individual’s back - ground might inﬂuence how deep or wide the exploration of solution spaces is . For instance , when compared to engineers , industrial designers were be more capable of generating solutions outside common and easily - accessible solution spaces , which suggests that industrial designers can be more resistant to conform to design ﬁxation . Engineers , on the other hand , provided more com - plex and detailed solutions with respect to the working mechanism underlying the idea . In other words , although industrial designers create a greater number and variety of solutions , engineers might be more concerned with how these solutions will actually solve the problem . These results reinforce the early studies into design ﬁxation performed by Purcell and Gero ( 1996 ) in which they found that when compared to mechanical engineers , industrial designers produced more designs , more types of design and more unique designs , whether they were exposed to external stimuli or not . This may reﬂect some - thing about design education that makes industrial designers continuously search for diﬀerence , perhaps even becoming ﬁxated on being creative ( Purcell & Gero , 1996 ) . As such , the education or training of individuals 12 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 ( which deﬁnes their background ) seems to impact directly on solutions they create ; therefore , some proﬁles may be more susceptible to ﬁxation eﬀects than others . 2 . 2 . 3 Problem abstraction In inspiration and ﬁxation experiments , problem statements or briefs vary in their length , level of detail and how explicit they are , and participants may interpret and respond to them diﬀerently on this basis . When generating alternative solutions , problem abstraction is required to draw analogies between dissimilar domains and to identify similarities between apparently diﬀerent structures . It is important to notice , however , that abstraction should not modify content , but make the problem independent of domain or context instead ( Zahner et al . , 2010 ) . When investigating these aspects , Zahner et al . ( 2010 ) found that abstract problems promote the divergence of ideas , whilst more concrete problems increase convergence . However , if a problem is framed in terms that are too abstract , then alternatives are less likely to ﬁt the problem requirements , and if it is too concrete the solutions become similar and converge within a domain . In other words , abstract deﬁnitions for problems can enhance the number of ideas , the number of domains represented by the ideas and the overall originality of solutions . Concrete deﬁnitions , on the other hand , are more likely to yield solutions that better ﬁt the problem constraints . Similarly , Liikkanen and Perttula ( 2008 ) revealed that deﬁning a context in the problem statement ( or brief ) has also been proven to inﬂuence the ﬁnal designs , especially with respect to the diversity of ideas . The context deﬁnes the problem space and is therefore necessary for retrieving memory related to the problem . Conversely , the absence of information about the context can activate a contextual defaulting strategy , therefore leading to self - similar solutions . Overall , it seems important to specify context and constraints when deﬁning a problem and designing for it , but at the same time some abstraction of the problem is beneﬁcial ; the most appropriate balance , however , is not clear . 2 . 2 . 4 Instructions for reproduction Instructions provided to participants can be more or less restrictive with respect to how participants may use and reproduce the inspiration sources . Chrysikou and Weisberg ( 2005 ) found that informing participants of the presence of negative features in example solutions was not enough to avoid ﬁxation ; participants had to be asked to avoid using the negative features in order to eliminate the ﬁxation eﬀect . They also reported an additional outcome of using instructions to prevent feature duplication , which is an apparent increase in the diﬃculty of the task . When using examples of design heuristics to help design students generate new concepts , Yilmaz , Seifert , and Gonzalez ( 2010 ) also reported instructing the students not to repeat the examples in their own designs . The researchers found no ﬁxation and reported Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 13 that the stimuli used were beneﬁcial to the students’ work . However , it is not clear whether the positive results can be attributed to the constraining instruction or not . In contrast , the results from Jansson and Smith ( 1991 ) revealed the occurrence of design ﬁxation even when students were instructed to avoid using features from the example provided . Perttula and Sipil € a ( 2007 ) arrived at similar conclusions , even though they clearly instructed participants not to reproduce the examples as such . Moreover , Smith et al . ( 1993 ) found that explicitly telling participants to diverge as much as possible from the examples ( and not only prohibiting participants from reproducing the examples ) did not decrease the participants’ conformity to example solutions . One possible explanation for this , as LeFevre and Dixon ( 1986 ) suggest , is that participants are naturally more likely to follow the ex - amples given than they are to follow the instructions . In summary , although it has been show to aﬀect inspiration , research has been equivocal on the ben - eﬁts of constraining instructions when providing stimuli to designers . 2 . 2 . 5 Time available When the experiments are conducted , the participants are only given a certain amount of time to explore the solution space and to represent their ideas . When analysing the diﬀerence between short and long periods of idea generation , Tsenn , Atilola , McAdams , and Linsey ( 2014 ) found that their participants generated more diverse solutions when allowed to work for longer time periods , and that the additional time increased the level of creativity of the solutions . However , even though participants continued generating solutions , the rate of idea generation decreased . This study also suggests two related ﬁndings . Firstly , whilst novelty and quality of the participants’ concepts do not seem to vary through the duration of the experiment , a longer procedure yields more varied solutions ( covering a wider range of solution categories ) and more non - repeated solutions . Secondly , time away from the problem ( or what Smith ( 1995 ) and Wallas ( 1926 ) would describe as incubation ) was shown to mitigate design ﬁxation because more varied and novel solutions were observed after participants had a long period away from the task ; the quality of the solutions remained similar however . Youmans ( 2011a ) also found that interrupting participants ( e . g . a sudden change of task ) could impact positively on the way they design under ﬁxation , especially if the disturbance happens in the very early stages of conceptual design . In contrast , Siangliulue et al . ( 2015 ) revealed that participants who were regularly interrupted to pay attention to examples were less productive , resulting in the generation of fewer ideas . Summing up , in order to deal with ﬁxation induced by external inspiration sources , it seems having enough time to generate ideas and spend some time away from the task may help . 14 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 2 . 2 . 6 Testing the ideas In most of the inspiration and ﬁxation experiments , participants do not get to test their ideas , but are only required to sketch and describe them . However , in less restrictive design contexts , prototyping and model building are common ways to test ideas and develop them further . Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2011 ) observed that working with physical models such as prototypes can reduce cognitive workload , visualizing solutions for complex problems , and identi - fying ﬂaws in concepts ; therefore leading to more feasible ideas . Similarly , Youmans ( 2011b ) observed that building models and testing the solution against its requirements ( i . e . validating an early - stage design ) increased the chances of producing solutions that are both more original and more useful . In addition , Youmans ( 2011b ) states that prototyping helps reducing ﬁxation and leads to superior designs , therefore improving innovative design thinking , while it could also be a quick and inexpensive design method . In the same direction , Kershaw , H € oltt € a - Otto , and Lee ( 2011 ) indicate that constant prototyping through the design process might mitigate ﬁxation , especially if individuals would otherwise receive no feedback on the concepts they develop . Jang and Schunn ( 2012 ) also report positive results of prototyping : they argue that using prototypes early during idea generation led participants to create more innovative designs , although using prototypes late was not correlated with the success of the experimental groups . Consistent with this last point , Vidal , Mulet , and G (cid:1) omez - Senent ( 2004 ) found no correlation between idea generation and physical models . In fact , there is even some evidence suggesting that being exposed to prototypes can inhibit the creation of between - domain or distant analogies , therefore constraining the creative process ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . Negative eﬀects of prototyping are also reported by Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2011 ) , when they describe how participants can ﬁxate on their own initial solutions due to a phenomenon called the sunk cost eﬀect ( Arkes & Blumer , 1985 ) , i . e . investing eﬀort and time in developing a physical model leads designers to become more attached to it . As has been noted , it is not clear how working with prototypes can be beneﬁcial e or harmful e for the creative process . 2 . 2 . 7 Group size Although some studies emphasise the beneﬁts of group work and supports the idea that groups will outperform individuals working alone ( Brodbeck & Greitemeyer , 2000 ; Shaw , 1932 ; Tindale & Larson , 1992 ) , other studies suggest that , in fact , it can inhibit creative thinking and yield worse results than if individuals had worked alone ( Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ; Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Taylor , Berry , & Block , 1958 ) , or even that no diﬀerence can be measured ( Youmans , 2011b ) . Indeed , some evidence indicates that the group is only as good as its best individual , with the ability of that individual predicting the overall success of the group ( Tindale & Larson , 1992 ) . When working in groups , mutual stimulation may lead to what is called the Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 15 ‘assembly bonus’ eﬀect , whilst interference caused by other members may lead to a ‘mutual production blocking eﬀect’ ( Nijstad et al . , 2002 ) . Therefore , being introduced to others’ ideas can have both positive and negative impacts when designers work in groups . Additionally , ideas that are oﬀered by others can become new search cues for the individuals . This can interrupt the idea generation process of an individual , but it can also reduce the time needed to produce new search cues and speed up the search for related knowledge in memory , therefore being beneﬁcial ( Nijstad et al . , 2002 ; Perttula & Sipil € a , 2007 ) . It is believed that group work can also help sharing the cognitive workload of the task among team members ( Youmans , 2011b ) . Thus , if we understand design as a knowledge - based activity , it is the case that when compared to homogeneous teams , heterogeneous teams generate a greater variety of ideas and are more eﬃcient in producing those ideas , as suggested by Liikkanen and Perttula ( 2008 ) . On the whole , however , it is diﬃcult to say whether the best results come from individuals working alone or from group work , or on what should the size of these groups be . 3 Diﬀerences between the studies As seen in Section 2 , the studies conducted to date have manipulated many diﬀerent variables and a great deal has been learnt about the possible eﬀects of external inspiration . The studies are generally conducted in a way that permits comparison between them , even if there is not always agreement between then studies’ results . However , a closer examination reveals that the studies diﬀer in a number of signiﬁcant ways . This leaves much room for interpretation when comparing the studies and makes it more diﬃcult to design future studies that are consistent with those that have already been conducted . These issues are outlined here , by considering variation in how the studies are conducted , variation in the assessment methods and metrics used , and variation in the phenomena of interest and how they can be explained . 3 . 1 Variation in how the studies are conducted and reported As with any kind of experimental research , inspiration and ﬁxation studies are potentially inﬂuenced by confounding variables that are overlooked , not controlled for or just not reported on . We focus here on those variables that might be particularly relevant to the design process and thus to the outcomes of such studies . In particular , we focus on variables that have not been systematically manipulated , that have varied between the experiments depending on how they were conducted , or that have not been controlled on some studies . Ignoring some of these variables , such as the complexity of the task , might not harm the internal validity of an experiment , but can prevent the comparison of results between experiments . For instance , two studies with same independent variable ( e . g . the disciplinary background of participants ) are likely to generate diﬀerent results when the task complexity 16 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 varies between experiments . Other variables that require attention and further investigation include aspects related to the participants’ background ( e . g . previous experience in solving the task , exposure to the example solution , knowledge of similar solutions ) , or related to experimental factors ( e . g . the level of complexity of the problem statement , whether participants must generate as many ideas as possible or just one ﬁnal idea ; and whether they must communicate their ideas only at the concept level or in more detail ) . Another point of diﬀerence between the studies that is central to the general method of how ﬁxation is investigated is how the example solutions are provided to the participants . Some studies explicitly report providing written instructions to participants saying that the example should be considered a solution for that problem ( Linsey et al . , 2010 ) , the example was provided to help them get started ( Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ) , that the examples are there to raise thoughts ( Liikkanen & Perttula , 2008 ) or that the examples should be used to awaken thoughts , but not just be reproduced ( Perttula & Sipil € a , 2007 ) . Other studies only report that the stimulus was provided to participants , without describing how it was explained to them ( e . g . Cardoso & Badke - Schaub , 2011 ; Fu et al . , 2013 ; Moreno et al . , 2014 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ; Viswanathan , Atilola , Esposito , & Linsey , 2014 ) . This matter is potentially critical , as irrespective of whether any instructions are written about how to use the stimuli or not , participants may wonder why they are being exposed to that extra material and change their idea generation process accordingly . For instance , participants may see the example as an extension of the instructions or even decide to incorporate that information to possibly please experimenters ( Page , 1981 ) . However , the impact of varying how these external stimuli are introduced to designers has not yet been studied systematically . Table 3 summarises some of the design process variables that vary between the studies without being manipulated or reported . Ideally , all these variables should be taken into account in designing an experiment and reporting on it , better allowing others to compare results between diﬀerent experiments or replicate previous ﬁndings . 3 . 2 Variation in assessment methods and metrics Whilst the earliest design ﬁxation experiments measured ﬁxation eﬀects by observing how participants reproduced features from an example ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ; Purcell & Gero , 1996 ) , later research has reported on the occurrence of ﬁxation based on the novelty and variety of participants’ ideas ( Viswanathan & Linsey , 2011 ) or on the participants’ resistance to change ( Kershaw et al . , 2011 ) . Even where researchers analyse the repetition of features from the example solutions they have provided to participants , this could involve repeating the overall structure of the solution , or some of its Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 17 Table 3 Design process variables that have not been systematically manipulated , controlled or reported in inspiration and fixation studies First author , year Previous task experience Existence of solutions Complexityofthetask Complexityoftheproblemstatement Final number of ideas Modality of the communication Complexity of the communication Yes No Known Unknown Complex Simple Complex Simple One or a few Many Text Sketch Prototyping Concept Detailed Cardoso , 2011 ? ? X X X X X X X Cheng , 2014 ? ? X X X X ? X X Chrysikou , 2005 ? ? X X X X X X X Dahl , 2002 X X X X X X X Fu , 2013 ? ? X X X X X X X Goldschmidt , 2006 ? ? X X X X X X Gonc¸alves , 2012 ? ? X X X X X X X Jansson , 1991 X X X X X X X X Liikkanen , 2008 ? ? X X X X X X X Linsey , 2010 X X X X X ? ? ? X Lujun , 2011 ? ? X X X X X X X Moreno , 2014 X X X X X X X X Nijstad , 2002 ? ? ? ? ? ? X X X X Perttula , 2006a ? ? X X X X X X Perttula , 2007 ? ? X X X X X X X Purcell , 1996 ? ? X X X X ? X X Sarkar , 2008 ? ? X X X X X X X Siangliulue , 2015 ? ? X X X X X X Smith , 1993 ? ? X X X X X X X Toh , 2014 ? ? X X X X X X Tseng , 2008 ? ? X X X X X X X Viswanathan , 2014 ? ? X X X X X X Yilmaz , 2010 ? ? X X X X X X X Youmans , 2011a ? ? X X X X X X X Youmans , 2011b ? ? X X X X X X X 18 D e s i g n S t ud i e s V o l 42 N o . C M on t h 201 6 components , functions , mechanisms or something else . However , whichever of these is being measured , it relates to the outputs of the design process and not the process itself . Most inspiration and ﬁxation studies take this approach , but there is also variation here , with some studies focussing on impacts on the process and some on the participant . In addition to the variation in what is being measured , there is variation in how the studies refer to what is measured . For instance , most of the studies that analyse ﬁxation quantitatively take into account the ﬁnal number of concepts that participants generate . This ‘number of solutions’ , however , is also reported as ‘ﬂuency’ , ‘productivity’ or ‘quantity’ ; and what is being counted is variously described as ‘solutions’ , ‘ideas’ , ‘concepts’ and ‘designs’ . Another common measure is the number of ideas that diﬀer from each other based on some system of classiﬁcation and this is usually deﬁned either as the ‘ﬂexibility’ , ‘variety’ or ‘breadth’ that the participants achieved . Similar observations can be made for the diversity of terms used for the qualitatively assessed measures , such as the quality , also reported as ‘usefulness’ and ‘functionality’ , and the viability of the candidates’ solutions , also reported as ‘feasibility’ or ‘practicality’ . Finally , many studies measure the ‘originality’ of the participants’ solutions , sometimes quantitatively ( i . e . the uniqueness of the ideas generated relative to the rest of the experimental cohort , also deﬁned as ‘novelty’ or ‘rarity’ ) and sometimes qualitatively ( i . e . based on the evalua - tors’ judgement ) , even if the assessment is then quantiﬁed . All of the measures discussed above , even those that might seem at ﬁrst to be objective ( such as number of ideas ) , require interpretation and assessment . These tasks are performed by evaluators whose characteristics can inﬂuence the assessments that are made . As such , most studies report the number of evaluators involved , and sometimes they provide a basic proﬁle of the evalu - ators , such as by describing them as PhD students or design practitioners . However , these studies seldom report on the process by which the evaluators were selected , blinded , briefed or otherwise assisted e important factors that might critically vary between the studies . The studies also typically provide very little information about the evaluators’ background , such as their area of expertise or their level of experience . In fact , some papers do not oﬀer any information at all about who performed the evaluation or how , again potentially compromising the interpretation of existing studies and the plan - ning of new ones . Table 4 summarises this information and more generally represents the variation that exists in how the inspiration and ﬁxation studies are analysed . 3 . 3 Variation in the explanation of the eﬀect As discussed in the introduction to this paper , there are many diﬀerent deﬁni - tions of ﬁxation , and as demonstrated above , there are many diﬀerent ways to Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 19 Table 4 Experimental variables , assessment methods and metrics used in inspiration and fixation studies Firstauthor , year Input focus ( independentvariable ) Output focus ( dependentvariable ) Output evaluationfocus Evaluation metrics Methodsandtools Evaluators Process Parti - cipant Example Process Parti - cipant Solution Quality Quantity # Proﬁle Cardoso , 2011 X X X X Repetition of attributes , Fluency , Flexibility , Originality , Ease of use , Manufacturing , Damage to product Solution analysis 2 Expert judges Cheng , 2014 X X X X X Number of initial ideas , Originality , Achieving the criteria Questionnaire , Solutionanalysis , Self - reporting scales 2 Professionaljudges Chrysikou , 2005 X X X X Number of solutions , Repeated solution , Repeated parts , Repeated domains , Repeated ﬂaws Solutionanalysis , Verbal protocol , Video recording 2 Author , Independentrater Dahl , 2002 X X X X X Number of different categories , Repetition of features , Analogical distance , Originality , Perceived customer value Questionnaire , Solutionanalysis , 25 2 Research assistants , 3 Senior product design professionals , 20 Potential customers Fu , 2013 X X X Quantity of ideas , Breadth of search , Novelty , Manufacturing ( costs , feasibility , people and time ) Questionnaire , Solution analysis 2 PhD students Goldschmidt , 2006 X X X X Originality , Practicality , ( Creativity ) , General quality Questionnaire , Solutionanalysis , Verbal protocol , Video recording 3 Senior graduate students in design or architecturewithprofessionalexperience 20 D e s i g n S t ud i e s V o l 42 N o . C M on t h 201 6 Table 4 ( continued ) Firstauthor , year Input focus ( independentvariable ) Output focus ( dependentvariable ) Output evaluationfocus Evaluation metrics Methodsandtools Evaluators Process Parti - cipant Example Process Parti - cipant Solution Quality Quantity # Proﬁle Gonc¸alves , 2012 X X X X Fluency , Flexibility , Originality Solution analysis 2 Independentexpertjudges Jansson , 1991 X X X X Number of solutions , Repetition of features , Flexibility , Originality Questionnaire , Solution analysis ? ? Liikkanen , 2008 X X X Categorical frequency Solution analysis ? ? Linsey , 2010 X X X X Number of solutions , Repetition of features , Number of solution types , Number of analogies drawn Questionnaire , Solutionanalysis , Self - reportingscales 2 Authors Lujun , 2011 X X X X Number of designs , Proportion of designs with features from example Solution analysis ? ? Moreno , 2014 X X X X Number of ideas , Number of repeated ideas Solutionanalysis , Survey , 2 Domainknowledgeexpertraters Nijstad , 2002 X X X X X X Productivity , Diversity , Within - category ﬂuency , Ratio of clustering , Recall , Response latency Solutionanalysis , Time tracking 2 Independentraters Perttula , 2006a X X X X X Fluency , Flexibility , Numberofunique categories , Categoricalfrequency , Explicit linkage , Cognitive stimulation Solutionanalysis , Verbal protocol , Video recording ? ? ( continued on next page ) I n s p i r a t i on a nd ﬁ xa t i on : a m e t hodo l o g i c a l r e v i e w 21 Table 4 ( continued ) Firstauthor , year Input focus ( independentvariable ) Output focus ( dependentvariable ) Output evaluationfocus Evaluation metrics Methodsandtools Evaluators Process Parti - cipant Example Process Parti - cipant Solution Quality Quantity # Proﬁle Perttula , 2007 X X X Number of new concepts , Genealogical linkage Solutionanalysis ? ? Purcell , 1996 X X X X Number of solutions , Repetition of features , Number of solution types , Number of unique designs Questionnaire , Solution analysis ? ? Sarkar , 2008 X X X X X Number of solutions , Number and type of search spaces , Flexibility Solution analysis ? ? Siangliulue , 2015 X X X X X X Number of nonredundant ideas , Novelty , Value Questionnaire , Solutionanalysis , Timestamps ? 2 Authors , AmazonMechanicalTurks Smith , 1993 X X X X Number of designs , Proportion of designs with features from example Solution analysis 1 Author Toh , 2014 X X X X X Novelty ( function and form ) , Quality , Number of methods , Functional focus Solutionanalysis , Design rating survey 2 Independentraters Tseng , 2008 X X X X Number of designs , Number of functional repeats , Number of different categories , Novelty Solutionanalysis , Timestamps 2 Authors Viswanathan , 2014 X X X X Replication of features Solution analysis 3 Primary rater , Independentraters 22 D e s i g n S t ud i e s V o l 42 N o . C M on t h 201 6 Table 4 ( continued ) Firstauthor , year Input focus ( independentvariable ) Output focus ( dependentvariable ) Output evaluationfocus Evaluation metrics Methodsandtools Evaluators Process Parti - cipant Example Process Parti - cipant Solution Quality Quantity # Proﬁle Yilmaz , 2010 X X X X X X Number of designs , Creativity , Practicability Solutionanalysis , Self - reporting scales 3 Undergraduatestudents Youmans , 2011a X X X X Repetition of features , Working memory capacity Solutionanalysis , Workingmemorycapacitymeasurement 2 Blind judges Youmans , 2011b X X X X Repetition of features , Functionality , Originality Solutionanalysis , Time tracking , Video recording 2 Undergraduateresearchers I n s p i r a t i on a nd ﬁ xa t i on : a m e t hodo l o g i c a l r e v i e w 23 measure what occurs in the experiments . There is even sometimes a diﬀerence between a study’s stated deﬁnition for what ﬁxation is and how it is subse - quently measured ( perhaps because these experiments measure a more observ - able aspect as a proxy for ﬁxation ) . This variation points to a general issue with the literature on inspiration and ﬁxation : it does not very precisely or consistently deﬁne what situations ‘in the world’ are of interest and thus how the design of the experiments relates to those situations . For example , the provision of example solutions in the experiments might be intended to represent real design contexts where examples are provided with the brief , or where they are already known to be viable , already known to be not viable , are searched for in a database for inspiration or are developed by the designers in their initial response to the brief ( Crilly , 2015 ) . Some of these situations imply that the potentially ﬁxating example is new information , whilst others that it resides in long - term memory ; some imply that it is explicitly related to the problem and some that it originates from a seemingly random source ; some imply that it results from the intellectual work of the designer and some that it is someone else’s idea . Unfortunately , these diﬀerent situations are rarely elaborated on or distinguished between in the literature , even though the experimental designs and the experimental ﬁndings might be interpreted very diﬀerently depending on the situation that is being considered . Although the experimental studies relate to design contexts in diﬀerent ways , they all somehow induce ﬁxation eﬀects by providing only one or a few example solutions to participants , which may not resemble real world situations . As such , it is conceivable that ﬁxation could be avoided by providing designers with access to multiple and more diverse examples ( Perttula & Liikkanen , 2006a ) or even with no examples at all ( Dahl & Moreau , 2002 ) . In addition , ﬁxation in design , as initially deﬁned , would seem very unlikely to happen during the development of novel products , since they lack pre - existing solutions and that would make the use of example designs barely possible ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) . Alternatively , if we explain ﬁxation as any inﬂuence of exemplars during generative tasks ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) , it is likely that some sort of ﬁxation will always occur during the design process because designers usually explore exemplars from their own experience when facing new problems . Again , indicating the design context and the real world situation being simulated is important for clarifying why , when and through what mechanisms ﬁxation might occur and thus how it might be studied . In addition to there being various situations that the inspiration and ﬁxation studies might relate to ( more or less easily ) , there are also diﬀerent possibilities for how the measured eﬀects might be explained . For instance , the path of least resistance ( Ward , 1994 ) describes the tendency to select the easiest way of solving tasks . Thus , individuals are likely to access known entities to generate new ideas , and an eﬀortless way to do so is to generate new concepts based on 24 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 existing ones ( Cheng et al . , 2014 ) . The sampling probability eﬀect ( Perttula & Liikkanen , 2006a ) suggests that most of the solutions generated initially are common and easily accessible ideas and would appear with or without the exposure to examples . As such , supposedly ﬁxated participants add fewer solutions to their idea - pool because the example solutions they are provided with ‘pre - exhaust’ the solution space they could have explored . Satisfaction of search ( Fleck , Samei , & Mitroﬀ , 2010 ) explains how people become less likely to ﬁnd further targets in a search , when they have already found one . Similarly , when engaged in problem solving , designers may reduce eﬀorts after they have found an initial solution that meets the problem requirements . Finally , as introduced previously ( see Section 2 . 2 . 5 ) , another mechanism proposed as a cause for design ﬁxation is the sunk cost eﬀect ( Viswanathan & Linsey , 2011 ) . However , this eﬀect is more easily explained as participants being reluctant to change an idea ( rather than being ﬁxated on a supplied example ) , and thus might also be connected to issues of psychological ownership , where people become attached to their ideas and seek to defend them ( Baer & Brown , 2012 ; Pierce , Kostova , & Dirks , 2003 ) . Finally , many studies use the repetition of negative features from an example solution or features from a ﬂawed example as an indication that ﬁxation has occurred . It is assumed that designers should be able to spot these ﬂaws and thus avoid copying the examples . However , once the examples are introduced as potential solutions ( often as an existing fully functional product ) , participants may ignore details of the example , not expecting ﬂaws and copying the designs as they are in order to avoid unnecessary rework ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) . Thus , design ﬁxation may result from the participants recognising that the requirements have already been met by an existing solution that they then adopt , rather than being a creative issue of not being able to arrive at a diﬀerent idea . Conversely , it is even possible that by presenting ﬂawed solutions as examples ( e . g . Chrysikou & Weisberg , 2005 ; Jansson & Smith , 1991 ; Linsey et al . , 2010 ; Perttula & Liikkanen , 2006a ; Viswanathan et al . , 2014 ; Youmans , 2011b ) , researchers may shift the participants’ attention towards those ﬂaws . This would eﬀectively change the design problem that they are addressing if they concentrate on solving these ﬂaws rather than addressing the speciﬁed problem . In considering these explanations , it seems that ﬁxation exists in a number of forms , by diﬀerent names , and due to many possible reasons . So maybe , as Purcell and Gero ( 1996 ) suggested , we should not be ﬁxated on the conception of what ﬁxation is , but we should also be aware that many diﬀerent eﬀects are being investigated . Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 25 4 Discussion and recommendations Over the last few decades , many studies have been conducted into inspiration and ﬁxation in design , generally using a similar experimental approach . The phenomena that are being studied potentially lie at the heart of creative design activities and a better understanding of them will allow the ﬁeld to improve design practice and education , better develop design support tools and structure further research eﬀorts . The work to date has investigated the impacts of many variables related to the nature of external stimuli ( see Section 2 . 1 ) as well as those related to the design process itself ( Section 2 . 2 ) . However , close attention to the studies reveals that there is variation in how the studies are conducted ( Section 3 . 1 ) , assessed ( Section 3 . 2 ) and also how they can be explained ( Section 3 . 3 ) . More generally , there is also variation in how the studies are reported and this can make it diﬃcult to understand the ways in which any given study is similar or diﬀerent to the others . There are aspects of the design process not currently being attended to in the literature ( Section 3 . 1 ) , and even though that may represent an opportunity for further research , it is also a matter of concern . As such , whether taken individually or collectively , the studies into inspiration and ﬁxation leave room for interpretation and debate . Having reviewed the methodological features of the studies in detail , it is possible to make some recommendations for actions that might help research in this area move forward . Some of these recommendations relate to increasing the formalisation of the basic method that is typically applied . For example , classiﬁcation schemes could be deﬁned for some key characteristics of partic - ipants and the design problems set so that these could be reported consistently . Standards could be established for aspects of timing and environment , the pre - sentation of stimuli and the outputs the participants are required to generate ( see Table 3 ) . Standards could also be deﬁned for the quantitative and quali - tative measures adopted to assess the resulting designs ( see Table 4 ) . However , standardising might still be diﬃcult as researchers continue to explore the methodological possibilities within the ﬁeld . In fact , the studies have been explicitly examining diﬀerent variables , whilst the methods have been varying implicitly or accidentally . Instead , researchers could now conduct focussed methodological research to better understand how the diﬀerent methods inﬂuence the results that are obtained . Beyond formalising the methods that are typically applied in studies of inspiration and ﬁxation , future work might also adopt a greater variety of approaches . On the one hand this might involve using a broader range of experimental methods , including eye tracking ( Smith , Youmans , Bellows , & Peterson , 2013 ) , brain scanning ( Alexiou , Zamenopoulos , Johnson , & Gilbert , 2009 ) , verbal protocols ( Chrysikou & Weisberg , 2005 ) and other tech - niques that could complement the output - based analysis of the current studies 26 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 ( for a discussion , see Howard , 2013 ) . On the other hand , future research might also seek to adopt non - experimental methods such as interviews , observations , diary techniques and other approaches to gain a better understanding of the real design situations that the experiments attempt to simulate ( Crilly , 2015 ; also see Busby & Lloyd , 1999a ; 1999b ; Eckert , Stacey , & Earl , 2005 ; Robertson & Radcliﬀe , 2009 ) . This more qualitative work could be used to understand the limitations of the current experimental design and develop new approaches to overcome those limitations . In addition to engaging with methodological developments , future work might also address diﬀerent research questions to those that have been focussed on to date . For example , studies could address the issue of whether the constrained behaviour measured in the experiments is really negative and undesirable , as most of the literature suggests it is . For instance , Sio et al . ( 2015 ) suggest that although ﬁxation may restrict the variety of solutions that designers generate , it may also enhanced the quality and novelty of those solutions . Viswanathan et al . ( 2014 ) also propose that some sort of ﬁxation could be beneﬁcial in later stages of the design process , when the costs of making changes increase . In addition , if expert designers are supposedly more prone to ﬁxation than novices ( Kim & Ryu , 2014 ) , that can possibly tell us that experts stick to their previous ideas because they know that these ideas lead to great designs , instead of investing time on uncertain and perhaps fruitless solutions . We can also ask if it is possible to be highly creative and highly ﬁxated simultaneously . According to some metrics found in the literature , the answer would be yes . That is , depending on the extent to which we limit the observation , some people could be highly creative inside one category of solutions while being highly ﬁxated by not exploring other categories . Research could thus explore what diﬀerent types of inspiration and ﬁxation exist , and learn how to diﬀerentiate them and their underpinning mechanisms . In summary , research into inspiration and ﬁxation has the potential to provide important insights into design creativity , but it would beneﬁt from a more systematic approach if it is to realise that potential . This would involve deﬁning general sets of research questions that the ﬁeld should address ( relating to what forms of ﬁxation occur in design practice , how can they be studied , and how to apply the ﬁndings ) ; recognising the diversity of possible research methods that might be employed ( whether experimental or observational ) ; and establishing a more uniform approach to the experimental work that is conducted ( once diﬀerent methods have been explored ) . Reviewing and scrutinizing the current literature was an important step to help design research in deciding how to study ﬁxation next , and to clarify what is known and unknown about interference in creativity for both design education and practice . Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 27 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Eloise Taysom and Maria Ana Correia for commenting on earlier drafts of this paper , James Moultrie for providing feed - back on the research done , and the two Design Studies reviewers for improving this work with their revisions . This work was supported by the CAPES Foundation , Ministry of Education of Brazil ( BEX 11468 / 13 - 0 ) and by the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council ( EP / K008196 / 1 ) . This is a literature review paper and therefore all data underlying this study is cited in the references . References Agogu (cid:1) e , M . , Poirel , N . , Pineau , A . , Houd (cid:1) e , O . , & Cassotti , M . ( 2014 ) . The impact of age and training on creativity : a design - theory approach to study ﬁxation eﬀects . Thinking Skills and Creativity , 11 , 33 e 41 . Alexiou , K . , Zamenopoulos , T . , Johnson , J . H . , & Gilbert , S . J . ( 2009 ) . Exploring the neurological basis of design cognition using brain imaging : some prelimi - nary results . Design Studies , 30 ( 6 ) , 623 e 647 . Anolli , L . , Antonietti , A . , Crisafulli , L . , & Cantoia , M . ( 2001 ) . Accessing source information in analogical problem - solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experi - mental Psychology Section A , 54 ( 1 ) , 237 e 261 . Arkes , H . R . , & Blumer , C . ( 1985 ) . The psychology of sunk cost . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 35 ( 1 ) , 124 e 140 . Baer , M . , & Brown , G . ( 2012 ) . Blind in one eye : how psychological ownership of ideas aﬀects the types of suggestions people adopt . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 118 ( 1 ) , 60 e 71 . Brodbeck , F . C . , & Greitemeyer , T . ( 2000 ) . Eﬀects of individual versus mixed in - dividual and group experience in rule induction on group member learning and group performance . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 36 ( 6 ) , 621 e 648 . Busby , J . A . , & Lloyd , P . A . ( 1999a ) . Inﬂuences on solution search processes in design organisations . Research in Engineering Design , 11 ( 3 ) , 158 e 171 . Busby , J . S . , & Lloyd , P . A . ( 1999b ) . Does experience enable or impede the design process ? Engineering Management Journal , 9 ( 3 ) , 137 e 142 . Cardoso , C . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2011 ) . The inﬂuence of diﬀerent pictorial rep - resentations during idea generation . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 45 ( 2 ) , 130 e 146 . Casakin , H . , & Goldschmidt , G . ( 1999 ) . Expertise and the use of visual analogy : implications for design education . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 153 e 175 . Chan , J . , Fu , K . , Schunn , C . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2011 ) . On the beneﬁts and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : ideation perfor - mance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . Journal of Mechanical Design , 133 ( 8 ) , 081004 . Cheng , P . , Mugge , R . , & Schoormans , J . P . L . ( 2014 ) . A new strategy to reduce design ﬁxation : presenting partial photographs to designers . Design Studies , 35 ( 4 ) , 374 e 391 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationship of analogical dis - tance to analogical function and preinventive structure : the case of engineering design . Memory & Cognition , 35 ( 1 ) , 29 e 38 . Christiaans , H . H . C . M . ( 2002 ) . Creativity as a design criterion . Creativity Research Journal , 14 ( 1 ) , 41 e 54 . 28 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 Chrysikou , E . G . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 2005 ) . Following the wrong footsteps : ﬁx - ation eﬀects of pictorial examples in a design problem - solving task . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 31 ( 5 ) , 1134 e 1148 . Crilly , N . ( 2015 ) . Fixation and creativity in concept development : the attitudes and practices of expert designers . Design Studies , 38 , 54 e 91 . Dahl , D . W . , & Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The inﬂuence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 47 e 60 . Dugosh , K . L . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive and social comparison processes in brainstorming . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 41 ( 3 ) , 313 e 320 . Dugosh , K . L . , Paulus , P . B . , Roland , E . J . , & Yang , H . C . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stim - ulation in brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 ( 5 ) , 722 e 735 . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( 5 ) , i . Eckert , C . M . , Stacey , M . , & Earl , C . ( 2005 ) . References to past designs . In J . S . Gero , & N . Bonnardel ( Eds . ) , Studying Designers ( pp . 3 e 21 ) . Sydney , Australia : University of Sydney . Finke , R . A . ( 1996 ) . Imagery , creativity , and emergent structure . Consciousness and Cognition , 5 ( 3 ) , 381 e 393 . Fleck , M . S . , Samei , E . , & Mitroﬀ , S . R . ( 2010 ) . Generalized ‘satisfaction of search’ : adverse inﬂuences on dual - target search accuracy . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Applied , 16 ( 1 ) , 60 e 71 . Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . , & Wood , K . ( 2013 ) . The meaning of “near” and “far” : the impact of structuring design databases and the eﬀect of distance of analogy on design output . Journal of Mechanical Design , 135 ( 2 ) , 021007 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 e 56 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 ( 3 ) , 306 e 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 e 38 . Goldschmidt , G . , & Sever , A . L . ( 2011 ) . Inspiring design ideas with texts . Design Studies , 32 ( 2 ) , 139 e 155 . Goldschmidt , G . , & Smolkov , M . ( 2006 ) . Variances in the impact of visual stimuli on design problem solving performance . Design Studies , 27 ( 5 ) , 549 e 569 . Gonc¸alves , M . , Cardoso , C . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2012 ) . Find your inspiration : exploring diﬀerent levels of abstraction in textual stimuli . In 2nd International Conference on Design Creativity ( pp . 1 e 8 ) . Glasgow , UK : The Design Society . Hanington , B . ( 2003 ) . Methods in the making : a perspective on the state of human research in design . Design Issues , 19 ( 4 ) , 9 e 18 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 ( 4 ) , 332 e 340 . Howard , T . , & in Editorial board of IJDCI . ( 2013 ) . Perspectives on design creativity and innovation research . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , 1 ( 1 ) , 1 e 42 . Jang , J . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2012 ) . Physical design tools support and hinder innovative engineering design . Journal of Mechanical Design , 134 ( 4 ) , 041001 . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design ﬁxation . Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 e 11 . Keane , M . ( 1987 ) . On retrieving analogues when solving problems . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 39 ( 1 ) , 29 e 41 . Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 29 Kershaw , T . C . , H € oltt € a - Otto , K . , & Lee , Y . S . ( 2011 ) . The eﬀect of prototyping and critical feedback on ﬁxation in engineering design . In 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 807 e 812 ) . Boston , USA : Cognitive Science Society . Kim , J . , & Ryu , H . ( 2014 ) . A design thinking rationality framework : framing and solving design problems in early concept generation . Human e Computer Interaction , 29 ( 5 e 6 ) , 516 e 553 . Lai , J . Y . , Roan , E . T . , Greenberg , H . C . , & Yang , M . C . ( 2008 ) . Prompt versus problem : helping students learn to frame problems and think creatively . In 2nd Design Creativity Workshop , Third International Conference on Design Computing and Cognition ( pp . 1 e 6 ) , Atlanta , USA . LeFevre , J . A . , & Dixon , P . ( 1986 ) . Do written instructions need examples ? Cogni - tion and Instruction , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 e 30 . Liikkanen , L . A . , & Perttula , M . K . ( 2008 ) . Inspiring design idea generation : in - sights from a memory - search perspective . Journal of Engineering Design , 21 ( 5 ) , 545 e 560 . Linsey , J . S . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . , & Schunn , C . ( 2010 ) . A study of design ﬁxation , its mitigation and perception in engineering design faculty . Journal of Mechanical Design , 132 ( 4 ) , 041003 . Linsey , J . S . , Wood , K . L . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2008 ) . Modality and representation in analogy . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Anal - ysis and Manufacturing , 22 ( 02 ) , 85 e 100 . Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanization in problem solving : the eﬀect of Einstellung . Psychological Monographs , 54 ( 6 ) , i . Lujun , Z . ( 2011 ) . Design ﬁxation and solution quality under exposure to example solution . In 2nd International Conference on Computing , Control and Industrial Engineering ( pp . 129 e 132 ) . Wuhan , China : IEEE . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans . II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 ( 2 ) , 181 e 194 . Moreno , D . P . , Hern (cid:1) andez , A . A . , Yang , M . C . , Otto , K . N . , H € oltt € a - Otto , K . , Linsey , J . S . , & Linden , A . ( 2014 ) . Fundamental studies in design - by - analogy : a focus on domain - knowledge experts and applications to transactional design problems . Design Studies , 35 ( 3 ) , 232 e 272 . Moss , J . , Kotovsky , K . , & Cagan , J . ( 2007 ) . The inﬂuence of open goals on the acquisition of problem - relevant information . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 33 ( 5 ) , 876 e 891 . Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : a meta - analytic integration . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 e 23 . Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2006 ) . How the group aﬀects the mind : a cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 10 ( 3 ) , 186 e 213 . Nijstad , B . A . , Stroebe , W . , & Lodewijkx , H . F . ( 2002 ) . Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups : exposure eﬀects in an idea generation task . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 ( 6 ) , 535 e 544 . Page , M . M . ( 1981 ) . Demand compliance in laboratory experiments . In J . T Tedeschi ( Ed . ) , Impression management theory and social psychological research ( pp . 57 e 82 ) . New York , USA : Academic Press . Perttula , M . K . , & Liikkanen , L . A . ( 2006a ) . Exposure eﬀects in design idea generation : unconscious conformity or a product of sampling probability . In Nord Design ( pp . 42 e 55 ) . Reykjavik , Iceland : University of Iceland . 30 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016 Perttula , M . K . , & Liikkanen , L . A . ( 2006b ) . Structural tendencies and exposure eﬀects in design idea generation . In ASME 2006 International Design Engineer - ing Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference ( pp . 199 e 210 ) , Philadelphia , USA . Perttula , M . , & Sipil € a , P . ( 2007 ) . The idea exposure paradigm in design idea gen - eration . Journal of Engineering Design , 18 ( 1 ) , 93 e 102 . Pierce , J . L . , Kostova , T . , & Dirks , K . T . ( 2003 ) . The state of psychological ownership : integrating and extending a century of research . Review of General Psychology , 7 ( 1 ) , 84 e 107 . Purcell , A . T . , & Gero , J . S . ( 1996 ) . Design and other types of ﬁxation . Design Studies , 17 ( 4 ) , 363 e 383 . Robertson , B . F . , & Radcliﬀe , D . F . ( 2009 ) . Impact of CAD tools on creative problem solving in engineering design . Computer - Aided Design , 41 ( 3 ) , 136 e 146 . Sarkar , P . , & Chakrabarti , A . ( 2008 ) . The eﬀect of representation of triggers on design outcomes . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 22 ( 02 ) , 101 e 116 . Sarkar , P . , & Chakrabarti , A . ( 2011 ) . Assessing design creativity . Design Studies , 32 ( 4 ) , 348 e 383 . Shaw , M . E . ( 1932 ) . A comparison of individuals and small groups in the rational solution of complex problems . The American Journal of Psychology , 44 ( 3 ) , 491 e 504 . Siangliulue , P . , Chan , J . , Gajos , K . Z . , & Dow , S . P . ( 2015 ) . Providing timely examples improves the quantity and quality of generated ideas . In ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( pp . 83 e 92 ) . New York , USA : ACM . Sio , U . N . , Kotovsky , K . , & Cagan , J . ( 2015 ) . Fixation or inspiration ? A meta - analytic review of the role of examples on design processes . Design Studies , 39 , 70 e 99 . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Getting into and out of mental ruts : a theory of ﬁxation , incubation , and insight . In The Nature of Insight . Cambridge , MA , USA : The MIT Press . Smith , S . M . , & Blankenship , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Incubation and the persistence of ﬁxation in problem solving . The American Journal of Psychology , 104 ( 1 ) , 61 e 87 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Schumacher , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Constraining eﬀects of examples in a creative generation task . Memory & Cognition , 21 ( 6 ) , 837 e 845 . Smith , M . B . , Youmans , R . , Bellows , B . , & Peterson , M . ( 2013 ) . Shifting the focus : an objective look at design ﬁxation . In A . Marcus ( Ed . ) , Design , User Experience , and Usability . Design Philosophy , Methods , and Tools ( pp . 144 e 151 ) . Las Vegas , USA : Springer Berlin Heidelberg . Taylor , D . W . , Berry , P . C . , & Block , C . H . ( 1958 ) . Does group participation when using brainstorming facilitate or inhibit creative thinking ? Administrative Science Quarterly , 3 ( 1 ) , 23 e 47 . Tindale , R . S . , & Larson , J . R . ( 1992 ) . Assembly bonus eﬀect or typical group performance ? A comment on Michaelsen , Watson , and Black ( 1989 ) . Journal of Applied Psychology , 77 ( 1 ) , 102 e 105 . Toh , C . A . , & Miller , S . R . ( 2014 ) . The impact of example modality and physical interactions on design creativity . Journal of Mechanical Design , 136 ( 9 ) , 091004 . Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2008 ) . The role of timing and analogical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies , 29 ( 3 ) , 203 e 221 . Inspiration and ﬁxation : a methodological review 31 Tsenn , J . , Atilola , O . , McAdams , D . A . , & Linsey , J . S . ( 2014 ) . The eﬀects of time and incubation on design concept generation . Design Studies , 35 ( 5 ) , 500 e 526 . Vidal , R . , Mulet , E . , & G (cid:1) omez - Senent , E . ( 2004 ) . Eﬀectiveness of the means of expression in creative problem - solving in design groups . Journal of Engineering Design , 15 ( 3 ) , 285 e 298 . Viswanathan , V . , Atilola , O . , Esposito , N . , & Linsey , J . ( 2014 ) . A study on the role of physical models in the mitigation of design ﬁxation . Journal of Engi - neering Design , 25 ( 1 e 3 ) , 25 e 43 . Viswanathan , V . , & Linsey , J . ( 2011 ) . Design ﬁxation in physical modeling : an investigation on the role of sunk cost . In ASME 2011 International Design En - gineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference ( pp . 119 e 130 ) , Washington , USA . Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The Art of Thought . New York , USA : Harcourt . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured Imagination : the role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 e 40 . Wiley , J . ( 1998 ) . Expertise as mental set : the eﬀects of domain knowledge in cre - ative problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 26 ( 4 ) , 716 e 730 . Wilson , J . O . , Rosen , D . , Nelson , B . A . , & Yen , J . ( 2010 ) . The eﬀects of biological examples in idea generation . Design Studies , 31 ( 2 ) , 169 e 186 . Yilmaz , S . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gonzalez , R . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive heuristics in design : Instructional strategies to increase creativity in idea generation . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 24 ( 03 ) , 335 e 355 . Youmans , R . J . ( 2011a ) . Design ﬁxation in the wild : design environments and their inﬂuence on ﬁxation . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 45 ( 2 ) , 101 e 107 . Youmans , R . J . ( 2011b ) . The eﬀects of physical prototyping and group work on the reduction of design ﬁxation . Design Studies , 32 ( 2 ) , 115 e 138 . Youmans , R . J . , & Arciszewski , T . ( 2014 ) . Design ﬁxation : classiﬁcations and modern methods of prevention . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 28 ( 02 ) , 129 e 137 . Zahner , D . , Nickerson , J . V . , Tversky , B . , Corter , J . E . , & Ma , J . ( 2010 ) . A ﬁx for ﬁxation ? Rerepresenting and abstracting as creative processes in the design of information systems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 24 ( 02 ) , 231 e 244 . 32 Design Studies Vol 42 No . C Month 2016