REVIEW PIN - Dependent Auxin Transport : Action , Regulation , and Evolution Maciek Adamowski and Ji (cid:1) rí Friml 1 Institute of Science and Technology Austria , 3400 Klosterneuburg , Austria Auxin participates in a multitude of developmental processes , as well as responses to environmental cues . Compared with other plant hormones , auxin exhibits a unique property , as it undergoes directional , cell - to - cell transport facilitated by plasma membrane - localized transport proteins . Among them , a prominent role has been ascribed to the PIN family of auxin ef ﬂ ux facilitators . PIN proteins direct polar auxin transport on account of their asymmetric subcellular localizations . In this review , we provide an overview of the multiple developmental roles of PIN proteins , including the atypical endoplasmic reticulum - localized members of the family , and look at the family from an evolutionary perspective . Next , we cover the cell biological and molecular aspects of PIN function , in particular the establishment of their polar subcellular localization . Hormonal and environmental inputs into the regulation of PIN action are summarized as well . POLAR AUXIN TRANSPORT Early experiments on plant tropisms suggested that a mobile signal exists in the plant , which has the ability to relay information about an environmental cue from the site of its perception to the tissues that react by altering their growth rates . Not only does this signal move , but it must be transported through plant tissues in a highly controlled manner , for example , to create concentration gradients between the shaded and illuminated sides of a phototropically responding coleoptile ( Went , 1974 ) . This signal is the plant hormone auxin , and further research , aided by identi ﬁ cation of transport in - hibitors , strengthened the notion of the physiological importance of auxin relocation in the plant . Auxin is distributed in the plant body by two distinct , but interconnected , transport systems : ﬁ rst , a fast , nondirectional stream in the phloem along with photosynthetic as - similates , and second , slow and directional cell - to - cell polar auxin transport ( PAT ) . While phloem transport provides a general way to deliver auxin from the sites of its synthesis ( mostly in young leaves ) to recipient organs , PAT distributes auxin in a precise manner that is critically important for the formation of local auxin maxima , mainly in developing tissues . At the level of single cells , PAT is explained by the chemios - motic hypothesis ( reviewed in Goldsmith , 1977 ) . This model is based on the chemical nature of the principal auxin form , indole - 3 - acetic acid ( IAA ) . In the slightly acidic pH of the apoplast , a fraction of IAA exists in a protonated state ( IAAH ) , which allows it to pass into the plasma membrane and enter the cell freely by diffusion . While in the cytosol , at a higher pH of around 7 , virtually all auxin molecules are dissociated into the ionic form and thus cannot exit the cell passively . For auxin transport out of the cell to occur , the existence of plasma membrane - localized auxin ef ﬂ ux carriers was postulated , and the strict directionality of PAT required these transporters to be localized only on one side of the cell ; thus , their polar localization being decisive for the direction of auxin movement . DISCOVERY OF PINs : THE POLARIZED AUXIN EFFLUX COMPONENTS PREDICTED BY CHEMIOSMOTIC HYPOTHESIS The founding member of PIN gene family , PIN1 , was identi ﬁ ed following isolation of the pin - formed1 ( pin1 ) mutant in Arabi - dopsis thaliana , which is characterized by a stem nearly devoid of organs such as leaves or ﬂ owers ( Okada et al . , 1991 ) . The absence of organs on the stems of pin1 mutants traces back to the shoot apical meristem , where primordia fail to form . The morphological phenotype of pin1 could be phenocopied by a treatment with PAT inhibitors , and pin1 mutants showed re - duced PAT . Molecular cloning of the PIN1 gene revealed that PIN1 encodes a transmembrane protein with similarity to bacterial and eukaryotic carrier proteins ( Gälweiler et al . , 1998 ) . The protein was found to be localized on the basal side of cells in the vascular tissue of the stem , just as one would predict for the auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier postulated by the chemiosmotic hypothesis . Around the same time , a mutant with agravitropic root was isolated in - dependently by four labs ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Luschnig et al . , 1998 ; Müller at al . , 1998 ; Utsuno et al . , 1998 ) and the underlying gene turned out to encode a protein highly homologous to PIN1 , with the same predicted membrane topology , thus named PIN2 . Root gravitropism has been long associated with PAT . The agravitropic pin2 phenotype along with the polarized localization of PIN2 in the root ( Müller at al . , 1998 ) identi ﬁ ed PIN2 as the PAT component of root gravitropic response . The auxin ef ﬂ ux capacity of PIN proteins has since been shown in a number of transport assays in different systems ( Petrásek et al . , 2006 ; Yang and Murphy , 2009 ; Barbez et al . , 2013 ; Zourelidou et al . , 2014 ) . An important question con - cerned the relation between PIN polarity and directionality of auxin transport . When PIN1 is expressed under the control of the PIN2 1 Address correspondence to jiri . friml @ ist . ac . at . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 114 . 134874 The Plant Cell , Vol . 27 : 20 – 32 , January 2015 , www . plantcell . org ã 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . promoter in the agravitropic pin2 mutant , it is , in contrast to PIN2 , localized predominantly basally ( toward root tip ) in epidermis cells . Therefore , the auxin transport capacity in basipetal ( shootward ) direction , necessary for correct gravitropism , is not achieved . However , a mutant version of PIN1 , containing a green ﬂ uorescent protein ( GFP ) insertion that presumably interferes with a polarity - determining signal , localizes more apically ( shootward ) and was able to rescue the agravitropism of pin2 by mediating the auxin ﬂ ux away from the root tip , similarly to PIN2 function in the wild type . Thus , by switching the polarity of ectopically expressed PIN1 in otherwise identical conditions , and observing resultant auxin redistribution and tropic response , the causal link between PIN polar localization and auxin ﬂ ow direction was proven ( Wi (cid:3) sniewska et al . , 2006 ) . DEVELOPMENTAL ROLES OF PIN - DRIVEN AUXIN TRANSPORT The phenotypes of mutants in the ﬁ rst two PIN genes indicated that PIN - driven PAT is crucial for processes as diverse as aboveground organogenesis and the root gravitropic response . Arabidopsis contains a total of eight PIN sequences , and isolation of other pin mutants extended the repertoire of processes mediated by this auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier family . Auxin transport mediated by PINs is necessary from the very beginning of multicellular plant body de - velopment , during the laying down of the main apical - basal bod y axis in early embryogenesis ( Friml et al . , 2003 ) . Embryos express four PIN genes , namely , PIN1 , 3 , 4 , and 7 , and developmental de - fects in early embryogenesis can be found in single pin4 ( Friml et al . , 2002a ) and pin7 mutants ( Friml et al . , 2003 ) , with increasingly severe aberrations in multiple mutant combinations ( Friml et al . , 2003 ; Blilou et al . , 2005 ; Vieten et al . , 2005 ) . Preferential accumulation of auxin is ﬁ rst seen in the apical cell originating after zygote division , and auxin remains present in the apical part of the embryo until a switch occurs around the 32 - cell stage , following which auxin maximum is instead detected in the basal parts of the embryo , as well as the uppermost suspensor cell ( Friml et al . , 2003 ; Figure 1C ) . Polar localizations of PINs correspond well with these auxin ﬂ uxes , as initially PIN7 is expressed in basal domains of the embryo and polarized toward apical cells , while later both PIN7 in the suspensor and PIN1 in provascular cells of the embryo proper exhibit basal polarity ( Friml et al . , 2003 ; Figure 1D ) . Recent modeling studies combined with experimental approaches revealed that the PIN po - larity switches during embryogenesis occur as a result of feedback regulation by auxin sources . In this scenario , local auxin production , ﬁ rst in the suspensor and presumably in the maternal tissues , and later at the apical end of the embryo , polarize auxin ﬂ uxes to de ﬁ ne the apico - basal embryonic axis ( Robert et al . , 2013 ; Wabnik et al . , 2013 ) . As embryo development progresses , additional peaks of auxin response appear at the sites of cotyledon formation . Accordingly , PIN1 protein can be detected in the epidermal layer with polarities facing toward these auxin maxima , while a canal expressing basally localized PIN1 forms in the inner embryo body , driving auxin away from the primordium and de ﬁ ning future vascular strands ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) . Indeed , cotyledon development de - fects , such as single , triple , fused , or improperly shaped cotyledons are observed in pin mutants ( Benková et al . , 2003 ; Friml et al . , 2003 ) . When seeds germinate underground , or in vitro in darkness , the elongated hypocotyl forms at its apical end a curved structure called the apical hook , designed by nature to protect the all - important shoot apical meristem from physical damage in the soil . During the development of this structure , an auxin response gradient is formed with a maximum in the inner side of the hook ( Friml et al . , 2002b ; Vandenbussche et al . , 2010 ; (cid:1) Zádníková et al . , 2010 ) . The importance of PAT for generating this local auxin maximum and for the resulting differential cell elongation is evi - dent by a complete loss of apical hook formation following treatment with PAT inhibitors ( (cid:1) Zádníková et al . , 2010 ) . Time - lapse imaging revealed disrupted dynamics of apical hook development in pin1 , pin3 , pin4 , and pin7 , as well as certain double mutant combinations . Interestingly , PIN3 and PIN4 are preferentially ex - pressed in the outer side of the apical hook , and the increased drainage of auxin from this region may result in its predominant accumulation on the opposite side ( (cid:1) Zádníková et al . , 2010 ) . From the seedling stage on , PINs function in maintaining the activity of the root apical meristem . The local auxin maximum in the root tip has been recognized as the pattern - and organ po - larity - organizing signal ( Sabatini et al . , 1999 ) established by di - rectional auxin transport driven by PINs ( Friml et al . , 2002a ; Blilou et al . , 2005 ) . Joint action of PIN1 , PIN2 , PIN3 , PIN4 , and PIN7 establishes a local “ re ﬂ ux loop ” of auxin ( Blilou et al . , 2005 ) . Studies on PIN function in the root apical meristem revealed that PIN proteins exhibit partial functional redundancy in this developmental context , aided by ectopic expression of some PIN genes to complement lack of others in pin mutants ( Blilou et al . , 2005 ; Vieten et al . , 2005 ) . The elaboration of plant body architecture at later stages of development involves auxin - and PIN - dependent postembryonic formation of new organs . The root system is extended into a branched network by the process of lateral root development . New roots arise from the pericycle layer of the primary root , at sites of elevated auxin response ( Benková et al . , 2003 ; Dubrovsky et al . , 2008 ) . The progression into a newly emerged organ involves dy - namic changes in PIN - driven auxin distribution , leading to gradual concentration of auxin at the apical end of the growing lateral organ ( Figures 1E and 1F ) . In pin mutants , lateral roots are generated at lower frequency , progress more slowly through development , or cannot be formed at all , instead resulting in a disorganized array of cells with diffuse auxin distribution ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) . While the development of underground tissues depends on the collaborative action of multiple PINs , the phenotypes of pin1 clearly imply a less redundant role of PIN1 in aerial organogene - sis . As stated above , pin1 is characterized by the presence of nearly naked stems , which only rarely form defective cauline leaves or ﬂ owers ( Okada et al . , 1991 ) . In the shoot apical meri - stem , where these organs originate , PIN1 is expressed in the outermost tissue layer , with polarities converging at an auxin maximum in the primordium tip ( Benková et al . , 2003 ; Reinhardt et al . , 2003 ; Heisler et al . , 2005 ; Figures 1A and 1B ) . Files of cells with basally localized PIN1 drain auxin from this maximum , into inner parts of the tissue . Later during development of the ﬂ ower , local auxin response maxima mark the apical end of each de - veloping ﬂ oral organ . When ovules develop inside the gynoecium , their tips also show auxin accumulation , and an auxin peak is seen at the tip of each developing integument ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) . PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 21 The examples of auxin - mediated formation of organs , such as cotyledons , lateral roots , leaves , or ﬂ owers , point at a common mode of auxin action ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) , in which PIN proteins , by their coordinated polarized localizations , direct auxin transport such that auxin accumulates locally and de ﬁ nes sites of organ - ogenesis . It is interesting to notice that in each case , auxin is transported toward the tip of the root through the central part of the tissue , a ﬂ ux that in root - derived organs supplies the local maximum with auxin , while in apical organs drains it ; thus , com - plementary ﬂ uxes through the outer tissue layers also have op - posite directions in apical and basal organs . These two patterns of auxin ﬂ ow in organogenesis have been termed “ fountain ” and “ reverse fountain ” ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) . As already hinted in the previous paragraphs , the vascular tis - sue , which serves as a connecting tract for transport of photo - synthetic assimilates , water , and minerals between the various plant organs , also forms in an auxin - dependent manner , and PIN1 appears to have a principal role in this process — at least when aboveground tissues are considered . pin1 mutant plants show vascular abnormalities in stems and leaves ( Gälweiler et al . , 1998 ; Mattsson et al . , 1999 ) , which can be mimicked by chemical in - hibition of PAT with 1 - N - naphthylphthalamic acid ( NPA ; Mattsson et al . , 1999 ) . Accordingly , the pattern of vascular development in leaves is preceded by expression of PIN1 and an elevated auxin response ( Scarpella et al . , 2006 ) . During leaf vasculature formation , the “ reverse fountain ” auxin ﬂ ow pattern can be observed , as PIN1 polarities converge in epidermis and form a stream reaching inside the leaf . PIN1 also controls the establishment of leaf shape , in particular the outgrowth of serrations at the leaf margin ( Hay et al . , 2006 ; Bilsborough et al . , 2011 ) . The epidermal auxin maxima that correspond to future veins in subepidermal tissues also mark sites for serration development . Consistently , pin1 mutants as well as NPA - treated plants exhibit smooth leaf margins ( Hay et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast to the developmental processes outlined above , the opening of Arabidopsis fruit appears to depend on a con - ceptually novel local auxin minimum , rather than formation of an Figure 1 . Examples of Auxin - Mediated Developmental Processes . Auxin response maxima ( visualized by transcriptional auxin response reporters ; green in [ A ] and [ C ] ; blue in [ E ] ) are established by the action of polarly localized PIN proteins ( green in [ B ] and [ F ] ; red in [ D ] ) during the development of shoot apical meristem - derived primordia ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) , embryo ( [ C ] and [ D ] ) , and lateral root ( [ E ] and [ F ] ) . s , upper suspensor cell ; hy , hypophysis I , IV , VI , and VII ; e , developmental stages of lateral roots . Reproduced with modi ﬁ cations from Benková et al . ( 2003 ) ( [ A ] , [ B ] , [ E ] , and [ F ] ) and Friml et al . ( 2003 ) ( [ C ] and [ D ] ) . ( A ) In the shoot apical meristem , auxin accumulates at the position of incipient primordia and in primordium tips ( indicated by arrowheads in [ A ] and [ B ] ) . ( B ) In epidermis , PIN1 is polarized toward these auxin maxima , while in the inner tissues , basally localized PIN1 presumably drives auxin away from the primordium ( inset ) . ( C ) During embryogenesis , auxin response is ﬁ rst observed in apical parts of the embryo ( left ; eight - cell stage ) and later in the basal parts ( right ; globular stage ) . ( D ) PIN7 localizes apically in the basal cell of a two - cell embryo ( left ; magni ﬁ ed in inset ) and PIN1 basally in provascular initials at 16 / 32 - cell stage ( right ; indicated by arrowhead ) . ( E ) Auxin concentrates at the apical end of a developing lateral root ( arrowheads indicate cell division planes ) . ( F ) PIN1 gradually establishes polarized localizations ( indicated by arrowheads ) in the inner tissues of the developing lateral root . 22 The Plant Cell auxin maximum ( Sorefan et al . , 2009 ) . Arabidopsis silique opens along thin margins between the replum and the two valves in a process dependent on the transcription factor INDEHISCENT ( IND ) expressed speci ﬁ cally at the valve margin . The proposed model suggests that fruit opening requires a localized auxin depletion resulting from IND - and phosphorylation - dependent modulation of PIN3 polarity and redirection of PAT . AUXIN TRANSPORT ACROSS THE ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM MEMBRANE The canonical , plasma membrane - localized PINs , which consist of two transmembrane regions separated by a long hydrophilic loop , are represented in Arabidopsis by ﬁ ve members : PIN1 - 4 and PIN7 . By contrast , PIN5 , PIN6 , and PIN8 are characterized by a reduction in the middle hydrophilic loop , partially in PIN6 and more pronounced in PIN5 and PIN8 . Surprisingly , localization studies revealed that PIN5 , PIN6 , and PIN8 predominantly localize to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ; Mravec et al . , 2009 ; Dal Bosco et al . , 2012 ; Ding et al . , 2012 ; Bender et al . , 2013 ; Sawchuk et al . , 2013 ) , although instances of plasma membrane localization of PIN5 and PIN8 have been reported as well ( Ganguly et al . , 2014 ) . Auxin transport and auxin content measurements indicate that PIN5 likely mediates auxin transport into the ER lumen ( Mravec et al . , 2009 ) , while PIN8 appears to counteract this activity , which is further supported by antagonistic genetic interactions observed between mutants and overexpressors of these two transporters ( Ding et al . , 2012 ; Sawchuk et al . , 2013 ) . The proposed role of PINs at the ER membrane is the regulation of auxin homeostasis by subcellular auxin compartmentalization , as auxin inserted into ER lumen is likely unavailable for participation in PAT and nuclear signaling and becomes a potential substrate for inactivation by ER - localized auxin conjugating enzymes ( Mravec et al . , 2009 ) . PIN6 - and PIN8 - mediated translocation of auxin from the ER lumen into the nucleus has also been hypothesized ( Sawchuk et al . , 2013 ) . ER - localized PINs play both distinct and overlapping functions in plant development . PIN8 , which is highly expressed in the male gametophyte , has an important role in pollen development and functionality ( Dal Bosco et al . , 2012 ; Ding et al . , 2012 ) , while PIN6 has been ascribed a function in the production of nectar and proper development of short stamens ( Bender et al . , 2013 ) as well as root growth and lateral root development ( Cazzonelli et al . , 2013 ) . PIN5 appears to be necessary for ﬁ ne - tuning of auxin function , as a pin5 mutant revealed only minor developmental phenotypes ( Mravec et al . , 2009 ) . Moreover , all three ER - localized PINs are necessary in leaf vascular patterning ( Sawchuk et al . , 2013 ) where their intracellular auxin transport activity interacts with the intercellular PAT driven by PIN1 . Recently , a novel family of putative auxin transporters , desig - nated PIN - likes ( PILS ) , has been discovered , based on in silico search for proteins with predicted topology similar to that of the PINs ( Barbez et al . , 2012 ) . Reduction or upregulation of PILS ac - tivity leads to alterations in auxin - mediated developmental pro - cesses , such as root and hypocotyl growth and lateral root formation . Analysis of transcriptional auxin responses suggested that PILS action leads to decreased auxin signaling , while auxin accumulation assays showed their ability to increase intracellular auxin retention , with a shift toward conjugated forms of the molecule . This mode of action is reminiscent of ER - localized PIN5 ; indeed , PILS transporters were found to localize to ER in all sys - tems analyzed . Thus , PILS emerged as a novel family of cellular auxin homeostasis regulators . EVOLUTION OF PIN PROTEINS In the ﬂ owering plant species A . thaliana , PIN proteins have be - come highly specialized , as evidenced by their differential expres - sion patterns , subcellular localizations , and developmental roles . An interesting question , then , arises about the evolutionary origin of this diversity in PIN function and the roles of PIN - mediated auxin transport in taxonomic groups ancestral to the ﬂ owering plants . Recently , experimental insights into the developmental functions of PIN transporters in the moss model species Physcomitrella patens have been reported . The P . patens genome encodes four PIN se - quences , denoted Pp - PINA - PIND , of which Pp - PINA - PINC repre - sent long , PIN1 - type transporters , while Pp - PIND encodes a short , PIN5 - type protein . Accordingly , Pp - PINA shows polar , plasma membrane localization at the apical ends of moss ﬁ laments and in leaves , while Pp - PIND does not colocalize with plasma membrane markers and has localization pattern reminiscent of ER ( Bennett et al . , 2014 ; Viaene et al . , 2014 ) . The auxin transport activity of Pp - PINs was veri ﬁ ed by various means , including measurements of IAA export into the media from P . patens tissues . The ﬁ rst stage of gametophyte development in moss is a struc - ture consisting of one - cell - wide ﬁ laments called protonemata , which grow by apical cell divisions , gradually changing their character from chlorophyll - rich chloronema to chlorophyll - poor caulonema . This developmental switch in cell identity seems to be regulated by auxin ( Prigge et al . , 2010 ; Jang and Dolan , 2011 ) . Presumably , Pp - PINs mediate auxin transport from the base of protonema ﬁ laments to their tips , in ﬂ uencing auxin content in each cell and thus their developmental fates ( Viaene et al . , 2014 ) . During later development , mosses generate gametophores with leaves consisting of two - dimensional sheets of cells . Auxin transport inhibition , external auxin application , and long - type pin knockouts suggest that PIN - driven auxin transport is required for multiple aspects of gametophore development , such as apical meristem activity , leaf initiation and growth , and tropisms ( Bennett et al . , 2014 ; Viaene et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , development of the P . patens sporophyte depends on Pp - PIN function ( Bennett et al . , 2014 ) , consistent with the presence of long - range PAT in moss sporophytes ( Fujita et al . , 2008 ) The ﬁ rst experimental insights into PIN protein function in P . patens , a representative of most basal land plants , indicate that auxin transport mediated by polarly localized PINs has been re - cruited in the dominant gametophyte stage of moss , controlling a suite of processes including the development of relatively simple morphologies , such as one - dimensional protonemal ﬁ laments or two - dimensional cell sheets that are the moss leaves . SUBCELLULAR TRAFFICKING FOR PIN POLAR LOCALIZATION Every plasma membrane - localized PIN protein in Arabidopsis ex - hibits polarized localization in some instances . How is that ach - ieved ? Today , there is mounting evidence supporting subcellular PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 23 traf ﬁ cking of PINs as the primary factor in the establishment of their polarities . Although one may presume that PIN proteins are statically deposited at the plasma membrane , in fact , PINs turned out to be continuously , dynamically cycling between their polar domain at the plasma membrane and endosomal compartments ( Figure 2 ) . This conclusion was ﬁ rst drawn from observations that the fungal toxin brefeldin A ( BFA ) triggers intracellular accumula - tion of PIN1 in so - called “ BFA compartments , ” which is fully re - versible after removal of BFA ( Geldner et al . , 2001 ) . BFA inhibits ADP - ribosylation factor guanine - nucleotide exchange factors ( ARF - GEFs ) , which activate ARFs , molecular players necessary for the formation of coated vesicles mediating various traf ﬁ cking events in the endomembrane system . Putting these facts to - gether , a BFA - sensitive ARF - GEF action mediates constitutive recycling of PIN1 from an endosomal compartment to the polar domain at the plasma membrane , and when this recycling step is blocked , the constitutive internalization of PIN1 is revealed by its intracellular accumulation . A candidate for the protein that may mediate this BFA - sensitive polar delivery of PIN1 is the ARF - GEF GNOM . gnom mutants demonstrate severe defects in de - velopment , characterized , in extreme cases , by a complete loss of apical - basal body plan ( Mayer et al . , 1991 ; Shevell et al . , 1994 ) . These defects originate at embryogenesis , where coordinated cell polarities are not correctly established , as manifested by the loss of correct polarization of PIN1 ( Steinmann et al . , 1999 ) . BFA - sensitive PIN1 recycling was conclusively linked with GNOM function with the use of an engineered , BFA - resistant , yet fully functional variant of GNOM ( Geldner et al . , 2003 ) . While originally a model was proposed in which GNOM mediates the recycling step from a hypothetical “ recycling endosome , ” recent in - depth analyses using high - end microscopy revealed that GNOM in fact acts at the Golgi apparatus ( Naramoto et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , GNOM may be indirectly in ﬂ uencing the function of trans - Golgi network / early endosome compartment , from where polar cargoes might be recycled . The GNOM - mediated pathway is to a large extent responsible speci ﬁ cally for the basal targeting of PIN proteins , while the apical pathway may be mediated by other , BFA - resistant ARF - GEFs ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2008a ) . Additional com - ponents of PIN delivery to the plasma membrane , namely , the ARF family member ARF1A1C ( Tanaka et al . , 2014 ) and a small GTPase RabA1b ( Feraru et al . , 2012 ) , were identi ﬁ ed in a forward genetic screen based on PIN1 - GFP ﬂ uorescence imaging ( reviewed in Zwiewka and Friml , 2012 ) . PIN proteins are internalized from the plasma membrane by clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . In - terference with clathrin - coated vesicle formation by expression Figure 2 . Subcellular Traf ﬁ cking and Polarity Maintenance of PIN Proteins . Polar localization of PIN proteins is established by GNOM - mediated recycling and clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) and maintained by clustering in the plasma membrane as well as cell wall - plasma membrane connections . Apical - basal polarity is determined by reversible phosphorylation by PID / WAG kinases and PP2A phosphatase . Auxin transport activity of PIN is mediated by D6PK . PINs undergo traf ﬁ cking through multivesicular body ( MVB ) for degradation in the lytic vacuole . Endogenous ( hormones and signal peptides ) and environmental ( light , gravity , and salinity ) signals in ﬂ uence various aspects of PIN traf ﬁ cking . GA , Golgi apparatus ; TGN / EE , trans - Golgi network / early endosome . 24 The Plant Cell of a dominant - negative truncated variant of clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) , referred to as HUB , abolished the BFA - visualized in - ternalization of PIN1 and PIN2 ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ; Kitakura et al . , 2011 ) , while a similar , but weaker effect on PIN2 was observed in clathrin light chain2 clathrin light chain3 ( clc2 clc3 ) double mutants ( Wang et al . , 2013 ) . The relevance of clathrin - mediated PIN endocytosis for correct auxin transport and auxin - mediated development is illustrated by improper auxin distribution in the above - mentioned HUB line , concomitant with root gravi - tropism and lateral root formation defects , embryo patterning defects in the chc2 mutant , which leads to development of seedlings with improperly formed cotyledons and root apical meristems ( Kitakura et al . , 2011 ) , as well as de ﬁ ciencies in auxin transport and distribution in clc2 clc3 mutant ( Wang et al . , 2013 ) . Other than clathrin , ARF machinery has also been implicated in endocytosis . The ARF - GEF GNOM , apart from regulating recycling , functions in endocytosis in concert with ARF - GTPase - activating protein VASCULAR NETWORK DEFECTIVE3 ( Naramoto et al . , 2010 ) , while the related ARF - GEF GNOM - LIKE1 participates more speci ﬁ cally in endocytosis of PIN2 ( Teh and Moore , 2007 ) . Down - stream of endocytosis , the early endosomal traf ﬁ cking of PINs is controlled by another ARF - GEF , BFA - visualized endocytic traf ﬁ ck - ing defective1 , and the Sec1 / Munc18 family protein BEN2 ( Tanaka et al . , 2009 , 2013 ) . The proposed role of constitutive internalization of PIN proteins is to maintain , in concert with polar recycling , the polarized local - ization of PINs at the plasma membrane . Presumably , this is necessary to counteract lateral diffusion in the absence of diffusion barriers , such as junctions that separate polar domains in polarized epithelial cells ( for a comparison of polarity determination mech - anisms in animal and plant cells , see Kania et al . [ 2014 ] ) . Indeed , PIN proteins are depolarized in the dominant negative clathrin HUB line as well as chc2 embryos ( Kitakura et al . , 2011 ) . Experi - mental and modeling approaches suggest that endocytosis of PINs , necessary for maintenance of its polarity , may take place preferentially at lateral cell sides ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2011 ) . The dy - namic nature of PIN traf ﬁ cking could be also highly relevant for rapid changes in PIN polar localization , occurring during embryo de - velopment ( Friml et al . , 2003 ) , lateral root formation ( Benková et al . , 2003 ) , root gravitropic response ( Friml et al . , 2002b ; Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2010 ) , and hypocotyl tropic responses ( Ding et al . , 2011 ; Rakusová et al . , 2011 ) . In support of the notion of PINs being dynamically redistributed to new polar domains , a trans - cytosis - like process , in which the same PIN protein mole - cules undergo traf ﬁ cking from one polar domain to another , was documented ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2008a ) and implicated in gravity - induced PIN3 relocation in the root tip columella ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2010 ) . Endocytosis and polar recycling jointly establish the polar localization of PINs at the plasma membrane . An additional layer of regulation comes from ubiquitination - dependent PIN degra - dation in the vacuole ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2008b ; Leitner et al . , 2012 ) , a process that requires proteasome function ( Abas et al . , 2006 ) . Multiple traf ﬁ cking components participate in vacuolar PIN sorting , including the adaptor protein complex 3 ( Feraru et al . , 2010 ; Zwiewka et al . , 2011 ) , the retromer ( Nodzy (cid:3) nski et al . , 2013 ) , and the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( Spitzer et al . , 2009 ; Gao et al . , 2014 ) . PIN POLARITY MAINTENANCE BY CLUSTERING AND THE CELL WALL Apart from the subcellular traf ﬁ cking events describe above , an additional factor that might be important for polarity maintenance during the residence of PIN in the plasma membrane has been un - covered ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2011 ) . PIN proteins have been observed to exhibit only limited lateral diffusion in the plasma membrane , when compared with non - polar plasma membrane markers . Following a detailed confocal and high - resolution microscopic analyses , PIN1 and PIN2 were found to be unevenly distributed in the plasma membrane , with a large fraction of the protein residing in so - called clusters , de ﬁ ned as agglomerations of PIN signals 100 to 200 nm in diameter . These clusters were immobile in the membrane , and since less clustering of non - polar membrane markers was observed , clustering was proposed as a factor limiting the lateral diffusion of PIN proteins out of their polar domains ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2011 ) . Another line of investigation aimed at identi ﬁ cation of novel components of PIN polarity was the regulator of pin polarity ( repp ) forward genetic screen , designed to identify mutants with a basal - to - apical switch in localization of PIN1 ectopically expressed in root tip epidermis . Because the screen was performed in the agravitropic pin2 mutant background ( PIN2 : PIN1 - HA , pin2 line ) , such apicalization of PIN1 in the epidermis could be identi ﬁ ed easily , since it would lead , by mimicking native function of apically localized PIN2 , to restoration of a correct auxin ﬂ ow and , hence , root gravitropism ( Feraru et al . , 2011 ) . The ﬁ rst mutant identi ﬁ ed in this screen , repp3 , was mapped to the CELLULOSE SYNTHASE3 locus , and independent pharmacological or genetic interference with cellulose biosynthesis phenocopied repp3 . This unexpected function of the cell wall for PIN polarity was substantiated by ob - servations that PIN proteins are associated with domains that are physically connected to the cell wall and by the rapid loss of PIN polarization after cell wall digestion . Furthermore , the lateral diffu - sion of PIN2 was much faster when cell wall connections were lost following pharmacological inhibition of cellulose synthesis or cell plasmolysis ( Feraru et al . , 2011 ) . The role of the plant cell wall in limiting lateral diffusion of plasma membrane proteins has been since further con ﬁ rmed ( Martinière et al . , 2012 ) . In summary , clus - tering and cellulose - based cell wall - to - polar domain connections presumably contribute to the maintenance of PIN proteins at their polar domains ( Figure 2 ) . The possible relationship between these two processes remains an open question for future research . PHOSPHORYLATION - BASED REGULATION OF PIN - MEDIATED AUXIN TRANSPORT In a genetic screen for mutants that have lost the ability to gen - erate ﬂ ower primordia , a mutant named pinoid ( pid ) was found , with phenotypic characteristics resembling those of pin1 ( Bennett et al . , 1995 ) . The PID protein encodes a member of AGCVIII family of protein kinases ( Christensen et al . , 2000 ) . Although initially a role in auxin signaling was ascribed ( Christensen et al . , 2000 ) , further analyses implicated PID in an auxin transport - related function ( Benjamins et al . , 2001 ) . Overexpression of PID led to frequent collapse of the main root ( Benjamins et al . , 2001 ; Friml et al . , 2004 ) , which correlated with loss of local auxin maximum in the root apex . This phenotype was preceded by basal - to - apical switch of PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 25 polarities of PIN1 , PIN2 , and PIN4 ( Friml et al . , 2004 ) , resulting in draining of auxin out of the root tip . Conversely , the pid mutant exhibits the opposite , apical - to - basal , polarity switch of PIN1 in the shoot apical meristem ( Friml et al . , 2004 ) , con ﬁ rming the function of PID in PIN apical versus basal polarity determination . PID and its homologs directly phosphorylate PIN protein hydrophilic loops at three highly conserved motifs , and the importance of these phosphorylation sites for PIN polarity determination was con ﬁ rmed in planta by the analysis of phosphomutant versions of PINs ( Michniewicz et al . , 2007 ; Huang et al . , 2010 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . The search for phosphatase activity that antagonizes PID function led to the identi ﬁ cation of protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) as an important factor in PIN polarity regulation . Initially , a mutant in one of the three Arabidopsis paralogs of the PP2A regulatory subunit A ( PP2AA1 ) was isolated in a forward genetic screen for altered re - sponse to the PAT inhibitor NPA ( Garbers et al . , 1996 ) . This and other phenotypes that indicated the involvement of PP2AA1 in auxin - mediated processes ( Rashotte et al . , 2001 ) prompted a more complete analysis that revealed severe auxin - related developmental defects during embryo and seedling development in multiple pp2aa mutants and arti ﬁ cial microRNA lines targeting PP2AA ( Michniewicz et al . , 2007 ) . Genetic interactions supported the notion that PP2AA phosphatase function antagonizes that of PID kinase . Crucially , a basal - to - apical polarity shift of PIN1 , PIN2 , and PIN4 was ob - served in PP2AA - de ﬁ cient plants ( Michniewicz et al . , 2007 ) , in - dicating that dephosphorylation of PINs by PP2A promotes their basal localization . Taking all these data together , a model emerged in which PID - mediated phosphorylation promotes apical PIN localization , whereas dephosphorylation by PP2A leads to basal PIN polarity ( Figure 2 ) . However , it remains unclear at which stage of the polar sorting processes and where in the cell these regulatory steps take place or whether they are relatively stable or more transient . Recently , another group of proteins from the same AGCVIII family of protein kinases , consisting of D6 protein kinase ( D6PK ) and D6 protein kinase - likes ( D6PKL ) , has been implicated in the regulation of PAT . Loss of D6PK activity led to typical auxin - related pheno - types that correlated with reduced PAT rates ( Zourelidou et al . , 2009 , 2014 ; Willige et al . , 2013 ) . D6PKs phosphorylate plasma membrane - localized PINs ( Zourelidou et al . , 2014 ) , but , unlike PID , do not affect their polar localizations ( Willige et al . , 2013 ) . Instead , D6PKs act as activators of auxin ef ﬂ ux activity of PIN proteins : In Xenopus laevis oocytes , auxin was actively trans - ported only when PINs were coexpressed with D6PK ( Zourelidou et al . , 2014 ) . In planta , this transport activation presumably occurs at basal polar domains , where D6PK localizes ( Barbosa et al . , 2014 ; Figure 2 ) . The auxin transport assays in Xenopus oocytes showed that PID and its close homolog WAG2 also activate PIN - driven auxin ef ﬂ ux ( Zourelidou et al . , 2014 ) , showing that AGCVIII family kinases likely have both different and partially overlapping functions in regulating PINs . AUXIN FEEDBACK REGULATION OF PIN - MEDIATED AUXIN TRANSPORT The canalization hypothesis , proposed by Tsvi Sachs , suggests self - organizing properties of PAT on the level of organs and tissues ( summarized in Sachs , 1991 ) . In an undifferentiated group of cells exposed to a source and a sink of auxin , the cells gradually polarize their auxin transport activities toward neigh - bors that already happen to transport auxin most ef ﬁ ciently . This feedback mechanism , in which local ﬂ ow of auxin affects the cells to modify this ﬂ ow ’ s direction and strength , results in emergence of a narrow , well - de ﬁ ned canal of cells ef ﬁ ciently transporting auxin to connect the source with the sink . The canalization hypothesis is intimately linked with several developmental roles of auxin , such as de novo vascular tissue formation or its regeneration . Cells forming the postulated canals of PAT will differentiate into vascular tissue connecting various parts of the plant body ; indeed , it is by micro - scopic observation of vascular cell differentiation that Sachs as - sumed the PAT directions in his experiments . According to the model described above , auxin itself should have the ability to in ﬂ uence the directionality and capacity of a given cell ’ s auxin transport . Nowadays , we see mechanisms that could contribute to the feedback regulation of auxin on its own transport by affecting PIN polar localization and PIN protein abundance in the cell or , more speci ﬁ cally , at the plasma mem - brane . A series of experiments on wounded pea ( Pisum sativum ) epicotyls , inspired by Sachs ’ ideas , but extending them by direct observations of PIN proteins , was conducted by Sauer et al . ( 2006 ) . The pea homolog of PIN1 coordinately polarized along the presumed path of auxin ﬂ ow that forms around a wound , spatially corresponding to the vascular tissue that later differentiated in order to reconnect the severed vascular strand . When an auxin source was arti ﬁ cially provided , PIN1 became expressed and polarized so as to create a new canal , connecting that auxin source to the sink — the preexisting central vascular cylinder . The competition between different auxin sources has an impact on their ability to induce such canalization , providing a possible mechanism for regulation of apical dominance ( Balla et al . , 2011 ) . Together , these observations show that PINs are suitable candi - dates to be targeted by the canalization mechanism , as both their expression and subcellular polarization are regulated by auxin itself . Auxin in ﬂ uence on PIN polarities can be also seen in the root apical meristem , where its external application leads to cell - type - speci ﬁ c lateral spreading of PIN1 and PIN2 via a mechanism involving the nuclear , Aux / IAA - and ARF - dependent auxin signaling pathway ( Sauer et al . , 2006 ) . As PINs are subject to dynamic subcellular traf ﬁ cking , regulatory inputs of auxin into speci ﬁ c traf ﬁ cking events could be envisioned as an ef ﬁ cient means for the hormone to regulate its own trans - port . Indeed , auxin was found to inhibit endocytosis , leading to stabilization of PIN proteins at the plasma membrane and en - hancement of the cell ’ s auxin ef ﬂ ux capacity ( Paciorek et al . , 2005 ) . This rapid auxin effect is mediated by a nontranscriptional pathway involving the auxin receptor AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1 ( ABP1 ) . These observations suggest a model ( Figure 3 ) in which ABP1 , when not bound to auxin , promotes clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis , while auxin binding would block this ABP1 activity , causing loss of clathrin from the plasma membrane and in - hibition of endocytosis , including that of PIN cargoes ( Robert et al . , 2010 ) . This extracellular ABP1 action on endocytosis , presumably coupled with PM - localized transmembrane kinase receptor - like kinases ( Xu et al . , 2014 ) , can potentially be the central part of the mechanism by which auxin polarizes its own ﬂ ux ( Wabnik et al . , 2010 ) . 26 The Plant Cell Auxin also affects the abundance of PINs . Auxin in ﬂ uence on PIN degradation in the vacuole has been extensively studied on the model of gravistimulated root ( Abas et al . , 2006 ; Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2008b ; Baster et al . , 2013 ) . While auxin transiently stabilizes PIN2 by its inhibitory effect on endocytosis , both prolonged ele - vation and reduction of auxin levels leads to degradation of PIN2 . Thus , only certain auxin optimum will not activate PIN2 degra - dation and so guarantee its stabilization at the plasma membrane ( Baster et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , multiple PIN genes respond transcriptionally to auxin treatments , being upregulated in a tis - sue - and PIN - speci ﬁ c manner ( Vieten et al . , 2005 ) . The data outlined above lead to a multifaceted picture of the auxin feedback regulation of its transport directionality and capacity , and we have yet to fully understand the hierarchy of , and the interactions between , the various regulatory components involved . ENDOGENOUS SIGNALS CONVERGING ON PINs Apart from the feedback of auxin on its own transport , other en - dogenous signals , among them other phytohormones and se - cretory peptides , can modulate PIN protein activity ( Figure 2 ) . The plant hormone cytokinin ( CK ) exhibits antagonistic interaction with auxin , and the crosstalk between these two molecules me - diates many aspects of root development ( reviewed in Schaller et al . , 2015 ) . One of the mechanisms of such interaction is the CK effect on auxin transport in the root realized by modulation of PIN transcription ( Dello Ioio et al . , 2008 ; R (cid:4) u (cid:1) zi (cid:1) cka et al . , 2009 ) . Fur - thermore , CK has been shown to in ﬂ uence PIN function at the posttranslational level . CK affects PIN1 traf ﬁ cking , promoting its delivery to the vacuole for degradation ( Marhavý et al . , 2011 ) . Since this effect seems to be preferential for PINs at certain polar domains , it enables CK to regulate the auxin transport directionality ( Marhavý et al . , 2014 ) . During lateral root development , PIN1 grad - ually reorients to drive auxin transport toward the tip of the newly developing root , in an axis perpendicular to the apical - basal axis of the main root . CK preferentially causes the removal of PIN1 from anticlinal membranes , while having little to no effect on periclinally localized PIN1 , thus potentially contributing to the establishment of a new auxin stream driving lateral root organogenesis . In contrast to CK , the plant hormone gibberellin ( GA ) exhibits a stabilizing effect on plasma membrane - localized PINs ( Willige et al . , 2011 ; Löfke et al . , 2013 ) . In GA biosynthesis - de ﬁ cient conditions , PINs are preferentially targeted for vacuolar degra - dation , while exogenously applied GA reduces vacuolar PIN traf ﬁ cking and promotes its residence at the plasma membrane . Although the speci ﬁ c molecular components recruited by GA remain unknown , it appears that a late traf ﬁ cking step on the way to the vacuole is targeted . GA ’ s input on PIN traf ﬁ cking might be relevant for regulation of the root gravitropic response , and , remarkably , involves an asymmetric distribution of GA mole - cules between the upper and the lower root side after gravitropic stimulation . While it seems that CK and GA effects on subcellular traf ﬁ cking are relatively speci ﬁ c to PINs ( Marhavý et al . , 2011 ; Löfke et al . , 2013 ) , the plant hormone salicylic acid affects endocytosis of PIN proteins as a part of its general inhibitory effect on clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Du et al . , 2013 ) . This ﬁ nding represents a novel and unexpected role of salicylic acid , which is molecularly distinct from Figure 3 . A Model of Auxin Transport Canalization by Extracellular Auxin Perception by ABP1 . This ﬁ gure shows an update of the model presented by Wabnik et al . ( 2010 ) . PIN proteins gradually polarize to form a canal of auxin ﬂ ow connecting auxin source to the sink . Two neighboring cells share an apoplastic pool of ABP1 molecules . ABP1 exists in auxin - free and auxin - bound states , whereby it promotes endocytosis or is inactive , respectively . Due to an auxin concentration gradient across the apoplastic space , cell A ( closer to the auxin source ) experiences higher apoplastic auxin levels and fewer auxin - free ABP1 and thus has low PIN endocytosis rates , resulting in stabilization of PIN at the plasma membrane . The extracellular space near cell B has lower auxin concentration and more free ABP1 molecules that promote PIN removal from the plasma membrane . PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 27 the well - established nuclear signaling pathway of this hormone , and its physiological functions remain unclear . Strigolactone has been shown to cause depletion of PIN1 from the plasma membrane in xylem parenchyma cells of the stem ( Shinohara et al . , 2013 ) . By regulating PIN1 levels at the plasma membrane , strigolactone can in ﬂ uence the capacity of bud - derived auxin to canalize toward the stem and thus mod - ulate the bud activity and shoot architecture . Apart from hormones , plants use small secretory peptides as short - range cell - to - cell signals for regulation of multiple de - velopmental processes . Three peptides of the GOLVEN / ROOT GROWTH FACTOR ( GLV / RGF ) family have been implicated in gravitropism ( Whitford et al . , 2012 ) . Overexpression of GLV1 - GLV3 genes , external application of corresponding GLV pep - tides , as well as loss - of - function mutants of the aforementioned genes lead to alterations in root and hypocotyl gravitropism . GLV3 peptide , within minutes of application , caused elevation of plasma membrane signal of PIN2 , as well as an increase in intracellular , endosomal occurrence of PIN2 . Internally synthesized GLV3 in a GLV3 overexpression line similarly promoted cellular PIN2 abun - dance , while a glv3 RNA silenced line exhibited decreased PIN2 signals . Thus , while the detailed aspects of GLV / RGF peptide function await clari ﬁ cation , GLV3 likely mediates short - range sig - naling to contribute to the correct PAT streams in the gravistimu - lated root by modulating PIN2 subcellular traf ﬁ cking dynamics . Recent work describes two membrane phospholipid species , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PtdIns4P ) and phosphatidylino - sitol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ] as important components of PIN traf ﬁ cking machinery and cell polarity in plants ( Ischebeck et al . , 2013 ; Tejos et al . , 2014 ) . Interference with these phosphoinositides in knockout mutants of PtdIns4P 5 - kinases PIP5K1 and PIP5K2 led to multiple auxin - related phenotypes concomitant with defective polarization of PIN1 and PIN2 . PIP5K1 and PIP5K2 participate in polarity determination presumably due to their preferential localiza - tion at apical and basal plasma membranes , where they regulate the balance between similarly locally enriched PtdIns4P and PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( Tejos et al . , 2014 ) . Such local regulation of phosphoinositides may in ﬂ uence the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles , thus being decisive for PIN endocytosis and so its polarity ( Ischebeck et al . , 2013 ) . This provides another input avenue for signaling pathways , where PIN polarity and traf ﬁ cking could be regulated via phos - phoinositide metabolism and distribution . Apart from these phosphoinositides , a role of inositol tri - sphosphate ( InsP 3 ) - dependent Ca 2 + signaling in PIN - driven auxin distribution has been recognized in a forward genetic screen for suppressors of PIN1 overexpression phenotypes ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . While genetic and pharmacological upregulation of InsP 3 and cytosolic Ca 2 + levels interfered with basal PIN polarity , de - creasing the levels of these signaling molecules affected apical PIN targeting . The intermediate steps leading to these outcomes , and thus the exact mechanism by which Ca 2 + in ﬂ uences PIN sorting , remain to be elucidated , but downstream regulation of PID activity is a likely component . ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES ON PIN - DRIVEN PAT PAT is in ﬂ uenced by external signals in addition to endogenous regulation ( Figure 2 ) . Such regulatory inputs are necessary for auxin - mediated adaptive growth responses , clear examples of which are phototropism and gravitropism , the alignment of plant growth with light direction and gravity vector , respectively . The differential distribution of auxin between two sides of a responding organ , resulting in differences in growth rates , has been proposed by Cholodny and Went as a basis of tropic growth ( summarized in Went , 1974 ) . This auxin asymmetry has been documented during phototropism and gravitropism with auxin - inducible reporters ( Luschnig et al . , 1998 ; Rashotte et al . , 2001 ; Friml et al . , 2002b ; Rakusová et al . , 2011 ) and con ﬁ rmed with a new generation of auxin sensors ( Band et al . , 2012 ; Brunoud et al . , 2012 ) . The role of PIN - driven PAT is evident from tropism de ﬁ ciencies in pin mutants , such as the root agravitropic phenotype of pin2 ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Luschnig et al . , 1998 ; Müller et al . , 1998 ; Utsuno et al . , 1998 ) , partial loss of root gravitropism in pin3 pin7 ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2010 ) , or reduced photo - and gravitropic bending of pin3 hypo - cotyls ( Friml et al . , 2002b ; Rakusová et al . , 2011 ) . Also , as seen in previous sections of this review , a number of molecular compo - nents regulating PIN traf ﬁ cking and activities have been identi ﬁ ed on the basis of tropism defects in corresponding mutants . How can auxin transport be redirected by PINs in accordance to environmental cues ? Within the PIN family , PIN3 exhibits a prominent ability to change its subcellular localization in re - sponse to gravity and light . In the columella cells of the root tip , where perception of gravity occurs ( Chen et al . , 1999 ) , PIN3 is localized to the plasma membrane in an apolar manner . How - ever , as early as several minutes after changing the gravity vector by rotating the plant , PIN3 begins to relocalize to the lateral , now lower side of the cells ( Friml et al . , 2002b ) . As such , it can redirect the auxin ﬂ ow toward the lower side of the root for its further displacement by PIN2 . In dark - grown hypocotyls , PIN3 shows prominent expression in the endodermis , without visible polarity . Both gravitropic stimulation ( Rakusová et al . , 2011 ) and unilateral light ( Ding et al . , 2011 ) cause polarization of the symmetrically distributed PIN3 to direct auxin ﬂ ow laterally toward either the lower , or the shaded , side of the organ . Although the tissue or environmental signals concerned vary , the PIN3 polarization events described above share some similarities at the molecular level ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2010 ; Ding et al . , 2011 ; Rakusová et al . , 2011 ) . In each instance , the ARF - GEF vesicle traf ﬁ cking regulator GNOM was shown to be necessary for polarization to occur , and during hypocotyl tropisms , the prominent role of PID / WAG protein kinases has been shown . Shade avoidance syndrome is a growth response triggered when plants are threatened to be out - competed for light by their neighbors . It is sensed as a lowered red to far - red ( R : FR ) light ratio , resulting from selective light absorption by chlorophyll in leaves of surrounding plants . Similarly to the phototropic re - sponse , a light signal is transduced by PIN3 , which translocates to the outer endodermis cell side , redirecting part of the PAT to the outer tissue layers and thus promoting elongation ( Keus - kamp et al . , 2010 ) . Accordingly , seedlings of pin3 mutant were unable to elongate hypocotyls upon sensing low R : FR ratio . Not only gravity and light , but also salinity is an environ - mental variable to which plants react in an auxin - and PIN - dependent manner . Halotropism is a recently described tropic response , wherein roots grow away from high salt con - centrations ( Galvan - Ampudia et al . , 2013 ) . During halotropic 28 The Plant Cell response , auxin accumulates differentially in the root tip , with more auxin at the side away from high salt concentration leading to asymmetric growth , analogous to the gravitropic response . This correlates with increased internalization of PIN2 at the side of salt perception , which likely leads to decreased auxin transport ca - pacity . The proposed mechanism of this salt - induced promotion of PIN2 endocytosis involves recruitment of clathrin to the plasma membrane by increased activity of phospholipase D , presumably through synthesis of phosphatidic acid , a phospholipid that has been shown to bind components of clathrin machinery ( McLoughlin et al . , 2013 ) . In summary , a number of environmental responses involve downstream regulation of dynamic subcellular traf ﬁ cking of PINs , typically leading to polarization to speci ﬁ c domains in order to redirect auxin ﬂ ow according to external cues . However , the exact mechanisms by which perception of signals such as gravity , light , or salinity leads to regulation of PIN traf ﬁ cking or polar sorting are still unclear . SUMMARY Auxin mediates an impressive variety of developmental processes . In virtually all its activities , the intercellular , and possibly also in - tracellular , transport mediated by PIN auxin transporters is of key importance . For their diverse roles to be ful ﬁ lled , PIN proteins are tightly controlled by an array of regulators at the levels of tran - scription as well as cellular polarity resulting from secretion , en - docytosis , recycling , and vacuolar traf ﬁ cking . Endogenous signals , including auxin itself and other hormones , in ﬂ uence these regula - tory steps in order to ﬁ ne - tune PIN localization and function . A number of external inputs are also decisive for regulating PIN ac - tivities , thus enabling the environmental conditions to be integrated into auxin - dependent developmental programs . In conclusion , from early on in their lineage , plants have gradually evolved a com - plex and versatile mechanism , in which integration of endog - enous and exogenous signals , converging on the PINs and distribution of auxin , provides instructions for many aspects of growth and development . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors contributed to the writing of the article . Received December 1 , 2014 ; revised December 1 , 2014 ; accepted January 5 , 2015 ; published January 20 , 2015 . REFERENCES Abas , L . , Benjamins , R . , Malenica , N . , Paciorek , T . , Wi (cid:3) sniewska , J . , Moulinier - Anzola , J . C . , Sieberer , T . , Friml , J . , and Luschnig , C . ( 2006 ) . Intracellular traf ﬁ cking and proteolysis of the Arabidopsis auxin - ef ﬂ ux facilitator PIN2 are involved in root gravitropism . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 249 – 256 . Balla , J . , Kalousek , P . , Reinöhl , V . , Friml , J . , and Procházka , S . ( 2011 ) . Competitive canalization of PIN - dependent auxin ﬂ ow from axillary buds controls pea bud outgrowth . Plant J . 65 : 571 – 577 . Band , L . R . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Root gravitropism is regulated by a transient lateral auxin gradient controlled by a tipping - point mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 4668 – 4673 . Barbez , E . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A novel putative auxin carrier family regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis in plants . Nature 485 : 119 – 122 . Barbez , E . , La (cid:1) nková , M . , Pa (cid:1) rezová , M . , Maizel , A . , Za (cid:1) zímalová , E . , Petrá š ek , J . , Friml , J . , and Kleine - Vehn , J . ( 2013 ) . Single - cell - based system to monitor carrier driven cellular auxin homeostasis . BMC Plant Biol . 13 : 20 . Barbosa , I . C . R . , Zourelidou , M . , Willige , B . C . , Weller , B . , and Schwechheimer , C . ( 2014 ) . D6 PROTEIN KINASE activates auxin transport - dependent growth and PIN - FORMED phosphorylation at the plasma membrane . Dev . Cell 29 : 674 – 685 . Baster , P . , Robert , S . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Vanneste , S . , Kania , U . , Grunewald , W . , De Rybel , B . , Beeckman , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . SCF ( TIR1 / AFB ) - auxin signalling regulates PIN vacuolar traf ﬁ cking and auxin ﬂ uxes during root gravitropism . EMBO J . 32 : 260 – 274 . Bender , R . L . , Fekete , M . L . , Klinkenberg , P . M . , Hampton , M . , Bauer , B . , Malecha , M . , Lindgren , K . , A Maki , J . , Perera , M . A . , Nikolau , B . J . , and Carter , C . J . ( 2013 ) . PIN6 is required for nectary auxin response and short stamen development . Plant J . 74 : 893 – 904 . Benjamins , R . , Quint , A . , Weijers , D . , Hooykaas , P . , and Offringa , R . ( 2001 ) . The PINOID protein kinase regulates organ development in Arabidopsis by enhancing polar auxin transport . Development 128 : 4057 – 4067 . Benková , E . , Michniewicz , M . , Sauer , M . , Teichmann , T . , Seifertová , D . , Jürgens , G . , and Friml , J . ( 2003 ) . Local , ef ﬂ ux - dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation . Cell 115 : 591 – 602 . Bennett , S . R . , Alvarez , J . , Bossinger , G . , and Smyth , D . R . ( 1995 ) . Mor - phogenesis in pinoid mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 8 : 505 – 520 . Bennett , T . A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Plasma membrane - targeted PIN proteins drive shoot development in a moss . Curr . Biol . 24 : 2776 – 2785 . Bilsborough , G . D . , Runions , A . , Barkoulas , M . , Jenkins , H . W . , Hasson , A . , Galinha , C . , Laufs , P . , Hay , A . , Prusinkiewicz , P . , and Tsiantis , M . ( 2011 ) . Model for the regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf margin de - velopment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 : 3424 – 3429 . Blilou , I . , Xu , J . , Wildwater , M . , Willemsen , V . , Paponov , I . , Friml , J . , Heidstra , R . , Aida , M . , Palme , K . , and Scheres , B . ( 2005 ) . The PIN auxin ef ﬂ ux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in Arabidopsis roots . Nature 433 : 39 – 44 . Brunoud , G . , Wells , D . M . , Oliva , M . , Larrieu , A . , Mirabet , V . , Burrow , A . H . , Beeckman , T . , Kepinski , S . , Traas , J . , Bennett , M . J . , and Vernoux , T . ( 2012 ) . A novel sensor to map auxin response and distribution at high spatio - temporal resolution . Nature 482 : 103 – 106 . Cazzonelli , C . I . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Role of the Arabidopsis PIN6 auxin transporter in auxin homeostasis and auxin - mediated development . PLoS ONE 8 : e70069 . Chen , R . , Hilson , P . , Sedbrook , J . , Rosen , E . , Caspar , T . , and Masson , P . H . ( 1998 ) . The arabidopsis thaliana AGRAVITROPIC 1 gene encodes a component of the polar - auxin - transport ef ﬂ ux carrier . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 : 15112 – 15117 . Chen , R . , Rosen , E . , and Masson , P . H . ( 1999 ) . Gravitropism in higher plants . Plant Physiol . 120 : 343 – 350 . Christensen , S . K . , Dagenais , N . , Chory , J . , and Weigel , D . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of auxin response by the protein kinase PINOID . Cell 100 : 469 – 478 . Dal Bosco , C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The endoplasmic reticulum localized PIN8 is a pollen - speci ﬁ c auxin carrier involved in intracellular auxin homeostasis . Plant J . 71 : 860 – 870 . Dello Ioio , R . , Nakamura , K . , Moubayidin , L . , Perilli , S . , Taniguchi , M . , Morita , M . T . , Aoyama , T . , Costantino , P . , and Sabatini , S . ( 2008 ) . A genetic framework for the control of cell division and dif - ferentiation in the root meristem . Science 322 : 13 80 – 1384 . PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 29 Dhonukshe , P . , Aniento , F . , Hwang , I . , Robinson , D . G . , Mravec , J . , Stierhof , Y . - D . , and Friml , J . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin ef ﬂ ux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 17 : 520 – 527 . Ding , Z . , et al . ( 2012 ) . ER - localized auxin transporter PIN8 regulates auxin homeostasis and male gametophyte development in Arabi - dopsis . Nat . Commun . 3 : 941 . Ding , Z . , Galván - Ampudia , C . S . , Demarsy , E . , Ł angowski , Ł . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Fan , Y . , Morita , M . T . , Tasaka , M . , Fankhauser , C . , Offringa , R . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . Light - mediated polarization of the PIN3 auxin transporter for the phototropic response in Arabi - dopsis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 447 – 452 . Du , Y . , Tejos , R . , Beck , M . , Himschoot , E . , Li , H . , Robatzek , S . , Vanneste , S . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Salicylic acid interferes with clathrin - mediated endocytic protein traf ﬁ cking . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 : 7946 – 7951 . Dubrovsky , J . G . , Sauer , M . , Napsucialy - Mendivil , S . , Ivanchenko , M . G . , Friml , J . , Shishkova , S . , Celenza , J . , and Benková , E . ( 2008 ) . Auxin acts as a local morphogenetic trigger to specify lateral root founder cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 8790 – 8794 . Feraru , E . , Feraru , M . I . , Asaoka , R . , Paciorek , T . , De Rycke , R . , Tanaka , H . , Nakano , A . , and Friml , J . ( 2012 ) . BEX5 / RabA1b reg - ulates trans - Golgi network - to - plasma membrane protein traf ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 24 : 3074 – 3086 . Feraru , E . , Feraru , M . I . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Martinière , A . , Mouille , G . , Vanneste , S . , Vernhettes , S . , Runions , J . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . PIN polarity maintenance by the cell wall in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 21 : 338 – 343 . Feraru , E . , Paciorek , T . , Feraru , M . I . , Zwiewka , M . , De Groodt , R . , De Rycke , R . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . The AP - 3 b adaptin mediates the biogenesis and function of lytic vacuoles in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 22 : 2812 – 2824 . Friml , J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . A PINOID - dependent binary switch in apical - basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin ef ﬂ ux . Science 306 : 862 – 865 . Friml , J . , Benková , E . , Blilou , I . , Wisniewska , J . , Hamann , T . , Ljung , K . , Woody , S . , Sandberg , G . , Scheres , B . , Jürgens , G . , and Palme , K . ( 2002a ) . AtPIN4 mediates sink - driven auxin gradients and root patterning in Arabidopsis . Cell 108 : 661 – 673 . Friml , J . , Vieten , A . , Sauer , M . , Weijers , D . , Schwarz , H . , Hamann , T . , Offringa , R . , and Jürgens , G . ( 2 003 ) . Ef ﬂ ux - dependent auxin gradients establish the apical - basal axis of Arabidopsis . Nature 426 : 147 – 153 . Friml , J . , Wi (cid:3) sniewska , J . , Benková , E . , Mendgen , K . , and Palme , K . ( 2002b ) . Lateral relocation of auxin ef ﬂ ux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis . Nature 415 : 806 – 809 . Fujita , T . , Sakaguchi , H . , Hiwatashi , Y . , Wagstaff , S . J . , Ito , M . , Deguchi , H . , Sato , T . , and Hasebe , M . ( 2008 ) . Convergent evolu - tion of shoots in land plants : lack of auxin polar transport in moss shoots . Evol . Dev . 10 : 176 – 186 . Galvan - Ampudia , C . S . , Julkowska , M . M . , Darwish , E . , Gandullo , J . , Korver , R . A . , Brunoud , G . , Haring , M . A . , Munnik , T . , Vernoux , T . , and Testerink , C . ( 2013 ) . Halotropism is a response of plant roots to avoid a saline environment . Curr . Biol . 23 : 2044 – 2050 . Ganguly , A . , Park , M . , Kesawat , M . S . , and Cho , H . - T . ( 2014 ) . Functional analysis of the hydrophilic loop in intracellular traf ﬁ cking of Arabidopsis PIN - FORMED proteins . Plant Cell 26 : 1570 – 1585 . Gao , C . , Luo , M . , Zhao , Q . , Yang , R . , Cui , Y . , Zeng , Y . , Xia , J . , and Jiang , L . ( 2014 ) . A unique plant ESCRT component , FREE1 , regu - lates multivesicular body protein sorting and plant growth . Curr . Biol . 24 : 2556 – 2563 . Gälweiler , L . , Guan , C . , Müller , A . , Wisman , E . , Mendgen , K . , Yephremov , A . , and Palme , K . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue . Science 282 : 2226 – 2230 . Garbers , C . , DeLong , A . , Deruére , J . , Bernasconi , P . , and Söll , D . ( 1996 ) . A mutation in protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit A affects auxin transport in Arabidopsis . EMBO J . 15 : 2115 – 2124 . Geldner , N . , Anders , N . , Wolters , H . , Keicher , J . , Kornberger , W . , Muller , P . , Delbarre , A . , Ueda , T . , Nakano , A . , and Jürgens , G . ( 2003 ) . The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF - GEF mediates endosomal re - cycling , auxin transport , and auxin - dependent plant growth . Cell 112 : 219 – 230 . Geldner , N . , Friml , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Jürgens , G . , and Palme , K . ( 2001 ) . Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle traf ﬁ cking . Nature 413 : 425 – 428 . Goldsmith , M . H . M . ( 1977 ) . The polar transport of auxin . Annu . Rev . Plant Physiol . 28 : 439 – 478 . Hay , A . , Barkoulas , M . , and Tsiantis , M . ( 2006 ) . ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 and auxin activities converge to repress BREVIPEDI - CELLUS expression and promote leaf development in Arabidopsis . Development 133 : 3955 – 3961 . Heisler , M . G . , Ohno , C . , Das , P . , Sieber , P . , Reddy , G . V . , Long , J . A . , and Meyerowitz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Patterns of auxin transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging of the Arabidopsis in ﬂ orescence meristem . Curr . Biol . 15 : 1899 – 1911 . Huang , F . , Zago , M . K . , Abas , L . , van Marion , A . , Galván - Ampudia , C . S . , and Offringa , R . ( 2010 ) . Phosphorylation of conserved PIN motifs directs Arabidopsis PIN1 polarity and auxin transport . Plant Cell 22 : 1129 – 1142 . Ischebeck , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in ﬂ uences PIN polarization by controlling clathrin - mediated mem - brane traf ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 4894 – 4911 . Jang , G . , and Dolan , L . ( 2011 ) . Auxin promotes the transition from chloronema to caulonema in moss protonema by positively regu - lating PpRSL1and PpRSL2 in Physcomitrella patens . New Phytol . 192 : 319 – 327 . Kania , U . , Fendrych , M . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . Polar delivery in plants ; commonalities and differences to animal epithelial cells . Open Biol . 4 : 140017 . Keuskamp , D . H . , Pollmann , S . , Voesenek , L . A . C . J . , Peeters , A . J . M . , and Pierik , R . ( 2010 ) . Auxin transport through PIN - FORMED 3 ( PIN3 ) controls shade avoidance and ﬁ tness during competition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 22740 – 22744 . Kitakura , S . , Vanneste , S . , Robert , S . , Löfke , C . , Teichmann , T . , Tanaka , H . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . Clathrin mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 1920 – 1931 . Kleine - Vehn , J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Recycling , clustering , and endocytosis jointly maintain PIN auxin carrier polarity at the plasma membrane . Mol . Syst . Biol . 7 : 540 . Kleine - Vehn , J . , Dhonukshe , P . , Sauer , M . , Brewer , P . B . , Wi (cid:3) sniewska , J . , Paciorek , T . , Benková , E . , and Friml , J . ( 2008a ) . ARF GEF - dependent transcytosis and polar delivery of PIN auxin carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 18 : 526 – 531 . Kleine - Vehn , J . , Ding , Z . , Jones , A . R . , Tasaka , M . , Morita , M . T . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . Gravity - induced PIN transcytosis for polari - zation of auxin ﬂ uxes in gravity - sensing root cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 22344 – 22349 . Kleine - Vehn , J . , Leitner , J . , Zwiewka , M . , Sauer , M . , Abas , L . , Luschnig , C . , and Friml , J . ( 2008b ) . Differential degradation of PIN2 auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier by retromer - dependent vacuolar targeting . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 17812 – 17817 . Leitner , J . , Petrá š ek , J . , Tomanov , K . , Retzer , K . , Pa (cid:1) rezová , M . , Korbei , B . , Bachmair , A . , Za (cid:1) zímalová , E . , and Luschnig , C . 30 The Plant Cell ( 2012 ) . Lysine63 - linked ubiquitylation of PIN2 auxin carrier protein governs hormonally controlled adaptation of Arabidopsis root growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 8322 – 8327 . Löfke , C . , Zwiewka , M . , Heilmann , I . , Van Montagu , M . C . E . , Teichmann , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Asymmetric gibberellin sig - naling regulates vacuolar traf ﬁ cking of PIN auxin transporters during root gravitropism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 : 3627 – 3632 . Luschnig , C . , Gaxiola , R . A . , Grisa ﬁ , P . , and Fink , G . R . ( 1998 ) . EIR1 , a root - speci ﬁ c protein involved in auxin transport , is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis thaliana . Genes Dev . 12 : 2175 – 2187 . Marhavý , P . , Bielach , A . , Abas , L . , Abuzeineh , A . , Duclercq , J . , Tanaka , H . , Pa (cid:1) rezová , M . , Petrá š ek , J . , Friml , J . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , and Benková , E . ( 2011 ) . Cytokinin modulates endocytic traf ﬁ cking of PIN1 auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier to control plant organogenesis . Dev . Cell 21 : 796 – 804 . Marhavý , P . , Duclercq , J . , Weller , B . , Feraru , E . , Bielach , A . , Offringa , R . , Friml , J . , Schwechheimer , C . , Murphy , A . , and Benková , E . ( 2014 ) . Cytokinin controls polarity of PIN1 - dependent auxin transport during lateral root organogenesis . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1031 – 1037 . Martinière , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Cell wall constrains lateral diffusion of plant plasma - membrane proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 : 12805 – 12810 . Mattsson , J . , Sung , Z . R . , and Berleth , T . ( 1999 ) . Responses of plant vascular systems to auxin transport inhibition . Development 126 : 2979 – 2991 . Mayer , U . , Torres - Ruiz , R . A . , Berleth , T . , Miséra , S . , and Jürgens , G . ( 1991 ) . Mutations affecting body organization in the Arabidopsis embryo . Nature 353 : 402 – 407 . McLoughlin , F . , Arisz , S . A . , Dekker , H . L . , Kramer , G . , de Koster , C . G . , Haring , M . A . , Munnik , T . , and Testerink , C . ( 2013 ) . Identi ﬁ - cation of novel candidate phosphatidic acid - binding proteins in - volved in the salt - stress response of Arabidopsis thaliana roots . Biochem . J . 450 : 573 – 581 . Michniewicz , M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Antagonistic regulation of PIN phosphor - ylation by PP2A and PINOID directs auxin ﬂ ux . Cell 130 : 1044 – 1056 . Mravec , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Subcellular homeostasis of phytohormone auxin is mediated by the ER - localized PIN5 transporter . Nature 459 : 1136 – 1140 . Müller , A . , Guan , C . , Gälweiler , L . , Tänzler , P . , Huijser , P . , Marchant , A . , Parry , G . , Bennett , M . , Wisman , E . , and Palme , K . ( 1998 ) . AtPIN2 de ﬁ nes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravi - tropism control . EMBO J . 17 : 6903 – 6911 . Naramoto , S . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Robert , S . , Fujimoto , M . , Dainobu , T . , Paciorek , T . , Ueda , T . , Nakano , A . , Van Montagu , M . C . E . , Fukuda , H . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor machinery mediates endocytosis in plant cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 21890 – 21895 . Naramoto , S . , Otegui , M . S . , Kutsuna , N . , de Rycke , R . , Dainobu , T . , Karampelias , M . , Fujimoto , M . , Feraru , E . , Miki , D . , Fukuda , H . , Nakano , A . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . Insights into the localization and function of the membrane traf ﬁ cking regulator GNOM ARF - GEF at the Golgi apparatus in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 26 : 3062 – 3076 . Nodzy (cid:3) nski , T . , Feraru , M . I . , Hirsch , S . , De Rycke , R . , Niculaes , C . , Boerjan , W . , Van Leene , J . , De Jaeger , G . , Vanneste , S . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Retromer subunits VPS35A and VPS29 mediate prevacuolar compartment ( PVC ) function in Arabidopsis . Mol . Plant 6 : 1849 – 1862 . Okada , K . , Ueda , J . , Komaki , M . K . , Bell , C . J . , and Shimura , Y . ( 1991 ) . Requirement of the auxin polar transport system in early stages of Arabidopsis ﬂ oral bud formation . Plant Cell 3 : 677 – 684 . Paciorek , T . , Zazímalová , E . , Ruthardt , N . , Petrásek , J . , Stierhof , Y . - D . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Morris , D . A . , Emans , N . , Jürgens , G . , Geldner , N . , and Friml , J . ( 2005 ) . Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its own ef ﬂ ux from cells . Nature 435 : 1251 – 1256 . Petrásek , J . , et al . ( 2006 ) . PIN proteins perform a rate - limiting func - tion in cellular auxin ef ﬂ ux . Science 312 : 914 – 918 . Prigge , M . J . , Lavy , M . , Ashton , N . W . , and Estelle , M . ( 2010 ) . Physcomitrella patens auxin - resistant mutants affect conserved elements of an auxin - signaling pathway . Curr . Biol . 20 : 1907 – 1912 . Rakusová , H . , Gallego - Bartolomé , J . , Vanstraelen , M . , Robert , H . S . , Alabadí , D . , Blázquez , M . A . , Benková , E . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . Polarization of PIN3 - dependent auxin transport for hypocotyl gravitropic response in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 67 : 817 – 826 . Rashotte , A . M . , DeLong , A . , and Muday , G . K . ( 2001 ) . Genetic and chemical reductions in protein phosphatase activity alter auxin transport , gravity response , and lateral root growth . Plant Cell 13 : 1683 – 1697 . Reinhardt , D . , Pesce , E . - R . , Stieger , P . , Mandel , T . , Baltensperger , K . , Bennett , M . , Traas , J . , Friml , J . , and Kuhlemeier , C . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport . Nature 426 : 255 – 260 . Robert , H . S . , Grones , P . , Stepanova , A . N . , Robles , L . M . , Lokerse , A . S . , Alonso , J . M . , Weijers , D . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Local auxin sources orient the apical - basal axis in Arabidopsis embryos . Curr . Biol . 23 : 2506 – 2512 . Robert , S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis . Cell 143 : 111 – 121 . R (cid:4) u (cid:1) zi (cid:1) cka , K . , Simásková , M . , Duclercq , J . , Petrásek , J . , Zazímalová , E . , Simon , S . , Friml , J . , Van Montagu , M . C . , and Benková , E . ( 2009 ) . Cytokinin regulates root meristem activity via modulation of the polar auxin transport . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 4284 – 4289 . Sabatini , S . , Beis , D . , Wolkenfelt , H . , Murfett , J . , Guilfoyle , T . , Malamy , J . , Benfey , P . , Leyser , O . , Bechtold , N . , Weisbeek , P . , and Scheres , B . ( 1999 ) . An auxin - dependent distal organizer of pattern and polarity in the Arabidopsis root . Cell 99 : 463 – 472 . Sachs , T . ( 1991 ) . Cell polarity and tissue patterning in plants . De - velopment 113 : 83 – 93 . Sauer , M . , Balla , J . , Luschnig , C . , Wisniewska , J . , Reinöhl , V . , Friml , J . , and Benková , E . ( 2006 ) . Canalization of auxin ﬂ ow by Aux / IAA - ARF - dependent feedback regulation of PIN polarity . Genes Dev . 20 : 2902 – 2911 . Sawchuk , M . G . , Edgar , A . , and Scarpella , E . ( 2013 ) . Patterning of leaf vein networks by convergent auxin transport pathways . PLoS Genet . 9 : e1003294 . Scarpella , E . , Marcos , D . , Friml , J . , and Berleth , T . ( 2006 ) . Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin transport . Genes Dev . 20 : 1015 – 1027 . Schaller , G . E . , Bishopp , A . , and Kieber , J . J . ( 2015 ) . The yin - yang of hormones : cytokinin and auxin interactions in plant development . Plant Cell 27 : 44 – 63 . Shevell , D . E . , Leu , W . M . , Gillmor , C . S . , Xia , G . , Feldmann , K . A . , and Chua , N . H . ( 1994 ) . EMB30 is essential for normal cell division , cell expansion , and cell adhesion in Arabidopsis and encodes a protein that has similarity to Sec7 . Cell 77 : 1051 – 1062 . Shinohara , N . , Taylor , C . , and Leyser , O . ( 2013 ) . Strigolactone can promote or inhibit shoot branching by triggering rapid depletion of the auxin ef ﬂ ux protein PIN1 from the plasma membrane . PLoS Biol . 11 : e 1001474 . Sorefan , K . , Girin , T . , Liljegren , S . J . , Ljung , K . , Robles , P . , Galván - Ampudia , C . S . , Offringa , R . , Friml , J . , Yanofsky , M . F . , and Østergaard , L . ( 2009 ) . A regulated auxin minimum is required for seed dispersal in Arabidopsis . Nature 459 : 583 – 586 . Spitzer , C . , Reyes , F . C . , Buono , R . , Sliwinski , M . K . , Haas , T . J . , and Otegui , M . S . ( 2009 ) . The ESCRT - related CHMP1A and B proteins PIN - Driven Auxin Transport 31 mediate multivesicular body sorting of auxin carriers in Arabidopsis and are required for plant development . Plant Cell 21 : 749 – 766 . Steinmann , T . , Geldner , N . , Grebe , M . , Mangold , S . , Jackson , C . L . , Paris , S . , Gälweiler , L . , Palme , K . , and Jürgens , G . ( 1999 ) . Co - ordinated polar localization of auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier PIN1 by GNOM ARF GEF . Science 286 : 316 – 318 . Tanaka , H . , Kitakura , S . , Rakusová , H . , Uemura , T . , Feraru , M . I . , De Rycke , R . , Robert , S . , Kakimoto , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Cell polarity and patterning by PIN traf ﬁ cking through early endosomal compartments in Arabidopsis thaliana . PLoS Genet . 9 : e1003540 . Tanaka , H . , Kitakura , S . , De Rycke , R . , De Groodt , R . , and Friml , J . ( 2009 ) . Fluorescence imaging - based screen identi ﬁ es ARF GEF component of early endosomal traf ﬁ cking . Curr . Biol . 19 : 391 – 397 . Tanaka , H . , Nodzy ł ski , T . , Kitakura , S . , Feraru , M . I . , Sasabe , M . , Ishikawa , T . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Kakimoto , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . BEX1 / ARF1A1C is required for BFA - sensitive recycling of PIN auxin transporters and auxin - mediated development in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell Physiol . 55 : 737 – 749 . Teh , O . K . , and Moore , I . ( 2007 ) . An ARF - GEF acting at the Golgi and in selective endocytosis in polarized plant cells . Nature 448 : 493 – 496 . Tejos , R . , Sauer , M . , Vanneste , S . , Palacios - Gomez , M . , Li , H . , Heilmann , M . , van Wijk , R . , Vermeer , J . E . M . , Heilmann , I . , Munnik , T . , and Friml , J . ( 2014 ) . Bipolar plasma membrane dis - tribution of phosphoinositides and their requirement for auxin - mediated cell polarity and patterning in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 26 : 2114 – 2128 . Utsuno , K . , Shikanai , T . , Yamada , Y . , and Hashimoto , T . ( 1998 ) . Agr , an Agravitropic locus of Arabidopsis thaliana , encodes a novel membrane - protein family member . Plant Cell Physiol . 39 : 1111 – 1118 . Vandenbussche , F . , Petrásek , J . , Zádníková , P . , Hoyerová , K . , Pesek , B . , Raz , V . , Swarup , R . , Bennett , M . , Zazímalová , E . , Benková , E . , and Van Der Straeten , D . ( 2010 ) . The auxin in ﬂ ux carriers AUX1 and LAX3 are involved in auxin - ethylene interactions during apical hook development in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings . Development 137 : 597 – 606 . Viaene , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Directional auxin transport mechanisms in early diverging land plants . Curr . Biol . 24 : 2786 – 2791 . Vieten , A . , Vanneste , S . , Wisniewska , J . , Benková , E . , Benjamins , R . , Beeckman , T . , Luschnig , C . , and Friml , J . ( 2005 ) . Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin - dependent cross - regulation of PIN expression . Development 132 : 4521 – 4531 . Wabnik , K . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Balla , J . , Sauer , M . , Naramoto , S . , Reinöhl , V . , Merks , R . M . H . , Govaerts , W . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . Emergence of tissue polarization from synergy of intracellular and extracellular auxin signaling . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 : 447 . Wabnik , K . , Robert , H . S . , Smith , R . S . , and Friml , J . ( 2013 ) . Modeling framework for the establishment of the apical - basal embryonic axis in plants . Curr . Biol . 23 : 2513 – 2518 . Wang , C . , Yan , X . , Chen , Q . , Jiang , N . , Fu , W . , Ma , B . , Liu , J . , Li , C . , Bednarek , S . Y . , and Pan , J . ( 2013 ) . Clathrin light chains regulate clathrin - mediated traf ﬁ cking , auxin signaling , and development in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 499 – 516 . Went , F . W . ( 1974 ) . Re ﬂ ections and speculations . Annu . Rev . Plant Physiol . 25 : 1 – 27 . Whitford , R . , et al . ( 2012 ) . GOLVEN secretory peptides regulate auxin carrier turnover during plant gravitropic responses . Dev . Cell 22 : 678 – 685 . Willige , B . C . , Ahlers , S . , Zourelidou , M . , Barbosa , I . C . R . , Demarsy , E . , Trevisan , M . , Davis , P . A . , Roelfsema , M . R . G . , Hangarter , R . , Fankhauser , C . , and Schwechheimer , C . ( 2013 ) . D6PK AGCVIII kinases are required for auxin transport and phototropic hypocotyl bending in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 25 : 1674 – 1688 . Willige , B . C . , Isono , E . , Richter , R . , Zourelidou , M . , and Schwechheimer , C . ( 2011 ) . Gibberellin regulates PIN - FORMED abundance and is required for auxin transport - dependent growth and development in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 23 : 2184 – 2195 . Wi (cid:3) sniewska , J . , Xu , J . , Seifertová , D . , Brewer , P . B . , Ruzicka , K . , Blilou , I . , Rouquié , D . , Benková , E . , Scheres , B . , and Friml , J . ( 2006 ) . Polar PIN localization directs auxin ﬂ ow in plants . Science 312 : 883 . Xu , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Cell surface ABP1 - TMK auxin - sensing complex activates ROP GTPase signaling . Science 343 : 1025 – 1028 . Yang , H . , and Murphy , A . S . ( 2009 ) . Functional expression and char - acterization of Arabidopsis ABCB , AUX 1 and PIN auxin transporters in Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Plant J . 59 : 179 – 191 . (cid:1) Zádníková , P . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Role of PIN - mediated auxin ef ﬂ ux in apical hook development of Arabidopsis thaliana . Development 137 : 607 – 617 . Zhang , J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Inositol trisphosphate - induced Ca2 + signaling modulates auxin transport and PIN polarity . Dev . Cell 20 : 855 – 866 . Zhang , J . , Nodzynski , T . , Pencík , A . , Rolcík , J . , and Friml , J . ( 2010 ) . PIN phosphorylation is suf ﬁ cient to mediate PIN polarity and direct auxin transport . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 918 – 922 . Zourelidou , M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Auxin ef ﬂ ux by PIN - FORMED proteins is activated by two different protein kinases , D6 PROTEIN KINASE and PINOID . eLife 3 : e02860 . Zourelidou , M . , Müller , I . , Willige , B . C . , Nill , C . , Jikumaru , Y . , Li , H . , and Schwechheimer , C . ( 2009 ) . The polarly localized D6 PROTEIN KINASE is required for ef ﬁ cient auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana . Development 136 : 627 – 636 . Zwiewka , M . , Feraru , E . , Möller , B . , Hwang , I . , Feraru , M . I . , Kleine - Vehn , J . , Weijers , D . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . The AP - 3 adaptor complex is required for vacuolar function in Arabidopsis . Cell Res . 21 : 1711 – 1722 . Zwiewka , M . , and Friml , J . ( 2012 ) . Fluorescence imaging - based forward genetic screens to identify traf ﬁ cking regulators in plants . Front . Plant Sci . 3 : 97 . 32 The Plant Cell DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 114 . 134874 ; originally published online January 20 , 2015 ; 2015 ; 27 ; 20 - 32 Plant Cell Maciek Adamowski and Jirí Friml PIN - Dependent Auxin Transport : Action , Regulation , and Evolution This information is current as of October 28 , 2017 References / content / 27 / 1 / 20 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 116 articles , 53 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists