CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA OScH in the Wild : Dissemination of Open Science Hardware and Implications for HCI Piyum Fernando Stacey Kuznetsov School of Arts , Media , and Engineering School of Arts , Media , and Engineering Arizona State University Arizona State University piyum . fernando @ asu . edu kstace @ asu . edu A B C D Figure 1 . ( A ) Open source hardware , a DIYBio incubator , developed by the authors ; ( B ) Hands - on work during a DIYbio workshop ; ( C ) OpenDrop digital microﬂudics platform developed by GuadiLabs ( image source : https : / / www . gaudi . ch ) ; ( D ) 3D printable pipette ( image source : https : / / www . thingiverse . com / thing : 255519 ) . ABSTRACT Open Science Hardware ( OScH ) refers to open - source alter - natives for proprietary scientiﬁc equipment . While the OScH movement aims to reduce barriers for scientiﬁc experimen - tation both in and beyond professional labs , disseminating OScH for widespread adoption proves to be challenging in practice . To this end , we examined real - world practices related to the dissemination of OScH through a two - part study . First , we developed an open science hardware , a DIY incubator , and disseminated it through the Instructables website and maker workshops . In parallel , we interviewed eight open science hardware practitioners from different parts of the world . In - sights from interviews together with our own self - reﬂections revealed how different OScH dissemination modalities serve unique purposes . Our ﬁndings also reveal several challenges for widespread adoption of OScH and the importance of col - laborations between OScH developers . We conclude by dis - cussing the opportunities for HCI to lower barriers for cus - tomization , support internationalization of OScH , and scaffold proactive distributed collaborations between developers and users . Author Keywords Open Science Hardware ; DIY ; Maker Movement CCS Concepts Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376659 • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; INTRODUCTION Over the last decade , efforts to democratize access to science have grown into a global movement . At the forefront of this , the Open Science Hardware ( OScH , formerly known as OSH ) initiative aims to create open alternatives for often expensive proprietary scientiﬁc equipment and to reduce barriers for scientiﬁc experimentation both within and outside of profes - sional labs [ 33 ] . The OScH movement makes such open de - signs globally available through free and modiﬁable blueprints ( e . g . , Biropette - 3D printable micropipette ( Figure 1D ) ) or as pre - built open - source instruments ( e . g . , OpenDrop ( Fig - ure 1C ) or DIY assembly kits ( e . g . , Open PCR [ 49 ] ) , which can be obtained , built or assembled for a fraction of the cost of their commercial counterparts . The OScH movement operates within the broader maker culture and takes advantage of DIY fabrication technologies such as 3D printers , laser - cutters , and open electronic prototyping platforms such as Arduino and Raspberry Pi . Paper 530 Page 1 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA While OScH has the potential to broaden participation in sci - ence and impact community - driven knowledge production , effective dissemination of OScH in the real world proves to be challenging due to a lack of clear guidelines for documenta - tion , protocols for quality control and widespread platforms for collaboration [ 25 ] . With this backdrop , our paper presents a study in which we explore real - world practices related to the dissemination of OScH , with an eye towards the opportuni - ties and challenges for HCI . Our work builds on HCI’s rich scholarship on DIY and maker movements ( e . g . , [ 6 , 42 ] ) , but we situate OScH as a unique domain within this landscape for two key reasons . First and foremost , OScH is not solely intended for hobby contexts and is being increasingly used for professional science experiments around the globe including resource - constrained regions [ 8 ] . This extends the scope of OScH beyond popular HCI topics of making such as hobby work , personal use , or self - satisfaction ( e . g . , [ 45 , 51 , 30 ] ) into serving a global socio - economic need [ 8 ] . Secondly , even though the design ﬁles and DIY instructions of OScH are openly available over the internet , in most cases , real - world end users , such as biologists , food scientists , or chemists might not possess the necessary skills or expertise in making ( e . g . , digital fabrication , basic electronics , etc . ) needed to replicate these designs . This in turn brings novel challenges for the dissemination of OScH . Our research goal is to better understand the challenges for dissemination and adoption of OscH , and to examine how HCI might be applied to overcome these . To this end , we conducted our study in two - parts . First , through a long - term iterative design process that started in 2015 in a collaboration with hobbyists and biologists , we developed an open science hardware platform , a DIY incubator ( Figure 1A ) , and openly disseminated its design through the Instructables website [ 28 ] and two maker workshops . We conducted these dissemination activities as self - reﬂective exercises in order to gain hands - on experience in OScH dissemination , and this work positioned us as active contributors to and members of the wider OScH community . Secondly , we interviewed eight open science hard - ware practitioners from different parts of the world including Africa , Asia , Europe and South America . These interviews aimed to uncover the broader experiences of developing , dis - seminating and using OScH in the real world . In this paper , we present ﬁndings from our research consist - ing of insights gained from the interviews and our own self - reﬂections from building and disseminating an OScH plat - form . Our ﬁndings reveal how different OScH dissemination modalities serve unique purposes towards the broader goal of openness and democratic access to science . Our research also reveals how current dissemination practices face challenges for widespread adoption of OScH , and highlights the importance of proactive interactions between OScH developers and end users . We conclude by discussing the opportunities for HCI to lower barriers for customization , support internationalization of OScH , and scaffold collaborations between OScH devel - opers and end users . More broadly , our work highlights new opportunities for HCI to engage with the OScH movement and to contribute to its core mission of open and democratic participation in science . BACKGROUND The roots of OScH go back to the late nineties . Early hardware - focused open source activities started with the emergence of the Open Design Movement in 1997 , which includes the development of physical artifacts—referred to as Open Source Hardware— through the use of publicly shared design blueprints [ 7 , 22 ] . Since its inception , the Open Design Move - ment has been shaped and complemented by the Open Source Software ( OSS ) movement and maker culture [ 23 ] . In the mid 2000s , the emergence of open source DIY electronic platforms such as Arduino , vendors such as Adafruit and Sparksfun , and the proliferation of affordable digital fabrication technologies like consumer - level 3D printers , gave open source hardware and the maker movement a huge boost [ 7 ] . This eventually sparked a new paradigm of scientiﬁc equipment production , where professional scientists as well as amateur science enthu - siasts could fabricate instruments themselves . At present , hundreds of open - source designs , build instruc - tions , and DIY assembly kits of OScH are available online ( e . g . , [ 48 , 10 ] ) . Additionally , there are many pre - built open - source instruments that can be bought for a fraction of the cost of their proprietary versions ( e . g . , [ 49 , 20 ] ) . Over the last decade , OScH has become a global phenomenon . Today , it is being developed and used for education , research , hobby work , as well as to facilitate community driven local citizen science initiatives such as tackling environmental pollution and tracking diseases around the world . While these efforts are facilitated and coordinated by regional OScH initiatives such as TECNOx in Latin America [ 54 ] and The Tech Academy in Bangladesh [ 1 ] , these communities are encompassed by the Global Open Science Hardware ( GOSH ) network 1 . To this end , since 2016 GOSH annually organizes the Gathering for Open Science Hardware ( also known as GOSH ) , supports open science publications , and provides a forum for the global open science hardware community . Foundational Principles of the GOSH community : The global Open Science Hardware network operates in ac - cordance with principles laid out in the GOSH manifesto with the mission of making open science hardware ubiquitous by 2025 [ 25 ] . In summary , the GOSH manifesto outlines 10 foun - dational principles highlighting the open , accessible and decen - tralized production and distribution of open science hardware , and its ethical and inclusive use regardless of one’s scholarly background , country , race , sex or religion . It calls for full disclosure of design ﬁles , blueprints , source codes , schematics etc . , to ensure maintainability and the right to repair , modify and redistribute . The GOSH manifesto also advocates for mov - ing science toward communal , accessible , and collaborative practices , and away from territorial , proprietary , institutional , and individualistic practices , transcending science beyond traditional lab setups . Furthermore , it also details the role of OScH in empowering people and communities to pursue research that is of interest to them , to have technological trans - parency and public oversight and to build a movement . While our own work has been predominantly embedded within this global open science hardware ecosystem , we also see con - 1 http : / / openhardware . science / Paper 530 Page 2 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA nections between our research and two major research trends within HCI and Design : Inquiries into Public Participation in Science and DIY making . Inquiries into Public Participation in Science Community - driven science practices have captured the atten - tion of HCI and design researchers resulting in many publica - tions at popular HCI venues , which explore the intersection of computation and participatory science practices ( e . g . , [ 35 , 36 , 12 ] ) . A body of recent HCI work explores these practices through participatory design [ 50 ] , as new forms of knowledge production [ 34 ] , and by investigating their social , political and economical implications [ 38 ] . More speciﬁcally in the domain of open science hardware , a series of work done by Kera et al . has explored the scientiﬁc , creative , social and humanitarian uses and non - uses of OSH on a global scale ( e . g . , [ 33 , 32 , 2 ] ) . Not only does prior HCI citizen science research aim to democratize citizen - driven science practice , it also highlights open source scientiﬁc equipment as a key opportunity area for HCI . Building on this , our work explores how HCI might be applied to support real - world dissemination and widespread adoption of OScH , a topic which has not been widely studied within HCI . HCI and DIY Making Practices around DIY making have also been examined in a multitude of contexts within HCI , including digital fabrication techniques ( e . g . , [ 30 , 44 , 46 ] ) , DIY electronic prototyping platforms ( e . g . , [ 60 , 9 , 47 ] ) , personal fabrication [ 45 ] and self - made tools [ 5 ] , and many others . In parallel , a body of work has focused on the broader impacts of such practices in the contexts of community engagement with technology [ 62 , 51 ] , social well being [ 53 , 56 , 16 , 43 ] , and emerging sites of open innovation [ 6 , 42 ] . Another strand of research has focused on DIY knowledge sharing including work by Torrey et al . on online how - to pages [ 57 ] and Tseng and Resnick’s investigation on the challenges of authoring DIY projects [ 59 ] . Even though OScH overlaps with existing HCI research on DIY making and maker cultures , the scope of OScH goes beyond those topics as it tries to serve a signiﬁcant global need by lowering the barriers for democratic access to sci - entiﬁc equipment around the world . To this end , our work explores real - world OScH dissemination , which comprises several underexplored areas in OScH making and knowledge sharing , including local sourcing of materials , economic and logistical constraints , language barriers and issues related to customization and troubleshooting . We position ourselves as active OScH practitioners , and our approach is inspired by Wakkary et al . ’s work [ 61 ] on DIY tutorial authorship , which suggests a practice - oriented role for interaction designers . METHODS To investigate the real - world practices of and challenges for OScH dissemination , we conducted a two - part study : a ) an interview study with eight open science hardware practitioners and b ) a series of self - reﬂective activities where we designed and disseminated an open science hardware platform—a low cost , yet accurate DIYbio incubator—via the Instructables website and two DIY maker workshops . Below we describe our two - part study methods in detail . Interview Study with Open Science Hardware Practitioners We promoted our interview study using an invitational ﬂyer seeking participants with at least one year of experience in building , hacking , sharing , or making use of open science hard - ware as a part of their open science practice . We distributed the ﬂyer to members of the Gathering for Open Science Hard - ware ( GOSH ) network as well our personal contacts from the broader open science hardware community in which we have been embedded for several years . We recruited eight open science hardware practitioners ( P1 - P8 , 4 females , age range 22 to 50 ) from Asia ( P1 , P2 , P5 ) , Africa ( P6 , P7 ) , Europe ( P3 ) , South America ( P4 ) , and the USA ( P8 ) who responded to our ﬂyer and fulﬁlled the selection criteria . While all eight participants had substantial experience in replicating and using OScH , P2 and P3 also had extensive experience in developing and disseminating new designs . While all the participants were driven by a shared passion for advocating for open science hardware , they had varied personal motivations to be involved with OScH . For many of them ( P1 , P5 , P6 and P8 ) OScH is a means of obtaining the necessary equipment to conduct science experiments in places where they do not have access to conventional lab equipment . These include communal places such as makerspaces and libraries , outdoor ﬁeld studies , and classroom settings without access to a laboratory . P2 was particularly interested in sharing his knowledge with open science hardware communities to teach them to build their own science equipment . P3 currently operates a community driven open science lab space and runs a startup business that develops open science equipment , which is sold online . P4 who is a social science researcher , studies the community practices related to open science hardware as part of her academic research . P8 , a college professor in Physics , builds and uses OScH equipment for his own research and teaching in order to overcome the ﬁnancial and geo - political barriers of obtaining conventional lab equipment . Interview Procedure Interviews were semi - structured , 45 - 90 minutes long , and were conducted by video calls with the exception of one in - person interview with P8 . We started the interviews by brieﬂy introducing our research . Then we asked open - ended ques - tions related to the OScH participants developed , replicated or used , the challenges they faced , and their suggestions to improve OScH dissemination platforms and methods . We further asked participants about their involvement with the OScH community and their aspirations related to practicing science and open knowledge sharing . We audio recorded all the interviews , which were later selectively transcribed . Self - Reﬂective Dissemination of Open Science Hardware In parallel , over the last ﬁve years , we have been exploring the intersection of HCI and open science hardware through several ﬁrst - hand research research activities . We established a BSL - 1 open biology lab—a facility that supports work with minimally - risky procedures and materials [ 15 ] — within our HCI studio [ 13 ] . Working with biologists and hobbyists , we Paper 530 Page 3 CHI 2020 Paper Figure 2 . Workshop participant assembling our OScH kit to build a DIYbio incubator at Genspace , NYC . identiﬁed a need for and designed a low - cost ( $ 75 ) and ac - curate ( + / - 0 . 25C ) incubator which can be used for basic mi - crobiology experiments such as bacteria culturing and yogurt fermentation . In our design process , we made use of low - cost , simple materials such as a styrofoam box and a tungsten light bulb , and off - the - shelf DIY electronic components such as an Arduino , an Adafruit Temperature sensor and a pre - built LCD module . In order to accurately control the temperature , we custom - designed an AC phase control module from scratch . We also designed a wooden laser cut enclosure to reliably house all the components ( Figure 1A ) . We successfully used this low - cost incubator in several microbiology experiments within our facility as well as at other DIYbio workspaces ( Fig - ure 1B ) ) including a local hackerspace and a workshop at ACM CHI 2017 [ 3 ] . Then , we disseminated our incubator using two methods : an online tutorial posted on Instructables and two maker work - shops . Disseminating via Instructables We openly shared our design ﬁles ( CAD ﬁles of the enclo - sure ) , electronic schematics , bill of materials , and step - by - step guidelines for replicating the incubator on the Instructables website [ 28 ] . We then used the Instructables tutorial as a medium to connect with real world OScH users . To this end , we actively engaged with the users who tried out our design via online discussions , direct messages and emails . To date , our Instructable has been viewed over 15 , 000 times . We re - ceived around 20 messages / emails from end users on topics such as customizing or repurposing our design , seeking assis - tance for troubleshooting and inquiring about possibilities of using alternative materials . Disseminating via DIY Maker Workshops In addition , we disseminated our platform in two maker work - shops . The ﬁrst of the two workshops was a half - day event held at a popular makerspace in central Singapore . The sec - ond workshop was held as two 3 - hour long sessions over two consecutive weekdays at Genspace—a community driven biospace in New York City [ 21 ] . Participating Communities : The makerspace where we hosted our ﬁrst workshop is one of the most popular places CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA among Singapore DIY communities with diverse interests ranging from electronics and IT to art and biology . The DIY - bio community with whom we co - organized the workshop is afﬁliated with this makerspace . Even though the makerspace does not provide bio equipment or lab facilities to conduct biology experiments , this bio community makes use of this space for regular meetups and workshops related to biotech - nology . Participants were invited through a public event page created on Facebook and 6 participants ( 4 females , 2 males , age range 18 to 45 ) attended . Additionally , 3 members of the makerspace who had expertise in electronics were actively in - volved in the workshop by guiding the participants throughout the hands - on sessions . Genspace , where the second workshop was held , is a well - established DIYbio community and BSL - 1 lab space in New York City . This community consists of hobbyists , en - trepreneurs , artists , designers , and scientists . The community space provides its members with a laboratory equipped with molecular and synthetic biology facilities . The workshop held here was promoted through an online social event page and 5 participants ( 3 females , 2 males , age range 20 to 55 ) attended . Only 2 participants had prior experience with DIY electronics . Workshop Structure : In both workshops , participants were divided into groups of 2 or 3 people , matching participants to compliment their prior knowledge of electronics . Both workshops followed a similar structure . They started with an introduction to Arduino programming , in which participants learned how to use the Arduino IDE , connected an LED , up - loaded an example code to blink an LED , and modiﬁed it . Participants were then presented with an overview of the ma - terials required to build our incubator . After that , they relied on relevant online tutorials ( e . g . , product web pages and our Instructables post ) and guidance from workshop organizers to experiment , build , and test the functionality of the incuba - tors ( Figure 2 ) . Throughout the workshops , we encouraged questions and discussion . At the end of the maker activities , we carried out informal post - workshop discussions in order to gain feedback from the participants . All these discussions were audio - recorded with the consent of the participants and later transcribed . Data Analysis Transcripts from the eight interviews and workshops along with the records of online discussions with Instructables users and personal notes were synthesized using open coding meth - ods to extract common themes . In this paper , we reference data owing to participants from our interviews as P1 - P8 , par - ticipants from our ﬁrst workshop as W1P1 - W1P6 , and partici - pants from the second workshop as W2P1 - W2P5 . FINDINGS The diversity of the interviewee pool together with our own experiences of interacting with open science hardware enthusi - asts in multiple contexts allowed us to broadly understand the ways in which OScH is disseminated in the real world and the deterrents for widespread adoption . Furthermore , throughout our study , we noted the importance of proactive engagements between OScH developers and end users , and technical and Paper 530 Page 4 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA social challenges for such engagements . Below we detail our ﬁndings under three themes : how different OScH dis - semination modalities serve unique purposes , challenges for widespread adoption of OScH , and collaborations between developers and end users . Different OScH Dissemination Modalities Serve Unique Purposes In our research , we found that the ways in which OScH is disseminated fall into three distinct categories : online DIY instructions , pre - built open - source instruments , and OScH workshops organized by local OScH communities . While all these dissemination modalities are based on the common ethos of openness and democratic access to science , our ﬁndings re - vealed how each of these modalities embrace those principles in unique ways . Online DIY Instructions Enable Reaching a Wider Audience with Less Overhead Online DIY instructions provide step - by - step guidelines to replicate OScH designs produced by OScH developers . In most cases , such instructions also come with bills of materials ( BOM ) , web links for sourcing materials , ﬁrmware source codes , and design blueprints such as CAD models , electronic schematics and PCB designs . End users can follow these in - structions by making use of digital fabrication equipment such as 3D printers and laser cutters and basic maker skills such as microcontroller programming , wiring , soldering , woodwork - ing etc . These instructions are shared through OScH web platforms like Hackteria [ 26 ] , DocuBricks [ 11 ] as well as pop - ular DIY documentation platforms like Instructables [ 28 ] and , in some cases , source code repositories such as GitHub [ 24 ] . With the accelerated growth of online science and DIY com - munities in the last decade , OScH developers can now reach a wider audience by disseminating OScH instructions through DIY tutorials . This includes communities from regions which are otherwise constrained by geo - political barriers such as international trade sanctions and logistical limitations [ 8 ] . The story of P7 , an African physicist and a university lecturer who populated a physics lab from self - produced equipment provides a noteworthy example . Due to several sanctions im - posed against his country , it was difﬁcult for him to acquire instruments for his research and teaching . Because of these limitations , he went on to successfully build equipment includ - ing a signal generator and multi - gate sequence timer , by solely following DIY instructions available over the internet . Similar to open - source software , this method of dissemination is done entirely through digital mediums , which signiﬁcantly reduces the overhead costs for developers . Currently , hundreds of DIY tutorials for building science instruments are available over the internet , including many derivatives of similar instruments . Pre - built Open - source Instruments Enable Immediate Entry Into Science Experimentation OScH is also disseminated as pre - built units that often allow complete out - of - the - box functionality ( e . g . , Open Drop 2 , an open source digital microﬂuidics platform from Gaudi Labs ) . 2 https : / / www . gaudi . ch / GaudiLabs / ? page i d = 392 In some cases , these are available as kits that can be assembled without special skills or tools ( e . g . , Open PCR 3 , a low - cost yet accurate thermocycler for controlling PCR reactions for DNA detection ) . These pre - built units and kits are usually sold online for a fraction of the cost of proprietary equipment by individuals or small groups of developers . They are often manufactured in relatively small quantities by low volume manufacturing facilities such as PCB houses and fab labs . Even though these pre - built instruments do not require tinker - ing from end users in order to function , developers make their design blueprints and source - codes openly available , which enable these instruments to be inspected , repaired , modiﬁed , and even sold by anyone . Primarily , these pre - built units and kits provide relatively low - cost options for obtaining science instruments for practitioners who are constrained by the higher price tag of proprietary equipment and do not have the time or skills to build hardware from scratch . While online DIY instructions require time , effort , and skills in making , disseminating instruments that are already pre - built enables immediate access to affordable scientiﬁc instruments . P3 further elaborated on this : “It is hard to think that everyone has the skills and time needed to build tools by following tutorials . Sometimes you have to put in more time for troubleshooting after you build it . Some people are primarily interested in doing science they love and curious about , but not necessarily in building instruments or playing with electronics . They are just looking for tools that they can afford . ” Many other participants ( P4 , P5 , P6 , P7 and P8 ) also expressed similar sentiments , and our experience with disseminating our incubator OScH platform also resonates with them . In the DIY biology workshops we conducted , having pre - built equipment enabled the participants to not worry about wiring components , programming the Arduino or troubleshooting the circuit , and instead , they had more time to tinker with bacteria , nutrients , petri dishes , and swabs— materials they were innately interested in working with . OScH Workshops Serve Local Needs and Scaffold Communities of Active Learners OScH workshops are usually organized by local open science hardware activists and are highly inﬂuential in promoting lo - cal adoption of OScH around the world . These workshops are primarily intended for serving local needs related to the dissemination of OScH , such as helping communities to build their own instruments using locally sourced materials . As our interviewees mentioned , these workshops are mainly con - ducted in or translated into local languages when organized by non - native speakers . While these workshops often produce functional instruments , their major focus is not the ﬁnal prod - uct , but rather the process of making and learning . According to P1 , instead of closely following a set of instructions , these workshops try to empower people to take ownership of their scientiﬁc instruments by providing a holistic understanding of the maker process : “Workshops teach users to understand how things work , and to know what’s inside and then later 3 https : / / openpcr . org / Paper 530 Page 5 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA improve them or customize to their needs . This is a way of empowering them to take ownership of their practice . ” Another noteworthy aspect of these workshops is the simple and opportunistic [ 27 ] nature of the artifacts being built during these workshops . To this end , P2 , who has spent substantial time in Southeast Asia conducting such workshops and open science ﬁeld work , elaborated on how materiality and tools affect the participants : “Products with nice enclosures and white laser cut wood might make them look reliable . But peo - ple may also think that they can not build these things without a laser cutter . Whereas messy prototypes with hot glued parts look easy to build and are less intimidating . I always try to keep it simple [ by ] only [ using ] everyday materials and simple tools . ” Furthermore , our participants mentioned these workshops as being highly generative encounters as they often produce con - structive community discussions around open science and other local issues . To this end , P2 emphasized “human to hu - man interactions” ( P2 ) that occur during hands - on making as integral to building communities . These sentiments align with our experience as well . Our workshops also produced many impromptu discussions around broader issues related to open science hardware including safety and ethical concerns , the role of universities and research institutes in promoting open science hardware , and potential ways open science hardware can challenge and reshape traditional academic models . Challenges for Widespread Adoption of OScH In recent years , hundreds of local grassroots organizations have rallied around the global OScH movement striving to pro - mote OScH around the world . However , our study highlighted several challenges that hinder widespread adoption of OScH . Below we describe them under three categories : challenges for customization , challenges for troubleshooting , and challenges for international adoption . Challenges for Customization Our studies highlight instances where users faced challenges to customize open designs to better ﬁt their needs . Over the last three years , we have received a number of direct mes - sages through Instructables from users seeking help to cus - tomize our incubator design . These ranged from modifying the source code to be compatible with different versions of Arduino boards , to supporting different AC input voltages or repurposing our design to build a chicken egg hatcher . How - ever , what was most striking to us were the instances where users found it difﬁcult to make minor adjustments to the 2D drawing of the enclosure based on the dimensions of the styro - foam box they used . The dimensions of the laser cut enclosure could be modiﬁed by editing the CorelDraw ﬁle we provided with our Instructable . Even though making smaller adjust - ments to a CorelDraw ﬁle may seem trivial , in most practical cases users were unable to do so due to not having access to a computer with CorelDraw ( or any similar program ) , not know - ing how to use those software packages , or ( in most cases ) both . Similarly , during a post - workshop discussion session , one participant ( W2 - P2 ) stated : “This incubator is too big for my space , I want a smaller one with a smaller styrofoam box . Is there a tool that I can just enter the dimensions of my styrofoam box and it will generate a ﬁle for me ? [ Because ] I don’t know how to do it manually . ” While many of our interview participants also expressed simi - lar concerns , according to some of them ( P1 , P4 , P5 ) , another major challenge for customization is the complexity of the designs . As they mentioned , sub - elements of those designs ( i . e . , sub - assemblies of a CAD ﬁle , individual electronic com - ponents used in a PCB , dimensions of 3rd party hardware , etc . ) are tightly coupled to each other , which in turn makes doing even a simple modiﬁcation challenging . P4 elaborated : “Most of the time , if you want to change or modify a design , you should learn the required software tools ﬁrst . Even if it is a very small change , you should have a reasonable level of competency in that software . Because of the way some of these ﬁles are originally created , a small change can lead to a lot of other changes . This is a real barrier for most of the users . ” Challenges for Troubleshooting Throughout our interviews , participants pointed out several instances in which they had to go through multiple iterations of troubleshooting in order to get their instruments to function . According to them , the biggest challenge for troubleshooting is the lack of simpliﬁed documentation on underlying working principles . P5 stated : “If you do not understand the source code or how a circuit works you can’t ﬁx them . The problem is , most online tutorials usually don’t explain how things work , even if they do , they were not written in a way that everyone can understand . ” Over the last 5 years , we have received multiple emails in response to our Instructable , asking for simpliﬁed documentation on parts of our OScH design ( e . g . , PID logic , AC phase controller , use of Arduino hardware timers ) . Most of the emails mentioned that this information would help troubleshoot the OScH . We made several updates to our Instructable by integrating simpliﬁed explanations of the underlying working principles of our system . In addition , according to P1 , another facet of this challenge is the lack of information on potential issues and solutions included in online instructions . As she put it : “Online docu - ments provide you with sets of instructions to follow , but they do not document the ways in which you can potentially get those instructions wrong or the previous instances of people running into problems when trying to follow those instructions , [ or ] how did they overcome those problems . ” While many of our participants mentioned instances where they ran into issues when following online instructions as well as instances where they were able to successfully troubleshoot such issues , none of them had proactively shared such experiences through online channels . Challenges for International Adoption Seven out of the eight participants in our interview study had substantial experience of working with non - English speaking open science hardware communities . According to them , a key challenge faced by these communties is the language barrier ( e . g . , P6 : “in my experience the biggest issue is the language” ) . As they pointed out , the majority of online materials are in English and most open sharing platforms do not provide trans - lations or multilingual support , which signiﬁcantly hinders Paper 530 Page 6 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA their use in non - English speaking regions . As P1 mentioned “Platforms like Instructables are heavily west - centric . [ Most of the ] content is in English , they are not popular among non - English speaking communities . ” Another challenge is that these materials are not search - engine - optimized for non - English search terms . According to P2 , most of these materials do not get picked up by search engines when native language search terms are used . He further elaborated on this issue : “Some of the tools I built are available in Hackteria for years , but people in Indonesia haven’t even seen them . It is a problem in Europe as well . When people use German or French search terms , they do not see materials written in English . ” Apart from language barriers , most open designs rely on hard - ware components that are either only available in North Amer - ica or Europe or are extremely expensive to obtain in other countries due to shipping costs and economic disparities . P2 went on to further elaborate on this : “One popular thinking is that anything “Arduino - powered” is cheap , but the reality is Arduinos are still comparatively expensive in some coun - tries . For the price of an Arduino you can spend a whole week in Indonesia . ” Nonetheless , our interviews brought into focus many successful attempts in building functional instru - ments in those regions in spite of such challenges , including P7’s lab equipment and P2’s work in Southeast Asia using locally - sourced materials . When reﬂecting on these concerns , we noted that the design of our open - source incubator is also tightly coupled to com - ponents that can only be sourced through North American distributors such as Adafruit or Amazon US . Even though we tried to make some references to local or regional vendors and tried to make it easier to build our kit using locally sourced materials , we were unable to do so due to the lack of informa - tion about regional suppliers . Because of these challenges , in many cases we responded to requests by shipping all necessary off - the - shelf components together with our custom made AC control module . However , this model is not feasible in the long run due to shipping and handling costs . Collaborations between OScH Developers and Users Unlike proprietary scientiﬁc equipment , OScH expects end - users to be more active than mere consumers , and encourages proactive participation from end users to inform the develop - ment process [ 25 ] . As P5 eloquently stated , “OScH [ plat - forms ] are not intended to be considered as products . They are projects . No matter if you replicate , hack or modify an existing design or just use an out of the box instrument , you can give back to the community by sharing your experience of building or using it and help improve the project . ” While iteration based on consumer feedback is not uncommon in commercial product design processes , OScH development projects signiﬁcantly rely on community - driven approaches to obtain user feedback due to monetary restrictions . Most of these projects are driven by non - proﬁt organizations or , are operated as individually - run small scale start - ups . Due to this , unlike their counterparts in capitalistic manufacturing mod - els , OScH developers do not possess the luxury of having a dedicated budget for rigorous user testing , quality assurance , or user research . P1 elaborated on how the OScH model is designed to overcome such restrictions through participatory approaches : “These instruments are pressure tested in the ﬁeld where they are being used . They are QAed by the people who build [ replicate ] them or use them , not only by who developed them . At the end of the day , it is a community effort , we all should contribute . ” P3 , a small - scale OScH manufacturer , shared one instance of many where this model was hugely suc - cessful : “I got really important contributions from users who bought it [ OScH ] , used it and hacked it , then I incorporated them [ their modiﬁcations ] back into the design . I can say at least probably half of the success of my products are from what other people have contributed . There were instances where people suggested new things so I decided this a good way to go . I would never have been able to get to this point with these products without the help of the community . ” Our own experiences with the incubator concur with our partici - pants’ feedback . The current source code used in our incubator is a much reﬁned version of the original code written by us and refactored by makerspace volunteers . Similarly , around 90 % of the in - code comments were added based on the ques - tions raised by the workshop participants and Instructables respondents . While these comments highlight the importance of commu - nication and collaboration between end users and developers , several factors that hinder such communications also surfaced through our study . Challenges for Communication and Collaboration According to many of our study participants , there are sev - eral misconceptions among OScH practitioners that prevent developers from getting feedback from the user community . One such misconception is end users not seeing the value of documenting failures . Similar to troubleshooting , there is a lack of reporting on instances where users could not build functional instruments based on open designs or were unable to reproduce the expected outcomes by using open instruments . P5 attributed the fact that people tend to not share their fail - ures as something derived from traditional academic practice . According to her , traditional academic publications consist of successful attempts but not of failures . She further explained how open science hardware is fundamentally different from this : “It is kind of a pity when you try to make something and it doesn’t work or doesn’t perform as you expected , then it becomes garbage in your backyard . [ . . . ] Failures are an important aspect of open science hardware . [ . . . ] Feedback [ on failed attempts ] is what makes OScH better in different contexts . ” Our participants also pointed out that many popular online dissemination platforms lack features that proactively promote documentation of failures . Looking back , our experience of using Instructables also resonates with this . Instructables has an inbuilt feature called “I made it ” which encourages users to share images and text content after they have ﬁnished the project . However , as we observed , there is no similar feature to nudge documentation of the attempts which failed midway . DISCUSSION Thus far , we have reported insights from a two - part study where we examined real - world practices related to the dissem - Paper 530 Page 7 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA ination of OScH . First , through a long - term iterative process , we developed an open science hardware platform , a DIY in - cubator , and disseminated it through the Instructables website and two maker workshops . Second , we interviewed eight open science hardware practitioners from Africa , Asia , Eu - rope , South America and the USA . Our study revealed how different modalities of OScH dissemination serve unique pur - poses within the broader OScH mission to enable openness and democratic participation in science . Our ﬁndings foregrounded several challenges for customization , troubleshooting , and the global adoption of OScH . Our work further highlighted the importance of collaborations between end users and develop - ers to understand the unique needs and improve the quality of OScH , as well as how existing dissemination platforms and end users’ reluctance to share their failures sometimes hinder such collaborations . In what follows , we discuss the broader implications of our ﬁndings for HCI by highlighting design opportunities and di - rections for future work under three themes : lowering barriers for customization , supporting internationalization of OScH , and scaffolding collaborations between OScH developers and end users . Lowering Barriers for Customization According to the Global OScH Roadmap , one foundational principle of the OScH movement is to allow scientists to exercise freedom in customizing their instruments . Unlike “proprietary black - boxes” [ 25 ] , OScH is intended to be fully transparent and easily - modiﬁable , giving users the ownership of the instruments they use . From a holistic viewpoint , it can be seen that OScH has achieved this to a considerable degree by open - sourcing design blueprints , including ﬁrmware source codes , as well as CAD ﬁles , schematics and PCB designs of electronic modules . In addition , the proliferation of afford - able digital fabrication tools and communal fabrication spaces signiﬁcantly reduce the barriers for converting blueprints into hardware artifacts . However , our ﬁndings reveal that despite the availability of design blueprints and wider access to hard - ware fabrication equipment , the absence of software tools with simpliﬁed workﬂows to modify open design ﬁles is a key chal - lenge for customization , especially for those who come from non - maker domains . Addressing this challenge raises new opportunities and questions for HCI : How might HCI research support the creation of new standards for sharing open - source design ﬁles and open hardware tools to enable quick and easy modiﬁcations ? To examine this area , future HCI research can explore new ﬁle formats and standards for sharing open - source design blueprints that store parametric relationships between different sub - elements of the design . For instance , in the case of our incubator , the overall height , width , and depth of the enclosure can be stored as a function of the respective dimensions of the styrofoam box being used . Future design tools can integrate such parametric representation to allow simple user interfaces and workﬂows to modify original designs . For example , a web - based tool with three text inputs for height , width , and depth of the desired dimensions of an OScH instrument can be used to generate the ﬁnal design of the enclosure based on the parametric relationships stored in the design ﬁle . Such tools could be broadly applied to existing OScH platforms such as Biropette 4 ( 3D printable pipette available through Thingivers web platform ) and Micromanipulator 5 ( 3D printable micropo - sitioning system available through open - labware . net ) to sup - port widespread customization . In addition , new ﬁle formats can support meta - level information on how different parts of an OScH relate to each other . Future design tools can leverage such meta - data to visualize how making a modiﬁcation could impact the relationship within the system . Moreover , future design platforms can further utilize such meta information to visualize touchpoints where users can make modiﬁcations without having to change the whole design . For instance , in the case of 3D printable pipettes , making a small change to the diameter of the pipette shaft to support a different pipette tip will not require any other modiﬁcations . However , changing the diameter of the tip eject handle will require modiﬁcations in the whole design . To this end , future design tools can intelli - gently mediate and guide interactions around such touchpoints based on the expertise of the user . While prior HCI research has paved the way for simple and abstract workﬂows for designing custom - printed circuit boards [ 37 ] , future work can also support easy customization of existing electronic designs . Future PCB blueprints can carry additional meta - data such as web links for alternative compo - nents that can substitute original components and references for region - speciﬁc data such as AC voltages and frequencies . By utilizing such meta - data , future tools can enable easy modi - ﬁcation of existing electronic blueprints . For example , a future design tool can take a country or region as a user input and au - tomatically modify the electronic design to be compatible with the AC mains supply of that country . Furthermore , such tools can auto - generate custom BOM ﬁles by making use of relevant meta - data , based on the location and component availability . Supporting Internationalization of OScH One of the fundamental missions of OScH is to enable scien - tists , both amateur enthusiasts as well as trained professionals in regions that are constrained by a lack of funds to obtain scientiﬁc equipment . In recent years , volunteer - run organiza - tions such as TReND in Africa [ 58 ] , workshops , and ﬁeldwork done by local and foreign open science hardware advocates in several Asian countries , as well as numerous ﬂedgling grass - root organizations in South America have made remarkable contributions to the empowerment of scientiﬁc research in these regions . While the OScH movement continues to grow in these localities , our study pointed out several key challenges related to disseminating OScH including language barriers , not having access to popular open - source materials , and lack of support for ﬁnding local vendors for materials . Over the years , HCI research has extensively explored avenues to facilitate multilingual communication ( e . g . , [ 4 , 18 , 19 ] ) . Building on this rich body of work , HCI research has a lot to contribute to support the multilingual dissemination of OScH : 4 https : / / www . thingiverse . com / thing : 255519 5 https : / / open - labware . net / projects / micromanipulator / Paper 530 Page 8 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA from automated language translation engines , to crowdsourc - ing platforms that mobilize globally - dispersed OScH commu - nities to support multilingual content creation . Furthermore , future research can extend prior HCI work on the authoring and sharing of DIY tutorials ( e . g . , [ 61 ] ) , by exploring the use of language - neutral and more widely understandable mediums such as pictorials for communicating DIY workﬂows related to OScH . Future research can also address issues related to local sourc - ing of materials . To this end , future work can support community - driven , distributed material repositories that store references for “geo - tagged materials” enabling location - based search queries . For example , a search query for an Adafruit temperature sensor from an African country might show refer - ences to local vendors who sell alternative temperature sensor modules or used consumer products ( e . g . , chicken egg hatchers or thermostats ) which can be recycled to obtain a functionally similar temperature sensor . In doing so , future work can build on HCI’s existing knowledge on validating distributed crowd inputs , to provide meaningful and reliable information to end users . Moreover , aspects of OScH internationalization might be addressed through policy making . While exploring policy implications is beyond the scope of our paper , we see great po - tential for future HCI research to support policy interventions for wider adoption of OScH ( e . g . , similar to [ 41 , 17 ] ) . Scaffolding Collaborations between OScH Developers and End Users Throughout this paper , we have brought to light numerous interactions between OScH developers and end users , which occurred over the internet and through in - situ “human to hu - man” ( P2 ) engagements at OScH workshops . We have shown the signiﬁcance of those interactions for the effective and in - clusive dissemination OScH , as they allow end users to seek di - rect guidance from developers , help understand the local needs of diverse open science hardware communities , and improve the quality of OScH designs through participatory feedback . Our ﬁndings further highlighted how the lack of commonly - accepted international platforms and feedback mechanisms hinder collaborations between end users and developers . Drawing on our ﬁndings , ﬁrst , we see opportunities for HCI to facilitate proactive online collaborations between end users and developers of OScH . Indeed , exploring the design and use of internet - based communication platforms such as online forums has been among HCI’s key interests for many years , and recent work has explored these in contexts such as social support [ 29 ] , career mentoring [ 55 ] and science communica - tion [ 31 ] . Future HCI research can build on this rich body of work to explore new digital mediums that allow end users to effectively communicate their experiences , challenges , and needs to hardware developers . For example , future work can explore the use of non - textual digital mediums such as time - lapse images or video clips that capture key moments of end user workﬂows as they build or use OScH . Such mediums will reduce language barriers and allow developers to clearly un - derstand the problems of diverse communities and efﬁciently support their open science hardware practices . Moreover , an exciting body of HCI work has examined several ways in which persuasive design principles can inform the user in - terface design processes in order to nudge people towards completing tasks ( e . g . , [ 14 , 52 ] ) . Drawing on those works , we see new possibilities for improving the user interfaces of online OScH platforms in a way that persuades end users to report their experiences more often during the entire work - ﬂow with OScH . Such interfaces can include new features to celebrate failures . This may in turn help change end user perceptions related to documenting failures and encourage sharing these experiences . In the long run , this would allow developers to receive constructive participatory feedback from larger user groups and communities . Secondly , beyond online interactions , our ﬁndings also high - light opportunities for HCI in mediating real - world , in - situ interactions between developers and end users . Here , future HCI work can explore ways in which existing participatory design approaches similar to work by Lindsay , et al . ( e . g . , [ 39 , 40 ] ) can be utilized to facilitate meaningful , reﬂective and generative interactions between OScH developers and users . For example , designing new OScH for and with end users would enable developers to understand the unique needs and aspirations of diverse communities . Similarly , such activities could blur the distinction between end users and developers : user feedback could be ﬂuidly shared with developers to sup - port the co - design of OScH that better address user needs in the future . CONCLUSION In this paper , we reported insights from our self - reﬂective dis - semination of an OScH platform , a DIYbio incubator , and our interview study with eight OScH practitioners from Africa , Asia , Europe , South America and the USA . Our ﬁndings reveal how different OScH dissemination modalities serve unique purposes , as well as how the challenges for collaborations between OScH developers and end users sometimes hinder widespread adoption of OScH . Our ﬁndings suggest future research opportunities where HCI can be applied to lower bar - riers for OScH customization , support internationalization of OScH , and scaffold collaborations between developers and end users . Through our work , we have shown the potential of HCI to support the global open science hardware movement , and more broadly , the efforts to democratize access to science . Above all , our work foregrounds the possibilities for position - ing ourselves—HCI researchers and practitioners—as active contributors to the wider global open science hardware com - munity , and to orient our research efforts towards proactively supporting a more open , accessible , and inclusive science practice . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank our interview participants , workshop attendees , and everyone who built or used our OScH platform and provided us with valuable feedback . We extend our sincere gratitude to Matthew Pandelakis , Cassandra Barrett , Jenny Molloy , Markéta Dolejšová , Cindy Lin , and Denisa Kera for their support at different stages of this research . Paper 530 Page 9 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA REFERENCES [ 1 ] Tech Academy . 2010 . Tech Academy . http : / / thetechacademy . net / . ( June 2010 ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 20 / 2019 ) . [ 2 ] Justyna Ausareny , Denisa Kera , Stefania Druga , and Yair Reshef . 2014 . Open source hardware ( OSHW ) supporting interaction between traditional crafts and emergent science : wayang kulit over microﬂuidic interfaces . In SIGGRAPH Asia 2014 Designing Tools For Crafting Interactive Artifacts . ACM , 4 . [ 3 ] Madeline Balaam , Lone Koefoed Hansen , Catherine D’Ignazio , Emma Simpson , Teresa Almeida , Stacey Kuznetsov , Mike Catt , and Marie L . J . Søndergaard . 2017 . Hacking Women’s Health . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 476 – 483 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3027085 [ 4 ] Patti Bao , Brent Hecht , Samuel Carton , Mahmood Quaderi , Michael Horn , and Darren Gergle . 2012 . Omnipedia : Bridging the Wikipedia Language Gap . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1075 – 1084 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208553 [ 5 ] Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Austin Toombs . 2014 . now that’s deﬁnitely a proper hack : self - made tools in hackerspaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 473 – 476 . [ 6 ] Shaowen Bardzell , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Sarah Ng . 2017 . Supporting cultures of making : Technology , policy , visions , and myths . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 6523 – 6535 . [ 7 ] Jérémy Bonvoisin , Jean - François Boujut , and others . 2015 . Open design platforms for open source product development : current state and requirements . In DS 80 - 8 Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 15 ) Vol 8 : Innovation and Creativity , Milan , Italy , 27 - 30 . 07 . 15 . 011 – 020 . [ 8 ] Rachel Brazil . n . d . Open - science hardware in the developing world Physics World . https : / / physicsworld . com / a / open - science - hardware - in % E2 % 80 % AFthe - developing - world / . ( n . d . n . d . ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 9 ] Leah Buechley , Mike Eisenberg , Jaime Catchen , and Ali Crockett . 2008 . The LilyPad Arduino : Using Computational Textiles to Investigate Engagement , Aesthetics , and Diversity in Computer Science Education . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 423 – 432 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357123 [ 10 ] cathalgarvey . 2009 . DremelFuge - A One - Piece Centrifuge for Rotary Tools . ( 2009 ) . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / www . thingiverse . com / thing : 1483 [ 11 ] DocuBricks . n . d . DocuBricks . https : / / www . docubricks . com / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 12 ] Alexandra Eveleigh , Charlene Jennett , Ann Blandford , Philip Brohan , and Anna L . Cox . 2014 . Designing for Dabblers and Deterring Drop - outs in Citizen Science . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2985 – 2994 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557262 [ 13 ] Piyum Fernando , Matthew Pandelakis , and Stacey Kuznetsov . 2016 . Practicing DIYBiology In An HCI Setting . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2064 – 2071 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892325 [ 14 ] Brian J Fogg . 2002 . Persuasive technology : using computers to change what we think and do . Ubiquity 2002 , December ( 2002 ) , 5 . [ 15 ] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 2018 . Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories ( BMBL ) 5th Edition | CDC Laboratory Portal | CDC . https : / / www . cdc . gov / labs / BMBL . html ? CDC _ AA _ refVal = https % 3A % 2F % 2Fwww . cdc . gov % 2Fbiosafety % 2Fpublications % 2Fbmbl5 % 2Findex . htm . ( Oct 2018 ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 16 ] Sarah Fox , Rachel Rose Ulgado , and Daniela Rosner . 2015 . Hacking culture , not devices : Access and recognition in feminist hackerspaces . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , 56 – 68 . [ 17 ] Guo Freeman , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2018 . Bottom - Up Imaginaries : The Cultural - Technical Practice of Inventing Regional Advantage through IT RD . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article Paper 325 , 11 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173899 [ 18 ] Ge Gao , Naomi Yamashita , Ari MJ Hautasaari , Andy Echenique , and Susan R . Fussell . 2014 . Effects of Public vs . Private Automated Transcripts on Multiparty Communication Between Native and Non - native English Speakers . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 843 – 852 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557303 [ 19 ] Ge Gao , Naomi Yamashita , Ari MJ Hautasaari , and Susan R Fussell . 2015 . Improving multilingual collaboration by displaying how non - native speakers use automated transcripts and bilingual dictionaries . In Paper 530 Page 10 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3463 – 3472 . [ 20 ] GaudiLabs . 2019 . OpenDrop . ( 2019 ) . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / www . gaudi . ch / OpenDrop / [ 21 ] Genspace . n . d . Genspace . https : / / www . genspace . org / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 22 ] M Geyer , C Reise , F Manav , N Schwenke , S Böhm , and G Seliger . 2012 . Open design for manufacturing - Best practice and future challenges . In Proceedings of the 10th Global Conference on Sustainable Manufacturing , Istanbul , Turkey . [ 23 ] Alicia Gibb and Steven Abadie . 2014 . Building open source hardware : DIY manufacturing for hackers and makers . Pearson Education . [ 24 ] GitHub . n . d . The world’s leading software development platform GitHub . https : / / github . com / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 25 ] GOSH . n . d . GOSH - roadmap - smll . pdf . http : / / openhardware . science / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 12 / GOSH - roadmap - smll . pdf . ( n . d . n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 26 ] Hackteria . n . d . Hackteria . https : / / www . hackteria . org / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 27 ] Björn Hartmann , Scott Doorley , and Scott R Klemmer . 2008 . Hacking , mashing , gluing : Understanding opportunistic design . IEEE Pervasive Computing 7 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 46 – 54 . [ 28 ] Instructables . n . d . Instructables - Yours for the making . https : / / www . instructables . com / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 19 / 2019 ) . [ 29 ] Joshua Introne , Bryan Semaan , and Sean Goggins . 2016 . A Sociotechnical Mechanism for Online Support Provision . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3559 – 3571 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858582 [ 30 ] Jennifer Jacobs and Leah Buechley . 2013 . Codeable Objects : Computational Design and Digital Fabrication for Novice Programmers . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1589 – 1598 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466211 [ 31 ] Ridley Jones , Lucas Colusso , Katharina Reinecke , and Gary Hsieh . 2019 . R / Science : Challenges and Opportunities in Online Science Communication . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 153 , 14 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300383 [ 32 ] Denisa Kera . 2012 . Hackerspaces and DIYbio in Asia : connecting science and community with open data , kits and protocols . Journal of Peer Production 2 , Jun ( 2012 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 33 ] Denisa Kera . 2018 . Science Artisans and Open Science Hardware . Bulletin of Science , Technology & Society ( 2018 ) , 0270467618774978 . [ 34 ] Stacey Kuznetsov , Carrie Doonan , Nathan Wilson , Swarna Mohan , Scott E . Hudson , and Eric Paulos . 2015 . DIYbio Things : Open Source Biology Tools As Platforms for Hybrid Knowledge Production and Scientiﬁc Participation . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4065 – 4068 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702235 [ 35 ] Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010a . Participatory Sensing in Public Spaces : Activating Urban Surfaces with Sensor Probes . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 21 – 30 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858175 [ 36 ] Stacey Kuznetsov and Eric Paulos . 2010b . Rise of the Expert Amateur : DIY Projects , Communities , and Cultures . In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Extending Boundaries ( NordiCHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 295 – 304 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1868914 . 1868950 [ 37 ] Richard Lin , Rohit Ramesh , Antonio Iannopollo , Alberto Sangiovanni Vincentelli , Prabal Dutta , Elad Alon , and Björn Hartmann . 2019 . Beyond Schematic Capture : Meaningful Abstractions for Better Electronics Design Tools . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 283 . [ 38 ] cindy lin kaiying , Silvia Lindtner , and Stefanie Wuschitz . 2019 . Hacking Difference in Indonesia : The Ambivalences of Designing for Alternative Futures . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1571 – 1582 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322339 [ 39 ] Stephen Lindsay , Katie Brittain , Daniel Jackson , Cassim Ladha , Karim Ladha , and Patrick Olivier . 2012a . Empathy , Participatory Design and People with Dementia . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 521 – 530 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207749 [ 40 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schoﬁeld , and Patrick Olivier . 2012b . Engaging Older People Using Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1199 – 1208 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 Paper 530 Page 11 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 41 ] Silvia Lindtner , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2016 . Reconstituting the Utopian Vision of Making : HCI After Technosolutionism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1390 – 1402 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858506 [ 42 ] Silvia Lindtner , Garnet D Hertz , and Paul Dourish . 2014 . Emerging sites of HCI innovation : hackerspaces , hardware startups & incubators . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 439 – 448 . [ 43 ] Janis Lena Meissner , John Vines , Janice McLaughlin , Thomas Nappey , Jekaterina Maksimova , and Peter Wright . 2017 . Do - It - Yourself Empowerment as Experienced by Novice Makers with Disabilities . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , 1053 – 1065 . [ 44 ] David Mellis , Sean Follmer , Björn Hartmann , Leah Buechley , and Mark D . Gross . 2013 . FAB at CHI : Digital Fabrication Tools , Design , and Community . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3307 – 3310 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2479673 [ 45 ] David A . Mellis and Leah Buechley . 2014 . Do - it - yourself Cellphones : An Investigation into the Possibilities and Limits of High - tech Diy . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1723 – 1732 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557309 [ 46 ] David A . Mellis , Dana Gordon , and Leah Buechley . 2011 . Fab FM : The Design , Making , and Modiﬁcation of an Open - source Electronic Product . In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 81 – 84 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1935701 . 1935718 [ 47 ] David A . Mellis , Sam Jacoby , Leah Buechley , Hannah Perner - Wilson , and Jie Qi . 2013 . Microcontrollers As Material : Crafting Circuits with Paper , Conductive Ink , Electronic Components , and an " Untoolkit " . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 83 – 90 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2460625 . 2460638 [ 48 ] Open - Labware . net . 2019 . Biropettes . ( 2019 ) . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / open - labware . net / projects / biropettes / [ 49 ] Open PCR . 2019 . Open PCR . ( 2019 ) . Retrieved January 16 , 2019 from https : / / openpcr . org / [ 50 ] Danial Qaurooni , Ali Ghazinejad , Inna Kouper , and Hamid Ekbia . 2016 . Citizens for Science and Science for Citizens : The View from Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1822 – 1826 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858575 [ 51 ] Yvonne Rogers , Jeni Paay , Margot Brereton , Kate L Vaisutis , Gary Marsden , and Frank Vetere . 2014 . Never too old : engaging retired people inventing the future with MaKey MaKey . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3913 – 3922 . [ 52 ] Joseph Seering , Tianmi Fang , Luca Damasco , Mianhong ’Cherie’ Chen , Likang Sun , and Geoff Kaufman . 2019 . Designing User Interface Elements to Improve the Quality and Civility of Discourse in Online Commenting Behaviors . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 606 , 14 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300836 [ 53 ] Nick Taylor , Ursula Hurley , and Philip Connolly . 2016 . Making community : the wider role of makerspaces in public life . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1415 – 1425 . [ 54 ] TECNOx . n . d . TECNOx : A Latin American Syn Bio ( and more ) student competition | PLOS Synthetic Biology Community . https : / / blogs . plos . org / synbio / 2016 / 02 / 09 / tecnox - a - latin - american - syn - bio - and - more - student - competition / . ( n . d n . d ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 20 / 2019 ) . [ 55 ] Maria Tomprou , Laura Dabbish , Robert E . Kraut , and Fannie Liu . 2019 . Career Mentoring in Online Communities : Seeking and Receiving Advice from an Online Community . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 653 , 12 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300883 [ 56 ] Austin L Toombs , Shaowen Bardzell , and Jeffrey Bardzell . 2015 . The proper care and feeding of hackerspaces : Care ethics and cultures of making . In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 629 – 638 . [ 57 ] Cristen Torrey , David W McDonald , Bill N Schilit , and Sara Bly . 2007 . How - To pages : Informal systems of expertise sharing . In ECSCW 2007 . Springer , 391 – 410 . [ 58 ] TReND . . TReND . https : / / trendinafrica . org / . ( . . ) . ( Accessed on 09 / 20 / 2019 ) . [ 59 ] Tiffany Tseng and Mitchel Resnick . 2014 . Product versus process : representing and appropriating DIY projects online . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , 425 – 428 . [ 60 ] Nicolas Villar , James Scott , and Steve Hodges . 2011 . Prototyping with Microsoft . Net Gadgeteer . In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 377 – 380 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1935701 . 1935790 Paper 530 Page 12 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 61 ] Ron Wakkary , Markus Lorenz Schilling , Matthew A Dalton , Sabrina Hauser , Audrey Desjardins , Xiao Zhang , and Henry WJ Lin . 2015 . Tutorial authorship and hybrid designers : The joy ( and frustration ) of DIY tutorials . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 609 – 618 . [ 62 ] Tricia Wang and Joseph’Joﬁsh’ Kaye . 2011 . Inventive leisure practices : understanding hacking communities as sites of sharing and innovation . In CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 263 – 272 . Paper 530 Page 13