Experiencing Annotation : Emotion , Motivation and Bias in Annotation Tasks Teodor Stoev * Institute for Data Science University of Greifswald Greifswald , Germany teodor . stoev @ uni - greifswald . de Kristina Yordanova Institute for Data Science University of Greifswald Greifswald , Germany kristina . yordanova @ uni - greifswald . de Emma L . Tonkin * University of Bristol Bristol , UK e . l . tonkin @ bristol . ac . uk Abstract —In this paper we present different aspects of how emotions can relate to the problem of data annotation . Our main contribution is an extensive literature review where we discuss how emotions could influence different stages of annotation tasks . The results of our literature review show that the nature of the data itself might be crucial to how the emotional state of annotators is affected , but also that the process is affected by other factors such as initial motivation , time pressure , repetitiveness , emotional reaction to particular words / scenes , and demographic background of annotators . In addition to the literature review we formulate several hypotheses connected with the effects of emotions on the overall annotation process and propose an experiment with the help of which these hypotheses could be studied . Index Terms —data annotation , data labeling , emotion , stress I . Introduction The study of emotion has increasingly become an active area of cross - disciplinary research [ 5 ] in recent years , although the definition of the word ‘emotion’ still remains a disputable topic [ 34 ] . According to Stangor et al . [ 38 ] emotions can be defined as ‘the mental and physiological feeling states that direct our attention and guide our behavior’ and may be grouped into two main categories : fundamental ( ‘basic’ ) emotions and secondary emotions . The former include fear , happiness , sadness , disgust , surprise , and anger , while to the latter belong for example disgust , shame , pride , optimism , etc . Emotions play a crucial role in our everyday life . While nations may considerably disagree in how emotions affect our overall perception of satisfaction , due to cultural values , our life satisfaction is connected to our emotional state [ 19 ] . But how are emotions related to the domain of data annotation , the process of assigning informative and mean - ingful labels to pieces of data and making them usable for Machine Learning ( ML ) algorithms ? Could emotions affect the way people perform labeling and , consequentially , the whole annotation process ? In this paper we open a discussion regarding emotion in annotation tasks . We consider this topic to be of major importance : the effects of the annotation process upon annotators’ emotional state is not considered in most publications related to machine learning , although it may affect the overall quality of the annotation outcome and , consequently , the performance of machine learning models trained on this dataset . There is a regulatory dimension to this concern : the EU’s draft AI act specifies a series of requirements surrounding dataset quality ( e . g . free from errors , representative of appropriate demographics , etc ) ; hence , understanding and controlling factors that affect dataset quality is relevant to regulatory compliance [ 42 ] . The main motivation for our work is a paper by Suravee et al . [ 40 ] where annotators labeled forum texts in which carers describe dementia patients’ behaviours . In discussion between the authors and the annotators following the annotation process , annotators reported feeling upset and negatively affected during the labeling task . This raised the question of how emotions could influence the annotation process . In particular , our main contributions are : • We provide a literature review related to the topic of emotions and their role in annotation tasks . • We present several hypotheses based on this review . • We propose an experimental study ( implemented as a web - app ) to study the hypotheses in a text - related annotation task by using the dataset collected in [ 40 ] . The paper is structured as follows : In section II we provide a literature review on different aspects of emotions in the domain of data annotation . In section III we formulate several hypotheses which are the outcome of our literature survey . Then , in section IV we propose an experimental study in order to test our hypotheses . Finally , in section V we summarize our findings and describe our future work . II . Literature Review A . Effects of harmful or emotional texts on readers and annotators The problem of how texts or other media affect readers / viewers is approached by the literature on content moderation ( CM ) , where the main task is to annotate content for illegal material , harmful material 1 or terms - of - service violations . Kirk et al . [ 18 ] identify several ways in which textual data may cause harm , including harmful content such as misinformation and hate speech . The authors also emphasize that such content could be encountered inadvertently , for instance when gathering data for research . Steiger et al . [ 39 ] characterise commercial content moderation ( CCM ) 1 Draft legislation is currently in preparation in the EU ( e . g . DSA ) and elsewhere relating to this concept : it is broadly defined as material which , while legal , may have harmful effects on some readers / viewers * These Authors contributed equally ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 978 - 1 - 6654 - 5381 - 3 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE 534 20 2 3 I E EE I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n P e r v a s i v e C o m pu t i n g a nd C o mm un i c a t i o n s W o r k s h o p s a nd o t h e r A ff ili a t e d E v e n t s ( P e r C o m W o r k s h o p s ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 538 1 - 3 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / P E R C O M W O R K S H O P S 56833 . 2023 . 10150364 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . as a large - scale task , as an estimated 100 000 people worked in the area during 2021 ; they report that CCM is on the one hand considered to be ‘the worst job in technology’ ( stated in [ 45 ] ) , but , on the other hand , people who do this job may be proud of making the web space safer for others ( as for example discussed in [ 47 ] in the context of Twitch micro communities ) . Automation of the task is difficult due , amongst other things , to ‘high accuracy requirements [ . . . ] , the subjective nature of the task , and complex , ever - changing moderation policies and forms of offending content’ . CCM tasks may lead to ‘vicarious trauma’ [ 39 ] , or the experience of emotional and physical fatigue resulting from empathetic engagement with traumatized people [ 26 ] , for moderators . The ‘invisible’ nature of the work leads to limited concern about the effects on those carrying it out , who are often employed indirectly . Indeed , CCM is often outsourced to the global south [ 1 ] , often relying on crowdsourcing or outsourcing , hence ‘obfuscating’ workers’ presence further [ 1 ] . This produces a false impression of objectivity [ 31 ] , as the process of moderation is opaque and the human workforce involved is largely unacknowledged . Moderator demographics are seldom reported , and if reported , are given inconsistently [ 33 ] . A recent report into OpenAI’s use of outsourced Kenyan content moderation firm Sama provides an illustrative example of sotto voce outsourcing of labour [ 28 ] . In this paper we explore the idea that taking part in annotation tasks may expose participants to material that , while not created with the intention of causing harm , may nonetheless prove hazardous to annotators . B . Stress and vicarious trauma in clinicians Marriage et al . [ 21 ] conducted an experimental study to explore the psychological responses and coping mechanisms of clinicians working with patients and families who have experienced excessive stress and trauma , finding that health professionals may develop vicarious traumatisation , and had developed several mitigations ( see section II - H ) . The results of this study raise the question of whether annotators of textual data could also be affected in a similar way when reading about stressful situations . In fact , the dataset described in [ 40 ] contains exactly such situations in the domain of patients with dementia and later in this work we will discuss how it could be used to perform an experiment for measuring how content affects the overall annotation process . C . Existing studies into research annotation of emotive texts Most studies into emotive text do not consider the effects on annotators ; for example , N´emeth et al . [ 25 ] describe a study that annotated patient - provided forum posts relating to depression , using social science students as annotators , attempting to categorise posts by topic and aspect of depression ( e . g . biomedical , social ) . The resulting labels had a low Cohen’s kappa ( 0 . 42 ) . No effect on annotators is mentioned ; the study did not evaluate this . By contrast , McKenzie et al . [ 23 ] describe a process in which research assistants ( RAs ) processed notes relating to suicide and suicidal behaviour , as part of a community intervention trial for suicide prevention . RAs used clinical notes , clerical notes and mental health records to decide which cases reflected Deliberate Self Harm ( DSH ) and suicidal ideation . The eight non - clinically trained research assistants involved were interviewed after a year working on the material . RAs indicated that they found the task stressful and frustrating in certain cases and that they found themselves drawn into individuals’ stories , describing the content as ‘shocking’ and ‘disturbing’ . They experienced cumulative stress as a result of this activity . Some RAs reported increased vigilance and awareness of the physical safety of themselves and others . While all RAs identified coping strategies , patient confidentiality meant that it was difficult to discuss the data externally . This echoes the findings of Kinard [ 17 ] , who reported negative effects upon researchers studying child maltreatment , including feelings of anger , sadness , frustration , and powerlessness . Similarly , Alexander et al . [ 2 ] report that researchers working on data drawn from rape crisis centres , which related to sexual abuse and rape , suffered ‘anger , dreams , fear of physical injury , and sleep disorders’ . D . Social , demographic and individual factors : effects on experiencing and recognition of emotion In considering the effects of emotive material on annotators , it is worth noting that annotators’ responses may vary . Re - garding age , Saakyan et al . [ 33 ] point out emotion recognition may be affected by demographic factors . Di Domenico et al . [ 10 ] find that older adults ( e . g . in their 70s ) recognise happy emotions faster than angry emotions , while this difference does not exist in younger adults ( in their 20s ) . They also rank both happy and angry expressions as more intense than the ranking given by younger adults . This preference for positive stimuli in older adults is called the positivity effect [ 6 ] . Regarding cultural and social factors , emotion recognition is generally more accurate for perceivers from the same group as expressors [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] . More broadly , these factors highlight the relevance of constructivist psychological theories . While a full discussion of this is beyond the scope of this paper , in constructivist theories individuals are understood as constructing ( making ) knowledge through experience and contact with others . For example , George Kelly’s personal construct theory postulated that an in - dividual actively constructs their world through anticipation and observation [ 46 ] – personal interpretation and understanding . Individuals therefore differ from one another in the way they experience events [ 3 ] . In the context of content moderation , reactions to material containing potentially distressing material may likewise be expected to vary idiosyncratically , culturally and as a result of experience . E . Effects of repetitive tasks on mental strain Annotation tasks can be viewed as tasks which contain elements of repetitiveness . Although the samples in given datasets for annotation are usually different ( e . g . texts which contain different words ) the labelling process itself remains the same ; e . g . the same software is used throughout and the steps involved are somewhat repetitive . H¨ausser et al . [ 16 ] review literature on repetitive tasks , identifying a series of psychophysiological correlates such as stress ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 535 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . responses , increased blood pressure , musculoskeletal complaints , sleep problems and negative effects on well - being . However , they also identify that performance increases occur when given a highly repetitive task ; the performance increase detected is potentially due to a learning effect , increasing familiarity with the task . Although high repetitiveness might boost the task performance , the negative effect on people’s well - being is a concern [ 16 ] . Demerouti et al . [ 9 ] summarises the effects of mental strain ( as impairment of functional efficiency ) and identifies some mitigations . The authors identify monotony as a cause : a short - term strain reaction in individuals resulting from ‘repetitive task performancewithanarrowfieldofattentionundermonotonousjobconditions’ , associated with ‘drowsiness , tiredness , and reductions in adaptability and responsiveness’ . They find that this is resolved rapidly through change in work activities . F . Motivation as a factor In this section , we briefly consider the reasons why individuals might engage in annotation tasks : what intrinsic or extrinsic motivations might an individual have to take part in an annotation task ? The broader question motivating this section is : to what extent might these counterbalance the stressors involved in annotation ? Stangor et al . [ 38 ] [ Chapter 11 ] relate emotions and motivations as the two main components of affect , itself defined as ‘the experience of feeling or emotion’ ; motivation is ‘a driving force that initiates and directs behaviour’ . Motivations are connected with our desire to reach a certain goal state or a reward which makes us happy ( for instance , eating in order to satisfy appetite or doing sport in order to get a desired health outcome ) . Existing research has explored how motivation can affect the annotation process . In a study of annotator experiences in a crowdsourced emotion recognition task , Ohman [ 27 ] identifies that students performing an annotation task on a corpus of movie subtitled found the task interesting as a ‘learning experience’ , and explicitly identifies this as a motivating factor for annotators . Wang et al . [ 43 ] discusses how people can be motivated to take part in crowdsourcing annotation tasks . The authors mention three main motivation factors : fun , profit and altruism . ‘Fun’ is especially important in the context of crowdsourcing platforms which incorporate a game with a purpose ( GWAP ) approach , where gamification principles are applied for annotation . A good example for this is a game called ‘Genes in Space’ [ 7 ] , or [ 29 ] . Profit is also considered as a motivation , as in the case of crowdsourcing platforms in which workers are paid to perform annotation tasks . 2 The third motivation factor , altruism , suggests that annotators may perform tasks for the benefit of others ; for example , contributors to Wikipedia may be motivated by the needs of the community , while volunteer moderators on Reddit and Twitch may be motivated by strong commitment to particular ‘channels’ ( e . g . subgroups ) [ 41 ] , [ 35 ] . It is worth noting that altruism as construed here may be defined within the context of a particular subgroup , rather than a more abstract notion ( such as working towards a common good that benefits society at large ) . 2 The ethical and data quality implications of these platforms are widely discussed in the literature ( e . g . [ 14 ] ) and are out of scope for this paper . G . Effects of emotion on annotation In this section we explore the literature for known effects of emotion on lower - level processing and recall , in order to establish a theoretical basis for predicting how emotional valence and emotional state might affect labelling tasks . 1 ) Processing : One type of study exploring the effect of emotional words is the ‘emotional’ Stroop colour - naming study . In general , Stroop studies are widely used to investigate the properties of stimuli that cause interference to a simple colour naming task : for example , if the words given are nonsense words ( non - words ) then they cause less interference [ 37 ] . Where emotional words are used , there is greater interference observed in naming the colour of emotional words than of neutral words . Emotional effects are demonstrated for words with negative affect [ 20 ] . Similarly , if spider - phobics are asked to perform a Stroop task with words related to spiders , their performance is severely impaired compared to non - spiderphobics on the same task [ 44 ] . Stroop studies are sensitive to demographic : a Stroop study comparing the performance of high - and low - anxiety groups on stimuli with positive , neutral , and threat stimuli found that low - anxiety participants performed similarly on all types of stimuli , whereas high - trait participants responded faster on positive stimuli and slower for threat stimuli . Time pressure also intensifies these effects [ 37 ] ; with little time pressure , these effects are often difficult to detect . 2 ) Memory : Emotion affects recall in complex ways . States such as depression and anxiety may cause attention - diverting ( irrelevant ) thoughts , interfering with task performance [ 36 ] ; Seibert et al . found that a group in a neutral emotional state did better in a recall task than individuals in either a happy or sad emotional state . Easterbrook [ 11 ] proposed an ‘attention - narrowing hypothesis’ : since attention is limited , if a negative or threatening stimulus causes emotional arousal , then fewer attentional resources are available to process other information . Hadley et al . [ 15 ] suggest that the presence of ‘taboo’ words , e . g . socially proscribed insults , sexual references , and profanities ( compared with control terms , neutral words relating to foodstuffs or cooking ) , affects recall on tasks That is , participants tend to remember taboo words better than neutral words when they are presented together . This is held to reflect an ‘interference effect’ – ‘a taboo word triggers an emotional reaction that delays the binding of episodic context for neutral neighbors , thereby impairing their encoding in rapidly presented lists containing taboo and neutral words’ [ 15 ] . Mather et al . [ 22 ] proposed a theory of ‘arousal - based computation’ , which is to say that high - priority stimuli are selected in favour of low - priority stimuli in general , and this effect is heightened in the case of emotional arousal . Consequentially , a stimulus that causes emotional arousal will be remembered better than stimuli that do not . H . Approaches to stress monitoring & management Several papers propose stress management and mitigation approaches . Steiger et al . [ 39 ] suggest organisational support measures and self - led approaches such as ‘distancing’ to limit stress , but also indirect measures such as controllable filters to reduce the bandwidth of material viewed ( e . g . user - controlled ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 536 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . blurring of harmful features [ 8 ] grayscaling and so forth ) . Marriage et al . identified several mitigations , following the feedback of professionals , such as : humour , hobbies , compartmentalisation , and mentoring with colleagues [ 21 ] . Both [ 17 ] and [ 2 ] also suggest similar coping measures that can be taken to reduce the impact on researchers , while Demerouti et al . [ 9 ] suggest change in work activities to limit mental strain . In - principle best practice in industry is hinted at by Time’s investigation of OpenAI’s 2021 - 2 outsourcing of content labelling of ‘toxic’ material to Kenya ( mentioned in Section II - A , above ) , during which OpenAI commented that , ‘Our [ . . . ] understanding was that [ at the contracted company ] wellness programs and 1 : 1 counseling were offered , workers could opt out of any work without penalization , exposure to explicit content would have a limit , and sensitive information would be handled by workers who were specifically trained to do so’ adding , however , that the external company was responsible for managing ‘mental health provisions for employees’ . Several assessment mechanisms which have been used to evaluate stress , e . g . the General Health Questionnaire , a self - screening tool relating to psychiatric disorder ; the Perceived Stress Scale , a measurement of stress ; the Oldenburg Burnout Inventory ( OLBI ) ; the Connor – Davidson Resilience Scale ( CD - RISC ) , which measures resilience , e . g . against stress . H¨ausser et al . [ 16 ] propose the use of an adapted version of the Plath & Richter questionnaire [ 30 ] to measure mental strain . III . Research questions & Hypotheses Based on the literature review above , in the following we define several hypotheses related to the topic of emotions in annotation and our main research question : How emotions affect annotation ? Hypothesis 1 : Annotation tasks which contain harmful content or content where stressful situations are described can affect negatively the emotional state of annotators . Hypothesis 2 : During annotation of textual data we expect to see slower processing of samples which cause distressing , threatening or emotional stimuli , particularly in the case of individuals with strong responses to the topic area . Hypothesis 3 : In a control group dealing with repetitive , neutral stimuli , we would expect speed to increase over time due to learning effects . Hypothesis 4 : where recall is involved in an annotation task , emotionally neutral aspects of an annotation task are likely to receive lower priority relative to aspects that involve ‘taboo’ terms or cause emotional arousal . IV . Proposed Experiment In order to explore the above hypotheses , we plan to implement an online application where users will get the task to annotate texts which contain potentially harmful content . Using data drawn from [ 40 ] with the study authors’ consent , we create a dataset with short texts which describe situations of challenging behaviour of dementia patients . Restricting the scope of the experiment to textual data is a limitation of our approach , but we believe that texts are a good starting point , since our immediate goal is to respond to feedback we Figure 1 . The SAM pictograms . have received from annotators who stated that texts negatively affected their emotions ( see Introduction I ) . In particular , we will ask users to complete the following assignments given short text snippets : A1 : The emotions that the text triggers are : positive , negative , or neutral ? ( only one option is possible ) A2 : The displayed text contains a situation in which the following behavior appears ( only one option possible ) : 1 ) verbal aggressive behaviour 2 ) verbal non - aggressive behaviour 3 ) physical aggressive behaviour 4 ) physical non - aggressive behaviour 5 ) none of the listed 6 ) I can not determine A3 : Mark the words or combination of words that are crucial for your choice in the previous question . A4 : Type in the words you remember having marked in A3 . The first question will help us understand participant perception of the text . When analyzing the results we will consider comparing the provided answer with other participants’ responses , as well as domain experts’ responses . A1 will be then used to study how annotators react to the description of behaviour and will help us to prove / reject Hypothesis 1 . We explicitly include samples which describe positive or neutral situations . Additionally , in order to estimate how annotators’ emotional states change before and after the experiment , we will use the Self - Assessment Manikin ( SAM ) self - assessment test [ 4 ] . The SAM assesses affective reactions [ 32 ] measuring valence ( is the emotion experienced as positive or negative ) , arousal ( is the emotion characterized more by excitement or relaxation ) , and dominance ( emotional loss of control versus being in control emotionally ) . The SAM questionnaire consists of three rows of pictograms , each of which uses stylized figures to capture one dimension on a five - point scale . The test is depicted in fig . 1 . Advantages of the SAM are that it does not have to be translated in multiple languages ( since it consists of pictograms ) , it is suitable for people of all ages , it is simple and can be completed fast . The SAM has also been used to quantify psychological risk [ 24 ] . Regarding the second question in our application , all options ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 537 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Figure 2 . Our current User Interface – the different windows will appear in a sequential order ( from left to right ) . Note that we only depicted the first 3 assignments , because of space limitations . 1 ) – 4 ) are related to exhibited behaviour and their exact description can be found in the paper [ 40 ] . For A2 we will assess inter - rater agreement across all participants and compare it with annotations provided by domain experts . In order to test Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3 , responses will be timed to evaluate the completion times of each subtask ( assignment ) and the overall time needed . In order to test our final hypothesis addressing the recall during annotation tasks , we analyse the users’ responses to task A4 – during this assignment the text snippet as well as the marked words from A3 will be hidden . We expect the annotators to recall more correct words with emotional valence than neutral words in the provided answers . In the following , we describe the design and workflow of the experimental setup . Participants are initially informed about the goals of the study and consent and agreement with terms of use is sought . They are given instructions on the use of the app works and explanations of the terminology . Since the annotators will be exposed to potentially stressful content , approval for this experiment has been applied for through the university’s ethics board . Therefore , the information given here is preliminary in nature . Participants are initially asked to fill in the SAM questionnaire . The annotation task then starts . For each task , the participant may choose to skip it and move to the next task , or proceed with the current task . Questions are then shown sequentially ( see fig . 2 ) . Participants may finish the experiment at any time . Once they have submitted their annotations , they will be asked to fill in a further SAM questionnaire . V . Conclusion and Future Work Through literature review of annotation , content moderation and recognition / recall tasks , we identify evidence that emotion can affect the labelling process and that exposure to stressful stimuli may affect annotators emotionally in measurable ways for which mitigations have been identified in the literature ( see Section II - H ) . The literature suggests that in situations where the data containsharmfulorstressfulcontent , thereissomerisktoannotator well - being . In particular , stress and vicarious trauma are realistic outcomes on annotators exposed to material of a distressing nature . Hence , one recommendation from this literature review is that this risk be taken into account and evaluated when planning , piloting and carrying out annotation tasks . Another finding from the literature is that many factors are reported to influence labelling processes : the content of the data , as well as annotators’ age , demographics and cultural environment . In our work we also explored how motivation and emotion are related and identified work from the literature suggesting that annotator motivation can have an impact on the overall quality of the annotation outcome . People who perform labelling tasks driven only by financial incentive might not concentrate as much on delivering high - quality annotations as people who do such tasks for fun or for the success of the system itself . The literature also shows that annotation can be viewed as a highly repetitive task . This repetitiveness brings some advantages : as people adapt to the task , performance may increase . However , repetitive tasks are reported to result in fatigue . We have hypothesised on the basis of literature review that annotation of material containing distressing , threatening or emotional stimuli may result in slower task completion , as well as prioritising of these aspects over ‘neutral’ stimuli . In future work , we will implement the web application described in section IV to explore the hypotheses identified in this paper in the scope of a text annotation task . We will also conduct a broader and more systematically constructed review of relevant literature . Acknowledgment This work was partly financed by the BehavE project , funded by the German Research Foundation , grant number YO 226 / 3 - 1 , and the University of Rostock Mare Balticum scholarship . ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 538 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . References [ 1 ] S . Ahmad . ‘It’s Just the Job’ : Investigating the influence of culture in India’s commercial content moderation industry . Master’s thesis , University of Oxford , 2019 . [ 2 ] J . G . Alexander , M . de Chesnay , E . Marshall , A . R . Campbell , S . Johnson , and R . Wright . Research note : Parallel reactions in rape victims and rape researchers . Violence and Victims , 4 ( 1 ) : 57 – 62 , 1989 . [ 3 ] G . Allport . Personality in psychology . M . : PCB , 1998 . [ 4 ] M . M . Bradley and P . J . Lang . Measuring emotion : the self - assessment manikin and the semantic differential . Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry , 25 ( 1 ) : 49 – 59 , 1994 . [ 5 ] J . T . Cacioppo and W . L . Gardner . Emotion . Annual review of psychology , 50 , 1999 . [ 6 ] L . L . CarstensenandJ . A . Mikels . Attheintersectionofemotionandcognition : Aging and the positivity effect . Current directions in psychological science , 14 ( 3 ) : 117 – 121 , 2005 . [ 7 ] C . Coburn . Play to cure : Genes in space . Lancet Oncology , 15 ( 7 ) : 688 , 2014 . [ 8 ] A . Das , B . Dang , and M . Lease . Fast , accurate , and healthier : Interactive blurring helps moderators reduce exposure to harmful content . Proceedings oftheAAAIConferenceonHumanComputationandCrowdsourcing , 8 ( 1 ) : 33 – 42 , Oct . 2020 . [ 9 ] E . Demerouti , A . Bakker , F . Nachreiner , and M . Ebbinghaus . From mental strain to burnout . European journal of work and organizational psychology , 11 ( 4 ) : 423 – 441 , 2002 . [ 10 ] A . Di Domenico , R . Palumbo , N . Mammarella , and B . Fairfield . Aging and emotional expressions : is there a positivity bias during dynamic emotion recognition ? Frontiers in psychology , 6 : 1130 , 2015 . [ 11 ] J . A . Easterbrook . The effect of emotion on cue utilization and the organization of behavior . Psychological review , 66 ( 3 ) : 183 , 1959 . [ 12 ] H . A . Elfenbein and N . Ambady . Is there an in - group advantage in emotion recognition ? Psychological Bulletin , 128 ( 2 ) : 243 – 249 , 2002 . [ 13 ] H . A . Elfenbein and N . Ambady . On the universality and cultural specificity of emotion recognition : a meta - analysis . Psychological bulletin , 128 ( 2 ) : 203 , 2002 . [ 14 ] I . H . Gleibs and N . Albayrak - Aydemir . Ethical concerns arising from recruiting workers from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk as research participants : Commentary on burnette et al . ( 2021 ) . International Journal of Eating Disorders , 55 ( 2 ) : 276 – 277 , 2022 . [ 15 ] C . B . Hadley and D . G . MacKay . Does emotion help or hinder immediate memory ? arousal versus priority - binding mechanisms . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 32 ( 1 ) : 79 , 2006 . [ 16 ] J . A . H¨ausser , S . Schulz - Hardt , T . Schultze , A . Tomaschek , and A . Mojzisch . Experimental evidence for the effects of task repetitiveness on mental strain and objective work performance . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 35 ( 5 ) : 705 – 721 , 2014 . [ 17 ] E . M . Kinard . Conducting research on child maltreatment : effects on researchers . Violence Vict , 11 ( 1 ) : 65 – 69 , Spring 1996 . [ 18 ] H . R . Kirk , A . Birhane , B . Vidgen , and L . Derczynski . Handling and presentingharmfultextinNLPresearch . In FindingsofEMNLP . Association for Computational Linguistics , 2022 . [ 19 ] P . Kuppens , A . Realo , and E . Diener . The role of positive and negative emotions in life satisfaction judgment across nations . Journal of personality and social psychology , 95 ( 1 ) : 66 , 2008 . [ 20 ] D . G . MacKay , M . Shafto , J . K . Taylor , D . E . Marian , L . Abrams , and J . R . Dyer . Relations between emotion , memory , and attention : Evidence from taboo stroop , lexical decision , and immediate memory tasks . Memory & cognition , 32 ( 3 ) : 474 – 488 , 2004 . [ 21 ] S . Marriage and K . Marriage . Too many sad stories : Clinician stress and coping . The Canadian Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Review , 14 ( 4 ) : 114 , 2005 . [ 22 ] M . Mather and M . R . Sutherland . Arousal - biased competition in perception and memory . Perspectives on psychological science , 6 ( 2 ) : 114 – 133 , 2011 . [ 23 ] S . K . Mckenzie , C . Li , G . Jenkin , and S . Collings . Ethical considerations in sensitive suicide research reliant on non - clinical researchers . Research Ethics , 13 ( 3 - 4 ) : 173 – 183 , 2017 . [ 24 ] M . Murdoch , M . R . Partin , D . Vang , and S . M . Kehle - Forbes . The psychological risk of minimal risk activities : A pre - and posttest study using the self - assessment manikin . Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics , 14 ( 1 ) : 15 – 22 , 2019 . [ 25 ] R . N´emeth , D . Sik , and F . M´at´e . Machine learning of concepts hard even for humans : The case of online depression forums . International Journal of Qualitative Methods , 19 , 2020 . [ 26 ] J . M . Newell and G . A . MacNeil . Professional burnout , vicarious trauma , secondary traumatic stress , and compassion fatigue . Best practices in mental health , 6 ( 2 ) : 57 – 68 , 2010 . [ 27 ] E . ¨Ohman . Challenges in annotation : annotator experiences from a crowdsourced emotion annotation task . In Proceedings of the Digital Humanities in the Nordic Countries 5th Conference . CEUR Workshop Proceedings , 2020 . [ 28 ] B . Perrigo . Exclusive : OpenAI used Kenyan workers on less than $ 2 per hour to make ChatGPT less toxic , 2023 . [ 29 ] J . P . Pinto and P . Viana . Tag4vd : a game for collaborative video annotation . In Proceedingsofthe2013ACMinternationalworkshoponImmersivemedia experiences , pages 25 – 28 , 2013 . [ 30 ] H . - E . Plath and P . Richter . Erm¨udung , Monotonie , S¨attigung , Stress : Verfahren zur skalierten Erfassung erlebter Beanspruchungsfolgen ; BMS . Psychodiagnostisches Zentrum , 1984 . [ 31 ] S . T . Roberts . Digital detritus : ‘Error’ and the logic of opacity in social media content moderation . First Monday , 2018 . [ 32 ] J . A . Russell and A . Mehrabian . Evidence for a three - factor theory of emotions . Journal of research in Personality , 11 ( 3 ) : 273 – 294 , 1977 . [ 33 ] W . Saakyan , O . Hakobyan , and H . Drimalla . Representational bias in expression and annotation of emotions in audiovisual databases . In CAIP 2021 : Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on AI for People : Towards Sustainable AI , CAIP 2021 , 20 - 24 November 2021 , Bologna , Italy , page 120 . European Alliance for Innovation , 2021 . [ 34 ] K . R . Scherer . What are emotions ? and how can they be measured ? Social science information , 44 ( 4 ) : 695 – 729 , 2005 . [ 35 ] J . Seering , R . Kraut , and L . Dabbish . Shaping pro and anti - social behavior on Twitch through moderation and example - setting . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing , CSCW ’17 , page 111 – 125 , New York , NY , USA , 2017 . Association for Computing Machinery . [ 36 ] P . S . Seibert and H . C . Ellis . Irrelevant thoughts , emotional mood states , and cognitive task performance . Memory & Cognition , 19 ( 5 ) : 507 – 513 , 1991 . [ 37 ] D . Sharma and F . P . McKenna . The role of time pressure on the emotional stroop task . British Journal of Psychology , 92 ( 3 ) : 471 – 481 , 2001 . [ 38 ] C . Stangor and J . Walinga . Introduction to psychology , 2014 . [ 39 ] M . Steiger , T . J . Bharucha , S . Venkatagiri , M . J . Riedl , and M . Lease . The psychological well - being of content moderators : the emotional labor of commercial moderation and avenues for improving support . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pages 1 – 14 , 2021 . [ 40 ] S . Suravee , T . Stoev , D . Schindler , I . Hochgraeber , C . Pinkert , B . Holle , M . Halek , F . Kr¨uger , and K . Yordanova . Annotation scheme for named entity recognition and relation extraction tasks in the domain of people with dementia . In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops and other Affiliated Events ( PerCom Workshops ) , pages 236 – 241 . IEEE , 2022 . [ 41 ] H . Thach , S . Mayworm , D . Delmonaco , and O . Haimson . ( in ) visible moder - ation : A digital ethnography of marginalized users and content moderation on twitch and reddit . New Media & Society , 0 ( 0 ) : 14614448221109804 , 0 . [ 42 ] E . Union . Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence ( Artificial Intelligence Act ) and amending certain Union legislative acts . COM / 2021 / 206 final , pages 1 – 107 , 2021 . [ 43 ] A . Wang , C . D . V . Hoang , and M . - Y . Kan . Perspectives on crowdsourcing annotations for natural language processing . Language resources and evaluation , 47 ( 1 ) : 9 – 31 , 2013 . [ 44 ] F . N . Watts , F . P . McKenna , R . Sharrock , and L . Trezise . Colour naming of phobia - related words . British Journal of Psychology , 77 ( 1 ) : 97 – 108 , 1986 . [ 45 ] L . Weber and D . Seetharaman . The worst job in technology : Staring at human depravity to keep it off Facebook . The Wall Street Journal , 27 , 2017 . [ 46 ] D . A . Winter . Still radical after all these years : George kelly’s the psychology of personal constructs . Clinical child psychology and psychiatry , 18 ( 2 ) : 276 – 283 , 2013 . [ 47 ] D . Y . Wohn . Volunteer moderators in Twitch micro communities : How they get involved , the roles they play , and the emotional labor they experience . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pages 1 – 13 , 2019 . ARDUOUS 2023 : Seventh International Workshop on Annotation of User Data for Ubiquitous Systems 539 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .