1498 Copyright © 2016 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 68 DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 8619 - 9 . ch068 The Impact of On - Line Consumer Reviews on Value Perception : The Dual - Process Theory and Uncertainty Reduction ABSTRACT This study combines the dual - process theory ( DPT ) and the uncertainty reduction theory ( URT ) to examine how on - line consumer reviews affect consumer uncertainty reduction and value perceptions in order to understand whether consumer attitudes will be influenced by on - line consumer reviews and if relationships are built between consumers and companies as a result . The results indicated that argument quality , recommendation sidedness , source credibility , confirmation of prior beliefs , and recommenda - tion ratings have a positive effect on the uncertainty reduction of consumers towards the businesses under consideration . Since uncertainty reduction has an effect on value perception , this study suggests that companies provide on - line consumer reviews on their websites to increase consumer uncertainty reduction and to improve consumer value perception of their companies . INTRODUCTION As an information source , the Internet has hugely expanded the scope of pre - purchase information searches by providing easy access to the advice of - fered from thousands of individuals . Considering that people can access such information anytime and anywhere through the use of the Internet , it is reasonable to state that people may navigate on the Internet to search for product information before they conduct transactions . One of the most popular information receiving sources is online Hsin Hsin Chang National Cheng Kung University , Taiwan Po Wen Fang National Cheng Kung University , Taiwan Chien Hao Huang National Cheng Kung University , Taiwan 1499 The Impact of On - Line Consumer Reviews on Value Perception reviews . Online reviews consist of word of mouth spread through online review platforms that can enhance business benefits , such as revenue and long - term relationships ( Kim & Son , 2009 ; Lu , Ba , Hung , & Feng , 2013 ) . In other words , online users can offer their opinions to other online us - ers by posting their word of mouth in the form of reviews . These online reviews thus become a platform by which to spread word of mouth . As a result , many firms are making use of on - line consumer reviews by regularly posting their product information , by sponsoring promotional chats on on - line forums , such as USENET , and by proactively prompting their consumers to pro - vide reviews of their products online ( Mayzlin , 2006 ) . Hence , online reviews not only provide a platform through which customers can express their opinions but also provide a method by which businesses can improve their products / services . Some firms even strategically manipulate online reviews in an attempt to influence consumers’ purchasing decisions ( Dellarocas , 2006 ; Lee , Kim , & Peng , 2013 ) . As described above , online consumer reviews play an important role in the marketing activities of companies . Social networking sites , brand websites , inter - net forums , product review websites , and personal blogs are all types of online consumer review plat - forms ( Chang & Chuang , 2011 ) . Online consumer reviews on consumer attitudes and product sales have been shown to have significant positive ef - fects on books sales ( Chevalier & Mayzlin , 2006 ; Saeed , Hwang , & Yi , 2003 ) , box office revenue ( Liu , 2006 ) , and sales in the video game industry ( Zhu & Zhang , 2010 ) . Prior online consumer re - view studies have also explored the characteristics of online consumer reviews , such as argument quality ( Bhattacherjee & Sanford , 2006 ; Cheung , Lee , & Rabjohn , 2008 ; Lee , Park , & Han , 2011 ) , recommendation framing ( Chevalier & Mayzlin , 2006 ; Hennig - Thurau & Walsh , 2003 ; Xue & Zhou , 2010 ) , recommendation sidedness ( Crowley & Hoyer 1994 ; Eisend , 2006 ; Kao , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2013 ) , source credibility ( Brown , Broderick , & Lee , 2007 ; Cheung et al . , 2008 ) , confirma - tion of prior beliefs ( Cheung , Luo , Sia , & Chen 2009 ) , consistency ( Benedicktus , Brady , Darke , & Voorhees , 2010 ; Khare , Labrecque , & Asare , 2011 ; West & Broniarczyk , 1998 ) , and ratings ( Chevalier & Mayzlin , 2006 ; Khare et al . , 2011 ; Mudambi & Schuff , 2010 ) . These characteristics were integrated by Cheung et al . ( 2009 ) through the dual - process theory ( DPT ) . The DPT posits two distinct types of influences ( informational and normative ) on the persuasive - ness of on - line consumer reviews . Informational influence is derived from the review’s messages , such as the content , source , and receiver , deter - mined by argument quality , recommendation framing , recommendation sidedness , source credibility , and confirmation of prior beliefs . Normative influence is a result of the norms or expectations of others that are implicit or explicit in the choice preference of a group or community ( Cheung et al . , 2009 ) . Normative determinants include recommendation consistency and recom - mendation ratings . Based on the discussion above , this study adopts the DPT’s concepts to explore the effects of characteristics of online consumer reviews on consumer uncertainty reduction . Adjei , Noble , and Noble , ( 2010 ) and Chang and Chuang ( 2011 ) proved that online customer - to - customer ( C2C ) communication can increase uncertainty reduc - tion for products , which in turn can lead to an increase in consumer purchase behavior . Accord - ingly , online consumer reviews can be used as a method of C2C communication , and consumer uncertainty reduction can be viewed as one type of consumer attitude . Online consumer reviews can affect consumer preference toward a product ( Lee et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , the reviews of others can determine customer evaluations . For instance , a customer can evaluate information about a spe - cific restaurant in a review . Customers can refer to the reviewer’s experience and then , based on this evaluation , may change their opinions . Even though customers may be unfamiliar with a res - 25 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / the - impact - of - on - line - consumer - reviews - on - value - perception / 137409 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Analysis of Cloud Services on Business Processes in the Digitalization of the Consumer Product Industry Ute Riemann ( 2016 ) . Web - Based Services : Concepts , Methodologies , Tools , and Applications ( pp . 1351 - 1387 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / analysis - of - cloud - services - on - business - processes - in - the - digitalization - of - the - consumer - product - industry / 140856 ? camid = 4v1a Geographic Information Retrieval and Text Mining on Chinese Tourism Web Pages Ming - Cheng Tsou ( 2010 ) . International Journal of Information Technology and Web Engineering ( pp . 56 - 75 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / geographic - information - retrieval - text - mining / 41728 ? camid = 4v1a Web Service Evaluation Using Probabilistic Models S . Zimeras ( 2014 ) . Evaluating Websites and Web Services : Interdisciplinary Perspectives on User Satisfaction ( pp . 288 - 294 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / web - service - evaluation - using - probabilistic - models / 97037 ? camid = 4v1a A Graphical Based Approach to the Conceptual Modeling , Validation and Generation of XML Schema Definitions Mark B . Dixon ( 2013 ) . International Journal of Information Technology and Web Engineering ( pp . 1 - 22 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / a - graphical - based - approach - to - the - conceptual - modeling - validation - and - generation - of - xml - schema - definitions / 85319 ? camid = 4v1a