CLOSING THE GAP BETWEEN EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND CONCEPTS OF ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION Kristina Zuza and Jenaro Guisasola Department of Applied Physics . UPV - EHU . University of the Basque Country . Abstract : Physics Education research indicates that there is a significant gap between the learning obtained by students and what teachers expect . In the usual teaching the fundamental concepts of electromagnetic induction are usually quickly analyzed , spending most of the time to solve problems in a more or less rote manner . However , P hysics Education research has shown that the fundamental concepts of the electromagnetic induction theory are barely understood by students . This article proposes an interactive teaching sequence introducing the topic of electromagnetic induction . The sequence has been designed based on contributions from Physics Education research . Particular attention is paid to the relationship between experimental findings ( macroscopic level ) and theoretical interpretation ( microscopic level ) . An example of the activities that have been designed will also be presented , describing the implementation context and the corresponding findings . Keywords : electromagnetic induction , teaching sequence , university introductory physics . INTRODUCTION One of the greatest challenges in Physics Education revolves around helping students to build scientific models that they can use to understand natural phenomena . The challenge is particularly serious for scientific areas , and the electromagnetic induction ( EMI ) is a representative example of one of these . This work describes the first part of a sequence for teaching electromagnetic induction in introductory university physics courses . In this study , we construct the sequence as part of the wide - ranging theoretical framework of developmental research ( Lijnse 1995 , Psillos 1998 , Savinainen 2004 ) . Our study centres on understanding how we can help our students in the task of constructing an explanatory model for EMI phenomena . In particular : 1 . - How can we help students to understand the importance of electromagnetic induction for technological development of industrial apparatus and everyday life ? How can we help students to understand the central role that electromagnetic induction theory plays in the relationship between electrical currents and magnetic fields ? 2 . - How can we help students to understand when electromagnetic induction occurs and when it does not ? 3 . - How can we help students to understand that the experimental measures obtained at a microscopic level are related to a primary explanatory model of electromagnetic induction that includes magnetic fields which vary over time and / or conductors moving in stationary magnetic fields ? BACKGROUND AND MAIN CONTRIBUTION OF RESEARCH There are some studies about the teaching of concepts and laws relating to electromagnetic induction ( Guisasola et al . , 2013 ) . Many of them are based on the reflections of teachers that highlight certain aspects of how the EMI ( Cohen 2005 ) is taught . Chabay and Sherwood ( 2006 ) indicate that “Faraday’s law is usually difficult for students . Moreover , the integral form involves the concept of flux , which is traditionally introduced at the start of the course in the context of Gauss’ law and not mentioned again until the introduction of Faraday’s law” ( p . 333 ) . Those works developed at University and High School ( 16 - 18 years old students ) have focused primarily on student understanding of the concept of flux and the definition of Faraday ' s law ( Venturini & Albert 2002 ) . This paper adds to previous studies a proposed teaching sequence based on the results of educational research rather than on experience and idiosyncrasies of teacher . The sequence has been implemented for two years in a general physics course in industrial engineering first year . An implementation structure of the research based on evidence is used in the teaching sequence . Thus a direct link between the decisions taken to design the sequence of the teaching unit and the contributions of research in physics education is established . In this paper we present the initial part of the introduction to understanding the phenomena of EMI and results obtained in class . We will focus on introductory level simple situations such as circuits at rest in a time - variable magnetic field , or circuits or conductors moving in a stationary magnetic field . These simple activities will allow us to focus on the conceptual and procedural aspects without being masked by the mathematical complexity of the problems . In the implementation results , we will analyze the understanding level of the students relating the empirical evidence with the interpretative level of the explanatory model . DESIGNING THE TEACHING - LEARNING SEQUENCE ( TLS ) Lijsen and Klaassen ( 2004 ) discuss that the design of sequences is a complex process of applying the general principles of teaching to a specific context of teaching a particular subject . They emphasize that it is not a linear process but a cyclical process with the goal of producing knowledge about teaching and learning , and relevant to the implementation of the sequence in class . This can be understood as the design of teaching sequences is not a mechanical process of transferring general pedagogical principles and research findings to the teaching of specific topics . On the other hand , designing learning sequences is a creative process that takes into account not only the results but also the culture of the classroom and the circumstances of teachers and students . From a social - constructivist point of view ( Leach & Scott 2003 ) it is considered that the teaching and learning of science is a process of acquiring knowledge through familiarization of scientific works’ own skills . Below we will describe in detail how to use this constructivist perspective to interpret the results and contributions of research in the design and evaluation of teaching sequences . To illustrate the steps in the design , we will use as example the sequence we made to introduce the interpretative model of EMI phenomena . Designing research - based sequences takes into account three types of research recommendations : a ) interests , attitudes and values of students and curriculum standards ; b ) results of empirical studies on conceptions and reasoning of students ; c ) contributions on how to learn and teach science . Although research shows that aspects related to emotions and values are clearly related to the cognitive process when students are working on their activities in science class ( Zembylas 2005 ) , this recommendation is often neglected in the design of sequences . To work with activities that relate science , technology , society and environment means supporting a socially contextualized presentation of science that stimulates student interest in the study of the discipline and in getting involved in solving class assignments ( Simpson & Oliver 1990 ) . The second type of contributions refers to the analysis of conceptions of students including not only conceptual but also epistemological and ontological aspects . Therefore this second type of contribution is related to contributions on the Nature of Science . The third type of contributions includes the relationship of the school curriculum and the current theoretical framework of physics , it is important to emphasize that taking into account the theoretical framework of physics includes the historical development of the subject taught , the difficulties that occurred in its development and the arguments used for defining new concepts and theories . Working from this epistemological analysis we can define the learning objectives well justified . In other words , it is possible to justify the objectives chosen based on epistemological evidence of the discipline . In conclusion , all the above is indicated in Table 1 . Table 1 The use of research evidence to design a teaching sequence ( Guisasola et al . 2012 . ) Interest , attitudes , values and standards S - T - S - E aspects Epistemological analysis of the contents of the school curriculum Learning indicators Students’ ideas and reasoning Learning difficulties Learning goals Set out specific problems and aims in a sequence Interactive learning environment Teaching strategies According to the inputs of Table 1 , we have designed some learning objectives that are expressed through what we want students to learn and the possible learning difficulties which are shown in Table 2 . By linking indicators with learning difficulties we aim to become aware of cognitive demand that involve the learning objectives of the curriculum . The type of activities and the amount will depend on the high or low cognitive demand of the competences want to teach . Table 2 Learning indicators and students difficulties . Skills related curriculum Learning indicators Students dificulties i1 ) To understand the interest of the study of the subject and its applications Missing relationship between curriculum content and STSE aspects i2 ) To become familiar with the experimental phenomena of electromagnetic induction . i . 2 . 1 ) To find out about electromagnetic induction phenomena in loops and solenoids crossed by variable magnetic fields . i . 2 . 2 ) To find out about electromagnetic induction phenomena in circuits that move within a stationary magnetic field . i . 2 . 3 ) To know induction phenomena combining the two previous situations . Lack of familiarization with the scientific methodology in the lab ( compiling data , handling equipment , analysing results ) Difficulties to distinguish between the empirical level ( use of multi - meters and measurements ) and the interpreting level that uses concepts such as magnetic and electrical fields that vary over time , Lorentz Force , magnetic flux and electromotive force . Attributing EMI to the presence of magnetic field . No used to work in group . i . 3 . 1 . ) To use field model correctly ( Faraday’ law ) i . 3 . 2 ) To use force model correctly ( Lorentz’ s force law ) Interpreting simple induction phenomena only at field level Attributing EMI to the presence of magnetic field Applying Faraday’s for motional emf , students confuse the area of integral with the area of circuit Students tend to use a model of field more frequently than a model of force for explaining EMI phenomena . The analysis of the objectives and difficulties leads to design activities as bridges that exceed the cognitive demand . In this paper we specify the sequence for indicators 1 and 2 . This sequence is summarized in Table 3 . Table 3 Teaching - learning sequence . Driving Problem Learning Goal Scaffolding strategy Implementation Why is the EMI interesting ? Do you think this phenomenon is present in your everyday life ? 1 . - Understanding the point of studying EMI and its applications . Motivating the need to find out about EMI to understand how everyday appliances work . A . 1 and A . 2 allow students to explore the relationship between technological applications and EMI phenomena . What causes EMI ? When does an EMI phenomenon occur and when does it not ? 2 . - Become familiar with EMI phenomena and construct a primary explanatory model Give the students opportunities to observe phenomena , make hypotheses and analyse results . A . 3 Students explore the characteristics of EMI phenomena . A . 4 Students relate the EMI experiments to theoretical explanations . They explore the role of different physical magnitudes such as magnetic field , current , etc . A . 5 Students interpret EMI characteristics on the current / time graph . A . 6 Students construct an explanatory model of when EMI occurs . They contrast their hypothetical model against experimental results . A . 7 . Analysis of a wind - powered generator . IMPLEMENTATION OF SEQUENCE The research described was carried out at the University of the Basque Country over a 2 year period . All first - year Engineering students ( 43 students in 09 / 10 and 61 students in 10 / 11 ) had previously completed two years of physics at high school . Students receive 3 . 5 hours of lectures and 2 hours in the lab per week . The lectures were given by experienced teachers from the Physics Department . EMI and Faraday’s law are taught for 2 or 3 weeks of this course . Two types of data were collected : a ) pre and post written evaluation questionnaires ; b ) videotaping of student group carrying out some classroom activities . The aim was to obtain information on student reasoning trends in relation to the learning goals set in the sequence . Videos were collected on the discussions and solutions proposed by student groups when solving some tasks in the sequence . DATA AND FINDINGS This study shows the four questions matched up with learning goals 1 and 2 . The goal of the pre - post test design was to study the control group students ' improvement in significant learning regarding EMI before and after implementing the didactic sequence we presented . The used Hake ' s g index ( Hake 1998 ) shows that the gain in comprehension is significant if this index is equal to or greater than 0 . 1 . Table 4 Hake ' s gain for each item in each year . Item First year ( N = 41 ) Second year ( N = 63 ) Description Pre ( % correct ) Post ( % correct ) g index Pre ( % correct ) Post ( % correct ) g index 1 EMI simple explanation 17 . 5 61 . 0 0 . 53 9 . 5 67 . 5 0 . 64 2 EMI in the everyday life 0 . 5 12 . 5 0 . 12 2 . 5 21 . 0 0 . 19 3 Is there EMI when B is stationary and the conductor is standing ? 30 . 5 59 . 0 0 . 40 33 . 0 63 . 0 0 . 45 4 Is there EMI when a conductor moves in a stationary B ? 2 . 0 37 . 0 0 . 35 0 . 0 28 . 0 0 . 28 DISSCUSION AND CONCLUSION We have found that the majority of students abandon reasoning based on intuition when making hypotheses and interpreting experimental electromagnetic induction situations . In addition , students are capable of taking an interest in electromagnetic induction due to its technological applications both in everyday life and in industry ( wind powered generator , induction hobs , etc . ) We found that the majority of students overcome the alternative conception of attributing induction to the magnetic field . However , in some matters ( item 4 ) only a minority of students demonstrate adequate comprehension . This seems to indicate that the TLS example provided in this work is not sufficient to support the construction a solid comprehension of electromagnetic phenomena . The greater implication of our work that we would like to discuss is the importance and feasibility of focusing instruction on mechanisms that relate experimental facts to the theory ' s concepts and laws . These reasoning mechanisms are an important component of the scientific argument ( Duschl and Jiménez Aleixandre , 2012 ) . Therefore , it seems that there is no reason not to focus instruction on the mechanisms that produce and predict electromagnetic induction . REFERENCES Duschl , R . A . , & Jiménez - Aleixandre , M . P . ( 2012 ) . Epistemic foundations for conceptual change . In S . M . Carver & J . Shrager ( Eds . ) The journey from child to scientist : Integrating cognitive development and the education sciences ( pp . 245 – 262 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Chabay R . , & Sherwood S . ( 2006 ) . Restructuring the introductory electricity and magnetism course . American Journal of Physics 74 , 329 Cohen , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Active learning in lectures introducing magnetic induction . American Journal of Physics 73 , 284 - 285 . Guisasola , J . , Almudi , J . M , & Zuza , K . ( 2013 ) University Students’ understanding of Electromagnetic Induction , International Journal of Science Education 35 ( 16 ) , 2692 - 2717 . Hake , R . R . ( 1998 ) . Interactive - engagement versus traditional methods : A six - thousand - student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses . Leach , J . , & Scott , P . ( 2003 ) . Individual and sociocultural perspectives on learning in science education . Science & Education 12 ( 1 ) , 91 - 113 . Lijnse , P . ( 1995 ) “Developmental research” as a way to an empirically based “didactical structure” of science . Science Education 79 ( 2 ) , 189 - 199 . Lijnse , P . , & Klaassen , K . ( 2004 ) . Didactical structures as an outcome of research on teaching – learning sequences ? International Journal of Science Education , 26 ( 5 ) , 537 – 554 . Meheut , M . & Psillos , D . ( 2004 ) Teaching - learning sequences : aims and tools for science education research . International Journal of Science Education 26 ( 5 ) , 515 - 535 . Psillos , D . ( 1998 ) Teaching introductory electricity , Connecting Research in Physics Education with Teacher Education , Volume 1 edited by A . Tiberghien , E . L . Jossem and J . Barojas ( Eds . ) , International Commission on Physics Education ( International Union of Pure and Applied Physics ) Savinainen , A . , Scott , P . & Viiri , J . ( 2005 ) . Using a Bridging Representation and Social Interactions to Foster Conceptual Change : Designing and Evaluating an Instructional Sequence for Newton’s Third Law . Science Education , 89 , 175 - 195 . Simpson R . D . & Oliver J . E . ( 1990 ) . A Summary of Major Influences on Attitude Toward and Achievement in Science Among Adolescent Students . Science Education , 74 ( 1 ) , 1 - 18 Venturini , P . , & Albe , V . ( 2002 ) . Interpretation des similitudes et differences dans la maitrise conceptualle d’etudiants en electromagnetisme a partir de leur ( s ) rapport ( s ) au ( x ) savoir ( s ) . Aster , 25 , 165 - 188 . Zembylas , M . ( 2005 ) . Three Perspectives on linking the Cognitive and the Emotional in Science Learning : Conceptual Change , Socio - Constructivism and Poststructuralism . Studies in Science Education , 41 , 91 - 115 .