Molecular Dissection of the Internalization Step of Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : Rvs167p and binding partners INAUGURALDISSERTATION zur Erlangung der Würde eines Doktors der Philosophie vorgelegt der Philosophisch - Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakultät der Universität Basel von Ruben Lombardi aus Basel Basel , 2001 Genehmigt von der Philosophisch - Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakultät auf Antrag von Professor Howard Riezman und Professor Michael N . Hall . Basel , den 3 . Juli 2001 Professor Andreas Zuberbühler , Dekan 1 Summary Several screens performed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae have led to the isolation of a large number of endocytic mutants . Interestingly , the majority of these mutants were shown to be defective in the internalization step . In this PhD thesis we have started to dissect the internalization step of endocytosis on a molecular level by looking for protein - protein interactions among the proteins required for this step . We found that Rvs167p , one of the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , is a central player in this interaction network and therefore focused the following studies on Rvs167p and its binding partners . In a first series of experiments , we demonstrated that Rvs167p and Rvs161p , the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , function together in vivo . The interaction of these proteins is relevant and required for their stability . We next found that Rvs167p interacts with Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p , two proteins involved in the internalization step , and that these three proteins are part of an approximately 600 kDa protein complex most likely involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . In a next series of experiments , we showed that Myo5p , a type I myosin , has a second ATP - independent actin binding site via the SH3 - domain in its tail . We show that the interaction with actin requires Vrp1p / End5p and is physiologically relevant . Furthermore , we have identified the two protein kinases Pkh1p and Pkh2p , the yeast PDK1 homologs , to be part of a sphingoid base - mediated signaling pathway required for the internalization step of endocytosis . We found that Rvs167p is a substrate for Pkh2p in vitro and show that mutating the phosphorylation site leads to an endocytic defect in vivo suggesting that Rvs167p is one of the downstream effectors of this signaling cascade . 2 Table of contents 3 Introduction 7 Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : Involvement of actin , actin - associated 9 protein complexes and lipids in the internalization step 1 . Introduction 10 2 . Techniques used to study endocytosis in yeast 13 2 . 1 . Fluid - phase endocytosis 13 2 . 1 . 1 . Fluorescent dye uptake 13 2 . 1 . 2 . Electron dense endocytic markers 14 2 . 2 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis 14 2 . 2 . 1 . (cid:1) - factor pheromone uptake 14 2 . 2 . 2 . a - factor receptor internalization 15 2 . 2 . 3 . Permeases and transporters uptake 15 3 . Actin and actin - associated proteins 16 3 . 1 . The actin cytoskeleton 16 3 . 2 . Actin - associated proteins 18 3 . 2 . 1 . Myo5p complex 18 3 . 2 . 2 . Arp2 / 3 complex 18 3 . 2 . 3 . Rvs167p complex 19 3 . 2 . 4 . Pan1p complex 20 4 . Involvement of clathrin in endocytosis 22 5 . Role of lipids in the endocytic pathway 23 5 . 1 . Lipid requirement in membrane trafficking in yeast 23 5 . 2 . Lipid requirement in endocytosis 24 5 . 2 . 1 . Sphingosine bases requirement for endocytosis 25 5 . 2 . 2 . Specific sterol requirement for endocytosis 26 6 . Outlook 27 7 . Acknowledgments 28 Recent findings 29 1 . New proteins involved in endocytosis 29 2 . Actin - associated protein complexes 30 3 . Sphingoid base requirement 31 4 . Sterols function early in Ste2p internalization 31 Results 33 Rvs161p and Rvs167p , the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , function together in vivo 35 Introduction 36 Materials and Methods 37 Results 39 Interactions of the BAR - domain of Rvs167p 39 Reduced stability of Rvs proteins in the absence of its partner 40 Amount and ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for endocytosis 41 Interaction of Rvs167p with actin does not require Abp1p 44 Discussion 45 Acknowledgments 47 Table of contents 4 Sphingosine signaling pathway via Pkh1 / 2 kinases is required for endocytosis in yeast 49 Introduction 50 Results 51 Overexpression of Pkh1 / 2p kinases restores endocytosis in the lcb1 - 100 mutant 51 Pkh1 / 2p kinases are required for endocytosis 53 Overexpression of Pkh1 / 2p specifically corrects the actin defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant 54 Sphingoid base activates Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinase activity in vitro 56 Discussion 58 Materials and Methods 60 Acknowledgments 62 Regulation of the endocytic function of Rvs167p - complex by phosphorylation 63 Introduction 64 Results 65 Rvs167p interacts with Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p 65 Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p are part of a 600 kDa protein complex 66 Interaction of the complex with actin is mediated by Rvs167p and Sla2p 68 Rvs167p is phosphorylated at Thr7 by Pkh2p in vitro 68 Phosphorylation of Rvs167p facilitates the internalization step of endocytosis 71 Discussion 71 Materials and Methods 74 Acknowledgments 76 An Intact SH3 Domain Is Required for Myosin I - Induced Actin Polymerization 77 Introduction 78 Results 79 Functionally relevant interaction between Myo5p tail and actin 79 The SH3 of Myo5p contributes to the functionally relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction 80 Vrp1p is required to sustain a physiologically relevant interaction between the Myo5p tail and F - actin 81 An intact SH3 domain and Vrp1p seem to be required for Myo5p - induced localized actin 83 polymerization Discussion 87 An intact Myo5p SH3 domain is required to sustain a physiologically relevant interaction 87 between the Myo5p tail and F - actin The yeast type I myosins might trigger localized actin polymerization at the sites of endocytosis 87 An intact SH3 domain and Vrp1p might be required to localize myosin - induced actin polymerization 88 Materials and Methods 89 Acknowledgments 94 Conclusions and Perspectives 97 Some thoughts about “complexity” 97 Protein - protein and protein - lipid interactions network 97 Outlook 99 Table of contents 5 References 101 Acknowledgments 113 Curriculum Vitae 115 6 Introduction 7 Introduction The first part of the introduction is a manuscript published in ‘Frontiers in Molecular Biology : Endocytosis’ . The second part summarizes recent findings published since the first part was written . Introduction 8 Introduction 9 Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : involvement of actin , actin - associated protein complexes and lipids in the internalization step in Frontiers in Molecular Biology : Endocytosis , 2001 ed . M . Marsh , Oxford University Press Ruben Lombardi , Sylvie Friant and Howard Riezman * Biozentrum of the University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland * Corresponding author , tel . + + 41 61 2672160 , fax . + + 41 61 267 2149 , Email : Howard . Riezman @ unibas . ch Introduction 10 1 . Introduction All eukaryotic cells are able to internalize extracellular material together with portions of their plasma membrane through a mechanism called endocytosis . The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( further referred to as yeast ) is an organism well suited for the study of cell biological processes like endocytosis . It is an unicellular eukaryote with a membrane organization and organelles similar to higher eukaryotes ( see Figure 1 ) , and it offers well developed genetic manipulation techniques that enable the identification of conditional mutants defective in the process of interest . Indeed , several studies have led to the isolation of endocytosis - deficient mutants in yeast based on three major approaches , defective accumulation of fluorescent dyes in their vacuole ( Chvatchko et al . , 1986 ; Wendland et al . , 1996 ) , defective pheromone receptor endocytosis ( Davis et al . , 1993 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ) and their synthetic lethality with a mutation in the vacuolar H + - ATPase ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Figure 1 . Membrane trafficking in yeast A schematic overview of a budding yeast cell with internal organelles is drawn showing the major membrane trafficking pathways in yeast . end , endocytic mutants ; sec , secretory mutants ; vps , vacuolar protein sorting mutants . Yeast can exist in three different cell types , two haploids with opposite mating types a or (cid:1) and a diploid a / (cid:1) . The haploid a or (cid:1) cells can either grow by mitotic cell division or they can mate with a cell of the opposite mating type thus forming an a / (cid:1) diploid cell . The diploid cell is no longer competent for mating . It also grows by mitotic cell division and upon starvation for nutrients ( especially nitrogen ) the diploid yeast undergoes meiosis and produces four haploid spores , two of each mating type ( see Herskowitz , 1988 , and references therein ) . The differences between a , (cid:1) and a / (cid:1) cells are determined by the mating type locus . Two different alleles encode for different regulatory proteins causing cell - specific expression or repression of a subset of genes ultimately generating the respective cell type ( Herskowitz , 1989 ) . In contrast to the diploid cells , both haploid mating types secrete and recognize short peptides called pheromones which bind to receptors on the cell surface of cells of the opposite mating type . Both the (cid:1) - factor receptor Ste2p and the a - factor receptor Ste3p are plasma membrane proteins with seven membrane - spanning segments and are coupled to a heterotrimeric G protein that is involved in the mating - specific signal transduction pathway ( Marsh et al . , 1991 ) . (cid:1) cells secrete (cid:1) - factor but recognize a - factor which is secreted by a cells and vice versa . Binding of either ligand to its receptor leads to several striking changes , including transcriptional induction of a variety of genes required for mating , arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle , clearance of pheromone binding sites , and formation of cell surface projections which are the sites of cell - cell fusion ( Kurjan , 1992 ; Marsh et al . , 1991 ) . Cells displaying these morphological changes have been termed ‘shmoos’ . Thus the mating pheromone system function in cell to cell communication to synchronize the cell cycles of the mating partners and to allow the appropriate fusion events . Receptor - mediated endocytosis was shown to occur in yeast by using radioactively labeled (cid:1) - factor pheromone ( Chvatchko et al . , 1986 ; Jenness and Spatrick , 1986 ) . The Introduction 11 study of the pheromone receptors , especially the (cid:1) - factor receptor Ste2p , has shed light on the sequence of events resulting in receptor down - regulation . It was shown that Mat a cells are competent to respond to (cid:1) - factor and internalize it throughout the cell cycle ( Zanolari and Riezman , 1991 ) . The pheromone receptors undergo constitutive endocytosis at a slow rate , and upon ligand binding the internalization rate is greatly stimulated and hyperphosphorylation and ubiquiti - nation of the cytoplasmic tail of the receptors are induced ( for review see Riezman , 1998 ) . Multiple internalization signals have been identified in the cytoplasmic tail of Ste2p . The most membrane proximal signal , SINNDAKSS , was shown to be necessary and sufficient for internalization of a truncated receptor . The crucial residue is the lysine that when mutated to arginine completely blocks receptor internalization ( Rohrer et al . , 1993 ) . The lysine was shown to be an acceptor site for ubiquitination and this ubiquitination signals the internalization of the receptor ( Hicke and Riezman , 1996 ) . Several other yeast and mammalian plasma membrane proteins have been shown to be ubiquitinated and internalized suggesting a general role of ubiquitination not only in yeast but also in higher eukaryotes ( for review see Hicke , 1997 , and Hicke , 1999 ) . Another internalization signal in yeast , NPFXD , was found in Kex2p and a similar NPF - sequence was shown to be necessary for the pheromone dependent internali - zation of a truncated a - factor receptor ( Tan et al . , 1996 ) . The endocytic pathway in mammalian cells has been well characterized at the morphological level ( see Gruenberg and Maxfield , 1995 ; Mellman , 1996 , and references therein ) while , until very recently , the characterization of this pathway in yeast was quite poor . Biochemical evidence for two endocytic intermediates between the plasma membrane and the vacuole in yeast came from studies following the internalization of radioactively labeled (cid:1) - factor . Internalized (cid:1) - factor travels successively and transiently through two biochemically distinct membrane - bound compartments to the vacuole ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . Based on the kinetics of (cid:1) - factor movement through those compartments and by analogy to the mammalian pathway , the two intermediates were termed early endosomes and late endosomes . Immunofluorescence studies following the internalization and delivery of the (cid:1) - factor receptor Ste2p have revealed a peripheral early endocytic compartment and a late endocytic compartment near the vacuole . The formation of the early endocytic compartment was dependent upon SEC18 gene function ( yeast homolog of the mammalian N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ) which is essential for multiple vesicular fusion events ( see Hicke et al . , 1997 , and references therein ) . Recently , an electron microscopy study has allowed the yeast cell endocytic pathway to be seen at an ultrastructural level by following the internalization and delivery of positively charged Nanogold TM ( Nanoprobes , Stony Brook , NY , USA ) to the vacuole ( Prescianotto - Baschong and Riezman , 1998 ) . In agreement with the previous reports , the first endocytic intermediates seen are small vesicles of approximately 50 nm in diameter which also accumulate at non - permissive temperature in the sec18 mutant . These vesicles are likely to be the primary endocytic vesicles . In wild - type cells , the Nanogold TM is next found in a peripheral compartment with a tubular - vesicular structure . Later the Nanogold TM is found in a large oval structure with internal membranes located near the vacuole and finally in the vacuole . Taken together , these data suggest a very similar organization of the endocytic pathways in mammalian cells and yeast . In yeast , the first detected intermediates are endocytic vesicles that either generate an early peripheral endocytic intermediate by Introduction 12 homotypic fusion or fuse with a pre - existing endocytic compartment . These tubular - vesicular structures at the cell periphery were termed early endosomes . The next clearly defined intermediate is a large oval structure with internal membranes located near the vacuole , called late endosome . Finally , the endocytosed material is delivered to the vacuole . It has been previously shown that vacuolar and endocytosed proteins accumulate in an aberrant compartment in a subset of vacuolar protein sorting ( vps ) mutants ( Piper et al . , 1995 ) . This compartment , termed ‘class E compartment’ , has been proposed to be an exaggerated form of a prevacuolar compartment where the endocytic and vacuole biogenesis pathways intersect ( Piper et al . , 1995 ) . The prevacuolar compartment could be an intermediate between the early and late endosomes as defined above . Transport between the endosomal compartments and the vacuole has been shown to require two small GTP - binding proteins of the Rab / Ypt family . Ypt51p functions in the early to late endosome transport step while Ypt7p is involved in late endosome to vacuole trafficking and in homotypic vacuolar fusion ( Schimmöller and Riezman , 1993 ; Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Singer - Krüger et al . , 1995 ; Wichmann et al . , 1992 ) . Several t - SNARES are involved in the endocytic pathway . Vam3p has been localized to the vacuole and shown to be important for several trafficking pathways leading to the vacuole ( Nichols et al . , 1997 ; Wada et al . , 1997 ) , while Pep12p has been localized to a prevacuolar compartment and functions in the traffic from the Golgi to this prevacuolar compartment ( Becherer et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , two other members of the yeast syntaxin family of t - SNARES , Tlg1p and Tlg2p , have been identified . Both have been implicated in the TGN / endosomal system but there is controversy as to their localization in the cell and on their exact function ( Abeliovich et al . , 1998 ; Coe et al . , 1999 ; Holthuis et al . , 1998a ; Holthuis et al . , 1998b ; Seron et al . , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , not only the morphology of the endocytic pathway but also the components involved in regulating and mediating the trafficking steps appear to be conserved from yeast to mammals . In this review , we will focus on the internalization step of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Different studies have led to the identification of a great number of mutants impaired in this step ( see Table 1 ) . Analysis of these mutants revealed two fundamental aspects of the internalization process : The requirement for actin and a subset of actin - associated proteins , and the importance of certain lipids . Both aspects will be discussed together with the role of clathrin and an overview of the techniques available to study endocytosis in yeast . Introduction 13 Table 1 . Yeast genes required for the uptake step of receptor - mediated endocytosis Yeast Gene Homologies / Comments Motifs / Domains ACT1 / END7 Actin AKR1 Ankyrin repeat ARC35 / END9 Subunit ARP2 / 3 - complex ARP2 Actin related protein ARP3 Actin related protein CHC1 Clathrin heavy chain CLC1 Clathrin light chain CMD1 Calmodulin Four EF hands END3 Eps15 EH domain ERG2 / END11 Ergosterol biosynthesis enzyme LAS17 / BEE1 Human WASP LCB1 / END8 Ceramide biosynthesis enzyme MYO5 Type I myosin SH3 PAN1 / DIM2 Eps15 EH domains RSP5 / NPI1 Ubiquitin protein ligase HECT domain RVS161 / END6 Amphiphysin RVS167 Amphiphysin SH3 SAC6 Fimbrin SJL1 , SJL2 , SJL3 Synaptojanin SLA2 / END4 Talin SRV2 / END14 VRP1 / END5 Proline rich 2 . Techniques used to study endocytosis in yeast Several reporter systems have been developed to study endocytosis in yeast . Fluid phase endocytosis can be followed by using fluorescent dyes like lucifer yellow ( Riezman , 1985 ) or FM 4 - 64 ( Vida and Emr , 1995 ) , or by internalization of electron dense particles and analysis by electron microscopy ( Prescianotto - Baschong and Riezman , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1996 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis can be assayed by following a - factor receptor Ste3p ( Davis et al . , 1993 ) and (cid:1) - factor pheromone ( Chvatchko et al . , 1986 ) or by measuring the clearance of transporters from the plasma membrane ( Berkower et al . , 1994 ; Lai et al . , 1995 ; Riballo et al . , 1995 ; Volland et al . , 1994 ) . In the present chapter we will present and detail these different methods to follow endocytosis in yeast . 2 . 1 . Fluid - phase endocytosis 2 . 1 . 1 . Fluorescent dye uptake Two fluorescent dyes are commonly used to study fluid - phase endocytosis in yeast , lucifer yellow - carbohydrazide ( LY ) , a fluid - phase marker , and FM 4 - 64 , a membrane probe . LY is a small hydrophilic fluorescent molecule that is incapable of diffusion across biological membranes . It is non - toxic , highly fluorescent and resistant to bleaching . Uptake of LY is time - , energy - , and temperature - dependent and it is nonsaturable . The rate of endocytic accumulation has been estimated as 27 nl / mg of cellular protein / hour at 30°C for yeast cells ( Riezman , 1985 ) , compared to 250 nl / mg / h in murine peritoneal macrophages ( Swanson et al . , 1985 ) . Internalized LY accumulates in the vacuole and can be visualized by fluorescence Introduction 14 microscopy using FITC optics . The vacuole in each cell is visible as an indentation when observed with Nomarski optics . LY has been used to screen for mutants that are defective in endocytosis , since the assay is simple to perform ( Chvatchko et al . , 1986 ) . Unfortunately , due to the limitations in the resolution of yeast organelles by light microscopy , it has not been possible to visualize internalized LY in any intermediate compartment . Recently , the lipophilic styryl dye FM 4 - 64 ( N - ( 3 - thiethylammoniumpropyl ) - 4 - ( p - diethyl - aminophenylhexatrienyl ) pyridi - nium dibromide ) has been shown to enter yeast cells by an endocytic mechanism ( Vida and Emr , 1995 ) . This dye selectively labels the membrane of the intracellular organelles along the endocytic pathway since it is fluorescent only when inserted into membranes . During a time - course of FM 4 - 64 staining , the dye initially stains the yeast plasma membrane , then the cytoplasmic intermediate endosomal compartments and finally the vacuolar membrane ( Vida and Emr , 1995 ) . FM 4 - 64 has the advantage that it can be used to visualize intermediates between the plasma membrane and the vacuole during endocytosis . 2 . 1 . 2 . Electron dense endocytic markers Positively charged Nanogold TM ( Nanoprobes , Stony Brook , NY ) is a new marker used to follow the endocytic pathway in yeast ( Prescianotto - Baschong and Riezman , 1998 ) . Nanogold TM binds to the plasma membrane of yeast spheroplasts and its internalization and intracellular targeting can be followed by electron microscopy . Nanogold TM cannot be degraded , and can be used to visualize all compartments along the endocytic pathway . Cationized ferritin was also used to follow endocytosis in yeast spheroplasts ( Wendland et al . , 1996 ) . This marker is also electron dense and can be visualized by electron microscopy . Cationized ferritin has been used to identify structures that accumulate in endocytic mutants . 2 . 2 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis 2 . 2 . 1 . (cid:1) - factor pheromone uptake Receptor - mediated endocytosis can be followed using the yeast pheromone (cid:1) - factor . (cid:1) - factor binds to its specific cell surface receptor , the STE2 gene product ( Jenness et al . , 1983 ) . Internalized (cid:1) - factor is transported through two intermediate compartments , the early and late endosomes ( Hicke et al . , 1997 ; Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) , on its way to the vacuole where it is degraded by resident vacuolar proteases ( Schandel and Jenness , 1994 ; Singer and Riezman , 1990 ) . The best way to quantitatively assess the earliest stages of endocytosis in yeast is to follow the uptake of radioactively labeled (cid:1) - factor by Mat a cells . Figure 2 . (cid:1) - factor uptake assay [ 35 S ] (cid:1) - factor binds the (cid:1) - factor receptor Ste2p and is internalized . The internalization rate is determined by dividing the fraction of radiolabelled (cid:1) - factor that is internalized and therefore cannot be removed from the cells by an acid wash protocol ( pH 1 - resistant ) , by the total cell - associated counts ( pH 1 - sensitive ) . Introduction 15 The (cid:1) - factor pheromone is radioactively labeled with 35 SO 4 in vivo , recovered from the culture supernatant and purified to obtain 35 S - labeled (cid:1) - factor ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . [ 35 S ] (cid:1) - factor uptake assays are performed on mid - log phase cells using either the continuous presence or the pulse - chase protocol ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . The percentage of internalized (cid:1) - factor at each time point is calculated by dividing the internalized counts ( pH 1 - resistant ) by the total cell - associated counts ( pH 6 - resistant ) ( see Figure 2 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . a - factor receptor internalization Receptor - mediated endocytosis can also be assayed by following the yeast a - factor receptor , Ste3p . The a - factor receptor , like the Ste2p , is subjected to two modes of endocytosis , a constitutive , ligand - independent mechanism and a regulated , ligand - dependent mechanism ( Davis et al . , 1993 ) . Both mechanisms result in delivery of the receptor to the vacuole for subsequent degradation . The endocytic assay was developed based on the down - regulation of the receptor by determining the rate of degradation of Ste3p . The ligand - independent turnover of the Ste3p receptor is rapid , with a t 1 / 2 estimated to be ~ 15 min . An endocytic defect leads to a turnover defect of Ste3p and to accumulation of the receptor at the cell surface . Ste3p is labeled with [ 35 S ] methionine in a pulse - chase protocol , at various time points after the initiation of the non - radioactive chase , aliquots of the labeled intact cells are taken and subjected to external protease treatment . This assay distinguishes surface - localized receptors ( susceptible to external proteases ) , from receptors that localize to compartments inside the cell ( resistant to external proteases ) . The Ste3p protein is immunoprecipitated from cell extracts and subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( Davis et al . , 1993 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 Permeases and transporters uptake Another rapid and sensitive way to follow endocytosis is to measure clearance of permeases and transporters from the plasma membrane . A number of stimuli appear to trigger rapid endocytosis and subsequent vacuolar degradation of various permeases when the uptake of their respective substrate is no longer needed by the cell . Such a control of permease stability in response to nutrients has been demonstrated for inositol , tryptophane and uracil permeases ( Beck et al . , 1999 ; Lai et al . , 1995 ; Seron et al . , 1999 ; Volland et al . , 1994 ) . Similar mechanisms were also reported for the Ste6p a - factor pheromone transporter , the Pdr5p ATP - binding cassette ( ABC ) transporter and the maltose transporter ( Berkower et al . , 1994 ; Egner et al . , 1995 ; Kolling and Hollenberg , 1994 ; Riballo et al . , 1995 ) . The best studied among the yeast permeases is the uracil permease , encoded by the FUR4 gene ( Weber et al . , 1986 ) . Uracil permease is phosphorylated and ubiquitinated at the plasma membrane and undergoes rapid internalization followed by vacuolar degradation in cells submitted to various stress conditions , such as inhibition of protein synthesis ( Galan et al . , 1996 ; Volland et al . , 1992 ) . The fate of plasma membrane uracil permease can be followed in exponentially growing cells after inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide . [ 14 C ] Uracil uptake is measured at various time points after addition of cycloheximide , and protein extracts are prepared and analyzed for uracil permease on immunoblots . In wild - type yeast cells , inhibition of protein synthesis triggers rapid loss of uracil uptake , concurrent with permease degradation , whereas in endocytic mutants a protection against cycloheximide - induced loss of uracil uptake is observed ( Volland et al . , 1994 ) . Introduction 16 The yeast maltose transporter is degraded in the vacuole after internalization by endocytosis ( Riballo et al . , 1995 ) . This internalization occurs under certain physiological conditions such as impaired protein synthesis or presence of a fermentable substrate in the medium . Endocytosis of this protein is dependent on the actin network but independent of microtubules ( Penalver et al . , 1997 ) . In addition , the binding of ubiquitin is required for the internalization step ( Lucero and Lagunas , 1997 ) . By using yeast mutants defective in the heavy chain of clathrin and in several subunits of the COPI and the COPII complexes , it has recently been shown that clathrin and the two cytosolic subunits of COPII , Sec23p and Sec24p , are involved in endocytosis of the maltose transporter ( Penalver et al . , 1999 ) . 3 . Actin and actin - associated proteins 3 . 1 . The actin cytoskeleton Initial studies in yeast revealed a fundamental role for the actin cytoskeleton in the internalization step of endocytosis ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) . Using two conditional mutations in both actin and (cid:2) - tubulin , a requirement for actin in the internalization step but not for post - internalization trafficking was demon - strated . Microtubules were not required at all . An act1 - 1 strain showed a rapid onset of the endocytic defect at 37°C , even without pre - incubation , and internalized (cid:1) - factor at less than 10 % of the rate detected in wild - type cells suggesting a direct role of actin in the internalization step . The actin cytoskeleton in yeast consists of cortical patches and actin cables both composed of F - actin . Patches show a polarized distribution that changes during the cell cycle and the cables generally run along the mother - bud axis ( see Amberg , 1998 , and references therein ) . At an ultra - stuctural level , the actin patches consist of a finger - like invagination of plasma membrane around which actin filaments and actin binding proteins like Abp1p and cofilin are organized ( Mulholland et al . , 1994 ) . These data led to the notion that actin patches might be the sites of endocytosis . However , a recent study following Ste2p internalization by immuno electron microscopy provided evidence that the cortical actin patches are not the sites of receptor internalization ( Mulholland et al . , 1999 ) . The authors showed that Ste2p is not randomly distributed over the plasma membrane but is concentrated in furrow - like invagi - nations . This localization of Ste2p agrees with previous immunofluorescence studies showing a spotty distribution of Ste2p on the cell surface ( Hicke et al . , 1997 ) . Using the drug latrunculin A , the actin filaments in yeast were shown to undergo rapid cycles of assembly and disassembly in vivo ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) suggesting a very dynamic actin cytoskeleton even in this nonmotile organism . Using conditional mutations in the yeast cofilin gene COF1 , rapid turnover of cortical actin structures was shown to be essential for endocytosis ( Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ) . Cells lacking the yeast homolog of the actin filament bundling protein fimbrin , Sac6p , are also defective for internalization ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) . Taken together , these data strongly support the central role of an organized dynamic actin cytoskeleton in the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . Further support comes from the analysis of isolated yeast mutants defective for endocytosis . One mutant allele isolated , end7 - 1 , has been shown to be allelic to ACT1 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) and several endocytic mutants also exhibit defects in the actin cytoskeleton ( Riezman et al . , 1996 ) . However , it is important to point out that not all mutants Introduction 17 with defects in the actin cytoskeleton are affected in endocytosis . Mutations in myo2 , pfy1 and tpm1 cause actin cytoskeleton defects similar to those observed in several endocytic mutants but they endocytose as well as wild - type yeast cells ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . The involvement of the actin cytoskeleton in mammalian cells has been a matter of discussion for a long time ( see Geli and Riezman , 1998 , and references therein ) . Ambiguous results have been obtained depending on the cell line and the actin depolymerizing agent used . A recent study using latrunculin A provided evidence that the actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells ( Lamaze et al . , 1997 ) , though other studies have suggested it is not essential ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ) . Figure 3 . Actin - associated protein complexes Schematic drawing of the four protein complexes described in detail in the text . Proteins that have been shown to interact biochemically and / or in the two - hybrid system are drawn near each other . Synthetic lethal interactions are shown by a dashed line , and an arrow marks phosphorylation of a protein by a kinase . Las17p might be part of three complexes and therefore connections are drawn by double - headded arrows . Introduction 18 3 . 2 . Actin - associated proteins As previously mentioned , several endocytic mutants exhibit defects in the actin cytoskeleton and some of the proteins encoded by these genes have been shown to bind to actin or are associated with actin - binding proteins . Several protein complexes have been implicated in the internalization step of endocytosis and will be described below ( see Figure 3 ) . 3 . 2 . 1 . Myo5p complex Type I myosins have been implicated in actin - dependent membrane motility processes such as membrane trafficking , organelle movement , phagocytosis , pinocytosis and cellular locomotion ( see Mermall et al . , 1998 , and references therein ) . The yeast genome encodes two type I myosins , MYO3 and MYO5 ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Goodson et al . , 1996 ) . Single deletions do not lead to any growth phenotype but deletion of both genes results in a severe growth defect or lethality ( see Geli and Riezman , 1996 , and references therein ) . In contrast to a myo3 (cid:2) strain , a myo5 (cid:2) strain is impaired for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 37°C , suggesting a more direct role of Myo5p in the internalization step ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ) . Myo5p contains two IQ motifs that constitute binding sites for the small EF - hand containing protein calmodulin ( Cmd1p ) and this interaction is required for endocytosis in vivo ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . A previous study had already implicated Cmd1p in the internalization step of endocytosis and this function of Cmd1p appears to be Ca 2 + - independent because a calmodulin allele defective in high - affinity calcium binding ( cmd1 - 3 ) shows no endocytic defect ( Kübler et al . , 1994 ) . In addition , evidence suggests that at least two distinct calmodulin functions are required for the internalization step . One target of Cmd1p is Myo5p and this function is impaired in the cmd1 - 247 mutant . Another function is impaired in the cmd1 - 228 mutant for which the target is not known ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . The actual function of Myo5p in the internalization step is unknown . Since none of the dynamin - homologs in yeast have a role in the internalization step of endocytosis , Myo5p was suggested to replace dynamin in yeast endocytosis if one assumes that dynamin works as a mechanochemical enzyme ( Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) . Myo5p has been shown to interact via its SH3 - domain with End5p / Vrp1p and this interaction is required for polarized localization of Myo5p ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) . Interestingly , a mutant allele of END5 , end5 - 1 , has been isolated in a previous screen for endocytic mutants ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . End5p is very rich in proline residues and contains several putative SH3 - binding sites . End5p interacts with actin in the two - hybrid system and an actin - binding domain was mapped to the first 70 amino acids of End5p ( Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) . In summary , the endocytic function of Myo5p is regulated at least partially by Cmd1p and there is a second function of Cmd1p in the internalization step whose target is unknown . Polarized localization of Myo5p depends on End5p and therefore this interaction might concentrate or activate Myo5p at the sites of function . 3 . 2 . 2 . Arp2 / 3 complex As already mentioned , a dynamic actin cytoskeleton is required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Recently , a protein complex , the Arp2 / 3 complex , has been implicated in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and identified in several organisms . The Arp2 / 3 complex consists of seven subunits and has been shown to stimulate actin filament nucleation and to bind both pointed - ends and sides of actin filaments ( see Machesky and Gould , 1999 , and references therein ) . Introduction 19 Interestingly , several subunits of the complex are required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Mutations in genes encoding the actin - related proteins ARP2 ( Moreau et al . , 1997 ) and ARP3 ( C . Schaerer - Brodbeck and H . Riezman , unpublished data ) block receptor - mediated endocytosis . A conditional mutant , end9 - 1 , has been isolated in a screen for endocytic mutants ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) and subsequently shown to be allelic to ARC35 , the 35 kD subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Schaerer - Brodbeck and Riezman , 2000b ) . The end9 - 1 strain is defective for both fluid phase and receptor - mediated endocytosis at the restrictive temperature ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Taken together these data strongly implicate the Arp2 / 3 complex in the internalization step . To our knowledge no data have been published concerning the endocytic phenotypes of mutations in the other subunits of the complex . Studies from two different laboratories have implicated the yeast homolog of the human Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein ( WASP ) , LAS17 / BEE1 , in Arp2 / 3 complex function ( Madania et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Las17p has been shown to interact with the Arp2 / 3 complex by co - immunoprecipitation . LAS17 is an allele - specific multicopy suppressor of ARP2 and ARP3 mutations , and overexpression restores the endocytic defect of the arp2 - 2 mutant allele . Furthermore , las17 (cid:2) is synthetically lethal with several ARP2 mutant alleles and with arp3 - 14 . In addition , Las17p stimulated the actin nucleation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro . Taken together , these data support an important functional interaction of Las17p and the Arp2 / 3 complex . Las17p interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex via its carboxy terminal WA - domain . Unexpectedly , deletion of this domain , as opposed to a las17 (cid:2) , caused relatively minor defects suggesting that Las17p does not function solely via the Arp2 / 3 complex and that other cellular factors act redundantly with Las17p to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , a las17 (cid:2) strain exhibits a strong (cid:1) - factor internalization defect indicating a role in endocytosis ( Madania et al . , 1999 ) . LAS17 has been isolated as a multicopy suppressor of the end5 - 1 temperature sensitive growth defect and overexpression of Las17p also restores the endocytic defect of this mutant allele . Furthermore , las17 (cid:2) is synthetically lethal with end5 (cid:2) and the two proteins interact in the two - hybrid system ( Naqvi et al . , 1998 ) . These findings suggest a functional relationship between Las17p and End5p . A similar interaction has been detected in human cells between WASP and WIP ( WASP interacting protein ) , whose yeast homolog probably is END5 ( Ramesh et al . , 1997 ) . In summary , the data presented in the previous section ( Myo5p complex ) together with this data suggest that End5p can associate with both Myo5p and Las17p and thus might functionally couple the Arp2 / 3 complex to the Myo5p complex . However , there is no evidence that End5p interacts with both proteins at the same time leaving the possibility that End5p exerts its function in two separate complexes . 3 . 2 . 3 . Rvs167p complex The end6 - 1 mutant was isolated in a screen for endocytic mutants and shown to be allelic to RVS161 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . Rvs161p shows homologies to a second yeast protein , Rvs167p , and to the mammalian protein amphiphysin . In mammalian cells , amphiphysin interacts with dynamin , synaptojanin , AP - 2 and clathrin , all proteins implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis , and has been suggested to act as a scaffold protein ( see Wigge and McMahon , 1998 , and references therein ) . The entire Rvs161p is homologous to the N - terminal part of Introduction 20 Rvs167p and amphiphysin but lacks the SH3 - domain present in Rvs167p and amphiphysin . Mutations in either RVS161 or RVS167 lead to similar phenotypes except for a cell fusion defect detected in rvs161 (cid:2) and not in rvs167 (cid:2) strains ( see Navarro et al . , 1997 , and references therein ; Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) . Both proteins are required for the internalization step of endocytosis ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) and they interact with each other ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) further supporting a joint function . Surprisingly , their localization in the cell is different . Rvs161p was shown to be mainly cytosolic in unbudded cells and upon appearance of the bud to localize mainly to the mother - bud - neck ( Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , in unbudded cells Rvs167p is localized mainly in small cortical patches throughout the cell which polarize at the bud emergence site and in the small buds ( Balguerie et al . , 1999 ) . Taken together , these data support both overlapping and unique functions of the proteins in the cell . Rvs167p interacts with the Pho85 cyclin - dependent kinase complexes and is a substrate for this kinase in vitro . The similarities of the phenotypes associated with the deletion of PHO85 and RVS167 as well as the reduced phosphorylation of Rvs167p in a pho85 (cid:2) strain in vivo suggest a regulatory function of Pho85 kinases on Rvs167p activity ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . The SH3 - domain of Rvs167p interacts with Act1p ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ) and Las17p ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ; Madania et al . , 1999 ) in the two - hybrid system and with Abp1p ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) in a binding assay . Another protein interacting with Rvs167p is End4p / Sla2p ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) , a protein isolated both in a screen for endocytic mutants ( Raths et al . , 1993 ) and in a synthetic lethal screen with abp1 (cid:2) ( Holtzman et al . , 1993 ) . The SH3 - domain of Abp1p interacts with Srv2p ( Freeman et al . , 1996 ) . Deletion of either ABP1 or SRV2 show no endocytic defect ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ; Wesp et al . , 1997 ) but interestingly , a mutant allele ( srv2 - 14 ) of SRV2 has been isolated based on its endocytic defect ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Furthermore , deletion of the central coiled - coil domain of End4p creates a synthetic endocytic defect in the absence of Abp1p or Srv2p suggesting a redundant endocytic function of both Abp1p and Srv2p with End4p ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Several lethal double mutant combinations have been shown among disruptions in ABP1 , END4 , RVS167 and SRV2 ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) further supporting a functional relationship of these actin - associated proteins . As mentioned previously , Rvs167p interacts with Las17p in the two - hybrid system . This interaction could link the Rvs167p complex to the Arp2 / 3 complex and / or the Myo5p complex via Las17p . However , Las17p probably does not interact with all these complexes at the same time . Rather a dynamic model can be envisioned in which Las17p interactions are tightly regulated and possibly mutually exclusive to allow a controlled interplay between the different complexes . 3 . 2 . 4 . Pan1p complex The end3 - 1 allele was isolated in a screen for endocytic mutants and shown to be required for the internalization of (cid:1) - factor and for fluid phase endocytosis ( Bénédetti et al . , 1994 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ) . End3p contains an N - terminal EH - domain ( Eps15 homology domain ) first identified in the mammalian protein Eps15 ( Wong et al . , 1995 ) . Several EH - domain containing proteins are present in yeast , and of these Pan1p has also been shown to be required for endocytosis ( Tang et al . , 1997 ; Wendland et al . , 1996 ) . Interestingly , END3 was identified as a multicopy suppressor of pan1 - 4 , and end3 (cid:2) is synthetically lethal with pan1 - 4 . In addition , both proteins have been shown to interact by co - immunoprecipitation and in the two - hybrid system ( Tang et al . , 1997 ) . Loss of function mutations in PRK1 Introduction 21 suppress the growth and actin defect of pan1 - 4 ( Zeng and Cai , 1999 ) . Prk1p is a serine / threonine kinase that was shown to phosphorylate Pan1p in vitro . This phosphorylation occurs in the Pan1p domain implicated in End3p binding and pre - incubation of this Pan1p - domain with End3p prior to the in vitro kinase assay reduced the phosphorylation of the Pan1p - domain ( Zeng and Cai , 1999 ) . PRK1 shows homologies to another putative yeast kinase , ARK1 . Single deletions of either kinase gene are viable but an ark1 (cid:2) prk1 (cid:2) strain exhibits large cytoplasmic actin clumps and severe defects in cell growth implicating both kinases in regulating the actin cytoskeleton ( Cope et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , Ark1p was isolated in a two - hybrid screen using parts of the End4p as bait , and prk1 (cid:2) is synthetically lethal with end4 (cid:2) providing a link to the previously described Rvs167p complex . So far , no function of either Prk1p or Ark1p in regulating End4p or the Rvs167p complex has been shown . Pan1p also interacts with yAP180A and yAP180B , the yeast homologs of the mammalian AP180 , via its EH - domain . As with to their mammalian counterparts , the two yeast proteins interact with clathrin and might therefore function as adaptor proteins ( Wendland and Emr , 1998 ) . However , this interaction might not be required for endocytosis because the two yAP180 are not required for endocytosis ( see Huang et al . , 1999 , and section 4 below ) . END3 and PAN1 show genetic interactions with several proteins involved in endocytosis . end3 - 1 is synthetically lethal with arp2 - 1 , a component of the previously described Arp2 / 3 complex ( Moreau et al . , 1997 ) and pan1 - 20 is synthetically lethal with sjl1 (cid:2) but not with sjl2 (cid:2) or sjl3 (cid:2) , the yeast homologs of mammalian synapto - janin ( Wendland and Emr , 1998 ) . A previous study has shown that a strain lacking SJL1 and SJL2 ( sjl1 (cid:2) sjl2 (cid:2) ) exhibits a defect in both receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis , while a sjl2 (cid:2) sjl3 (cid:2) mutant had only a minor defect , and a sjl1 (cid:2) sjl3 (cid:2) had no defect , implicating these proteins in endocytosis like their mammalian counterpart , synaptojanin ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1998 ) . PAN1 shows allele - specific synthetic lethality with RSP5 ( Zolladek et al . , 1997 ) , an ubiquitin - ligase involved in the ubiquitination of several permeases and therefore in their internalization ( see Springael et al . , 1999 , and references therein ) . RSP5 is an essential gene , and the conserved cysteine in the HECT domain is required for both yeast cell viability and ubiquitination of permeases like Gap1p . Interestingly , deletion of the N - terminal C 2 - domain of Rsp5p does not affect viability but it impairs internalization of Gap1p without affecting ubiquitination of the permease indicating a role of Rsp5p in internalization in addition to its function in ubiquitination ( Springael et al . , 1999 ) . Recently , two yeast homologs of the mammalian epsin , Ent1p and Ent2p have been identified and shown to be required for FM4 - 64 internalization . Ent1p interacts with clathrin via its final eight amino acids ( Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . A previous study had reported a weak interaction of Ent1p and the EH - domain of Pan1p in the two - hybrid system ( Wendland and Emr , 1998 ) providing a possible link between the yeast epsins and the Pan1p complex . Taken together , these data suggest that the two protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p are involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton and may work , at least partially , via Pan1p . The genetic interactions detected link the yeast homologs of synaptojanin , SJL1 - 3 , and the ubiquitin ligase RSP5 to the Pan1p complex . Introduction 22 4 . Involvement of clathrin in endocytosis In mammalian cells , the most prominent and best studied mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis occurs via clathrin - coated pits and vesicles ( see Hirst and Robinson , 1998 ; Schmid , 1997 , and references therein ) . In addition to the clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway , other so called clathrin - independent endocytic pathways are present and function as the major internalization routes for some receptors ( see Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 , and references therein ) . Selective inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis causes the up - regulation of these clathrin - independent pathways ( Damke et al . , 1995 ) . The clathrin molecule is a triskelion formed by three clathrin heavy chain molecules , each associated with a clathrin light chain . The yeast genome contains a single clathrin heavy chain gene ( CHC1 ) and also a single clathrin light chain gene ( CLC1 ) . Strains with a disruption of either CHC1 or CLC1 , as well as a strain harboring a chc1 - ts allele , show a defect in (cid:1) - factor internalization . However , these strains still internalize radioactive (cid:1) - factor at about 35 - 50 % of the level detected in wild - type cells ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Payne et al . , 1988 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . Compared to the strict requirement of actin and several actin - associated proteins for (cid:1) - factor internalization ( see section 3 above ) this partial effect of clathrin mutations points to a non - essential role of clathrin in receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Several models have been proposed to explain this partial effect of clathrin mutations : 1 ) Clathrin is only required to concentrate receptors at the sites of internalization but not for the actual budding of the vesicles . 2 ) At least two endocytic pathways exist in yeast that are actin - dependent but only one of them is clathrin - dependent . 3 ) Another protein can partially substitute for mutations in clathrin and take over some of its functions . 4 ) The defect of clathrin mutations is indirect . The findings that no other genes with extended homologies to CHC1 are found in the yeast genome and the rapid onset of the endocytic defect in a chc1 - ts strain ( Tan et al . , 1993 ) would argue against the later two models . An interesting recent finding is that the internalization of the uracil permease Fur4p is unaffected at restrictive temperature in a chc1 - ts strain ( A . Gratias and R . Haguenauer - Tsapis , unpublished data ) . Therefore , the requirement for clathrin in endocytosis seems to be dependent on the protein to be internalized . According to the second model , the two proteins might be internalized by two different endocytic pathways . According to the first model , a cell might need to remove an actively signaling receptor ( Ste2p with bound (cid:1) - factor ) from the plasma membrane faster than a pyrimidine base permease ( Fur4p ) and thus only Ste2p would normally be concentrated for internalization . In mammalian cells , the heterotetrameric adaptor complexes have been implicated both in recruiting clathrin to membranes and in concentrating receptors in clathrin - coated pits via interactions with their cytoplasmic tails ( Hirst and Robinson , 1998 ) . A recent study demonstrated that clathrin can function in the absence of both heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . A yeast strain with disruptions of all six heterotetrameric AP large chain genes ( all (cid:2) chains , (cid:1) / (cid:3) / (cid:4) chains removed ) as well as a strain with disruption of the three AP large chain (cid:2) - subunit genes and the two Introduction 23 YAP180 genes did not display the phenotypes of clathrin - deficient cells . Endocytosis was not affected in these strains and the authors were able to isolate clathrin - coated vesicles from them . Taken together , these data suggest that clathrin can be recruited to membranes in the absence of functional adaptors and that clathrin can function in the absence of adaptors . There is still the possibility that other proteins can function as adaptor molecules and therefore mediate the membrane association of clathrin and the concentration of receptors . In mammalian cells , (cid:2) - arrestin was shown to act as a clathrin adaptor in the endocytosis of the (cid:2) 2 - adrenergic receptor and some other seven transmembrane domain G protein - coupled receptors ( Goodman et al . , 1996 ) . Taken together , all these data clearly suggest that a re - evaluation of the requirements to form a clathrin - coated vesicle must take place . Additional support for a non - essential role for clathrin in the internalization step in yeast comes from the finding that none of the dynamin - homologs in yeast are involved in endocytosis ( see Geli and Riezman , 1998 , and references therein ) . It is well established in mammalian cells that dynamin is required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Schmid et al . , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , several proteins involved in endocytosis in yeast have homologs in mammalian cells and vice versa pointing to at least some functional homologies of endocytosis in both cell types ( for a review see Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) . 5 . Role of lipids in the endocytic pathway 5 . 1 . Lipid requirement in membrane trafficking in yeast Recently , not only proteins but also specific lipids were shown to be required for the endocytic pathway . Lipids are responsible for the structural integrity of biological membranes and confer specific dynamic properties to the bilayer . Major lipid components of eukaryotic membranes are phospholipids , sterols , sphingolipids , and glycerolipids . Phosphatidic acid , diacylglycerol ( DAG ) , sphingolipids , and phosphoinositides ( PI ) have been implicated in several stages of membrane trafficking in yeast . The vacuolar protein sorting ( VPS ) pathway of yeast mediates transport of vacuolar protein precursors from the late Golgi to the lysosome - like vacuole ( see Figure 1 ) . Sorting of some vacuolar proteins occurs via the prevacuolar endosomal compartment and mutations in a subset of VPS genes interfere with the Golgi - to - endosome transport step . The VPS34 gene encodes a PI 3 - kinase and this enzyme is required for protein sorting to the vacuole ( Schu et al . , 1993 ) . Inactivation of VPS34 results in impaired fusion of endosomal transport intermediates with the vacuole . These data implicate PI ( 3 ) P as a regulator of membrane traffic ( Wurmser and Emr , 1998 ) . The SEC14 gene product encodes a phosphatidylinositol / phosphatidylcholine transfer protein that is required for the production of secretory vesicles from the Golgi ( Bankaitis et al . , 1990 ) . This requirement can be relieved by inactivation of the cytosine 5 ' - diphosphate ( CDP ) - choline pathway for phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis ( Cleves et al . , 1991 ) or by increasing the supply of DAG to the Golgi ( Kearns et al . , 1997 ) . Recently , a sec14 Introduction 24 mutant that was inactivated for phosphatidylinositol ( PI ) , but not phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) transfer activity , was shown to be able to rescue the lethality and the Golgi secretory defects associated with sec14 - ts or sec14 (cid:2) mutations . These findings indicate that PI binding / transfer seems to be dispensable for Sec14p function in vivo ( Phillips et al . , 1999 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are attached to the membrane via a glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - ( GPI ) anchor whose carbohydrate core is conserved in all eukaryotes . Apart from membrane attachment , the precise role of the GPI - anchor is not known , but it has been proposed to play a role in protein sorting . In vitro and in vivo data suggest that ceramides are required for trafficking of GPI - anchored proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to the Golgi apparatus in yeast ( Horvath et al . , 1994 ; Skrzypek et al . , 1997 ; Sutterlin et al . , 1997 ) . Members of the synaptobrevin / VAMP family of v - SNAREs are involved in vesicle docking and have been shown to be essential for exocytosis in yeast . Recessive mutations in either ELO2 or ELO3 , two genes that mediate the elongation of very long chain fatty acids , allow yeast to grow normally and secrete in the absence of v - SNAREs . Thus , the v - SNARE require - ment in constitutive exocytosis can be abrogated by mutations in genes involved in lipid synthesis ( David et al . , 1998 ) . 5 . 2 . Lipid requirement in endocytosis The VMA2 gene encodes the 60 kD vacuolar H + - ATPase ( V - ATPase ) regula - tory subunit ( subunit B ) . In cells bearing a disruption of VMA2 ( vma2 (cid:2) ) , the V - ATPase does not assemble on the vacuolar membrane and consequently the lumen of the vacuole fails to become acidified . Yeast vma2 (cid:2) mutants are able to grow if the external medium is around pH 5 . 5 but not at pH 7 or higher pH ( Yamashiro et al . , 1990 ) , because the cells are able to take up protons from the medium by fluid - phase endocytosis . Based on this result a screen for isolation of endocytosis - deficient ( end ) mutants was developed , taking advantage of the synthetic lethality of endocytic mutants with vma2 (cid:2) . Figure 4 . The vma2 synthetic lethality mutant screen The VMA2 chromosomal gene is disrupted by LEU2 in a yeast strain carrying the wild type VMA2 gene on a URA3 low copy plasmid ( pCY36 ) . After mutagenesis some of the cells will become endocytosis - deficient ( end ) mutants . These end mutants cannot grow without a wild type copy of VMA2 thus cannot lose the pCY36 plasmid . 5’ - fluoro - orotic acid ( 5’ - FOA ) is used to screen for end mutants , because only the Ura - cells , which are END + can grow on this selective medium . Introduction 25 The principle of this screen is presented in Figure 4 and resulted in isolation of the end8 - 1 and end11 - 1 mutants among others ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . The cloning and sequencing of these two genes revealed that END8 is allelic to LCB1 , an enzyme required in sphingolipid synthesis and that END11 encodes ERG2 an enzyme involved in ergosterol synthesis ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . These findings showed that mutants affected in lipid biosynthesis are defective in endocytosis . 5 . 2 . 1 . Sphingosine bases requirement for endocytosis The LCB1 gene is essential and encodes a subunit of the serine palmitoyl - transferase enzyme ( SPT ; Buede et al . , 1991 ) . SPT catalyses the first step in de novo sphingolipid synthesis , the condensation of serine and palmitoyl - CoA to yield the 3 - ketosphinganine ( KDS ; see Figure 5 and Nagiec et al . , 1994 ) . In yeast , sphingosine bases ( KDS , PHS and DHS ) are generated by de novo synthesis in the ER . The end8 - 1 = lcb1 - 100 mutant cells have a temperature - sensitive growth defect . At 24°C this mutant exhibits (cid:1) - factor uptake kinetics that are almost like wild - type cells , but at 37°C the mutant is clearly defective . Moreover , the lcb1 - 100 cells are defective for accumulation of LY in the vacuole at 24°C and 37°C and showed a few small vacuoles when viewed by Nomarski optics . In summary , the lcb1 - 100 mutant is defective in the internalization step of both receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis at non - permissive temperature ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . These findings suggest that sphingosine bases might play an important role in the internalization step of endocytosis . To test this hypothesis , sphingosine bases ( PHS and DHS ) were added externally to the lcb1 - 100 strain and the rate of receptor - mediated endocytosis was determined . Both phytosphingosine ( PHS ) and dihydrosphingosine ( DHS ) were able to suppress the endocytic defect observed in lcb1 - 100 cells ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . The use of genetic approaches should help to identify the sphingosine base compound ( KDS , DHS or PHS ) that is required for endocytosis in yeast . The Sur2p activity is required to interconvert DHS and PHS in yeast ( see Figure 5 ; Haak et al . , 1997 ) . To check whether one of these two compounds is specifically required for the suppression , the double mutant lcb1 sur2 cells can be tested for (cid:1) - factor uptake in presence of DHS or PHS . The recent identification of two Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes encoding sphingosine kinases , LCB4 and LCB5 ( Nagiec et al . , 1998 ) , should indicate whether phosphorylated sphingosine bases are required to trigger endocytosis in yeast . Figure 5 . Sphingolipid biosynthetic pathway in yeast Known pathway intermediates , substrates , and genes implicated in sphingolipid biosynthesis are indicated . Sphingolipids are characterized by the presence of a long chain fatty acid that is amide - linked to a sphingosine long chain base moiety . Sphingosine long chain bases are indicated . Introduction 26 Sphingosine bases and their phosphorylated derivatives ( DHS - 1P and PHS - 1P ) are thought to be signaling molecules for regulating a variety of mammalian cellular processes including cell growth , motility and apoptosis ( Hannun , 1996 ; Perry and Hannun , 1998 ) . Sphingolipids and phosphorylated sphingo - sine bases have also been implicated in the yeast stress response ( Jenkins et al . , 1997 ; Mandala et al . , 1998 ; Skrzypek et al . , 1999 ) . Sphingosine bases or ceramides have been proposed to activate protein phosphatases . The best candidate for a ceramide - activated protein phosphatase ( CAPP ) in yeast is the protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) , which has two regulatory subunits , Cdc55p and Tpd3p ( Healy et al . , 1991 ; van Zyl et al . , 1992 ) , and a catalytic subunit . The catalytic subunit of CAPP has been postulated to be Sit4p ( Nickels and Broach , 1996 ) , but three other genes that are functionally overlapping , PPH21 , PPH22 and PPH3 , encode the major yeast PP2A catalytic activity ( Ronne et al . , 1991 ; Sneddon et al . , 1990 ) . In a lcb1 cdc55 (cid:2) double mutant and in a lcb1 pph21 (cid:2) pph22 (cid:2) pph3 (cid:2) pph21 - ts strain , endocytosis is restored in the absence of sphingosine synthesis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , the sphingosine requirement for endocytosis can be suppressed by PP2A mutations . Furthermore , overexpression of two kinases can suppress the sphingosine requirement for both receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . In summary , the sphingosine requirement for endocytosis can be suppressed by loss of PP2A activity or by overexpression of two kinases , suggesting a signaling function of sphingosine in activation of a protein kinase and a protein phosphatase acting sequentially in endocytosis . 5 . 2 . 2 . Specific sterol requirement for endocytosis The end11 - 1 mutant is defective for the internalization step of endocytosis and has been shown to be allelic to ERG2 ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . The ERG2 gene encodes the sterol C - 8 isomerase , an enzyme required for one of the late steps in ergosterol synthesis ( see Figure 6 ; Arthington et al . , 1991 ) . Ergosterol is the principal sterol in yeast and is an essential lipid component for proper function of the membranes ( Daum et al . , 1998 ) . The end11 ( erg2 ) - 1 mutant is defective for LY accumulation in the vacuole and for (cid:1) - factor uptake at both 24°C and 37°C ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . These results suggest an important role of ergosterol in the internalization step of endocytosis . Figure 6 . Ergosterol biosynthesis in yeast The ergosterol biosynthesis pathway is described from zymosterol to ergosterol . The first steps of this pathway to the mevalonate pathway and the farnesyl pyrophosphate to zymosterol pathway are not described . The last steps of ergosterol synthesis represented here are non - essential . Introduction 27 To test this hypothesis some other erg mutants were analyzed for endocytosis ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . Yeast cells require sterols for viability . Only the last steps of ergosterol biosynthesis ( formation of zymosterol to ergosterol ) are not essential and therefore enzymes that are involved in these steps can be mutated ( see Figure 6 ) . The erg6 (cid:2) and the double mutant erg2 (cid:2) erg6 (cid:2) strains were analyzed for (cid:1) - factor uptake and LY accumulation at both 24°C and 37°C . The erg6 (cid:2) cells exhibited reduced internalization of (cid:1) - factor at 24°C and 37°C and a wild - type LY accumulation in the vacuole , whereas in the erg2 (cid:2) erg6 (cid:2) mutant cells both LY and (cid:1) - factor uptake were completely defective ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . The ERG6 gene encodes the sterol C - 24 methyl transferase and catalyses the formation of fecosterol that serves as substrate for the Erg2p enzyme ( see Figure 6 ; McCammon et al . , 1984 ) . One characteristic of the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway is that mutations in the Erg2p and / or Erg6p do not prevent subsequent enzymes from altering the improperly modified substrates ( Lees et al . , 1995 ; Parks and Casey , 1995 ) . Thus these mutations lead to accumulation of sterol structures that are not normal intermediates of the pathway . To correlate the endocytic defects that are observed in erg2 , erg6 and erg2 erg6 mutants with the sterol composition , the sterols accumulating in these different erg mutants were analyzed . The results suggested that the state of desaturation of the B - ring may be critical for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . Recently , plasma membrane cholesterol was shown to play a critical role in clathrin - coated pit internalization in mammalian cells ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Subtil et al . , 1999 ) . Cholesterol depletion from the plasma membrane inhibited transferrin and EGF endocytosis , demonstrating an essential role of cholesterol for the formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . In summary , sterols were identified as a novel requirement for endocytosis in yeast and in animal cells , but the exact role ( s ) of sterols are unknown up to now . The use of genetic approaches should help to clarify the ergosterol requirement for endocytosis in yeast . 6 . Outlook The studies in yeast have revealed several crucial aspects of the internalization step of receptor - mediated endocytosis . The actin cytoskeleton plays a major role and several actin - associated protein complexes are involved in the process . A great number of proteins have been isolated based on their role in the internalization step of endocytosis and surely more proteins will be discovered in the future . However , very little is known about the function of these proteins in endocytosis . The Arp2 / 3 complex has been implicated in actin - nucleation and pointed - end capping but whether these functions are required for endocytosis or if there is an additional endocytic function of the complex is unknown . The type I myosin , Myo5p , is a motor protein and thus may be involved in force generation in endocytosis . However , nothing is known about which step ( s ) in the endocytic pathway require force and how this force is generated . The major goals for the future are to understand the precise role of the different protein complexes involved in the internalization step , how their functions are regulated and how they co - operate to drive the internalization step of endocytosis . The lipid requirement for endocytosis in yeast is still conceptually at an early stage . The link between a sphingosine signaling pathway and the internalization step of endocytosis remains to be defined . The near future should provide significant advances in the identification and characterization of downstream effectors and upstream regulators of the sphingosine Introduction 28 activated signaling pathway . Likewise , there is a gap in our understanding of the ergosterol requirement for the internalization step . Analysis of other viable erg single and double mutants should permit the development of theories to explain how sterols function in endocytosis . The combination of genetic and biochemical approaches should help to answer the remaining questions about the protein and lipid requirements in yeast endocytosis . 7 . Acknowledgments We thank Antje Heese - Peck for critical comments on this manuscript and the other members of the Riezman laboratory for stimulating discussions . This work was funded by the Canton of Basel Stadt and by a grant to H . R . from the Swiss National Science Foundation and a long term fellowship from HFSPO to S . F . Introduction 29 Recent findings The internalization step of endocytosis is differentially affected by different actin mutant alleles . The findings that two actin mutant alleles ( act1 - 1 , end7 - 1 ) affect the internalization step of endocytosis ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ) and that most other internalization mutants ( e . g . sla2 / end4 , rvs167 ) affect the actin cytoskeleton , clearly support a central role of actin in endocytosis in yeast . However , the actin requirement seems to be rather specific since other mutants disrupting proper actin localization ( e . g . pfy1 , tpm1 ) do not affect endocytosis ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . A recent study has further investigated the role of actin in endocytosis by using an isogenic collection of actin mutants ( Whitacre et al . , 2001 ) . The actin mutants exhibited a wide range in their abilities to internalize (cid:1) - factor at 25°C and 37°C . Some alleles internalize like a wt strain or are defective at both temperatures , while other alleles have a ts phenotype with defects in internalization only at 37°C . Interestingly , there may be a correlation between defects in internalization and growth on salt of the different actin alleles with the exception of act1 - 4 . The act1 - 4 allele is severly impaired for internalization at 25°C and 37°C but is not especially salt - sensitive suggesting that this allele has a somewhat more specific effect on endocytosis ( Whitacre et al . , 2001 ) . Furthermore , the same study demonstrated that internalization in yeast is affected by high external osmolarity ( 600 mM NaCl or 1 M sorbitol ) as is the case in mammalian cells . 1 . New proteins involved in endocytosis A recent study has used a mutant library generated by the European Functional Analysis Network ( EUROFAN ) to screen for strains defective in fluid - phase endocytosis . A total of 700 strains disrupted for a single non - essential ORF were tested and 14 mutants were identified ( Wiederkehr et al . , 2001 ) . As about 2 % of the tested strains were defective in the accumulation of LY in the vacuole , the authors extrapolated that approximately 110 non - essential genes present in the yeast genome might be required for efficient fluid phase endocytosis . Interestingly , only 2 of the 14 mutants show a partial defect in the internalization step ( Gagny et al . , 2000 ; Wiederkehr et al . , 2001 ) while the rest was affected in post - internalization steps . This is in marked contrast to previous screens for endocytosis - deficient mutants which yielded mostly internalization mutants ( see D ' Hondt et al . , 2000 , and references therein ) . Both new internalization mutants , YNL177c and EDE1 , show a mild defect affecting mostly the initial internalization rate . Interestingly , Ede1p contains several EH - domains like two other proteins ( End3p and Pan1p ) already implicated in the internalization step ( Benedetti et al . , 1994 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ; Tang et al . , 1997 ; Wendland et al . , 1996 ) . Combination of ede1 (cid:2) with either rsp5 - 1 , pan1 - 10 or end3 - 1 leads to a synthetic growth defect ( Gagny et al . , 2000 ) suggesting that Ede1p might be linked to the Pan1p - complex previously described ( see section 3 . 2 . 4 ) . Introduction 30 2 . Actin - associated protein complexes Recent studies have found an increasing cross - talk between the previously described protein complexes involved in endocytosis ( see section 3 . 2 ) . Interestingly , several of these findings deal with the Arp2 / 3 complex further emphasizing its central role in actin dynamics . As mentioned previously , Cmd1p has at least two roles in endocytosis . One is to regulate the type I myosins Myo3p and Myo5p , and this function is affected by the cmd1 - 247 and cmd1 - 226 mutations . The second function is affected by the cmd1 - 228 and cmd1 - 226 mutations and the target is unknown ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . A recent study identified Arc35p , the 35 kDa subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex , as the second target of Cmd1p in endocytosis ( Schaerer - Brodbeck and Riezman , 2000a ) . Overexpression of wild type or mutant Cmd1p ( except cmd1 - 228p and cmd1 - 226p ) suppressed both the endocytic and actin cytoskeleton defect of arc35 - 1 . Furthermore , Arc35p was shown to interact with Cmd1p and to be required for the cortical localization of Cmd1p ( Schaerer - Brodbeck and Riezman , 2000a ) . Taken together these data suggest an important functional interaction between the 35 kDa subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex Arc35p and calmodulin . Interestingly , the other target of Cmd1p function in endocytosis , the type I myosins ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) , has been implicated in Arp2 / 3 complex mediated actin assembly ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; see section 4 of the Results ) . The acidic domain of type I myosins interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex via Arc40p and Arc19p . Furthermore , Las17p also interacts with Myo3 / 5p . More importantly , the acidic domains of Myo3 / 5p were shown to be genetically redundant with the acidic domain of Las17p ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . These findings explain the mild phenotype of deleting the acidic domain of Las17p compared to a complete knockout las17 (cid:2) ( Winter et al . , 1999 ) , since Myo3 / 5p are still present . Using an in vitro assay , Myo3 / 5p were shown to be essential for cortical actin assembly . This function required motor activity as well as phosphorylation of the motor domain by PAK’s ( Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , the function of Myo5p in actin polymerization requires interaction with Vrp1p ( see section 4 of the Results ) . Taken together these findings support a very close connection between the Myo5p complex and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( see section 3 . 2 . ) . Abp1p has been identified as another activator of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Goode et al . , 2001 ) . Abp1p interacts biochemically with the Arp2 / 3 complex and purified Abp1p activates the actin polymerization activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro ( Goode et al . , 2001 ) . Abp1p has been shown to interact with Rvs167p ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) and might therefore connect the Rvs167p complex and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( see section 3 . 2 . ) . A recent two - hybrid screen using Rvs167p and Rvs161p as baits identified a large number of interacting proteins ( Bon et al . , 2000 ) . However , since no confirmation of the interactions using other techniques were made , these proteins cannot be considered bona fide interactors . Instead , a possible interesting link between the Rvs167p complex and the Pan1p complex via Sla1p might take place ( Ayscough et al . , 1999 ; Tang et al . , 2000 ) . Sla1p was shown to associate with both Pan1p and End3p ( Tang et al . , 2000 ) suggesting that Sla1p participates in the Pan1p complex . Another study showed that Sla1p is required for correct localization of Sla2p ( Ayscough et al . , 1999 ) , a component of the Rvs167p complex , suggesting that Sla1p might regulate Sla2p function . In summary , these recent findings point to a complex protein - protein interactions network involved in regulating actin dynamics and / or endocytosis in yeast . Introduction 31 3 . Sphingoid base requirement The lcb1 - 100 ( end8 - 1 ) mutant was isolated in a screen for endocytosis - deficient mutants and shown to affect the internalization step ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Since Lcb1p is involved in the first step of sphingolipid biosynthesis , these findings suggested that ongoing sphingoid base synthesis is required for endocytosis . Indeed , exogenous sphingoid bases can suppress the endocytic defect of lcb1 - 100 ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . In order to identify the intermediate in the sphingolipid synthesis pathway required for the internalization , the lcb1 - 100 mutant was combined with mutations that affect the utilization of exogenously added sphingoid bases . Using conditions , where no DHS - 1 - P ( lcb1 / 4 / 5 ) or no ceramides ( lcb1 / 3 / ysr3 respectively addition of australifungin ) are made , addition of DHS still suppressed the internalization defect of lcb1 - 100 ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . These data strongly suggest that sphingoid bases DHS or PHS are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . Interestingly , the lcb1 - 100 strain shows a non - polarized actin cytoskeleton at 37°C . Addition of DHS can partially restore proper actin localization ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) suggesting that at least one function of sphingoid bases in endocytosis might be mediated via the actin cytoskeleton . Since sphingoid bases are rapidly turned over , they are ideal candidates to act as signaling molecules . Indeed , inactivation of the CDC55 regulatory or PPH catalytic subunits of protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) suppress the endocytic defect of lcb1 - 100 ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . Similarly , overexpression of the protein kinases Yck2p ( completely ) or Pkc1p ( partially ) suppressed the endocytic defect of lcb1 - 100 ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . These data suggest a function of sphingoid bases in activating a protein phosphorylation pathway required for the internalization step . Interestingly , Yck2p and Pkc1p have an overlapping function in endocytosis because only cells with impaired activity of both kinases are defective for endocytosis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , PP2A mutations or kinase overexpression partially suppressed the actin cytoskeleton defect of lcb1 - 100 further supporting the hypothesis that the actin cytoskeleton is likely to be one target of sphingoid base synthesis requirement ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . 4 . Sterols function early in Ste2p internalization The erg2 - 1 ( end11 - 1 ) mutant was isolated in a screen for endocytosis - deficient mutants and shown to affect the internalization step ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Erg2p is involved in one of the late steps of ergosterol biosynthesis suggesting a function for sterols in endocytosis . A study using different erg mutants indicated that the state of desaturation of the B - ring may be important for the internalization step ( Munn et al . , 1999 ) . However , a recent study analyzing more erg mutants has suggested that B - ring desaturation is not the sole structural requirement but that also side - chain methylation is important for the internalization step ( Heese - Peck et al . , submitted ) . In contrast to most other endocytosis mutants , at least two erg mutants ( erg2 (cid:2)(cid:3) erg6 (cid:2) , erg3 (cid:2)(cid:3) erg6 (cid:2) ) affecting internalization do not have pronounced actin cytoskeleton defects . However , they affect Ste2p phosphorylation ( Heese - Peck et al . , submitted ) suggesting that sterols function early in receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Interestingly , an erg3 (cid:5) strain internalizes (cid:1) - factor like a wt strain while it is defective in fluid - phase endocytosis ( LY - uptake ) suggesting that sterols also function further downstream of the endocytic pathway on the way to the vacuole ( Heese - Peck et al . , submitted ) . Introduction 32 One possible role of sterols in endocytosis may be to provide the proper environment ( “rafts” ) to recruit the endocytic machinery and / or cargo ( e . g . Ste2p ) . Interestingly , two recent studies have demonstrated that homo - oligomeric complexes of Ste2p are functional units of endocytosis ( Overton and Blumer , 2000 ; Yesilaltay and Jenness , 2000 ) . A tempting hypothesis would be that Ste2p oligomerization requires a proper membrane environment ( and thus appropriate sterols ) and that oligo - merization is required for efficient phosphorylation of the receptor . However , no effect of oligomerization of Ste2p on its own phosphorylation has been reported up to now . Results 33 Results The results are presented in the form of four manuscripts . Two of them have been published and the other two are being submitted for publication . Results 34 Results 35 Rvs161p and Rvs167p , the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , function together in vivo in J . Biol . Chem . 2001 , Volume 276 , 6016 - 6022 Ruben Lombardi and Howard Riezman * Biozentrum of the University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland * Corresponding author , tel . + + 41 61 2672160 , fax . + + 41 61 267 2149 , Email : Howard . Riezman @ unibas . ch Abstract : Mutations in RVS161 and RVS167 , the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , cause very similar growth phenotypes , a depolarized actin cytoskeleton and a defect in the internalization step of endocytosis . Rvs161p and Rvs167p have been shown to interact in the two - hybrid system but their localization in the cell may be different raising the question whether the interaction is physiologically relevant . Here we demonstrate that the two proteins function together in vivo . We find that the steady state level of Rvs167p is strongly reduced in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain . Similarly , the level of Rvs161p is strongly reduced in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain . We demonstrate that these reduced protein levels at steady state are due to a decreased stability of either Rvs protein in the absence of the other . Furthermore , we find that the amount and ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for receptor - mediated endocytosis . In addition , using the two - hybrid system we show that the interaction of Rvs167p with actin is not abolished in an abp1 (cid:2) strain suggesting that Abp1p is not essential for this interaction . I wrote the manuscript and performed all the experiments . Results 36 Introduction The yeast Rvs161p and Rvs167p , together with mammalian amphiphysin I and II , nematode and fission yeast isoforms , constitute a family of conserved proteins ( Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ) . The N - termini of the different proteins share the highest homology and this common domain was called the BAR - domain ( BIN / Amphiphysin / RVS - domain ; Sakamuro et al . , 1996 ) . Rvs161p consists only of the BAR - domain ( Figure 1 ) while the other members of the family have an SH3 - domain at their C - termini and a central domain varying among the different proteins . In the case of Rvs167p , the central domain is rich in glycine , proline and alanine and therefore is called the GPA - domain ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Schematic overview of the domains of Rvs161p and Rvs167p BAR , BIN / Amphiphysin / RVS domain ; GPA , glycine - proline - alanine - rich region ; SH3 , Src homology 3 domain . The mammalian homolog , amphiphysin I , was first identified as a brain protein enriched at presynaptic regions ( Lichte et al . , 1992 ) . The identification of dynamin , synaptojanin , the (cid:1) c - subunit of AP2 - adaptin and clathrin as amphiphysin I - interacting proteins further implicated amphiphysin I in endocytosis ( Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ) . A more broadly expressed isoform , amphiphysin II , has been identified by several groups and was found to interact with the same proteins that interact with amphiphysin I ( Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ) . Interestingly , the two isoforms can be coimmunoprecipitated from brain extracts suggesting that they act in concert ( Wigge et al . , 1997 ) . Indeed , two studies ( Ramjaun et al . , 1997 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ) found that the two amphiphysin isoforms colocalize in brain . However , a third study identified a different subcellular localization of the two isoforms ( Butler et al . , 1997 ) . Amphiphysin I was shown to be concentrated in the cortical cytoplasm of nerve terminals , whereas amphiphysin II was concentrated in axon initial segments and nodes of Ranvier ( Butler et al . , 1997 ) . The two yeast members of the amphiphysin family , encoded by RVS161 and RVS167 , were first identified in a screen for mutations causing reduced viability upon nutrient starvation ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ; Crouzet et al . , 1991 ) . RVS161 was also identified in a screen for endocytosis mutants ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . Mutations in rvs161 or rvs167 exhibit the same phenotypes except for a defect in cell fusion only found in the rvs161 mutant ( Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) . The mutant phenotypes include defects in endocytosis , cell polarization , bud site selection in diploid cells , and a depolarized actin cytoskeleton ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ; Sivadon et al . , 1995 ) . Rvs161p and Rvs167p have been shown to interact through the BAR - domain in the two - hybrid system ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) . However , their localization in the cell seems to be different , raising the question whether the Rvs161p - Rvs167p interaction is relevant in vivo . Rvs161p was shown to be mainly cytosolic in unbudded cells and upon bud emergence it localizes mainly to the mother - bud neck region ( Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , in unbudded cells Rvs167p is localized mainly in small cortical patches throughout the cell which polarize at the bud emergence site and in small buds ( Balguerie et al . , 1999 ) . Using the two - hybrid system the BAR - domain of Rvs167 has also been shown to mediate homodimerization in one study ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) while another study failed to detect any Rvs167p - Rvs167p interaction ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) . Results 37 Mutations in rvs161 and rvs167 affect the actin cytoskeleton ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ; Sivadon et al . , 1995 ) . Interestingly , the SH3 - domain of Rvs167p has been shown to interact with actin in the two - hybrid system ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ) . The finding that Rvs167p interacts with the actin binding protein Abp1p through its GPA / SH3 - domains ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) led to the hypothesis that Abp1p could mediate the interaction between Rvs167p and actin . In this study we investigated whether Rvs161p and Rvs167p indeed function together in vivo . We find that the steady state level of Rvs161p is strongly reduced in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain . Similarly , the level of Rvs167p is strongly reduced in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain . We demonstrate that these reduced protein levels at steady state are caused by a decreased stability of either Rvs protein in a strain mutated in the other rvs gene . Furthermore , we provide evidence that the amount and ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for receptor - mediated endocytosis . In addition , using the two - hybrid system we find that Abp1p is not required to mediate the interaction of Rvs167p with actin . Material and Methods Yeast strains , media and general techniques Yeast strains used in this study were EGY48 ( Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 ) , RH448 ( Mat a his4 leu2 lys2 ura3 bar1 ) , RH3376 ( Mat a his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ) , RH2600 ( Mat a his4 ura3 rvs161 (cid:2) bar1 ) , RH2950 ( Mat a his4 leu2 trp1 : : URA3 ura3 rvs167 : : TRP1 bar1 ) , RH5238 ( Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 abp1 : : KanMX6 ) and RH5239 ( Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 rvs161 : : KanMX6 ) . Strains that did not bear plasmids were grown in complete media YPUAD ( 2 % glucose , 2 % peptone , 1 % yeast extract , 40 (cid:6) g / ml uracil , 40 (cid:6) g / ml adenine and 40 (cid:6) g / ml tryptophan , 2 % agar for solid media ) . Unless mentioned otherwise , strains bearing plasmids were selected on SD minimal media ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . Standard recombinant DNA techniques were used ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . Restriction endonucleases were obtained from MBI Fermentas , Klenow from Boehringer Mannheim and Pfu polymerase was obtained from Stratagene . Plasmid constructions pEG202 and pJG4 - 5 were described elsewhere ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) , both plasmids contain a 2 (cid:4) origin of replication . The reporter gene plasmid pSH18 - 34 was described elsewhere ( Estojak et al . , 1995 ) , it contains eight LexA - operators upstream of the reporter gene GAL1 - LacZ . To construct pEG RVS161 the RVS161 - ORF was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction with Pfu polymerase using the 5’ - primer GATACGGAATTCATGAGTT GGGAAGGTTTTAAG and 3’ - primer GAGTATTCCGCTCGAGTTATTTTATCCCGAGCGCACAAAT introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the RVS161 - ORF . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pEG202 . To construct pJG ACT1 the ACT1 - ORF was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer GATACGGAATTCATGGATT CTGGTATGTTCTAG and 3’ - primer TACGCGGATCCTTAGAAACACTTGTGGTGAACG introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a BamH I - site downstream of the ACT1 - ORF . The fragment was then cut with BamH I , the 5’ overhang filled in with Klenow , and cut with EcoR I . This fragment was then inserted in a pJG4 - 5 which was cut with Xho I , the 5’ overhang filled in with Klenow , and cut with EcoR I . To construct pEG RVS167 the RVS167 - ORF was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer Results 38 RVS167 , 1 ( GATACGGAATTCATGAGT TTTAAAGGGTTTACCAAG ) and 3’ - primer RVS167 , 2 ( GAGTATTCCGCT CGAGCTAGTTCTTGTTGAGTTGCACG ) introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the RVS167 - ORF . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pEG202 . pJG RVS167 was described elsewhere ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) . To construct pJGBAR the BAR - domain of RVS167 was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer RVS167 , 1 and 3’ - primer GAGTATTCCGCTCGAGCTA CTTAGAGTAACCGAGTTTAAAGintroducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the BAR - domain . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pJG4 - 5 . To construct pJGBAR / GPA the BAR - and GPA - domains of RVS167 were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer RVS167 , 1 and 3’ - primer RVS167 , 6 ( GAGTATTCCGCTCGAGCT AGCCAGGAGCTGCCGCTACG ) intro - ducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the BAR / GPA - domains . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pJG4 - 5 . To construct pJGGPA the GPA - domain of RVS167 was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer RVS167 , 8 ( GATACGGAATTCCTTTAA ACTCGGTTACTCTAAG ) and 3’ - primer RVS167 , 6 introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the GPA - domain . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pJG4 - 5 . To construct pJGGPA / SH3 the GPA - and SH3 - domains of RVS167 were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer RVS167 , 8 and 3’ - primer RVS167 , 2 introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the GPA / SH3 - domains . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pJG4 - 5 . To construct pJGSH3 the SH3 - domain of RVS167 was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using the 5’ - primer GATACGGAATTCCCTGGCGTTGAAACTGTTACCG and 3’ - primer RVS167 , 2 introducing an EcoR I - site upstream and a Xho I - site downstream of the SH3 - domain . The fragment was then inserted as an EcoR I - Xho I - fragment into pJG4 - 5 . To construct p181 RVS161 and p195 RVS161 the 2 . 2 - kb EcoR I fragment from pUB1 - 3 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) was excised and cloned into Yeplac181 ( p181 ; Gietz and Sugino , 1988 ) and Yeplac195 ( p195 ; Gietz and Sugino , 1988 ) . To construct p181 RVS167 and p195 RVS167 the 1 . 8 - kb Kpn I - Sph I fragment from pFBKS ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ) was excised and cloned into Yeplac181 ( p181 ) and Yeplac195 ( p195 ) . Two - hybrid analysis Two - hybrid analysis was performed as described ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . Briefly , the strains contain the reporter plasmid pSH18 - 34 with the reporter gene GAL1 - LacZ under the control of eight LexA - operators . To assay the interaction between bait and prey the strains are streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . The positive colonies turn dark while the negative ones remain white . Protein extracts and immunoblotting Yeast strains were grown to exponential phase , harvested and lysed with glass beads in 500 (cid:6) l lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % SDS and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain ) . The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using the Bio - Rad protein assay . Equivalent amounts of each sample were analyzed by SDS - PAGE ( Laemmli , 1970 ) and immunoblotting with antibodies against Rvs161p and Rvs167p . As a control , antibodies against Sla2p were used ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Results 39 Pulse - chase experiments Metabolic labeling of cells was carried out as described previously ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) with the modification that the cells were not converted to spheroplasts , but were lysed with glass beads in 200 (cid:6) l of lysis buffer and then heated for 3 minutes at 95°C . Rvs161p or Rvs167p were immuno - precipitated from the lysates and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . Coimmunoprecipitation WT ( RH448 ) and rvs167 (cid:2) ( RH2950 ) strains were grown to exponential phase , harvested and converted to spheroplasts using lyticase ( Raths et al . , 1993 ) . The spheroplasts were lysed by osmotic shock in 2 ml of buffer ( 20 mM MES pH 6 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 mM PMSF and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors pepstatin , leupeptin , antipain ) . The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using the Bio - Rad protein assay . Equal amounts of total protein for both strains were taken and proteins were immunoprecipitated with antibodies against Rvs167p . The immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Rvs161p . (cid:1) - factor uptakes (cid:1) - factor uptakes ( continuous presence ) were done as described previously ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . The strains were tested at 24°C . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per time unit in the linear range and normalized to the internalization rate of the strain with the empty vector set to 100 % . The results represent the average of at least three independent experiments and the standard deviation was calculated . Growth curves The strains transformed with the indicated plasmids were grown overnight and the cell density was determined . The cultures were diluted to about 10 6 cells / ml , a sample was taken ( time point 0 ) and the cultures were incubated at 24°C . Every 3 hours a sample was taken and the cell density determined . Actin staining Yeast cell pre - cultures were grown at 24°C in SD selective media in order to maintain the plasmids . Cells taken from the pre - culture were then grown at 24°C in YPUAD to early log phase . Cells at 1 . 5 x 10 7 were then fixed in fomaldehyde and stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) to visualize F - actin essentially as described previously ( Benedetti et al . , 1994 ) . Results Interactions of the BAR - domain of Rvs167p Rvs167p can be divided into three regions : the N - terminal BAR - domain , the GPA - domain and the C - terminal SH3 - domain ( Figure 1 ) . Two previous studies have shown that the BAR - domain of Rvs167p interacts with Rvs161p . However , in one of these reports the BAR - domain of Rvs167p also interacted with full - length Rvs167p ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) while in the other report no such interaction was detected ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) . In order to clarify this point we tested these interactions in a different two - hybrid system . Both previous studies used a two - hybrid system with the yeast Gal4p as DNA - binding domain while in our system the E . coli protein LexA is used as DNA - binding domain . As expected we detected a strong interaction of Results 40 Rvs161p with the BAR - domain of Rvs167p ( Figure 2A ) . As shown in Figure 2B we also detected a strong interaction between full - length Rvs167p and the BAR - domain of Rvs167p . Since the BAR - domain of Rvs167p mediates both the interactions with Rvs161p and Rvs167p there is the possibility that the interaction of Rvs167p with itself is indirect and mediated via Rvs161p . To test this we performed a two - hybrid analysis in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain and still detected a strong Rvs167p - Rvs167p interaction ( Figure 2C ) , suggesting that the interaction is direct or mediated by another protein than Rvs161p . To confirm the report that Rvs161p and Rvs167p form a complex in vivo ( Navarro et al . , 1997 ) , we showed that the two proteins could be coimmunoprecipitated under native conditions with antibodies against Rvs167p ( Figure 2D ) . Reduced stability of Rvs proteins in the absence of its partner Interestingly , the localization of Rvs161p ( mostly cytoplasmic , at mother - bud neck region in small budded cells ) and Rvs167p ( small cortical patches that polarize upon bud emergence ) seems to be different ( Balguerie et al . , 1999 ; Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) . These findings raise the question whether the interaction of Rvs161p with Rvs167p is required in vivo . We found that when compared to a WT strain at steady state , the level of Rvs167p is strongly reduced in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 3A ) . Similarly the level of Rvs161p is strongly reduced in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 3A ) . As control we detected Sla2p , a protein that is also required for endocytosis and actin organization ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Its levels were constant in the three strains ( Figure 3A ) . A decreased synthesis or an increased instability of the proteins in the mutant strains could cause these reduced protein levels at steady state . In order to address this question , we performed pulse - chase experiments in the different strains . As shown in Figure 3B , both Rvs161p in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain and Rvs167p in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain are unstable when compared to a WT strain . Taken together these data suggest an in vivo function for the Rvs161p - Rvs167p interaction in stabilizing both proteins . Figure 2 . Two - hybrid interactions of the BAR domain of Rvs167p Strains containing the reporter gene plasmid pSH18 - 34 with the LacZ - gene under the control of eight LexA - operators , a bait and a prey were streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . Positive interactors turn dark while negative colonies remain white . ( A ) Full - length Rvs161p as bait ( pEG RVS161 ) was tested against full - length Rvs167p ( pJG RVS167 ) and indicated Rvs167p - domains as preys . ( B ) Full - length Rvs167p as bait ( pEG RVS167 ) was tested against full - length Rvs167p ( pJG RVS167 ) and indicated Rvs167p - domains as preys . ( C ) The interaction of Rvs167p with itself was tested in a WT ( EGY48 ) and in a rvs161 (cid:1) ( RH5239 ) strain . ( D ) Coimmunopreci - pitation of Rvs161p and Rvs167p . Lysates from WT ( RH448 ) and rvs167 (cid:1) ( RH2950 ) were incubated with antibodies against Rvs167p or with a preimmuneserum and the immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Rvs161p . Results 41 Figure 3 . Interaction of Rvs161p and Rvs167p is required for the stability of both proteins ( A ) Protein extracts from WT ( RH3376 ) , rvs161 (cid:1) ( RH2600 ) and rvs167 (cid:1) ( RH2950 ) at steady state were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Rvs161p and Rvs167p . As a control the same extracts were blotted with antibodies against Sla2p . ( B ) Pulse - chase experiments . WT ( RH3376 ) , rvs161 (cid:1) ( RH2600 ) and rvs167 (cid:1) ( RH2950 ) cells were metabolically labeled and lysates were prepared as described in Materials and Methods . Proteins were immuno - precipitated from the lysates with antibodies against Rvs161p or Rvs167p and the immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . Amount and ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for endocytosis Mutations in rvs161 or rvs167 have both been shown to affect the internalization step of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . In order to learn more about the involvement of the proteins in endocytosis we decided to overexpress them and measure how they affect (cid:1) - factor internalization . Introduction of a 2 (cid:4) - plasmid with RVS161 or RVS167 in a WT strain does not affect (cid:1) - factor internalization ( Figure 4A ) . Interestingly , overexpression of Rvs167p in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain exacerbated the endocytic defect of this strain ( Figure 4B ) . Similarly , over - expression of Rvs161p in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain exacerbated the endocytic defect of this strain ( Figure 4C ) . The protein levels of Rvs161p and Rvs167p upon over - expression in a WT or a mutated strain are similar ( data not shown ) . Interestingly , co - overexpression of both Rvs161p and Rvs167p in a WT strain reduces (cid:1) - factor internalization to about two thirds of WT rate ( Figure 4D ) . Taken together these data suggest that not only the amounts of Rvs161p and Rvs167p , but also their ratio are critical parameters for endocytosis . We have tested the same strains overexpressing the Rvs proteins for an actin and a growth phenotype . As shown in Figures 5A - H , overexpression of the Rvs proteins either individually or together in a WT strain does not affect the actin cytoskeleton profoundly . The cells have a normal polarized actin cytoskeleton with cables running along the mother - bud axis . Also the growth rates of the different strains are not greatly affected ( Figure 5I ) . Results 42 Figure 4 . (cid:1) - factor uptakes ( A ) WT strain ( RH3376 ) transformed with either p181 , p181 RVS161 or p181 RVS167 were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 24°C . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per time unit in the linear range and normalized to the strain with p181 set to 100 % . Note that the internalization rate of the WT strain transformed with p181 is ~ 4 . 6 % / min . ( B ) rvs161 (cid:1) strain ( RH2600 ) transformed with either p195 or p195 RVS167 were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 24°C . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per time unit in the linear range and normalized to the strain with p195 set to 100 % . Note that the internalization rate of the rvs161 (cid:1) strain transformed with p195 is ~ 1 . 7 % / min . ( C ) rvs167 (cid:1) strain ( RH2950 ) transformed with either p181 or p181 RVS161 were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 24°C . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per time unit in the linear range and normalized to the strain with p181 set to 100 % . Note that the internalization rate of the rvs167 (cid:1) strain transformed with p181 is ~ 2 . 0 % / min . ( D ) WT strain ( RH3376 ) transformed with combinations of either p181 , p195 , p181 RVS167 and p195 RVS161 were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 24°C . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per time unit in the linear range and normalized to the strain with p181 / p195 set to 100 % . As shown in Figures 6A to 6H , over - expression of Rvs167p in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain or overexpression of Rvs161p in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain does not further deteriorate or ameliorate the actin defect exhibited by the mutants . We detect a mild growth phenotype upon overexpression of Rvs167p in the rvs161 (cid:2) strain when compared to the strain with the empty vector ( Figure 6I ) . Overexpression of Rvs161p in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain has no obvious effect on the growth rate ( Figure 6I ) . Results 43 Figure 5 . Actin staining and growth curve ( A - H ) WT strain ( RH3376 ) transformed with p181 and p195 ( A , B ) , p181 and p195 RVS161 ( C , D ) , p181 RVS167 and p195 ( E , F ) , p181 RVS167 and p195 RVS161 ( G , H ) were fixed and filamentous actin was visualized using TRITC - phalloidin ( panels A , C , E , G ) or Nomarski optics ( panels B , D , F , H ) . ( I ) The same strains were grown overnight . The cultures were diluted to about 10 6 cells / ml , incubated at 24°C and the cell densities were determined every three hours . Results 44 Figure 6 . Actin staining and growth curve ( A - D ) rvs161 (cid:1) strain ( RH2600 ) transformed with either p195 ( A , B ) or p195 RVS167 ( C , D ) were fixed and filamentous actin was visualized using TRITC - phalloidin ( panels A , C ) or Nomarski optics ( panels B , D ) . ( E - H ) rvs167 (cid:1) strain ( RH2950 ) transformed with either p181 ( E , F ) or p181 RVS161 ( G , H ) were fixed and filamentous actin was visualized using TRITC - phalloidin ( panels E , G ) or Nomarski optics ( panels F , H ) . ( I ) The same strains were grown overnight . The cultures were diluted to about 10 6 cells / ml , incubated at 24°C and the cell densities were determined every three hours . Interaction of Rvs167p with actin does not require Abp1p Mutations in rvs167 affect the actin cytoskeleton ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ) and Rvs167p has been shown to interact with actin via its SH3 - domain ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ) . The actin binding protein Abp1p has been proposed to mediate this interaction of Rvs167p and actin since it interacts with the GPA / SH3 - domains of Rvs167p ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) . As Results 45 shown in Figure 7 , the interaction of Rvs167p with actin in the two - hybrid system is not abolished in an abp1 (cid:2) strain showing that Abp1p is not required to mediate the interaction of Rvs167p with actin . Interestingly , we also detect an interaction of Rvs161p with actin in the two - hybrid system . However , this interaction is abolished in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain suggesting that the interaction of Rvs161p with actin is mediated via Rvs167p ( data not shown ) . Figure 7 . Two - hybrid analysis The interaction of Rvs167p ( pEG RVS167 ) with actin ( pJG ACT1 ) was tested in a WT ( EGY48 ) and in an abp1 (cid:1) ( RH5238 ) strain . The strains contain the reporter gene plasmid pSH18 - 34 with the LacZ - gene under the control of eight LexA - operators , a bait and a prey . They were streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . Positive interactors turn dark while negative colonies remain white . Discussion In this study we provide direct evidence that Rvs161p and Rvs167p function together in vivo . We find that the steady state levels of the two proteins are inderdependent . This effect is caused by a dramatically decreased stability of either Rvs protein in the absence of its partner . These data provide evidence that the interaction of Rvs161p and Rvs167p is physiologically relevant and required for the stability of both proteins . Furthermore these findings might explain the almost identical phenotypes that are seen upon mutation of the two genes individually . The mutant phenotypes detected in either mutant strain might be a combination of loss of both Rvs proteins . Nevertheless , one function , the Rvs161p function in cell fusion ( Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) , does not seem to require Rvs protein - protein interaction . Apparently , the highly reduced levels of Rvs161p in the rvs167 (cid:2) mutant are sufficient for this function . As seen in Figure 3B , Rvs161p is more sensitive to Rvs167p levels than vice versa . Since Rvs167p has two additional domains when compared to Rvs161p this difference might reflect a partial stabilization of Rvs167p in the absence of Rvs161p via interactions mediated by these domains with other proteins ( e . g . interaction with actin ) . As mentioned in the introduction , two previous studies have investigated the cellular localization of Rvs161p ( mostly cytoplasmic , at mother - bud neck region in small budded cells ; Brizzio et al . , 1998 ) and Rvs167p ( small cortical patches that polarize upon bud emergence ; Balguerie et al . , 1999 ) . The two proteins apparently do not co - localize in the cell , however in this study we have provided evidence that these two proteins do function together in vivo . This discrepancy might be explained if one considers that Rvs161p localization is mainly cytosolic . Therefore it might also be localized to the Rvs167p - containing patches but is not concentrated there . In the case of Rvs167p , the bright fluorescence caused by its high concentration in cortical patches might make it difficult to detect an additional weak diffuse cytosolic staining . Therefore it is possible , that a certain amount of Rvs167p is localized to the cytosol and interacts with Rvs161p . Interestingly , overexpression of either Rvs161p or Rvs167p alone in a WT strain has no major effect on the internalization step of endocytosis . However , co - overexpression of both proteins reduced the (cid:1) - factor internalization rate to two thirds of WT levels . Also , overexpression of Rvs161p in a rvs167 (cid:2) strain , as well as overexpression of Rvs167p in a rvs161 (cid:2) strain , exacerbated the endocytic defect Results 46 found in the mutated strains . Since the amount of protein upon overexpression is similar in all the strains ( WT , rvs161 (cid:2) and rvs167 (cid:2) , data not shown ) we conclude that both the amount and the ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for the internalization step of endocytosis . We have tested the strains used for the endocytosis assays for an actin and a growth phenotype . None of the strains overexpressing the Rvs proteins exhibited an obvious change in their actin cytoskeleton when compared to the strains with the empty vectors . Also the growth rates were almost identical with the exception of a mild defect detected upon overexpression of Rvs167p in the rvs161 (cid:2) strain . The endocytic defect we detect in some of the strains overexpressing the Rvs proteins might be explained in two ways . One possibility would be that overexpression of the Rvs proteins causes a very subtle actin defect not detectable by immunofluorescence but affecting endocytosis . Another possibility would be that by overexpressing the Rvs proteins another protein required for endocytosis is titrated out and therefore endocytosis is affected . By using the two - hybrid system we detected an interaction of Rvs167p with itself mediated via the BAR - domain as previously described ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) . Since the same domain also mediates the interaction with Rvs161p , we wanted to determine if the Rvs167p - Rvs167p interaction is direct or mediated via Rvs161p . Two - hybrid analysis in an rvs161 (cid:2) strain demonstrated that Rvs161p is not required for this interaction and therefore Rvs167p either interacts directly with itself or the interaction is mediated via another protein than Rvs161p . Interestingly , amphiphysin I has also been shown to interact with itself in mammalian cells ( Slepnev et al . , 1998 ) . Mutations in rvs161 and rvs167 have been shown to affect the actin cytoskeleton ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ; Sivadon et al . , 1995 ) . A previous study has shown that Rvs167p interacts with actin via its SH3 - domain ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ) and it was suggested that the actin binding protein Abp1p could mediate this Rvs167p - actin interaction ( Lila and Drubin , 1997 ) . Here we show that in the two - hybrid system Rvs167p interacts with actin in an abp1 (cid:2) strain showing that Abp1p is not required for this interaction . There are several possible explanations for this finding . First , it could be that in the absence of Abp1p another protein takes over its function . Second , there could be more than one protein involved in mediating this interaction . Third , Rvs167p could interact directly with actin . Another potential candidate to mediate the Rvs167p - actin interaction could be Las17p , since it was shown to interact with the GPA / SH3 domains of Rvs167p in the two - hybrid system ( Madania et al . , 1999 ) . rvs mutant cells show pleiotropic phenotypes including sensitivity to non - optimal growth conditions , defects in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , defects in bud - site selection and endocytosis ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ; Sivadon et al . , 1995 ) . Interestingly , Rvs167p was identified as a target of the Pho85 cyclin - dependent kinase and thus might be involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton early in cell cycle ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . Also its mammalian homolog , amphiphysin , has been shown to be regulated by phosphorylation ( Bauerfeind et al . , 1997 ; Slepnev et al . , 1998 ) . In addition , amphiphysin I has been implicated in the autoimmune Stiff - Man syndrome disorder associated with breast cancer and amphiphysin II has been shown to interact with the MYC oncoprotein implicating it in Results 47 cell cycle control ( David et al . , 1994 ; Sakamuro et al . , 1996 ) . Taken together these data suggest that some general functions and regulation of these proteins have been conserved through evolution . In addition , these findings implicate the members of this protein family not only as important players in intracellular membrane trafficking but also in mediating signals during the cell cycle . In summary , we demonstrate for the first time that the yeast amphiphysin homologs Rvs161p and Rvs167p function together in vivo . The interaction between the proteins seems to be crucial for their stability . Furthermore , we show that the amount and ratio of Rvs161p and Rvs167p are critical parameters for the internalization step of endocytosis . Acknowledgments We thank the members of the Riezman laboratory for discussions and Kathleen D’Hondt for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was funded by the Canton Basel - Stadt and by a grant to H . R . from the Swiss National Science Foundation . Results 48 Results 49 Sphingosine signaling pathway via Pkh1 / 2 kinases is required for endocytosis in yeast Sylvie Friant ( 1 ) , Ruben Lombardi , Tobias Schmelzle and Howard Riezman * Biozentrum of the University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland ( 1 ) present address : IBCP / UMR 5086 , Lyon cedex 07 , France * Corresponding author , tel . + + 41 61 2672160 , fax . + + 41 61 267 2149 , Email : Howard . Riezman @ unibas . ch Abstract : In yeast , sphingoid base synthesis is required for the internalization step of endocytosis and organization of the actin cytoskeleton . We show that overexpression of one of two kinases Pkh1p or Pkh2p , that are homologous to mammalian 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent kinase - 1 ( PDK1 ) , can specifically suppress the sphingoid base synthesis requirement for endocytosis . Pkh1p and Pkh2p have an overlapping function because only a mutant with impaired function of both kinases is defective for endocytosis . We show that Pkh1 / 2p kinases are activated in vitro by nanomolar concentrations of sphingoid base ( PHS ) . These results suggest that Pkh1 / 2p kinases are part of a sphingoid base - mediated signaling pathway that is required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Two downstream effectors of this signaling cascade were identified , the Pkc1p kinase and the amphiphysin homolog , Rvs167p . Both proteins are phosphorylated by Pkh1 / 2p kinases and play a role in endocytosis . My contribution to this work is shown in Figure 3A . Results 50 Introduction Endocytosis is the process whereby eukaryotic cells internalize extracellular material as well as part of their own plasma membrane . This pathway is commonly used for uptake of nutrients , down - regulation of receptors and removal of other proteins from the cell surface . The development of several reporter systems to study endocytosis , as well as the use of genetic studies in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has allowed the identification of many components required for this pathway . The internalization step of endocytosis requires actin , proteins that are required for proper actin cytoskeleton organization , such as fimbrin , calmodulin , type I myosin , the amphiphysin homologs Rvs161p and Rvs167p , clathrin , and a large set of proteins associated to these major components ( D’Hondt et al . , 2000 ; Geli and Riezman , 1998 ; Lombardi et al . , 2001 ; Riezman et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , not only proteins but also lipids have been implicated in several stages of membrane trafficking , but the role of lipids in vesicle budding and fusion in living cells is poorly understood . It is known that the sphingolipid synthesis pathway is neces - sary for trafficking of glycosylphosphati - dylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus ( Horvath et al . , 1994 ; Sütterlin et al . , 1997 ) . Phospholipids , in particular phosphorylated derivatives of phospha - tidylinositol ( PtdIns ) , also appear to play a critical role in regulating transport events ( De Camilli et al . , 1996 ) . Sterols have been implicated in control of the internalization step of endocytosis in both yeast and mammalian cells ( Munn et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Subtil et al . , 1999 ) . Sphingoid bases have also been shown to play a role in regulation of cell surface expression of amino acid permeases ( Skrzypek et al . , 1998 ) . Using the S . cerevisiae lcb1 - 100 mutant , a requirement for sphingoid base synthesis for the internalization step of endocytosis and for proper actin cytoskeleton organization was revealed ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . The LCB1 gene encodes a subunit of the serine palmitoyltransferase that catalyses the first step in sphingolipid synthesis , the condensation of serine and palmitoyl - CoA to yield 3 - ketosphinganine ( Nagiec et al . , 1994 ) . The sphingoid base requirement for endocytosis can be suppressed by loss of protein phosphatase 2A activity or by overexpression of two kinases ( Pkc1p or Yck2p ) , suggesting a signaling function of sphingoid bases in activation of a protein kinase and a protein phosphatase acting sequentially in endocytosis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . These results imply that the function of sphingoid bases in endocytosis is to control protein phosphorylation . In mammalian cells , studies revealed that sphingosine induces in vitro phosphorylation of endogenous proteins through the activation of protein kinases ( Pushkareva et al . , 1992 ) and two unidentified sphingosine - activated protein kinases were characterized by their substrate specificity and their sphingosine requirement ( Pushkareva et al . , 1993 ) . Sphingosine acts also by inhibiting some kinases like protein kinase C ( Hannun et al . , 1986 ) or by activating some others , like the casein kinase II ( McDonald et al . , 1991 ) , the atypical protein kinase C isoform (cid:7) ( Muller et al . , 1995 ) , the p21 activated kinase - 1 ( PAK1 ; Bokoch et al . , 1998 ) and the 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent kinase - 1 ( PDK1 ; King et al . , 2000 ) . Thus sphingoid bases play a dual role in the regulation of protein phosphorylation . It was recently shown that sphingosine stimulates PDK1 kinase autophospho - rylation and increases the phosphorylation of known PDK1 substrates like PAK1 , Akt and PKC (cid:2) kinases in vitro suggesting that sphingosine is a novel activator of PDK1 Results 51 ( King et al . , 2000 ) . PDK1 phosphorylates several protein kinases in vitro and is responsible for activating these enzymes in vivo ( Alessi et al . , 1998 ; Le Good et al . , 1998 ; Pullen et al . , 1998 ) . S . cerevisiae has two PDK1 homologs encoded by the PKH1 and PKH2 genes . Similarly , Pkh1 / 2p kinases were shown to phosphorylate and activate several protein kinases including Ypk1 / 2p and Pkc1p both in vitro and in vivo ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases share an essential role for cell growth since the double knockout pkh1 (cid:2) pkh2 (cid:2) yeast strain is not viable . Synthetic lethality of pkh1 (cid:2) pkh2 (cid:2) double mutant is complemented by full length human PDK1 , or human PDK1 lacking the C - terminal pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain that was shown to bind phosphoinositides ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore both Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases contain no obvious PH domain , in contrast to Human and Drosophila PDK1 , suggesting that in yeast the activation of Pkh1 / 2p kinases may not be dependent on phosphoinositides . A recent study revealed that yeast cells overproducing PKH1 display an increased resistance to myriocin treatment , a serine palmitoyl transferase ( Lcb1p ) inhibitor ( Sun et al . , 2000 ) . Pkh2p was shown to phosphorylate Pkc1p kinase in vitro and the temperature - sensitivity of a pkh - ts ( pkh1 - ts pkh2 (cid:2) ) mutant is partially suppressed by a PKC1 - R398P dominant mutation ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . In a previous study , we showed that PKC1 overexpression or PKC1 - R398P expression can suppress the sphingoid base requirement for endocytosis , suggesting a link between sphingoid base synthesis and Pkc1p activation ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . These results suggest that the Pkh1 / 2p kinases may be activated by sphingoid bases and play a role in endocytosis via Pkc1p activation . To test this hypothesis , we investigated the implication of Pkh1 / 2p kinases in endocytosis . Here , we show that overexpression of one of two protein kinases , Pkh1p or Pkh2p , can abrogate the sphingoid base synthesis requirement for endocytosis and restore a proper organization of the actin cytoskeleton in lcb1 - 100 mutant cells . The two kinases have an overlapping function in endocytosis because only a mutant with impaired function of both kinases is defective in the internalization step of endocytosis . Furthermore , phosphorylation of Pkc1p by Pkh1p or Pkh2p kinase in vitro is increased in the presence of nanomolar concentration of sphingoid base . These results imply that the function of sphingoid base in endocytosis is to activate a signaling pathway via Pkh1 / 2p kinases . The ultimate target of the sphingoid base - mediated signaling pathway may be the endocytic machinery via a novel effector , the amphiphysin - homolog Rvs167p ( R . Lombardi et al . , accompanying study ) and / or the actin cytoskeleton via the Pkc1p kinase . Results Overexpression of Pkh1 / 2p kinases restores endocytosis in the lcb1 - 100 mutant To test if yeast PDK1 homologs , Pkh1 / 2p kinases , could be part of the sphingoid base requirement for endocytosis , we analyzed if PKH1 or PKH2 overexpression could suppress the endocytic defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant . The lcb1 - 100 strain was transformed with high copy ( 2 (cid:4) (cid:8) plasmids bearing PKH1 or PKH2 genes ( Table I ) . Neither of the two protein kinases tested was able to suppress the temperature - sensitive growth phenotype displayed by the lcb1 - 100 mutant ( data not shown ) . The same strains overexpressing Pkh1p or Pkh2p kinases were tested for internalization of [ 35 S ] (cid:1) - factor at 37°C . High copy expression of PKH2 and to a less extent PKH1 restored the defect in Results 52 (cid:1) - factor internalization of the lcb1 - 100 mutant cells at 37°C ( Figure 1A ) . To compare the suppressor effect of the Pkh1 / 2p kinases , we tested in parallel the two other kinases , Yck2p and Pkc1p , that were already shown to restore the lcb1 - 100 defect in endocytosis ( Figure 1A ; Friant et al . , 2000 ) . The (cid:1) - factor uptake rate displayed by the lcb1 - 100 cells overexpressing PKH2 overlaps more or less with the one overexpressing YCK2 , whereas PKH1 suppressor effect is more similar to the one of PKC1 ( Figure 1A ) . Figure 1 . Overexpression of PKH1 and PKH2 specifically suppresses the lcb1 - 100 (cid:1) - factor internalization defect ( A ) Strain RH3802 ( lcb1 ) was transformed with high copy plasmids carrying PKH1 , PKH2 , PKC1 or YCK2 kinase genes ( Table I ) and the corresponding transformants were assayed for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 37 o C and compared with lcb1 - 100 cells . ( B ) The sla2 - 41 ( end4 - 1 ) and end6 - 1 ( rvs161 ) temperature sensitive mutants ( RH3802 , RH1597 and RH2082 ) were transformed with a high copy number plasmid bearing PKH1 or PKH2 and assayed for (cid:1) - factor uptake at 37°C . To determine if other endocytosis mutants could also be suppressed by PKH1 or PKH2 overexpression , the sla2 - 41 ( end4 - 1 ) and end6 - 1 ( rvs161 ) strains were transformed with the 2 (cid:4) plasmids bearing the PKH1 / 2 genes and assayed for (cid:1) - factor uptake at 37°C ( Figure 1B ) . These two mutants are defective for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 37°C ( Munn et al . , 1995 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ) . The high copy expression of PKH1 or PKH2 did not restore endocytosis in these strains ( Figure 1B ) , showing that Pkh1 / 2p over - expression specifically suppresses the lcb1 - 100 endocytic defect . The ability of lcb1 - 100 cells overexpressing PKH1 or PKH2 to carry out fluid - phase endocytosis at 37°C was also tested and compared to wild type and lcb1 - 100 cells ( Figure 2 ) . The lcb1 - 100 mutant showed a few small vacuoles when viewed by Nomarski optics and was defective for uptake and accumulation of the fluorescent dye lucifer yellow ( LY ) in the vacuole at 37°C ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . Consistent with the (cid:1) - factor uptake results , overexpression of PKH1 or PKH2 allowed the lcb1 - 100 mutant to accumulate LY in the vacuole even tough the vacuole morphology defect was not restored ( Figure 2 ) . Taken together , these results show that overexpression of Pkh1 / 2p kinases specifically suppress both receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis defects of the lcb1 - 100 mutant . Furthermore , they support the notion that sphingoid bases may activate a protein phosphorylation pathway required for the internalization step of endocytosis and mediated via Pkh1 / 2p kinases . Results 53 Figure 2 . PKH1 / 2 overexpression suppresses the fluid - phase endocytic defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant Wild - type cells ( WT , RH448 ) and lcb1 - 100 ( lcb1 , RH3802 ) cells carrying either a PKH1 or a PKH2 high copy number plasmid ( lcb1 + PKH1 or lcb1 + PKH2 ) were assayed for LY accumulation in the vacuole at 37°C . The same field of cells viewed by fluorescence ( left panel ) and by Nomarski optics ( right panel ) is shown . Note that lcb1 - 100 cells have fragmented vacuoles when compared to wild - type cells ( right panel ) . Pkh1 / 2p kinases are required for endocytosis To determine whether Pkh1 / 2p kinase activity is required for the internalization step of endocytosis , (cid:1) - factor uptake and LY accumulation of pkh1 (cid:2) , pkh2 (cid:2) and pkh - ts strains were assayed ( Figure 3 and 4 ) . PKH1 and PKH2 have overlapping function for cell growth ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . The pkh - ts strain harbors a chromosomal deletion of the PKH2 gene ( pkh2 : : LEU2 ) and a temperature - sensitive pkh1 - ts mutant allele ( pkh1 D398G ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . The single disruptants and temperature - sensitive mutant strains were assayed for (cid:1) - factor uptake and compared to wild - type cells ( Figure 3A and 3B ) . The single mutant cells pkh1 (cid:2) and pkh2 (cid:2) internalized Results 54 (cid:1) - factor with the same rate as wild - type cells at 37°C ( Figure 3A ) . At 24°C , the pkh - ts strain showed a partial (cid:1) - factor internalization defect when compared to wild - type cells , and at 37°C the mutant strain was unable to internalize (cid:1) - factor ( Figure 3B ) . Therefore , we conclude that Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases have an overlapping function for endocytosis and that the loss of Pkh1 / 2p kinase activity affects the internalization step of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Figure 3 . Pkh1 / 2p are required for receptor - mediated endocytosis ( A ) Pkh1p and Pkh2p have redundant function in endocytosis . The single mutant pkh1 (cid:1) ( RH3802 ) and pkh2 (cid:1) ( RH4336 ) cells were assayed for (cid:1) - factor uptake at 37°C and compared to the wild - type cells ( WT , RH448 ) . ( B ) Pkh1 / 2p kinases are required for endocytosis . Radiolabeled (cid:1) - factor uptake assays were performed at 24°C ( open symbols ) or 37°C ( closed symbols ) on wild - type ( RH448 ) and pkh - ts ( RH4329 ) strains . As the pkh - ts mutant is defective for receptor - mediated internalization at 37°C it was important to examine whether this mutant is also defective for fluid - phase endocytosis . Therefore , we tested for a defect using the LY uptake assay . The pkh - ts cells were completely defective in LY accumulation at 37°C ( Figure 4 ) . These results show that Pkh1p and Pkh2p have an overlapping function in endocytosis , because only the cells with impaired activity for both kinases were defective for the internalization step of endocytosis . Figure 4 . Pkh1 / 2p kinases are required for fluid - phase endocytosis Wild - type ( WT , RH448 ) and pkh - ts ( RH4598 ) cells were incubated with LY for 1 hr at 37°C . To visualize LY uptake , cells were viewed by FITC - fluorescence optics ( left panel ) . The same fields of cells were viewed by Nomarski optics ( right panel ) to visualize the vacuoles . Overexpression of Pkh1 / 2p specifically corrects the actin defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant The lcb1 - 100 mutant is defective in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton at 37°C . This defect , like the endocytic defect , can be suppressed by addition of phytosphingosine ( PHS ) or overexpression of Yck2p or Pkc1p kinases in the lcb1 - 100 cells ( Friant et al . , 2000 ; Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , it is conceivable that overexpression of the Pkh1 / 2p kinases , which restored endocytosis in the lcb1 - 100 mutant , may also correct the actin organization defect of this mutant . To test this , we examined whether Pkh1p or Pkh2p overexpression in the lcb1 - 100 mutant could restore the polarized distribution of actin at 37°C . Wild - type , lcb1 - 100 and Results 55 lcb1 - 100 overexpressing PKH1 or PKH2 cells were grown at 24°C , shifted to 37°C for 2 hours and the cells were fixed and stained with TRITC - phalloidin to visualize F - actin ( Figure 5 ) . A shift from 24°C to 37°C causes a heat - induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in wild - type yeast cells to a non - polarized distribution . Normal polarized actin localization is restored after 1 . 5 - 2 h at 37°C in wild type cells ( Figure 5 ) . In contrast , this perturbation was irreversible in the lcb1 - 100 mutant cells , as seen by the accumulation of actin patches in the mother cell of the budded cells ( Figure 5 ; Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . However , lcb1 - 100 mutant cells that were suppressed for endocytosis either by Pkh1p or Pkh2p kinase overexpression , displayed polarized distribution of actin that was more similar to wild - type cells with cortical actin patches concentrated in the bud ( Figure 5 ) . Figure 5 . Pkh1 / 2p kinases overexpression suppresses specifically the lcb1 - 100 actin organization defect Logarithmic cultures of wild - type cells ( WT , RH448 ) , lcb1 - 100 , end4 - 1 ( sla2 - 41 ) and end6 - 1 ( rvs161 ) mutant cells ( RH3802 , RH1597 and RH2082 ) without or with the PKH1 and PKH2 plasmids , were grown at 24°C , shifted to 37°C for 2 hr , fixed , stained with TRITC - phalloidin and observed by fluorescence ( actin ) and Nomarski ( DIC ) microscopy . Results 56 Pkh1 / 2p kinases have been shown to be required for proper actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . To determine if the suppression by PKH1 / 2 was specific for the sphingoid base synthesis requirement of lcb1 - 100 cells , two other endocytic mutant that display actin cytoskeleton defects the sla2 - 41 ( end4 - 1 ) and end6 - 1 ( rvs161 ) , were tested ( Munn et al . , 1995 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ) . The sla2 - 41 and end6 - 1 mutants were trans - formed with the high copy number plasmids bearing PKH1 or PKH2 genes and assayed for actin localization at 37°C ( Figure 5 ) . Proper actin localization was not restored by either PKH1 or PKH2 overexpression in these mutants , showing that suppression is specific for the lcb1 - 100 mutant . The above results suggest that one target of the sphingoid base synthesis requirement is likely to be the actin cytoskeleton because overexpression of the Pkh1 / 2p kinases specifically corrected the actin defect in the lcb1 - 100 mutant . Sphingoid base activates Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinase activity in vitro We could show that Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases are required for endocytosis and that their overexpression can suppress the requirement for sphingoid base synthesis . The above results suggest that like their mammalian homologue PDK1 , Pkh1p and Pkh2p could be directly activated by sphingoid base as part of a signaling cascade required for the internalization step of endocytosis . To test this hypothesis , we developed an in vitro phosphorylation assay by using immunoprecipitated Pkh1p or Pkh2p incubated in presence of increasing concentration of phyto - sphingosine ( PHS ) . Wild - type cells were transformed with a plasmid bearing PKH1 or PKH2 genes tagged at their C - terminus with a triple HA epitope ( Table I ) . These two Pkh1 - HA 3 and Pkh2 - HA 3 constructs are functional because they can suppress the temperature sensitive growth phenotype displayed by the pkh - ts strain ( data not shown ) . It was recently shown that Pkh1 / 2p kinases directly phospho - rylate and thus activate Pkc1p ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , we used immuno - precipitated Pkc1p as the natural substrate for Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinase in our in vitro assay . A wild - type strain was transformed with a multicopy plasmid encoding Pkc1p triple HA tagged at its C - terminus ( pTS94 ) . This construct is functional since a pkc1 - 2 strain transformed with this plasmid shows no growth defect at 37°C anymore . Pkh1 - HA 3 , Pkh2 - HA 3 or Pkc1 - HA 3 were immunoprecipitated with an anti - HA antibody . Immunoprecipitated Pkc1 - HA 3 shows a proper folding and activity because in an in vitro phosphorylation assay the immunoprecipitated Pkc1 - HA 3 phosphorylated correctly its substrate , the myelin basic protein ( Antonsson et al . , 1994 ; data not shown ) . Immuno - precipitated Pkh1 - HA 3 or Pkh2 - HA 3 was incubated in presence of its substrate Pkc1 - HA 3 , and aliquots of this kinase - substrate mix were incubated with [ (cid:3) - 32 P ] ATP in the presence of increasing concentration of phytosphingosine ( PHS ) ( Figure 6 ) . A control without Pkh1 / 2p kinase to determine the amount of Pkc1 - HA 3 autophosphorylation was done in parallel . Phosphorylated [ 32 P ] Pkc1 - HA 3 was revealed by using a Cyclone Storage Phosphor Imager ( Packard ) after electrophoresis on a 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE ( Figure 6A and 6C ) and the amount of radiolabeled Pkc1 - HA 3 was quantified ( Figure 6B and 6D ) . All phosphorylation assays were performed at least twice , the results shown are from one of the independent experiments that gave nearly identical results . PHS was found to be a potent activator of both Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases , since at concentration as low as 0 . 5 nM there is an increase in Pkc1 - HA 3 phosphorylation ( Figure 6A and 6C ) Results 57 therefore an activation of Pkh1 / 2p kinase activity . A 3 - fold activation of both Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinase activity is observed in the presence of 2 . 5 nM to 25 nM PHS respectively ( Figure 6B and 6D ) . However , PHS becomes less effective at higher concentrations and at 500 nM PHS inhibited both Pkh1p and Pkh2p phosphorylation of Pkc1p ( Figure 6 ) . These findings suggest that PHS has a bifunctional effect on Pkh1 / 2p activity in vitro , stimulating the activity at low concentrations and inhibiting it at high concentrations . These results show that Pkh1 / 2p kinases are directly activated by PHS in vitro and are one of the yeast sphingoid base - activated kinases . Figure 6 . Phytosphingosine activates the Pkh1 / 2p kinases ( A ) Immunoprecipitated Pkh1 - HA 3 was incubated with its substrate Pkc1 - HA 3 in the presence of [ (cid:2) - 32 P ] ATP and increasing amounts of PHS . Phosphorylated Pkc1 - HA 3 was revealed by a Cyclone Storage Phosphor Imager ( Packard ) after separation on a 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE . ( B ) The amount of radiolabeled [ 32 P ] Pkc1 - HA 3 was quantified in each lane and basal phosphorylation of Pkc1p by Pkh1p without PHS was set as 1 . ( C ) and ( D ) The same assay was done using Pkh2 - HA 3 as the kinase . Results 58 Discussion The major finding of this study is that Pkh1 / 2p kinases are part of a sphingoid base - mediated signaling pathway required for the internalization step of endocytosis and for proper actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast . As shown previously , the actin cytoskeleton plays an essential role in the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast , because yeast mutants in actin and actin - binding proteins are defective in endocytosis ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ) . Here we showed that overexpression of PKH1 / 2 restored the endocytic and the actin cytoskeleton organization defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant . It is interesting to note , that neither PKH1 nor PKH2 over - expression restored the endocytic or actin defect of other mutants that are defective in the internalization step of endocytosis and in actin cytoskeleton organization , meaning that this suppressor effect was specific for the lcb1 - 100 mutation . We show that Pkh1p and Pkh2p kinases have redundant functions for both fluid - phase and receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . A previous study has shown that these two kinases are also required for actin cytoskeleton organi - zation , since the pkh - ts strain displays a defect in actin polarization upon shift to 37°C ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . These results suggest that Pkh1 / 2 kinases play adirect role in endocytosis perhaps by regulating the endocytic machinery and / or the actin cytoskeleton . Here , we showed that sphingoid base activates both Pkh1p and Pkh2p protein kinases in vitro . All these results together suggest that there is a sphingoid base - mediated signaling path - way required for endocytosis and that the sphingoid base activated kinase that mediates this cascade are the Pkh1 / 2p kinases . Pkh1p and Pkh2p are the yeast homologs of mammalian PDK1 kinase . Human , Drosophila and C . elegans PDK1 kinases contain a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain and this PH domain binds PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( Currie et al . , 1999 ; Fruman et al . , 1999 ; Stephens et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , the two yeast members of this kinase family , Pkh1p and Pkh2p , lack the PH domain ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . It was previously shown that mammalian PDK1 lacking the PH domain was sufficient to rescue pkh1 (cid:2) pkh2 (cid:2) mutant cells from lethality ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , yeast cells are not able to generate PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( Hawkins et al . , 1993 ) and Pkh1p does not bind PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 under conditions where this phospholipid binds tightly to PDK1 ( R . Currie and C . P . Downes , unpublished data ) . These findings suggest that Pkh1 / 2 kinases are not regulated by phospho - inositides like their mammalian counterpart . The best candidates for regulating Pkh1 / 2p kinases activity are sphingoid bases , because a previous study showed that mammalian PDK1 kinase is activated in vitro in presence of sphingosine and that elevated intracellular sphingosine level increases PDK1 activity in vivo ( King et al . , 2000 ) . Here , we showed that overexpression of PKH1 or PKH2 suppresses the endocytic defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant strain that is impaired in sphingoid base synthesis . Moreover , by using an in vitro kinase assay we could show that both Pkh1p and Pkh2p are activated by nanomolar concentration of phytosphingosine ( PHS ) . There is a three fold increase in Pkh1 / 2p kinases activity in presence of very low concentrations of PHS ( 0 . 5 to 2 . 5 nM ) . Using the same in vitro kinase assay , we also tested the ability of dihydrosphingosine ( DHS ) , another sphingoid base that was shown to suppress the lcb1 - 100 endocytic defect ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) , to activate Pkh1p kinase . We obtained the same results as for PHS ( data not shown ) . All these results together suggest that both PDK1 and its yeast counterparts Pkh1 / 2p kinases are sphingoid base - activated kinases . Further - more , the results obtained here together with previous results showing that neither Results 59 phosphorylated sphingoid bases nor ceramides or sphingolipids are required for endocytosis ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) , suggest that sphingoid bases ( DHS and / or PHS ) are required for Pkh1 / 2 kinases activation . However , we cannot rule out the possibility that another yet unidentified derivative of PHS / DHS could be the true Pkh1 / 2 kinase activator , but this derivative cannot be phosphorylated sphingoid base because yeast incapable of generating phospho - rylated sphingoid bases are capable of endocytosis ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) . Pkc1p and Ypk1 / 2p kinases were identified as downstream effectors of the Pkh1 / 2p protein kinase cascade . These two kinases are directly phosphorylated by Pkh kinase in vitro ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . Reduced Pkc1p activity was observed in a pkh - ts mutant strain indicating that Pkh1 / 2p kinases are required for Pkc1p function in vivo ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . In a previous study , we could show that an increased gene dosage of PKC1 or expression of a dominant , activated allele of PKC1 suppresses the endocytic defect of the lcb1 - 100 mutant ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . The above results showed that Pkc1p phospho - rylation by Pkh1 / 2p kinases is activated by sphingoid base in vitro . These data suggest that Pkc1p may be activated by Pkh1 / 2p kinases in response to sphingoid base and that this signaling cascade is required for the internalization step of endocytosis . The essential role for Pkh1 / 2 kinases in endocytosis is further confirmed by the strong endocytic defect observed in a pkh - ts mutant strain . The lcb1 - 100 mutant strain blocked in sphingoid base synthesis shows a similar endocytosis defect ( Zanolari et al . , 2000 ) , whereas the pkc1 - ts mutant cells showed wild - type endocytosis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . Therefore , the Pkc1p kinase is one of the downstream effectors of the Pkh1 / 2p signaling cascade , but it is not the only one required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Yck2p kinase could be another downstream effector , because overexpression also suppresses the lcb1 - 100 endocytosis defect and only the double mutant pkc1 - ts yck - ts strain is completely defective for endocytosis ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . We did not find a consensus PDK1 / 2 - Pkh1 / 2 phosphorylation site in the Yck2p kinase , whereas both Pkc1p and Ypk1 / 2p kinases have these site ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) , meaning that Yck2p is probably not directly activated by Pkh1 / 2p . There could be another kinase upstream of Yck2p in the signaling cascade . The Ypk1 / 2p kinases would be good candidates . The Ypk1p kinase was recently identified as a multicopy suppressor gene that restores growth in presence of a serine palmitoyl transferase ( Lcb1p ) inhibitor . Furthermore , phosphorylation of the Ypk1p kinase is increased in presence of PHS ( Sun et al . , 2000 ) . This phosphorylation could be due to activation of Pkh1 / 2p kinases by PHS , because Ypk1p is directly phosphorylated by Pkh2p in vitro ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . In agreement with this hypothesis , it was shown that Pkh kinase activity was required for maximal Ypk1p phospho - rylation in vivo ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . These data suggest that Pkh1 / 2p kinases might be tightly regulated by sphingoid bases , not only for their function in endocytosis , but for their overall function in regulating several yeast processes , like cell growth , control of the mitogen - activated protein kinases and organization of the actin cytoskeleton . In a previous study , we could show that YPK1 or YPK2 overexpression did not suppress the lcb1 - 100 endocytosis defect ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) , suggesting that these kinases are not part of the signaling cascade required for the internalization step of endocytosis . However , we cannot exclude that YPK1 / 2 overexpression would not be sufficient to mimic the Pkh1 / 2p activation effect on these kinases , because they may not be active in their dephosphorylated state , even if overexpressed . Results 60 In summary , our results are the first example of a sphingoid base activated signaling pathway being used to regulate a step of membrane traffic . Many details remain to be discovered , including the identification of the downstream effectors of the Pkh1 / 2p sphingoid base activated protein kinase and the mechanism whereby sphingoid base controls the relative activities of protein kinases . The ultimate target of the sphingoid base mediated signaling pathway may be the endocytic machinery via a novel effector , the amphiphysin homolog Rvs167p ( R . Lombardi et al . , accompanying study ; Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) and / or the actin cytoskeleton via the Pkc1p kinase . The ease of genetic and molecular studies in yeast should help to understand these questions . Materials and Methods Plasmids , strains , media and genetic manipulations Plasmids and yeast strains used in this study are listed in Tables I and II , respectively . Disruption mutants were created by integrative transformation using standard techniques . Yeast cell cultures and genetic manipulations were carried out essentially as described ( Sherman et al . , 1983 ) . Yeast cells were transformed by the LiAc method using single - stranded carrier DNA and DMSO ( Hill et al . , 1991 ; Schiestl and Gietz , 1989 ) . Rich YPUAD medium and synthetic minimal media ( SD ) complemented with the appropriate nutrients for plasmid maintenance were prepared as described ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) . Endocytosis assays Lucifer yellow - carbohydrazide ( LY ) ( Fluka , Buchs , Switzerland ) assays were performed as described ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ; Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Yeast precultures were grown at 24°C in SD selective media in order to maintain the plasmids . Cells taken from the pre - culture were then grown at 24°C in YPUAD to mid log phase , shifted to 37°C for 15 min and incubated for 1 h at 37°C with LY . [ 35 S ] (cid:1) - factor uptake assays were performed on mid - log phase cells using the continuous presence protocol as described ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . Pre - cultures were done at 24°C in SD selective media in order to maintain the plasmids . Cells taken from the pre - culture were then grown at 24°C in YPUAD medium , the (cid:1) - factor uptake assays were carried out at 24°C or 37°C after 15 min preincubation at the respective temperature . All uptake assays were performed at least twice , the results shown are from one of the independent experiments , which gave nearly identical results . Rhodamine - Phalloidin staining of actin Yeast cells pre - cultures were grown at 24°C in SD selective media in order to maintain the plasmids . Cells taken from the pre - culture were then grown at 24°C in YPUAD medium to early log phase . Cells at 1 x 10 7 cells / ml were then incubated for 2 hr at 37°C , fixed in formaldehyde and stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) to visualize F - actin essentially as described previously ( Benedetti et al . , 1994 ) . Results 61 Table I . Plasmids Plasmid Yeast Ori Insert Source YEp195 - PKH1 2 (cid:1) PKH1 Schmelzle and Hall YEp195 - PKH2 2 (cid:1) PKH2 Schmelzle and Hall pTS80 2 (cid:1) PKH1 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall pTS81 2 (cid:1) PKH2 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall pSH24 2 (cid:1) PKC1 Helliwell et al . , 1998 pTS101 2 (cid:1) PKC1 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall pL2 . 3 2 (cid:1) YCK2 Robinson et al . , 1992 Table II . Yeast strains Strains Genotype Source RH448 leu2 ura3 his4 lys2 bar1 Lab . Strain RH1597 leu2 ura3 his4 bar1 end4 - 1 Raths et al . , 1993 RH2082 leu2 ura3 his4 bar1 end6 - 1 Munn et al . , 1995 RH3802 leu2 ura3 his4 his3 ade2 lys2 bar1 lcb1 - 100 Friant et al . , 2000 RH3809 leu2 ura3 his4 bar1 lcb1 - 100 Friant et al . , 2000 RH5388 leu2 ura3 ade2 trp1 bar1 : : URA3 pkh2 : : LEU2 This study RH5411 leu2 ura3 his2 ade1 trp1 bar1 : : URA3 This study RH5412 leu2 ura3 his2 ade1 trp1 bar1 : : URA3 pkh1 - ts pkh2 : : LEU2 This study RH5413 leu2 ura3 his3 ade2 trp1 lys2 bar1 pkh1 : : TRP1 This study All strains listed in this table are MAT a . In vitro phosphorylation assay Wild - type yeast cells ( RH448 ) transformed with plasmids bearing PKC1 - HA 3 , PKH1 - HA 3 or PKH2 - HA 3 were grown at 24°C in SD selective media in order to maintain the plasmids . Cells around 1 . 5 x 10 7 cells / ml were then harvested and total yeast proteins were extracted by glass beads lysis in a buffer containing , 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM KCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 10 % glycerol and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain . The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using the Bio - Rad protein assay . Equal amounts of total protein for the different kinases were taken and triple HA - tagged kinases were immunoprecipitated over - night at 4°C from these extracts using 5 (cid:6) l of anti - HA rat monoclonal antibody ( Clone 3F10 , Boehringer Manheim ) , 50 (cid:6) l of 30 % protein G - sepharose beads in a final volume of 750 (cid:6) l immunoprecipitation buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain ) . Beads were then washed three times in immuno - precipitation buffer and two times in 40 mM MOPS pH 7 . 5 buffer and resuspended in phosphorylation buffer ( 40 mM MOPS pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM DTT and 10 mM MgCl 2 ) . Equal amounts of kinase - beads ( Pkh1p or Pkh2p beads ) were mixed with Pkc1p - beads ( substrate ) . In order to determine the amount of autophospho - rylation , a control containing the same amount of Pkc1p beads mixed with phosphorylation buffer was treated in parallel . The kinase - substrat mix was aliquoted and 1 (cid:6) l of D - erythro - phyto - sphingosine ( PHS ) at the proper dilution in ethanol was added to the mix in order to get a final concentration of 0 . 5 , 2 . 5 , 25 , 100 , 200 or 500 nM of PHS in each reaction assay . The control reaction without PHS was done by adding 1 (cid:6) l of ethanol to the reaction . After 10 min of pre - incubation at room temperature , 2 (cid:6) l of Results 62 [ 32 P ] ATP mix ( 1 mM ATP and 4 (cid:6) Ci [ (cid:3) - 32 P ] ATP ) was added and the phospho - rylation reaction was run for 30 min at room temperature . The reaction was stopped by addition of cold ATP at a final concentration of 50 mM and Laemmli protein sample buffer . Samples were boiled for 5 min and the total reaction was loaded on a 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE . After electrophoresis , the gel was washed once in 12 . 5 % TCA and two times in Coomassie blue destaining solution . Phosphorylated Pkc1 - HA 3 was revealed and quantified by using a Cyclone Storage Phosphor Imager ( Packard ) . All phosphorylation assays were performed at least twice . The results shown are from one of the independent experiments , which gave nearly identical results . Acknowledgments We thank for strains and plasmids , Jeannette Holenstein and Thomas Aust for technical assistance , Pierre Morsomme for helpful comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by the Canton of Basel - Stadt , an HFSP long - term fellowship ( to S . F . ) and a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation ( to H . R . ) . Results 63 Regulation of the endocytic function of Rvs167p - complex by phosphorylation Ruben Lombardi , Sylvie Friant ( 1 ) and Howard Riezman * Biozentrum of the University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland ( 1 ) present address : IBCP / UMR 5086 , Lyon cedex 07 , France * Corresponding author , tel . + + 41 61 2672160 , fax . + + 41 61 267 2149 , Email : Howard . Riezman @ unibas . ch Abstract : The internalization step of endocytosis in yeast requires the actin cytoskeleton and a large number of actin - associated proteins . To understand the functions of the different proteins involved in this step we have looked for protein - protein interactions among them . We find that three proteins involved in this process , Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p / End4p , interact with each other and form a 600 kDa protein complex most likely involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . We also identified Rvs167p as an important target for regulation of endocytosis by Pkh2p protein kinase . Pkh1 / 2p kinases are homologous to mammalian 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent kinase - 1 ( PDK1 ) . By sequence comparison we identified a putative phospho - rylation site at the extreme N - terminus of Rvs167p and we could show that Pkh2p is able to phosphorylate Rvs167p in vitro . We mutated the phosphorylated Thr7 to an alanine and demonstrate that this point mutation affects the internalization step of endocytosis in vivo . Interestingly , the point mutation did not affect the actin cytoskeleton suggesting a possible direct function of Rvs167p in endocytosis besides its role in actin cytoskeleton function . I wrote the manuscript and performed all shown experiments . Results 64 Introduction Endocytosis is a general mechanism whereby eukaryotic cells internalize portions of their own plasma membrane together with molecules from the external environment . Several studies in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have identified a large number of mutants defective in the internalization step of endocytosis and initial analysis of these mutants revealed the central role of the actin cytoskeleton and actin associated proteins in the internalization step ( Lombardi et al . , 2001 ) . However , little is known about the exact function of the different proteins involved in endocytosis . Studies in mammalian cells have identified a complex protein - protein interactions network acting in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Slepnev and De Camilli , 2000 ) . One of the key player is dynamin , a GTPase shown to be essential for the final pinching off of endocytic vesicles ( Hinshaw , 2000 ) . Amphiphysin interacts via its SH3 - domain with the PRD - domain of dynamin and is thought to localize dynamin to the clathrin - coated pits ( Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ) . Besides these two proteins a large number of other proteins have been implicated in this process and most of them interact with either dynamin , amphiphysin , clathrin or the AP - 2 adaptor complex ( Slepnev and De Camilli , 2000 ) but little is known about their exact function . One exception is endophilin , which was recently shown to exhibit lysophosphatidic acid acyl transferase activity and thus might affect the membrane curvature directly ( Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , phosphorylation was shown to be an important regulatory mechanism for clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . The association of an important subset of proteins ( e . g . dynamin and amphiphysin ) with other components of the endocytic machinery is controlled by coordinated phosphorylation - dephospho - rylation cycles ( Slepnev et al . , 1998 ) . Interestingly , several yeast proteins involved in the internalization step of endocytosis show homology to mammalian proteins implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . For example , Rvs161p and Rvs167p are homologous to amphiphysin and yeast contains also clathrin and AP - 2 adaptors . However , clathrin is only partially required for endocytosis in yeast ( Payne et al . , 1988 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) and AP - 2 adaptors are not required at all ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Instead , actin is absolutely required in yeast ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) while its involvement in mammalian cells is less clear ( Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) . In addition , none of the three yeast proteins with significant homology to dynamin seems to be involved in the internalization step of endocytosis ( Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) . To understand the role of some of the proteins involved in the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast , we looked for protein - protein interactions among them . We found that the yeast amphiphysin homolog Rvs167p interacts with both Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p . Sla2p is an actin - binding protein whose actin - binding domain resides in its C - terminal talin - homology domain ( McCann and Craig , 1997 ) . Sla2p was shown to be required for the internalization step of endocytosis and for proper actin cytoskeleton function ( Holtzman et al . , 1993 ; Raths et al . , 1993 ; Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Its mammalian homolog Hip1R ( Huntingtin interacting protein 1 related ) was shown to localize to clathrin coated pits implicating this protein in endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ) . Myo5p is a type I myosin shown to be required for the internalization step of endocytosis and polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Goodson et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , Myo5p together with its homolog Myo3p have been implicated as key players in regulating actin polymerization ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Geli et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . Results 65 Here , we demonstrate that Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p cofractionate in gel filtration experiments . Furthermore , we could coprecipitate the three proteins from these gel filtration fractions suggesting that they form a protein complex with an approximate size of 600 kDa . We further show that the interaction of the complex with actin is probably mediated via Sla2p and Rvs167p . Rvs167p has been shown to interact with an increasing number of proteins ( Lombardi et al . , 2001 ) and therefore these different interactions must be tightly regulated . One obvious regulatory mechanism would be protein phospho - rylation . In an accompanying article , Friant and coworkers have identified a pair of homologous protein kinases in yeast , Pkh1p and Pkh2p , that are required for the internalization step of endocytosis . These kinases are the yeast homologs of the mammalian kinase PDK1 ( 3 - phospho - inositide - dependent kinase 1 ) and were shown to share an essential function ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . PDK1 was shown to phosphorylate and thus activate a large set of protein kinases and thereby elicits important physiological responses ( Belham et al . , 1999 ; Vanhaesebroeck and Alessi , 2000 ) . In a search of the yeast protein database for proteins containing the PDK / Pkh - consensus phosphorylation site we retrieved Rvs167p . Rvs167p has been shown to be phosphorylated by the Pho85 cyclin dependent protein kinase involved in cell cycle regulation ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . The same study demonstrated that Rvs167p is still phosphorylated in vivo in the absence of Pho85 suggesting that other kinases also phosphorylate the protein ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . The putative PDK / Pkh - phosphorylation site of Rvs167p is localised at the extreme N - terminus of the protein . The N - terminal BAR - domain of Rvs167p was shown to be sufficient to rescue most of the phenotypes of a rvs167 (cid:2) strain ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) . We demonstrate that Rvs167p is an in vitro substrate for Pkh2p but not for Pkc1p or Ypk1p , two kinases implicated in the Pkh - signaling cascade ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , we show that mutation of the phosphorylated Thr7 to Ala affects the internalization step of endocytosis in vivo . The same point mutation does not affect the actin cytoskeleton suggesting that the phospho - rylation of Rvs167p by Pkh2p is important for the endocytic function of Rvs167p but perhaps not for its actin cytoskeleton function . Figure 1 . Schematic overview of the domains of Rvs167p , Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p BAR : BIN / Amphiphysin / RVS domain ; GPA : glycine - proline - alanine - rich region ; SH3 : Src homology 3 domain ; Pro - rich : proline - rich region ; cc : coiled coil region ; Talin - like : Talin homology domain ( I / LWEQ module ) ; Head : motor domain of myosins ; basic : region rich in basic amino acids ; TH2n : N - terminal part of tail homology 2 domain ; TH2c : C - terminal part of tail homology 2 domain . SLA2 - M , SLA2 - C and MYO5 show some of the constructs used for the two - hybrid analysis . Results Rvs167p interacts with Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p In order to dissect the internalization step of endocytosis on a molecular level we looked for protein - protein interactions among proteins corresponding to some of the known proteins defective in endocytic mutants . As shown in Figure 2A and 2B we detected a strong interaction of Rvs167p with both Sla2p / End4p and Myo5p in the two - hybrid system . Since the three proteins are built up of different Results 66 domains ( see Figure 1 ) we investigated which of these domains are involved in the interactions . We found that the N - terminal BAR - domain of Rvs167p interacted with both the medial and C - terminal parts of Sla2p ( Figure 2A ) . The interaction of Rvs167p with the tail of Myo5p was mediated by either the BAR - or the SH3 - domain of Rvs167p ( Figure 2B ) . The TH2n - as well as the SH3 - domain of Myo5p were sufficient to mediate the interaction with Rvs167p ( Figure 2C ) . Figure 2 . Two - hybrid interactions of Rvs167p with Sla2p and Myo5p Yeast strain EGY48 containing the reporter gene plasmid pSH18 - 34 with the lacZ gene under the control of eight LexA operators , a bait , and a prey were streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . Positive interactors turn dark and negative colonies remain white . ( A ) Rvs167p interacts with Sla2p via its BAR - domain . The central ( pJG SLA2 - M ) and C - terminal ( pJG SLA2 - C ) parts of Sla2p as a prey were tested against full - length Rvs167p ( pEG RVS167 ) and indicated Rvs167p domains as baits . ( B ) Rvs167p interacts with Myo5p via its BAR - and SH3 - domains . The tail of Myo5p ( pEG MYO5 ) as a bait was tested against full length Rvs167p ( pJG RVS167 ) and indicated Rvs167p domains as preys . ( C ) Myo5p interacts with Rvs167p via its TH2n - and SH3 - domains . Full length Rvs167p ( pJG RVS167 ) as a prey was tested against the indicated Myo5p domains as baits . To confirm biochemically these two - hybrid interactions we constructed a tagged version of Rvs167p on a CEN - plasmid ( p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 ) . The construct is functional because it rescued the growth defect of a rvs167 (cid:2) strain on YPUAD + 1M NaCl plates to the same extent as a WT - copy of RVS167 on a CEN - plasmid ( p RVS167 , Figure 3A ) . We precipitated Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p from total cell extracts with Ni - NTA - agarose beads ( Qiagen Inc . ) and analyzed the pellets by immuno - blotting using antibodies for the Myc - epitope , Sla2p and Myo5p . We found that both Myo5p and Sla2p coprecipitated with Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p ( Figure 3B ) . These coprecipitations were specific because they occurred only in cells expressing the tagged Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p and not in cells expressing WT - Rvs167p . Taken together the two - hybrid and biochemical data demonstrate that Rvs167p interacts with Myo5p and Sla2p . Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p are part of a 600 kDa protein complex We next wanted to further characterize the Rvs167p , Myo5p , Sla2p protein complex by performing gel filtration experiments . We loaded total cell extracts on a Superose 6 column , collected 1 ml fractions , TCA precipitated the proteins and analyzed them by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . When we used the same strain as for the coprecipitation experi - ments ( RH5237 + p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 ) we had a very weak signal with the antibodies against Myo5p due to the low amount of protein loaded on the column . Therefore , we decided to use a strain with a Myc - tagged Myo5p ( RH5264 ) . As shown in Figure 3C , mycMyo5p was found in fractions 9 to 11 , 14 and 15 , with the highest amounts in fractions 14 and 15 , which was where Sla2p was also found . Rvs167p was found in fractions 8 to 20 with a peak in fractions 14 and 15 . These data show that all three proteins Results 67 cofractionate in fractions 14 and 15 . We detected exactly the same distribution of Sla2p and Rvs167p when we used lysates from the RH5237 + p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 strain ( data not shown ) and therefore used this strain to determine if the three proteins indeed interact with each other in fractions 14 and 15 , where they cofractionate . We pooled the fractions 14 and 15 , precipitated Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p with Ni - NTA - agarose beads and analyzed the pellet by immunoblotting . A strong signal for Myo5p and Sla2p could be detected coprecipitating with Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p ( Figure 3D ) indicating that Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p form a protein complex with an approximate size of 550 - 600 kDa . Figure 3 . Rvs167p , Sla2p and Myo5p form a 600 kDa protein complex ( A ) Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p is functional . RH5237 transformed with either Ycplac33 ( empty plasmid ) , p RVS167 or p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 was streaked out on YPUAD + 1 M NaCl plates and grown for three days at 30°C . ( B ) Coprecipitation of Sla2p and Myo5p with Rvs167p from cell lysates . Total cell lysates from strain RH5237 transformed with either p RVS167 or p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were incubated with Ni - NTA - agarose beads and the precipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myo5p , Sla2p and Myc - epitope ( for Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p ) . ( C ) Gel filtration experiment . Total cell lysates from strain RH5264 were fractionated on a Superose 6 column and the proteins of the different fractions TCA - precipitated and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Rvs167p , Sla2p and Myc - epitope ( for mycMyo5p ) . ( D ) Coprecipitation of Myo5p and Sla2p with Rvs167p from gel filtration fractions 14 and 15 . Total cell lysates from strain RH5237 + p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were fractionated on a Superose 6 column . Fractions 14 and 15 were pooled , incubated with Ni - NTA - agarose beads and the precipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myo5p , Sla2p and Myc - epitope ( for Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p ) . Results 68 Interaction of the complex with actin is mediated by Rvs167p and Sla2p Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p were all shown to interact with actin ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ; Geli et al . , 2000 ; McCann and Craig , 1997 ) . However , in the case of Myo5p it has been shown that the interaction with actin is indirect and mediated via Vrp1p ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) . Figure 4 . Interaction of the 600 kDa protein complex with actin is mediated by Sla2p and Rvs167p Yeast strains containing the reporter gene plasmid pSH18 - 34 with the lacZ gene under the control of eight LexA operators , a bait , and a prey were streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . Positive interactors turn dark and negative colonies remain white . ( A ) Interaction of Sla2p with actin depends on Rvs167p . The C - terminal part of Sla2p ( pEG SLA2 - C ) as bait was tested against full length Act1p ( pJG ACT1 ) as a prey in a WT ( EGY48 ) , myo5 (cid:1) ( RH5510 ) and rvs167 (cid:1) ( RH5237 ) strain . ( B ) Interaction of Rvs167p with actin depends on Sla2p . Full length Rvs167p ( pEG RVS167 ) as bait was tested against full length Act1p ( pJG ACT1 ) as a prey in a WT ( EGY48 ) , myo5 (cid:1) ( RH5510 ) and sla2 (cid:1) ( RH5511 ) strain . ( C ) Interaction of Myo5p with actin depends on both Rvs167p and Sla2p . Full length tail of Myo5p ( pEG MYO5 ) as bait was tested against full length Act1p ( pJG ACT1 ) as a prey in a WT ( EGY48 ) , rvs167 (cid:1) ( RH5237 ) and sla2 (cid:1) ( RH5511 ) strain . Since we have demonstrated that the three proteins form a protein complex we wanted to determine if the interaction of any of these proteins with actin is affected in the absence of one of the other subunits of the complex . As shown in Figure 4A , the interaction of Sla2p with actin in the two - hybrid system was affected in an rvs167 (cid:2) but not in a myo5 (cid:2) strain . Similarly , the interaction of Rvs167p with actin was affected in a sla2 (cid:2) but not in a myo5 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 4B ) . Interestingly , the interaction of the tail of Myo5p with actin was affected in both an rvs167 (cid:2) and a sla2 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 4C ) . Taken together these data suggest that the interaction of the 600 kDa protein complex with actin requires both Rvs167p and Sla2p . Rvs167p is phosphorylated at Thr7 by Pkh2p in vitro Rvs167p has been shown to interact with a large number of proteins ( Lombardi et al . , 2001 ) and we have identified two new ones in this study . It is clear , that these interactions must be regulated and one obvious mechanism could be by protein phosphorylation . Indeed , Rvs167p has been shown to be phosphorylated by the Pho85 cyclin - dependent kinase ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . In the same study , the authors demonstrated that Rvs167p is still phosphorylated in the absence of Pho85 , albeit to a lesser degree , suggesting that other kinases also phosphorylate it . In an accompanying article Friant and co - workers demonstrate that two protein kinases , Pkh1p and Pkh2p , are required for the internalization step of endocytosis . These two kinases are the yeast homologs of mammalian PDK1 ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) and a consensus phosphorylation site for these kinases has been determined ( see Figure 5 ; Casamayor et al . , 1999 ) . By searching the yeast proteins database we found that Rvs167p contains a putative Pkh - phosphorylation site at its extreme N - terminus ( Figure 5 ) . Results 69 Figure 5 . Rvs167p contains a putative PDK / PKH - consensus phosphorylation site Comparison of the PDK - and PKH - phosphorylation sites in human respectively yeast proteins . Entrez protein database accession numbers : PKB (cid:1) , XP _ 015191 ; SGK , XP _ 004255 ; p70 S6K (cid:1) , AAA36411 ; PKC (cid:3) , AAA60101 ; Ypk1p , P12688 ; Ypk2p , P18961 ; Pkc1p , AAA34878 ; Rvs167p , S40887 . Using an in vitro phosphorylation assay we could show , that Pkh2p was able to phosphorylate Rvs167p ( Figure 6A ) . The phosphorylation was specific for Pkh2p since Pkc1p and Ypk1p , two protein kinases implicated in the Pkh - signaling cascade ( Casamayor et al . , 1999 ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) , were not able to phosphorylate Rvs167p in vitro ( Figure 6A ) . Since we localized the putative Pkh - phosphorylation site in Rvs167p to amino acids 3 to 7 we wanted to investigate if Thr7 is the residue that is phosphorylated by Pkh2p . We constructed a point mutant , where the Thr7 was changed to an alanine ( RVS167 - TA - MYC 5 - HIS 6 ) and used this Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p as a substrate for Pkh2p in the in vitro phosphorylation assay . As shown in Figure 6B , mutant Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p was not phosphorylated by Pkh2p . As a further control we used a kinase negative form of Pkh2p ( PKH2 - KR ; Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) and as shown in Figure 6B , Pkh2 - KRp did not phospho - rylate Rvs167p . These results show that Pkh2p kinase phosphorylates specifically and directly the yeast amphiphysin homolog Rvs167p . Figure 6 . In vitro phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr 7 by Pkh2p ( A ) In vitro phosphorylation of Rvs167p by Pkh2p . Yeast strain RH5237 transformed with either p PKH2 , p PKC1 , p YPK1 , p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were grown to log phase . Pkh2 - HA 3 p , Pkc1 - HA 3 p and Ypk1 - HA 3 p were immunoprecipitated from cell extracts . In vitro protein kinase assay were conducted with immunoprecipitated Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p as a substrate . ( B ) Thr7 is the phosphorylation site on Rvs167p . Yeast strain RH5237 transformed with either p PKH2 , p PKH2 - KR , p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 or p RVS167 - TA - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were grown to log phase . Pkh2 - HA 3 p and HA 2 - Pkh2 - KRp were immunoprecipitated from cell extracts . In vitro protein kinase assay were conducted with immuno - precipitated Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p or Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p as a substrate ( top ) . A parallel set of immune complexes was subjected to immuno - blotting of Pkh2 - HA 3 p , HA 2 - Pkh2 - KRp , Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p or Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p ( bottom ) . Results 70 Figure 7 . Phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr7 is required in vivo ( A ) Phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr 7 is required for the internalization step of endocytosis in vivo . Yeast strains RH5262 transformed with either Ycplac33 ( empty plasmid ) , p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 or p RVS167 - TA - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization at 24°C . The values correspond to the average of three independent experiments with standard deviations smaller than 10 % . ( B ) Phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr7 is not required for its actin cytoskeleton function . Yeast strains RH5262 transformed with either Ycplac33 ( empty plasmid ) , p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 or p RVS167 - TA - MYC5 - HIS 6 were fixed , and filamentous actin was visualized using TRITC - phalloidin ( left panels ) and Nomarski optics ( right panels ) . Results 71 Phosphorylation of Rvs167p facilitates the internalization step of endocytosis In a next step , we investigated if the phosphorylation of Rvs167p by Pkh2p is physiologically relevant . To do this , we replaced the wild type RVS167 with the mutated RVS167 - TA - MYC 5 - HIS 6 allele and assayed its effect on the internalization step of endocytosis . As shown in Figure 7A , we found that the mutated protein was not able to restore the internalization defect of a rvs167 (cid:2) strain to WT - levels . Instead , we found that the ability of the strain expressing Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p to internalize radiolabeled (cid:1) - factor was significantly less than the strain expressing Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p suggesting that phosphorylation at Thr7 is important for endocytosis in vivo . Since an rvs167 (cid:5) strain exhibits a depolarized actin cytoskeleton ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ) and actin is one of the key requirements for endocytosis in yeast ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) we determined if the mutant Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p was also unable to completely restore the actin defect of the deletion strain . As shown in Figure 7B , expression of Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p in the rvs167 (cid:2) strain completely restored the actin defect suggesting that the endocytic defect detected may not be due to a defect in the actin cytoskeleton . Discussion In this study we demonstrated that Rvs167p , Sla2p and Myo5p , three proteins required for the internalization step of endocytosis and for actin function , form an approximately 600 kDa protein complex probably involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . We showed that the three proteins can be coprecipitated from total cell lysates , that they partially cofractionate in gel filtration experiments and can be coprecipitated from these gel filtration fractions . Using the two - hybrid system we have investigated which domains of the proteins are involved in these interactions . We found that both the central ( containing two coiled - coil domains ) and the C - terminal ( containing the talin - like domain ) parts of Sla2p interact with Rvs167p . We have also tested the N - terminal part of Sla2p but we did not detect any interaction with Rvs167p ( data not shown ) . Interestingly , we found that the BAR - domain of Rvs167p interacts with both Myo5p and Sla2p . A previous study demonstrated that the BAR - domain of Rvs167p is sufficient to rescue most of the phenotypes of a rvs167 (cid:2) strain ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) suggesting that the BAR - domain might be the most important domain of Rvs167p . Additionally , we found that the SH3 - domain of Rvs167p also interacts with Myo5p . In the case of Myo5p , we showed that either the TH2n - or the SH3 - domain were sufficient to interact with Rvs167p . The SH3 - domain of Myo5p has been shown to interact with Vrp1p , another protein involved in the internalization step of endocytosis ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ; Geli et al . , 2000 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ) . Taken together these data suggest a rather complicated interaction pattern among Rvs167p , Myo5p and Sla2p . Interestingly , a previous study demonstrated that the tail of Myo5p interacts with actin in a physiologically relevant manner and that this interaction is mediated by Vrp1p ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) . Here we find , that in the absence of either Rvs167p or Sla2p the interaction of Myo5p with actin in the two - hybrid system is abolished . One possible explanation could be that the interaction of Myo5p with Vrp1p is stabilized when Myo5p is part of the protein complex with Rvs167p and Sla2p . The interaction of Rvs167p with actin and of Sla2p with actin is affected in absence of Sla2p respectively Rvs167p suggesting that the two interactions stabilize each other . Taken together these data suggest that Myo5p , Rvs167p and Sla2p form an approximately 600 kDa Results 72 protein complex stabilized by multiple interactions among the proteins and probably involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . In our gel filtration experiments ( Figure 3C ) we found , that both Myo5p and Rvs167p were not confined to fractions 14 and 15 , while Sla2p was almost exclusively found in these fractions . We could also detect Myo5p in fractions 9 to 11 suggesting that Myo5p is also found in another high molecular weight complex ( approximately 2000 kDa ) . It will be interesting to determine with which proteins Myo5p interacts in this complex since no Sla2p can be detected in these fractions and Rvs167p does not seem to be enriched in these fractions . In contrast to the very distinct distribution of Myo5p and Sla2p in our gel filtration experiments , Rvs167p is more broadly distributed . As already mentioned , Rvs167p has been shown to interact with a large number of proteins ( Lombardi et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , this broad distribution might reflect the involvement of Rvs167p in several different protein complexes . We have previously shown that Rvs167p needs to interact with its homolog Rvs161p for proper in vivo function ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) . Interestingly , we find that the distribution of Rvs161p in the gel filtration experiments closely resembles that of Rvs167p ( our unpublished data ) supporting the view that the broad distribution of Rvs167p might reflect participation in several complexes rather than just smearing of the protein . In mammalian cells , amphiphysin has been proposed to function as a scaffold protein that might recruit part of the endocytic machinery including dynamin to sites of endocytosis ( Wigge and McMahon , 1998 ) . The yeast amphiphysin homolog Rvs167p might perform a similar function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . As already mentioned , none of the yeast dynamin - homologs is involved in the internalization step of endocytosis ( Geli and Riezman , 1998 ) . Instead , the actin cytoskeleton and the motor protein Myo5p are absolutely required ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) and in this study we have demonstrated that Rvs167p interacts with Myo5p . If we assume that dynamin works as a mechanochemical enzyme in mammalian cells ( and therefore provides the driving force to pinch off the endocytic vesicles ) and if we take into account that recent studies have demonstrated the involvement of Myo5p in regulating actin polymerization ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Geli et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) it is very tempting to put up the following hypothesis . The combined functions of Myo5p as a motor protein and in inducing actin polymerization might be the driving force to pinch off endocytic vesicles in yeast and thus might be the functional equivalent to dynamin in mammalian cells . In agreement with this hypothesis the molecular environments of dynamin and Myo5p are very similar in terms of interacting with amphiphysin / Rvs167p and being part of a complex protein - protein interactions network . Furthermore , recent studies in mammalian cells have shown that endocytic vesicles are associated with actin comet tails ( Merrifield et al . , 1999 ; Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) suggesting that actin polymerization might be involved in pinching off vesicles from the plasma membrane . In this study we also identified Rvs167p as a target of Pkh2p protein kinase . Pkh2p together with Pkh1p are part of a sphingoid base - mediated signaling pathway that is required for the internalization step of endocytosis ( see accompanying article by Friant et al . ; previous section ) . Rvs167p is directly and specifically phosphorylated by Pkh2p in vitro and could therefore be part of the sphingoid base - activated signaling cascade like Pkc1p , another substrate of Pkh2p . It is worthwhile to point out , that to our knowledge , Rvs167p is the first non - kinase target of the PDK1 / 2 / Pkh1 / 2p Results 73 kinases identified so far . We have demonstrated that Rvs167p is phospho - rylated at a specific site ( Thr 7 ) in vitro by Pkh2p , but not by two other kinases ( Pkc1p and Ypk1p ) involved in the Pkh - signaling pathway or in the internalization step of endocytosis like Pkc1p ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) . Mutation of Thr7 to an alanine showed that this mutant Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p was not phosphorylated anymore by Pkh2p in vitro . The phosphorylation of Rvs167p by Pkh2p is physiologically relevant . Expression of the mutated Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p in an rvs167 (cid:2) strain uncovered an endocytic phenotype of the point mutation in vivo . Interestingly , we found that the same point mutation was apparently able to completely restore the actin cytoskeleton defect of an rvs167 (cid:2) strain . However , the immuno - fluorescence assay for actin function is not a quantitative assay and we could have missed a small defect in Rvs167p function using this assay . Taken together these data demonstrate that the phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr7 by Pkh2p is required in vivo for the full function of Rvs167p in the internalization step of endocytosis but perhaps not for the actin cytoskeleton function , suggesting that Rvs167p may have a direct role in the internalization step of endocytosis that is independent of its actin function . However , since the endocytic defect seen upon complete loss of Rvs167p is more pronounced than the one seen in the mutant Rvs167 - TAp , we must also conclude that the actin cytoskeleton function of Rvs167p is important for endocytosis . What might be the endocytic function of Rvs167p that is regulated by Pkh2p - dependent phosphorylation ? Since we found that the BAR - domain of Rvs167p contains the phosphorylation site and this domain is also sufficient to mediate interaction with both Sla2p and Myo5p , one obvious option would be that the assembly of the protein complex is regulated by this phosphorylation . Using the two - hybrid system we investigated if the Thr7 to Ala mutation affects one these interactions . However , we still detected a strong interaction between Rvs167 - TAp and either Myo5p or Sla2p ( data not shown ) suggesting that the association of Sla2p and Myo5p with Rvs167p may not be regulated by this phosphorylation . However , we cannot rule out the possibility , that association of other proteins to this complex is regulated by phosphorylation of Rvs167p at Thr7 . Interestingly , human amphiphysin I also contains a PDK2 - phosphorylation site at amino acids 401 - 405 : FNGFT ( Entrez protein database accession number XP _ 004749 ) . The localization of this putative site is different from the one we identified in Rvs167p . However , two recent studies have shown that amphiphysin is a substrate for Cdk5 kinase ( Floyd et al . , 2001 ; Rosales et al . , 2000 ) and Cdk5 is the mammalian homolog of the yeast kinase Pho85 that was shown to phosphorylate Rvs167p ( Lee et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , both proteins , Rvs167p and amphiphysin , are regulated by homologous kinases , Pho85 and Cdk5 , and thus it might well be that amphiphysin I is also regulated by PDK2 as we have shown here for Pkh2p regulation of Rvs167p . In summary , we demonstrated that Rvs167p is an important player of the endocytic machinery in yeast . We have identified an approximately 600 kDa protein complex containing Myo5p , Rvs167p , Sla2p and probably other unidentified proteins most likely involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Furthermore , we identified Rvs167p as the first non - kinase target for PDK / Pkh - protein kinases and demonstrated that this phosphorylation by Pkh2p is important in vivo . We have provided evidence that suggests separation of the function of Rvs167p in the internalization step of endocytosis from its function in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Results 74 Materials and Methods Yeast strains and media Yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table I . Strains that did not bear plasmids were grown in complete media YPUAD ( 2 % glucose , 2 % peptone , 1 % yeast extract , 40 (cid:6) g / ml uracile , 40 (cid:6) g / ml adenine and 40 (cid:6) g / ml tryptophan , 2 % agar for solid media ) . Unless mentioned otherwise , strains bearing plasmids were selected on SD minimal media ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . DNA techniques and plasmid construction Standard recombinant DNA techniques were used ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . Restriction endonucleases were obtained from MBI Fermentas and Pfu polymerase was obtained from Stratagene . Plasmids used in this study and their relevant features are listed in Table II . Further details are available upon request . Table I . Yeast strains Strain Genotype Source EGY48 Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) RH5237 Mat (cid:2) his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 rvs167 : : trp1 : : LEU2 bar1 this study RH5262 Mat a his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 rvs167 : : trp1 : : LEU2 VRP1 - HA 3 - TRP1 bar1 this study RH5264 Mat a ade2 his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 mycMYO5 : : URA3 : : myo5 : : TRP1 bar1 this study RH5510 Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 myo5 : : KanMX6 this study RH5511 Mat (cid:2) his3 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 sla2 : : his3 : : LEU2 bar1 this study Table II . Plasmids Plasmid Yeast Ori Insert Source pEG202 2 (cid:1) LexA ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pJG4 - 5 2 (cid:1) B42 ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pSH18 - 34 2 (cid:1) 8 LexA Op . LacZ ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pEG RVS167 2 (cid:1) RVS167 ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pEGBAR 2 (cid:1) LexA - BAR - domain of RVS167 ( aa 1 - 281 ) this study pEGBAR / GPA 2 (cid:1) LexA - BAR - and GPA - domains of RVS167 ( aa 1 - 423 ) this study pEGGPA 2 (cid:1) LexA - GPA - domain of RVS167 ( aa 292 - 423 ) this study pEGSH3 2 (cid:1) LexA - SH3 - domain of RVS167 ( aa 421 - 482 ) this study pJG RVS167 2 (cid:1) B42 - RVS167 ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pJGBAR 2 (cid:1) B42 - BAR - domain of RVS167 ( aa 1 - 281 ) ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pJGBAR / GPA 2 (cid:1) B42 - BAR - and GPA - domains of RVS167 ( aa 1 - 423 ) ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pJGGPA 2 (cid:1) B42 - GPA - domain of RVS167 ( aa 292 - 423 ) ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pJGGPA / SH3 2 (cid:1) B42 - GPA - and SH3 - domains of RVS167 ( aa 292 - 482 ) ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pJGSH3 2 (cid:1) B42 - SH3 - domain of RVS167 ( aa 421 - 482 ) ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pEG SLA2 - C 2 (cid:1) LexA - C - terminal part of SLA2 ( aa 665 - 968 ) this study pJG SLA2 - M 2 (cid:1) B42 - central part of SLA2 ( aa 334 - 664 ) this study pJG SLA2 - C 2 (cid:1) B42 - C - terminal part of SLA2 ( aa 665 - 968 ) this study pJG ACT1 2 (cid:1) B42 - ACT1 ( Lombardi and Riezman , 2001 ) pEG MYO5 2 (cid:1) LexA - MYO5 tail ( aa 757 - 1219 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - TH2c (cid:3) 2 (cid:1) LexA - myo5 - TH2c (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 - 1181 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - SH3 , TH2c (cid:3) 2 (cid:1) LexA - myo5 - SH3 , TH2c (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 - 1091 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - TH2 , SH3 (cid:3) 2 (cid:1) LexA - myo5 - TH2 , SH3 (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 - 996 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - TH2n (cid:3) 2 (cid:1) LexA - myo5 - TH2n (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 - 996 + aa 1095 - 1219 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - TH2n 2 (cid:1) LexA - TH2n - domain of MYO5 ( aa 984 - 1091 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - TH2c 2 (cid:1) LexA - TH2c - domain of MYO5 ( aa 1142 - 1219 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) pEG MYO5 - SH3 2 (cid:1) LexA - SH3 - domain of MYO5 ( aa 1085 - 1181 ) ( Geli et al . , 2000 ) p RVS167 CEN pFBKS , RVS167 ( Bauer et al . , 1993 ) p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 CEN RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 this study p RVS167 - TA - MYC 5 - HIS 6 CEN RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 with Thr3 mutated to Ala this study p PKH2 2 (cid:1) pTS81 , PKH2 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall p PKH2 - KR 2 (cid:1) pKT10 , GAL - HA 2 - PKH2 - ( K208R ) ( Inagaki et al . , 1999 ) p PKC1 2 (cid:1) pTS94 , PKC1 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall p YPK1 2 (cid:1) pTS82 , YPK1 - HA 3 Schmelzle and Hall Ycplac33 CEN no insert ( Gietz and Sugino , 1988 ) Results 75 Two - hybrid analysis Two - hybrid analysis was performed as described ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . Briefly , to assay the interaction between a bait and a prey , the strains containing the reporter gene plasmid ( pSH18 - 34 ) , bait and prey were streaked out on plates containing X - Gal . The positive colonies turn dark while the negative ones remain white . Protein extracts Strains were grown to exponential phase , harvested and converted to spheroplasts using lyticase ( Raths et al . , 1993 ) . The spheroplasts were lysed by osmotic shock in 1 ml lysis buffer ( 137 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCl , 6 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 1 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 10 mM EGTA , and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain ) . The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using the Bio - Rad protein assay . Coprecipitation experiments Equal amounts of total protein for RH5237 + p RVS167 and RH5237 + p RVS167 - MYC 5 - HIS 6 were taken , lysis buffer was added to a final volume of 0 . 9 ml and 100 (cid:6) l of Ni - NTA - agarose beads ( Qiagen Inc . ) were added . After two hours of incubation the beads were washed three times with 1 ml lysis buffer + 0 . 5 % NP - 40 . The precipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myo5p , Sla2p and Myc - epitope . Gel filtration experiments Protein extracts were loaded onto a Superose 6 gel filtration column ( 1 . 0 x 30 cm , Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . The column was developed with running buffer ( 137 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCl , 6 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 1 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 ) at a flow rate of 0 . 2 ml / min . 1 ml fractions were collected , the proteins TCA - precipitated and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with antibodies against Myo5p , Sla2p and Myc - epitope . The molecular mass standards were ferritin ( 440 kDa ) , thyroglobulin ( 669 kDa ) and blue dextran ( 2000 kDa ) . For the coprecipitation experiment the fractions 14 and 15 were pooled and the proteins were precipitated as described above . In vitro phosphorylation experiments Strains were grown to exponential phase , harvested and lysed with glass beads in buffer ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 5 , 20 % glycerol , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 150 mM KCl , and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain ) . The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using the Bio - Rad protein assay . Equal amounts of total protein for the different kinases and substrates were taken and immunoprecipitation buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1mM EGTA , 1 % NP - 40 , and 1 (cid:6) g / ml of the protease inhibitors aprotinin , leupeptin , pepstatin A , chymostatin and antipain ) was added to a final volume of 0 . 8 ml . Then 8 (cid:6) l of antibodies against the HA - epitope ( for Pkh2 - HA 3 p , HA 2 - Pkh2 - KRp , Pkc1 - HA 3 p and Ypk1 - HA 3 p ) respectively antibodies against Myc - epitope ( for Rvs167 - Myc 5 - His 6 p and Rvs167 - TA - Myc 5 - His 6 p ) and 60 (cid:6) l of a 30 % protein G - sepharose solution were added . After an overnight incubation the beads were washed three times with 1 ml immunoprecipitation buffer , two times with 1 ml buffer ( 40 mM MOPS pH 7 . 5 ) and resuspended in 60 (cid:6) l phosphorylation buffer ( 40 mM MOPS pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM MgCl 2 ) . For the phosphorylation experiments 10 (cid:6) l of sepharose beads - substrate immuno - complex ( or 10 (cid:6) l phosphorylation buffer for the control ) were incubated with 10 (cid:6) l Results 76 of sepharose beads - protein kinase immuno - complex ( or 10 (cid:6) l phosphorylation buffer for the control ) and 3 (cid:6) Ci 32 P - (cid:3) - ATP for 30’ at room temperature . Sample buffer + 50 mM ATP was added and the samples were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . (cid:1) - Factor uptakes (cid:1) - Factor uptakes ( continuous presence ) were done as described previously ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . The results represent the average of at least three independent experiments . Actin staining Yeast cell pre - cultures were grown at 24°C in SD selective media to maintain the plasmids . Cells taken from the pre - culture were then grown at 24°C in YPUAD to early log phase , fixed in formaldehyde and stained with TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma ) to visualize F - actin essentially as described previously ( Benedetti et al . , 1994 ) . Acknowledgments We thank Dr . T . Schmelzle , Dr . M . N . Hall , Dr . K . Matsumoto and Dr . M . I . Geli for kindly providing plasmids , T . Aust for technical assistance with the FPLC and members of the Riezman laboratory for helpful discussions . This work was supported by the Canton of Basel - Stadt , an HFSP long - term fellowship ( to S . F . ) and a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation ( to H . R . ) . Results 77 An Intact SH3 Domain Is Required for Myosin I - Induced Actin Polymerization in EMBO J . 2000 , Volume 19 , 4281 - 4291 M . Isabel Geli ( 1 ) * , Ruben Lombardi ( 2 ) , Birgit Schmelzl ( 1 ) and Howard Riezman ( 2 ) ( 1 ) Biochemie Zentrum Heidelberg ( BZH ) , University of Heidelberg , D - 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ( 2 ) Biozentrum of the University of Basel , CH - 4056 Basel , Switzerland * Corresponding author E - mail : Maribel . Geli @ urz . uni - heidelberg . de Abstract The yeast type I myosins ( MYO3 and MYO5 ) are involved in endocytosis and in the polarization of the actin cytoskeleton . The tail of these proteins contains a TH2 ( Tail Homology 2 ) domain that constitutes a putative actin - binding site . Because of the important mechanistic implications of a second ATP - independent actin - binding site , we analyzed its functional relevance in vivo . Even though the myosin tail interacts with actin and this interaction seems functionally important , deletion of a major portion of the TH2 domain did not abolish interaction . In contrast , we found that the SH3 domain of Myo5p significantly contributes to this interaction implicating other proteins . We found that Vrp1p , the yeast homolog of WIP ( WASP Interacting Protein ) , seems necessary to sustain the Myo5p tail / F - actin interaction . Consistent with recent results implicating the yeast type I myosins in regulating actin polymerization in vivo , we demonstrate that the C - terminal domain of Myo5p is able to induce cytosol - dependent actin polymerization in vitro and that this activity requires both an intact Myo5p SH3 domain and possibly Vrp1p . My contribution to this work is shown in Figures 1C and 3A . Results 78 Introduction The type I myosins are actin activated ATPases that bear a short positively - charged tail that binds acidic phospholipids and cellular membranes . This feature suggests their role in membrane dynamics ( Mooseker and Cheney , 1995 ; Pollard et al . , 1991 ) . However , demonstration of their involvement in specific tasks has been difficult . Only recently , genetic approaches have brought some light to this point ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Goodson et al . , 1996 ; Jung et al . , 1996 ; Novak et al . , 1995 ) . MYO3 and MYO5 encode the type I myosins of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Deletion of either gene does not result in any obvious phenotype for growth , whereas a double knockout is synthetically lethal or nearly so suggesting functional redundancy ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Goodson et al . , 1996 ) . The yeast type I myosins are required for the uptake step of endocytosis and the polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Goodson et al . , 1996 ) . However , the mechanistic basis for their function in these processes is unknown . Besides the putative membrane binding domain ( TH1 ) , the tails of Myo3p and Myo5p contain two C - terminal domains that are homologous to other members of this protein family : an Ala and Pro rich domain ( TH2 ) and a Src Homology Domain 3 ( SH3 or TH3 ) ( Mooseker and Cheney , 1995 ; Pollard et al . , 1991 ) . SH3 domains are present in variety of proteins associated with the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and with signal transduction . This domain mediates protein - protein interactions through binding to proline ( Pro ) rich stretches ( Kuriyan and Cowburn , 1997 ) . The TH2 domain of the protozoal type I myosins binds actin in vitro ( Brzeska et al . , 1988 ; Doberstein and Pollard , 1992 ; Jung and Hammer , 1994 ; Rosenfeld and Rener , 1994 ) . However , in contrast to the motor head - actin interaction , ATP does not influence the affinity of the TH2 - actin interaction in vitro . A second ATP - independent actin binding site on the type I myosins could have important mechanistic implications . It has been suggested that the TH2 domain could serve to recruit type I myosin molecules onto the actin filaments , securing a high local concentration of myosin heads when the actin / myosin ratio is low and thus it might help to achieve processivity ( Albanesi et al . , 1985 ) . Alternatively , a second actin binding site could allow the type I myosins to crosslink and contract actin filaments ( Fujisaki et al . , 1985 ; Lynch et al . , 1986 ) . Despite the extensive biochemical characterization of the ATP - independent actomyosin interaction of the protozoal type I myosins , its physiological relevance remains obscure . We decided to use site directed mutagenesis on MYO5 and the Wertman collection of actin alleles ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ; Wertman et al . , 1992 ) to investigate whether the ATP - independent actomyosin interaction is functionally relevant . We find that the Myo5p tail binds F - actin in an ATP - independent manner and this interaction appears to be functionally important . However , in contrast to what was found for the protozoal type I myosins , the SH3 domain of Myo5p significantly contributes to this ATP - independent actomyosin interaction in vivo suggesting that the actin binding might not be direct . Consistently , we find that the yeast homolog of the human WIP ( WASP Interacting Protein ) , Vrp1p ( Vaduva et al . , 1999 ) , is required to sustain the SH3 - dependent Myo5p tail - actin interaction . Consistent with a recently proposed role of the yeast type I myosins in regulating actin polymerization in vivo ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , Results 79 2000 ) we find that gluthatione sepharose beads coated with a fusion protein consisting of GST and the C - terminal fragment of Myo5p trigger cytosol - dependent actin polymerization in vitro and strikingly , such activity seems to require both an intact SH3 domain and Vrp1p . Results Functionally relevant interaction between Myo5p tail and actin The presence of a TH2 domain in Myo5p ( Goodson et al . , 1996 ) suggests that the Myo5p tail bears an ATP - independent actin - binding site . To investigate this possibility we tested the ability of myc - tagged Myo5p ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) to pellet with exogenously added F - actin in the presence or absence of ATP . As expected , a significant amount of Myo5p interacted with F - actin in the presence of ATP ( Figure 1A ) . In contrast , a degradation product lacking a C - terminal fragment of about 25 KDa ( Figure 1A , * ) failed to pellet with F - actin under these conditions . According to the shift in apparent molecular weight , the missing C - terminal fragment should include the TH2 and the SH3 domains . In agreement , a mutant Myo5p lacking these domains ( Myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:5) p ) had an apparent molecular weight similar to that of the Myo5p degradation product ( * ) and failed to pellet with F - actin in the presence of ATP ( Figure 1A ) . A LexA - fusion protein containing only the TH2 and the SH3 domains of Myo5p interacted with F - actin regardless of the presence or absence of ATP in the buffer ( Figure 1A , LexA - ( TH2 , SH3 ) ) . These results were confirmed using the two - hybrid assay . The MYO5 tail ( MYO5 ) strongly induced transcription of a (cid:2) - galactosidase reporter gene when tested against actin ( ACT1 ; Figure 1C ) . Truncation of the Myo5p tail immediately upstream of the TH2 domain abolished the interaction ( MYO5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:2) ) whereas a fragment containing the TH2 and the SH3 domains ( TH2 , SH3 ) was sufficient to trigger transcription of the reporter (cid:9) ( Figure 1C ) . In order to investigate whether the Myo5p tail - actin interaction was functionally relevant , we used a subset of the actin alleles from the Wertman collection ( Wertman et al . , 1992 ) . These actin mutations have been shown to differentially affect interaction with several actin - binding proteins ( Amberg et al . , 1995 ) . Since Act1p and Myo5p are required for the internalization step of endocytosis ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ; Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) , the (cid:1) - factor uptake assay ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) can be used to monitor subtle differences in the function of different ACT1 and MYO5 alleles in vivo . Thus , if the Myo5p tail - actin interaction was functionally important for endocytosis , all actin mutations affecting binding to Myo5p should also exhibit defective uptake kinetics . The opposite assertion is not necessarily true since additional actin binding proteins are necessary for the endocytic uptake . We actually found that all mutations that strongly diminished the interaction with the Myo5p tail severely impaired endocytosis ( Figure 2A , MYO5 ) . Consistent with this result , the mutant Myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:5) p , which was unable to pellet with actin in the presence of ATP , was also unable to sustain endocytosis ( Figure 2B ) . Results 80 Figure 1 . The Myo5p tail interacts with actin ( A ) Cytosolic fractions were prepared from strains bearing integrated versions of wt or mutant myo5 ( SCMIG277 , SCMIG278 , SCMIG279 , SCMIG280 ) or a strain expressing the TH2 and SH3 domains fused to LexA ( EGY48 pEG202 - TH2 , SH3 ) in a buffer containing 1 mM ATP . Purified actin ( + actin ) or buffer ( - actin ) were added to cell extracts . After allowing actin polymerization , one sample containing exogenously added actin was incubated with apyrase to hydrolyze ATP ( + apyrase ) . F - actin was recovered by centrifugation and the pellet analyzed by immunoblotting . 9E10 was used for detection of Myo5p , and EW / IK for detection of the LexA fusion protein . One quarter of the protein extract utilized per incubation was loaded as total . ( B ) Recombinant GST fusion proteins ( GST - TH2 , SH3 or GST - SH3 , TH2c ) were incubated with cytosolic fractions of a wt strain ( RH3975 ) and increasing concentrations of G - actin . After allowing actin polymerization , F - actin was recovered by centrifugation and the pellets were analyzed for the presence of the recombinant proteins by immunoblotting using the EW / IK antibody . The increasing amounts of actin in the pellet were monitored by Ponceau Red staining . The same amount of GST fusion proteins used per assay were loaded as total . ( C ) Different MYO5 tail fragments ( pEG202 MYO 5 ; pEG202 myo5 - TH2 , SH3 (cid:1) ; pEG202 myo5 - TH2n (cid:1) ; pEG202 myo5 - SH3 , TH2c (cid:1) ; pEG202 - TH2 , SH3 ; pEG202 - SH2 , TH2c ; pEG202 - TH2n ; pEG202 - SH3 ; pEG202 - TH2c ) were tested versus ACT1 ( pJG4 - 5 ACT1 ) , or versus the B42 transcriptional activator ( pJG4 - 5 ) as a control , in the two - hybrid assay on X - Gal - containing plates . The SH3 of Myo5p contributes to the functionally relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction The C - terminal fragment of the Myo5p tail that seems necessary and sufficient to mediate the ATP - independent actomyosin interaction bears both the TH2 and the SH3 domains . The SH3 domain of most protozoal type I myosins is placed at the C - terminus immediately downstream of the TH2 domain ( Mooseker and Cheney , 1995 ) . In contrast , the SH3 domain of Myo5p and Myo3p is inserted within the TH2 domain and it splits it into an N - terminal region of about 110 amino acids ( TH2n ) with more than 40 % of Pro and Ala content , and a C - terminal region of about 70 amino acids with only half the percentage of Pro and Ala ( TH2c ) . Deletion of the region encoding the TH2n results in a MYO5 allele that can Results 81 complement the growth defect of a myo3 (cid:2) myo5 (cid:2) mutant and does not display any defect in actin polarization suggesting that this domain is not required for Myo5p function ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) . In agreement , we found that the analogous mutant could sustain endocytosis with nearly wt kinetics in a myo3 (cid:2) background ( Figure 2B , myo5 - ( TH2n ) (cid:2) ) . Since our data suggested that the Myo5p tail - actin interaction is required to sustain endocytosis we investigated this further . We found that actually , deletion of the N - terminal portion of the TH2 domain neither abolished the ATP - independent actin binding of Myo5p in the pelleting assay ( Figure 1A , Myo5 - ( TH2n ) (cid:5) p ) nor the Myo5p tail - actin interaction in the two - hybrid system ( Figure 1C , Myo5 - ( TH2n ) (cid:5) p ) . However , we found that a Myo5p truncated immediately upstream of the SH3 domain no longer pelleted with F - actin in the presence of ATP ( Figure 1A , Myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:5) p ) and its tail only weakly interacted with actin in the two - hybrid system ( Figure 1C , MYO5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:2) ) . Additionally , the C - termi - nal fragment containing only the SH3 and TH2c domains was able to interact with actin both in the pelleting ( Figure 1B ) and the two - hybrid assays ( Figure 1C ) . The two - hybrid analysis indicated that both , the SH3 and the TH2c domains , were necessary to sustain the interaction ( Figure 1C ) . Consistent with the functional significance of the ( SH3 , TH2c ) - mediated Myo5p - actin interaction , truncation of Myo5p immediately upstream of the SH3 domain blocked its ability to sustain endocytosis ( Figure 2B , myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:2) ) . Additionally , the most C - terminal Myo5p fragment containing the SH3 domain ( SH3 , TH2c ) was sufficient to reproduce the Myo5p tail footprint on actin ( Figure 2A ) . Vrp1p is required to sustain a physiologically relevant interaction between the Myo5p tail and F - actin Our data indicates that the SH3 domain of Myo5p might be required to sustain a functionally relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction . To further test this possibility we analyzed the effect of a point mutation in a conserved residue of the SH3 domain ( W1123S ) . Consistent with the requirement of the SH3 domain in the functionally relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction , the W1123S mutation prevented binding of the ( SH3 , TH2c ) fragment with actin in the two - hybrid and abolished the interaction between a GST fusion protein containing the TH2 and SH3 domains in the pelleting assays ( Figure 3B ) . This result strongly suggested that the SH3 domain is required for the physiologically relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction . The contribution of the SH3 domain to the Myo5p tail - actin interaction implicated that some intermediate proteins might be involved . In an effort to identify the cytosolic components required for the Myo5p tail - actin interaction we tested the need for Vrp1p . Several findings point to the potential role of Vrp1p in this binding event . It was shown that the Myo5p SH3 domain interacts with the proline - rich protein Vrp1p ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) . On the other hand , Vrp1p , likewise Myo5p , is required for the uptake step of endocytosis and the polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Munn et al . , 1995 ; Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) and it interacts with actin in the two - hybrid system ( Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) . Additionally , we observed that the W1123S mutation , that prevented binding of the of the Myo5p C - terminal fragment to actin , also abolished interaction of this domain with Vrp1p in the two - hybrid assay ( Figure 3A ) . Results 82 Figure 2 . The Myo5p tail - actin interaction is functionally relevant ( A ) The indicated MYO5 tail fragments or END3 as control ( pEG202 MYO5 ; pEG202 - TH2 , SH3 ; pEG202 - SH3 , TH2c ; pEG END3 ) were tested versus the indicated ACT1 alleles ( pJG4 - 5 act1 - x ) in the two - hybrid X - Gal - containing plate assay . The same actin mutants were tested for their ability to sustain endocytosis in vivo . The percentage of cell - bound (cid:1) - factor internalized / min is indicated . ( B ) myo3 (cid:1) strains bearing integrated myc - tagged wt or mutant MYO5 ( SCMIG277 , SCMIG278 , SCMIG279 , SCMIG280 ) were tested for (cid:1) - factor internalization . The percentage of cell - bound (cid:1) - factor internalized / min is indicated . The expression level of the integrated proteins ( lower panel ) was monitored by immunoblotting . 9E10 was used for detection of wt and mutant Myo5p ( lanes 1 - 4 ) . C4 was used for detection of actin as internal reference . In agreement with a possible requirement of Vrp1p for the Myo5p tail - actin interaction , we observed a strong inhibition of the MYO5 / ACT1 - induced (cid:2) - galacto - sidase transcription in the vrp1 (cid:2) strain , when compared to wt cells ( Figure 3A ) . Three criteria indicated that this effect was specific . First , deletion of another protein required for the uptake step of endocytosis and the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , did not significantly affect the Myo5p tail - actin interaction ( Figure 3A , end3 (cid:2) ) . Second , the inter - action of the Myo5p tail with another protein appeared unaffected in the vrp1 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 3A , MYO5 - RVS167 ) . Third , an N - and a C - terminal truncations of VRP1 , which were equally unable to complement the growth defect of a vrp1 (cid:2) strain at 37 (cid:10) C ( Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) , differentially restored the two - hybrid Myo5p tail actin interaction in the vrp1 (cid:2) cells . The requirement of Vrp1p for the Myo5p tail - actin interaction was confirmed Results 83 using the actin pelleting assay . The GST - ( SH3 , TH2 ) fusion protein failed to pellet with F - actin when cytosol from a vrp1 (cid:2) strain was used in the assay ( Figure 3C ) . Also consistent with a proposed role of Vrp1p in mediating the Myo5p tail - actin interaction , HA tagged Vrp1p was also found in the actin pellet together with Myo5p regardless of the presence or absence of ATP in the buffer ( Figure 3B ) . To further test this hypothesis we compare the footprint of Myo5p and Vrp1p on the actin molecule . If Vrp1p was really required to mediate the Myo5p tail - actin interaction , all mutations that diminish Vrp1p - Act1p binding should also impair the interaction of Act1p with the Myo5p tail . As expected , the Myo5p and Vrp1p footprints on actin were strikingly similar ( Figure 3C ) . An intact SH3 domain and Vrp1p seem to be required for Myo5p - induced localized actin polymerization Recent results strongly suggest that the yeast type I myosins might be implicated in the regulation of localized actin polymerization in vivo ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . Myo3p and Myo5p physically interact with the Arp2p / Arp3p actin - nucleating complex ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) and they are required for polarized assembly of cortical actin patches in a semi in vitro assay ( Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . On the other hand , Vrp1p has also been implicated in the regulation of actin polymerization in vivo . Overexpression of Las17p , the yeast homolog of WASP ( Wiscott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ) , suppresses the actin polarization and endocytic defect of a ts allele of VRP1 but not of a null mutation ( Naqvi et al . , 1998 ) . Las17p interacts with the Arp2p / Arp3p complex and activates its actin nucleation activity in vitro ( Madania et al . , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Additionally , a vrp1 (cid:2) strain is hyper - sensitive to the inhibitor of actin polymerization Latrunculin A and a vrp1 temperature sensitive ( ts ) mutant can be suppressed by increasing the intracellular concentration of actin by providing an extra copy of ACT1 ( Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) . We collected further evidence in vivo indicating that Vrp1p and the yeast type I myosins are together involved in positive regulation of actin polymerization and that this function is required for the uptake step of endocytosis in yeast . We previously showed that the myo5 (cid:2) mutant ( but not myo3 (cid:2) cells ) exhibits a partial endocytosis defect at 37 (cid:10) C ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ) ( Figure 4A ) . Thus , the wt MYO3 seems to be less efficient than MYO5 to sustain endocytosis at high temperatures . Interestingly , increasing the intracellular actin concentration by providing an extra copy of ACT1 could partially rescue the ts endocytic defect of the myo5 (cid:2) strain ( Figure 4A ) . Also , overexpression of Vrp1p efficiently rescued the endocytosis defect of a myo5 (cid:2) strain . However , over - expression of Vrp1p or Act1p was not able to restore endocytosis in a myo3 (cid:2) myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:2) strain suggesting that suppression required the presence of at least one myosin I - SH3 domain ( data not shown ) . Interestingly , overexpression of Las17p failed to restore endocytosis in the myo5 (cid:2) strain , suggesting that type I myosins and Las17p only share partially overlapping functions ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ) . Additionally , deletion of MYO5 , but interestingly not deletion of MYO3 , exhibits synthetic lethality with mutations in genes specifically involved in the regulation of actin polymerization ( ARP3 , VRP1 ) but not with other genes required for polarization of the actin cytoskeleton and endocytosis ( i . e . SLA2 , RVS161 , RVS167 , ABP1 , SAC6 , END3 ; Figure 4B ) . Results 84 Figure 3 . Vrp1p is required for the Myo5p tail - actin interaction ( A ) Upper left panel : the most C - terminal MYO5 fragment containing the SH3 domain ( pEG202 - SH3 , TH2c ) wt or the same fragment bearing a point mutation in the SH3 domain ( W1223S ) was tested versus ACT1 ( pJG4 - 5 ACT1 ) or VRP1 ( pJG4 - 5 VRP1 ) using the two - hybrid assay on X - Gal - containing plates . Lower left panel : the MYO5 tail ( pEG202 MYO5 ) was tested versus ACT1 ( pJG4 - 5 ACT1 ) or RVS167 ( pJG4 - 5 RVS167 ) in wt ( RH2884 ) or isogenic end3 (cid:1) ( SCMIG45 ) or vrp1 (cid:1) ( SCMIG48 ) strains bearing the (cid:4) - galactosidase reporter gene ( pSH18 - 34 ) . Enzyme activity was monitored on X - Gal - containing plates . Right panel : the MYO5 tail ( pEG202 MYO5 ) was tested versus ACT1 ( pJG4 - 5 ACT1 ) in a vrp1 (cid:1) ( SCMIG48 ) strain bearing the (cid:4) - galacto - sidase reporter gene ( pSH18 - 34 ) , and either an empty plasmid ( Ycplac111 ) or the same plasmid bearing wt or the indicated mutant vrp1 genes . Enzyme activity was monitored on X - Gal - containing plates . ( B ) Upper panel : recombinant purified GST fusion proteins containing the wt TH2 and SH3 domains ( GST - TH2 , SH3 ) wt , or the same construct bearing the W1223S mutatin in the SH3 domain were incubated with cytosolic fractions from wt ( RH3975 ) or vrp1 (cid:1) ( SCMIG48 ) strains and increasing concentrations of G - actin . After allowing polymerization , F - actin was recovered by centrifugation and the pellets analyzed for the presence of the recombinant fusion proteins by immunoblotting using the EW / IK antibody . The increasing amounts of actin in the pellet were monitored by Ponceau Red staining . The same amounts of GST fusion proteins used per assay were loaded as total ( T ) . Lower panel : a cytosolic fraction from a strain bearing a plasmid with an HA - tagged VRP1 ( SCMIG277 p181 VRP1HA ) was prepared in a buffer containing 1 mM ATP . Either purified G - actin ( + actin ) or G - buffer ( - actin ) was added to the cell extracts . After allowing actin polymerization , one of the samples containing actin was incubated with apyrase to hydrolyze ATP ( + apyrase ) . F - actin was recovered by centrifugation and the pellet analyzed by immunoblotting using the anti - HA antibody . One quarter of the protein extract utilized per incubation was loaded as total ( T ) . ( C ) The MYO5 tail ( pEG202 MYO5 ) or VRP1 ( pEG202 VRP1 ) was tested versus the indicated ACT1 alleles ( pJG4 - 5 act1 - x ) in the EGY48 strain using the two - hybrid assay on X - Gal - containing plates . Results 85 It has recently been pointed out that the C - terminal region of Myo5p shares homology with Las17p including an acidic peptide required for the interaction and activation of the Arp2p / Arp3p complex ( Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Given this information and all previous data regarding the role of Vrp1p and the yeast type I myosins in the regulation of actin polymerization , we hypothesize that Myo3p and Myo5p might be able to induce localized actin polymerization and this activity might then require the interaction with Vrp1p . In order to directly test this hypothesis we established a visual actin polymerization assay in vitro based on Ma et al . 1998a and 1998b ( Ma et al . , 1998a ; Ma et al . , 1998b ) . In this assay gluthatione sepharose beads coated with GST fusion proteins are incubated with cell extracts in the presence of trace amounts of rhodamine - labeled actin . The de novo polymerization of actin triggered by a given GST - fusion protein can be monitored under the microscope by visualizing the accumulation of fluorescent signal on the sepharose beads . We chose this assay because , in contrast to the pyrene actin polymerization assay ( Cooper et al . , 1983 ) , it allows to monitor not only actin polymerization but also its localization . Strikingly , we found that beads coated with the GST - ( SH3 , TH2 ) fusion protein , but not those coated with naked GST , accumulate a bright fluorescent signal when incubated in cell extracts from a wt strain in the presence of rhodamine labeled actin ( Figure 4C ) . The signal was abolished when the assay was performed in the presence of the Latrunculin A or DNAse I ( Figure 4C , table ) . This result clearly points to a direct role of the yeast type I myosins in the regulation of actin polymerization . Myosin - induced actin polymerization was clearly dependent on the presence of other cellular components since no signal was detected on the GST - ( SH3 , TH2 ) coated beads when buffer was used in the assay instead of a cellular extract . Consistent with a proposed function of the yeast type I myosins in the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex actin nucleation activity , myosin induced actin polymerization seemed dependent on the presence of the complex since extracts from an arp2 - 2 mutant were unable to sustain actin polymerization onto the beads . To investigate a possible requirement of the Vrp1p - Myo5p interaction in this process , we assayed the GST fusion protein bearing the point mutation that abolished interaction of the Myo5p SH3 domain with Vrp1p ( W1123S ) . Interestingly , this construct was unable to trigger accumulation of fluorescently labeled actin onto the coated beads indicating that an intact SH3 domain is required for Myo5p - induced localized actin polymerization . This result also hinted the involvement of Vrp1p in the process . Consistently , we found that cellular extracts from a vrp1 (cid:2) strain were unable to sustain accumulation of rhodamine - labeled actin onto GST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) coated beads ( Figure 4C ) . Results 86 Figure 4 . Myo5p might regulate localized actin polymerization ( A ) A myo5 (cid:1) strain ( RH3976 ) bearing plasmids carrying ACT1 ( p413 ACT1 ) and VRP1 ( p181 VRP1 ) or the corresponding control plasmids ( pRS413 and Ycplac181 , respectively ) was tested for internalization of (cid:1) - factor . The percentage of cell - bound (cid:1) - factor internalized / min is shown . A wt ( RH3975 ) was assayed as control . ( B ) arp3 - 62 ( SCMIG286 ) and vrp1 (cid:1) ( RH2892 ) strains were crossed to myo5 (cid:1) strains ( SCMIG276 and RH3976 , respectively ) bearing a centromeric plasmid with the MYO5 and URA3 genes ( p33 MYO5 ) , to construct the corresponding single or double mutations carrying p33 MYO5 , which were streaked on 5’ - FOA plates . A representative of each genotype is shown . Lack of synthetic lethality ( SL , see table - ) between myo3 (cid:1) or myo5 (cid:1) mutations and the indicated mutants ( vrp1 (cid:1) , arp3 - 62 , sac6 (cid:1) , rvs161 (cid:1) , rvs167 (cid:1) , end3 (cid:1) and sla2 (cid:1) ) was assessed by standard tetrad analysis . * Even though the myo5 (cid:1)(cid:2) sla2 (cid:1) spores failed to germinate , the double mutant covered with the p33 MYO5 plasmid was able to grow on 5’ - FOA plates . ( C ) The C - terminal fragment of the Myo5p tail is able to induce actin polymerization in vitro . Glutathione - Sepharose beads coated with either GST or GST fused to the MYO5 TH2 and SH3 domains ( GST - TH2 , SH3 ) , or the same fusion portein bearing the W1123S mutation , were incubated with extracts from either a wt ( RH3975 ) , vrp1 (cid:1) ( SCMIG48 ) or arp2 - 2 ( SCMIG4165 ) strain , or buffer ( none ) , in the presence of rhodamine - actin . Samples were incubated at 30°C and the fluorescent signal visualized using a fluorescence microscope . Latrunculin A ( LatA ) or Dnase I was added to the samples ( wt + LatA and wt + Dnase I , respectively ) during the incubation . For the wt + Pha + LatA sample , actin filaments polymerized in the absence of beads were stabilized with phalloidin ( Pha ) prior to the addition of GST - TH2 , SH3 - coated beads and latrunculin A . Representative ( + ) and ( - ) signals are recorded in the left panel ( GST - TH2 , SH3 and GST , respectively ) . The appearance of the beads in a given sample was homogeneous and the assays were repeated at least three times independently . Results 87 Discussion An intact Myo5p SH3 domain is required to sustain a physiologically relevant interaction between the Myo5p tail and F - actin As previously demonstrated for the protozoal type I myosins that contain a TH2 domain ( Brzeska et al . , 1988 ; Doberstein and Pollard , 1992 ; Jung and Hammer , 1994 ; Rosenfeld and Rener , 1994 ) , we found that the Myo5p tail interacts with F - actin . Despite the extensive biochemical characterization of the second actin - binding site of the protozoal type I myosins , no experiments have addressed its role in vivo . We provide here the first genetic evidence suggesting that the Myo5p tail - actin interaction is physiologically relevant . We found that a number of mutations in either MYO5 or ACT1 that greatly diminished this interaction , either in the two - hybrid and / or the actin pelleting assays , did also affect their function . Previous experiments with the protozoal type I myosins indicate that the second ATP - independent actin binding site resides within the TH2 domain ( Brzeska et al . , 1988 ; Doberstein and Pollard , 1992 ; Jung and Hammer , 1994 ; Rosenfeld and Rener , 1994 ) . However , our data indicate that the Myo5p tail - actin interaction detected in either the actin - pelleting and the two - hybrid assays resides within the SH3 and the most C - terminal portion of the TH2 domain . The C - terminal fragment containing the SH3 and the TH2c was sufficient to reconstitute the Myo5p tail footprint on the actin molecule and it was necessary and sufficient to mediate the Myo5p tail - actin interaction both in the two - hybrid and pelleting assays . In contrast , deletion of the N - terminal portion of the TH2 domain did not affect the interaction with actin in either assay . Consistent with this , deletion of the TH2n region in MYO5 did not disrupt its function in endocytosis or in the polarization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) . The apparent discrepancy between previous findings for the protozoal myosins and our findings for the yeast type I myosin could be explained in several ways . It could be that the different results reflect differences in the assays used to monitor the interaction . Otherwise , there could be evolutionary divergences in the structural organization of the myosin tails . It is possible that the region defined as a TH2 domain in Myo5p is not a bona fide TH2 domain . Glycines in this region are rare when compared to the protozoal counterparts and the percentage of alanine and proline in the C - terminal region downstream of the SH3 domain is relatively low . The requirement of the SH3 domain for a physiologically relevant Myo5p tail - actin interaction implicates intermediate proteins in this event . Consistently , we found that a protein that binds both the Myo5p SH3 domain ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) and F - actin ( This manuscript and Vaduva et al . , 1997 ) , Vrp1p , seems required to sustain this interaction both in the two - hybrid and in the actin pelleting assays . The functional importance of this interaction is hinted by the demonstration that point mutations in either actin or the SH3 domain of Myo5p , that strongly dimininshed the interaction with Vrp1p , also disrupted the ATP - independent actomyosin interaction and the endocytic function . The yeast type I myosins might trigger localized actin polymerization at the sites of endocytosis It was demonstrated recently that in mast cells transfected with a fusion protein consisting of green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) and (cid:2) - actin , endocytic vesicles ignite a burst of actin polymerization at the moment they pinch off from the plasma membrane ( Merrifield et al . , 1999 ) . This Results 88 result suggests a direct involvement of Apr2 / 3 - dependent localized actin polym - erization in some endocytic pathways in mammalian cells . In yeast , mutations in different subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibit the uptake step of endocytosis ( Moreau et al . , 1997 ; Schaerer - Brodbeck and Riezman , 2000a ) suggesting that a similar mechanism might be involved . The actin nucleating activity of purified Arp2 / 3 complex is moderate . It is believed that different molecules , including the members of the WASP family , locally activate the Arp2 / 3 complex to fulfill distinct cellular functions ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Madania et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ; Welch , 1999 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 1999 ) . Our results suggest that the yeast type I myosins may play a key role to regulate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymeri - zation at the sites of endocytosis . Surprisingly , we observe that increasing the cellular concentration of actin by providing an extra copy of ACT1 partially suppresses the ts endocytic defect of myo5 (cid:2) mutant . Further , we could directly demonstrate that the C - terminal domain of Myo5p is able to trigger localized actin polymerization in vitro and such activity most likely depends on the presence of an intact Arp2 / 3 complex . Type I myosins bind acidic phospholipids with high affinity via their TH1 domain ( Mooseker and Cheney , 1995 ; Pollard et al . , 1991 ) . Besides , phosphatidic acid and phosphoinositides have been implicated in budding at the plasma membrane ( Jost et al . , 1998 ; Schmidt et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , the type I myosins could be recruited to sites where these lipids are locally produced to trigger localized Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin polymerization . An intact SH3 domain and Vrp1p might be required to localize myosin - induced actin polymerization The C - termini of Myo3p and Myo5p share homology with the C - terminal acidic peptide of Las17p that greatly activates the actin nucleating activity of purified Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) . In our assay though , the carboxi terminus of Myo5p ( TH2c ) containing the acidic peptide does not suffice to trigger accumulation of rhodamine - labeled actin ( data not shown ) . Rather , our data clearly indicates that the SH3 domain of Myo5p is also required in this process . A point mutation in the SH3 domain completely abolishes accumulation of fluorescence onto the GST - ( SH3 , TH2 ) coated beads . Interestingly , the same mutations also abolished a physiologically relevant interaction of the Myo5p tail with F - actin . A view consistent with all these data is that the SH3 domain of Myo5p is required to bind the actin filaments that are being nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Thus , in essence , the SH3 domain would be required to localize actin polymerization rather than to activate nucleation . Since our results indicate that Vrp1p is required to mediate the Myo5p tail interaction with F - actin this hypothesis would be consistent with the observation that a cell extract from a vrp1 (cid:2) strain is unable to sustain accumulation of rodhamine - labeled actin onto GST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) coated beads . This possibility does not exclude that Vrp1p and the carboxi terminal acidic peptide of Myo5p work synergistically to promote actin polymerization . Localized accumulation of F - actin might for example exponentially provide new sites for Results 89 activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) . Additionally , Vrp1p bears a WH2 ( WASP homology 2 ) domain that shares with members of the WASP family including Las17p ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ) . This domain binds monomeric actin in vitro and has been proposed to promote actin polymerization by increasing the concentration of G - actin in the proximity of growing barbed ends of the filamentous actin . Materials and Methods Yeast , media , strains and genetic techniques Yeast strains used in this report are listed in Table I with their relevant genotypes . Unless otherwise mentioned strains that did not bear plasmids were grown in complete media YPUATD ( 2 % glucose , 2 % peptone , 1 % yeast extract , 40 (cid:6) / ml uracil ( Ura ) , 40 (cid:6) g / ml adenine ( Ade ) and 40 (cid:6) g / ml tryptophan ( Trp ) , 2 % agar for solid media ) . Strains bearing plasmids were selected on SD minimal media ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . Sporulation , tetrad dissection and scoring of genetic markers were performed as described by ( Sherman et al . , 1974 ) . Recombinant lyticase was purified from E . coli as described in ( Hicke et al . , 1997 ) . Transformation of yeast cells was accomplished by the lithium acetate method of ( Ito et al . , 1983 ) . Strains SCMIG277 to SCMIG280 were generated by integrating the corresponding wt and mutant MYO5 genes as described in ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) . SCMIG37 and SCMIG40 were obtained by crossing RH1995 and RH2892 , respectively , to RH2884 . Diploids were selected in SD - His and subsequently sporulated , dissected and segregants scored for the appropriate markers . SCMIG45 , SCMIG48 and SCMIG286 were obtained by plating SCMIG37 , SCMIG40 and RH4166 respectively , on SD plates containing 2 g / l of 5’ - Fluoroorotic acid ( 5’ - FOA ) . Single colonies were restreaked on SD + 5’ - FOA plates and all the markers and the ts phenotype rechecked . Single colonies with identical phenotype as those of the original strains but unable to grow on SD - Ura , were chosen . SCMIG308 to SCMIG325 were constructed as follows : the heterozygous diploids carrying the different actin alleles linked to HIS3 ( DBY5533 , 5534 , 5536 , 5537 , 5538 , 5543 , 5545 , 5546 , 5547 , 5548 , 5550 , 5551 , 5552 , 5553 , 5555 , 5556 , 5559 and 5562 , respectively ; Wertman et al . , 1992 ) were sporulated , dissected and the segregants scored for the different markers . Mat (cid:1) act1 - x haploids were then crossed to RH422 - 8A ( Mat a ACT1 ade2 his3 leu2 ura3 trp1 vma2 (cid:2) : : LEU2 pVMA2 : : URA3 bar1 ) . The diploids were selected on SD - Ura - Leu , sporulated , dissected and the segregants scored for the appropriated markers . Mat a act1 - x his3 leu2 ura3 bar1 and either ade2 or ADE2 and trp1 or TRP1 were chosen to perform the assays ( SCMIG308 to SCMIG325 ) . DNA Techniques and Plasmid Constructions All DNA manipulations were performed according to standard techniques ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) unless otherwise specified . Restriction enzymes , Klenow and T4 DNA ligase were obtained from Boehringer Mannheim , New England Biolabs , United States Biochemical or Stratagene Cloning Systems . Plasmids were purified by the Qiagen plasmid purification kit ( Qiagen ) , and transformation of E . coli was performed by electroporation ( Dower et al . , 1988 ) . All PCR for cloning purposes were performed with a DNA polymerase with proof reading Results 90 activity ( Pfu , Stratagene Cloning Systems ) and a TRIO - thermoblock ( Biometra GmbH ) . Oligonucletides were synthesized by Microsynth GmbH or Interactiva . All constructs were sequenced by Sequencing service of the ZMBH ( Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 , D - 69120 Heidelberg , Germany ) . Plasmids used in this report and their relevant features are listed in Table II . Further details are available under request . Immunoblots and antibodies SDS - PAGE for protein separation was performed as described ( Laemmli , 1970 ) using a Minigel system ( Bio Rad Laboratories ) . High and low range SDS - PAGE molecular weight standards ( Bio Rad Laboratories ) were used for determination of apparent molecular weight . Protein concentration was determined using a Bio Rad Protein assay ( Bio Rad Laboratories ) . Total yeast protein extractions were performed as and Western blots and immunodetection were performed as described in ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) using the polyclonal EW and IK antibodies against Myo5p C - terminal peptides ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) the 9E10 anti - myc monoclonal antibody ( Roche Biochemicals ) and the C4 anti - actin monoclonal antibody ( Roche Biochemicals ) . Yeast extracts Yeast cells were grown in rich media to a density of approx . 4 x 10 7 cell / ml . Cells were harvested and washed twice with XB ( 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM ATP , 10 mM Hepes pH 7 . 7 and 50 mM Sucrose ) . 1 / 10 pellet volume of XB 50 mM Sucrose was added and the cells glass bead lysed in the presence of proteinase inhibitors ( 0 . 5 mM PMSF , 1 (cid:6) g / ml aprotinin , 1 (cid:6) g / ml pepstatin , 1 (cid:6) g / ml leupeptin ) . Unbroken cells and debris were eliminated by centrifugation at 2 , 500 g at 4°C . For low speed pelleted ( LSP ) extracts , Sucrose was supplemented to 200 mM , freezed in liquid N 2 and stored at – 80 (cid:10) C until use in the actin polymerization assay . Usually 30 to 40 mg of protein per ml of LSP extract was measured using the BioRad protein assay . For the high speed pelleted ( HSP ) or cytosolic extracts , 100 (cid:6) l aliquots of the LSP extracts were transferred to 1 . 5 ml polyallomer tubes ( Beckman Instruments ) and spun twice for 2 h at 45 , 000 rpm in a TL100 Beckman table top ultracentrifuge using a TLA - 45 rotor . Supernatants were then collected , supplemented to 200 mM Sucrose , freezed in liquid N 2 and stored at – 80 (cid:10) C until use in the pelleting assays . About 10 to 20 mg of protein per ml of HSP extract was measured using the Bio Rad protein assay . Recombinant GST fusion protein purification For purification of recombinant GST fusion proteins , the corresponding pGST plasmids were transformed into BL21 E . coli ( Novagen ) . Cultures grown at 24 (cid:10) C in minimal media ( MM ) ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) supplemented with 50 mg / l Ampicillin were induced at O . D . 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 with 0 . 1 mM IPTG ( isopropylthio - (cid:2) - D - galactoside ) for 2 h . For protein purification , a GST Amersham - Pharmacia purification kit was used ( 27 - 4570 - 01 ) according to the manufacturer instructions . For the actin pelleting assays , purified GST - fusion proteins were supplemented with 10 % glycerol , freezed in liquid N 2 and stored at – 80 (cid:10) C until use . For the actin polymerization assay , GST fusion proteins were freshly purified to a final concentration of 2 mg of fusion protein per ml of 50 % glutahion sepharose . Results 91 Table I . Yeast strains Strain Genotype Reference RH3375 Mat a / Mat (cid:2) ade2 / ADE2 his3 / his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 / MYO3 myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 / MYO5 ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ) leu2 / leu2 lys2 / LYS2 trp1 / trp1 ura3 / ura3 bar1 / bar1 SCMIG281 Mat a / Mat (cid:2) ade2 / ADE2 his3 / his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 / MYO3 mycMYO5 : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:3) : : this study TRP1 / MYO5 leu2 / leu2 trp1 / trp1 ura3 / ura3 bar1 / bar1 SCMIG282 Mat a / Mat (cid:2) ade2 / ADE2 his3 / his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 / MYO3 mycmyo5 - TH2n (cid:3) : : URA3 : : this study myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 / MYO5 leu2 / leu2 trp1 / trp1 ura3 / ura3 bar1 / bar1 SCMIG283 Mat a / Mat (cid:2) ade2 / ADE2 his3 / his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 / MYO3 mycmyo5 - ( SH3 , TH2 ) (cid:3) : : this study URA3 : : myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 / MYO5 leu2 / leu2 trp1 / trp1 ura3 / ura3 bar1 / bar1 SCMIG284 Mat a / Mat (cid:2) ade2 / ADE2 his3 / his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 / MYO3 bar1 / bar1 mycmyo5 - this study ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:3) : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 / MYO5 leu2 / leu2 trp1 / trp1 ura3 / ura3 RH3975 Mat a ade2 his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) RH2881 Mat a his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 Riezman laboratory RH2884 Mat (cid:2) ade2 his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) RH3977 Mat (cid:2) his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) RH3377 Mat a ade2 his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ) RH3976 Mat a ade2 his3 myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) RH3978 Mat a his3 myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) SCMIG276 Mat (cid:2) ade2 his3 myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG277 Mat a ade2 his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 mycMYO5 : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG278 Mat a his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 mycmyo5 - TH2n (cid:3) : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG279 Mat a his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 mycmyo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:4)(cid:3) : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:4)(cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 trp1 this study ura3 bar1 SCMIG280 Mat a ade2 his3 myo3 (cid:3) : : HIS3 mycmyo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:4)(cid:3) : : URA3 : : myo5 (cid:4)(cid:3) : : TRP1 leu2 this study trp1 ura3 bar1 RH1995 Mat a his4 leu2 bar1 end3 (cid:3) : : URA3 ( Bénédetti et al . , 1994 ) SCMIG37 Mat (cid:2) ade2 his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 end3 (cid:3) : : URA3 this study RH2892 Mat a vrp1 (cid:3) : : URA3 his4 leu2 lys2 ura3 bar1 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) SCMIG40 Mat (cid:2) ade2 vrp1 (cid:3) : : URA3 his3 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study RH4166 Mat a ade2 arp3 - 62 : : LEU2 his3 lys2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 : : URA3 B . Windsor SCMIG286 Mat a ade2 arp3 - 62 : : LEU2 his3 lys2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 : : ura3 this study SCMIG273 Mat a las17 (cid:3) : : LEU2 his3 ura3 leu2 trp1 bar1 A . Munn RH3392 Mat (cid:2) his3 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 end4 (cid:3) : : HIS3 p END4 : : URA3 ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) SCMIG47 Mat (cid:2) his3 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 end4 (cid:3) : : his3 : : LEU2 this study RH2600 Mat a rvs161 (cid:3) his4 ura3 bar1 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) RH2950 Mat a leu2 his4 ura3 trp1 : : URA3 rvs167 (cid:3) : : TRP1 bar1 ( Munn et al . , 1995 ) RH2565 Mat a sac6 - (cid:3) : : URA3 ura3 bar1 his3 leu2 ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) RH4165 Mat a arp2 - 2 : : URA3 ts GAL + ade2 trp1 leu2 his lys2 ura3 bar1 B . Windsor EGY48 Mat a his3 trp1 ura3 leu2 : : lexAop6 - LEU2 ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) SCMIG45 Mat (cid:2) ade2 his3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 end3 (cid:3) : : ura3 this study SCMIG48 Mat (cid:2) ade2 vrp1 (cid:3) : : ura3 his3 leu2 lys2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG308 Mat a act1 - 101 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG309 Mat a act1 - 102 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG310 Mat a act1 - 104 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG311 Mat a act1 - 105 : : HIS3 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG312 Mat a act1 - 108 : : HIS3 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG313 Mat a act1 - 111 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG314 Mat a act1 - 113 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG315 Mat a act1 - 115 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG316 Mat a act1 - 116 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG317 Mat a act1 - 117 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG318 Mat a act1 - 119 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG319 Mat a act1 - 120 : : HIS3 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG320 Mat a act1 - 121 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG321 Mat a act1 - 122 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG322 Mat a act1 - 124 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 trp1 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG323 Mat a act1 - 125 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG324 Mat a act1 - 129 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study SCMIG325 Mat a act1 - 132 : : HIS3 ade2 leu2 ura3 bar1 this study Actin pelleting assays The actin pelleting assays performed with the yeast strains expressing the myc tagged wt and mutant Myo5p and HA tagged VRP1 were designed based on ( Wang et al . , 1998 ) . Cells were grown either in rich media or SD ( for plasmid maintenance ) , to a density of 2 x 10 7 cell / ml . For each pelleting assay , 3 x 10 9 cells were harvested . Half the volume of pellet of 3 x EB was added ( EB = 20 mM PIPES pH6 . 8 , 100 mM sorbitol , 100 mM KoAc , 25 mM KCl , 0 . 5 % Triton - X - 100 , 5 mM Results 92 MgCl 2 , 1 mM ATP , 0 . 5 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM PMSF , 1 (cid:6) g / ml aprotinin , 1 (cid:6) g / ml pepstatin , 1 (cid:6) g / ml leupeptin ) on ice and the cells glass bead - lysed . Unbroken cells and debris were eliminated by centrifugation at 2500 g at 4°C . The supernatants were transferred to a new tube and the protein concentration adjusted to 15 (cid:6) g / (cid:6) l with EB . Three 100 (cid:6) l aliquots of the protein extract were transferred to 1 . 5 ml polyallomer tubes ( Beckman Instruments ) and spun 2 h at 45000 rpm in a TL100 Beckman table top ultracentrifuge using a TLA - 45 rotor . The supernatants were collected into a fresh tube and 2 x 70 (cid:6) l were transferred to polyallomer tubes containing 10 (cid:6) l of 3 x EB and 20 (cid:6) l of G buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM ATP ) containing 2 mg / ml actin ( Sigma A - 2522 ) . 70 (cid:6) l were transferred to a polyallomer tube containing 10 (cid:6) l of 3 x EB and 20 (cid:6) l of G buffer for the - actin control . After 2 hour incubation at 4 (cid:10) C , 0 . 2 u of apyrase ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) was added to one of the samples containing actin for the - ATP control . 10 min after incubation at room temperature ( RT ) , the samples were centrifuged at 45 , 000 rpm for 2 h at 4°C in the TL100 Beckman tabletop ultracentrifuge using the TLA - 45 rotor . The supernatants were discarded and the pellet washed once with 100 (cid:6) l of EB either treated ( for the - ATP control ) or not with apyrase . The pellets were resuspended in 30 (cid:6) l of SDS - PAGE sample buffer and processed for immunoblot analysis . 14 (cid:6) l of protein extract after the first ultracentrifugation were loaded as total . For the experiments performed with the recombinant Myo5p fragments , 20 (cid:6) l of the HSP fraction ( adjusted to 10 mg / ml ) of the corresponding strain ( see above ) were diluted with 60 (cid:6) l XB to bring sucrose concentration to 50 mM , and centrifuged 2 h at 4°C at 45 , 000 rpm in the TLA - 45 rotor . 70 (cid:6) l of the supernatant was recovered and mixed with 4 (cid:6) l of G buffer or 4 (cid:6) l of G - actin either 2 or 4 (cid:6) g / (cid:6) l . After mixing , 3 (cid:6) l of the corresponding GST fusion proteins adjusted to 0 . 5 (cid:6) M were added and the samples incubated at 4 (cid:10) C for 2 h . After centrifuging 2 h at 4°C at 45 , 000 rpm in the TLA - 45 rotor , the supernatant was aspirated and the pellet washed with 100 (cid:6) l of XB 50 mM Sucrose . After centrifuging further 2 h , the supernatant was eliminated and the pellet resuspended in 20 (cid:6) l of SDS - PAGE SB . 3 (cid:6) l of the corresponding GST fusion proteins adjusted to 0 . 5 (cid:6) M were brought to 20 (cid:6) l with SDS - PAGE SB and the same amount loaded on the gel as total for comparison . Visual actin - polymerization assay The actin polymerization assay was designed according to ( Ma et al . , 1998a ; Ma et al . , 1998b ) . Briefly , 7 (cid:6) l of LSP extracts adjusted to 20 mg of protein / ml with XB 200 mM sucrose or just buffer , were mixed with 1 (cid:6) l of ARS ( 10 mg / ml Creatine Kinase , 10 mM ATP , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 400 mM Creatine Phosphate ) and 1 (cid:6) l of 10 (cid:6) M rhodamine - labeled actin ( Cytoskeleton , Inc . ) . The polymerization reaction was initiated by adding 1 (cid:6) l of 50 % gluthatione sepharose beads bound to 2 - 3 (cid:6) g of the corresponding GST fusion protein . Samples were incubated at room temperature ( RT ) and visualized using fluorescence Microscope Zeiss Axioskop after 10 - 20 min incubation . Latrunculin and DNase I were added to final concentration of 10 (cid:6) M and 0 . 5 (cid:6) g / (cid:6) l respectively , previous to the addition of the gluthation sepharose beads . (cid:1) - Factor uptake assay [ 35 S ] (cid:1) - factor uptake assays were performed as described ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . A pulse - chase protocol was used . Cells were grown in YPUATD or minimal media at 24 (cid:10) C to a density of 0 . 5 - 1 x 10 7 cells / ml , harvested Results 93 and resuspended in ice - cold YPUATD media for binding of (cid:1) - factor at 0 (cid:10) C for 45 min . Cells were harvested at 4 (cid:10) C to eliminate unbound (cid:1) - factor , and internalization was triggered by resuspension in 37°C prewarmed YPUATD . Samples were taken at the indicated time points into pH 1 and pH 6 buffers . Internalized counts were calculated by dividing pH1 by pH6 resistant counts per each time point . The internalization rates were calculated as the percentage of counts internalized per minute between 5 and 10 min ( linear range ) . All uptake assays were performed at least two times and the mean and standard deviations calculated for each time point . Table II . Plasmids Plasmid Yeast Yeast Insert Reference Ori marker Yeplac181 2 µm LEU2 - ( Gietz and Sugino , 1988 ) p181 VRP1 2 µm LEU2 VRP1 this study p181 VRP13HA 2 µm LEU2 VRP13HA pRS413 CEN HIS3 - ( Sikorski et al . , 1989 ) p413 ACT1 CEN HIS3 ACT1 this study p33 MYO5 CEN URA3 MYO5 ( Geli et al . , 1998 ) p111 VRP1 CEN LEU2 VRP1 this study p111 vrp1 ( 9 – 200 ) (cid:3) CEN LEU2 vrp1 ( 9 – 200 ) (cid:3) this study p111 vrp1 ( 201 – 816 ) (cid:3) CEN LEU2 vrp1 ( 201 – 816 ) (cid:3) this study pINmyc MYO5 - URA3 myc - tagged MYO5 this study pINmyc myo5 - ( TH2n ) (cid:3) - URA3 myc - tagged myo5 - ( TH2 ) (cid:3) this study pINmyc myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:3) - URA3 myc - tagged myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:3) this study pINmyc myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:3) - URA3 myc - tagged myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:3) this study pJG4 - 5 2 µm TRP1 B42 ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pJG4 - 5 ACT1 2 µm TRP1 B42 ACT1 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 101 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 101 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 102 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 102 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 104 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 104 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 105 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 105 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 108 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 108 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 111 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 111 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 113 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 113 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 115 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 115 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 116 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 116 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 119 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 119 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 120 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 120 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 121 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 121 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 122 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 122 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 124 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 124 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 125 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 125 this study pJG4 - 5 act1 - 129 2 µm TRP1 B42 act1 - 129 this study pJG4 - 5 RVS167 2 µm TRP1 B24 RVS167 this study pEG202 2 µm HIS3 LexA ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pEG202 MYO5 2 µm HIS3 LexA MYO5 tail ( aa 757 – 1219 ) this study pEG202 myo5 - ( TH2c ) (cid:3) 2 µm HIS3 LexA myo5 - ( TH2c ) (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 – 1181 ) this study pEG202 myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:3) 2 µm HIS3 LexA myo5 - ( SH3 , TH2c ) (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 – 1091 ) this study pEG202 myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:3) 2 µm HIS3 LexA myo5 - ( TH2 , SH3 ) (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 – 996 ) this study pEG202 ( TH2 , SH3 ) 2 µm HIS3 LexA ( TH2 , SH3 ) domain ( aa 984 – 1219 ) this study pEG202 ( SH3 , TH2c ) 2 µm HIS3 LexA ( SH3 , TH2c ) domain ( aa 1085 – 1219 ) this study pEG202 ( TH2n , SH3 ) 2 µm HIS3 LexA ( TH2n , SH3 ) domain ( aa 984 – 1181 ) this study pEG202 TH2c 2 µm HIS3 LexA TH2c domain ( aa 1142 – 1219 ) this study pEG202 TH2 2 µm HIS3 LexA TH2 domain ( aa 984 – 1091 ) this study pEG202 SH3 2 µm HIS3 LexA SH3 domain ( aa 1085 – 1181 ) this study pEG202 myo5 - TH2n (cid:3) 2 µm HIS3 LexA myo5 - TH2n (cid:3) tail ( aa 757 – 996 ) + ( aa1095 – 1219 ) this study pEG202 END3 2 µm HIS3 LexA END3 this study pSH18 – 34 2 µm URA3 8 LexA Op . LacZ ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pRFM - 1 2 µm HIS3 LexAbicoid ( Gyuris et al . , 1993 ) pGEX5X - 3 - - GST pGST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) - - GST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) domain ( aa 984 – 1219 ) this study pGST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) - W1123S - - GST - ( TH2 , SH3 ) domain ( aa 984 – 1219 ) – W1123S this study pGST - ( SH3 , TH2c ) - - GST - ( SH3 , TH2c ) domain ( aa 1085 – 1219 ) this study pGST - ( TH2c ) - - GST - TH2c domain ( aa 1142 – 1219 ) this study Results 94 Acknowledgments We thank members of the Riezman and Geli laboratories for scientific discussion . We are grateful to D . Botstein , B . Winsor , A . Munn and R . Brent for sending strains and plasmids . M . I . G . thanks members of the BZH for general support . This work was funded by the Canton Basel - Stadt , by a grant from the Swiss National Science Fundation ( to H . R . ) , by the University of Heidelberg and a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( to M . I . G . , SFB 352 ) . Conclusions and Perspectives 95 Conclusions and Perspectives Conclusions and Perspectives 96 Conclusions and Perspectives 97 Some thoughts about “complexity” The last couple of years have brought an enormous increase in the number of organims whose genomes have been sequenced . Scientific “Pet” organisms like S . cerevisiae , D . melanogaster and C . elegans have been sequenced and last but not least also a working draft of the H . sapiens genome is available . Using sophisticated gene - prediction software the approximate number of genes encoded by the different genomes was determined and of course the different species were compared . To the big dissapointment of the general public and especially of pharma - ceutical and biotechnology companies , the latest studies predict only about 30 ' 000 to 40 ' 000 genes for humans and not 70 ' 000 to 100 ' 000 as some previous studies had predicted . There is a big disappointment that humans are only about two times as “complex” as worms and only about five times as “complex” as yeast even though no one can really say what the term “complex” really means . Fortunately , the focus seems to turn away from the mere number of genes to what genes are actually for : they mostly encode for proteins ! DNA is very important because it encodes almost the whole properties of the cell ( it is believed that some membrane properties of organelles are “inherited” to “daughter” organelles and cannot arrise de novo ) . However , the cell is mainly made of proteins and lipids and proteins carry out most of the activities going on in a cell . Different cell types of the same organism express different proteins even though they have exactly the same genome . To further complicate the whole system one gene can encode for more than one protein because alternative splicing and RNA editing can produce from one precursor mRNA a large number of “mature” mRNA’s encoding for different proteins leading to an increase in complexity . However , an increased number of proteins per se does not necessarily mean increased “complexity” . What really determines the “complexity” of a cell are the interactions among its proteins and lipids that allow a cell to function properly . The regulation of protein - protein interactions networks and the integration and fine - tuning of outputs from the diverse networks are the key features that ensure survival and allow a cell to pursue its tasks . If we want to understand the smallest “unit of life” ( i . e . a cell ) we need to understand how it works at a molecular level by unravelling its functional networks . Anyways , the existence of life is such a wonder that the classification in different classes of “complexity” is pure semantics . Especially because every single living organism has proven to be the best suited for its place in nature under the current conditions . Protein - protein and protein - lipid interactions network In this PhD thesis we have started to unravel part of the interactions network involved in the internalization step of endocytosis on a molecular level . As previously described in the introduction , the different proteins required for this process can be distributed to different protein complexes based on genetic and / or biochemical data . However , recent studies from several groups ( see introduction ) and work presented here in this thesis have clearly demonstrated that the described protein complexes are much more interconnected than previously thought leading to the notion that the whole system is a complex network of interactions . ( see Figure 1 ) . To further increase the complexity , lipids add an additional level of regulation and seem to work via different mechanims to allow correct working of the process . Sterols might provide the proper membrane environment to allow the endocytic machinery to be recruited and / or to assemble at specific sites . Another possible function might be to modulate the biophysical properties of the membrane to allow the proper membrane Conclusions and Perspectives 98 curvature to build and / or to allow an endocytic vesicle to pinch off . In contrast , sphingoid bases seem to act as signaling molecules controling a whole cascade of protein kinases starting with Pkh1p and Pkh2p and required for the internalization step ( this thesis ) . Previous data ( Friant et al . , 2000 ) and work presented in this thesis suggest that one of the roles of this sphingoid base - mediated signaling cascade might be to regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Our initial studies have identified two possible effectors of this signaling pathway ( Rvs167p and Pkc1p ) and we can assume that there will be more ( e . g . Yck2p ) . Therefore we propose that this signaling cascade will affect endocytosis directly and not only via regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Figure 1 . Protein - protein interactions network involved in the internalization step of endocytosis Schematic drawing of the new connections ( big double - headed arrows ) between the four protein complexes described in detail in the introduction . Proteins that have been shown to interact biochemically and / or in the two - hybrid system are drawn near each other . Synthetic lethal interactions are shown by a dashed line , and an arrow marks phosphorylation of a protein by a kinase . Las17p might be part of three complexes and therefore connections are drawn by double - headded arrows . Conclusions and Perspectives 99 We have provided preliminary data suggesting that the phosphorylation of Rvs167p by Pkh2p is required for its endocytic function but maybe not for its actin function ( see third section of the results ) . However , we cannot exclude that the immunofluorescence assay used to monitor the actin cytoskeleton is not sensitive enough to monitor subtle changes . Furthermore , we do not know which actin structures are really required for endocytosis . Interestingly , recent studies have identified two new proteins , Myo5p and Abp1p , that activate the actin nucleation functions of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Goode et al . , 2001 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; this thesis ) . Myo5p has been shown to be involved in the internalization step ( Geli and Riezman , 1996 ) and Abp1p has a redundant endocytic function with the central coiled - coil domains of Sla2p ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , both proteins could be involved in initiating and / or regulating the actin structures required for internalization . However , in the case of Abp1p the in vivo relevance of its role in Arp2 / 3 complex acitvation has not been thorougly adressed , yet . In the case of Myo5p the evidence supports a physiologically relevant interaction with actin . Rvs167p is one of the two yeast amphiphysin homologs . Members of this protein family have been implicated in endocytosis . Work presented in this thesis and several other studies have suggested a high degree of similarity in terms of regulation and binding partners between Rvs167p and amphiphysin ( Floyd et al . , 2001 ; Lee et al . , 1998 ; Lombardi and Riezman , 2000 ; Navarro et al . , 1997 ; Rosales et al . , 2000 ; Wigge et al . , 1997 ) . Amphiphysin I interacts with amphiphysin II as does Rvs167p with Rvs161p . Rvs167p is phosphorylated by Pho85 kinase as is amphiphysin by the mammalian Pho85 homolog Cdk5 suggesting that at least part of the regulation has been conserved through evolution . We have shown in this thesis that Pkh2p phosphorylates Rvs167p and have identified a PDK2 consensus phosphorylation site in amphiphysin I . Given the striking similarities between Rvs167p and amphiphysin I we propose that PDK2 might phosphorylate and thus regulate amphiphysin I . Furthermore , it might be interesting to investigate a possible role of PDK - kinases in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Outlook It is very clear , that we have just started to unravel the interactions network acting at the internalization step of endocytosis . There are still a large number of proteins missing and even more protein - protein interactions to be discovered . However , what is almost completely missing is knowledge about the actual functions of the proteins involved in this process . Up to now , the type I myosin Myo5p was the only protein where a direct role in force generation and / or rearrangement of actin filaments could be postulated . However , now several studies ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; this thesis ) have unravelled an additional function of Myo5p in actin polymerization suggesting that Myo5p might not behave as a normal motor protein carrying its cargo from A to B . Myo5p might be able to induce the actin filaments it needs to move and / or generate additional force by polymerizing new actin filaments at the sites of internalization by activating the Arp2 / 3 complex . As mentioned previously , we don’t know which actin structures are involved in the internalization step . However , the actin patches are most likely not the sites of internalization ( Mulholland et al . , 1999 ) suggesting that a more specialized actin structure not visible by conventional fluorescence microscopy might be required . Conclusions and Perspectives 100 For the rest of the proteins we don’t have any concrete idea about their role in internalization . Most of them affect the actin cytoskeleton and therefore it would be interesting to determine if their endocytic defect is solely due to the actin defect or if they have a more direct role in the process . One obvious approach would be to generate mutants and determine if the two phenotypes can be genetically separated . Furthermore , one could deter - mine if they work on actin directly by investigating how they affect actin polymerization and / or the stability of F - actin . However , the most usefull tool to understand the role of the different proteins in the internalization process would be an in vitro endocytosis assay . This would allow to dissect at which step a certain protein is involved by interfering with the protein function and determining where the process is blocked . Furthermore , the minimal requirements to build and pinch off an endocytic vesicle might be determined giving a hint which factors are absolutely necessary , which factors increase the efficiency and which factors are involved in regulation . Another major issue is to understand how internalization is regulated . There are now several kinases identified to be required for the internalization step ( Pkh1p , Pkh2p , Pkc1p and Yck2p ; Friant et al . , 2000 ; this thesis ) . Two other kinases , Ark1p and Prk1p , have been shown to be involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton and might be linked to the Pan1p complex ( see introduction , section 3 . 2 . 4 . ) . However , there is no report about a possible role in endocytosis . Sphingoid bases have been shown to activate a whole signaling cascade including at least three of these kinases ( Pkh1p , Pkh2p and Pkc1p ; Friant et al . , 2000 ; Zanolari et al . , 2000 ; this thesis ) . We have identified Rvs167p as a down - stream effector of Pkh2p but we don’t know what targets Pkc1p regulates . Furthermore , we don’t know if Yck2p is also part of this sphingoid base - mediated signaling cascade or if it defines another signaling pathway involved in regulating internalization . We are far away from understanding the internalization step of endocytosis at a molecular level but we have started to design a rough sketch on which to build up . References 101 References References 102 References 103 Abeliovich , H . , Grote , E . , Novick , P . and Ferro - Novick , S . ( 1998 ) Tlg2p , a yeast syntaxin homolog that resides on the Golgi and endocytic structures . J Biol Chem , 273 , 11719 - 27 . Albanesi , J . P . , Fujisaki , H . and Korn , E . D . ( 1985 ) A kinetic model for the molecular basis of the contractile activity of Acanthamoeba myosins IA and IB . J Biol Chem , 260 , 11174 - 9 . Alessi , D . R . , Kozlowski , M . T . , Weng , Q . P . , Morrice , N . and Avruch , J . ( 1998 ) 3 - Phospho - inositide - dependent protein kinase 1 ( PDK1 ) phosphorylates and activates the p70 S6 kinase in vivo and in vitro . Curr Biol , 8 , 69 - 81 . Amberg , D . C . ( 1998 ) Three - dimensional imaging of the yeast actin cytoskeleton through the budding cell cycle . Mol Biol Cell , 9 , 3259 - 62 . Amberg , D . C . , Basart , E . and Botstein , D . ( 1995 ) Defining protein interactions with yeast actin in vivo . Nat Struct Biol , 2 , 28 - 35 . Anderson , B . L . , Boldogh , I . , Evangelista , M . , Boone , C . , Greene , L . A . and Pon , L . A . ( 1998 ) The Src homology domain 3 ( SH3 ) of a yeast type I myosin , Myo5p , binds to verprolin and is required for targeting to sites of actin polarization . J Cell Biol , 141 , 1357 - 70 . Antonsson , B . , Montessuit , S . , Friedli , L . , Payton , M . A . and Paravicini , G . ( 1994 ) Protein kinase C in yeast . Characteristics of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae PKC1 gene product . J Biol Chem , 269 , 16821 - 8 . Arthington , B . A . , Hoskins , J . , Skatrud , P . L . and Bard , M . ( 1991 ) Nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding yeast C - 8 sterol isomerase . Gene , 107 , 173 - 4 . Ayscough , K . R . , Eby , J . J . , Lila , T . , Dewar , H . , Kozminski , K . G . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) Sla1p is a functionally modular component of the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton required for correct localization of both Rho1p - GTPase and Sla2p , a protein with talin homology . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 1061 - 75 . Ayscough , K . R . , Stryker , J . , Pokala , N . , Sanders , M . , Crews , P . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol , 137 , 399 - 416 . [ published erratum appears in ( 1999 ) J Cell Biol , 146 , following 1201 ] . Balguerie , A . , Sivadon , P . , Bonneu , M . and Aigle , M . ( 1999 ) Rvs167p , the budding yeast homolog of amphiphysin , colocalizes with actin patches . J Cell Sci , 112 , 2529 - 37 . Bankaitis , V . A . , Aitken , J . R . , Cleves , A . E . and Dowhan , W . ( 1990 ) An essential role for a phospholipid transfer protein in yeast Golgi function [ see comments ] . Nature , 347 , 561 - 2 . Bauer , F . , Urdaci , M . , Aigle , M . and Crouzet , M . ( 1993 ) Alteration of a yeast SH3 protein leads to conditional viability with defects in cytoskeletal and budding patterns . Mol Cell Biol , 13 , 5070 - 84 . Bauerfeind , R . , Takei , K . and De Camilli , P . ( 1997 ) Amphiphysin I is associated with coated endocytic intermediates and undergoes stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation in nerve terminals . J Biol Chem , 272 , 30984 - 92 . Becherer , K . A . , Rieder , S . E . , Emr , S . D . and Jones , E . W . ( 1996 ) Novel syntaxin homologue , Pep12p , required for the sorting of lumenal hydrolases to the lysosome - like vacuole in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 7 , 579 - 94 . Beck , T . , Schmidt , A . and Hall , M . N . ( 1999 ) Starvation induces vacuolar targeting and degradation of the tryptophan permease in yeast . J Cell Biol , 146 , 1227 - 38 . Belham , C . , Wu , S . and Avruch , J . ( 1999 ) Intracellular signalling : PDK1 - - a kinase at the hub of things . Curr Biol , 9 , R93 - 6 . Bénédetti , H . , Raths , S . , Crausaz , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) The END3 gene encodes a protein that is required for the internalization step of endocytosis and for actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 5 , 1023 - 37 . Berkower , C . , Loayza , D . and Michaelis , S . ( 1994 ) Metabolic instability and constitutive endocytosis of STE6 , the a - factor transporter of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell , 5 , 1185 - 98 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature , 404 , 1007 - 11 . Bokoch , G . M . , Reilly , A . M . , Daniels , R . H . , King , C . C . , Olivera , A . , Spiegel , S . and Knaus , U . G . ( 1998 ) A GTPase - independent mechanism of p21 - activated kinase activation . Regulation by sphingosine and other biologically active lipids . J Biol Chem , 273 , 8137 - 44 . Bon , E . , Recordon - Navarro , P . , Durrens , P . , Iwase , M . , Toh , E . A . and Aigle , M . ( 2000 ) A network of proteins around Rvs167p and Rvs161p , two proteins related to the yeast actin cytoskeleton . Yeast , 16 , 1229 - 41 . Brizzio , V . , Gammie , A . E . and Rose , M . D . ( 1998 ) Rvs161p interacts with Fus2p to promote cell fusion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol , 141 , 567 - 84 . Brzeska , H . , Lynch , T . J . and Korn , E . D . ( 1988 ) Localization of the actin - binding sites of Acanthamoeba myosin IB and effect of limited proteolysis on its actin - activated Mg2 + - ATPase activity . J Biol Chem , 263 , 427 - 35 . Buede , R . , Rinker - Schaffer , C . , Pinto , W . J . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1991 ) Cloning and characterization of LCB1 , a Saccharomyces gene required for biosynthesis of the long - chain base component of sphingolipids . J Bacteriol , References 104 173 , 4325 - 32 . [ published erratum appears in ( 1993 ) J Bacteriol , 175 , 919 ] . Butler , M . H . , David , C . , Ochoa , G . C . , Freyberg , Z . , Daniell , L . , Grabs , D . , Cremona , O . and De Camilli , P . ( 1997 ) Amphiphysin II ( SH3P9 ; BIN1 ) , a member of the amphiphysin / Rvs family , is concentrated in the cortical cytomatrix of axon initial segments and nodes of ranvier in brain and around T tubules in skeletal muscle . J Cell Biol , 137 , 1355 - 67 . Casamayor , A . , Torrance , P . D . , Kobayashi , T . , Thorner , J . and Alessi , D . R . ( 1999 ) Functional counterparts of mammalian protein kinases PDK1 and SGK in budding yeast . Curr Biol , 9 , 186 - 97 . Chu , D . S . , Pishvaee , B . and Payne , G . S . ( 1996 ) The light chain subunit is required for clathrin function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem , 271 , 33123 - 30 . Chvatchko , Y . , Howald , I . and Riezman , H . ( 1986 ) Two yeast mutants defective in endocytosis are defective in pheromone response . Cell , 46 , 355 - 64 . Cleves , A . E . , McGee , T . P . , Whitters , E . A . , Champion , K . M . , Aitken , J . R . , Dowhan , W . , Goebl , M . and Bankaitis , V . A . ( 1991 ) Mutations in the CDP - choline pathway for phospholipid biosynthesis bypass the requirement for an essential phospholipid transfer protein . Cell , 64 , 789 - 800 . Coe , J . G . , Lim , A . C . , Xu , J . and Hong , W . ( 1999 ) A role for Tlg1p in the transport of proteins within the Golgi apparatus of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 2407 - 23 . Colwill , K . , Field , D . , Moore , L . , Friesen , J . and Andrews , B . ( 1999 ) In vivo analysis of the domains of yeast Rvs167p suggests Rvs167p function is mediated through multiple protein interactions . Genetics , 152 , 881 - 93 . Cooper , J . A . , Walker , S . B . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) Pyrene actin : documentation of the validity of a sensitive assay for actin polymerization . J Muscle Res Cell Motil , 4 , 253 - 62 . Cope , M . J . , Yang , S . , Shang , C . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J Cell Biol , 144 , 1203 - 18 . Crouzet , M . , Urdaci , M . , Dulau , L . and Aigle , M . ( 1991 ) Yeast mutant affected for viability upon nutrient starvation : characterization and cloning of the RVS161 gene . Yeast , 7 , 727 - 43 . Currie , R . A . , Walker , K . S . , Gray , A . , Deak , M . , Casamayor , A . , Downes , C . P . , Cohen , P . , Alessi , D . R . and Lucocq , J . ( 1999 ) Role of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate in regulating the activity and localization of 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent protein kinase - 1 . Biochem J , 337 , 575 - 83 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , van der Bliek , A . M . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J Cell Biol , 131 , 69 - 80 . Daum , G . , Lees , N . D . , Bard , M . and Dickson , R . ( 1998 ) Biochemistry , cell biology and molecular biology of lipids of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast , 14 , 1471 - 510 . David , C . , Solimena , M . and De Camilli , P . ( 1994 ) Autoimmunity in stiff - Man syndrome with breast cancer is targeted to the C - terminal region of human amphiphysin , a protein similar to the yeast proteins , Rvs167 and Rvs161 . FEBS Lett , 351 , 73 - 9 . David , D . , Sundarababu , S . and Gerst , J . E . ( 1998 ) Involvement of long chain fatty acid elongation in the trafficking of secretory vesicles in yeast . J Cell Biol , 143 , 1167 - 82 . Davis , N . G . , Horecka , J . L . and Sprague , G . F . , Jr . ( 1993 ) Cis - and trans - acting functions required for endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors . J Cell Biol , 122 , 53 - 65 . De Camilli , P . , Emr , S . D . , McPherson , P . S . and Novick , P . ( 1996 ) Phosphoinositides as regulators in membrane traffic . Science , 271 , 1533 - 9 . D ' Hondt , K . , Heese - Peck , A . and Riezman , H . ( 2000 ) Protein and lipid requirements for endocytosis . Annu Rev Genet , 34 , 255 - 295 . Doberstein , S . K . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1992 ) Localization and specificity of the phospholipid and actin binding sites on the tail of Acanthamoeba myosin IC . J Cell Biol , 117 , 1241 - 9 . Dower , W . J . , Miller , J . F . and Ragsdale , C . W . ( 1988 ) High efficiency transformation of E . coli by high voltage electroporation . Nucleic Acids Res , 16 , 6127 - 45 . Dulic , V . , Egerton , M . , Elguindi , I . , Raths , S . , Singer , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1991 ) Yeast endocytosis assays . Methods Enzymol , 194 , 697 - 710 . Egner , R . , Mahe , Y . , Pandjaitan , R . and Kuchler , K . ( 1995 ) Endocytosis and vacuolar degradation of the plasma membrane - localized Pdr5 ATP - binding cassette multidrug transporter in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol , 15 , 5879 - 87 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J Cell Biol , 147 , 1503 - 18 . Estojak , J . , Brent , R . and Golemis , E . A . ( 1995 ) Correlation of two - hybrid affinity data with in vitro measurements . Mol Cell Biol , 15 , 5820 - 9 . References 105 Evangelista , M . , Klebl , B . M . , Tong , A . H . , Webb , B . A . , Leeuw , T . , Leberer , E . , Whiteway , M . , Thomas , D . Y . and Boone , C . ( 2000 ) A role for myosin - I in actin assembly through interactions with Vrp1p , Bee1p , and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol , 148 , 353 - 62 . Floyd , S . R . , Porro , E . B . , Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Tsai , L . H . and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) Amphiphysin 1 Binds the Cyclin - dependent Kinase ( cdk ) 5 Regulatory Subunit p35 and Is Phosphorylated by cdk5 and cdc2 . J Biol Chem , 276 , 8104 - 10 . Freeman , N . L . , Lila , T . , Mintzer , K . A . , Chen , Z . , Pahk , A . J . , Ren , R . , Drubin , D . G . and Field , J . ( 1996 ) A conserved proline - rich region of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cyclase - associated protein binds SH3 domains and modulates cytoskeletal localization . Mol Cell Biol , 16 , 548 - 56 . Friant , S . , Zanolari , B . and Riezman , H . ( 2000 ) Increased protein kinase or decreased PP2A activity bypasses sphingoid base requirement in endocytosis . Embo J , 19 , 2834 - 44 . Fruman , D . A . , Rameh , L . E . and Cantley , L . C . ( 1999 ) Phosphoinositide binding domains : embracing 3 - phosphate . Cell , 97 , 817 - 20 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic , 1 , 161 - 71 . Fujisaki , H . , Albanesi , J . P . and Korn , E . D . ( 1985 ) Experimental evidence for the contractile activities of Acanthamoeba myosins IA and IB . J Biol Chem , 260 , 11183 - 9 . Gagny , B . , Wiederkehr , A . , Dumoulin , P . , Winsor , B . , Riezman , H . and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 2000 ) A novel EH domain protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Ede1p , involved in endocytosis . J Cell Sci , 113 , 3309 - 19 . Galan , J . M . , Moreau , V . , Andre , B . , Volland , C . and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 1996 ) Ubiquitination mediated by the Npi1p / Rsp5p ubiquitin - protein ligase is required for endocytosis of the yeast uracil permease . J Biol Chem , 271 , 10946 - 52 . Geli , M . I . , Lombardi , R . , Schmelzl , B . and Riezman , H . ( 2000 ) An intact SH3 domain is required for myosin I - induced actin polymerization . Embo J , 19 , 4281 - 4291 . Geli , M . I . and Riezman , H . ( 1996 ) Role of type I myosins in receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Science , 272 , 533 - 5 . Geli , M . I . and Riezman , H . ( 1998 ) Endocytic internalization in yeast and animal cells : similar and different . J Cell Sci , 111 , 1031 - 7 . Geli , M . I . , Wesp , A . and Riezman , H . ( 1998 ) Distinct functions of calmodulin are required for the uptake step of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast : the type I myosin Myo5p is one of the calmodulin targets . Embo J , 17 , 635 - 47 . Gietz , R . D . and Sugino , A . ( 1988 ) New yeast - Escherichia coli shuttle vectors constructed with in vitro mutagenized yeast genes lacking six - base pair restriction sites . Gene , 74 , 527 - 34 . Goode , B . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Barnes , G . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2001 ) Activation of the arp2 / 3 complex by the actin filament binding protein abp1p . J Cell Biol , 153 , 627 - 34 . Goodman , O . B . , Jr . , Krupnick , J . G . , Santini , F . , Gurevich , V . V . , Penn , R . B . , Gagnon , A . W . , Keen , J . H . and Benovic , J . L . ( 1996 ) Beta - arrestin acts as a clathrin adaptor in endocytosis of the beta2 - adrenergic receptor . Nature , 383 , 447 - 50 . Goodson , H . V . , Anderson , B . L . , Warrick , H . M . , Pon , L . A . and Spudich , J . A . ( 1996 ) Synthetic lethality screen identifies a novel yeast myosin I gene ( MYO5 ) : myosin I proteins are required for polarization of the actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol , 133 , 1277 - 91 . Gruenberg , J . and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1995 ) Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 7 , 552 - 63 . Gyuris , J . , Golemis , E . , Chertkov , H . and Brent , R . ( 1993 ) Cdi1 , a human G1 and S phase protein phosphatase that associates with Cdk2 . Cell , 75 , 791 - 803 . Haak , D . , Gable , K . , Beeler , T . and Dunn , T . ( 1997 ) Hydroxylation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae ceramides requires Sur2p and Scs7p . J Biol Chem , 272 , 29704 - 10 . Hannun , Y . A . ( 1996 ) Functions of ceramide in coordinating cellular responses to stress . Science , 274 , 1855 - 9 . Hannun , Y . A . , Loomis , C . R . , Merrill , A . H . , Jr . and Bell , R . M . ( 1986 ) Sphingosine inhibition of protein kinase C activity and of phorbol dibutyrate binding in vitro and in human platelets . J Biol Chem , 261 , 12604 - 9 . Hawkins , P . T . , Stephens , L . R . and Piggott , J . R . ( 1993 ) Analysis of inositol metabolites produced by Saccharomyces cerevisiae in response to glucose stimulation . J Biol Chem , 268 , 3374 - 83 . Healy , A . M . , Zolnierowicz , S . , Stapleton , A . E . , Goebl , M . , DePaoli - Roach , A . A . and Pringle , J . R . ( 1991 ) CDC55 , a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene involved in cellular morphogenesis : identification , characterization , and homology to the B subunit of mammalian type 2A protein phosphatase . Mol Cell Biol , 11 , 5767 - 80 . Helliwell , S . B . , Schmidt , A . , Ohya , Y . and Hall , M . N . ( 1998 ) The Rho 1 effector Pkc1 , but not Bni1 , mediates signalling from Tor2 to the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol , 8 , 1211 - 4 . Herskowitz , I . ( 1988 ) Life cycle of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Microbiol Rev , 52 , 536 - 53 . References 106 Herskowitz , I . ( 1989 ) A regulatory hierarchy for cell specialization in yeast . Nature , 342 , 749 - 57 . Hicke , L . ( 1997 ) Ubiquitin - dependent internalization and down - regulation of plasma membrane proteins . Faseb J , 11 , 1215 - 26 . Hicke , L . ( 1999 ) Gettin ' down with ubiquitin : turning off cell - surface receptors , transporters and channels . Trends Cell Biol , 9 , 107 - 12 . Hicke , L . and Riezman , H . ( 1996 ) Ubiquitination of a yeast plasma membrane receptor signals its ligand - stimulated endocytosis . Cell , 84 , 277 - 87 . Hicke , L . , Zanolari , B . , Pypaert , M . , Rohrer , J . and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) Transport through the yeast endocytic pathway occurs through morphologically distinct compartments and requires an active secretory pathway and Sec18p / N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein . Mol Biol Cell , 8 , 13 - 31 . Hill , J . , Donald , K . A . , Griffiths , D . E . and Donald , G . ( 1991 ) DMSO - enhanced whole cell yeast transformation . Nucleic Acids Res , 19 , 5791 . Hinshaw , J . E . ( 2000 ) Dynamin and its role in membrane fission . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol , 16 , 483 - 519 . Hirst , J . and Robinson , M . S . ( 1998 ) Clathrin and adaptors . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1404 , 173 - 93 . Holthuis , J . C . , Nichols , B . J . , Dhruvakumar , S . and Pelham , H . R . ( 1998a ) Two syntaxin homologues in the TGN / endosomal system of yeast . Embo J , 17 , 113 - 26 . Holthuis , J . C . M . , Nichols , B . J . and Pelham , H . R . B . ( 1998b ) The syntaxin Tlg1p mediates trafficking of chitin synthase III to polarized growth sites in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 9 , 3383 - 97 . Holtzman , D . A . , Yang , S . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1993 ) Synthetic - lethal interactions identify two novel genes , SLA1 and SLA2 , that control membrane cytoskeleton assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol , 122 , 635 - 44 . Horvath , A . , Sütterlin , C . , Manning - Krieg , U . , Movva , N . R . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) Ceramide synthesis enhances transport of GPI - anchored proteins to the Golgi apparatus in yeast . Embo J , 13 , 3687 - 95 . Huang , K . M . , D ' Hondt , K . , Riezman , H . and Lemmon , S . K . ( 1999 ) Clathrin functions in the absence of heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast . Embo J , 18 , 3897 - 908 . Huang , K . M . , Gullberg , L . , Nelson , K . K . , Stefan , C . J . , Blumer , K . and Lemmon , S . K . ( 1997 ) Novel functions of clathrin light chains : clathrin heavy chain trimerization is defective in light chain - deficient yeast . J Cell Sci , 110 , 899 - 910 . Inagaki , M . , Schmelzle , T . , Yamaguchi , K . , Irie , K . , Hall , M . N . and Matsumoto , K . ( 1999 ) PDK1 homologs activate the Pkc1 - mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway in yeast . Mol Cell Biol , 19 , 8344 - 52 . Ito , H . , Fukuda , Y . , Murata , K . and Kimura , A . ( 1983 ) Transformation of intact yeast cells treated with alkali cations . J Bacteriol , 153 , 163 - 8 . Jenkins , G . M . , Richards , A . , Wahl , T . , Mao , C . , Obeid , L . and Hannun , Y . ( 1997 ) Involvement of yeast sphingolipids in the heat stress response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem , 272 , 32566 - 72 . Jenness , D . D . , Burkholder , A . C . and Hartwell , L . H . ( 1983 ) Binding of alpha - factor pheromone to yeast a cells : chemical and genetic evidence for an alpha - factor receptor . Cell , 35 , 521 - 9 . Jenness , D . D . and Spatrick , P . ( 1986 ) Down regulation of the alpha - factor pheromone receptor in S . cerevisiae . Cell , 46 , 345 - 53 . Jost , M . , Simpson , F . , Kavran , J . M . , Lemmon , M . A . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1998 ) Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate is required for endocytic coated vesicle formation . Curr Biol , 8 , 1399 - 402 . Jung , G . and Hammer , J . A . , 3rd . ( 1994 ) The actin binding site in the tail domain of Dictyostelium myosin IC ( myoC ) resides within the glycine - and proline - rich sequence ( tail homology region 2 ) . FEBS Lett , 342 , 197 - 202 . Jung , G . , Wu , X . and Hammer , J . A . , 3rd . ( 1996 ) Dictyostelium mutants lacking multiple classic myosin I isoforms reveal combinations of shared and distinct functions . J Cell Biol , 133 , 305 - 23 . Kearns , B . G . , McGee , T . P . , Mayinger , P . , Gedvilaite , A . , Phillips , S . E . , Kagiwada , S . and Bankaitis , V . A . ( 1997 ) Essential role for diacylglycerol in protein transport from the yeast Golgi complex [ see comments ] . Nature , 387 , 101 - 5 . King , C . C . , Zenke , F . T . , Dawson , P . E . , Dutil , E . M . , Newton , A . C . , Hemmings , B . A . and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2000 ) Sphingosine is a novel activator of 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent kinase 1 . J Biol Chem , 275 , 18108 - 13 . Kolling , R . and Hollenberg , C . P . ( 1994 ) The ABC - transporter Ste6 accumulates in the plasma membrane in a ubiquitinated form in endocytosis mutants . Embo J , 13 , 3261 - 71 . Kübler , E . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . Embo J , 12 , 2855 - 62 . Kübler , E . , Schimmöller , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) Calcium - independent calmodulin requirement for endocytosis in yeast . Embo J , 13 , 5539 - 46 . Kuriyan , J . and Cowburn , D . ( 1997 ) Modular peptide recognition domains in eukaryotic signaling . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct , 26 , 259 - 88 . Kurjan , J . ( 1992 ) Pheromone response in yeast . Annu Rev Biochem , 61 , 1097 - 129 . References 107 Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature , 227 , 680 - 5 . Lai , K . , Bolognese , C . P . , Swift , S . and McGraw , P . ( 1995 ) Regulation of inositol transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae involves inositol - induced changes in permease stability and endocytic degradation in the vacuole . J Biol Chem , 270 , 2525 - 34 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J Biol Chem , 272 , 20332 - 5 . Lamaze , C . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) The emergence of clathrin - independent pinocytic pathways . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 7 , 573 - 80 . Lappalainen , P . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo Nature , 388 , 78 - 82 . [ published erratum appears in ( 1997 ) Nature , 389 , 211 ] . Le Good , J . A . , Ziegler , W . H . , Parekh , D . B . , Alessi , D . R . , Cohen , P . and Parker , P . J . ( 1998 ) Protein kinase C isotypes controlled by phosphoinositide 3 - kinase through the protein kinase PDK1 . Science , 281 , 2042 - 5 . Lechler , T . , Shevchenko , A . and Li , R . ( 2000 ) Direct involvement of yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J Cell Biol , 148 , 363 - 73 . Lee , J . , Colwill , K . , Aneliunas , V . , Tennyson , C . , Moore , L . , Ho , Y . and Andrews , B . ( 1998 ) Interaction of yeast Rvs167 and Pho85 cyclin - dependent kinase complexes may link the cell cycle to the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol , 8 , 1310 - 21 . Lees , N . D . , Skaggs , B . , Kirsch , D . R . and Bard , M . ( 1995 ) Cloning of the late genes in the ergosterol biosynthetic pathway of Saccharomyces cerevisiae - - a review . Lipids , 30 , 221 - 6 . Lichte , B . , Veh , R . W . , Meyer , H . E . and Kilimann , M . W . ( 1992 ) Amphiphysin , a novel protein associated with synaptic vesicles [ published erratum appears in EMBO J 1992 Oct ; 11 ( 10 ) : 3809 ] . Embo J , 11 , 2521 - 30 . Lila , T . and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) Evidence for physical and functional interactions among two Saccharomyces cerevisiae SH3 domain proteins , an adenylyl cyclase - associated protein and the actin cytoskeleton . Mol Biol Cell , 8 , 367 - 85 . Lombardi , R . , Friant , S . and Riezman , H . ( 2001 ) Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : involvement of actin , actin - associated protein complexes and lipids in the internalization step . In Frontiers in Molecular Biology , Endocytosis . editor Marsh , M . , Oxford University Press . Lombardi , R . and Riezman , H . ( 2001 ) Rvs161p and Rvs167p , the two yeast amphiphysin homologs , function together in vivo . J Biol Chem , 276 , 6016 - 6022 . Lucero , P . and Lagunas , R . ( 1997 ) Catabolite inactivation of the yeast maltose transporter requires ubiquitin - ligase npi1 / rsp5 and ubiquitin - hydrolase npi2 / doa4 . FEMS Microbiol Lett , 147 , 273 - 7 . Lynch , T . J . , Albanesi , J . P . , Korn , E . D . , Robinson , E . A . , Bowers , B . and Fujisaki , H . ( 1986 ) ATPase activities and actin - binding properties of subfragments of Acanthamoeba myosin IA . J Biol Chem , 261 , 17156 - 62 . Ma , L . , Cantley , L . C . , Janmey , P . A . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1998a ) Corequirement of specific phosphoinositides and small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 in inducing actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . J Cell Biol , 140 , 1125 - 36 . Ma , L . , Rohatgi , R . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1998b ) The Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin polymerization induced by the small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 95 , 15362 - 7 . Machesky , L . M . and Gould , K . L . ( 1999 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex : a multifunctional actin organizer . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 11 , 117 - 21 . Machesky , L . M . and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol , 8 , 1347 - 56 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 96 , 3739 - 44 . Madania , A . , Dumoulin , P . , Grava , S . , Kitamoto , H . , Scharer - Brodbeck , C . , Soulard , A . , Moreau , V . and Winsor , B . ( 1999 ) The saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue of human wiskott - aldrich syndrome protein las17p interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex [ In Process Citation ] . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 3521 - 38 . Mandala , S . M . , Thornton , R . , Tu , Z . , Kurtz , M . B . , Nickels , J . , Broach , J . , Menzeleev , R . and Spiegel , S . ( 1998 ) Sphingoid base 1 - phosphate phosphatase : a key regulator of sphingolipid metabolism and stress response . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 95 , 150 - 5 . Marsh , L . , Neiman , A . M . and Herskowitz , I . ( 1991 ) Signal transduction during pheromone response in yeast . Annu Rev Cell Biol , 7 , 699 - 728 . McCammon , M . T . , Hartmann , M . A . , Bottema , C . D . and Parks , L . W . ( 1984 ) Sterol methylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Bacteriol , 157 , 475 - 83 . McCann , R . O . and Craig , S . W . ( 1997 ) The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signifies F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 94 , 5679 - 84 . McDonald , O . B . , Hannun , Y . A . , Reynolds , C . H . and Sahyoun , N . ( 1991 ) Activation of casein References 108 kinase II by sphingosine . J Biol Chem , 266 , 21773 - 6 . Mellman , I . ( 1996 ) Endocytosis and molecular sorting . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol , 12 , 575 - 625 . Mermall , V . , Post , P . L . and Mooseker , M . S . ( 1998 ) Unconventional myosins in cell movement , membrane traffic , and signal transduction . Science , 279 , 527 - 33 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Wunderlich , I . and Almers , W . ( 1999 ) Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat Cell Biol , 1 , 72 - 4 . Miki , H . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) Direct binding of the verprolin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem Biophys Res Commun , 243 , 73 - 8 . Mooseker , M . S . and Cheney , R . E . ( 1995 ) Unconventional myosins . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol , 11 , 633 - 75 . Moreau , V . , Galan , J . M . , Devilliers , G . , Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . and Winsor , B . ( 1997 ) The yeast actin - related protein Arp2p is required for the internalization step of endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell , 8 , 1361 - 75 . Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . and Botstein , D . ( 1999 ) Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 799 - 817 . Mulholland , J . , Preuss , D . , Moon , A . , Wong , A . , Drubin , D . and Botstein , D . ( 1994 ) Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol , 125 , 381 - 91 . Muller , G . , Ayoub , M . , Storz , P . , Rennecke , J . , Fabbro , D . and Pfizenmaier , K . ( 1995 ) PKC zeta is a molecular switch in signal transduction of TNF - alpha , bifunctionally regulated by ceramide and arachidonic acid . Embo J , 14 , 1961 - 9 . Munn , A . L . , Heese - Peck , A . , Stevenson , B . J . , Pichler , H . and Riezman , H . ( 1999 ) Specific sterols required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 3943 - 57 . Munn , A . L . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) Endocytosis is required for the growth of vacuolar H ( + ) - ATPase - defective yeast : identification of six new END genes . J Cell Biol , 127 , 373 - 86 . Munn , A . L . , Stevenson , B . J . , Geli , M . I . and Riezman , H . ( 1995 ) end5 , end6 , and end7 : mutations that cause actin delocalization and block the internalization step of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell , 6 , 1721 - 42 . Nagiec , M . M . , Baltisberger , J . A . , Wells , G . B . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1994 ) The LCB2 gene of Saccharomyces and the related LCB1 gene encode subunits of serine palmitoyltransferase , the initial enzyme in sphingolipid synthesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 91 , 7899 - 902 . Nagiec , M . M . , Skrzypek , M . , Nagiec , E . E . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1998 ) The LCB4 ( YOR171c ) and LCB5 ( YLR260w ) genes of Saccharomyces encode sphingoid long chain base kinases . J Biol Chem , 273 , 19437 - 42 . Naqvi , S . N . , Zahn , R . , Mitchell , D . A . , Stevenson , B . J . and Munn , A . L . ( 1998 ) The WASp homologue Las17p functions with the WIP homologue End5p / verprolin and is essential for endocytosis in yeast . Curr Biol , 8 , 959 - 62 . Navarro , P . , Durrens , P . and Aigle , M . ( 1997 ) Protein - protein interaction between the RVS161 and RVS167 gene products of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1343 , 187 - 92 . Nichols , B . J . , Ungermann , C . , Pelham , H . R . , Wickner , W . T . and Haas , A . ( 1997 ) Homotypic vacuolar fusion mediated by t - and v - SNAREs [ see comments ] . Nature , 387 , 199 - 202 . Nickels , J . T . and Broach , J . R . ( 1996 ) A ceramide - activated protein phosphatase mediates ceramide - induced G1 arrest of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genes Dev , 10 , 382 - 94 . Novak , K . D . , Peterson , M . D . , Reedy , M . C . and Titus , M . A . ( 1995 ) Dictyostelium myosin I double mutants exhibit conditional defects in pinocytosis . J Cell Biol , 131 , 1205 - 21 . Overton , M . C . and Blumer , K . J . ( 2000 ) G - protein - coupled receptors function as oligomers in vivo . Curr Biol , 10 , 341 - 4 . Parks , L . W . and Casey , W . M . ( 1995 ) Physiological implications of sterol biosynthesis in yeast . Annu Rev Microbiol , 49 , 95 - 116 . Payne , G . S . , Baker , D . , van Tuinen , E . and Schekman , R . ( 1988 ) Protein transport to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis by clathrin heavy chain - deficient yeast . J Cell Biol , 106 , 1453 - 61 . Penalver , E . , Lucero , P . , Moreno , E . and Lagunas , R . ( 1999 ) Clathrin and two components of the COPII complex , Sec23p and Sec24p , could be involved in endocytosis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae maltose transporter . J Bacteriol , 181 , 2555 - 63 . Penalver , E . , Ojeda , L . , Moreno , E . and Lagunas , R . ( 1997 ) Role of the cytoskeleton in endocytosis of the yeast maltose transporter . Yeast , 13 , 541 - 9 . Perry , D . K . and Hannun , Y . A . ( 1998 ) The role of ceramide in cell signaling . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1436 , 233 - 43 . Phillips , S . E . , Sha , B . , Topalof , L . , Xie , Z . , Alb , J . G . , Klenchin , V . A . , Swigart , P . , Cockcroft , S . , Martin , T . F . , Luo , M . and Bankaitis , V . A . ( 1999 ) Yeast Sec14p deficient in phosphatidylinositol transfer activity is functional in vivo . Mol Cell , 4 , 187 - 97 . Piper , R . C . , Cooper , A . A . , Yang , H . and Stevens , T . H . ( 1995 ) VPS27 controls vacuolar and References 109 endocytic traffic through a prevacuolar compartment in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol , 131 , 603 - 17 . Pollard , T . D . , Doberstein , S . K . and Zot , H . G . ( 1991 ) Myosin - I . Annu Rev Physiol , 53 , 653 - 81 . Prescianotto - Baschong , C . and Riezman , H . ( 1998 ) Morphology of the yeast endocytic pathway . Mol Biol Cell , 9 , 173 - 89 . Pullen , N . , Dennis , P . B . , Andjelkovic , M . , Dufner , A . , Kozma , S . C . , Hemmings , B . A . and Thomas , G . ( 1998 ) Phosphorylation and activation of p70s6k by PDK1 . Science , 279 , 707 - 10 . Pushkareva , M . , Bielawska , A . , Menaldiv , D . , Liotta , D . and Hannun , Y . A . ( 1993 ) Regulation of sphingosine - activated protein kinases : selectivity of activation by sphingoid bases and inhibition by non - esterified fatty acids . Biochem J , 294 , 699 - 703 . Pushkareva , M . , Khan , W . A . , Alessenko , A . V . , Sahyoun , N . and Hannun , Y . A . ( 1992 ) Sphingosine activation of protein kinases in Jurkat T cells . In vitro phosphorylation of endogenous protein substrates and specificity of action . J Biol Chem , 267 , 15246 - 51 . Ramesh , N . , Anton , I . M . , Hartwig , J . H . and Geha , R . S . ( 1997 ) WIP , a protein associated with wiskott - aldrich syndrome protein , induces actin polymerization and redistribution in lymphoid cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 94 , 14671 - 6 . Ramjaun , A . R . , Micheva , K . D . , Bouchelet , I . and McPherson , P . S . ( 1997 ) Identification and characterization of a nerve terminal - enriched amphiphysin isoform . J Biol Chem , 272 , 16700 - 6 . Raths , S . , Rohrer , J . , Crausaz , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) end3 and end4 : two mutants defective in receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol , 120 , 55 - 65 . Riballo , E . , Herweijer , M . , Wolf , D . H . and Lagunas , R . ( 1995 ) Catabolite inactivation of the yeast maltose transporter occurs in the vacuole after internalization by endocytosis . J Bacteriol , 177 , 5622 - 7 . Riezman , H . ( 1985 ) Endocytosis in yeast : several of the yeast secretory mutants are defective in endocytosis . Cell , 40 , 1001 - 9 . Riezman , H . ( 1998 ) Down regulation of yeast G protein - coupled receptors . Semin Cell Dev Biol , 9 , 129 - 34 . Riezman , H . , Munn , A . , Geli , M . I . and Hicke , L . ( 1996 ) Actin - , myosin - and ubiquitin - dependent endocytosis . Experientia , 52 , 1033 - 41 . Robinson , L . C . , Hubbard , E . J . , Graves , P . R . , DePaoli - Roach , A . A . , Roach , P . J . , Kung , C . , Haas , D . W . , Hagedorn , C . H . , Goebl , M . , Culbertson , M . R . and Carlson , M . ( 1992 ) Yeast casein kinase I homologues : An essential gene pair . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 89 , 28 - 32 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 961 - 74 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell , 97 , 221 - 31 . Rohrer , J . , Benedetti , H . , Zanolari , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Identification of a novel sequence mediating regulated endocytosis of the G protein - coupled alpha - pheromone receptor in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 4 , 511 - 21 . Ronne , H . , Carlberg , M . , Hu , G . Z . and Nehlin , J . O . ( 1991 ) Protein phosphatase 2A in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : effects on cell growth and bud morphogenesis . Mol Cell Biol , 11 , 4876 - 84 . Rosales , J . L . , Nodwell , M . J . , Johnston , R . N . and Lee , K . Y . ( 2000 ) Cdk5 / p25 ( nck5a ) interaction with synaptic proteins in bovine brain . J Cell Biochem , 78 , 151 - 9 . Rosenfeld , S . S . and Rener , B . ( 1994 ) The GPQ - rich segment of Dictyostelium myosin IB contains an actin binding site . Biochemistry , 33 , 2322 - 8 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . , Insall , R . H . , Roth , M . G . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriott , G . , Hall , A . and Yin , H . L . ( 2000 ) Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr Biol , 10 , 311 - 20 . Sakamuro , D . , Elliott , K . J . , Wechsler - Reya , R . and Prendergast , G . C . ( 1996 ) BIN1 is a novel MYC - interacting protein with features of a tumour suppressor [ see comments ] . Nat Genet , 14 , 69 - 77 . Sambrook , J . , Fritsch , E . F . and Maniatis , T . ( 1989 ) Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual , 2nd ed . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Schaerer - Brodbeck , C . and Riezman , H . ( 2000a ) Functional interactions between the p35 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex and calmodulin in yeast . Mol Biol Cell , 11 , 1113 - 27 . Schaerer - Brodbeck , C . and Riezman , H . ( 2000b ) Saccharomyces cerevisiae Arc35p works through two genetically separable calmodulin functions to regulate the actin and tubulin cytoskeletons . J Cell Sci , 113 , 521 - 32 . Schandel , K . A . and Jenness , D . D . ( 1994 ) Direct evidence for ligand - induced internalization of the yeast alpha - factor pheromone receptor . Mol Cell Biol , 14 , 7245 - 55 . Schiestl , R . H . and Gietz , R . D . ( 1989 ) High efficiency transformation of intact yeast cells using single stranded nucleic acids as a carrier . Curr Genet , 16 , 339 - 46 . References 110 Schimmöller , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Involvement of Ypt7p , a small GTPase , in traffic from late endosome to the vacuole in yeast . J Cell Sci , 106 , 823 - 30 . Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu Rev Biochem , 66 , 511 - 48 . Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 10 , 504 - 12 . Schmidt , A . , Wolde , M . , Thiele , C . , Fest , W . , Kratzin , H . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Witke , W . , Huttner , W . B . and Soling , H . D . ( 1999 ) Endophilin I mediates synaptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature , 401 , 133 - 41 . Schu , P . V . , Takegawa , K . , Fry , M . J . , Stack , J . H . , Waterfield , M . D . and Emr , S . D . ( 1993 ) Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase encoded by yeast VPS34 gene essential for protein sorting . Science , 260 , 88 - 91 . Seron , K . , Blondel , M . O . , Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . and Volland , C . ( 1999 ) Uracil - induced down - regulation of the yeast uracil permease . J Bacteriol , 181 , 1793 - 800 . Seron , K . , Tieaho , V . , Prescianotto - Baschong , C . , Aust , T . , Blondel , M . O . , Guillaud , P . , Devilliers , G . , Rossanese , O . W . , Glick , B . S . , Riezman , H . , Keranen , S . and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 1998 ) A yeast t - SNARE involved in endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell , 9 , 2873 - 89 . Sherman , S . , Fink , G . and Hicks , J . B . ( 1983 ) Methods in Yeast Genetics : A Laboratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , NY . Sherman , S . , Fink , G . and Lawrence , C . ( 1974 ) Methods in Yeast Genetics . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Sikorski , R . S . and Hieter , P . ( 1989 ) A system of shuttle vectors and yeast host strains designed for efficient manipulation of DNA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics , 122 , 19 - 27 . Singer , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1990 ) Detection of an intermediate compartment involved in transport of alpha - factor from the plasma membrane to the vacuole in yeast . J Cell Biol , 110 , 1911 - 22 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Frank , R . , Crausaz , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) Partial purification and characterization of early and late endosomes from yeast . Identification of four novel proteins . J Biol Chem , 268 , 14376 - 86 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Nemoto , Y . , Daniell , L . , Ferro - Novick , S . and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) Synaptojanin family members are implicated in endocytic membrane traffic in yeast . J Cell Sci , 111 , 3347 - 56 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Stenmark , H . , Dusterhoft , A . , Philippsen , P . , Yoo , J . S . , Gallwitz , D . and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) Role of three rab5 - like GTPases , Ypt51p , Ypt52p , and Ypt53p , in the endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways of yeast . J Cell Biol , 125 , 283 - 98 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Stenmark , H . and Zerial , M . ( 1995 ) Yeast Ypt51p and mammalian Rab5 : counterparts with similar function in the early endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci , 108 , 3509 - 21 . Sivadon , P . , Bauer , F . , Aigle , M . and Crouzet , M . ( 1995 ) Actin cytoskeleton and budding pattern are altered in the yeast rvs161 mutant : the Rvs161 protein shares common domains with the brain protein amphiphysin . Mol Gen Genet , 246 , 485 - 95 . Skrzypek , M . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1997 ) Suppressor gene analysis reveals an essential role for sphingolipids in transport of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Bacteriol , 179 , 1513 - 20 . Skrzypek , M . S . , Nagiec , M . M . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1998 ) Inhibition of amino acid transport by sphingoid long chain bases in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem , 273 , 2829 - 34 . Skrzypek , M . S . , Nagiec , M . M . , Lester , R . L . and Dickson , R . C . ( 1999 ) Analysis of phosphorylated sphingolipid long - chain bases reveals potential roles in heat stress and growth control in Saccharomyces . J Bacteriol , 181 , 1134 - 40 . Slepnev , V . I . and De Camilli , P . ( 2000 ) Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Rev Neurosci , 1 , 161 - 72 . Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Butler , M . H . , Grabs , D . and Camilli , P . D . ( 1998 ) Role of phosphorylation in regulation of the assembly of endocytic coat complexes . Science , 281 , 821 - 4 . Sneddon , A . A . , Cohen , P . T . and Stark , M . J . ( 1990 ) Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein phosphatase 2A performs an essential cellular function and is encoded by two genes . Embo J , 9 , 4339 - 46 . Springael , J . Y . , De Craene , J . O . and Andre , B . ( 1999 ) The yeast Npi1 / Rsp5 ubiquitin ligase lacking its N - terminal C2 domain is competent for ubiquitination but not for subsequent endocytosis of the gap1 permease . Biochem Biophys Res Commun , 257 , 561 - 6 . Stephens , L . , Anderson , K . , Stokoe , D . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Painter , G . F . , Holmes , A . B . , Gaffney , P . R . , Reese , C . B . , McCormick , F . , Tempst , P . , Coadwell , J . and Hawkins , P . T . ( 1998 ) Protein kinase B kinases that mediate phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - dependent activation of protein kinase B . Science , 279 , 710 - 4 . Subtil , A . , Gaidarov , I . , Kobylarz , K . , Lampson , M . A . , Keen , J . H . and McGraw , T . E . ( 1999 ) Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 96 , 6775 - 80 . References 111 Sun , Y . , Taniguchi , R . , Tanoue , D . , Yamaji , T . , Takematsu , H . , Mori , K . , Fujita , T . , Kawasaki , T . and Kozutsumi , Y . ( 2000 ) Sli2 ( Ypk1 ) , a homologue of mammalian protein kinase SGK , is a downstream kinase in the sphingolipid - mediated signaling pathway of yeast . Mol Cell Biol , 20 , 4411 - 9 . Sütterlin , C . , Doering , T . L . , Schimmoller , F . , Schroder , S . and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) Specific requirements for the ER to Golgi transport of GPI - anchored proteins in yeast . J Cell Sci , 110 , 2703 - 14 . Swanson , J . A . , Yirinec , B . D . and Silverstein , S . C . ( 1985 ) Phorbol esters and horseradish peroxidase stimulate pinocytosis and redirect the flow of pinocytosed fluid in macrophages . J Cell Biol , 100 , 851 - 9 . Tan , P . K . , Davis , N . G . , Sprague , G . F . and Payne , G . S . ( 1993 ) Clathrin facilitates the internalization of seven transmembrane segment receptors for mating pheromones in yeast . J Cell Biol , 123 , 1707 - 16 . Tan , P . K . , Howard , J . P . and Payne , G . S . ( 1996 ) The sequence NPFXD defines a new class of endocytosis signal in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol , 135 , 1789 - 800 . Tang , H . Y . , Munn , A . and Cai , M . ( 1997 ) EH domain proteins Pan1p and End3p are components of a complex that plays a dual role in organization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton and endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol , 17 , 4294 - 304 . Tang , H . Y . , Xu , J . and Cai , M . ( 2000 ) Pan1p , End3p , and S1a1p , three yeast proteins required for normal cortical actin cytoskeleton organization , associate with each other and play essential roles in cell wall morphogenesis . Mol Cell Biol , 20 , 12 - 25 . Vaduva , G . , Martin , N . C . and Hopper , A . K . ( 1997 ) Actin - binding verprolin is a polarity development protein required for the morphogenesis and function of the yeast actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol , 139 , 1821 - 33 . Vaduva , G . , Martinez - Quiles , N . , Anton , I . M . , Martin , N . C . , Geha , R . S . , Hopper , A . K . and Ramesh , N . ( 1999 ) The human WASP - interacting protein , WIP , activates the cell polarity pathway in yeast . J Biol Chem , 274 , 17103 - 8 . van Zyl , W . , Huang , W . , Sneddon , A . A . , Stark , M . , Camier , S . , Werner , M . , Marck , C . , Sentenac , A . and Broach , J . R . ( 1992 ) Inactivation of the protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit A results in morphological and transcriptional defects in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol , 12 , 4946 - 59 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . and Alessi , D . R . ( 2000 ) The PI3K - PDK1 connection : more than just a road to PKB . Biochem J , 346 Pt 3 , 561 - 76 . Vida , T . A . and Emr , S . D . ( 1995 ) A new vital stain for visualizing vacuolar membrane dynamics and endocytosis in yeast . J Cell Biol , 128 , 779 - 92 . Volland , C . , Garnier , C . and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 1992 ) In vivo phosphorylation of the yeast uracil permease . J Biol Chem , 267 , 23767 - 71 . Volland , C . , Urban - Grimal , D . , Geraud , G . and Haguenauer - Tsapis , R . ( 1994 ) Endocytosis and degradation of the yeast uracil permease under adverse conditions . J Biol Chem , 269 , 9833 - 41 . Wada , Y . , Nakamura , N . , Ohsumi , Y . and Hirata , A . ( 1997 ) Vam3p , a new member of syntaxin related protein , is required for vacuolar assembly in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Sci , 110 , 1299 - 306 . Wang , Y . X . , Catlett , N . L . and Weisman , L . S . ( 1998 ) Vac8p , a vacuolar protein with armadillo repeats , functions in both vacuole inheritance and protein targeting from the cytoplasm to vacuole . J Cell Biol , 140 , 1063 - 74 . Weber , E . , Jund , R . and Chevallier , M . R . ( 1986 ) Chromosomal mapping of the uracil permease gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Curr Genet , 11 , 93 - 6 . Welch , M . D . ( 1999 ) The world according to Arp : regulation of actin nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Trends Cell Biol , 9 , 423 - 7 . Wendland , B . and Emr , S . D . ( 1998 ) Pan1p , yeast eps15 , functions as a multivalent adaptor that coordinates protein - protein interactions essential for endocytosis . J Cell Biol , 141 , 71 - 84 . Wendland , B . , McCaffery , J . M . , Xiao , Q . and Emr , S . D . ( 1996 ) A novel fluorescence - activated cell sorter - based screen for yeast endocytosis mutants identifies a yeast homologue of mammalian eps15 . J Cell Biol , 135 , 1485 - 500 . Wendland , B . , Steece , K . E . and Emr , S . D . ( 1999 ) Yeast epsins contain an essential N - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . Embo J , 18 , 4383 - 93 . Wertman , K . F . , Drubin , D . G . and Botstein , D . ( 1992 ) Systematic mutational analysis of the yeast ACT1 gene . Genetics , 132 , 337 - 50 . Wesp , A . , Hicke , L . , Palecek , J . , Lombardi , R . , Aust , T . , Munn , A . L . and Riezman , H . ( 1997 ) End4p / Sla2p interacts with actin - associated proteins for endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell , 8 , 2291 - 306 . Whitacre , J . , Davis , D . , Toenjes , K . , Brower , S . and Adams , A . ( 2001 ) Generation of an Isogenic Collection of Yeast Actin Mutants and Identification of Three Interrelated Phenotypes . Genetics , 157 , 533 - 43 . Wichmann , H . , Hengst , L . and Gallwitz , D . ( 1992 ) Endocytosis in yeast : evidence for the involvement of a small GTP - binding protein ( Ypt7p ) . Cell , 71 , 1131 - 42 . Wiederkehr , A . , Meier , K . D . and Riezman , H . ( 2001 ) Identification and characterization of References 112 Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants defective in fluid - phase endocytosis . Yeast , 18 , 759 - 73 . Wigge , P . , Kohler , K . , Vallis , Y . , Doyle , C . A . , Owen , D . , Hunt , S . P . and McMahon , H . T . ( 1997 ) Amphiphysin heterodimers : potential role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell , 8 , 2003 - 15 . Wigge , P . and McMahon , H . T . ( 1998 ) The amphiphysin family of proteins and their role in endocytosis at the synapse . Trends Neurosci , 21 , 339 - 44 . Winter , D . , Lechler , T . and Li , R . ( 1999 ) Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr Biol , 9 , 501 - 4 . Wong , W . T . , Schumacher , C . , Salcini , A . E . , Romano , A . , Castagnino , P . , Pelicci , P . G . and Di Fiore , P . ( 1995 ) A protein - binding domain , EH , identified in the receptor tyrosine kinase substrate Eps15 and conserved in evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 92 , 9530 - 4 . Wurmser , A . E . and Emr , S . D . ( 1998 ) Phosphoinositide signaling and turnover : PtdIns ( 3 ) P , a regulator of membrane traffic , is transported to the vacuole and degraded by a process that requires lumenal vacuolar hydrolase activities . Embo J , 17 , 4930 - 42 . Yamashiro , C . T . , Kane , P . M . , Wolczyk , D . F . , Preston , R . A . and Stevens , T . H . ( 1990 ) Role of vacuolar acidification in protein sorting and zymogen activation : a genetic analysis of the yeast vacuolar proton - translocating ATPase . Mol Cell Biol , 10 , 3737 - 49 . Yarar , D . , To , W . , Abo , A . and Welch , M . D . ( 1999 ) The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol , 9 , 555 - 8 . Yesilaltay , A . and Jenness , D . D . ( 2000 ) Homo - oligomeric complexes of the yeast alpha - factor pheromone receptor are functional units of endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell , 11 , 2873 - 84 . Zanolari , B . , Friant , S . , Funato , K . , Sutterlin , C . , Stevenson , B . J . and Riezman , H . ( 2000 ) Sphingoid base synthesis requirement for endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Embo J , 19 , 2824 - 33 . Zanolari , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1991 ) Quantitation of alpha - factor internalization and response during the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle . Mol Cell Biol , 11 , 5251 - 8 . Zeng , G . and Cai , M . ( 1999 ) Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast by a novel serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . J Cell Biol , 144 , 71 - 82 . Zolladek , T . , Tobiasz , A . , Vaduva , G . , Boguta , M . , Martin , N . C . and Hopper , A . K . ( 1997 ) MDP1 , a Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene involved in mitochondrial / cytoplasmic protein distribution , is identical to the ubiquitin - protein ligase gene RSP5 . Genetics , 145 , 595 - 603 . Acknowledgments 113 Acknowledgments I would like to thank Howard Riezman for giving me the opportunity to stay in his lab after my diplom a work and carry out this PhD thesis . He provided an excellent environment that allowed me to freely pursue my scientific interests and helped me whenever I needed his advice and support . I thank Mike Hall and Martin Spiess for being part of my thesis committee . A big THANK YOU to all former and current members of the Riezman lab for the phantastic environment they provided over the last five years . It was always a pleasure to talk about scientific and non - scientific topics with you . A special thank you of course to the people of lab 501 . Thanks to Claudia for all the fun and also serious discussions we had during the first couple of years , Maribel and Kathleen for great discussions and advices . I would like to thank my parents and my sister Diana for their constant love and for always being there when I needed them . Thanks also do all my friends for their patience during tougher moments and especially to Alex , I really liked our coffee and lunch sessions . 114 Curriculum Vitae 115 Curriculum Vitae Name Ruben Lombardi Date of Birth 25 th March 1974 Place of Birth Basel , Switzerland Education : 1987 – 1993 Matura Typus C , Mathematisch - Naturwissenschaftliches Gymnasium Basel , Switzerland 1993 – 1997 Study of Biology II Biozentrum , University of Basel , Switzerland 1996 – 1997 Diploma thesis with Prof . Howard Riezman Biozentrum , Department of Biochemistry University of Basel , Switzerland “Investigation of Protein - Protein Interactions Involved in Endocytosis via the Yeast Two - Hybrid System” October 1997 Diploma in Biology II ( Biochemistry ) 1998 – 2001 PhD thesis with Prof . Howard Riezman Biozentrum , Department of Biochemistry University of Basel , Switzerland “Molecular Dissection of the Internalization Step of Endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : Rvs167p and binding partners”