REMEDIA TING MISCONCEPTIONS CONCERNING CHEMICAL BONDING THROUGH CONCEPTUAL CHANGE TEXT KİMYASAL BAGLARLA İLGİLİ KAVRAM YANıLGıLARıNIN KAVRAMSAL DEGİşİM METİNLERİ KULLANILARAK DÜZELTİLMESİ Aybüke PABUÇCU * , Ömer GEBAN * * ABSTRACT : The purpose of this study was to explore the effects of conceptual change texts oriented instructionon 9thgrade students ' understandingof chemical bonding concepts . in this study , the main aim of the preparationof conceptual change texts was to activate students ' prior knowledge and misconceptions and to help them to understand the chemical bonding concepts throughthe use of explanations . analogies andexamples . Analogies were used in the conceptual change texts to deal with students ' misconceptions more effectively . The results revealed that conceptual change texts oriented instruction produeeda positive effect on studentsunderstandingof scientifıc conceptions related to ehemical bonding and elimination of misconeeptions . The mean scores ofboth groups showed thatstudentsin the experimentalgroup performed betIer with respeet to ehemical bonding eoncepts . Keywords : misconception , conceptual change , conceptual ehange text , analogy , chemical bonding . ÖZET : Bu çalışmanın amacı kavramsal de ~ işim metinlerinin 9 . sınıf ögrencilerinin kimyasal baglarla ilgili kavramlan anlamalarınaetkisini incelemektir . Bu çalışmada , kavramsal degişim metinlerinin hazırlanmasının temel amacı ögrencilerin sahipoldugu ön kavramaların ve kavram yanılgılannın fark edilmesini saglamak ve onlann kimyasal baglarla ilgili kavramları ögrenmelerine açıklamalar , analojiler ve örnekler kullanarak yardım etmektir . Kavramsal degişim metinlerinin içinde analojilerin kullanılmasının sebebi ögrencilerin sahip olduklan kavram yanılgılannı daha etkili bir şekilde düzeltebilmektir . Sonuçlar kavramsal degişim metinleri kullanılarak uygulanan ögretim yönteminin ögrencilerin kimyasal baglarla ilgili kavramları anlamalannda ve kavram yanılgılarının giderilmesinde olumlu bir etkisi oldugunu göstermiştir . Her iki gurubun başan ortalamaları karşılaştırıldıgında , deney gurubunun kimyasal baglarla ilgili kavramlarda daha fazla başarı gösterdigi görülmüştür . Anahtar Sözcükler : kavram yanılgısı , kavramsal degişim , kavramsal degişim metni , analoji , kimyasal baglar ı . INTRODUCTION In recent years , student understanding of scientifıc knowledge became the most important subject of the science education researchers ( Fisher , 1985 ; Chambers and Andre , 1997 ) . The aim of these studies is to improve students ' understanding of science concepts and use them for intended purposes . Unfortunately , most of these research studies on science education have revealed that many students tend not to leam meaningfully and thus may have diffıculty relating what is taught to them in science with other science ideas , and with real world experience s ( Novak , 1988 ) . The construction and reconstruction of meanings by learners requires that they actively seek to integrate new knowledge with knowledge already in their cognitive structure ( Novak , 2002 ) . That is , meaningful leaming involves students in constructing integrated knowledge structures , which contain their prior knowledge , experiences , new concepts , and other relevant knowledge ( Tsai , 2000 ) . Many researchers studied the connection between meaning and learning . These studies have consistently shown that students come to school with varying experience with , ideas about . and explanations of the natural world . The ideas and explanations that students generate are * BursJu Araştırma Görevlisi , Başkent ( ' niversitesi İlkögretim Bölümü , Ankara , eI11659 @ metu . edu . tr * * Prof . Dr . , Orta Doğu Teknik Üniversiıcsi Ortaögretim Fen ve Matematik Alanları Eğitimi , Ankara , geban @ metu . edu . tr 185 AybükePABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN i H . O . EğitimFakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Jou17I / l1of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 often different from those of scientists . Some researchers have been described these differing frameworks as misconceptions ( e . g . , Fisher , 1985 ; Griffiths and Grant , 1985 ) . Throughout this artic1e , the term misconception was also used to refer to students ' conceptions that are different from scientific conceptions . Characteristics of misconceptions can be summarized as follows : Misconceptions are resistant to change , persistent , well embedded in an individual ' s cognitive ecology , and difficult to extinguish even with instruction designed to address them ( Fisher , 1985 ) . Since new knowledge is linked to the existing conceptions , the misconceptions leamers may hold generally hinder their subsequent leaming ( Taber , 2000 ; Palmer , 2 ( 01 ) . Thus , misconceptions are really big obstac1es to promote meaningfulleaming . Misconceptions cover a large range of science concepts , so science educators in many countries have focused their attention upon students ' misconceptions at science concepts ( Osbome and Wittrock , 1983 ) . Studies focusing on students ' understanding of cbemical bonding indicated that students had a considerable degree of misconceptions in various grade levels and these misconceptions are resistant to change by traditional teaching methods because most of current traditional teaching is focused on the content of the curriculum and on knowledge and information transmission . Although this will remain an essential aspect of teaching , it is no longer enough for an effective and stimulating leaming process because knowledge cannot be transmitted to the leamer ' s mind by the teacher . Therefore it should be used instructional strategies other than the traditional methods to remediate students ' misconceptions . in the current study , we try to create meaningful leaming in students about chemical bonding , and eliminate their misconceptions . Chemical bonding is fundamental to subsequent leaming of various topies in chemistry ( Boo , 1998 ) . For example , it is essential to comprehend the nature of thermodynamics , molecular structure , chemical equilibrium , chemical reactions and some physical properties such as boiling points . Up to now , there have been numerous studies done to determine students ' understanding and misconceptions about chemical bonding concepts ( Le . , Birk and Kurtz , 1999 ; Boo , 1998 ; Harrison and Treagust , 2000 ; Nicoll , 2001 ; Taber , 2 ( 03 ) . These studies revealed that most of the students have difficulty in understanding the concepts in chemical bonding ( Tan , and Treagust , 1999 ) . One possible reason of that understanding chemical bonding requires prerequisite knowledge such as the particulate nature of matter , electronegativity , energy and force in which students have difficulty in understanding . in addition , misconceptions can develop because chemical bonding involve relatively large number of abstract concepts ( Coll and Taylor , 200 1 ) and it inc1udes words from everyday language are used with different meanings . in a study reported by Boo ( 1998 ) , it was stated that everyday experience s and language usage can lead to arise misconceptions in chemieal bonding . Boo ( 1998 ) reported that meaning of the term " bond " varied in daily life , and in schooL . in daily life , the term " bond " is often used in the sense of a physical link ( Le . , a glue which holds two pieces of materials together ) , which entails the idea that energy is needed to make alink . Boo ( 1998 ) also suggested that the other source of misconceptions in chemical bonding would be the lack of understanding of the particulate nature of matters . Stili another source of students ' misconceptions in chemical bonding concepts may comes from inappropriate language used by textbooks in explaining these concepts ( De Posada , 1999 ) . For instance , De Posada ( 1999 ) analyzed high school chemistry textbooks from 1974 to 1998 for grades 9 - 12 in terms of metaııic bonding , how metaııic bond is taught and whether textbooks are enough to cause meaningful leaming . He designed a questionnaire to analyze textbooks and to fmd out whether they give opportunity for meaningful leaming . Results showed that only a few textbooks ' approach is constructivist . Moreover , analogies used in the textbooks present more differences between target and source than similarities , thus these analogies cause misconceptions in students who cannot think in abstract terms and students couldn ' t understand the relationship between the AybükePABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN / H . Ü . EğitimFakültesiDergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) ı84 - ı92 186 theoretical model and experimental facts . These fındings about sources of misconceptions in chemical bonding are crucial because by taking them into account , removing of misconceptions could be achieved . Although the need to identify students ' misconceptions concerning chemical bonding concepts has been widely expressed in science education literatüre , there are few studies on how these misconceptions can be treated . However , to promote meaningfullearning , ways must be found to eliminate ör prevent misconceptions . Several research studies suggested that instructional strategies leading to conceptual change could be employed to eliminate students ' misconceptions . Conceptual change implies that a learner actively and rationally replaces existing pres . cientific conceptions with scientifically acceptable explanations as new propositional linkages are formed in his conceptual framework . Many constructivist science educators have chosen the use of conceptual change approaches in science education ( Abd - EI - Khalick and Akerson , 2004 ; Dhindsa and Anderson , 2004 ; Luera , Otto and Zitzewitz , 2005 ) . The best - known conceptual change model has been that of Posner , Strike , Hewson , and Gertzog ( 1982 ) , which describes the conditions of conceptual change . This model suggested that four conditions must exist before conceptual change likely to occur : ( 1 ) students must experience dissatisfaction with their existing conception ; ( 2 ) they must be able to understand the new conception ; ( 3 ) the new conception must seem plausible to them ; and ( 4 ) the new conception must appear to be betler at explaining their experiences and observations than their previous conception . Only after these conditions have been met are students more likely to experience conceptual change , discarding their naive conception for a scientifically accepted öne . Several science education researchers ( Hynd , McWhorter , Phares , and Suttles , 1994 ) have showed that conceptual change approach provided a better acquisition of scientifıc conceptions and removing alternatiye conceptions . One of the conceptual change instructional strategies is the use of conceptual change texts . These texts are designed to make readers aware of the inadequacy of their intuitive ideas and help students understand and apply the target scientifıc concept through the use of explanations and examples ( Hynd et . a1 . 1994 ) . in other words , the meaning of the textual information is not derived wholly from the reading of these texts , but from the interaction of the reader with textual information . in these texts , the identifıed misconcepti ons of the students are given fırst and then students are informed of the scientifıc explanations supported by examples to create dissatisfaction . Several researchers reported the effectiveness of conceptual change texts on creating conceptual change and promoting meaningfullearning ( Le . , Chambers and Andre , 1997 ; Tekkaya , 2003 ) . For example , Hynd et . al ( 1994 ) used conceptual change texts to create conceptual conflict and meaningful learning in students about Newton ' s law of motion . During their instroction , the teacher directs students to read the conceptual change text silently , and , at the end of the paragraph in which a question is posed , students are asked to stop reading . The evidence is presented that a misconception is incorrect ör a concept is explained signifıcantly . Then the teacher discusses the statements in the text with students . Af ter their study , Hynd et . al ( 1994 ) found that conceptual change text facilitated conceptual understanding of Newton ' s law of motion . in separate studies , Wang and Andre ( 1991 ) and Chambers and Andre ( 1997 ) also showed that conceptual change text led to better understanding of electricity concepts compared to traditional text . in the current study , conceptual change texts were chosen to remove students ' misconceptions because teachers often rely on texts to promote learning ( Chambers and Andre , 1997 ) , and students can use texts when the teacher is unavailable . So , learning from textbooks is an important part of the educational process . Moreover , conceptual change texts can be used effectively in both small and large classrooms to facilitate conceptual change ( Chambers and Andre , 1997 ) . 187 AybükePABUÇCU . Ömer GEBAN i H . O . EgitimFakültesiDergisi ( H . U . Jounuıl of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 Many researchers agree that using analogies as explanatory devices can be a useful way to teach science ( Le . , Glynn , 1997 ; Rule , and Furletti , 2004 ; Yanowitz , 2 ( 01 ) , and facilitate text learning ( Glynn and Takahashi , 1998 ) . These studies revealed that analogies provide the leamers opportunities to work with their existing concepts and construct their knowledge ( Beall , 1999 ) . As they eonstruet knowledge , leamers seek to give meaning to the information theyare leaming , and the eomparative nature of analogies promotes meaningful leaming . Moreover , the linkage between new understandings and the real world motivates students to leam more ( Heywood , 2002 ) , and analogies are pereeived as effeetive ways to arouse students ' interest and euriosity . Duit ( 1991 ) also stated that analogies are believed to help student learning by providing visualization of abstracts eoneepts , by helping compare similarities between objeets and events in the students ' world and the phenomenon under diseussion . Thus , we used analogies in the conceptual change texts to help students to make scienee interesting and to explain the abstract concepts of chemical bonding . During the study , the limitations of each analogy given in the conceptual change texts also diseussed in the classroom . As a summary of many research studies , it was found that students have many misconceptions about chemical bonding coneepts , and these misconceptions are resistance to change . AIso , if these misconceptions could not be eliminated , they affect further leaming negatively . For this reason , in the present study , we eoncerned with stud ~ nts ' misconceptions and with instructional strategies ( conceptual change texts and analogies ) to improve the understanding of chemical bonding concept . 2 . METHODOLOGY 2 . 1 Subjects The subjects of this study consisted of 41 ninth grade students enrolIed in a chemistry course in a private high schooL . The age of the students was about 14 - 15 years old . Students were selected from the two intact classes whose teacher volunteered to participate in this study . One of two instructional methods was randomly assigned to each class . The data were obtained from 21 students in the experimental group using conceptual change texts oriented instruction accompanied with analogies and 20 students participating in the control group receiving traditional instruction . 2 . 2 Instruments In this study , Chemieal Bonding Concepts Test ( CBCT ) was developed by the researchers to determine students ' understanding of ehemical bonding concepts . The content of the test was determined by examining textbooks , instructional objectives for the chemical bonding unit and related literatüre . During the developmental stage of the test , the instructional objectives of chemical bonding unit were determined to investigate whether the students achieved the behavioral objectives of the present study . The test included 21 items based on the two - tier multiple - choice format . The first tier of each item examined the content knowledge with two , three ör four alternatives . The second tier consisted of four reasons for the fırst tier . These reasons include öne scientifically acceptable answer supporting the desired content knowledge in the fırst tier and three miseonceptions identified from the literatüre related to students ' misconceptions with respect to chemical bonding concepts ( Birk and Kurtz , 1999 ; Coll and Taylor , 2001 ; Nicoll , 2001 ) and opinions of chemistry teachers . A students ' answer to an item was considered correct if the students selected both the correct content choice and the correct reason . For the content validity , each item İn the test was examİned by a group of experts İn science educatİon , chemistry and by the classroom teachers . . The internal consistency reliability of this test was found to be 0 . 73 . The following is an example of the test items : - - - - - - - AybükePABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN / H . Ü . EğitimFakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 188 Example ı . What can be said about the polarities of CCL4 and CHC 13 ? ( I ) Both of them are polar ( II ) Both of them are nonpolar ( III ) CHC13 is polar and the other CCL4 is nonpolar Reason : A ) A molecule is nonpolar , only if atoms of molecule have same electronegativities . B ) if molecule has tetrahedral shape , it is nonpolaro c ) if molecule contains polar bonds it is apolar molecule . D ) Polarity of molecule depends on the polarity of its bonds and shape of the molecule . Some misconceptions obtained from related literatüre and opinion of chemistry teachers are given in Table ı . Those misconceptions were used in the test items as distractors . Table ı . Some misconceptions in chemical bonding 1 . Bonds are material conneetions rather than forces . 2 . Bonds are only formed between atoms that donate \ accept electrons 3 . Metals and nonmetals form molecules 4 . lonic charges determine the polarity of the bond . 5 . Equal sharing of the electron pair occurs in ali covalent bonds so that ali covalent bonds are nonpolar 6 . Polar molecules form when it has polar bonds 7 . Atoms are bonded together to fiil their octets . 8 . Nitrogen atoms can share five electron pairs in bonding . 9 . Intermolecular forces are forces within a molecule . 2 . 3 . Procedure The purpose of this study was to explore whether the conceptual change texts oriented instruction produced a positive effect on 9thgrade students ' understanding of chemical bonding and elimination of their misconceptions . This study was conducted over a period of 8 weeks . The same chemistry teacher gaye the classroom instruction for both groups . A total of 41 ninth grade students from two intact science classes were involved , and the quasi - experimental design was used in the study . One of the classes was assigned as the experimental group instructed through the conceptual change texts and the other group was assigned as the control group instructed through traditional instruction . Both groups were instructed on the same content of the chemistry course . The topic related to chemical bonding concept was covered as a part of the regular curriculum in the chemistry schedule course . In the control group , the teacher used lecture and discussion methods to teach chemical bonding concepts without consideration of the students ' misconceptions . The students studied the textbooks on their own before the class hour . The instruction was teacher centered . The teacher explained each concept and asked questions by directing students ' answers . AIso , the students were provided with the worksheets . Worksheets developed specifically for each lesson were used as practice activities ; they required written responses and reinforced the concepts presented in the classroom sessions . They were collected and correeted by the teaeher , and the students reviewed their sheets after correction . 189 Aybüke PABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN i H . O . Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 Students in the experimental group worked with the conceptual change texts through teacher lecture . Prior to the beginning of treatment , teacher mentioned the characteristics of conceptual change texts and analogies . The researchers in light of the information obtained from aliteratüre review prepared conceptual change texts . The conceptual change texts were written on the following topics : the defınition of a bond , types of bonds , polarity of bonds and molecules , and electron pair repulsion theory . They were given to students to be read 2 days before the class hour when the related topic would be covered . The main aim of the preparation of conceptual change texts was to suggest conditions in which misconceptions can be replaced into scientifıc conceptions . So , conceptual change texts were constructed by use of Posner et al . ' s ( 1982 ) conceptual change model . Firstly , students were asked questions to make them aware of their naive conceptions . Some questions in the texts were : What is the chemical bond ? Why does chemical bond occur ? Does bonding occur only between atoms that give and accept eleetrons ? How two hydrogen atoms are held together ? Firstly , students were allowed to discuss these questions in the conceptual change text by using their previous knowledge related to chemical bonding concepts . During discussions , they had cognitive conflict when their ideas were not adequate to answer these questions and they dissatisfıed with their existing conceptions . This situation supported the fırst conditionofPosner et al . ' s ( 1982 ) modeL . Then , the teacherdirectedstudentsto read the paragraph in which the evidence was presented that the typical misconception was incorreet ör a scientifically correct explanation of the concept was provided . Since chemical bonding is an abstract topic , analogies were also used to explain the concept in the conceptual change texts . For example , most students thought that bonds are " things " that holds atoms together but they could not explain exactly what the " thing " is . They believed \ vrongly that chemical bonds are material connections simply . However , there are forces that hold the atoms of elements together in a compound . These forces are called as " chemical bonds " . in other words , the " thing " between atoms you mentioned is the electrostatic forces that hold atoms together . in the text , magnet analogy was used to explain this . Students were familiar with magnets . The like poles of magnets repel each other , \ vhile the unlike poles attract each other . AIso , atoms are electrically charged , thus attract and repellike the " poles " of a magnet . Attractions between particles of atoms lead to chemical bond and holds structure together . Thus , bond means electrostatic forces between the atoms . By using analogies in the conceptual change text , we also accomplished Posner et al . ' s ( 1982 ) conditions ofintelligibility and plausibility because it helps to stress on the students ' preconceptions , and make relationship between their conceptions and scientific knowledge . Finally , it was suggest students to replace ör integrate the newly learned concepts with their existing conceptions . Moreover , students saw usage of information theyobtained in explaining other situations . Therefore , Posner et al . ' s ( 1982 ) last condition ( fruitfulness ) was also achieved . Homework questions were also given to the students in conceptual change texts . These questions required students create their own analogies for real model and then discuss the like and unlike points of their analogies with real modeL . For example , borrowing a book from a library was used as an analogy to explain how two hydrogen atoms are held together in H2 molecule . it was statedthat when you get the book from library , you are treatedas if it belongs to you ; yet at the same time , it is counted as being part of the library collection . Then students discussed the shared and unshared points of this analogy with reality . For shared point , they stated that when you borrow a book from a library , library and you possess a book simultaneously . it is similar to electrons between hydrogen atoms , which are possessed simultaneously by two nuclei of hydrogen atoms and they have been . counted twice . For unshared point , they said that in H2 partide , both H atoms simultaneously attract electrons and equally share them but when you borrow a book , only you use AybükePABUçeU , Ömer GEBAN / H . O . Elitim Fakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 190 a book AIso , in H2 partide , electrons spend most of their time in the overlap area of the shells that is shared , but book is mostly with you . Lastly , they pointed that in H2 partide , both H atoms share their öne electron with the other öne , but you do not have to share your own book with library for borrowing a book from library . Ali of these answers of students were discussed in the classroom . Because , the use of classroom discussions of analogies has been advocated as a way to increase awareness of their limitations and encourage critical thinking ( Webb , 1985 ; Orgill and Bodner , 2004 ) . 3 . RESULTS Chemical Bonding ConceptsTest ( CBCT ) was given to ali subjectsof the studyas pre - andpost - test . Independent - samplest - test was used to analyze the pre - and post - test data at a signifıcance level of 0 . 05 . The resultof the pre - testshowed thattherewas no signifıcantmeandifference at the beginningof the treatmentbetween the experimentaland the control group in terms of students ' understanding of chemical bonding concepts ( t = 0 . 53 , p > O . 05 ) . The results of the post - test indicated that there was a signifıcant mean differences between the performance of the students in the experimental and the control group ( t = 3 . 23 , P < 0 . 05 ) . That is , using conceptual change texts oriented instruction caused a bener acquisition of chemical bonding concepts . 4 . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Many students have difficulty in leaming science because much of their leaming tends to involve memorization of facts in which newly leamed materials is not related in ways that make sense to the leamer ( Novak , 1988 ) . However , leaming in science requires more than just adding new concepts to the knowledge . it often requires realignment in thinking and construction of new ideas that may be in conflict with earlier ideas . Additionally , research studies have consistently shown that students do not come to classroom with blank slates ( Posner , et . al . , 1982 ) . in fact , students from the moment of birth infants need to make sense of their world . They construct their own explanations for how and why things behave as they do . So , long before they begin formal schooling , children have made meaning of their everyday experiences . And , they will construct new knowledge on their previous conceptions . As accepted by many scientists , when these students ' previous conceptions are different from the views of scientists , these differing frameworks affect further learning negatively . Throughout this article , the term misconception was used to refer to students ' conceptions that are different from scientifıc conceptions . Since new knowledge is linked to the existing conceptions , misconceptions are really big obstacles to promote meaningful leaming . So , to promote meaningful leaming , ways must be found to eliminate ör prevent misconceptions . Conceptual change approach could be employed to eliminate students ' misconceptions . Conceptual change implies that a leamer actively and rationally replaces existing prescientifıc conceptions with scientifically acceptable explanations as new propositionallinkages are formed in his conceptual framework . The model of conceptual change developed by Posner et aL . ( 1982 ) proposed that four conditions must occur before students can replace an existing misconception . This theory holds that leamers must become dissatisfied with their existing conceptions as well as fmd new concepts intelligible , plausible , and fruitful , before conceptual restructuring will occur . The conceptual change text used in this study was designed according to Posner et aL . ' s ( 1982 ) instructional theory . in the experimental group , the main aim of the preparationof conceptual change texts was to activate students ' prior knowledge and misconceptionsandto helpthemtounderstandandapplythechemicalbondingconceptsthrough 191 AybükePABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN / H . Ü . EğitimFakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 the use of explanations , analogies and examples . We used analogies in the texts to deal with students ' misconceptions more effectively . However , we observed that some student misconceptions are very resistant to instructional change , and some students persist in giying answers consistent with their misconceptions even after instruction . Some examples of students ' misconceptions were presented in the Table 1 . For example , both group students showed low achievement for the question related to electrical conductivity of graphite . Af ter the treatment , none of the students in the control group gaye correct answer to the two parts of this question whereas only 11 . 8 % of the students in the experimental group answered it correctly . Among control group students , the common misconceptions were that electrons escape from the covalent bonds in graphite and are free to move within the molecule ( 41 . 2 % ) . And , most of the experimental group students thought that graphite could conduct electricity because it has layers of carbon atoms ( 41 . 2 % ) . This misconception might because they were taught that mobile electrons and ions conduct electrieity and therefore the layers of atoms could also electricity because they could move . Although both groups had some misconceptions even after the treatment , this study also showed that more students in the experimental group removed their misconceptions after instruction than students in the control group . For example , at the end of the study , most experimental group students change their wrong conceptions about electron pair repulsion theory , the polarity of molecules , and Van der Waals forces , but most control group students did not change their misconceptions in these topies . in this study , it can be stated that traditionally designed chemistry instruction did not facilitate conceptual change because teacher strategies were dependent on teacher exploration without consideration of students ' misconceptions . Additionally , students in the control group were passiye listeners and theyare not constructing their knowledge where as students in the experimental group were allowed to construct their knowledge by using conceptual change approach . This might cause the difference in the concept tests scores of students in control and experimental groups . However , in the present study , the research method was barely adequate for understanding the effects of conceptual change text instruction on elimination of students ' misconceptions about chemical bonding because the subjects were limited to 41 students in two classrooms . In summary , this study showed that conceptual change text instruction led to better understanding of chemieal bonding concepts and elimination of students ' misconceptions than traditionally designed instruction . AIso , it was found that students have diffıculties in understanding chemieal bonding concepts , and misconceptions of students about these concepts are resistance to change . If these misconceptions could not be eliminated , they affect further leaming negatively . Therefore , teachers , curriculum developers and textbook writers must be aware of students ' misconceptions in chemical bonding and try to prevent them from occurring . REFERENCES AAbd - EI - Kha ! ick , F . , & Akerson , V . L . ( 2004 ) . Learning about nature of science as conceptua ! change : Factors that mediate the development of preservice elementary teachers ' views of natureof science . Science Education , 88 ( 5 ) , 785 - 810 . Beall , H . ( 1999 ) . The ubiquitous metaphorsof chemistry teachingo Journal ofChemical Education , 76 , 366 - 368 . Birk , J . P . and Kurtz , MJ . ( 1999 ) . Effect of experience on retention and elimination of misconceptions about molecular structureand bonding . Journal ofChemical Education , 76 ( 1 ) , 124 - 128 . Boo , K . H . ( 1998 ) . Students ' understandingof chemical bond and the energetic of chemica ! reactions . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 ( 5 ) , 569 - 581 . Chambers , S . K . & Andre , T . ( 1997 ) . Gender , prior knowledge , interest , and experience in electricity and conceptua ! change text manipulationsin learning about direct current . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 34 ( 2 ) , 107 - 123 . AybükePABUÇCU , Ömer GEBAN / H . O . Elitim Fakültesi Dergisi ( H . U . Journal of Education ) . 30 ( 2006 ) 184 - 192 192 Coll , R . K . and Taylor , T . G . N . ( 2001 ) Using constmctivism to inform tertiary chemistry pedagogy . Chemistry Education : Research and Practice in Europe , 2 ( 3 ) , 215 - 226 . De Posada , I . M . ( 1999 ) . The presentationofmeta1lic bonding in high school science textbooks during three decades : science educational reforms and substantive changes of tendencies . Science Education , 83 , 423 - 447 . Dhindsa , H . S . & Anderson , O . R . ( 2004 ) . Using a Conceptual - Change Approach to Help Preservice Science Teachers Reorganize Their Knowledge Structuresfor Constructivist Teaching . Journal ofScience Teacher Education , 15 ( 1 ) , 63 - 85 . Duit , R . ( 1991 ) . On theroleof analogiesandmetaphorsin leamingscience . Science Education , 75 ( 6 ) , 649 - 672 . Fisher , K . M . ( 1985 ) . A misconception in biology : Amino acids and translation . Journal ofResearch in Science Teaching . 22 , 53 - 62 . Glynn , S . M . ( 1997 ) . Learning from science text : Role of an elaborate analogy . College Park , MD : National Reading Research Center . Glyoo , S . M . & T . Takahashi , ( 1998 ) . Leaming from analogy - enhanced science text . lournal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 , 1129 - 1149 . Griffıths , A . K , & Grant , BA . C . ( 1985 ) . High school students ' understanding of food webs : Identification of a leaming hierarchy and related misconceptions . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 22 , 421 - 436 . Harrison , A . G . & Treagust , D . F . ( 2000 ) . Leaming about atoms , molecules , and chemical bonds : a case study of multiple model use in grade 11 chemistry . Science Education , 84 , 352 - 381 . Heywood , D . ( 2002 ) . The Place of Analogies in Science Education . Cambridge Journal of Educarion , 32 ( 2 ) , 233 - 247 . Hynd , C . R . , McWhorter , I . Y . , Phares , V . L . & Suttles , C . W . ( 1994 ) . The role ofinstmctional variables in conceptual change in high school physics topics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 31 ( 9 ) , 933 - 946 . Luera , GR , Otto , CA . , & Zitzewitz , P . W . ( 2005 ) . A conceptual change approach to teaching energy & thermodynamics to pre - service elementary teachers . Journal of Physics Teacher Education Online , 2 ( 4 ) , 3 - 8 . Nicoll , G . ( 2001 ) . A report of undergraduates ' bonding misconceptions . International Journal of Science Education , 23 ( 7 ) , 707 - 730 . Novak , I . D . ( 1988 ) . Leaming science and the science of leaming . Studies in Science Education , 15 , 77 - 101 . Novak , I . D . ( 2002 ) . Meaningfulleaming : The essential factor for conceptual change in limited ör inappropriateprepositional hierarchies \ eading to improvement of leamers . Science Education , 86 ( 4 ) , 587 - 571 . Orgill , M . , & Bodner , G . M . ( 2004 ) . What Research Telis Us About Using Analogies to Teach Chemistry , Chemical Education : Research and Practice , 5 ( 1 ) , 15 - 33 . Osbome , R . I . & Wittrock , M . C . ( 1983 ) . Leaming science : A generatiye process . Science Education , 67 ( 4 ) , 489 - 508 . Palmer , D . ( 2001 ) . Students ' aItemative conceptions and scientifıcally acceptable conceptions about gravity . International Journal ofScience Education , 23 ( 7 ) , 691 - 706 . Posner , G . I . , Strike , K . A . , Hewson , P . W . & Gertzog , W . A . ( 1982 ) . Accomadation of a scientific conception : toward theory of conceptual change . Science Education , 66 ( 2 ) , 211 - 227 . Rule , A . C . & Furletti , C . , ( 2004 ) . Using form and function analogy object boxes to teach human body systems , School Science and Mathematics , 104 , 155 - 169 Taber , K . S . ( 2000 ) . Multiple frameworks ? Evidence of manifold conceptions in individual cognitive structure . International Journal of Science Education , 22 , 4 , 399 - 417 . Taber , K . S . ( 2003 ) . Mediating mental models of metals : acknowledging the priority of the leamer ' s prior leaming . Science Education , 87 , 732 - 758 . Tan , K . D . and Treagust , D . F . ( 1999 ) . Evaluating students ' understanding of chemical bonding . School Science Review , 81 ( 294 ) , 75 - 83 . Tekkaya , C . ( 2003 ) . Remediating high school students ' misconceptions conceming diffusion and osmosis through concept mapping and conceptual change text . Research in Science & Technalogical Education , 21 ( 1 ) , 5 - 16 . Tsai , C . ( 2000 ) . Enhancing science instruction : the use of ' conflict maps ' . International Journal ofScience Education , 22 , 285 - 302 . Wang , T . & Andre , T . ( 1991 ) . Conceptual change text versus traditionaltext and application questions versus no questions in leaming about electricity . Contemporary educationalpsychology , 16 , 103 - 1 . Webb , M . I . ( 1985 ) . Analogiesandtheirlimitations . School Science andMathematics . 85 , 645 - 650 . Yanowitz , K . L . ( 2001 ) . The effects of analogies on elementary school students ' leaming of scientific concepts . School Science " nd M " thematics , 101 , 133 - 142 .