Understanding Complex Systems 1 THIS IS A DRAFT . PLEASE DO NOT CIRCULATE OR QUOTE Promoting Transfer through Complex Systems Principles Robert L . Goldstone Indiana University Uri Wilensky Northwestern University Running head : Understanding Complex Systems Correspondence Address : Robert Goldstone Department of Psychology Indiana University Bloomington , IN . 47408 Other Correspondences : rgoldsto @ indiana . edu ( 812 ) 855 - 4853 Understanding Complex Systems 2 Abstract Understanding scientific phenomena in terms of complex systems principles is both scientifically and pedagogically important . Situations from different disciplines of science are often governed by the same principle , and so promoting knowledge transfer across disciplines makes valuable cross - fertilization and scientific unification possible . Although evidence for this kind of transfer has been historically controversial , experiments and observations of students suggest pedagogical methods to promote transfer of complex systems principles . One powerful strategy is for students to actively interpret the elements and interactions of perceptually grounded scenarios . Such interpretation can be facilitated through the presentation of cases alongside general principles , and by students exploring and constructing computational models of cases . The resulting knowledge can be both concretely grounded yet highly perspective - dependent and generalizeable . We discuss methods for coordinating computational and mental models of complex systems , the roles of idealization and concreteness in fostering understanding and generalization , and other complementary theoretical approaches to transfer . Understanding Complex Systems 3 Promoting Transfer through Complex Systems Principles When and how do students transfer what they have learned to new situations ? This is one of the most important questions confronting education and cognitive science . Addressing it has crucial practical consequence , while also touching on deep basic research issues related to learning , analogical reasoning , and conceptual representation . Considerable research suggests that students do not spontaneously transfer what they have learned , at least not to superficially dissimilar domains ( Detterman , 1993 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; 1983 ) . This is disturbing because teachers choose content with the hope that students will apply what they have learned to relevant new situations . We believe that students can transfer scientific principles across superficially dissimilar domains , and we are not alone in this belief ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Jacobson , 2001 ; Judd , 1908 ; Simon , 1980 ) . To present our case , we will describe kinds of transfer that are worth “fighting for . ” Identifying these turns out not to be only an educational question , but a scientific question as well . Accordingly , we will describe a novel approach toward science that seeks to unite phenomena from disparate domains according to general principles that govern complex systems . This complex systems approach to science offers unique educational opportunities for imparting scientific understanding that is both concretely grounded yet transportable . The notion of a grounded generalization may sound like an oxymoron , but it is key to our account of transfer . The time - honored method for conveying generalizations has been to use symbolic formalisms such as predicate logic or algebra . These formalisms can enable a student to transcend the specifics of a situation , but they also run the risk of disconnecting the resulting abstraction from an intuitive understanding of the situation . Instead , we propose learning and teaching methods that promote situation construals that are concrete insofar as they are perceptually , temporally , and spatially grounded . However , they are still idealizations in that many elements of a situation are ignored or highly simplified 1 . In this paper , we will develop an approach to achieving grounded generalizations through the following steps : 1 ) Describe the 1 See also the notion of ‘situated abstraction’ in the section “comparison to other approaches to transfer . ” Understanding Complex Systems 4 nature of complex systems accounts of science , 2 ) provide examples of general complex systems principles that appear in several case studies , 3 ) Describe pedagogical benefits of teaching science through complex systems , 4 ) Discuss the importance of transfer and generalization in relation to complex systems , 5 ) present a method for achieving generalization through perceptually grounded yet interpreted simulations , 6 ) compare generalization from grounded simulations to formalism - centered strategies , and 7 ) draw parallels between computational and mental models , with the aim of identifying design principles that allow the two kinds of models to mesh . Connecting Science with Complex Systems Principles One way to advance science is to progressively flesh out theories , adding experimental details and elaborating mechanistic accounts . By this account , the “devil is in the details” and the proper occupation of scientists is to pursue these details . This vision of science was most emphatically painted by John Horgan in his 1996 book “The End of Science . ” He argued that the age of fundamental scientific theorizing and discoveries has passed , and that all that is left to be done is refining the details of theories already laid down by the likes of Einstein , Darwin , and Newton . The rapid rate of scientific specialization seems to support Horgan’s argument . We have gone from an era when the only major scientific journals were “Nature” and “Science” to an era with specialized journals such as “Journal of Contaminant Hydrology” and “Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery , ” each an umbrella outlet for several distinct sub - specializations . Well over half of the respondents to a Science Advisory Board believe that biologists are loosing track of the big picture by specializing in narrowly defined biological fields . Yet , many scientists feel compelled to specialize to still further degrees due to the sheer volume of scholarly output that competes for their eyes and minds . A small subset of scientists have chosen to reverse the trend toward increasing specialization . They have instead pursued principles that apply to many scientific domains , from physics to biology to social sciences . The principles are not applied to these domains in a metaphoric or vague fashion , as the terms “chaos” and “fractal” often were applied to art or interpersonal relations . Rather , the claim of complex system researchers Understanding Complex Systems 5 is that the same specific principle , sometimes expressible as equations or as sets of computational rules , can describe seemingly different phenomena . By complex systems , we refer to systems that contain numerous distinct elements that interact locally , resulting in a system globally changing over time . Over the past few decades , the field of complex systems theory has been rapidly developing ( Bar - Yam , 1997 ; Holland , 1995 ; Kauffman , 1993 ; Wolfram , 2002 ) . Complex systems theory and methods are now endemic to the sciences and can be found in just about every academic discipline and profession ( Amaral & Ottino , 2004 ; Barabasi , 2002 ; Diermeir & Merlo , 2000 ; Epstein & Axtell 1996 ; Wolfram , 1986 ) . It may at first seem that complex systems represent a small fraction of natural and social phenomena . But , this would be a misunderstanding of the field . What makes something a complex system or complex phenomenon is a matter of perspective . If you take a complex systems perspective , focusing on the interaction of system elements , then almost every system in nature and in society can be described as a complex system . Seen from this perspective , the system can then be analyzed using complex systems principles and methods . Complex systems theory has described a number of quite general principles that can describe natural and social systems across a wide variety of traditional disciplines . A few examples are in order . A commonly found system architecture in nature is : Pattern 1 : An entity causes more entities like itself to be produced . At the same time , it causes another kind of entity to be produced that eliminates the first entity . An example of this is the well - known predator - prey population dynamics wherein prey ( e . g . , sheep ) produce more prey through reproduction , and also increase the number of predators ( e . g . , wolves ) by providing biomass energy , while the predators cause prey to be eliminated through predation . A second instantiation of this pattern is the Belousov - Zhabotinsky chemical reaction in which one chemical is involved in a reaction that produces more of itself and a second chemical , while the second chemical removes the first chemical by reacting with it ( Kapral & Showlater , 1995 ) . Both systems can be described by very similar differential Understanding Complex Systems 6 equations called reaction - diffusion systems ( Ball , 1999 ) and show the same large - scale patterns over time . Both systems can also be described by similar agent rule - sets derived from the description in Pattern 1 ( see Wilensky & Reisman , 1998 ; Wolfram , 2003 ) . Macroscopically , both systems produce oscillating amounts of the two entities , and the pattern of distribution is often a dynamically moving spiral . Figure 1 : Two systems with oscillating behavior . These phenomena seem very different , but they can be viewed as two examples of a general complex systems principle . a ) An agent - based computer simulation of oscillating populations in wolf sheep predation , from http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo / models / WolfSheepPredation . b ) An agent - based simulation of oscillating levels of chemicals in the Belousov - Zhabotinsky reaction http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo / models / B - Zreaction . c ) a photo of the physical B - Z reaction taking place around a star - shaped stamp . ( photo courtesy of Kyle Bishop and Bartosz Grzybowski . see http : / / dysa . northwestern . edu / ) Understanding Complex Systems 7 Pattern 2 : Many individual elements move randomly . If a moving element touches another element , it becomes attached . The emergent result is fractally connected branching aggregates . This process , called diffusion - limited aggregation ( DLA ) , has been implicated in the growth of human lungs ( Garcia - Ruiz et al . , 1993 ) , snowflakes ( Bentley & Humphreys , 1962 ) , and cities ( Batty & Longley , 1993 ) . As with the reaction - diffusion systems , the individual elements of different DLA systems are highly dissimilar , but the interactions between the elements can be captured by very similar agent - based rule sets ( Bar - Yam , 1994 ; Wilensky , 1997b ) . The resultant overall patterns of thin , fractally connected branches , are remarkably similar , and have almost identical statistical properties ( Ball , 1999 ) . Figure 2 . An agent - based computer simulation of diffusion limited aggregation ( see ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo / models / DiffusionLtdAggregation ) Pattern 3 : To solve a problem , use many independent " agents " all trying partial solutions in parallel . Use positive feedback to reinforce successful partial solutions . Eventually the agents will assemble a near - optimal complete solution . This pattern is inspired by the behaviors of social insects , particularly ants . Ant algorithms are one of the most successful examples of swarm intelligent systems . They have been used to explain how social insects organize Understanding Complex Systems 8 behavior such as foraging , nest building and swarming ( Dorigo & Stutzle , 2003 ) . They have also been applied to many types of engineering problems , ranging from the classic traveling salesman problem to the sequential ordering problem to routing in telecommunications networks ( Dorigo & Stutzle , 2004 ) . Pattern 4 : Particles move ( perhaps with some degree of randomness ) , favoring moves to lower energy states . As a result , the system as a whole converges on a state of least energy . This pattern governs many phenomena in physics and chemistry . It is a powerful tool for understanding chemical reactions , magnetism , gravity , protein synthesis , transformation , crystal growth , and countless other phenomena . Historically it has been often been modeled analytically using differential equations , but it is also amenable to agent - based modeling . For example , Blikstein & Wilensky ( 2004b ) have used the agent - based approach to construct a suite of models , MaterialSim ( Blikstein & Wilensky , 2004c ) , of grain growth in materials , a core topic in the field of materials science . Here is how the models work : Atoms inside a metallic sample randomly switch their orientations moving from crystal to crystal . But the probability of an atom staying in a specific crystal is higher if it is among neighbors of the same type as itself . Running a simulation based on these simple rules yields the same numerical results as the traditional analytical , equation - based approach ( Anderson et al . , 1984 ; Mehnert & Klimanek , 1996 ) . As illustration , consider a case in which there are two adjacent crystals with the atoms configured as in figure 3a below . The rules governing this case can be summarized as follows : ( a ) An atom of crystal # 2 calculates its free energy , which is proportional to the number of neighbors different from itself . Therefore , the initial free energy ( E i ) equals 5 . A random flip occurs , and the atom switches its orientation to align with crystal # 1 . ( b ) To verify if the new configuration is more stable , we calculate , again , the atom ' s free energy . As there are only three different neighbors , the resulting free energy ( E f ) is lower ( 3 instead of 5 ) . Therefore , this new state ( figure 3b ) is maintained . Understanding Complex Systems 9 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 : An atom from crystal # 2 switches its orientation and aligns itself with crystal # 1 , thus reducing its free energy . Note that the resulting grain boundary is flat , as predicted by the Laplace - Young equation , yet the simulation is ‘not aware’ of the equation . The equation emerges from the underlying rules of interaction . We are not arguing that a cross - discipline , complex systems approach to science is superior to a specialist’s focus on a single domain’s details . Both approaches are necessary for a complete science , and in fact it is only by understanding a system’s details that we can determine the general principles by which it is governed . However , given the climate of progressive specialization in contemporary science , it is important to remember that many of the most noteworthy advances of science have involved finding deep principles shared by seemingly dissimilar phenomena . Finding biological laws that govern the appearance of both snails and humans ( Darwin , 1859 ) , physical laws that govern both electromagnetic and gravitational acceleration ( Einstein , 1989 ) , and psychological laws that underlie transfer of learning across species and stimuli ( Shepard , 1987 ) are undeniably important enterprises . Another reason to focus on the cross - domain integrations provided by complex systems is pedagogical . Students are often heard to complain that their science classes are too particularistic . These students feel that they are asked to go from subject to subject , but are not given tools for making connections between subjects and seeing the coherence amongst them . Theories from complex systems can provide these organizational frameworks . Blikstein and Wilensky ( 2004a , 2005 ) have found , for example , that undergraduates studying crystal growth in a materials science class oftentimes “mix - and - match” different 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 EE ii = 5 = 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 EE ff = 3 = 3 Understanding Complex Systems 10 levels of explanation to solve crystal growth problems . Typically they use either equations ( such as the Laplace - Young or flux equations ) or heuristics ( such as “large grains grow , small grains shrink” ) to solve these problems . In a study of a group of undergraduates they found that students had a fragmented view of the process of crystal growth , seeing it as a set of related but distinct situations . This lack of a coherent view was troubling for these students , and they recognized that they failed to see the different situations as falling under a broad principle . In contrast , the students in the same class using the MaterialSim models easily attain insight into the mechanism of crystal grain growth ( Blikstein & Wilensky , 2004 ; 2005a , b ) . Furthermore , they come to see many apparently different instances of crystal growth as instances of the general principle of energy minimization . By coming to understand this general principle , we have also seen students apply the principle in other domains ( Blikstein & Wilensky , 2005b ) . Another example : one of our students who learned about positive feedback systems from an example of a microphone feeding into , and placed near , a loudspeaker was spontaneously reminded of this example when she was discussing a scenario involving people purchasing products that other people had already purchased . The reminding was apt . Both situations are instantiations of positive feedback systems , where the presence of an attribute in a system variable leads to further increase of the same attribute . Furthermore , seeing the similarity in the two situations enabled an inference : when two products compete in the marketplace , if one gets a lead , for whatever reason , positive feedback will result in its increasing its lead regardless of the relative quality of the two products 2 . The principles of complex systems are naturally applicable in many , often times seemingly unrelated , situations . This is because the principles are expressed in generic terms such as : element , agent , resource , inhibition , excitation , interactions , connection , motion , force , neighbor , energy , and strength . Some examples of complex systems are presented in Table 1 . The principles of complex systems can be expressed generically , but we do not advocate this as a stand - alone pedagogical procedure . The principles are typically very difficult to understand when only presented in a generic form , but highly intuitive when instantiated in a case study . However , the existence of 2 The case of VHS and BetaMax video recorders is often described as a case where the technically inferior product won out through positive feedback ( Arthur , 1988 ; 1989 ) . Understanding Complex Systems 11 the generic description level does offer opportunities for transfer between dissimilar scenarios . When a case study of a complex systems principle is presented in a way that the generic principle to be understood , either implicitly or explicitly , then there is potential for transfer . This will most typically not be achieved by simply presenting a single case study ( Detterman , 1993 ) . It is more likely achieved by having people experience and compare multiple case studies of the same principle ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Kurtz , Mioa , & Gentner , 2001 ) , explain the case studies to themselves ( Ainsworth & Loizou , 2003 ; Graesser & Olde , 2003 ) , or construct explicit ( e . g . , computational ) models of the cases ( Resnick , 1994 ; Repenning et al , 2004 ; Wilensky , 1999 ; Wilensky & Reisman , 1998 ) . An example will illustrate the insufficiency of simply presenting case studies for promoting transfer . Consider the isomorphism between tic - tac - toe and the “Fifteen Sum” game . In this latter game , two players take turns selecting , without replacement , digits from 1 - 9 . The first player to have any combination of 3 of their selected digits add up to 15 wins . The reader may want to pause for a moment before reading the coming spoiler , and imagine playing a round our two of this game . It is implausible that learning to play tic - tac - toe better would help somebody to play Fifteen Sum better if both games are presented separately , as self - contained systems . However , as soon as Fifteen Sum is presented with the magic square shown in Figure 4 , transfer becomes considerably simpler . The figure makes it clear that the digits 1 - 9 can be arranged so that the numbers in each horizontal , vertical , and diagonal line add up to 15 . Discovering a new strategy in tic - tac - toe can be applied directly to the Fifteen Sum game . Selecting the center square in tic - tac - toe is equivalent to choosing “5” in Fifteen Sum , and if one’s opponent already has selected “8” and “3” then consulting Figure 4 reveals that one better select “4 . ” Our notion is that the complex systems principles can provide equivalent magic squares for science domains . That is , they provide ways of interpreting a case study so that its structural homology to other related cases is readily apparent . 8 1 6 3 5 7 4 9 2 Understanding Complex Systems 12 Figure 4 . A 3 by 3 magic square that provides the visual support necessary to see why the “Fifteen Sum” game ( see text ) is really the same game as tic - tac - toe . Complex systems principles as structurally rich perspectives We have argued for the power of a complex systems perspective from both scientific and pedagogical perspectives , and in fact the source of this power is the same . Presenting case studies as complex systems is pedagogically effective precisely because examples of the same principle have many scientifically important properties in common . Knowing that a system is a positive feedback system leads to the expectation of an exponential pattern of growth . Knowing that a system involves inhibition among a set of alternatives leads to the expectation of winner - take - all effects whereby one alternative becomes maximally active while the others become quiescent 3 ( Grossberg , 1976 ) . The commonalities between examples of the same principle run deeper than what people often consider to be analogies . Cigarettes are analogous to time bombs because both cause damage after a delay ( Gentner & Clement , 1988 ) . New Yorker is for magazines what quiche is for food ( Kelly & Keil , 1987 ) . The commonalities that underlie complex systems are not analogies in these senses . They are structural identities from a particular perspective . When corrosion on tin organ pipes speeds up the spread of further corrosion , it is exactly an autocatalytic process , with the rich mathematically governed behaviors that characterize all autocatalytic processes . Unlike mutually exclusive Platonic essences , a particular case study may instantiate several complex systems principles . The organ pipe is not only an autocatalytic process , but also a resonating chamber and a harmonic series generator . Complex systems analyses are inherently perspectival , with each principle emphasizing a small subset of a situation’s entities , properties and relations , ignoring the rest . 3 See e . g . http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo / models / GenDriftTinteract . Understanding Complex Systems 13 It is illustrative to compare the perspectival , yet structurally rich concepts underlying complex systems to other commonly used concepts . Figure 5 lays out different kinds of concepts in terms of their inductive potential and perspective - dependence . Inductive potential refers to the extent to which a category allows us to generalize our experiences with some objects to other objects from the same category . Experience with one slobbering dog may lead one to suspect that an unfamiliar dog may have the same proclivity . Natural kind , taxonomic categories are useful because they allow many properties to be inductively predicted ( Rosch , 1975 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) . Rosch ( Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ; Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , and Boyes - Braem , 1976 ) argues that basic - level categories like gold , dog , and flute are defined by family resemblance ; category members need not all share a definitional feature , but they tend to have several features in common . Furthermore , she argues that people’s basic level categories preserve the intrinsic correlational structure of the world . All feature combinations are not equally likely . For example , in the animal kingdom , flying is correlated with laying eggs and possessing a beak . There are “clumps” of features that tend to occur together . Natural categories with this kind of correlational structure permit many inductive inferences . If we know something belongs to the category dog , then we know that it probably has four legs and two eyes , eats dog food , is somebody’s pet , pants , barks , is bigger than a breadbox , and so on . These taxonomic categories allow many inductions because their members share similarities across many dimensions / features . Understanding Complex Systems 14 Figure 5 . A map of three classes of concepts in terms of their inductive potential and their dependence on adopting a particular perspective . Complex systems do depend upon adopting a particular perspective , but once that perspective is adopted , many properties and systematic predictions are possible . In contrast to taxonomic categories , ad - hoc categories and metaphors offer little by way of inductive potential . Ad - hoc categories are categories that collect together apparently dissimilar members into a single temporary category to meet a goal ( Barsalou , 1983 ) . For example , if one’s house is burning , then children , jewelry , and insurance policies may all be temporarily grouped together in the ad hoc category “Things to take out of a burning house . ” This category has low inductive potential because if we know that an object belongs in the category , we do not know much more about the object . We may suspect that the object is valuable and Inductive Potential P e r s p ec ti v e - d e p e nd e n ce Positive feedback system Gold Things to take from a burning house Reaction - diffusion Metaphorical prisons Dog Flute Diffusion - limited aggregation Metaphorical time bombs Ad - hoc Categories and Metaphors Complex Systems Natural Kinds and Taxonomic Categories Low High High Low Understanding Complex Systems 15 portable , but not much else can be inferred . The same is true of metaphorical time bombs that include cigarettes , the ozone layer , and disgruntled postal workers . Excluding the basis for the metaphor , the notion of delayed , increasing likelihood of damage , these entities have little in common . At first glance , it seems that the lack of inductive potential is necessarily linked to the second dimension of Figure 5 : perspective - dependence . Barsalou ( 1993 ) argues that ad hoc categories show our ability to organize the world in unusual ways in order to satisfy temporary and context - specific goals . They are constructed because they are required by momentary perspective changes . To a person trying to change a light bulb , the “able to provide sufficient height to reach light fixture” property of coffee tables is highly salient even though it may never before have been brought to mind ( Barsalou , 1982 ) . Similarly , from a particular perspective , postal workers are like the ozone layer , but it is only from this very special “time bomb” perspective that this analogy holds . Conversely , taxonomic category membership is relatively robust to perspectival change . The overall similarity between one crocodile and another in their external form , internal biology , behavior , diet , and customary environment means that no matter which of these perspectives we adopt , the two crocodiles will remain similar . To be sure , the perspective - independence is never complete , but taxonomic categories are far less affected by perspective than are ad hoc categories . One source of evidence for this is that some properties of taxonomic categories are brought to mind even when they are not contextually relevant . For example , people seem to automatically activate the property “smells” when the category “skunk” is mentioned ( Barsalou , 1982 ) . We are now in a position to appreciate the unique intellectual role of complex systems principles . As shown in Figure 5 , these systems are simultaneously perspective - dependent and inductively potent . Unlike taxonomic categories , complex systems concepts are perspective - dependent . Situations that are dissimilar according to most perspectives are seen as deeply related by a complex systems perspective . The scientist armed with a model of Diffusion Limited Aggregation sees striking similarities between lungs and snowflakes that are missed by most others . Unlike ad hoc categories or metaphors , complex systems concepts are inductively potent . Once snowflakes are appreciated as examples of Diffusion Limited Aggregation , one can predict how Understanding Complex Systems 16 they will change with time , how they will be affected by temperature , what shapes they can and cannot attain , and so on . The combination of perspective - dependence and inductive potential is the key for understanding the pedagogical challenges and opportunities of complex systems . Most people not exposed to complex systems theory will never attain the principles because they depend upon particular perspectives . At the same time , if people do attain them , they can provide organizing structures that are inductively fertile . In one of our undergraduate classes , a student learned the principle of competitive specialization ( see Table 1 ) by interacting with two exemplifying simulations . She first explored a system in which ants self - organized themselves so that each staked out a unique food pile . She then explored a neural network simulation in which neurons became specialized for specific visual patterns like horizontal or vertical lines . She spontaneously noticed the connection between the two situations , each involving originally undifferentiated agents that became specialized over time . Her dramatic and sudden understanding led her to exclaim , “I feel like I have a new category for understanding the world , with ants and neurons in it . I wouldn’t have thought that a category like this could be good for anything , but in many ways , it’s better than my old categories . The new category explains how unique individuals can come out of any crowd of identical things . ” Once created , this category allowed the student to devise a method for adapting the neurons that allowed them to automatically custom themselves to environmental inputs . The method was analogous for how the ants learned to cover food resources , but using analogy required creating the new category inspired by a complex systems perspective . In another case , one of us observed a student in a middle school classroom who had interacted with several multi - agent NetLogo ( Wilensky , 1999a ) simulations of animal populations and gas particles . She had come to see macro - properties of the gas such as pressure and temperature as emergent from the interactions of the molecules . Later , when asked for an example of an emergent phenomenon , she animatedly exclaimed “Juice . You pour it out of a container and it looks liquid and continuous , but actually it’s made up of millions of little tiny balls , vibrating and colliding . ” ( Wilensky , Hazzard & Longenecker , 2000 ) . These kinds of epiphanies are common when students learn about complex systems because the concepts are novel , yet structurally rich . Understanding Complex Systems 17 Benefits of a Complex Systems Perspective As suggested by the above analysis , complex systems cases are pedagogically valuable because they give students fresh and fertile perspectives . In addition to this general benefit , there are a number of other benefits that we will briefly describe here . Bridging explanations . Learning complex systems cases ( either through a specialized complex systems course or through the integration of complex systems materials in a subject area course ) gives students experience with an under - represented , but vitally important , skill for science – explaining large - scale , macro - level phenomena in terms of local , micro - level events . The principles provide explanations of phenomena that bridge two levels , explaining , for example , how organized economies can emerge from businesses each acting in self - interest , how the spiral structure of pine cones emerges from inhibition between individual leaves as they grow , and how ordered thought emerges from neurons that simply pass electrical and chemical signals among themselves . The explanations are satisfying because they provide formal mechanisms for otherwise mysterious objects and events , and because they explain the entities at a global level in terms of better understood elements that are less assumptive . Researchers have noted that bridging between levels is difficult cognitive work . Chi ( 2005 ) argues that misconceptions of systems with emergent processes are particularly resistant to correction because students must typically make a conceptual shift across ontological kinds . Wilensky and Resnick ( 1999 ) and Penner ( 2001 ) specifically attribute the difficulty in understanding complex systems to the need to connect phenomena occurring at the microscopic level with those that occur at the macroscopic level . Wilensky & Resnick ( 1999 ) show that people often use non - emergent constructs to bridge the levels , construing the relation between the macro to the micro in terms of the metaphors of hierarchy or containment . Wilensky and Resnick have also described a resistance to emergent explanations ( Resnick , 1994 ; Resnick & Wilensky , 1993 ; 1995 ; Wilensky , 1999 ; 2000 ; 2001 ; Wilensky & Resnick , 1999 ) . They have described two components of this resistance : 1 ) a tendency to understand complex phenomena as orchestrated by a leader or designed by a single entity and 2 ) a resistance to seeing randomness as constructive of order and pattern . Together they refer to these two Understanding Complex Systems 18 components as the Deterministic - Centralized Mindset ( or for short , DC Mindset , Resnick & Wilensky , 1993 ; 1995 ; Wilensky & Resnick , 1999 ) . Wilensky and colleagues ( Wilensky , Hazard & Longenecker , 2000 ; 2005 ) describe stages in the development of emergent reasoning . Students typically start by 1 ) paying attention to a single level , move on to 2 ) being able to move between levels , but still seeing the aggregate level as simple collection of individuals , sometimes referring to the macro level as an “illusion , ” claiming that only the individual level reduction is real . In Stage 3 ) they see the emergent level as a new entity , its properties are different from its constituents and , finally , in Stage 4 ) they come to see all stable entities as emergent and as processes in some kind of equilibrium . Researchers have also stressed another difficult aspect of bridging levels – the need to understand not only the lower - level structures , but also their interactions ( and mechanisms of interaction ) , functions , and behavior ( Centola , Mckenzie & Wilensky , 2000 ; Resnick & Wilensky , 1998 ; Wilensky & Reisman , 1998 ) . Hmelo - Silver & Pfeffer ( 2004 ) found that the largest difference between expert and novice mental models of complex systems , such as aquarium ecosystems , is in terms of how the parts function and behave with respect to each other , not in terms of their intrinsic structures . It is understanding the interactions among parts that promotes expertise and true bridging explanations . Grounding for formalisms . Complex systems provide an appealing entryway to learning tools in mathematics and computation . A shared mathematical formulation applies to snowflakes and lungs , and attaining fluency with the formulation is important for proving properties of the systems’ behaviors and making quantitative predictions . However , without a bridge between the formalisms and the systems , the mathematics is frequently conceptually inert and opaque . A complex systems perspective provides a bridge because classes of system behaviors can be tied to classes of formalism . The two kinds of formalism commonly used to describe complex systems are equations and computational rule - sets . Both of these forms can be tied to and characterize complex system behaviors . The former is the traditional approach , capturing the system behavior by averaging over individual elements . The latter form , Understanding Complex Systems 19 newly enabled by computational power , can be especially advantageous when there is considerable variability amongst the individual elements of the system . Well - known equations underlie virtually all of the complex systems we have described . For example , whenever a substance travels across a lattice of fixed agents and the total amount of substance is conserved , standard equations for diffusion are applicable . When substances are transmitted across the agents without conservation , equations for epidemic spread are applicable . People who bring to mind a schematic complex system model when they are faced with its associated equation or rule - set are much more likely to be able to reason flexibly about the behavior of the formalism . In this way , complex systems give students and researchers tools to connect formalisms to real - world phenomena . Formalisms can bring to mind characteristic situations , simultaneously grounding the formalism and adding a productive perspective to the situation . Cross - fertilization between sciences . The central thesis of complex systems is that apparently unrelated systems often exhibit a common underlying principle . This thesis is a welcome antidote to the frequently myopic and alienating nature of scientific specialization . The aggregation of slime molds , the changing popularity of musical styles , and the development of regional centers of technology such as Silicon Valley can all be understood as positive feedback systems . Sand piles , earthquakes , and human memory for temporal intervals can all be understood as systems that naturally adapt to a point of self - organized criticality governed by a 1 / f power spectrum ( Bak , 1996 ; Gilden , Thornton , & Mallon , 1995 ) . As noted by Bar - Yam ( 1997 ) : “the study of the dynamics of complex systems creates a host of new interdisciplinary fields . It not only breaks down the barriers between physics , chemistry and biology , but also between these disciplines and the so - called soft sciences of psychology , sociology , economics , and anthropology . ” Taking this perspective , we can view science itself as a complex system - - its component disciplines differentiate and aggregate resulting in a dynamically transforming reorganizaion of the scientific world ( Börner , Maru , & Goldstone , 2004 ) . This cross - domain applicability of complex system principles is valuable for psychological investigations because it allows for a natural examination of the extent of transfer of a domain - general principle to different domains . Instead of creating word problems with different cover stories , or abstract schemas that can be Understanding Complex Systems 20 instantiated with different insight problems , diverse domains can be selected that naturally and intrinsically instantiate principles of complex adaptive systems . Systems are inherently rather than arbitrarily connected to their general principles ( Bassok , 1996 ) . The cross - disciplinary nature of complex systems is not only a methodological boon for psychologists interested in transfer . It is a boon for scientists looking for new insights into their own field . To the mind equipped with complex system principles , these insights can come from distant fields . All too frequently , the practitioners working in a common field have similar backgrounds , knowledge , and skills . An advantage to inter - field cross - fertilization is that a perspective from a different field may shed new light on one’s problem . Similar to Granovetter’s ( 1973 ) argument that some of the most important social ties are bridging links that connect one to a clique other than one’s own , learning from theoretical developments in fields other than one’s own frequently pays off because it extends one’s knowledge beyond what is already locally available ( Merton , 1968 p . 159 ) . Strategies for Promoting Transportable Representations Now that we have described the benefits of organizing science according to complex systems principles , our next agenda is to portray effective strategies for learning and teaching them . Generalizing beyond complex systems per se , we are interested in methods for promoting transportable knowledge . By transportable knowledge , we mean knowledge that is applied to domains significantly beyond those presented when the knowledge was initially acquired . We begin by contrasting a traditional strategy based on explicitly teaching formalisms with a method based on presenting general principles in concretely grounded contexts . Generalization through Formalisms As a tool , mathematics has historically been an unparalleled device for distilling situations to an essence . The formalizations provided by algebra , set theory , and logic are immensely powerful because they are domain - general . An equation for combinatorics is equally applicable to the worlds of manufacturing , sports , science , and dating . Determining how many arrangements of dating partners is possible is the same problem Understanding Complex Systems 21 as finding the number of ways of affixing labels to bottles . Their common equation from combinatorics is the palpable proof of this sameness . The domain - independence of equations is the ultimate in the economy of scale to which mass production aspires . Once methods for processing formalisms are derived and validated , then they can apply off - the - rack to an infinite number of situations . Customization is not only not required , but is forbidden within a consistent formal system . By eliminating the content of a scenario and reducing it to a purely formal equation , one is assured that the sanctioned transformations of the equation will be valid . This focus on content - irrelevant processing has led some to quip that formalists are not able to understand anything unless it is made meaningless ( Smullyan , 1983 ) , but the advantages of all - purpose formalisms are too compelling to let pass . Given the attractiveness of formalisms , it is understandable that so many educators have been drawn to couch their explanations in terms of them . Mathematical and logical formalisms are the epitome of devices for eliminating misleading superficial features . Once equivalent manufacturing , sports , science , and dating situations have been couched in equations , it might be expected to be possible to freely transfer knowledge from one domain to another . This notion is endemic in high - school mathematics curricula , which often feature abstract formalisms that , once presented , are subsequently fleshed out by examples . Word problems typically provide examples of the application of formalisms , rather than justifications for why the formalism was initially developed . The justification for a formalism , if provided at all , is usually based on formal transformations of axioms . Philosophers , mathematicians and educators have noted the mismatch between how mathematics is presented and how it is conceived ( Lakatos , 1976 ; Thurston , 1994 ; Wilensky , 1991 ; 1993 ) . In their own published research , mathematicians tend to provide formal proofs but not the visual - spatial inspiration for the proofs . This has led mathematicians to complain that the true heart of the proof , the intuitive conceptualization , is ignored in the formal description of the proof steps themselves ( Hadamard , 1949 ) . The scholarly articles contain the step - by - step , formally sanctioned steps , but if one wishes to understand where the idea for these steps comes from , then one must attempt to generate the underlying idea oneself , without much insight from the Understanding Complex Systems 22 published report . The exterior face of mathematics is presented without revealing the skeleton that is the source of the facial structures . This tendency to hide the conceptual structure has spread from the research to educational mathematical community . In mathematics textbooks , formalisms are either treated as givens , or when they are derived , they tend to be derived formally from other formalisms . Mathematicians , mathematical historians and mathematics educators have lamented the dissociation between explicit presentations of formalisms and the visual and bodily intuitions that drive the formalisms but are left out of the presentation ( Lakatos , 1976 ; Mazur , 2003 ; Papert , 1980 ; Poincare , 1908 , Wilensky , 1993 ) . The cognitive scientists Lakoff and Nunez ( 2000 ) argue that traditional mathematics education , with its emphasis on symbolic formalisms , bans exactly the kind of images , metaphorical thought , signs , and pictures that makes mathematics one of the most imaginative activities of humankind . Their proposed solution is to teach mathematics using the conceptual , embodied metaphors that were the original motivations for the formalisms . Arguing against claims that mathematics must be decontextualized to be transportable , these researchers show that even mysterious quantities like “i” and mysterious equations like e i π = - 1 arose from the grounded experience of mathematicians at the time of discovery and can still now be made intuitive and grounded in experience . The assumptions of the “Formalism - first” approach to promoting generalization across domains are : 1 ) if an equation is known , it should be able to be recognized and applied when it is relevant in a new situation , 2 ) generalizations are obtained by eliminating superficial features of a scenario , and this is achieved by distilling the scenario to its formalism , and 3 ) potential for generalization is maximized by creating the most formal , content - reduced representation . We question these assumptions , and the resulting conception of generalization via equations . We question the first assumption because the connection between equations and scenarios is typically indirect and difficult to see . Students often have difficulty finding the right equation to fit a scenario even when they know both the equation and the major elements of the scenario ( Ross , 1987 ; 1989 ) . We question the second assumption because elements that are construed as superficial often turn out to be critical for understanding a system . Understanding Complex Systems 23 Bassok ( 1996 ; Bassok , Chase , & Martin , 1998 ) has found that people assume and create connections between semantic aspects of the elements in word problems and their roles in equations . For example , a problem requiring the number of apples to be divided by the number of baskets is easier to solve than one requiring baskets to be divided by apples . Students can use the semantic relation PLACE IN [ apples , baskets ] to infer their mathematical roles in the DIVIDE [ dividend , divisor ] structure ( Bassok , 2001 ) . Formally equivalent word problems are not treated equivalently , and if natural parallels between semantic aspects and mathematical roles are honored , then understanding is promoted . We question the third assumption because , even though formalisms are maximally content - independent , they run the risk of being cognitively inert . They offer little by way of scaffolding for understanding , and may not generalize well because cues to resemblance between situations have been stripped . Generalization through the interpretation of grounded situations We are in agreement with the “formalism first” position that generalization is a valuable goal . Very often principles are taught in the hope that they will be applied whenever they are useful in the future . However , we offer an alternative method for promoting generalization that we believe is more likely to be successful . The motivation for this method stems from our observation of students learning principles of complex systems using computer simulations . We have observed that students often interact with the simulations by actively interpreting the elements and their interactions . Their interpretations are grounded in the particular simulation with which they are interacting . However , because the interpretations may be highly selective , perspectival , and idealized , the same interpretation can be given to two apparently dissimilar situations . The process of interpreting physical situations can thus provide understandings that are grounded yet transportable . Practicing what we preach , we now will ground our notion of interpretive generalization with a “Simulated Annealing” principle example from our “Complex Adaptive Systems” courses ( http : / / cognitrn . psych . indiana . edu / rgoldsto / complex / p747description . htm and http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / . This scientific principle will be elucidated using two computer simulations that can be downloaded from http : / / cognitrn . psych . indiana . edu / rgoldsto / complex / . Understanding Complex Systems 24 Simulated annealing refers to a search technique that makes use of randomness in order to find optimal solutions to a problem ( Kirkpatrick , Gelatt , & Vecchi , 1983 ) . In actual annealing , ductile metal structures are formed by first heating then gradually cooling the metal . At high temperatures , the atoms of the metal have high mobility with respect to one another . If the metal is cooled slowly , thermal mobility is gradually lost . The atoms arrange themselves to form a pure crystal , thereby increasing the strength of the structure . Similarly , the notion of simulated annealing is to gradually reduce the randomness in a system . Early on , randomness helps the system sample different candidate solution spaces . Later on , stability helps the system settle down into a single strong solution . In computational applications of simulated annealing , the probability that a system will move from a state with energy E1 to a state with energy E2 is set to e - ( E2 - E1 ) / kT , where a low E value means a good solution ( energy is measuring discord ) , and T is the temperature or randomness in the system . As such , if temperature is very low , then the system will almost always move in the direction of lower E . However , if T is high , then the system may move toward the state with a higher E . Although it may seem counter - productive to increase the energy of the system if one wants to have the least energy possible , it helps the system in avoiding local minima . Local minima are states such that the current E value is lower than all E values that are obtained by neighboring states , yet E is not the lowest possible value that the system could obtain . In order to find global rather than local minima , it is often necessary to temporarily increase the energy in the system . For example , if a dog wants to get a bone on the other side of a fence , it may actually have to walk further away from the bone ( momentarily ) so as to walk around the fence in order to eventually be close to the bone . The local minimum in this case would be the dog salivating at the fence with the bone a mere one meter away on the other side . It is a local minimum because the dog cannot move without increasing its distance from the bone ( increasing E ) . There is a global minimum that would have the dog at the bone , but this could only be found if the dog jostles itself out of the local minimum . High values of T allow this to happen . Understanding Complex Systems 25 a b c Figure 6 : A computer simulation of simulated annealing used to create a pure metallic crystal . a ) With low temperature T , two metallic crystals ( or grains ) find a local minimum , and the system is stuck . b ) By temporarily increasing T , the system gets out of the local minimum , and the increased randomness generates the “ragged” edge . c ) Gradually reducing T back to its original value brings the system to a global minimum . Figures were generated from the MaterialSim simulation package ( Blikstein & Wilensky , 2004a ) . Figure 7 : Resulting structure from crystal growth , using agent - based annealing methods , modeled in NetLogo3D ( Wilensky , 2005 ) . The pictures show the evolution of a metallic sample ( 50x50x50 ) in a simulated grain growth experiment . The algorithm is based solely on free - energy minimization . The sample was heated to a specific temperature for some time ( in this case , 80 clock ticks ) . The resulting structure shows that , as predicted by theory , larger grains grow at the expense of the smaller ones . The remaining grains are the ones with lower surface energy . ( See Blikstein & Tschiptschin , 1999 ; Wilensky & Blikstein , 2004b ) . Dropping Balls . A classic domain involving simulated annealing is balls dropping on a user - drawn landscape , as shown in Figures 8 and 9 . Having students imagine a ball rolling with some randomness on a landscape is one of the most commonly used analogies for teaching simulated annealing . Small red balls fall according to Understanding Complex Systems 26 three rules : 1 ) A ball will tend to fall downward due to gravity , 2 ) A ball also moves with a user - controlled degree of randomness ( due to “chance winds” ) , and 3 ) If a ball ' s movement would place it on a user - drawn green patch ( the landscape ) , then it does not move . Learners are given the general goal of developing an automatic strategy that will cause the balls to fall to the lowest region of the landscape they draw . The learner can control several aspects of the simulation by manipulating buttons , sliders , and the cursor . The learner can reset the balls ' positions to the top of the screen , start / stop the balls ' movements , clear the screen of all landscape , and enter in four different modes of interaction : draw landscape , erase landscape , place balls , and move balls . By manipulating sliders , learners can change five parameters of the simulation : the number of balls that are dropped , the amount of randomness in the balls’ movements , the amount of movement at each time step , the size of the pen used for drawing , and the frequency of updating a running graph that shows the average depth of the balls over time . Starting with the configuration of balls and the user - drawn landscape in Figure 8 , two possible end states are shown in Figure 9 . If the amount of randomness is never very large , or if the amount of randomness is reduced too quickly , then local minima are likely to arise . A local minimum occurs if a ball falls to rest in a valley that is not the deepest valley of the landscape . If randomness is gradually reduced and thus consistent with simulated annealing , then all of the balls will eventually come to rest at the lowest spot on the landscape . Understanding Complex Systems 27 Figure 8 . A screen - dump from the " Ball Drop " simulation before the balls have completely dropped onto the landscape . User - controlled buttons and sliders , and the continuously updating graph , are shown on the left side . In the right window is a dynamically changing environment in which balls are dropping , landscapes are drawn and altered , and balls are selected and moved . Figure 9 . Two possible final configurations for the " Ball Drop " simulation . If balls drop without much randomness added to their movements , then the final configuration of balls will typically show several local minima . A ball is in a local minima if its location is lower than neighboring locations , but is not the lowest location for the whole landscape . If the amount of randomness is gradually reduced as specified by a simulated annealing method , then all of the balls will occupy the lowest position on the landscape . Path Finder . The second example of simulated annealing involves finding a pathway around obstacles . The pathway ideally connects two fixed blue points at the top and bottom of the screen , avoids the green obstacles , and is as short as possible . In traditional artificial intelligence , the search for a pathway through a maze is typically viewed as a process of adding segments to a pathway and backtracking when dead - ends are found . The alternative method pursued here is to have simple agents locally influence each other’s positions . They Understanding Complex Systems 28 globally form a path even though no agent by itself represents an entire solution . This is accomplished by having a set of small red balls follow three rules : 1 ) Each ball is assigned two neighbors , making a set of balls arranged from first to last . One of the fixed blue points is the neighbor of the first ball . The other blue point is the neighbor of the last ball , 2 ) Each ball moves toward each of its two neighbors , and also moves with a user - controlled amount of randomness , 3 ) If the location to which a ball would move is painted green , then it does not move . The buttons and parameters are similar to those used in " Dropping Balls " and are shown in Figure 10 . Starting with the initially random configuration in Figure 10 , two possible final configurations of the balls are shown in Figure 11 . In the configuration on the left , each of the balls is as close as it can get to its two neighbors without traveling through a green region . The configuration does not indicate a strong pathway between the fixed points , and is typical of the kind of pattern that is found when the balls do not move with sufficient randomness , or when the randomness is reduced too quickly . These " knots " cannot be avoided if the balls do not have some randomness that allows them to break out of arrangements that place them as close to their neighbors as possible given the constraints of Rule 3 , but still are not globally good solutions . By contrast , the configuration on the right shows the kind of pattern reached using simulated annealing . The situations on the left panels of Figures 9 and 11 are analogous ( both showing systems that are stuck in local minima ) as are the patterns on the right panels ( both showing globally optimal solutions ) . Info Reset Adjust Quiz Paint Erase Move Clear Graph Updating Number of Balls Pen Size Randomness Movement Time Understanding Complex Systems 29 Figure 10 . A screen - dump from the simulation " Path finder . " In this initial configuration , balls are randomly positioned on the screen . They move toward their pre - specified two neighbors , unless the movement will place them on top of a green patch . Figure 11 . Two possible final configurations for the " Path finder " simulation . If the balls move toward their neighbors without any randomness , then they will typically create " knots " that fail to form a single coherent pathway between the endpoints . If the amount of randomness is gradually reduced , then coherent pathways are formed . These two possibilities are analogous to the two possibilities shown in Figure 9 . Transporting simulated annealing . Our laboratory and classroom investigations with these two demonstrations of simulated annealing have shown that students can , under some circumstances , transfer what they learn from one simulation to another ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Goldstone & Son , 2005 ) . In our experiments , we first give students a period of focused exploration with the “Dropping Balls” simulation Final State With Local Mimima Final State Using Simulated Annealing Understanding Complex Systems 30 because it embodies simulated annealing in a canonical physical example . Then , we let students explore the “Path Finder” simulation . We probe their understanding of the latter simulation through both multiple choice questions designed to measure their appreciation of the principle of simulated annealing in the path finding context , as well as open - ended questions about their conceptualization of the path finding scenario and its connection to the dropping balls scenario . Using this method , we find that students show better understanding of the Path Finder simulation when it has been preceded by Dropping Balls than by a simulation governed by a different principle . Better understanding was shown both on explicit multiple - choice quiz items as well as implicit action - based measures of students’ interactions with the simulations . The student interviews revealed that a large part of the positive transfer was due to training perceptual interpretations of grounded situations . That is , experiencing Dropping Balls caused students to see events in the Path Finder simulation in new ways . In a small way , our students experienced what Thomas Kuhn has described as the perceptual transformation of the world due to knowledge . Kuhn ( 1962 ) described how scientists , when exposed to a particular theoretical paradigm , see physical phenomena in new ways : " Though the world does not change with a change of paradigm , the scientist afterward works in a different world . " ( p . 121 ) and " During [ scientific ] revolutions , scientists see new and different things when looking with familiar instruments in places they have looked before " ( p . 111 ) . Examples of transformed perceptual interpretations can be understood in connection with Figure 11 . Without training on Dropping Balls , students looking at the left panel of this figure typically describe the final configuration in terms of balls simply not finding good paths . When pressed on why good paths are not found , a typical response was , “The balls are attracted to each other in small clumps , but there’s no reason that these small clumps should unite . ” By contrast , training on Dropping Balls gave students an understanding of the left panel as a local minima . Students now saw attractive forces between non - adjacent balls . In one student’s words , “The ball here would like to move over there to be close to that ball , but it can’t because of the green blob , and so it stays stuck . ” Another student sees the left panel as a suboptimal situation in which “the balls can’t get together because they are always trying to go straight for their neighbors , but obstacles are in the Understanding Complex Systems 31 way . ” This interpretation , in turn , frequently gives the students the insight necessary to create the coherent , globally optimal path . One student reasoned as follows : “With no random movements , the balls will stay stuck forever . These balls are forever trying to get together , but the obstacles won’t let them . So , we need to add some randomness to the balls so they don’t always try the same thing . If one of these balls happens to move above this obstacle , then it can successfully move to its partner , and bring all of the rest of the balls under it along for the ride . ” Another student was even more explicit about the pertinence of local minima for Path Finder : “Sometimes the balls get stuck in a bad configuration . The only way to get them unstick is to add randomness to their movements . The randomness jostles them out of their bad solution and gives them the chance to find a real path . ” 4 Although students rarely mentioned the connection between two simulations , it is clear that their interpretations of the second simulation were affected by their experiences with the first . What is most striking about the students’ descriptions of Path Finder is the extent of knowledge - driven perceptual interpretation . Their on - line interpretations of the behaviors of the balls is affected by their prior exposure to a canonical simulated annealing situation . These interpretations are not simply formalisms grafted onto situations . Rather , the interpretations affect the perception of the simulation elements . The prepared students see attractive forces that create clusters of balls , stuck configurations , and obstacles that could be skirted with the injection of sufficient randomness . To the experienced eye , analogous perceptual configurations are visible in both the Dropping Balls and Path Finder simulations . Having a ball trapped in a shallow valley in Dropping Balls does not generally look like a scrambled knot of balls in Path Finder . However , if one has understood the principle of simulated annealing as applied to Dropping Balls , then one can form an interpretation that makes the two situations perceptually similar . In both cases , there is a less - than - ideal configuration that is stable . Randomness dislodges the configuration , and when randomness is gradually reduced , a more ideal configuration results . The elements of this interpretation are not purely formal elements like mathematical or logical symbols . Randomness , stability , and dislodgment all have perceptual 4 Several other papers have described students at many different levels discovering the value of randomness as a tool for getting unstuck . ( see e . g . , Papert , 1996 ; 2000 ) . Understanding Complex Systems 32 signatures , and when these elements are selectively attended , the two superficially dissimilar scenarios can be seen as related . For this “grounded interpretation” account of generalization , transportable understandings come from the interaction between the physical elements of simulations and the interpretations of those elements . Simply giving the interpretation is not adequate . Like equations , standalone descriptions are unlikely to foster transfer because of their lack of contact to applicable situations . When we simply give students the rules for ball movements in Path Finder , they are seldom reminded of Dropping Balls . Physically grounding a description is one of the most effective ways of assuring that it is conceptually meaningful . Conversely , giving the grounded situation but no interpretation is also inadequate . When either the rules of Dropping Balls or Path Finder are withheld from students , there was a general failure to transfer knowledge from one to the other . The insufficiency of the physical situation itself to provide a basis for reminding is consistent with evidence that spontaneous remindings tend to be superficial ( Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ; Keane , 1988 ; Ross , 1987 ; 1989 ) . A single ball finding a deep valley in Dropping Balls does not bear much overall resemblance to a set of balls forming a coherent and short path in Path Finder . It is only when the interpretation is added to the presentation of the situations that the resemblance becomes apparent . When both an interpretation and a relevant physical situation are simultaneously present , then there is an opportunity for the distant transfer of principles . Grounded situations with spatial and temporal dynamics serve as strong cues for reminding . The perspective - shifting capacity of the interpretation allows only some of the physical properties to be functionally important for the reminding . A pedagogical implication is that case studies and interpretations should be intermingled rather than separated . Education researchers have long debated whether rules should be given before or after case studies . On the one hand , the vast majority of textbooks proceed from rules to examples ( Bagchi & Wells , 1998 ) . The argument is frequently made that examples prior to definitions or rules are ineffective because it is not clear how the example is an example of the rule until the rule is given . This is a classic deductive argument , going from general claims to specific instantiations . On the other hand , other researchers have noted that there is a striking dissociation between Understanding Complex Systems 33 teaching methods and learning preferences . Felder and Silverman ( 1988 ) noted that almost all engineering professors claim to use deductive instruction methods when teaching others even though they themselves use inductive learning methods as much as deductive ones . Inductive methods proceed from particulars to generalities , and are often useful when the generalization is difficult to comprehend . In contrast to most textbooks , some researchers have advised that “as a rule one , should start with the presentation of one or more modeling examples and then explicitly present the problem - solving phases and rules of thumb that are illustrated by those examples” ( van Merriënboer , Clark , & de Croock , 2002 , p . 50 ) . In contrast to either a “rules first” or an “examples first” strategy , our simulations use either concurrent or alternating presentations of rules and case studies . The argument that rules should be given before examples because otherwise examples are not clear neglects the fact that rules are often equally hard to fathom despite their apparent precision . In our simulations , we have often found that examples clarify rules as much as vice versa . For example , one student exploring Dropping Balls observed , “I read the rule that balls would move with randomness , but I didn’t really understand what this meant until I saw them jiggling around . ” By presenting case studies and rules simultaneously , the rules are grounded and the case study is made meaningful . The power of mutually supportive rules and examples is most apparent when our students are interacting with simulations and interpreting those elements . When a student looks at the stable but stuck configuration in Figure 11 and realizes , “These balls can’t break out of their pattern unless randomness is added” they have learned something about both the principle of simulated annealing and the Path Finding simulation . The specific case study helps the students to decipher the meaning of the simulation rules , remember and spontaneously use the rules , and most importantly , to understand why the rules have been so devised 5 . In turn , the rules enable the students to understand the otherwise baffling motion of the balls . In a nutshell , when the simulations are effective , students are not just seeing events , they are seeing events as 5 Wilensky ( 1997 ) found that when competent students followed mathematical rules without understanding the rationale for those rules or the space of possible rules from which these rules were drawn , they experienced “epistemological anxiety” stemming from their uncertainty about the epistemological status of the rules – for example , are the rules arbitrarily or conventionally selected or are they necessary truths ? Understanding Complex Systems 34 instantiating principles . This act of interpretation , an act of “seeing something as X” rather than simply seeing it ( Wittgenstein , 1953 ) , is the key to cultivating transportable knowledge . Generalization through the constructive modeling of grounded situations Agent - based modeling is a powerful technology for analyzing and depicting complex systems . Agent - based models are increasingly used to bring complex systems perspectives to a wide variety of fields including the natural sciences , social sciences and engineering ( e . g . , Langton & Burkhardt , 1997 ; North et al , 2002 ; Ottino , 2004 ) . Several efforts are ongoing to bring agent - based methods to educational contexts ( e . g . , Resnick , 1994 ; Wilensky , 2001 ) . Wilensky has focused his development effort on integrated environments that are both “low threshold” ( novices can start right in on exploring and constructing models ) and “high ceiling” ( enabling scientists to construct useful and accurate models for their research ) . Using the multi - agent environments NetLogo and StarLogoT ( Wilensky , 1997a ) , Wilensky and colleagues have worked with students at a variety of educational levels to explore , modify and construct agent - based models of complex systems situations . In one such project ( Wilensky , Hazzard & Longenecker , 2000 ) , they devised secondary curriculum that explicitly asks students to practice seeing a diverse range of phenomena as “emergent” . Students switch between an agent - level view and a bird’s - eye view of different phenomena such as population ecologies ( Wilensky , Hazard & Longenecker , 2000 ) , traffic patterns ( Wilensky & Stroup , 1999 ) and probability distributions ( Abrahamson & Wilensky , 2004 ) . In a middle school implementation of this curriculum , students learned to spontaneously switch perceptual focus in a variety of cases where both an agent - level and an aggregate - level perspective were possible . In a science classroom , students were asked to give simple rules to agents and then describe the result “in terms of the agent’s point of view and also in terms of the overall pattern . ” The default initialization of the agents has all of the agents at a single location but with different headings . A typical simple rule the students tried was to tell the agents to move forward 10 units . Initially , the students’ two descriptions were very similar : the agent - view was described as “the agent moved 10 units” and the overall pattern was described as “all the agents 6 moved 10 units . ” After being challenged to describe the overall pattern , the 6 As the students were using a multi - turtle Logo , they actually used the word “turtle” , not “agent . ” Understanding Complex Systems 35 students came to describe the overall pattern as “a circle of radius 10 . ” This very simple example of an “emergent entity” served as a touchstone case . After many such ( what the teacher called ) “emergent exercises” , students came to see the overall pattern resulting from their increasingly complex rules , not as a pattern of many individuals , but instead as a description of a new emergent entity , a “population” or “aggregation” of agents . Being able to shift between these two levels of description , enabled them to understand a basic complex systems principle : that properties of the individual elements of a system are not necessarily properties of the aggregate system as a whole and vice versa . A rudimentary example of students coming to understand this principle is seen through the students giving the agents a rule to move around the perimeter of the circle . Even though , from the agent’s point of view , it is moving , the aggregate entity of which it is a part , the circle , stays still . Later in the year , the class was reading an article entitled “the graying of America” describing how the US population was aging . In discussing this article , the students discussed the baby boom and how the aging of that large cohort was a major factor in explaining the graying . In the class discussion , students thought about what would happen when that cohort passed on . One student said there would be a “younging of America” . The discussion proceeded to the question : “how could America be getting younger when each individual was getting older ? ” The students were not troubled by this apparent paradox , they explained it by referring to cases such as the agents circling where the agents were doing something different than the aggregate . In the approach embodied in this curriculum , the student is not presented with a simulation , but rather the pedagogical strategy is to present a theme which allows students to select their own situation . Students typically begin by selecting an existing simulation to explore , proceed to modify the simulation , then progress to creating a simple simulation . Creating a simulation or model of a situation forces the creator to ground his / her interpretation of the elements . Creating a simulation is a powerful strategy for extracting a general principle from the situation ( see Papert , 1980 ) . In order for the simulation to work , the student must model the mechanisms through which systems elements interact . When they encounter a new situation with similar Understanding Complex Systems 36 system element interactions , they are primed to see those mechanisms at work . They can thus come to see patterns of mechanisms as in our Patterns 1 – 4 . By carefully selecting the themes and starting cases , students can be led to discover proto - versions of general complex systems principles . In the class described above , one theme was for students to create models of population level change by devising rules of birth and death for agents and observing the resulting population levels . Typically , students started with a population of agents ( each with a randomly selected color ) and gave them simple birth and death rules . In one class discussion , students noticed that even though their birth and death rules did not favor one color over another , after some time , the population would end up being composed entirely of agents of the same color . Through this case they came to an understanding of a proto of the principle of lateral inhibition . One student created a model in which there were sheep that ate grass . Running it with an initial condition of 100 sheep resulted in the population stabilizing at roughly 50 sheep . In an attempt to rescue the sheep population , he increased the number of initial sheep . To his dismay , this resulted in a lower final population level . Through this case , he came to understand a proto version of the principle of System Overshoot . Papert ( 2000 ) describes students who are trying to program a virtual creature to reach a designated target . When they tried to guide the creature directly to the target , it would get stuck if there was an intervening obstacle . However , they discovered that if they added a little random “wiggle” to the creatures movement towards the target , it would get unstuck and reach the target . In this way they discovered a proto version of the principle of simulated annealing . The Cognitive Science of Transferring Complex Systems Principles Thus far , we have presented an initial case for teaching complex systems principles by giving students experience interacting with or constructing a simulation that embodies a general principle . Crucially , the aim is for students to actively interpret the elements of the simulation according to theoretical elements underlying the principle to be taught . Students learn how to see events as manifesting principles , and this learning prepares them for seeing future events in terms of the same principles ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . It is Understanding Complex Systems 37 difficult for anybody to spontaneously see events as manifesting mathematical formalisms , which is why transfer based upon shared formalism alone is so rare . It is far more plausible for transfer to proceed by applying previously learned methods of interpreting events . For example , practice interpreting the balls in Figure 9 as being stuck without randomness facilitates interpreting the paths in Figure 11 similarly ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ) . In this third section , we provide additional empirical support for transfer based on interpreting grounded situations , and flesh out aspects of the proposal . The flexible perception of similarity An important plank of our proposal is that the similarity between situations governed by the same complex systems principle can be used to promote transfer even if the situations are dissimilar to the untutored eye , and even if the similarity is not explicitly noticed . This claim apparently contradicts the empirical evidence for very limited transfer between remote situations ( Detterman , 1993 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 , but see also Barnett & Ceci , 2002 for a balanced evaluation of the evidence ) . In fact , our claim is that the perceived similarity of situations is malleable , not fixed by objective properties of the situations themselves . It may well be that remotely related situations rarely facilitate each other . However , well - designed activities can alter the perceived similarity of situations , and what were once dissimilar situations can become similar to one another with learning . Much of the apparent inconsistency in the empirical evidence for and against remote transfer is eliminated if one considers whether the learner possesses an understanding that can relate originally unrelated situations ( Brown , 1989 ) . For example , students can transfer the survival strategy of mimicry from one animal to another if they are taught the causal principles underlying the defense mechanism ( Brown & Kane , 1988 ) . Our hope , then , is not to have students transfer by connecting remotely related situations , but rather to have students warp their psychological space so that formerly remote situations are similar . There is strong evidence that this kind of warping spontaneously occurs . Suzuki , Ohnishi , and Shigemasu ( 1992 ) have shown that similarity judgments depend on level of expertise and goals . Expert and novice subjects were asked to solve the Tower of Hanoi puzzle , and judge the similarity between the goal and various states . Experts’ similarity ratings were based on the number of moves required to transform one position to the Understanding Complex Systems 38 other . Less expert subjects tended to base their judgments on the number of shared superficial features . Similarly , Hardiman , Dufresne , and Mestre ( 1989 ) found that expert and novice physicists evaluate the similarity of physics problems differently , with experts basing similarity judgments more on general principles of physics than on superficial features ( see Sjoberg , 1972 for other expert / novice differences in similarity ratings ) . Interestingly , the warping of similarities occurs not only at the level of explicit , cognitive judgments , but also perceptually . Objects that share membership in important categories become increasingly similar . In one study , Goldstone ( 1994 ) first trained subjects on one of several categorization conditions in which one physical dimension was relevant and another was irrelevant . Subjects were then transferred to same / different judgments ( “Are these two squares physically identical or not ? ” ) . Ability to discriminate between squares in the same / different judgment task , measured by Signal Detection Theory’s d’ , was greater when the squares varied along dimensions that were relevant during categorization training . The warping of similarities according to experience has been found in other laboratory experiments as well ( Goldstone , Lippa , & Shiffrin , 2001 ; Livingston , Andrews , & Harnad , 1998 ; Ö zgen , 2004 ) . It has also been found in cross - cultural studies on color perception ( Roberson , Davies , & Davidoff , 2000 ) , where color discriminations are affected by the color categories of one’s native language . The weight of this evidence indicates that even perceptual similarities are affected by categories learned over one’s lifetime as well as those learned in restricted laboratory contexts . One might argue that these studies show relatively modest changes in similarities , but not the kind of shift that would make the ozone layer perceptually similar to organ pipes ( see Table 1 ) . However , research also indicates more radical shifts in similarities with experience . Whorf ( 1941 ) argues for similarities that depend on cultural context . For Shawnee Native Americans , the sentences “I pull the branch aside” and “I have an extra toe on my foot” reflect similar situations . Roughly speaking , the first sentence would be represented as “I pull it ( something like the branch of a tree ) more open or apart where it forks” and the second sentence is represented as “I have an extra toe forking out like a branch from a normal toe . ” Controlled laboratory studies has similarly shown that language has a large impact on conceptualization of time ( Boroditsky , 2001 ) , and that Understanding Complex Systems 39 learning relational language can lead children to see abstract commonalities between situations that they would have otherwise missed ( Gentner , 2003 ) . With respect to educational situations per se , case - based reasoning researchers have stressed the feasibility and importance of flexibly assessing the similarity between scenarios ( Kolodner , 1997 ) . A sense of similarity , it seems , is highly educable . However , the real power of adaptive similarity is that it can be implicitly trained and automatically deployed . People seem predisposed to interpret ambiguous situations in a way that makes them similar to previously presented situations . For example , in Figure 12 , subjects are asked to assess the similarity of either the pairs A and B , or B and C ( Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . The center objects B are ambiguous , and have mutually exclusive interpretations that are consistent with A or C . When subjects are asked to describe how the objects A and B in the top row are similar , they frequently respond with some variant of , “They both have three prongs . ” However , when presented with B and C , subjects tend to respond with , “They both have four prongs . ” Clearly , subjects’ representation of B is not fixed , but rather is constructed as it is compared to A and C ( see also Hofstadter , 1997 ) . Objects are often interpreted in a manner consistent with previously presented objects ( Bugelski and Alampay , 1961 ; Leeper , 1935 ) , even when people are unaware of this influence . Understanding Complex Systems 40 A B C A B C A B C A and B Share : Three prongs A and B Differ : Different shapes B and C share : Four prongs B and C differ : B has one small / warped prong A and B Share : Circle held by pinchersA and B Differ : B ' s pinchers are less thick B and C share : Circle with square B and C differ : B ' s circle is unattached to square A and B Share : two triangles with line above A and B Differ : B ' s line is straight B and C share : Two triangles with third inverted triangleB and C differ : B ' s inverted triangle is connected to others Figure 12 . Examples of stimuli from Medin , Goldstone , and Gentner ( 1993 ) . Subjects were asked to describe features that were shared and difference between pairs of objects . The middle objects labeled B are ambiguous , and tend to be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with the objects ( A or C ) with which they are paired . When determining both common and distinctive features , people apparently first interpret objects so as to make them more comparable . With respect to teaching complex systems , the implication is that giving people experience with one system embodying a principle can prime their ability to see another system as embodying the same principle . This should be particularly true if the priming is visual , rather than strictly intellectual . Priming is particularly potent if perceptual routines are configured that can apply in new situations ( Kolers & Roediger , 1984 ) . One reason why skeptics doubt remote transfer is because of a focus on analytic and explicit transfer . It may be difficult to get people to analytically bring to mind previously learned schemas ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . Instead , we propose to teach people ways of looking at situations that become natural perceptual habits . Computational and Mental Models Understanding Complex Systems 41 One of our central arguments has been that complex system principles are good for science theory and learning and teaching , and for many of the same reasons . Models made up of elements that interact according to simple rules and create emergent organizations offer compelling explanations in both the social and natural sciences . They are also productive explanations . Once one has understood a model , one can mentally simulate variants of it to come up with predictions for new situations . For example , in Figure 10 , we can ask “What happens if each of the balls is attracted to its two neighbors , but the blue endpoints at the top and bottom are not assigned as neighbors for any ball ? ” One can simulate the situation to come up with answer , “All of the balls will migrate to the central tendency of the balls . ” This ability to mentally simulate new situations is impressive because it allows us to generate new knowledge that we have not stored anywhere and yet does not require consulting a physical object ( Dartnell , 2004 ) . Research on mental models ( Gentner & Stevens , 1983 ; Johnson - Laird , 1983 ) attests to people’s ability to mentally simulate real world events to derive new knowledge . Mental models use an interesting blend of analog and analytic representation ( Hegarty , 2004a ) . On the one hand , they are analog in the sense that they intrinsically embody constraints similar to those found in physical situations , such as the necessity to rotate through intermediate angles when reorienting an object ( Schwartz & Black , 1996a , 1996b ) . On the other hand , mental models are also analytically composed out of elements , giving rise to simulation times that are proportional to the number of elements that must be transformed ( Hegarty , 1992 ) . These properties are both useful for modeling complex systems . Analog representations allow the models to make predictions that are valid for the world without explicit , summary information needed to coordinate the model and modeled world . Compositional representations allow the models to apply to complex situations made up of several interacting elements . These two aspects of mental models coincide perfectly with aspects of computer simulations of complex systems , and helps us understand why complex systems are often instantiated by working computer models rather than equations . The computer simulations are analog representations in that they create computer worlds that intrinsically reproduce dynamics and interactions similar to those found in the modeled situation . They are analytic representations in that they decompose a situation into elements ( e . g . , environment Understanding Complex Systems 42 “patches” and agents ) . Both mental and computational models need to be run to derive predictions , and they are both valuable when formal , closed form equations are not available to directly derive solutions . One reason why complex system computer simulation environments such as NetLogo are so pedagogically effective is that they mesh well with mental models ( Resnick , 1994 ; Wilensky , 1991 , 1999 , 2001 ; Wilensky & Reisman , 1999 ) . These agent - based computer models enact the same kind of step - by - step simulation of elements and interactions that effective mental models do . Both mental and computer models of complex systems operate on the principle that if one knows something about the elementary components of a system and their mechanisms of interaction , then some aspects of the system’s behavior can be predicted by observing the results of elements’ behaviors over time . For this reason , both modeling efforts are truly experimental methods even though neither involves observation of natural physical systems . They are experimental in that the behavior of the system is not known before the simulations are conducted , conducting the simulations involves creating iterated interactions between the simulation elements , and the results of the simulation can be observed . A good example of the experimental nature of mental models is Schwartz and Black’s ( 1996a ) demonstration that answering questions by observing one’s own model can produce different solutions than obtained using general world knowledge . Subjects were given the task of determining the angle at which water would start pouring out of the narrow and wide glasses in Figure 13 . Subjects were more likely to correctly respond when they mentally simulated the glasses pouring rather than using their explicit knowledge . The correct response is that the narrow glass must be tipped further than the wide glass , and another mental simulation may convince you of this . Imagine a very , very narrow glass . It should be clear from your mental simulation that this glass will need to be tipped nearly 90 degrees sideways before water pours out . In any case , even though people construct their mental simulations , they may be surprised by the behaviors of these simulations , and if the simulations preserve the important functional features of the real world phenomenon , the simulations will often be better synchronized with the world than explicit knowledge . Understanding Complex Systems 43 Figure 13 . Schwartz and Black ( 1996a ) asked their subjects which glass will pour water out sooner if both are gradually tipped at the same rate . Subjects are more likely to give the correct answer ( the narrower glass ) when they mentally simulate the glasses rather than using their general knowledge . This surprise element is even more prevalent when simulating complex systems . Indeed , such simulations regularly surprise even their creators . Though they themselves encode the rules for the elements , the emergent results are often quite unexpected . Idealized but Grounded Models Although we have been advocating grounded knowledge for scientists and students alike , we need to clarify what is and is not entailed by grounding . In particular , grounding is compatible with idealization . In fact , we will consider evidence that models ought to be at least partially idealized if the goal is to promote transportable understandings . By grounded knowledge , we mean knowledge that is conveyed by perceptual simulations . The simulations are perceptual in that they incorporate spatial and temporal information , and do so by using brain regions that are dedicated to perceptual processing . Arnheim ( 1970 ) , Barsalou ( 1999 ) and others have argued that our concepts are not amodal and abstract symbolic representations , but rather are grounded in the external world via our perceptual systems . According to Barsalou’s Perceptual Symbols Theory , conceptual knowledge involves activating brain areas dedicated for perceptual processing . When a concept is brought to mind , sensory - motor areas are reactivated to implement perceptual symbols . Even apparently abstract concepts , such as truth and negation , are grounded in complex perceptual simulations of combined physical and introspective events . Several lines of empirical evidence are consistent with a perceptually grounded conceptual system . Understanding Complex Systems 44 Detailed perceptual information is represented in concepts and this information is used when reasoning about those concepts ( Barsalou et al . , 2003 ) . Concepts that are similar to one another give rise to similar patterns of brain activity , and a considerable amount of this activity is found in regions associated with perceptual processing ( Simmons & Barsalou , 2003 ) . Grounded knowledge has a major advantage over amodal representations – they preserve aspects of the external world in a direct manner so that the mental simulation and world automatically stay coordinated even without explicit machinery to assure correspondence . Consider a physically grounded device for sorting salaries from highest to lowest ( Dewdney , 1985 ) . For each salary , cut a piece of dry spaghetti to a length equal in centimeters to the salary in dollars divided by 10 , 000 . The sorting “computation” consists solely of holding all strands of spaghetti in one hand and placing their bottoms on a table . When a book is lowered from above the strands , the first strand of spaghetti that it contacts represents the highest salary , the second represents the second - to - highest salary , and so on . This device works by preserving the real - world salary relations directly via the height relations in the spaghetti model . Similarly , grounded mental models of complex systems preserve spatial and temporal aspects of real world situations consisting of multiple elements and their relations . The essence , then , of a grounded representation is that dimensions in the model naturally correspond to dimensions of the modeled world . Given this characterization , it is clear that grounded representations need not superficially resemble the modeled world nor preserve all of the raw , detailed information of that world ( Barsalou , 1999 ; Shepard , 1984 ) . Our experience with students’ understanding of complex systems computer simulations indicates that simulations lead to the best transfer when they are relatively idealized . Goldstone and Sakamoto ( 2003 ) gave students experience with two simulations exemplifying the principle of competitive specialization . The first simulation involved ants foraging for food while the second involved categories adapting to pictures . The first simulation , of foraging ants , was either presented using line drawings of ants and food , or simplified geometric forms . Overall , students showed greater transfer to the second scenario when the elements were graphically idealized rather than realistic ( see also Smith , 2003 for consistent results Understanding Complex Systems 45 with rich versus simple geometric objects ) . Interestingly , the benefit of idealized graphical elements was largest for students who had relatively poor understanding of the initial simulation . It might be thought that strong contextualization and realism would be of benefit to those students with weak comprehension of the abstract principle . Instead , it seems that poor comprehenders are particularly at risk for interpreting situations at a superficial level , and using realistic elements encourages this tendency . Other researchers have found that idealization is often times effective for promoting symbolic understanding . In a standard paradigm employed by Judy DeLoache ( DeLoache , 1991 , 1995 ; DeLoache & Burns , 1994 ; DeLoache & Marzolf , 1992 ) , a child around the age of 2 . 5 years is shown a model of a room , the child watches as a miniature toy is hidden behind or under a miniature item of furniture in the model , and the child is told that a larger version of the toy is hidden at the corresponding piece of furniture in the room . Children were better able to use the model to find the toy in the actual room when the model was a two - dimensional picture rather than a three - dimensional scale model ( DeLoache , 1991 ; DeLoache & Marzolf , 1992 ) . Decreasing children’s access to a model of a room by placing it behind a window allowed children to more effectively use it as a model ( Deloache , 2000 ) . DeLoache and her colleagues ( DeLoache , 1995 ; Uttal , Scudder , & DeLoache , 1997 ; Uttal , Liu , & Deloache , 1999 ) explain these results in terms of the difficulty in understanding an object as both a concrete , physical thing , and as a symbol standing for something else . Word problems in mathematics presents another example where the ability of an object to serve as a symbol decreases as its physical properties become more salient . Bassok and Holyoak ( 1989 ) examined transfer between isomorphic domains of arithmetic progression in algebra and constant acceleration in physics . They found greater positive transfer from the algebra problems to the physics problems than vice versa . They interpreted their results as showing that when abstract mathematics is easily isolated from the content - specific cover story in which it occurs , it transfers widely to different situations . Likewise , children ( Rattermann & Gentner , 1988 ) and adults ( Goldstone , Medin , & Gentner , 1991 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ) are less likely to respond on the basis of abstract relations among objects in a scene and are more likely to respond on the basis of superficial object attributes as the richness of the objects in the scene increases . As with the DeLoache Understanding Complex Systems 46 studies , when the concrete manifestation of an abstraction is difficult to ignore , then it adversely impacts responding on the basis of abstractions . A natural question to ask is , “How can we tell whether a particular perceptual detail will be beneficial because it provides grounding or detrimental because it distracts students from appreciating the underlying principle ? ” The answer depends both on the nature of complex systems principles and mental simulations . Complex systems models are typically characterized by simple , similarly configured elements that each follow the same rules of interaction . For this reason , idiosyncratic element details can often be eliminated , and information about any element only needs be included to the extent that it affects its interactions with other elements . Mental simulations are efficient at representing spatial and temporal information , but are highly capacity - limited ( Hegarty , 2004a ) . Under the assumption that a student’s mental model will be shaped by the computational model that informs it , the following prescriptions are suggested for building computer simulations of complex systems : 1 ) eliminate irrelevant variation in elements’ appearances , 2 ) incorporate spatial - temporal properties , 3 ) do not incorporate realism just because it is technologically possible , 4 ) strive to make the element interactions visually salient , and 5 ) be sensitive to peoples’ capacity limits in tracking several rich , multi - faceted objects . Another empirically supported suggestion for compromising between grounded and idealized presentations is to begin with relatively rich , detailed representations , and gradually idealize them over time ( Goldstone & Ji , 2005 ) . This regime of “Concreteness fading” was proposed as a promising pedagogical method because it allows simulation elements to be both intuitively connected to their intended interpretations , but also eventually freed from their initial context in a manner that promotes transfer . The above prescriptions for the design of simulations imply corresponding prescriptions for the design of computer modeling environments . To facilitate the construction of simulations compatible with students’ mental models , such environments must provide interface elements and language constructs that facilitate the construction of simulations that satisfy these criteria . Tisue & Wilensky ( 2004 ) describe how these design principles continue to guide the development of NetLogo . Comparison to Existing Approaches to Transfer Understanding Complex Systems 47 An appreciation of the power of complex systems principles , and how they are effectively taught , adds a useful perspective to the large and growing literature on transfer ( reviewed by National Research Council , 1999 ) . Complex systems are a natural domain for exploring transfer because superficially dissimilar systems are inherently connected to one another by these principles . The most meaningful evidence that a learner has appreciated these connections is that they can better understand one system after having experienced another system governed by the same principle . The role of formalisms in transfer . In an earlier section we distinguished the approach we advocated , of getting students to interpret grounded situations , from a “formalism first” approach in which transfer occurs primarily by learning formalisms that connect superficially unrelated situations . Learners are most likely to transfer what they have learned when they have developed a causal mental model ( Gentner & Schumacher , 1986 ) . The problem with formalisms is that , even when they have been acquired , it is difficult to recognize when the formalism is applicable to a situation , and so spontaneous transfer is unlikely . Although we are not sanguine about the prospects of “formalism first” approaches to transfer , we also do not advocate a “formalism never” approach . Once a grounded mental model has been built for a complex system , it can provide a scaffold for constructing mathematical and logical formalisms . The advantage of eventually generating formalisms is that , like simulations , they provide new ways of interpreting complex situations . Perhaps even more so than simulations , mathematical formalisms ( either in the traditional form of equations or in the newer form of computational rule - sets ) are able to connect superficially dissimilar situations . For example , once one has learned a reaction - diffusion equation , relevant situations are likely to be naturally decomposed into activators and inhibitors . The formal distinction between these elements helps propel the conceptual distinction . The very fact that equations and their elements are labeled provides useful tags for accessing them . Simply knowing that a formalism is called the Lotka - Voltera equations is not likely to help somebody identify instances of it . However , if one understands the critical elements of the equation ( e . g . , the birth rate of prey , the efficiency with which prey are turned into predators , and the death rate of predators ) , then one will tend to see future situations in terms of these elements . If one of these variables is hidden within Understanding Complex Systems 48 a system , knowledge of the equation can give one the impetus to uncover it . In addition , when one hears that Lotka - Voltera equations are relevant to a situation , a constellation of expectations and causal models are brought to mind . Grounded but transportable knowledge . Several other researchers have proposed ideas similar to our notion of transfer of interpretations of grounded situations . Our notion blends the concreteness of actual situations , as filtered through mental and computer models , with the perspective - dependence and idealization of interpretations . Other researchers have described the concept of “situated abstraction” ( Hoyles & Noss , 1992 ; 1996 ) or “situated generalization” ( Carraher , Nemirovsky , & Schliemann , 1995 ) to highlight the interpenetration and inseparability of concrete ( specific and contextual ) and abstract ( general ) learning . Wilensky ( 1991 ) describes the process of “concretion” ( as opposed to abstraction ) to highlight the groundedness of non - superficial understanding . Hoyles and Noss discuss “situated abstractions” as emerging from a wealth of previous learning experiences . This work , like our own , provides an account of how early experience can inform later experience without abandoning concrete spatial - temporal aspects of the original experience . Noss and Hoyles note that challenges to the use and authority of abstractions most often arise in the context of technological change , particularly with the advent of computation . They note : “ This we suggest is not an accident : the constraints and boundedness of static media are often invisible due to their ubiquity so that their role in ‘non - transfer’ is not recognized . ” ( Hoyles & Noss , 2004 ) . The science of complex systems , deeply embedded as it is in computational media , is thus a natural candidate for challenging accepted abstractions and their non - transfer . Our empirical research has led us to propose computer simulations that are perceptually grounded , yet are also idealized in many respects . This proposal runs counter to much of the work in virtual reality that has as an explicit goal the realistic mimicking of real - world phenomena ( Grady , 1998 ; Heim , 2000 ) . However , other researchers have also argued for the power of visualizations that abstract from , or distort , reality ( Hegarty , 2004 ; Schwan & Riempp , 2004 ) . Similar to our findings with poor comprehenders being distracted and overly constrained by realistic details , Lowe ( 2003 , 2004 ) finds that novices are often distracted by perceptually salient aspects of a realistic and dynamic display rather than deeper , and more important , Understanding Complex Systems 49 relational aspects . Lowe ( 2004 ) concludes that learners will often require specific guidance regarding search strategies so they will not be distracted by salient visual elements . This is consistent with our efforts to provide learners not just interactive simulations , but also the apparatus needed to guide their interpretations of these simulations . When combined with rules that guide interpretation , idealized computer simulations can be appropriated into productive and generative mental models ( Rieber , 1992 ) . Rieber et al . ( 1992 ) found that learning with graphical simulations is more successful when it was supplemented with written and graphical explanations . It is possible to have knowledge that is both grounded and air borne . A contribution of a complex systems perspective beyond this previous work has been to provide guidelines on which aspects of a real - world system should be perceptually instantiated and which should be idealized . Our emphasis on educating students to interpret concrete situations according to models straddles a commonly made division between “low - road” and “high - road” transfer ( Salomon & Perkins , 1989 ) . Low - road transfer results from extensive , varied practice and the automatic triggering of routinized , stimulus - controlled behavior in new situations . High - road transfer involves the deliberate generalization of principles that apply across contexts , and is exemplified by the explicit application of previously learned mathematical formalisms . The perceptually mediated nature of our transfer is consistent with the non - strategic nature of low - road transfer as well as Bransford and Schwartz’s ( 1999 ) observation that using old materials to facilitate learning of new material frequently occurs in the absence of conscious remindings . Our students seem to develop new ways of looking at situations that depend upon their previous learning , but they are not typically intellectually aware of this debt . On the other hand , because the learned mental models are idealized , they do naturally apply across contexts , and they also support the development of mathematical formalisms . This “middle - road” transfer is both perspectival and automatic , and is consistent with Mayer’s ( 2004 ) call for specific transfer based on general knowledge . Situated Learning . A major theoretical position related to transfer was developed in 1980s and 1990s called “situated learning . ” This community argued that learning takes place in specific contexts , and these contexts are essential to what is learned ( Lave , 1988 ; Lave & Wenger , 1991 ) . Traditional models of transfer Understanding Complex Systems 50 were criticized as treating knowledge as a static property of an individual ( Hatano & Greeno , 1999 ) , rather than as contextualized or situated , both in a real - world environment and a social community . According to situated learning theorists , one problem of traditional theorizing is that knowledge is viewed as tools for thinking that can be transported from one situation to another because they are independent of the situation in which they are used . In fact , a person’s performance on school tasks is often worse than their performance on a street task even though by some analyses , the same abstract tools are required ( Nunes , 1999 ) . Our approach has a number of similarities and differences in relation to the situated learning movement . One of the primary similarities , though deriving from different perspectives , is that we view the similarity of tasks or situations as the result of both activity by the problem solver and the community . We are dubious of attempts to find an objective metric for measuring the distance between situations . The educability of similarity is pivotal for us . Accordingly , we have talked about learning as changing the perceived similarities between scenarios rather than learning as allowing people to relate dissimilar scenarios . A second similarity is that we both emphasize grounded knowledge . For us , knowledge is not simply in the extracted verbal description of a situation , but rather in the interpretation of a concrete scenario . Learning consists of developing methods for processing concrete situations , methods that may be widely applicable . One of the most obvious differences is that we continue to frame learning in terms of transfer , a suspect notion for situated learning theorists . Brazilian children who sell candy may be quite competent at using currency even though they have considerable difficulty solving word problems requiring calculations similar to the ones they use on the street ( Nunes , 1999 ) . This case study has become a paradigmatic example of the contextualized nature of knowledge according to situated learning theorists , and is very different from the kind of cross - domain transfer we have tried to teach and champion . We have championed this kind of transfer because , as described in the first section , we believe complex systems principles are valuable additions to the science curriculum and to science more generally . Given this belief , we have been compelled to try to distill systems to idealized mental models and eventually mathematical formalisms . These similarities and differences highlight two different senses of knowledge decontextualization . Understanding Complex Systems 51 We are not advocating decontextualized knowledge in the sense of formalism - based transfer . Formalisms per se rarely provide the basis for deep remindings ( Ross , 1989 ) . Instead , knowledge should be couched in terms of learned processes for interpreting concrete scenarios . However , there is a second sense of decontextualization that we do support . We believe in the importance of complex systems principles , and that the same principle applies in multiple situations . Accordingly , we support learners acquiring principles of complex systems in a way that enables the principles to be recognized in the myriad of concrete forms that they can take . For example , we are interested in people recognizing both microphones attached to speakers and fashion buying habits as positive feedback systems . This is achieved by people creating mental models of the situations that feature a variable whose presence causes more of the variable to be produced . We seek learning and teaching methods that enable people to develop mental models that implement general complex systems principles , while at the same time pushing for spatial - temporal grounding for those models . Summary Our line of argumentation makes several interrelated claims . 1 ) We argued that understanding complex systems principles is important scientifically and pedagogically . Seemingly unrelated systems are often deeply isomorphic , and the mind that is prepared to use this isomorphism can borrow from all of science in understanding a concrete scenario . 2 ) Complex systems principles are unique because they lead to the construction of categories that are both perspective - dependent and inductively powerful . Because they are perspectival , these categories are not likely to be discovered without guidance . Teaching these categories is worthwhile because of their inductive potential . 3 ) If one is committed to fostering the productive understanding of complex systems , then one must be interested in promoting knowledge that can be transported across disciplinary boundaries . 4 ) Our observation of students interacting with complex systems simulations indicates that one of the most powerful educational strategies was to have students actively interpret situations . A situation’s events inform and correct interpretations , while the interpretations give meaning to the events . 5 ) One effective way for students to make these interpretations is for them to construct models of the situations . Modeling requires students to explicitly make interpretive choices . 6 ) Perspective - Understanding Complex Systems 52 dependent interpretations can promote transfer where formalism - centered strategies fail , by educating people’s flexible perception of similarity . Transfer , by this approach , occurs not by applying a rule from one domain to a new domain , but rather by allowing two scenarios to be seen as embodying the same principle . Complex systems theory opens up new ways of organizing science , according to underlying principles , not according to established disciplines such as biology , physics , chemistry , and psychology . 7 ) Complex systems theories are often expressed by computational models , and the elements and interactions of these models conform well with those naturally found in mental models . The close connection between mental and computational models of complex systems makes transfer via shared mental models plausible for these systems , and also makes computational models pedagogically promising . 8 ) To realize this promise , we have recommended that computer simulations be designed or student - constructable so as to mesh well with idealized mental models . For transportable knowledge , realism is sometimes disadvantageous . Computer models , like their corresponding mental models , should be spatially - temporally grounded to take advantage of our highly evolved perceptual capabilities , but idealized in other respects to reduce cognitive load and increase generality . As is clear from the preceding paragraph , the steps in this argument depend upon and extend one another . To the reader’s exasperated question , “Is your foremost agenda to argue for benefits of thinking in terms of complex systems principles , or to describe ways of achieving scientific transfer ? ” our reply is an emphatic “Yes ! ” We have fused these two agendas because the cognitive science of transfer explains why complex systems principles are cognitively beneficial , and the existence of cross - discipline connections between the sciences motivates the effort to learn how to achieve transportable knowledge . The transfer of knowledge across disciplinary lines is cognitively possible because it scientifically exists ( see Table 1 ) , and is scientifically possible because it cognitively exists . Understanding Complex Systems 53 References Abrahamson , D . & Wilensky , U . ( 2004 ) . S . A . M . P . L . E . R . : Collaborative interactive computer - based statistics learning environment . Proceedings of the 10th International Congress on Mathematical Education , Copenhagen , July 4 - 11 , 2004 . Ainsworth , S . , & Loizou , A . T . ( 2003 ) . The effects of self - explaining when learning with text or diagrams . Cognitive Science , 27 , 669 - 681 . Amaral , L . A . N . , & Ottino , J . M . ( 2004 ) . “Complex networks : Augmenting the framework for the study of complex systems , ” Europ . Phys . J . B . 38 , 147 – 162 . Anderson , M . P . , Srolovitz , D . J . , Grest , G . S . , & Sahni , P . S . ( 1984 ) . Computer simulation of grain growth - - i . Kinetics . Acta Metallurgica , 32 ( 5 ) , 783 . Arnheim , R . ( 1970 ) . Visual Thinking . Arthur , W . B . , ( 1988 ) . Competing technologies : an overview , in G . Dosi , C . Freeman , R . Nelson , G . Silverberg and L . Soete ( ed . ) , Technical Change and Economic Theory , Pinter : London . Arthur , W . B . , ( 1989 ) . Competing technologies , increasing returns and lock - in by historical events , Economic Journal , 99 , pp . 116 - 131 . Bagchi , A . , & Wells , C . ( 1998 ) . Varieties of mathematical prose . Primus , 8 , 116 - 136 . Bak , P . ( 1996 ) . How nature works : The science of self - organized criticality . New York : Springer - Verlag . Ball , P . ( 1999 ) . The self - made tapestry . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Barabási , A . ( 2002 ) . Linked : The New Science of Networks . Cambridge , MA , Perseus Publishing . Barnett , S . M . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . When and where do we apply what we learn ? A taxonomy for far transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 128 , 612 - 637 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1999 ) . Perceptual symbol systems . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22 , 577 - 660 . Barsalou , L . W . , Simmons , W . K . , Barbey , A . K . , & Wilson , C . D . ( 2003 ) . Grounding conceptual knowledge in modality - specific systems . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 84 - 91 . Bar - Yam , Y . ( 1997 ) . Dynamics of complex systems . Reading , MA , Addison - Wesley . Understanding Complex Systems 54 Bassok , M . ( 1996 ) . Using content to interpret structure : Effects on analogical transfer . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 5 , 54 - 58 . Bassok , M . ( 2001 ) . Semantic alignments in mathematical word problems . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( eds . ) The analogical mind . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . ( pp . 401 - 433 ) . Bassok , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Interdomain transfer between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 153 - 166 . Batty , M . , & Longley , P . A . ( 1994 ) . Fractal cities : A geometry of form and function . New York : Academic Press . Bentley , W . A . , & Humphreys , W . J . ( 1962 ) . Snow crystals . New York : Dover . Blikstein , P . and Tschiptschin , A . P . ( 1999 ) . Monte Carlo Simulation of Grain Growth . Materials Research , 2 ( 3 ) : p . 133 - 137 . Blikstein , P . & Wilensky , U . ( 2004a ) . MaterialSim . Evanston , IL . Center for Connected Learning and Computer Based Modeling , Northwestern University . http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / curriculum / materialsim . Blikstein , P . & Wilensky , U . ( 2004b ) . MaterialSim : an agent - based simulation toolkit for Materials Science learning . ( PDF ) Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Education . Gainesville , Florida . Börner , K , Maru , J . T . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2004 ) . The simultaneous evolution of article and author networks in PNAS . The Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , 101 , 5266 - 5273 . Boroditsky , L . ( 2001 ) . Does language shape thought ? English and Mandarin speakers ' conceptions of time . Cognitive Psychology , 43 ( 1 ) , 1 - 22 . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of Research in Education , 24 , 61 - 101 . Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 369 - 412 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Understanding Complex Systems 55 Brown , A . L . & Kane , M . J . ( 1988 ) . Preschool children can learn to transfer : Learning to learn and learning from example . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 493 - 523 . Bugelski , B R & Alampay , D . A . ( 1961 ) . ' The role of frequency in developing perceptual sets ' , Canadian Journal of Psychology 15 ( 4 ) : 201 - 11 Carraher , D . W . , Nemirovsky , R . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 1995 ) . Situated generalization . Proceedings of the 19th annual meeting of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education ( Vol . 1 , p . 234 ) . Universidade Federal de Pernambus , Recife , Brazil . Carraher , D . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 2002 ) . The transfer dilemma . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 11 , 1 - 24 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 2005 ) . Commonsense Conceptions of Emergent Processes : Why Some Misconceptions Are Robust . Journal of Learning Sciences , 14 , 161 - 199 . Dartnell , T . ( 2004 ) . Can We Access Knowledge We Have Not Stored Anywhere ? Cognitive Science , 29 , 135 - 143 . Darwin , C . ( 1859 ) . On the origin of species by means of natural selection . London : Murray . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1991 ) . Symbolic functioning in very young children : Understanding of pictures and models . Child Development , 62 , 736 - 752 . DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early understanding and use of symbols : The model model . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 4 , 109 - 113 . Deloache , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Dual representation and young children ' s use of scale models . Child Development , 71 , 329 - 338 . DeLoache , J . S . , & Burns , N . M . ( 1994 ) . Symbolic functioning in preschool children . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 15 , 513 - 527 . DeLoache , J . S . , & Marzolf , D . P . ( 1992 ) . When a picture is not worth a thousand words : Young children ' s understanding of pictures and models . Cognitive Development , 7 , 317 - 329 . Detterman , D . R . ( 1993 ) . The case for prosecution : Transfer as an epiphenomenon . In : Detterman D K , Understanding Complex Systems 56 Sternberg R J ( eds . ) Transfer on Trial : Intelligence . Diermeier , D . , Merlo , A . ( 2000 ) . Government Turnover in Parliamentary Democracies . Journal of Economic Theory . 94 , 46 - 79 . Dorigo , M . & Stützle , T . ( 2004 ) Ant Colony Optimization . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Dorigo , M . & Stützle , T . ( 2003 ) The ant colony optimization metaheuristic : Algorithms , applications and advances . In F . Glover and G . Kochenberger , editors , Handbook of Metaheuristics , volume 57 of International Series in Operations Research & Management Science , pages 251 - 285 . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Norwell , MA . Epstein , J . and Axtell , R . ( 1996 ) . Growing Artifical Societies : Social Science from the Bottom Up . Washington , Brookings Institution Press . Felder , R . M . , & Silverman , L . K . ( 1988 ) . Learning and teaching styles in engineering education . Engineering Education , 78 , 674 - 681 . Garcia - Ruiz , J . M . , Louis , E . , Meakin , P . m & Sander , L . M . ( 1993 ) . Growth patterns in physical sciences and biology . New York : Plenum Press . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity , analogy , and thought ( pp . 199 - 241 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Why we’re so smart . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) Languge in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . ( pp . 195 - 236 ) . Gentner , D . , & Clement , C . ( 1988 ) . Evidence for relational selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation , advances in research and theory . New York : Academic Press . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learning and transfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 393 - 405 . Gentner , D . , Schumacher , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Use of structure - mapping theory for complex systems . In : Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , pp . 252 - 260 . Understanding Complex Systems 57 Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability and inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 - 575 . Gentner D , Stevens A L ( eds . ) ( 1983 ) Mental Models . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 - 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 39 . Gilden , D . L . , Thornton , T . , & Mallon , M . W . ( 1995 ) . 1 / f noise in human cognition . Science , 267 , 1837 - 1839 . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994 ) . Influences of categorization on perceptual discrimination . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 123 , 178 - 200 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Barsalou , L . ( 1998 ) . Reuniting perception and conception . Cognition , 65 , 231 - 262 . Goldstone , R . L . , Lippa , Y . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 2001 ) . Altering object representations through category learning . Cognition , 78 , 27 - 43 . Goldstone , R . L . , Medin , D . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features in similarity judgments . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 222 - 264 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems . Cognitive Psychology , 46 , 414 - 466 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . The transfer of scientific principles using concrete and idealized simulations . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 , 69 - 110 . Grady , S . M . ( 1998 ) . Virtual reality : Computers mimic the physical world . New York : Facts on File inc . Graesser , A . C . , & Olde , B . A . ( 2003 ) . How does one know whether a person understands a device ? The quality of the questions the person asks when the device breaks down . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 , 524 - 536 . Granovetter , M . ( 1973 ) . The strength of weak ties . American Journal of Sociology , 78 , 1360 - 1380 . Grossberg , S . ( 1976 ) . Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding I : Parallel development and coding of neural feature detectors . Biological Cybernetics , 23 , 121 - 134 . Understanding Complex Systems 58 Hadamard , J . ( 1949 ) . The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field . Princeton University Press : Princeton , NJ . Hardiman , P . T . , Dufresne , R . , & Mestre , J . P . ( 1989 ) . The relation between problem categorization and problem solving among experts and novices . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 627 - 638 . Hegarty , M . ( 1992 ) Mental animation : inferring motion from static diagrams of mechanical systems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 1084 – 1102 . Hegarty , M . ( 2004a ) . Mechanical reasoning by mental simulation . Trends in Cognitive Science , 8 , 280 - 285 . Hegarty , M . ( 2004b ) . Dynamic visualizations and learning : getting to the difficult questions . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 343 - 351 . Heim , M . ( 2000 ) . Virtual realism . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , & Pfeffer , M . G . ( 2004 ) . Comparing expert and novice understanding of a complex system from the perspective of structures , behaviors , and functions . Cognitive Science , 28 , 127 - 138 . Hofstadter , D . ( 1997 ) . Fluid concepts and creative analogies : computer models of the fundamental mechanisms of thought . New York : Basic Books . Holland , J . ( 1995 ) . Hidden Order : How Adaptation Builds Complexity . Reading , MA , Helix Books / Addison - Wesley . Horgan , J . ( 1996 ) . The end of science : Facing the limits of knowledge in twilight of the scientific age . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Hoyles , C . & Noss , R . ( 2004 ) Situated abstraction : mathematical understandings at the boundary . In " Learning and Cognition in Mathematics : Students formation of mathematical conceptions , notions , strategies , and beliefs” ( in press ) Proceedings of Study Group 22 of ICME - 10 , Copenhagen , July 2004 . Hoyles , C . , & Noss , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1992 ) . Learning mathematics and Logo . Cambridge , MA : MITPress . Jacobson , M . J . ( 2001 ) . Problem solving , cognition , and complex systems : Differences between experts and novices . Complexity , 6 ( 3 ) , 41 - 49 . Understanding Complex Systems 59 Jacobson , M . J . , & Wilensky , U . ( 2005 ) . Complex systems in education : scientific and educational importance and research challenges for the learning sciences . Journal of Learning Sciences . ( in press ) . Johnson - Laird P N ( 1983 ) Mental Models : Towards a Cognitive Science of Language , Inference , and Consciousness . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Judd , C . H . ( 1908 ) . The relation of special training to general intelligence . Educational Review , 36 , 28 - 42 . Kapral , R . , & Showalter , K . ( 1995 ) Chemical waves and patterns . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . Kauffman , S . ( 1993 ) . The Origins of Order : Self - Organization and Selection in Evolution . New York , NY , Oxford University Press . Keane , M . T . ( 1988 ) . Analogical problem solving . New York : Halsted Press . Kelly , M . H . , & Keil , F . C . ( 1987 ) . Metaphor comprehension and knowledge of semantic domains . Metaphor and Symbolic Activity , 2 , 33 - 51 . Kirkpatrick , S . , Gelatt , C . D . , & Vecchi , M . P . ( 1983 ) . Optimization by Simulated Annealing , Science , 220 , 671 – 680 . Kolers , P . A . , & Roediger , H . L . ( 1984 ) . Procedures of mind . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 23 , 425 - 449 . Kolodner , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Educational implications of analogy : A view from case - based reasoning . American Psychologist , 52 , 57 - 66 . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kurtz , K . J . , Miao , C . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Learning by analogical bootstrapping . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 , 417 - 446 . Lakatos , I . ( 1976 ) . Proofs and Refutations . Cambridge , England , Cambridge University Press . Lakoff , G . , & Nuñez , R . E . ( 2000 ) . Where mathematics comes from . Basic Books : New York . Langton , C . & Burkhardt , G . ( 1997 ) . Swarm . Santa Fe Institute . http : / / www . swarm . org / release . html , Santa Fe . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . New York : Cambridge University Press . Understanding Complex Systems 60 Lave , J . , & Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated learning : Legitimate peripheral participation . NewYork : Cambridge University Press . Leeper , R . ( 1935 ) : A study of a neglected portion of the field of learning : The development of sensory organization , Journal of Genetic Psychology m 46 , 41 - 75 Livingston , K . R . , Andrews , J . K . , & Harnad , S . ( 1998 ) . Categorical perception effects induced by category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 24 , 732 - 753 . Leeper , R . W . ( 1935 ) . A study of a neglected portion of the field of learning – The development of sensory organization . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 46 , 41 - 75 . Lowe , R . ( 2003 ) . Animation and learning : selective processing information in dynamic graphics . Learning and Instruction , 13 , 157 - 176 . Lowe , R . ( 2004 ) . Interrogation of a dynamic visualization during learning . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 257 - 274 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 - 467 . Mayer , R . E . ( 2004 ) . Teaching of subject matter . Annual Review of Psychology , 55 , 715 - 744 . Mazur , B . ( 2003 ) . Imagining Numbers . New York : Farrar Strauss Giroux . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 - 278 . Mehnert K . & Klimanek , P . ( 1996 ) . Monte Carlo simulation of grain growth in textured metals using anisotropic grain boundary mobilities , Computational Materials Science , 7 ( 1 ) , 103 . van Merriënboer , J . J . G . , Clark , R . E . , & de Croock , M . B . M . ( 2002 ) . Blueprints for Complex Learning : The 4C / ID - Model . Education Technology Research & Development , 50 , 39 – 64 . National Research Council ( 1999 ) . How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , and school . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Understanding Complex Systems 61 Noss , R . & Hoyles , C . ( 1996 ) Windows on Mathematical Meanings : Learning Cultures and Computers . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Nunes , T . ( 1999 ) . Mathematics learning as the socialization of the mind . Mind , Culture , and Activity , 6 , 33 – 52 . Özgen , E . ( 2004 ) . Language , Learning , and Color Perception . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 13 , 95 - 98 . Ottino , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Engineering complex systems . Nature , 427 ( 9 ) , p . 399 . Papert , S . ( 1980 ) . Mindstorms . New York : Basic Books . Papert , S . ( 1996 ) . " An Exploration in the Space of Mathematics Educations . " International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning . 1 ( 1 ) : 138 - 142 . Papert , S . ( 2000 ) . What’s the big idea ? Towards a pedagogy of idea power . IBM Systems Journal , 39 ( 3 / 4 ) Penner , D . E . ( 2000 ) . Explaining processes : Investigating middle school students’ understanding of emergent phenomena . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 37 , 784 - 806 . Poincare , H . ( 1908 ) . The Foundations of Science . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . The effect of language on similarity : The use of relational labels improves young children ' s performance in a mapping task . In K . Holyoak , D . Gentner , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of theory and data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sciences ( pp . 274 - 282 ) . Sophia : New Bulgarian University . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 - 450 . Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 , 381 - 400 . Resnick , M . ( 1994 ) . Turtles , Termites , and Traffic Jams . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Resnick , M . , & Wilensky , U . ( 1993 ) . Beyond the deterministic , centralized mindsets : New thinking for New Sciences . American Educational Research Association , Atlanta . GA . Resnick , M . & Wilensky , U . ( 1995 ) . New Thinking for New Sciences : Constructionist Approaches for Understanding Complex Systems 62 Exploring Complexity . American Educational Research Association , San Francisco , CA . Resnick , M . , & Wilensky , U . ( 1998 ) . Diving into complexity : Developing probabilistic decentralized thinking through role - playing activities . Journal of Learning Sciences , 7 , 153 - 172 . Rieber , L . P . ( 1992 ) . Computer - based microworlds : A bridge between constructivism and direct instruction . Educational Technology Research & Development , 40 , 93 - 106 . Rieber , L . P . , Tzeng , S - C . , & Tribble , K . ( 2004 ) . Discovery learning , representation , and explanation within a computer - based simulation : finding the right mix . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 307 - 323 . Roberson , D . , Davies , I . , & Davidoff , J . ( 2000 ) . Color categories are not universal : Replications and new evidence in favor of linguistic relativity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 129 , 369 – 398 . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : the use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 - 639 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Different effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 - 468 . Salomon , G . & Perkins , D . N . ( 1989 ) . Rocky roads to transfer : Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon . Educational Psychologist , 24 , 113 - 142 . Schwan , S . , & Riempp , R . ( 2004 ) . The cognitive benefits of interactive videos : learning to tie nautical knots . Learning and Instruction , 14 , 293 - 305 . Schwartz , D . L . & Black , J . B . ( 1996a ) . Analog imagery in mental model reasoning : Depictive models . Cognitive Psychology , 30 , 154 - 219 . Schwartz , D . L . & Black , J . B . ( 1996b ) . Shuttling between depictive models and abstract rules : Induction and fallback . Cognitive Science , 20 , 457 - 497 . Sfard A . ( 2001 ) There is more to discourse than meets the ears : Looking at thinking as communicating to learn more about mathematical learning . Special Issue , Educational Studies in Mathematics , 46 , 13 - 57 . Shepard , R . N . ( 1984 ) . Ecological constraints on internal representations : Resonant kinematics of perceiving , imagining , thinking , and dreaming . Psychological Review , 91 , 417 - 447 . Understanding Complex Systems 63 Shepard , R . N . ( 1987 ) . Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science . Science , 237 , 1317 - 1323 . Simmons , K . , & Barsalou , L . W . ( 2003 ) . The similarity - in - topography principle : Reconciling theories of conceptual deficits . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 20 , 451 - 486 . Simon H A ( 1980 ) . Problem solving and education . In : Tuma D T , Reif R ( eds . ) Problem Solving and Education : Issues in Teaching and Research . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ . Sjoberg , L . ( 1972 ) . A cognitive theory of similarity . Goteborg Psychological Reports , 2 ( 10 ) . Smith , L . B . ( 2003 ) . Learning to recognize objects . Psychological Science , 14 , 244 - 250 . Smullyan , R . ( 1983 ) . 5000 B . C . and other philosophical fantasies . St . Martin’s Press : NY . Suzuki , H . , Ohnishi , H , & Shigemasu , K . ( 1992 ) . Goal - directed processes in similarity judgment . Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . ( pp . 343 - 348 ) . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Thurston , W . ( 1994 ) . On proof and progress in mathematics . Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society . 30 ( 2 ) : 161 - 177 . Tisue , S . , & Wilensky , U . ( 2004 ) . NetLogo : A Simple Environment for Modeling Complexity . Paper presented at the International Conference on Complex Systems ( ICCS 2004 ) , Boston , MA , May 16 - 21 , 2004 . Uttal , D . H . , Liu , L . L . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Taking a hard look at concreteness : Do concrete objects help young children learn symbolic relations ? in C . S . Tamis - LeMonda ( Ed ) Child psychology : A handbook of contemporary issues ( pp . 177 - 192 ) . Philadelphia , PA : Psychology Press . Uttal , D . H . , Scudder , K . V . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1997 ) . Manipulatives as symbols : A new perspective on the use of concrete objects to teach mathematics . Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , 18 , 37 - 54 . Wilensky , U . ( 1991 ) . Abstract meditations on the concrete and concrete implications for mathematics education . In I . Harel , & S . Papert ( Eds . ) Constructionism . ( pp . 193 - 203 ) . Westport , CT : Ablex . Understanding Complex Systems 64 Wilensky , U . ( 1993 ) . Connected Mathematics : Building Concrete Relationships with Mathematical Knowledge . Doctoral dissertation . Cambridge , MA , MIT . Wilensky , U . ( 1999a ) . NetLogo . Evanston , IL . Center for Connected Learning and Computer Based Modeling , Northwestern University . http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu / netlogo . Wilensky , U . ( 1999b ) . GasLab - an Extensible Modeling Toolkit for Exploring Micro - and - Macro - Views of Gases . Computer Modeling and Simulation in Science Education . N . Roberts , W . Feurzeig and B . Hunter . Berlin , Springer Verlag . Wilensky , U . ( 2001 ) . Modeling nature ' s emergent patterns with multi - agent languages . Proceedings of EuroLogo 2001 . Linz , Austria . Wilensky , U . & Reisman , K . ( 1999 ) . ConnectedScience : Learning biology through constructing and testing computational theories - - An embodied modeling approach . InterJournal of Complex Systems , 234 , 1 - 12 . Wilensky , U . & Reisman , K . ( 2005 ) . Thinking like a wolf , a sheep or a firefly : Learning biology through constructing and testing computational theories - - An embodied modeling approach . Cognition and Instruction . ( in press ) . Wilensky , U . , Hazzard , E . & Longenecker , S . ( 2000 ) . A Bale of Turtles : A case study of a middle school science class studying complexity using multi - agent modeling . Paper presented as the annual meeting of the Spencer Foundation . Wilensky , U . & Resnick , M . ( 1999 ) . Thinking in Levels : A dynamic systems perspective to making sense of the world . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 8 , 3 - 18 . Wilensky , U . , Stroup , W . ( 1999 ) . Learning Through Participatory Simulations : Network - Based Design for Systems Learning in Classrooms . Computer Supported Collaborative Learning Conference , Stanford University , California . Wittgenstein , L . ( 1953 ) . Philosophical Investigations . G . E . M . Anscombe , trans . , New York : Macmillan . Wolfram , S . ( 1986 ) . Minimal Cellular Automaton Approximations to Continuum Systems . Cellular Automata . Understanding Complex Systems 65 Wolfram , S . ( 2002 ) . A New Kind of Science . Champaign , IL , Wolfram Media . Understanding Complex Systems 66 Author Notes Many useful comments and suggestions were provided by Dor Abrahamson , Paulo Blikstein , David Landy , Sharona Levy , Spiro Maroulis , Linda Smith , Ji Son and Seth Tisue . This research was funded by Department of Education , Institute of Education Sciences grant R305H050116 , and NSF grants 0125287 , 9632612 and 0126227 . Further information about the authors’ laboratories can be found at http : / / cognitrn . psych . indiana . edu / and http : / / ccl . northwestern . edu . Understanding Complex Systems 67 Table 1 . Examples of complex systems principles , with specific cases of each . System Principle Examples Positive feedback The presence of an attribute in a system leads to more of the same attribute . Microphone placed near , and connected to , a speaker Citations of an article lead to more citations of the article Wealth begets more wealth Negative feedback An increase in a system variable leads to a decrease to the same variable Thermostat that triggers heat when temperature falls too low Lack of food causes blood sugar decrease , which causes hunger Competitive specialization Agents adapt toward resource patches . The closest agent to a patch inhibits others from adapting to the patch , leading each agent to become specialized to a unique patch . Different visual cortex neurons become specialized to lines with different orientations Different oil companies become specialized for different oil reserves Autocatalysis Reaction product is itself the catalyst for that reaction , where a catalyst is a substance that accelerates the rate of a reaction without being consumed . As soon as tin organ pipes start to decompose , the decomposition process speeds up , feeding on itself The reaction of chlorine nitrate with ozone that leads to continued depletion of the ozone layer Active Walker model Agents affect their environment as they move , Human path formation on grassy Understanding Complex Systems 68 facilitating subsequent agents that follow the same path . Agent motion becomes a compromise between going to their destinations and going where others have gone . fields Ants trails during food foraging Lateral inhibition Neighbors inhibit one another , with the result that one unit will become much more activated than the others When reading , the two meanings of a homograph ( e . g . “bank” ) inhibit one another Edge enhancement : Light - detecting cells inhibit their neighbors , leading to light regions near dark regions to be more salient than light regions surrounded by other light regions Simulated annealing To get a system to find a good solution , begin by adding a large amount of randomness to the search , and then gradually decrease the amount of randomness . Balls find deepest valley if they move randomly at first , but then gradually become more influenced by gravity . Agents form paths around obstacles if they first move randomly , but then gradually move more toward each other .