ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING : CELL LOGISTICS SHAPE THE EUKARYOTIC CELL PLAN Sara Sigismund , Stefano Confalonieri , Andrea Ciliberto , Simona Polo , Giorgio Scita , and Pier Paolo Di Fiore IFOM , Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare ; Dipartimento di Medicina , Chirurgia ed Odontoiatria , Universita’ degli Studi di Milano ; and Istituto Europeo di Oncologia , Milan , Italy L Sigismund S , Confalonieri S , Ciliberto A , Polo S , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Endocytosis and Signaling : Cell Logistics Shape the Eukaryotic Cell Plan . Physiol Rev 92 : 273 – 366 , 2012 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00005 . 2011 . —Our understanding of endocytosis has evolved remarkably in little more than a decade . This is the result not only of advances in our knowledge of its molecular and biological workings , but also of a true paradigm shift in our understanding of what really constitutes endocytosis and of its role in homeostasis . Although endocytosis was initially discovered and studied as a relatively simple process to transport molecules across the plasma membrane , it was subsequently found to be inextricably linked with almost all aspects of cellular signaling . This led to the notion that endocytosis is actually the master organizer of cellular signaling , providing the cell with understandable messages that have been resolved in space and time . In essence , endocytosis provides the communications and supply routes ( the logistics ) of the cell . Although this may seem revolutionary , it is still likely to be only a small part of the entire story . A wealth of new evidence is uncovering the surprisingly pervasive nature of endocytosis in essentially all aspects of cellular regulation . In addition , many newly discovered functions of endocytic proteins are not immediately interpretable within the classical view of endocytosis . A possible framework , to rationalize all this new knowledge , requires us to “upgrade” our vision of endocytosis . By combining the analysis of biochemical , biological , and evolutionary evidence , we propose herein that endocytosis constitutes one of the major enabling conditions that in the history of life permitted the development of a higher level of organization , leading to the actuation of the eukaryotic cell plan . I . INTRODUCTION : THE VANTAGE POINT . . . 273 II . AT THE CELL’S GATES : ENTRY . . . 275 III . THE PARTNERSHIP : ENDOCYTOSIS . . . 278 IV . THE PARTNERSHIP : SIGNALING . . . 285 V . MULTIPLE ROLES OF UBIQUITIN . . . 291 VI . INTEGRATING THE PARTNERSHIP : . . . 295 VII . INTEGRATING THE PARTNERSHIP : . . . 300 VIII . ENDOCYTOSIS AND DISEASES 315 IX . EVOLUTION OF ENDOCYTOSIS 338 X . OUTLOOK : BEYOND THE PARTNERSHIP 340 The line between disorder and order lies in logisticsSun Tzu I . INTRODUCTION : THE VANTAGE POINT OF ENDOCYTOSIS ON SIGNALING ( AND VICE VERSA ) A search for the term endocytosis in any major cell biol - ogy textbook , in the Encyclopedia Britannica , or even in Wikipedia will result in a deﬁnition corresponding to a more or less sophisticated version of the following ( taken from Wiki ) : “Endocytosis is the process by which cells absorb molecules . . . that cannot pass through the plasma membrane . ” This is indeed true ; endocytosis serves to bring nutrients and / or other types of molecules into the cell and , at the same time , to regulate the com - position of the plasma membrane ( PM ) . Indeed , endocy - tosis most likely evolved for this purpose . However , this is only a fragment of the whole picture . Based on present knowledge , a more precise deﬁnition of endocytosis should read : “a vast program , deeply ingrained in the cellular master plan and inextricably intertwined with signaling , which constitutes the major communications infrastructure of the cell . As such , it governs almost all aspects of the relationships of the cell with the extracel - lular environment and of intracellular communication . Its evolution constitutes , arguably , the major driving force in the evolution of prokaryotic to eukaryotic organ - isms . ” A shorter version might read as follows : “Endo - cytosis is the logistics of the cell , ” where logistics ( again as deﬁned by Wiki ) “involves the integration of informa - tion , transportation , inventory , warehousing , material handling and packaging , and security , ” or in brief “hav - ing the right thing , in the right place , at the right time . ” This latter deﬁnition of endocytosis underscores a shift from a limited perspective ( what we might call a “tradi - tional view” ) to a much wider one , in which endocytosis is the cornerstone of the eukaryotic cell project . The de - Physiol Rev 92 : 273 – 366 , 2012 doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00005 . 2011 273 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m clared intent of this review is to illustrate how we have moved , in the course of the past 15 years or so , from one outlook to the other . The attentive reader will notice that this review ends where it should have started , i . e . , with a discussion of the evolu - tion of endocytosis and of the endomembrane system . This is because the past is paradoxically the best bridge between the present and the future , or , in other words , because the evolutionary perspective , though speculative , can help us to rationalize a number of heterogeneous observations and can indicate which experimental strategies might serve to achieve a coherent biological picture of endocytosis . For the sake of clarity , however , we would be wise to take things from the beginning . Early prokaryotic life forms used rela - tive simple devices , such as pumps or channels , to transport essential molecules , such sugars , amino acids , and ions , through the PM . As prokaryotes evolved to eukaryotes , more complex “entry portals” began to appear . As Chris - tian De Duve suggested ( 151 ) , this might have happened as a consequence of the selective pressure provided by the transition from “the primordial soup to oceans , ” i . e . , from environments in which nutrients were present in a concen - trated form to diluted environments . Such a transition might have provided selective pressure for the survival of life forms capable of actively searching for , and concentrat - ing nutrients . Regardless of how endocytosis came to be , this “simple” evolutionary perspective also pretty much encapsulates our traditional view of endocytosis that spanned a number of years . The problem is that we then started to discover things that were ( and still are , to some extent ) more and more difﬁcult to reconcile with the traditional view , starting from the tight connection between endocytosis and signaling . From the signaling viewpoint , our outlook on endocytosis started to change with the pioneering studies of Brown and Goldstein ( 12 ) , which established the concept of receptor - mediated endocytosis . By using surface receptors , the cell cleverly concentrates macromolecules at the PM and re - duces the energy consumption necessary for their internal - ization . However , this mechanism of internalization has other interesting implications that are not immediately con - nected with the uptake of nutrients . Receptor - mediated endocytosis can be either constitutive or ligand induced . In the constitutive process , membrane re - ceptors are continuously internalized and then recycled back to the cell surface , after sorting in the endosomal com - partment . The internalized ligand is destined to different metabolic fates : either recycling to the surface or routing to lysosomes for degradation . In the ligand - regulated process , internalization is triggered by the interaction of a ligand with its surface receptor . The receptor - ligand complex is normally routed to the lysosomal compartment with ensu - ing degradation . However , the internalized receptors ( and sometimes their ligands ) can be redelivered to the PM , in a recycling process not dissimilar to that of constitutive en - docytosis . Ligand - mediated endocytosis is typical of signaling recep - tors , such as receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) . In this case , one important role of endocytosis is to remove active , sig - naling receptors from the PM and to destine them for deg - radation , thus achieving signal extinction and long - term attenuation . An interesting side effect ( so to speak ) of this process is that endocytosis continuously remodels the com - position of the PM , thus allowing plasticity in the cellular responses to the microenvironment , something that , as we will see , plays a determining role in many biological pro - cesses , ﬁrst and foremost cell fate determination . Another relevant implication of these ﬁndings concerns recycling . While recycling was initially considered to be a device that simply replenished the PM with receptors , this process is now understood to be a major tool for redistributing recep - tors and other signaling membranes to speciﬁc regions of the PM where polarized signaling needs to occur . The discovery of receptor - mediated endocytosis led to fur - ther signaling - relevant insight . In the endosomal compart - ments , signaling receptors are frequently still bound to their ligands , and are therefore active . Thus the possibility ex - isted that signaling might not occur from the PM exclu - sively , but could persist throughout the endosomal route . More interestingly , signaling receptors in the endosomal compartment could potentially be exposed to substrates that were inaccessible at the PM . Under this scenario , en - docytosis would be a mechanism to sustain signaling and to achieve signal diversiﬁcation and speciﬁcity . The ﬁrst compelling functional evidence in this direction came from a study published by the Schmid laboratory . These researchers exploited a dominant negative mutant of dynamin , which blocks most endocytic events , to show that while some signaling pathways were augmented ( as would be expected if signaling were to occur exclusively from the PM and endocytosis were simply an attenuation device ) , other pathways were dampened ( 807 ) . This study estab - lished the concept that endocytosis is required for at least some forms of signaling . In the decade that followed this seminal discovery , the ﬁeld witnessed a tumultuous ex - pansion in knowledge that ﬁrmly established the fact that the signaling and endocytic programs are profoundly inter - connected . This bi - univocal correspondence is witnessed by 1 ) the regulation of signaling pathways by endocytosis , 2 ) the reciprocal regulation of endocytosis by signaling , and 3 ) a shareware situation in which several molecules have a dual role in endocytosis and signaling . Over recent years , progress in the deconvolution of the biochemical wirings that connect endocytosis and signaling has been mirrored by a spectacular series of studies that have highlighted how these circuitries actuate and coordinate the execution of SIGISMUND ET AL . 274 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m several biological programs . Not surprisingly , efforts di - rected at discovering how things can go wrong have also highlighted an important contribution of endocytosis to several pathological human conditions . And yet , this might still represent only part of the entire story . In recent years , numerous studies have reported a role for endocytic proteins in cellular programs that cannot be directly linked to biomembranes , such as the control of gene transcription , cell cycle progression , and mitosis . Many of these connections cannot intuitively be rational - ized within a canonical view of endocytosis . They appear , therefore , to identify “noncanonical” functions of the pro - cess . Regardless of nomenclature , the real question to re - solve is the relationship between the molecular machinery of endocytosis and that of apparently very distant cellular processes . One possibility is that endocytic proteins partic - ipate in these events as “freelancers , ” so to speak : their functions in these processes would be unrelated to the roles they play in endocytosis . There is , however , an alternative and much more appealing hypothesis , i . e . , that endocytosis is integrated with , and necessary for , the execution of these cellular programs , however distant they may appear to be from membrane dynamics . The declared intent of this review is to try and provide a unitary framework that can accommodate all these appar - ently heterogeneous functions of endocytosis . We will try to support the hypothesis , originally put forward by evolu - tionary biologists , that the acquisition of a system of endo - membranes constitutes a “quantum leap” in evolution that allowed the actuation of the eukaryotic cell plan , thus jus - tifying the involvement of endocytosis in so many cellular functions . To build our case , we will start by providing a necessarily succinct account of the mechanisms of endocy - tosis . This section ( sect . II ) is essentially for the beneﬁt of the nonexpert reader and makes no pretense of exhaustiveness ( interested readers will be directed to several in - depth re - views ) . Then , we will explore the wealth of evidence that established the “inseparable partnership” between signal transduction and endocytosis , from the biochemical per - spective ( sects . III – V ) . Next , we will review a number of examples that , at the systems biology level and at the bio - logical and cellular biochemical levels , show how endocy - tosis is an integral part of most cellular programs in eukary - otic cells ( sects . VI and VII ) , including those identifying apparently “noncanonical” functions of endocytosis . The pervasiveness of endocytosis within the cell is mirrored by the frequent subversion of endocytosis and / or trafﬁcking in pathological conditions ( sect . VIII ) . In the last part of the review , we will analyze how an understanding of the evo - lution of endocytosis ( sect . IX ) might provide reasonable explanations or , at minimum , a viable working hypothesis for a unitary view of endocytosis . By building on an evolu - tionary perspective , we will ﬁnally discuss a concept that we have recently proposed , that of the “endocytic matrix” ( sect . X ) , which views endocytosis as the major enabling condition that allowed the emergence of many other fea - tures and programs of the eukaryotic cell . II . AT THE CELL’S GATES : ENTRY PORTALS AND ENDOCYTIC ROUTES The vastness of the impact of endocytosis on cellular ho - meostasis is revealed through the intricacy of entry portals and through the subsequent modalities of cargo sorting in intracellular membranous compartments . An explosion of knowledge , in the past few years , has forced the ﬁeld to abandon the idea of a simple and universal mechanism of internalization / trafﬁcking in favor of the notion of multiple and interconnected entry routes , which coexist in the same cell type and are more or less selective for different types of cargoes . Many attributes of the system , including molecular determinants , cargo speciﬁcity , and lipid requirements , are also frequently cell context dependent , thereby increasing its convolution . Here , we will cover some basic aspects of the endocytic routes , and refer the reader to a number of recent reviews for a more comprehensive account of their complexity and of the present level of knowledge and / or uncertainty about their nature ( for comprehensive reviews , see Refs . 173 , 509 , 517 , 586 , 623 , 631 , 781 , 889 ) . A note about nomenclature : throughout this review , the names of proteins are given in capital letters , regardless of the species of origin , except for cases in which descriptive names , such as dynamin , clathrin , or integrin , are used . The complexity of the system kicks off at the PM where multiple entry portals have been described ( TABLE 1 ) . A rough classiﬁcation is based on the size of the initial mem - brane invagination . Large particles ( (cid:1) 500 nm ) are taken up by phagocytosis ( reviewed in Ref . 763 ) , as in general is the case for bacteria or for apoptotic cells , whereas ﬂuid uptake occurs by macropinocytosis ( reviewed in Refs . 391 , 516 ) . Both processes involve large rearrangements of the PM guided by actin cytoskeleton remodeling , and coordinated by the stepwise involvement of RHO - GTPases ( reviewed in Ref . 345 ) . Micropinocytic events are instead characterized by smaller invaginations ( (cid:2) 200 nm ) and include clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) and non - clathrin endocytosis ( NCE ) ( reviewed in Ref . 173 ) . CME is the best - characterized endocytic route . This path - way involves the recruitment of PM - resident cargo into clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , in a process in which adaptor molecules , such as AP - 2 , bridge the internalizing cargo with clathrin ( reviewed in Ref . 781 ) . Clathrin polymerization then drives the progressive invagination of the pit , which is eventually released into the cytoplasm as an endocytic ves - icle , through the action of the GTPase dynamin ( reviewed in Ref . 521 ) . The apparent simplicity of this process is belied by the fact that more than 50 different proteins are associ - ated with CCPs , where they assist coat formation and ves - ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 275 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m icle release ( TABLE 1 and Refs . 173 , 781 ) . Some of these accessory proteins ( such as epsins and (cid:1) - arrestins ) have been demonstrated , or proposed , to work as substitute adaptors for AP - 2 , since they can bind both cargo and clath - rin . Furthermore , the existence of such a wealth of proteins involved in CME , together with the large variety of sorting signals , has raised the possibility that they might be required for the formation of distinct types of CCPs , specialized in terms of cargo selection and possibly of speciﬁc intracellular fate , a concept that is , however , still debated ( 393 , 423 , 520 , 543 , 627 , 779 ; a stimulating discussion of this issue can be found in Ref . 781 ) . The exact mechanism of forma - tion and release of CCPs and the role of the several partic - ipating proteins are currently the focus of intense investiga - tion based on biochemical , structural , and live imaging ap - proaches ( see , for instance , and limitedly to recently Table 1 . Pathways of internalization Pathway MorphologyandSize Coat or Coat - like DynaminDependence Small GTPase Involved Internalized Cargoes Associated / Regulatory Proteins Phagocytosis Cargo - shaped None No RAC1 / RHOA / CDC42 [ depending on type ( 9 , 105 , 763 ) ] Pathogens , apoptotic cells , FcRs ( 738 , 763 ) Actin , ARP2 / 3 ( 507 ) , Formins ( 133 ) , PI3K ( 808 ) , WASP ( 479 ) , WAVE2 ( 2 ) , amphiphysin ( 864 ) , coronin ( 867 ) , others ( 763 ) (cid:1) 500 nm Macro - pinocytosis Rufﬂed0 . 2 – 10 (cid:2) m None In somecases ( 575 ) RAC1 , CDCD42 ( 560 , 837 ) , ARF6 ( 687 ) , RAB5 ( 426 , 427 ) RTKs ( 575 ) , ﬂuids , bacteria ( 391 , 763 ) Actin , ARP2 / 3 , cortactin ( 413 ) , PI3K ( 17 , 18 ) , SRC ( 382 , 391 ) , PAK1 ( 164 ) , RAS , CTBP1 / BARS ( 454 ) , others ( 763 ) Clathrin - mediated Vesicular Clathrin Yes RAB5 ( 89 ) RTKs ( 742 ) , GPCR ( 744 ) , TFR ( 539 ) , LDLR ( 539 ) , toxins ( 681 ) , bacteria ( 804 ) , viruses ( 517 ) AP - 2 , epsins , EPS15 , intersectin , amphiphysin , ARRs , DAB2 , ARH , others ( (cid:1) 50 ) ( 388 , 645 , 781 ) ; FCHO1 / 2 ( 309 ) , ARFGAP1 ( 36 ) 150 – 200 nm Caveolae - mediated Flask - shaped 50 – 120 nm Caveolin 1 and 2 Yes Not clear GPI - linked proteins ( 291 ) , CTxB ( 681 ) , SV40 ( 517 ) , TGF - (cid:1) R ( 167 ) , IGF - 1R ( 678 ) PTRF / cavin1 ( 290 , 546 ) , SDPR / cavin2 ( 289 ) , SRBC / cavin3 ( 512 ) , MURC / Cavin4 ( 49 ) , SRC ( 702 ) CLIC / GEEC Tubular None No CDC42 , ARF1 ( 416 ) Fluids , bulk membrane , GPI - linked proteins ( 327 ) Actin ( 327 ) , GRAF1 ( 172 ) , ARHGAP10 ( 416 ) IL - 2R (cid:1) Vesicular50 – 100 nm None Yes RHOA , RAC1 ( 424 ) IL - 2R (cid:1) ( 424 ) , (cid:3) c - cytokine receptor ( 686 ) PAK1 and 2 , cortactin , N - WASP ( 424 ) Arf6 - dependent Tubular None None as yet ARF6 ( 147 ) MHC I - II ( 67 , 814 ) , CD59 ( 551 ) , CD55 , GLUT1 ( 203 ) , AchR ( 76 ) None as yet Flotillin - dependent Vesicular Flotillin 1 and 2 No None CTxB , CD59 , proteoglycans ( 230 , 258 , 591 ) , DAT , EAAT2 ( 141 ) None as yet The known pathways of internalization are shown together with the morphology and the size of the internalizing membrane structure , the coat involved , the dependence of the pathway on dynamin , the involvement of GTPases , the type of cargo internalized , and the known associated molecular machinery . Relevant references are in parentheses . CLIC , clathrin - independent carriers ; GEEK , GPI - AP enriched early endosomal compart - ment ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; GPCR , G protein - coupled receptor ; TFR , transferrin receptor ; LDLR , low - density lipoprotein receptor ; DAB2 , disabled - 2 ; ARH , autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ; CTxB , cholera toxin B ; SV40 , simian virus 40 ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol ; MHC , major histocompatibility complex ; TGF - (cid:1) R , transforming growth factor - beta receptor ; IGF - IR , insulin - like growth factor I receptor ; PTRF , polymerase I and transcript release factor ; SDPR , serum deprivation response ; SRBC , sdr - related gene product that binds to - c - kinase ; MURC , muscle restricted coiled - coil protein ; CtBP1 , COOH - terminal binding protein 1 ; DAT , dopamine transporter ; EAAT2 , glial glutamate transporter ; AchR , acetylcholine receptor . SIGISMUND ET AL . 276 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m published studies , Refs . 118 , 180 , 225 , 226 , 247 , 309 , 354 , 387 , 475 , 524 , 620 , 767 ) , and we refer the reader to the cited reviews for an in - depth analysis of this aspect of en - docytosis . Compared with CME , the current picture of NCE is at a lower level of resolution . The term NCE is used to refer to a heterogeneous group of pathways that share the common property of being insensitive to clathrin depletion , but that frequently depend on cholesterol - rich PM microdomains , thus being sensitive to pharmacological cholesterol deple - tion . While knowledge of the molecular machinery of NCE ( s ) is still somewhat limited , attempts to classify these pathways rely on three major criteria ( TABLE 1 , see also Refs . 173 , 516 ) : 1 ) dependency on dynamin for vesicle re - lease ; 2 ) presence of “coatlike” proteins involved in mem - brane curvature and stabilization , such as caveolins or ﬂo - tillins , in the case of caveolae - mediated or ﬂotillin - mediated internalization , respectively ; and 3 ) dependency on small GTPases , which control the entry of speciﬁc cargoes such as interleukin ( IL ) - 2R (cid:1) ( dependent on RHO - A ) , major histo - compatibility complex ( MHC ) - I ( dependent on ARF6 ) , or ﬂuid - phase markers , which enter through the so - called CLIC / GEEC pathway ( CDC42 dependent , GRAF - 1 depen - dent ) . A recent study has provided a precise quantitative assessment of the CLIC / GEEC pathway in ﬁbroblasts , which surprisingly revealed that it is the major endocytic pathway for ﬂuid - phase and bulk membrane endocytosis , being three times more active than CME ( 327 ) . In addition , the biochemical puriﬁcation of vesicles internalized through this pathway has highlighted unexpected links with the ac - tin - based cell migration machinery ( 327 ) . While a detailed description and analysis of NCE pathways would exceed the scope of this review , caveolae deserve a particular men - tion , as they not only represent one of the best - known ex - ample of non - clathrin internalization portals , but their function intersects with several other aspects of control of signaling , possibly also in a manner unrelated to endocyto - sis . The role of caveolae in internalization and signaling will be discussed in detail in section VII A . Cargoes , internalized either through CME or NCE , are routed to early endosomes , where they are subjected to distinct trafﬁcking paths that ultimately determine their fates : degradation in the lysosome , recycling to the PM , or retrotransport to the Golgi ( reviewed in Refs . 330 , 370 , 751 ) . Early endosomes represent in all likelihood a common sorting station for all internalization pathways . In the case of caveolar trafﬁcking , the existence of a separate interme - diate station , the caveosome , was proposed ( 598 ) , although more recently this concept has been revised and reincorpo - rated into a standard endosome - lysosome perspective ( 195 , 299 ; discussed in Ref . 585 ) . The mechanisms governing the speciﬁcity of sorting at the endosomal station reveal a surprisingly dynamic picture . Growing evidence indicates that early endosomes are a morphologically and functionally heterogeneous popula - tion , whose complexity is enhanced by the presence of bio - chemically distinct membrane subdomains , which ulti - mately inﬂuence the signaling capacity and fate of receptors within individual organelles ( 423 , 523 , 740 , 885 ) . Further - more , it has been shown that newly formed endocytic vesi - cles can convert directly into early endosomes ( 617 ) , and early endosomes into late endosomes ( 652 ) . Cargo selection is , therefore , predicted to speciﬁcally and dynamically con - trol the continuous remodeling of the downstream endo - cytic pathway , a concept that will be elaborated in detail in section IV A . At the molecular level , small GTPases , mostly , but not ex - clusively , belonging to the RAB subfamily , play a para - mount role in orchestrating the different sorting fates of cargoes in endosomal stations ( reviewed in Ref . 757 ) . For instance , once delivered to early endosomes , cargoes can be recycled to the PM through either a fast or a slow recycling route , depending on RAB4 and RAB8 / RAB11 , respectively ( 757 ) . An additional recycling pathway relies on ARF6 ac - tivity . This latter route is mainly followed by receptors in - ternalized through NCE , such as MHC - I ( reviewed in Ref . 693 ) , although CME - internalized cargo can also be recy - cled through this pathway ( 580 ) . In other instances , cargoes are committed to degradation in lysosomes via sorting through late endosomes and multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) . This route depends on an - other RAB family member , RAB7 ( 757 ) . Cargo ubiquiti - nation provides the crucial signal for entering this path - way . Indeed , several protein complexes harboring ubiq - uitin ( UB ) - binding domains recognize ubiquitinated cargoes and escort them along the degradative route to the lysosome ( reviewed in Ref . 169 ) . These complexes called ESCRT ( endosomal sorting complex required for transport ) act sequentially at various stations of the deg - radative route . ESCRT - 0 , composed of two interacting proteins HRS and STAM , works at the level of the endo - some , by sequestering ubiquitinated cargo . Three addi - tional complexes , ESCRT - I , ESCRTII , and ESCRT - III , act at the MVB membrane . ESCRT - I and ESCRT - II me - diate the invagination of the membrane into which cargo is sorted , and ESCRT - III is involved in the pinching off and release of the invaginations that constitute the in - traluminal vesicles ( ILVs ) of the MVB ( 852 , 853 ) ; deu - biquitinating enzymes , recruited by ESCRT - III , remove UB from the cargo so that it enters the ILVs in a deubiq - uitinated state . This ensures that the free UB pool in the cell is continuously replenished . Finally , ESCRT - III oli - gomers are dissociated through the activity of the ATPase VPS4 ( for reviews , see Refs . 338 , 631 ) . The impact of cargo ubiquitination , and of the UB signal in general , on the endocytic pathway will be discussed in detail in sec - tion V . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 277 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m III . THE PARTNERSHIP : ENDOCYTOSIS CONTROLS SIGNALING In the following three sections , we will take a close look at the biochemical foundations of the partnership between endocytosis and signaling by reviewing evidence of 1 ) how endocytosis controls signaling , 2 ) how signaling cont - rols endocytosis , and 3 ) how the UB system plays a special and pivotal role in this partnership . As highlighted in section I , endocytosis is a major mech - anism of long - term signal attenuation . However , the li - aison between endocytosis and signaling runs much deeper than signal extinction : endocytosis enables cells to adopt several strategies for the regulation of signal prop - agation and duration . The emerging picture is that the biological outcome of signaling pathways depends on physical constraints resulting from the association of sig - naling molecules with biomembranes , in turn regulated by endocytosis , and by cycles of endocytosis and recy - cling ( endo / exocytosis cycles , EECs ) to the PM . This not only allows cells to resolve signals according to precise time kinetics and spatially deﬁned sites of action , but also to ﬁne - tune a diverse array of biological outputs in re - sponse to extracellular stimuli , thereby determining sig - nal speciﬁcity . In this section , we review current knowl - edge of how endocytic circuits control signaling . We will focus on general principles , while referring the reader to recent reviews for more extensive coverage of the molec - ular details ( 694 , 744 ) . A . Endocytosis Regulates Signaling at the Plasma Membrane Receptors at the PM are the ﬁrst line sensors of extracellular signals . Not surprisingly , therefore , the regulation of their surface levels has an immediate impact on how a cell re - sponds to environmental stimuli . There are several mecha - nisms through which endocytosis controls receptor signal - ing speciﬁcally at the cell surface . FIGURE 1 . Endocytosis controls signaling . Examples are provided of how endocytosis and recycling control signaling at different levels and cellular locations . References to the depicted circuitries ( in this and all subsequent ﬁgures ) are in the main text . A : endocytosis regulates signaling at the PM . Endocytosis extinguishes signals by routing PM receptors to degradation . In addition , even in the presence of continuous endosomal signaling ( see below ) , endocytosis extinguishes signals dependent on the assembly and activation of molecular transducers exclusively localized at the PM , by removing receptors from the PM . Two examples are provided . In the case of RTKs ( exempliﬁed by EGFR , a ) , ligand binding and receptor autophosphorylation allow binding to SH2 - domain containing lipid kinases ( e . g . , PI3K ) or lipases ( e . g . , PLC - (cid:3) ) , which mediate RTK - dependent signaling by using PM - enriched phospholipids as substrates . Endocytosis of the RTK , therefore , extinguishes this type of PM - restricted signaling . In the case of GPCR signaling ( b ) , ligand binding permits the coupling with heterotrimeric G proteins ( (cid:4) and (cid:1)(cid:3) ) . This allows GPCR to act as GEFs for G (cid:4) , a step necessary for the ability of G (cid:4) to activate adenylyl cyclase and signaling . Since heterotrimeric G proteins are PM - resident ( with some notable exceptions , as depicted in panel C - i ) , the internalization of the GPCR [ which can proceed through ARR - independent ( b ) or ARR - dependent ( c ) mechanisms ] extinguishes the PM - based signal . Furthermore , upon ligand binding , GPCRs can become phosphorylated ( c ) and bind to ARR , which prevents the recruitment of stimulatory G proteins ( desensitization ) and promotes CME , thus terminating signaling ( c ) . Internalized ligand - GPCR complexes are routed to early endosomes , where the reduced pH causes the dissociation of the ligands from their receptors , as well as receptor dephosphorylation by an endosomally localized PP2A phosphatase ( d ) . The subsequent rapid recycling of receptors to the PM allows the reexposure of resensitized GPCRs at the cell surface ( d ) . Ligand availability is also controlled by endocytosis . For example , in NOTCH signaling , endocytosis and recycling of DELTA to restricted regions of the PM may promote high local levels of ligand , thus causing robust NOTCH activation ( e ) . Additionally , posttranslational modiﬁcations , such as monoubiquitination , of DSL ligands in the recycling compartments might also activate the ligands , via as yet ill - deﬁned mechanisms ( e ) . B : different endocytic routes modulate signal duration . Several receptors can be internalized through both CME and NCE , and the relative partitioning of receptors between the two entry routes determines the ﬁnal biological output . For EGFR and TGF - (cid:1) R , CME ( red arrows ) and NCE ( black arrows ) , respectively , destine receptors preferentially to recycling to the PM ( f ) or degradation ( g ) . Recycling leads to sustained signaling , while routing to lysosomes terminates signaling . Other cargoes exploit the two internalization pathways in the opposite manner ( not shown ) . C : endosomes act as signaling platforms . The signaling endosome hypothesis was originally proposed in neurons where endosomes were postulated to serve as platforms for the assembly and transport of protein complexes for long - range signal transmission . Several neuronal and nonneuronal receptors exploit the unique physical - chemical properties of endosomal membranes to either prolong signals originating from the PM , or to specify and diversify signaling outcome . A paradigmatic example is provided by sustained endosomal activation of ERK kinases . Endosomes are enriched in speciﬁc adaptor proteins , such as P18 that serves as an anchor for an ERK - activating scaffold ( MEK1 / MP1 / P14 ) . This allows ERK signaling from the endosome upon activation of EGFR , in addition to PM - originated ERK signaling ( h ) . A similar situation occurs for signaling along the GPCR - ARR - ERK axis ( not shown ) . In this case , endosomes act as platforms that , in addition to prolonging ERK signaling , also bias it towards predominantly cytosolic rather than nuclear ERK substrates . In the case of the GPCR PHTR , different conformations of the receptor , associated with the binding to PTH or PTHrP , lead to different signals ( i ) . The PTHrP : PTHR complex signals canonically from the PM . Conversely , PTH stimulates cotrafﬁcking into early endosomes of PTHR with stimulatory G (cid:4) that promotes adenylyl cyclase ( A cycl . ) activation and production of cAMP from that location ( i ) . Endosomes can also act as intermediate stations for the propagation of signals to the nucleus . Activation of EGFR stimulates the translocation of APPL1 from endomembranes to the nucleus , where it controls the activity of chromatin remodeling enzymes ( not shown ) . Similarly , HGF stimulation of MET receptor promotes STAT3 activation both at the PM ( j ) and on endosomes ( k ) . STAT3 must translocate to the nucleus to promote transcription . When MET activation is weak , such as in the presence of limited amounts of ligand , endosomes are used to transport STAT3 to the nucleus , while protecting it from being deactivated by cytosolic phosphatases ( k ) . Finally , there is increasing evidence of endosome - directed signal speciﬁcity . This is the case for SARA - endosomes mediating TGF - (cid:1) R signaling . The recruitment of SMAD2 by SARA leads to phosphorylation of SMAD2 by internalized TGF - (cid:1) R . Phosphorylated SMAD2 dissociates from the receptor and forms a complex with SMAD4 that translocates to the nucleus , where it regulates gene transcription ( l ) . SIGISMUND ET AL . 278 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 1 . Regulation of receptor availability at the cell surface Soluble and cell - associated ligands have long been known to promote ligand - induced internalization of their cognate receptors . As a consequence , signaling receptors are rapidly removed from PM , providing a mechanism that directly limits the magnitude and duration of signaling from this site . At steady state , continuous stimulation with soluble ligands , such as those activating RTKs , frequently causes a permanent reduction of the number of cell surface recep - tors , which are routed to degradative pathways ( reviewed in Ref . 744 ) ( FIGURE 1 A ) . This negative - feedback loop is es - sential to circumvent excessive signaling and to maintain homeostasis . The risks of losing this safety net can be seen in pathological conditions such as cancer , where the fre - quently seen overexpression of both ligands and receptors contributes to malignant transformation ( reviewed in Ref . 538 ) . Removal of surface receptors does not necessarily lead to a reduction of maximal signal stimulation . Rather , it causes a dose - response shift so that higher ligand concentrations are required to elicit the same magnitude of signal response . This regulatory mechanism is operational , for instance , during chemotaxis in response to soluble ligands . A number ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 279 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m of PM receptors , including RTKs and G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) , function as motogenic sensors , able to respond to gradients of chemotactic factors that guide the migration of cells to their ﬁnal destination ( reviewed in Ref . 177 ) . In addition to moving directionally , migrating cells must also be able to stop at their target sites , where the concentration of chemotactic factors is highest . It was shown , for example , that in the case of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - dependent chemotaxis of mammary carci - noma cell lines , the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) is uniformly dis - tributed over the cell surface . Ligand binding at the fore end of the cell causes ligand sequestration . This prevents lateral diffusion of the ligand and reduces the gradient . The subse - quent internalization and degradation of the ligand - recep - tor complex , at the fore end , renders cells progressively less sensitive to the chemotactic stimulus , until they stop at their target sites where the concentration of the chemotactic fac - tors is the highest ( 37 ) . Thus a ligand - dependent internal - ization / sorting mechanism , driving a motogenic receptor toward a degradative pathway , is critical for both sensing and switching off a migratory signal . Mechanisms of this kind have been shown to regulate the migration of primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) toward the go - nads during zebraﬁsh development . PGCs express the chemokine receptor CXCR4b and migrate directionally to - ward sites in the embryo at which the ligand SDF - 1a is expressed ( 174 , 644 ) . An internalization defective receptor led to aberrantly elevated receptor signaling levels , in - creased nondirectional cell migration , and increased ectopic cell migration ( 527 ) . Similar mechanisms have also been described , during Drosophila melanogaster oogenesis , in border cells that migrate directionally in response to plate - let - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) gradients ( 362 ) . Mutants in critical endocytic factors , such as the E3 ligase CBL or the RAB5 activator SPRINT , showed impaired endocytosis with uni - formly localized surface signaling , leading to loss of the spatial information necessary for directed cell migration . In this context , a balance between pro - and antiendocytic ac - tivities is also required to control the localization and amount of guidance receptors at the cell surface . Genetic ablation of the endocytic inhibitor MIM ( missing in metas - tasis ) , for example , leads to increased receptor internaliza - tion , resulting in a lack of directional movement by the border cell cluster ( 629 ) . Thus the antiendocytic function of MIM might be required to maintain the level of guidance signaling within a functional range that regulates the ability of cells to select the direction to follow and prevent their migratory arrest ( 629 ) . 2 . Regulation of ligand accessibility to the receptor Signaling can also be modulated by the regulation of ligand accessibility through endocytosis . NOTCH receptor signal - ing provides a specialized example of this kind . We will brieﬂy review here the complex role played by endocytosis in NOTCH activation , which also involves the regulation of the accessibility of NOTCH ligands to the receptor . Notch signaling is induced through the direct engagement of the receptor by ligands of the DSL ( DELTA , SERRATE , LAG - 2 ) family that are present , in a membrane - anchored form , on an adjacent signal - sending cell . Following binding , a series of events ensues in the NOTCH - containing ( signal - receiving ) cell leading to two proteolytic cuts in NOTCH ( the so - called S2 and S3 cuts ) . The S3 cut , executed by (cid:3) - secretases , occurs in the transmembrane region of NOTCH , leading to the release of a soluble cytoplasmic fragment of NOTCH , which translocates to the nucleus and activates the expression of target genes . While the exact mechanism through which DSL ligands activate NOTCH is still the object of intense scrutiny and debate ( reviewed in Refs . 224 , 237 , 406 , 592 ) , endocytosis is involved in every proposed model , also in light of genetic evidence that the signaling function of NOTCH requires dynamin , and there - fore presumably endocytosis ( 700 ) . Endocytosis seems to be required both in the signal - receiv - ing and in the signal - sending cell . In the signal - receiving cell , endocytosis of NOTCH is required for its activation , since the ﬁnal activating S3 cut probably takes place in endo - somes ( although it may also occur at the PM ) , as supported by evidence that 1 ) (cid:3) - secretase is present at the PM and on endosomes ; 2 ) (cid:3) - secretase displays peak activity at low pH ( 587 ) , suggesting that endosomal transit is necessary for Notch activation ; 3 ) DELTA : NOTCH interaction is fa - vored at low pH ( 595 ) ; and 4 ) endocytosis is necessary for the cleavage of NOTCH ( 788 ) . The endocytic regulation of NOTCH activation in the signal - receiving cell is likely to include additional levels of complexity , as ligand - indepen - dent NOTCH internalization pathways controlled by the UB ligase DELTEX also exist ( 847 ) . Surprisingly , NOTCH activation in the signal - receiving cell requires endocytosis to occur in the signal - sending cell as well ( FIGURE 1 A ) . One model contemplates a mechano - transduction mechanism in which pulling forces exerted by the internalizing DSL ligand “strip” the extracellular do - main of NOTCH from the intracellular membrane - an - chored moiety ( NOTCH is a heterodimeric receptor ) , thereby allowing proteolytic cleavage of NOTCH ( possibly including an internalization step in the signal - receiving cell , see above ) , as recently demonstrated in Drosophila germ lines ( 849 ) . However , for DELTA at least , endocytosis also appears to be necessary for ligand “activation . ” Endocyto - sis and recycling of DELTA to restricted regions of the PM are probably required to maintain sufﬁciently high local levels of ligand to cause robust NOTCH activation , as also supported by recent ﬁndings in Drosophila ( 632 ; see also section VII C ) . Consistent with this idea , clustering of DSL ligands can potentiate their signaling effects in mammalian cell culture assays ( 311 , 718 ) . Within this context , speciﬁc SIGISMUND ET AL . 280 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m posttranslational modiﬁcations of DSL ligands in the sort - ing or recycling compartments , such as monoubiquitination of their intracellular domains , might also activate the li - gands ( reviewed in Ref . 223 ) , through mechanisms that remain to be clariﬁed ( FIGURE 1 A ) . Like NOTCH , EPH receptors also recognize membrane - bound ligands , called ephrins , present on neighboring cells . This subfamily of RTKs is involved in development of the nervous system and is important in establishing cell - cell contacts . Ligand - receptor interactions trigger bidirectional endocytosis , during which the ephrin - containing cell inter - nalizes EPH receptor , and vice versa . Ultimately each cell contributes to controlling its neighbor’s ligand and surface receptor availability . This regulatory mechanism is impor - tant for the activation of RHO GTPases and results in changes in the actin cytoskeleton that mediate the repulsion or attraction of neighboring cells ( reviewed in Ref . 187 ) . 3 . Regulation of the assembly of PM - speciﬁc platforms The differential distribution of signaling effectors between the PM and the endosomal compartment contributes to the spatial and temporal regulation of signals . Removal of re - ceptors from the PM , through endocytosis , additionally ex - tinguishes certain signals that depend on PM - speciﬁc mol - ecules . For example , GPCR signaling via PM potassium channels requires that both receptors and K (cid:3) channels are present in the same membrane in order for the trimeric G proteins to initiate signaling ( 502 ) . Furthermore , GPCR - mediated signaling via phospholipase C ( PLC ) requires the prevalent , if not exclusive , localization of the PLC sub - strate , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , at the PM ( 511 ) . Similarly , PLC and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) signaling by the EGFR is virtually abrogated by re - ceptor internalization due to the lack of PIP 2 in endosomes ( 295 ) ( FIGURE 1 A ) . The interplay between PM - enriched inositol - containing phospholipids , such as PIP 2 and phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate ( PIP 3 ) , endocytosis and signaling is rather complex , and extends well beyond the mere extinction of PIP 2 - requiring signals at the PM . It is known that both PIP 2 and PIP 3 regulate CCP dynamics ( 142 , 369 , 550 , 886 ) . In - deed PIP 2 can bind , and concentrate at the PM , a variety of endocytic proteins including clathrin adaptors ( reviewed in Ref . 168 ) and dynamin ( 633 ) . PIP 3 can also bind to endo - cytic adaptors ( 243 , 351 , 638 ) . The requirement for tight regulation of phosphoinositide turnover in the formation of CCPs is underscored by the presence in CCPs of enzymes that synthesize PIP 2 and PIP 3 [ type I PIP kinases , ( 38 , 410 , 550 , 769 ) ] , as well as of enzymes responsible for their ca - tabolism [ the inositol - 5 - phosphatases synaptojanin - 1 , OCRL , and SHIP2 , ( 126 , 196 , 493 , 550 , 604 ) ] . The various phosphatases are recruited to CCPs with time kinetics that are partly overlapping and partly sequential , suggesting that 1 ) a coordinated action of multiple phosphatases is required in CCP formation and 2 ) a certain level of redun - dancy and robustness is built in the system . A recent study elucidates how the action of one of these phosphatases , synaptojanin 1 , might be regulated by a geometry - based mechanism to contribute to the spatial restriction of PIP 2 elimination in certain membrane domains ( 115 ) . Synapto - janin 1 is recruited to sites of internalization predominantly through interaction with the BAR - containing protein endo - philin ( 242 , 651 ) . Through the action of its BAR domain , endophilin participates in and senses membrane curvature . It was shown that , by acting in concert with endophilin , synaptojanin 1 preferentially removes PIP 2 from curved membranes , with respect to ﬂat ones ( 115 ) . Interestingly , these data are in line with recently developed systems mod - els , developed for yeast endocytosis , highlighting the impor - tance of the connection between chemical reactions and mechanical deformation of the PM ( 465 , 466 ; see also sect . VI B1 ) . Finally , it is worth mentioning here that GPCR - mediated signaling is regulated by (cid:1) - arrestin ( ARR ) - mediated inter - nalization ( reviewed in Refs . 292 , 495 ) ( FIGURE 1 A ) , a pro - cess that is intimately linked with endocytosis and signaling . The complexity of this liaison represents an almost paradig - matic case of the partnership between these two cellular programs , something we will cover brieﬂy in section VII F2 , while referring the reader to a recent excellent review for an in - depth analysis ( 485 ) . B . The Integration of Different Endocytic Routes Controls the Net Biological Output The biological output of a speciﬁc signal can be controlled not only by internalization of receptors and / or ligands into endosomal organelles , but also by the routes through which receptors reach the different compartments ( FIGURE 1 B ) . Many signaling receptors , including RTKs , GPCRs , tumor growth factor (cid:1) receptor ( TGF (cid:1) R ) , WNT , and NOTCH , undergo both CME and NCE , and the relative partitioning of receptors between the two entry routes determines the ﬁnal net signaling / extinction output . TGF (cid:1) R , for example , can be internalized by both CME and NCE ( through the caveolar pathway ) . Binding of the FYVE - domain contain - ing adaptor protein SARA ( smad anchor for receptor acti - vation ) to the TGF (cid:1) R at the PM causes receptor routing to signaling - competent endosomal vesicles . Conversely , re - cruitment of SMAD7 to the receptor is associated with ad - ditional binding of the E3 UB ligase SMURF , leading to receptor ubiquitination , internalization through an NCE route , and subsequent degradation ( 167 ) . A similar sce - nario might also be operational during signaling and inter - nalization of the EGFR . In this case , EGFR is committed to a signaling - competent or a degradative pathway as a func - ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 281 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tion of ligand dose ( 722 ) . At low doses of EGF , the EGFR is almost exclusively internalized through CME ; at higher doses , the receptor is internalized through both CME and NCE ( 721 , 722 ) . CME leads to recycling of the receptor and sustained signaling , with limited degradation ( 721 ) . The NCE route [ which in the case of EGFR is still poorly char - acterized , although it has been shown to be clathrin - and caveolin - independent ( 721 ) ] leads instead to an MVB - de - pendent degradative pathway , limiting both the duration and the intensity of EGFR - dependent signaling pathways ( 721 ) ( see also sect . V C1 ) . In other studies , however , the internalization of EGFR was reported to be exclusively through CME at all concentrations of EGF ( 386 , 639 ) . The discrepancy between these two scenarios may lie in cell - speciﬁc differences between the EGFR internalization mod - els studied by the different groups . Whereas TGF (cid:1) R and EGFR ( at least in some cases ) utilize CME for signaling / recycling , and NCE for degradation ( FIGURE 1 B ) , other cargoes exploit the two types of inter - nalization routes in the opposite manner , as is the case for the WNT3a - activated low - density receptor - related protein 6 ( LRP6 ) . Signaling by LRP6 is associated with internaliza - tion by NCE , while degradation is clathrin dependent . In the presence of WNT3a , LRP6 is phosphorylated and inter - nalized into a caveolin - positive vesicular compartment , where it can stabilize (cid:1) - catenin and transduce the signal via the CK1 (cid:3) kinase . LRP6 can also bind the WNT3a antago - nist DKK , which diverts it from the caveolin to the clathrin pathway . This prevents the encounter of LRP6 with CK1 (cid:3) ( that is restricted to caveolin - positive compartments ) , ulti - mately resulting in enhanced (cid:1) - catenin degradation ( 865 ) . Notably , the regulation of the WNT - LRP6 canonical sig - naling can also take place at the endosomal levels . A well - known target of this signaling axis is represented by glyco - gen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) , which is normally active and free in the cytoplasm to phosphorylate (cid:1) - catenin , thereby promoting its degradation ( 14 ) . Upon internalization , how - ever , activated LRP6 is directed to endosomes where it can sequester GSK3 , preventing its encounter with (cid:1) - catenin ( 143 ) . Remarkably , the sequestration of GSK3 can also oc - cur in late endosome / MVB , and this appears to be critical for long - lasting (cid:1) - catenin activity ( 764 ) . Collectively , these results illustrate how internalization portals and endocytic routes contribute to ﬁnely tune signaling outcome . C . Endosomes Are Signaling Stations A large body of evidence supports the notion that signaling is not restricted to the PM . As internalization proceeds , activated transmembrane molecules , with their tails ex - posed toward the cell cytoplasm , are conﬁned and enriched within endomembrane organelles , from where they con - tinue to signal . Such structures are bona ﬁde signaling plat - forms that inﬂuence the duration , amplitude , and speciﬁcity of the downstream signals ( reviewed in Refs . 265 , 744 ) . Consistent with this view , a growing number of signal transduction pathways are reported to require active endo - cytic machinery , or to originate exclusively from various types of endosomes . The term signaling endosome embod - ies this concept ( FIGURE 1 C ) . The concept was ﬁrst proposed by the Bergeron group showing that EGFR internalization leads to the assembly of a variety of signaling complexes and their compartmentalization into endosomal vesicles ( 166 ) . The actual term signaling endosome ( FIGURE 1 C ) was later introduced as a hypothesis to account for the long - distance retrograde transmission of neurotrophic signals along axons ( 54 , 272 ) . In the last decade , this concept has received overwhelming experimental support , and it has now entered in the common language of signaling to indi - cate that endosomes ( and MVBs ) are signaling compart - ments , which confer time - and space - resolution to signals that would otherwise be only partially informative , and which add speciﬁcity to signaling through a variety of mo - lecular mechanisms . A number of speciﬁc features of endosomes make them ideal for both signal propagation and speciﬁcity . Endo - somes are characterized by 1 ) a limited volume that may favor the interaction between receptor and ligand when the two are internalized in the same vesicle , further sustaining receptor activity ; 2 ) a relatively longer resident time of ac - tivated receptors , with respect to the PM from which active receptors are rapidly removed as a consequence of internal - ization ; 3 ) a scaffold - promoting microenvironment , thanks to their enrichment in particular lipids or proteins [ such as the lipid phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PI3P ) , or the protein P18 ] that are able to assemble speciﬁc signaling complexes ; 4 ) a chemically deﬁned microenvironment char - acterized by low pH , which favors speciﬁc reactions , such as proteolysis of signaling molecules . Put simply , endosomes can inﬂuence signaling either by sustaining signals originat - ing from the PM or by contributing to signal speciﬁcity through their provision of a platform for the assembly of speciﬁc signaling complexes that are prohibited at the PM . These concepts have been discussed in detail in a series of recent reviews ( 265 , 694 , 744 ) . Here we provide a few examples of variations on these themes . 1 . Endosomes sustain signals RTK endosomal signaling serves as a canonical example of continuous signaling . The ﬁrst compelling evidence in sup - port of this concept was provided by the selective inhibition of EGF - induced activation of PI3K and extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERKs ) by a dominant - interfering mutant of dynamin that arrests EGF internalization ( 807 ) . Indeed , several signaling receptors , including RTKs and the TGF (cid:1) R , remain bound to their ligand and active once in - ternalized within endosomes , thus being capable of sus - tained signaling ( 93 , 166 , 272 , 294 , 300 , 325 , 420 , 603 , SIGISMUND ET AL . 282 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 813 , 824 , 829 ) ( for a notable exception in the case of the TGF (cid:4) : EGFR interaction , see sect . III D ) . An additional level of endosomal regulation of signals is provided by the observation that all components of the ERK activation cascade can be detected in endosomes ( 613 , 666 , 859 ) . Endosomal - speciﬁc proteins that serve to sustain sig - naling have been identiﬁed , such as P18 that serves as an anchor for an ERK - activating scaffold and is required for the maximal amplitude of ERK1 / 2 phosphorylation ( 547 ) ( FIGURE 1 C ) . This further reinforces the notion of endo - somes as speciﬁc signal - sustaining stations . A similar situa - tion also occurs in the case of GPCR signaling where ARR , similarly to P18 , acts as a speciﬁc scaffold stably anchoring ERK1 / 2 to the endosome . This seems to prolong signaling , and it has also been proposed to bias signaling towards cytosolic rather than nuclear ERK substrates ( 163 ) . Two recent studies have also highlighted the requirement of GPCR / G protein internalization for persistent G (cid:4) s signal - ing ( leading to cAMP production ) from an endosomal com - partment ( 98 , 218 ) ( FIGURE 1 C ) . In the case of the parathy - roid hormone receptor ( PTHR ) , the stability of the recep - tor - hormone complex is critical . The PTHR responds to two native ligands ; the endocrine parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) and paracrine acting PTH - related protein ( PTHrP ) with divergent downstream effects . Treatment with PTH , but not PTHrP , causes prolonged GPCR activation and G protein signal response ( 218 ) . PTH also stimulates cotraf - ﬁcking of PTHR with G (cid:4) s into early endosomes . A dynamin dominant negative mutant prevents sustained cAMP pro - duction in response to PTH . Conversely , PTHrP causes the dissociation of G (cid:4) s from its receptor prior to PTHR inter - nalization ( 218 ) . Thus PTH - induced internalization of the receptor into the endosomal compartment is required for sustained signaling , possibly protecting the receptor from ARR - mediated desensitization . 2 . Endosomes transmit signals over long distances Neurotrophin receptors at nerve terminals must send their signals to the neuronal body and the nucleus that may be up to a meter away . The speed with which signals travel cannot be accounted for by simple diffusion . Internalized nerve growth factor ( NGF ) bound to its cognate TRKA receptor is sequestered into early endosomes , where it remains fully competent to signal to the ERK1 / 2 and PI3K / AKT path - ways . The NGF - containing endomembranes can be trans - ported by retrograde microtubule - and dynein - based trans - port to their targets where signal is delivered , promoting survival ( reviewed in Refs . 324 , 343 ) . Recently , alternative routes of NGF - TRKA internalization have been unveiled , showing that the activated receptor can also undergo clath - rin - independent macropinocytosis , which requires the ac - tivity of the small GTPase RAC and the trafﬁcking pro - tein PINCHER ( 790 , 791 ) . NGF - TRKA - positive macropi - nocytic endosomes are resistant to degradation and are long - lived structures , suggesting , by analogy to early endo - somes , that they may be involved in promoting sustained or long - range ERK1 / 2 signaling . 3 . Endosomes as intermediate stations between PM and nucleus In conﬁrmation of the signaling endosome hypothesis , it has been demonstrated in a few cases that endocytic structures can function as obligatory intermediate signaling stations between the PM and the nucleus . For instance , in response to EGFR stimulation , APPL1 ( adaptor protein containing PH domain , PTB domain , and Leucine zipper motif ) trans - locates from these endomembranes to the nucleus , where it interacts with the nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase multiprotein complex NURD / MECP1 , an es - tablished regulator of chromatin structure and gene expres - sion ( 42 , 523 ) . A somewhat similar mechanism exploiting the endosomal machinery appears to be involved in the propagation of signaling from the RTK MET to the activation of the mul - tifunctional transcription factor STAT3 ( signal transducer and activator of transcription ) . Stimulation of MET by its ligand ( the hepatocyte growth factor , HGF ) results in re - cruitment of STAT3 , which is believed to be activated by the receptor at the PM . STAT3 then travels , via endocytic organelles , to the nucleus where it controls gene transcrip - tion . Recent observations have demonstrated that the strength of the signaling response is related to trafﬁcking of the receptor and downstream signaling components ( 390 ) ( FIGURE 1 C ) . Endosomal trafﬁcking may thus not only serve as an efﬁcient directional transport mechanism of STAT3 into the nucleus , but it may also protect weakly activated STAT3 from cytosolic phosphatases ( 390 ) . 4 . Endosomes specify signaling An increasing number of reports have demonstrated the existence of endosome - speciﬁc signaling platforms . This is the case for so - called SARA - endosomes and the APPL - en - dosomes , involved in signaling by the TGF (cid:1) R and by RTKs , respectively . Endosomal recruitment of SMAD2 by the FYVE domain adaptor SARA allows efﬁcient phosphorylation of SMAD2 by internalized TGFR . Once phosphorylated , SMAD2 dis - sociates from the complex and interacts with SMAD4 . The SMAD2 - SMAD4 complex then translocates to the nucleus , where it regulates gene transcription ( 122 , 300 , 783 ) ( FIGURE 1 C ) . APPL1 - containing endosomes are a population of precur - sors of early endosomes that contain RAB5 but lack the RAB5 - binding protein EEA1 . The interaction of APPL1 with RAB5 appears to be part of a control mechanism that ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 283 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m couples the release of APPL1 from these very early endo - somes to growth factor signaling and trafﬁcking ( 458 , 523 ) . It was recently proposed that APPLs and EEA1 compete for binding to GTP - bound RAB5 , and their recruitment to early endosomes is regulated by phosphoinositide content ( 885 ) . Thus the acquisition of PI3P through the recruitment and activation of the class 3 phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase , PI3KC3 ( also called Vps34 ) , which can directly phosphor - ylate phosphoinositol , results in the accumulation of EEA1 and the concomitant dissociation of APPLs in maturing early endosomes . This phosphoinositide - dependent switch mechanism has important consequences on signal duration since APPL - 1 - positive earlier - stage endosomes are compe - tent for AKT signaling , which is terminated following the acquisition of EEA1 and maturation of the vesicular com - partment ( 885 ) . Several other receptor systems , such as GPCRs , NOTCH , tumor necrosis factor - 1 receptor ( TNF1R ) , and TOLL - like receptors , also exploit signal - speciﬁc endosomes and have been reviewed elsewhere ( 671 , 744 ) . Differential subcellular compartmentalization of the three main RAS isoforms ( H - RAS , N - RAS , and K - RAS ) is believed to underlie their biological differences . For example , endo - somal localization of certain RAS isoforms has been shown to attenuate RAS - ERK signaling in mammalian cells ( 372 ) . It was shown that shuttling of RAS between the PM and the endosome is mediated by RAS mono - and di - ubiquitination catalyzed by RABEX - 5 , an E3 ligase and RAB5 exchange fac - tor ( 862 ) . This process is also conserved in Drosophila , where RABEX - 5 - mediated ubiquitination of RAS leads to endo - somal relocalization of RAS , thus restricting its signaling dur - ing the establishment of organism size , wing vein pattern , and eye versus antennal fate ( 866 ) . In this case , the canonical func - tion of endosomes in signal attenuation is therefore coupled to signal speciﬁcation . This latter mechanism seems also to oper - ate in specifying the signaling of different Ras isoforms . Using live imaging with probes that allow the monitoring of acti - vated Ras and binding to its effectors , it was shown that not only can K - RAS ( but not H - RAS or N - RAS ) enter endocytic CME pathways , but it is also transported along early endo - somes , late endosomes / MVB , and ﬁnally into lysosomes . K - RAS is active on late endosomes / MVB , where , together with the p14 - MP1 scaffolding complex , it provides an active intra - cellular signaling platform ( 480 ) . Thus , although the late en - docytic compartment is thought mainly to downregulate sig - naling by destining receptors and transducers to degradation ( see below ) , it can also selectively regulate speciﬁc signaling events . D . Regulation of Signaling by Endosome Sorting Endosome sorting plays an essential role in the spatial restric - tion of signals , which prevents signals from becoming uni - formly distributed throughout the cell , and consequently un - informative . EECs are necessary for the execution of a number of polarized cellular functions , including directed cell migra - tion , cell - fate decisions , epithelial - cell polarization , growth cone movement , tissue morphogenesis during development , and cell invasion into the surrounding tissues of metastatic cells ( see sect . VII , B and C , for an in - depth discussion ) . Endosome sorting also controls signaling fate . Routing of cargo to degradative pathways effectively terminates signal - ing , while recycling pathways that lead cargo back to PM replenish the supply of substrates for a further round of acti - vation . Both these mechanisms are exploited by cells and therefore affect temporal and spatial limitation of signaling ( reviewed in Refs . 495 , 744 ) . Transfer of activated receptors to late endosomes / MVB terminates signaling , either by seques - tering receptors in ILVs , thus preventing their interaction with effectors , or by promoting their lysosomal degradation . Re - ceptor ubiquitination plays a critical role in this process ( see sect . V for details ) . On the other hand , recycling of internalized receptors to the PM replenishes the cell surface with ligand - free receptors and also restores receptor sensitivity to extracel - lular ligands , as is the case for GPCRs . (cid:1) 2 Adrenergic receptor ( (cid:1) 2AR ) coupling to trimeric G proteins is inhibited by receptor phosphorylation events at the PM ( see , for instance , Refs . 56 , 57 , 610 ; also reviewed in Ref . 389 ) , which cause functional desensitization of signaling in the absence of endocytosis . However , sorting of internalized ARR - bound receptor into a rapid recycling pathway promotes receptor dephosphoryla - tion by an endosome - associated PP2A protein phosphatase , thus ensuring the return of intact receptor for successive rounds of signaling ( resensitization ) ( 611 , 801 , 868 ) ( FIGURE 1 A ) . The mechanism is signaling - regulated , as it was shown that PI3K hampers (cid:1) AR resensitization and that it does so by inhibiting PP2A activity ( 801 ) . A functionally similar process also occurs during EGFR signaling . Both TGF - (cid:4) and EGF elicit rapid internalization of EGFR . EGF binding to EGFR is relatively stable at the pH of endosomes , so EGFR remains active in these organ - elles , before being ubiquitinated ( see sect . V ) and trans - ported to lysosomes for degradation . In contrast , TGF - (cid:4) rapidly dissociates from the receptor when exposed to the acidic endosomal environment . As a consequence , the re - ceptor becomes deactivated and is recycled back to the PM ( 153 , 183 , 229 , 476 ) . This differential trafﬁcking fate is crucial to the duration of the EGFR signal . Following re - ceptor degradation , the EGFR signal will be diminished until the number of EGFRs at the PM has been reestablished by protein synthesis . In contrast , following receptor recy - cling , the cell is immediately able to undergo an additional round of EGFR activation . In accordance with this , TGF - (cid:4) is a more potent mitogen than EGF ( 832 ) . Thus the endo - some regulates signaling output for the EGFR , as a function of ligand type bound to the receptor . SIGISMUND ET AL . 284 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m IV . THE PARTNERSHIP : SIGNALING CONTROLS ENDOCYTOSIS As previously mentioned , endocytosis and signaling are bi - univocally related , meaning that the regulation of signaling by endocytosis is mirrored by a reciprocal control of endo - cytosis by signaling . Section III described the ﬁrst half of this relationship . This section will instead provide an overview of the latter half of these events . A . Plasticity of the Endocytic Compartment in Response to Signaling The regulation of endocytosis by signaling events can be directly inferred from the remodeling of endocytic compart - ments upon growth factor stimulation . Such rearrange - ments involve the entire endocytic pathway , from vesicles internalizing at the PM all the way down to the endosomal and lysosomal compartments . 1 . Plasticity at the plasma membrane At the PM , it has been reported that that activation of EGFR or TRKA is able to induce newly formed clathrin nucleation sites in epithelial and neuronal cells , respectively ( 53 , 136 , 366 , 625 , 844 ) . Mechanistically , this correlates with the fact that EGFR activates SRC kinases , which in turn phosphorylate the clathrin heavy chain in the hub do - main , causing redistribution of clathrin at the cell periphery and increasing EGFR endocytosis , possibly through the reg - ulation of clathrin assembly ( 844 ) . It is noteworthy that , even in the case of nonsignaling receptors , such as the trans - ferrin receptor ( TFR ) , it has been recently shown ( 463 ) that clustering of receptors can promote initiation of CCP for - mation , an event that correlates with increased TF uptake induced by TFR clustering . CCPs containing clustered TRF mature more efﬁciently and exhibit longer lifetime than other CCPs in the same cell ( 463 ) . The relative contribution of receptor clustering ( it should be remembered that signal - ing receptors cluster as a consequence of ligand binding ) and / or of true signaling to the initiation of CCPs remains , therefore , an open question . Regardless , the sum of the results indicates a major impact of cargo composition in the dynamics of CCPs . Signaling - regulated plasticity of entry portals might not be limited to CME . During mild stimulation of neurons , syn - aptic vesicle recycling , regulated by clathrin endocytosis , is the main mode of vesicle recovery after neurotransmitter release ( 269 , 883 ) . Such vesicle retrieval occurs in response to exocytosis at the synapse as a result of calcium activation of calcineurin , which causes a rapid dephosphorylation of numerous endocytic proteins , including dynamin and am - phiphysin ( 51 , 497 ) . However , during stronger neuronal stimulation , clathrin - independent bulk endocytosis ( also called ADBE , activity - dependent bulk endocytosis ) steps in to become the dominant mode of internalization ( 129 , 130 ) . The switch to ADBE is regulated by GSK3 activity , possibly through the phosphorylation of dynamin I ( 130 ) . In the case of EGFR , EGF has been reported to increase the number of caveolae and caveolae - like structures at the PM of epithelial cells ( 573 ) . Moreover , caveolin and ﬂotillins , two major regulators of non - clathrin pathways of endocy - tosis ( TABLE 1 ) , are phosphorylated in response to EGF or PDGF , and this has been proposed to be important for the assembly of caveolin - or ﬂotillin - containing pits ( 33 , 436 , 563 , 573 ) . It should be noted , however , that the relevance of caveolae to the internalization of the EGFR has been questioned ( 386 ) and that the emerging signaling role of caveolin - 1 imposes caution in extrapolating results ob - tained on this protein to the physiology of caveolae tout court ( an issue that will be dealt with in detail in sect . VII A ) . Thus it remains to be established whether the reported ef - fects of signaling pathways on caveolin ( and perhaps ﬂotil - lin ) result in regulation of NCE routes or are part of signal - ing circuitries not directly pertinent to endocytosis . 2 . Plasticity at the endosomal and multivesicular body level Early endosomes are a critical sorting station in the endo - cytic pathway , as a number of fate decisions are made in this compartment according to which cargoes can be recycled to the PM , retrotransported to the Golgi , or further routed to late endosomes for eventual degradation in the lysosome . We will concentrate here on the transition from early to late endosomes , in which recent ﬁndings highlight an important impact of signaling , while we refer the reader to reviews for other aspects of sorting at the early endosomal station ( 330 , 370 , 751 ) . The debate on the mechanisms of transition from early to late endosomes is almost as old as the concept itself of endosomes ( 305 ) . In one “classical” model ( the vesicular transport model ) , vesicles budding from early endosomes fuse with late endosomes ; according to this hypothesis , en - dosomal compartments are more or less static and con - nected by vesicular transport . In another , more dynamic , model ( the maturation model ) , a series of events progres - sively occurring on the surface of early endosomes convert them into late endosomes . At the biochemical level , RAB GTPases play an essential role in the control of sorting events . These proteins determine the functional organiza - tion of different endosomal compartments , by generating biochemically distinct RAB - containing membrane domains both in early and late endosomes ( excellently reviewed in Ref . 757 ) . With reference to the early - to - late endosome switch , two RABs are critical , RAB5 and RAB7 , which label , by and large , early and late endosomes , respectively ( 119 ) . However , RAB5 and RAB7 are also simultaneously present on a subpopulation of early endosomes , in two distinct membrane domains ( 652 , 810 ) . The question is , therefore , how the two domains become separated , to give ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 285 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m rise to RAB7 - containing endosomes . In support of a classi - cal vesicle transport model , budding and ﬁssion of RAB7 domains from RAB5 - positive endosomes have been ob - served ( 810 ) . However , the Zerial group has observed that endosomal membranes switch from being RAB5 - positive to being RAB7 - positive as they proceed from early to late en - dosomes , or , in other words , that the RAB5 domain de - creases while the RAB7 one increases , on individual endo - somes ( 652 ) . This mechanism , dubbed “RAB conversion , ” directly supports a maturation model . Additional support for maturation mechanisms in the endocytic pathway has come from recent studies of the De Camilli group that showed PI3P - dependent maturation of APPL endosomes ( see sect . III C4 ) ( 885 ) , and of the Donaldson group that showed that newly formed endocytic vesicles can convert directly into early endosomes ( 617 ) . From the signaling perspective , it is relevant that the RAB conversion is controlled by the progressive concentration of speciﬁc cargoes at the endosomal station . For instance , li - gands destined for degradation , such as low - density lipo - proteins ( LDL ) , progressively concentrate in fewer and larger endosomes that migrate from the cell periphery to the center , where RAB5 is replaced by RAB7 ( 618 , 652 ) . Im - portantly , growth factor receptors inﬂuence the kinetics of this kind of transport , as shown by the fact that treatment with EGF slows down LDL transport possibly by activating RAB5 and delaying the RAB5 - to - 7 conversion ( 618 , 652 ) ( for systems biology approaches to the phenomenon of RAB conversion , see section VI B1 ) . Another station at which signaling exerts control over en - docytic dynamics is the MVB . It was shown that EGF stim - ulation controls 1 ) MVB biogenesis , by increasing the num - ber of MVBs per unit of cytoplasm , and 2 ) inward vesicu - lation , by increasing the number of ILVs per MVB ( 840 ) . The effect of EGF on MVB biogenesis was found to depend on TSG101 , a component of the ESCRT - I machinery ( 643 ) . Although the molecular mechanisms are unknown , the in - volvement of TSG101 must rely on an EGFR - mediated sig - naling component since the effects of TSG101 depletion on MVB formation were much greater in EGF - stimulated ver - sus unstimulated cells ( 643 ) . A more recent study , in which all four ESCRT complexes were simultaneously silenced , shed additional light . It was found that , in pan - ESCRT - depleted cells , the formation of EGF - induced MVBs was inhibited ; however , the formation of EGF - independent MVBs was still allowed , albeit with considerable alterations in morphology ( 759 ) . Thus at least two major mechanisms of MVB formation seem to exist : an ESCRT - dependent one , which is regulated by EGFR signaling , and an ESCRT - in - dependent one , which is EGFR independent . It remains to be seen whether this latter mode is constitutive or whether it depends on other types of , as yet unknown , signals . Similarly , the stimulation of inward vesiculation was spe - ciﬁc to the subset of EGFR - containing MVBs and required the phosphorylation of annexin I ( 840 ) , which is known to be a major substrate of the EGFR in the MVB ( 241 ) . Im - portantly , annexin I was neither required for the formation of ILVs in unstimulated cells , nor for EGF - induced MVB biogenesis ( 840 ) , arguing that there are at least two mech - anistically distinct pathways through which EGFR regu - lates MVB function . In ILV formation , the EGFR - mediated signal , through annexin I , operates downstream of ESCRT proteins ( 840 ) , raising the possibility that this mechanism , as well , is ESCRT independent . In this latter contention , it is to be noted that at least two ESCRT - independent mecha - nisms of ILV formation have been reported ( 768 , 780 ) ( see also sect . VII E ) . At the functional level , the dual control by EGF on MVB function probably results in different mechanisms of signal attenuation . The effect on MVB biogenesis is most likely functional to EGFR degradation , since all ESCRT proteins are equally required for the degradation of the EGFR ( 630 ) . On the other hand , loss of annexin I ( which impacts on EGF - induced ILV formation ) has little effect on EGF deg - radation ( 840 ) . In this case , increased sequestration of EGFR into ILVs might represent a mechanism to remove the EGFR catalytic kinase domain from the cytosol , thereby terminating its signaling from the endosomal compartment . It was recently shown that this process is regulated by the tyrosine phosphatase PTP - 1B , which dephosphorylates the EGFR at the limiting membrane of the MVB ( 186 ) . Inter - estingly , PTP - 1B localizes at the cytoplasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( 228 ) , and it was shown that the interaction between EGFR and PTP - 1B is made possible by membrane contacts between the MVB and the ER ( 186 , 285 ) . 3 . Genome - wide approaches to plasticity System - wide analysis of the endocytic pathway ( 132 , 484 , 597 , 735 ) has helped the understanding of some of the regulatory networks at the basis of the endocytic system ( see also sect . VI ) . In one recent study , RNAi - based high - throughput screening on a genome - wide scale was com - bined with multiparametric image analysis to proﬁle EGF and transferrin ( TF ) endocytosis ( 132 ) . This analysis fur - ther reinforced the idea that the endocytic pathway does not involve simple transport from one static compartment to another , but , rather , it is dynamically regulated and rear - ranged depending on the type and intensity of signaling and the cargoes engaged . Indeed , various signaling pathways , such as integrin , TGF (cid:1) R , NOTCH , and WNT , were found to affect both EGF and TF endocytosis , possibly by exerting feedback mechanisms on the endocytic machinery itself . In addition , cells seem to speciﬁcally regulate the number of EGF - positive endosomes , tightly coupling their number , size , and intracellular location to cargo concentration ( 132 ) . This might have a signiﬁcant impact on endosomal SIGISMUND ET AL . 286 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m signaling , controlling both quality and strength of signaling outputs , ultimately inﬂuencing cell fate . A similar systems biology approach was applied to investi - gate population context - dependent phenotypes in endocy - tosis , using viruses as tools to follow endocytic pathways ( 735 ) . This analysis revealed that CME ( determined as a function of TF internalization and MHV , mouse hepatitis virus , infection ) is mostly active in densely populated cell cultures , while SV40 and cholera toxin entry , which depend on lipid microdomains , are more efﬁcient in sparsely pop - ulated cell cultures . Local cell density regulates endocytosis through the modulation of surface levels of the sphingolipid GM1 and activation of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) . There - fore , a speciﬁc signaling pathway , controlled by population context , regulates virus infection and endocytosis . Fol - low - up of these “high - throughput” studies is needed to gain a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms re - sponsible for these signaling circuitries and their biological implications ( see also sect . VI ) . B . Endocytic Regulation by Actin Signaling Endocytosis and actin dynamics are intimately connected . On the one hand , endocytosis and recycling can exert spa - tial and temporal control over a number of critical regula - tors of actin dynamics , thus inﬂuencing the biological out - come of a variety of actin - based processes , as will be dis - cussed in section VII B . On the other hand , there is a clear requirement for the actin cytoskeleton along the various steps of the endocytic process , both to provide structural support for membrane trafﬁcking intermediates , such as tubules emanating from endocytic vesicles , and to generate forces that aid either the deformation of membranes into invaginations or the scission of vesicles and their motility . In addition , actin assembly and polymerization are spatially and dynamically controlled by signaling , suggesting that pathways regulating this process may therefore also inﬂu - ence membrane trafﬁcking . However , evidence in support of this latter contention has only recently started to emerge ( reviewed in Refs . 431 , 440 , 614 ) . In this section , we brieﬂy illustrate established and evolutionarily conserved mecha - nisms through which actin dynamics modulate and control the different steps of the endocytic process ; more extensive descriptions can be found in recent reviews ( 135 , 245 , 375 ) . A tight regulation of the actin cytoskeleton is crucial for various modes of cellular uptake , including phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and some forms of NCE ( see sect . II ) . However , the role of actin dynamics in CME is still matter of debate . Much of the discussion stems from the fact that while CME in yeast is entirely dependent on actin dynamics for curvature of the membrane , stabilization of vesicular intermediates and pinching - off , a similar requirement in mammals , has not yet been established . In mammals , for instance , proteins such as dynamin appear to have a greater role both in deforming the membrane and pinching off ves - icles , thus making the role of actin dynamics less critical than in yeast ( 465 ) . Consistently , drugs that disrupt the actin cytoskeleton and its dynamics have been reported to affect CCP dynamics and lateral mobility within the PM , although their effects appear to be cell - type dependent ( 519 , 672 , 871 ) . In keeping with this notion and further compli - cating the matter , recent observations revealed the existence of two classes of clathrin - containing structures at the PM with distinct kinetic properties , namely , coated pits , the classical short - lived endocytic invaginations , and coated plaques , longer - lived structures present on the basal mem - brane of some adherent cell types . While the former are internalized in an actin - independent manner , the latter rely entirely on a functional actin cytoskeleton for their dynam - ics and internalization ( 672 ) . This notwithstanding , the evidence implicating the actin cytoskeleton in aiding or facilitating CME is mounting also in mammals . For example , a plethora of mammalian pro - teins directly link the endocytic pathway with the actin cytoskeleton , potentially regulating actin assembly at endo - cytic sites ( FIGURE 2A ) . Just to name a few : HIP1R binds clathrin , actin , and cortactin and may locally slow down actin assembly rates ( 432 ) ; intersectin binds to N - WASP , a well - established nucleator promoting factor that is re - cruited to CCP and facilitates CME ( 340 ) ; dynamin directly binds to cortactin and ABP1 ( both inducers of actin polym - erization ) , and these interactions may support endocytosis by stimulating cytoskeletal functions as well as regulating cell shape and movement ( 392 , 513 ) . In addition , live im - aging studies have shown that actin , together with actin - regulatory proteins , is invariably recruited to CCPs before their detachment from the PM , in a fashion and timing not dissimilar to what has been demonstrated in yeast ( 374 , 519 , 871 ) ( FIGURE 2 A ) . Finally , biochemical reconstitution experiments , using puriﬁed proteins and lipid vesicles to mimic the initial endocytic steps , have demonstrated that a stabilized actin network is involved in the generation of pulling forces necessary to bend the membrane for invagi - nation and subsequent scission ( 665 ) ( FIGURE 2 A ) . Remark - ably , these latter ﬁndings are entirely consistent with the role attributed to actin in yeast , where the presence of the cell wall and an elevated turgor pressure requires actin - based forces to allow early endocytic events to occur ( 3 ) . In support of this model , increasing turgor pressure has been shown to hinder endocytosis , whereas reducing the pressure suppresses the internalization defects of actin - bundling mutants and of cells treated with actin depolymerizing drugs ( 3 ) . The actin cytoskeleton , in addition to generating pulling inward forces that aid the bending of the PM , may also contribute to local changes in the lipid organization that correlate with the formation of membrane microdomains on model membranes , suggesting that domain boundary ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 287 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m forces are driving tubule membrane constriction . It was recently shown that an actin shell that nucleates along the sides of invaginating membrane tubules causes local mem - brane reorganization , lipid domain repartition , and line tension ( 659 ) ( FIGURE 2 A ) . These areas of membrane dis - continuity and accumulated tension may facilitate scission by a physical mechanism that can function independently from or in synergy with pinchase activities , such as the one provided by dynamin . It must be pointed out that this mech - anism has been shown to operate in clathrin - independent endocytic processes , but its relevance in CME remains to be established . Compared with yeast , mammals have a relatively lower internal counter pressure , and thus a lower force to oppose invagination . This may also account for early ﬁndings sug - gesting that dynamin may be sufﬁcient to promote constric - tion and generate tension for vesicle pinching - off ( 665 ) , although at the neck of budding vesicles other factors lead - ing to tension have been proposed to cooperate with the activity of dynamin ( 665 ) . Indeed , work in dynamin 1 and 2 double - knockout ( KO ) mice showed that while vesicle scis - sion was hindered , membrane invagination and tubule for - mation still occurred through the coordinated action of membrane bending ( mediated by BAR - containing proteins ) and actin dynamics . BAR protein and actin likely act up - stream of dynamin ( through clathrin - dependent recruit - ment mechanisms ) , generating tubular intermediates of size and composition that are remarkably similar to the endo - cytic tubular invaginations in yeast ( 215 , 350 , 857 ) ( FIGURE 2 A ) . All these studies contribute to reconcile divergent views of endocytosis in different organisms and suggest that the underlying processes are fundamentally conserved . Thus actin dynamics may modulate local membrane tension to facilitate invagination , scission , and vesicle movement of CCPs both in yeast and mammals . Yet , a number of unre - solved discrepancies still remain . These differences likely reﬂect the plasticity and increasing complexity of uptake mechanisms in various organisms and cell types , as wit - nessed by the observations that a single mammalian cell can employ a large spectrum of endocytic mechanisms to inter - nalize different cargoes , each characterized by different re - quirements for clathrin , dynamin , actin regulators , and lip - ids ( as discussed in sect . II ) . Actin is further involved , in both yeast and mammals , in moving vesicles away from the PM , for their subsequent trafﬁcking along the endocytic pathway ( reviewed in Refs . 262 , 615 , 739 ) ( FIGURE 2 A ) . Within this context , actin dy - namics provide a default basic engine to propel vesicle mo - tility inside the cells , in close cooperation with the microtu - bule - dependent transport system ( reviewed in Ref . 660 ) . SIGISMUND ET AL . 288 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m However , recent evidence indicates that actin polymeriza - tion can also be regulated in a cargo - dependent manner at speciﬁc endocytic sites to control cargo sorting . At the en - dosomal station of mammalian cells , the actin machinery can generate specialized subsets of tubular microdomains involved in sequence - dependent recycling of the (cid:1) 2AR fam - ily of signaling and endocytic receptors ( 626 ) . An actin shell is speciﬁcally recruited along (cid:1) 2AR - positive tubules , ema - nating from early endosomes , and this shell is signiﬁcantly more stable compared with the highly dynamic tubules in - volved in bulk endocytosis . This stability allows slow - dif - fusing , sequence - dependent cargoes enough time to enter into recycling pathways , and thus actin dynamics can ulti - mately control the fate of internalized , recycled receptors . Notably , the actin cytoskeleton at these sites also promotes the concentration of cargo , which is speciﬁcally recruited to these microdomains through interactions between PDZ do - mains , contained in actin regulatory proteins , and PDZ - binding motifs in (cid:1) 2AR ( 626 ) . Therefore , efﬁcient sorting at the endosomal station is exerted through a combination of kinetic and afﬁnity mechanisms , both of which are me - diated by actin . These results have established a connection between endosomal and actin dynamics that is clearly dis - tinct from the function of actin in endosome motility . Fi - nally , it is worth noting here that the connection between actin and endocytosis is bidirectional , and membrane dy - namics control , in turn , the actin cytoskeleton ( FIGURE 2 B and sect . VII B ) C . Transcriptional Programs Controlling Endocytosis Signaling also controls the endocytic pathway through the activation / repression of speciﬁc transcriptional programs . Several stress - induced signaling pathways directly modu - late the transcription of endocytic proteins to induce spe - ciﬁc cellular responses , as illustrated here using a few spe - ciﬁc examples ( see also FIGURE 3 ) . Under hypoxia conditions , the hypoxia - inducible factor HIF1 (cid:4) was shown to inhibit the transcription of RABAP - TIN - 5 gene , a critical RAB5 effector ( 825 ) . This impairs RAB5 - mediated early endosome fusion and delays the en - docytic pathway . As a consequence , the resident time of activated EGFR in endosomes is prolonged , and signaling is FIGURE 2 . Multiple and bidirectional connections between actin dynamics and endocytosis . A : endocytosis and recycling harness actin dynamics . Macropinocytosis , phagocytosis , and most forms of NCE are dependent on actin dynamics . The requirement for actin polymerization in CME in mammalian cells is less well established . However , recent evidence , mainly obtained using advanced live imaging , has shown that actin and actin regulatory proteins are invariably recruited along each of the various steps of CME and that they mediate key events in the transport and motility of endosomal vesicles . The initial curvature ( a ) of the PM is generated by the assembly of clathrin coats and additional endocytic proteins ( not shown ) , such as F - BAR - containing membrane deforming proteins . As invagination proceeds ( b ) , changes in curvature may be sensed by other BAR - domain - containing proteins that cooperate with the large GTPase dynamin ( not shown ) and actin polymerization regulatory factors to promote neck formation ( c ) , which precedes vesicle scission ( d ) . Proteins of the endocytic coat ( not shown ) may directly link the membrane to the actin network . Actin polymerization may generate the force necessary to promote pit invagination into the cell , until dynamin - mediated scission occurs . Alternatively , an actin shell that nucleates along the sides of invaginating membrane tubules may cause membrane reorganization , lipid domain repartition , and line tension , aiding dynamin - dependent scission . Actin is also involved in vesicle motility and trafﬁcking inside the cells ( d ) and has recently been shown to inﬂuence cargo sorting ( e ) . This is the case for (cid:1) 2ARs that generate endosomal , actin - coated , subdomains by recruiting actin regulatory factors through their PDZ - interacting motives . This provides a physical basis for sequence - dependent sorting of internalized membrane proteins from distinct domains within the same endosome , enabling separation and diversiﬁcation between bulk [ here , represented by TFR recycling ( f ) ] and sequence - dependent ( (cid:1) 2AR ) , actin - mediated recycling to the PM ( e ) . Thus actin may be crucial not only for endosomal motility , but also for cargo - mediated regulation of receptor recycling . B : endocytosis and recycling control actin dynamics - based migration . Coordination between membrane trafﬁc , cell substrate adhesion , and actin remodeling is required to generate and spatially conﬁne the forces responsible for the formation of polarized cell protrusions , such as lamellipodia and circular dorsal rufﬂes ( CDR ) . Two endocytic / signaling networks implicated in polarized migration are shown . In the ﬁrst one ( g – h ) , in response to stimulation of RTKs , such as HGF stimulation of the MET receptor , CME and RAB5 activation promote the internalization of RAC and its GEF , TIAM1 , into early endosomes ( g ) . Activated GTP - bound RAC is subsequently recycled through the ARF6 endosomal pathway ( h ) to conﬁned PM regions , where actin polymerization supports the formation of CDR , a step that occurs prior to the extension of migratory protrusions . In the second network ( n – o ) , the trafﬁcking of integrins , through CME and raft - dependent NCE , enables sustained and polarized integrin signaling to lamellipodia as well as precise coordination of integrin activity with the changing dynamics of focal adhesions . Integrins , such as (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 , are continuously internalized ( i ) and recycled to the PM , through RAB25 - endosomes that are compartmentalized at the leading edge of cells for lamellipodial extension . Coordination of integrin adhesion and lipid raft endocytosis and recycling is also crucial to integrate RAC and integrin activation ( j ) . Lipid rafts are endocytosed through caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 ) - containing caveolae ( j ) . Lipid rafts are also binding sites for RAC ( k ) . Integrin signaling blocks lipid raft internalization by promoting CAV1 phosphorylation and its retention in focal adhesions at the PM ( l ) . Thus , when integrins are engaged by the ECM , RAC binding sites at the PM become available . On the contrary , cell detachment abrogates integrin acti - vation and extinguishes RAC signaling at the PM , by enabling the relocalization and subsequent caveolae - mediated internalization of CAV1 and lipid rafts . Recycling of CAV1 ( m ) , as well as of RAC ( h ) and integrins may be coordinated by ARF6 . Mature , integrin - containing focal adhesions at the rear of the cells need to be disassembled to enable effective cell locomotion . This process involves dynamin and CME ( n ) . Finally , internalized integrin , bound to ECM ligands such as ﬁbronectin ( FN ) , may be speciﬁcally directed to lysosomes for degradation , through a mechanism involving integrin ubiquitination and recognition by the ESCRT machinery ( o ) . Cells expressing a ubiquitination - deﬁcient (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 - integrin mutant are impaired in cell migration , suggesting that FN - integrin complex turnover is essential for locomotion . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 289 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m sustained leading to cell proliferation and survival ( 825 ) . In agreement with this mechanism , tumor hypoxia and HIF1 (cid:4) overexpression correlate with an aggressive phenotype and poor patient prognosis ( 825 , 878 ) ( FIGURE 3 A ) . Lysosomal stress can activate a transcriptional circuitry controlling endocytosis . In lysosomal storage disorders ( LSDs ) , the transcription factor TFEB translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and mediates the coordi - FIGURE 3 . Transcriptional programs controlling endocytosis and genetic reprogramming by endocytosis . A : activation of HIF1 (cid:4) during hypoxia causes the inhibition of the RABAPTIN - 5 gene transcription and , consequently , endosomal retention of the EGFR , eventually leading to sustained EGFR signaling from the endosomal station and tumor progression . B : lysosomal stress causes nuclear translocation of the TFEB transcription factor , which induces transcription of a cluster of genes involved in lysosomal biogenesis . C : upon different types of cellular stresses , p53 translocates into the nucleus and activates the transcription of genes which play roles at different stations of the endocytic pathway : DRAM1 , a lysosomal membrane protein ; TSAP6 and CHMP4C , which are involved in exosome release from MVBs ; CAV - 1 , which stimulates caveolar endocy - tosis . D : at the MVB , the ESCRT complex is assembled ( CHMP4 being one of its components ) , which is involved in the recognition of ubiquitinated cargoes , and in invagination and scission of intraluminal vesicles ( see sect . V C ) . Subunits of the ESCRT - II complex can selectively bind to mRNAs . MVBs are also platforms for the assembly of the RISC complex , which directs the degradation or translational repression of target mRNAs . In particular , two components of the RISC are speciﬁcally enriched at this site , AGO and GW182 . All these events participate in the regulation of exosome secretion , which in turn is a tool for genetic reprogramming of adjacent cells . E : TP53 mutations found in human cancers exert part of their oncogenic potential through the P63 - dependent ( transcriptional - dependent ) stimulation of RCP - mediated recycling of integrin - EGFR complexes , leading to induced migration and metastasis . The molecular mechanism for this remains unclear . SIGISMUND ET AL . 290 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m nated transcriptional activation of lysosomal genes to stimulate lysosome biogenesis and function , which facil - itates the clearance of nondegraded molecules ( 684 ) . These observations illustrate how lysosomal function is tightly and speciﬁcally modulated in response to cellular needs ( FIGURE 3 B ) . Stress signals activating TP53 transcriptional programs have been also shown to affect the endocytic compartment . Indeed , TP53 regulates genes , such as TSAP6 ( also known as STEAP3 ) and CHMP4C ( which encodes a subunit of the ESCRT - III complex localized to the MVB ) , that are in - volved in exosome production ( see also sect . VII E ) , as well as DRAM that encodes a lysosomal membrane protein re - quired for the induction of the autophagy pathway ( 872 ) . In addition , TP53 transcriptionally regulates caveolin - 1 , a reg - ulator of caveolar function ( see sect . VII A ) . As a conse - quence of TP53 activation , caveolin - 1 and EGFR are re - ported to be simultaneously internalized from the PM and to be directed to the MVB compartment ( 872 ) . Therefore , one of the mechanisms through which the TP53 program suppresses cell growth and division in response to stress might be the regulation of endocytosis ( FIGURE 3 , C AND D ) . Indeed , it appears that the oncogenic potential of TP53 point mutants found in human cancer may partly lie in their regulation of the endocytic pathway ( 542 ) . It has recently been demonstrated that these mutants not only lose tumor suppression activity , but that they also promote invasion and metastasis by inducing RCP ( RAB - coupling protein ) - mediated recycling of integrins and EGFR , thus sustaining AKT signaling and inducing cell migration ( 542 ) . The mechanism involved is not completely understood , but it possibly relies on the inhibition of P63 ( a TP53 family mem - ber ) transcriptional activity ( FIGURE 3 E ) . TP53 may also regulate the endocytic machinery through mechanisms that are independent from its role as a tran - scription factor . In fact , TP53 has been found to localize in the cytoplasm , mitochondria , and centrosomes ( reviewed in Ref . 270 ) , where it has been proposed to prevent tumori - genesis through nontranscriptional mechanisms ( see also sect . VII ) . It was recently shown that TP53 binds to the clathrin heavy chain not only in the nucleus ( as we will discuss in sect . VII F1 ) , but also in the cytoplasm , and it was found to colocalize with clathrin heavy chain and EGFR at the PM upon EGF stimulation . Thus a possible role of TP53 in the regulation of EGFR endocytosis has been suggested ( 194 ) . TP53 ablation delays receptor internalization and increases EGFR signaling , suggesting that TP53 might reg - ulate EGFR endocytosis to control speciﬁc signaling out - comes ( 194 ) . While the transcription - independent connec - tion between TP53 and endocytosis needs further valida - tion and independent conﬁrmation , it might add to the nonnuclear functions of TP53 . V . MULTIPLE ROLES OF UBIQUITIN IN THE CONNECTION BETWEEN ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING Posttranslational modiﬁcation of signaling receptors by the covalent attachment of one , or often more , UB moieties has emerged as the major regulatory mechanism responsible for receptor “downregulation . ” Ubiquitination is a complex process executed by a cascade of enzymes , whose ﬁnal ef - fectors , the UB ligases , or E3 enzymes , catalyze the addition of a UB moiety or of a UB chain to their substrates . E3 substrates can therefore be monoubiquitinated ( when a sin - gle UB is appended ) , multiple monoubiquitinated ( when single UBs are appended to multiple sites ) , or polyubiquiti - nated ( when substrates are conjugated to a UB chain ) . In addition , UB chains display different topologies , according to the linkages joining the various UB moieties in the chain . The reader interested in understanding the enormous im - pact of ubiquitination on cell physiology and pathology has only to start picking among the (cid:4) 4 , 000 reviews retrievable from PubMed using the search word ubiquitin . Here we will limit ourselves to the connections between UB and en - docytosis , exclusively from the signaling perspective . Pioneering work in yeast has demonstrated that UB is required for the ﬁrst step in cargo internalization , as well as for targeting cargoes to vacuoles ( the yeast equivalent of lysosomes ) ( 310 , 404 ) . Following these initial obser - vations , there are now numerous reports of ubiquitina - tion of a vast array of mammalian signaling receptors , such as RTKs , GPCRs , growth hormone receptor ( GHR ) , MHC - I , NOTCH , various channels and transporters , cy - tokine , and interferon receptors . The molecular basis of UB - dependent regulation of endocytosis is being clari - ﬁed . UB - mediated internalization / sorting of membrane receptors requires accurate recognition of the ubiquiti - nated cargo by endocytic UB receptors , proteins contain - ing one or more UB - binding domain ( UBD ) . Such UB - binding “route - controllers” inexorably ferry the inter - nalized receptor towards a degradative fate in lysosomes and away from a recycling pathway . We will describe two reciprocal aspects of the process , namely , how sig - naling controls ubiquitination ( ligand - induced ubiquiti - nation of receptors and of endocytic adaptors ) and how ubiquitination controls endocytosis , fate , and conse - quently signaling . A . Ligand - Induced Ubiquitination of Cargo Activation of signaling receptors can transmit signals to the ubiquitination machinery that then modiﬁes the receptors themselves . The best - characterized circuitry involves the E3 ligase CBL , which is responsible for the ubiquitination of several RTKs . In the case of EGFR and MET , the molecular mechanism of receptor ubiquitination has been investigated in detail . In both cases , CBL binds directly to phosphoty - ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 291 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m SIGISMUND ET AL . 292 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m rosine ( pY ) - sites on the activated receptor through its NH 2 - terminal tyrosine kinase binding ( TKB ) domain ( 450 , 606 ) , as well as indirectly through its constitutive partner GRB2 , which is recruited to receptors via other pY sites ( 336 , 364 , 831 ) . Once bound , the ligase is phosphorylated and conse - quently activated ( 383 ) . Both direct and indirect interac - tions of CBL with EGFR or MET are required for the full ubiquitination of these receptors ( FIGURE 4 A ) . Another class of E3 ligases , the HECT NEDD4 family ( 663 ) , whose regulation has been extensively studied , also regulates endocytosis and sorting of numerous signaling receptors . Of these ligases , AIP4 can interact directly with CXCR4 via a noncanonical WW domain - mediated interac - tion involving serine residues within the COOH - terminal tail of CXCR4 . These serine residues are phosphorylated upon agonist activation and are critical for mediating ago - nist - promoted binding of AIP4 and the subsequent ubiquiti - nation and degradation of CXCR4 ( 62 ) ( FIGURE 4 B ) . Once again , the ligase appears to be regulated by its phosphory - lation . AIP4 phosphorylation is activated by JNK1 ( 244 ) , which presumably leads to conformational changes that disrupt the inhibitory intramolecular interactions between its WW and the HECT domains . A similar regulatory mech - anism has been suggested for SMURF2 , NEDD4 , and WWP2 , for which an intramolecular interaction between the C2 and HECT domains has been shown ( 843 ) . For SMURF2 , this in cis - autoinhibition can be relieved by bind - ing of SMAD7 to the E3 HECT domain ( 565 ) . In some cases , such as for the epithelial Na (cid:3) channel ( ENaC ) , receptor : ligase interaction , and consequent recep - tor ubiquitination , is the default pathway , with phosphor - ylation negatively regulating ligase activity . NEDD4 – 2 binds constitutively to ENaC PPxY - containing motifs and catalyzes its ubiquitination , internalization , and lysosomal targeting . This prevents Na (cid:3) overload in epithelial cells and is necessary for the maintenance of salt and ﬂuid balance in the body . To increase ENaC abundance at the surface and enhance epithelial Na (cid:3) absorption , NEDD4 – 2 is phos - phorylated by various kinases , including PKA , SGK , and IKK (cid:1) ( reviewed in Ref . 736 ) ( FIGURE 4 C ) . Phosphorylation induces binding of 14 – 3 - 3 , which prevents NEDD4 – 2 from binding to ENaC ( 61 , 344 ) . Finally , speciﬁc binding proteins can regulate the process of ubiquitination by acting as adaptors to recruit the E3 to receptors that lack a direct binding motif for the ligase ( reviewed in Ref . 446 ) . Recently , the yeast family of ARR - related proteins ( ARTs ) was shown to direct the yeast HECT RSP5 activity towards PM receptors ( 457 , 556 ) ( FIGURE 4 D ) . B . Ligand - Induced Ubiquitination of Adaptors Similar to direct receptor ubiquitination , the ubiquitination of endocytic adaptors plays a critical role in endocytosis . The ARR family of proteins is able to direct internalization of the GPCR cargo . Signaling from activated GPCRs is terminated when GPCRs are phosphorylated by G protein - coupled receptor kinases ( GRKs ) , leading to the recruit - ment of ARR that binds to AP - 2 and clathrin , causing the whole complex to be internalized . Agonist - stimulated ubiq - uitination of ARR mediated by the E3 UB ligase MDM2 is critical for rapid receptor internalization ( 710 ) . MDM2 - ARR binding occurs constitutively and does not persist af - ter receptor activation , suggesting that UB modiﬁcation might cause a conformational change on ARR required to promote internalization . GPCRs themselves can also be ubiquitinated , most likely by NEDD4 , an event required for cargo degradation but not internalization ( 711 ) . Thus after the “phosphorylation code” on the receptor carboxyl tail , UB modiﬁcations on both adaptors and receptors result in a “ubiquitination code” that ﬁne - tunes signal strength , local - ization , and cellular functions of GPCR ( FIGURE 4 E ) . ARR is not the sole example of endocytic adaptor subjected to UB modiﬁcation . Several components of the downstream FIGURE 4 . The ubiquitin system and endocytosis . A : EGFR ( and MET , not shown ) ubiquitination by CBL . A GRB2 - CBL complex binds to the receptor through interactions of i ) the SH2 domain of GRB2 with pY1068 or pY1086 of EGFR , and ii ) the tyrosine kinase binding ( TKB ) domain of CBL ( either c - CBL or CBL - b ) with pY1045 . a : EGFR - bound CBL becomes phosphorylated and activated . b : Recruitment of E2 ( not shown ) to the RING domain of CBL results in covalent attachment of monoUb and polyUb chains to the kinase domain of the receptor ( c ) . B : AIP4 mediates ubiquitination of CXCR4 . Upon agonist - mediated activation , CXCR4 becomes phosphorylated at Ser324 and Ser325 by an unknown kinase ( d ) . This leads to the recruitment of the E3 ligase AIP4 , through its WW domain ( e ) , that ubiquitinates the receptor ( f ) . C : ENaC ubiquitination by NEDD4 – 2 . NEDD4 – 2 binds to ENaC PPxY motifs and catalyzes its ubiquitination ( g ) . This induces ENaC endocytosis and lysosomal targeting , resulting in fewer channels at the cell surface ( g ) . To increase Na (cid:3) transport , NEDD4 – 2 is phosphorylated by kinases , including PKA , SGK , and IKK (cid:1) , in turn activated by various signaling pathways ( h ) . Phosphorylation of NEDD4 – 2 induces binding of 14 – 3 - 3 dimers ( not shown ) , which prevents NEDD4 – 2 from binding to ENaC . As a result , endocytosis of ENaC is inhibited ( i ) , and increased ENaC presence at the surface enhances epithelial Na (cid:3) absorption . D : RSP5 ubiquitinates permeases and transporters . In yeast , arrestin - related trafﬁcking adaptors ( ARTs ) and the E3 UB ligase Rsp5 are recruited to the PM in response to environmental stimuli that trigger the endocytosis of proteins such as permeases and transporters ( e . g . , the arginine transporter Can1 ) ( j ) . Through their PPxY motifs , ARTs bind to the WW domain of Rsp5 ( j ) and mediate ubiquitination of cargo ( k ) . The ubiquitinated cargo is then internalized and degraded ( k ) . ARTs are also ubiquitinated by Rsp5 , an event required for endocytosis , though the mechanism remains unclear ( l ) . E : ubiquitination of adaptors : ARR . Agonists induce rapid ubiquitination of GPCR - recruited ARR by MDM2 , a process required for receptor internalization . F : ubiquitination of adaptors by EGFR . Activated EGFR is ubiquitinated at the PM by CBL ( A ) and recruits UBD - containing endocytic proteins such as EPS15 , epsin , and HRS ( at the endosome ) . These adaptors , in turn , are ubiquitinated by NEDD4 through a process known as coupled monoubiquitination ( cU ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 293 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m endocytic machinery are modiﬁed by monoubiquitination upon RTK activation ( 284 , 384 , 616 , 716 ) . In most cases , these adaptors are UB receptors that are ubiquitinated by the E3 ligase NEDD4 . The presence of a UBD is required for monoubiquitination of the UBD - harboring adaptor , in a process termed “coupled monoubiquitination , ” whose mo - lecular workings have been elucidated using the endocytic proteins EPS15 and epsin - 1 as model systems ( 206 , 851 ) ( FIGURE 4 F ) . On the contrary , the mechanism by which the upstream signal induced by the activated EGFR causes NEDD4 recruitment remains to be clariﬁed . What is the role of adaptor ubiquitination ? Monoubiquiti - nation might permit the formation of several tiers of ubiq - uitination - dependent interactions in the endosome , by al - lowing binding of ubiquitinated cargo ( through UBDs ) and recruiting another layer of UB receptors through a monoUb signal . The result would be signal ampliﬁcation and pro - gression of ubiquitinated cargoes along the endocytic path - way . Alternatively , it has been proposed that ubiquitination ( with particular reference to coupled monoubiquitination ) could represent a signal to “switch off” the binding activity of the adaptor ( or of other endocytic proteins that undergo the same process ) , by allowing intramolecular interactions between the UBD and the UB moiety present in cis ( 319 ) . This mechanism might in turn harbor a series of conse - quences , for instance , the release of ubiquitinated cargo that would thus become available for the next tier of interactions along the endocytic route . In favor of this possibility , it was shown that EPS15 - UB fails to localize properly on endo - cytic vesicles containing internalized EGFR , thereby pre - venting the interaction between the UBDs contained in EPS15 and EGFR - UB , an event associated to delayed inter - nalization and degradation of the receptor ( 206 , 319 ) . A similar mode of regulation was proposed for RABEX - 5 , which despite not being an endocytic adaptor is also subject to coupled monoubiquitination ( 439 , 602 ) . In this case , it was shown that monoubiquitination of RABEX - 5 was suf - ﬁcient to prevent its recruitment to endosomes ( 505 ) . It is to be noted , however , that in many cases endocytic proteins are ubiquitinated at a rather low stoichiometry : an occur - rence not immediately compatible with a “switch off” func - tion of ubiquitination , unless the process is tightly regulated locally ( i . e . , it occurs and it is relevant only on a minor fraction of the endocytic protein in a particular location ) . In addition , it was recently reported that monoubiquitination of Vps27 ( vacuolar protein sorting 27 , the yeast homologue of HRS ) , a component of ESCRT - 0 , is not required for cargo sorting along the degradative endocytic route ( 758 ) . In conclusion , while the relevance of the ubiquitination of endocytic proteins is clear in some cases , it remains obscure in others . One possibility is that the simple idea of a general mechanism should be abandoned and that the role of ubiq - uitination in endocytosis be established on a per - case basis . This would not be inconceivable , given the extreme versa - tility and plasticity of ubiquitination as a regulator of pro - tein function . For instance , a relatively unexplored aspect concerns the signaling properties of UB as a tool for the propagation of effector signals , something that might in - volve also endocytic proteins . In this contention it is of note ( as also reviewed in sect . VI A ) that recent studies highlight how the UB modiﬁcation induced by activation of the EGFR involves a network of proteins as vast ( or vaster ) than that based on the more “canonical” modality of signal transmission through pY ( 22 ) . C . Impact of Ubiquitination on Internalization and Fate In this section , we will concentrate on the relevance of ubiquitination on 1 ) the internalization step of endocy - tosis and 2 ) the determination of fate at the endosomal level . While at the endosomal level the picture is reason - ably well deﬁned and most likely identiﬁes a stereotyped and general mechanism to commit cargo to degradation in the lysosome , at the internalization step the situation is much more heterogeneous and , in some instances , still controversial . 1 . Cargo ubiquitination and internalization In yeast it is well established that monoubiquitination of several PM receptors ( (cid:4) - factor receptor , permeases , and transporters ) is sufﬁcient to trigger their internalization , although modiﬁcation with Lys63 - linked UB chains speeds up this process ( reviewed in Ref . 428 ) . In mammalian cells , the situation is far more complex , and the regulation by UB often varies depending on the receptor system . In the case of several membrane transporters ( ENaC and DAT being the best studied examples , reviewed in Refs . 339 , 528 ) , ubiq - uitination is required both for internalization and trafﬁck - ing of the cargo to the lysosomes . In many other cases , however , receptor ubiquitination does not seem to be essen - tial for the internalization step ( while still being essential for sorting at the endosomal level ) . This has been shown by mutational studies on different receptors , such as EGFR ( 332 , 335 , 365 , 722 ) , FGFR ( 296 ) , GHR ( 266 , 796 ) , and GPCRs ( e . g . , (cid:1) 2 - adrenergic receptor and CXCR4 , Refs . 494 , 709 ) . The fact that receptor ubiquitination is not indispensable for the internalization step , in the mentioned cases , does not imply that it has no role at all . Indeed , at least three different sets of observations should be taken into account to fully understand the liaison between ubiquitination and internal - ization in mammalian cells . 1 ) UB is just one of the multiple internalization signals that might be present in various receptors . This is the case of RTKs where multiple docking sites for the internalization machinery have been identiﬁed . EGFR provides the best SIGISMUND ET AL . 294 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m understood model : through the combination of biochemi - cal , proteomic , and mutational studies , multiple endocytic signals have been identiﬁed in the intracytoplasmic moiety of the receptor ( 259 ) . These include linear recognition mo - tifs [ e . g . , dileucine and tyrosine - based motifs ( 333 , 743 ) ] , pY - based motifs ( 306 , 321 , 365 , 745 ) , phosphoSer / Thr - based motifs ( 43 , 140 , 212 , 304 , 570 , 775 ) , UB sites ( 332 , 335 ) , and acetylation ( 259 ) and neddylation sites ( 577 ) , although the relevance of these two latter modiﬁcations to EGFR endocytosis is not established . Such a plethora of signals deﬁnes a probable scenario in which 1 ) optimal in - ternalization requires cooperation of different signals and of their recruited pathways and 2 ) multiple layers of redun - dancy might be built in the system to ensure robustness . Thus individual signals , such as UB , might not be indispens - able , but still participate in the process under physiological conditions . 2 ) At least in some cases , the UB modiﬁcation might selec - tively couple the same receptor with different entry portals . In the case of the EGFR , molecular genetic evidence ob - tained with receptors mutated in the E3 ligase - binding sites or in the UB - acceptor lysines showed that direct EGFR ubiquitination is not essential to promote CME ( 332 , 335 , 365 , 722 ) , while it is essential for NCE ( 722 ) . Also in the case of TGF (cid:1) R , receptor ubiquitination is associated with the caveolar endocytic pathways and not with CME , al - though in this case it is not clear whether receptor ubiquiti - nation is the signal that triggers caveolar endocytosis ( 167 ) . In addition , different types of ubiquitination might direct the cargo to distinct endocytic routes . In the case of the IGF - 1R , the E3 ligase Mdm2 catalyzes the formation of Lys63 - linked UB chains and targets receptors to CME , while CBL preferentially utilizes Lys48 and , under these conditions , the internalization of IGF - 1R seems to proceed via caveolae ( 697 ) . 3 ) Ubiquitination of the endocytic machinery , and not the cargo itself , is often required for internalization , as exem - pliﬁed by the case of GPCRs or of GHR . Ubiquitination of ARR , but not of the cargo itself , is required for GPCR recruitment to CCPs ( 708 , 709 ) . Recruitment of the E3 ligase TrCP and an intact UB machinery , but not receptor ubiquitination , are required for GHR internalization through CME , possibly through ubiquitination of endo - cytic adaptors ( 266 , 796 ) . In these cases , therefore , it is the cargo - associated adaptor that provides the signal for ubiq - uitination . In conclusion , it is becoming clear that ubiquitination regulates internalization via multiple mechanisms , which are frequently cargo - speciﬁc , and in some instances cou - pled to different entry portals . In addition , cells may have learned how to exploit cargo ubiquitination to add re - dundancy and robustness to their internalization . 2 . Cargo ubiquitination and endosomal sorting Following internalization , ligand - induced ubiquitination plays a key role in the lysosomal targeting and downregu - lation of signaling receptors . UB - directed sorting into MVBs is mediated by the ESCRT multiprotein complexes ( 31 , 32 , 34 , 385 , 481 , 852 , 853 ; see also sect . II ) . This conserved machinery performs three distinct but connected functions : 1 ) it recognizes ubiquitinated cargoes and pre - vents their recycling and retrograde trafﬁcking ; 2 ) it de - forms the endosomal membrane , allowing cargo to be sorted into endosomal invaginations ; and 3 ) it catalyzes the ﬁnal abscission ( breaking off ) of the endosomal invagina - tions , forming intraluminal vesicles that contain the sorted cargo ( for exhaustive reviews , see Refs . 338 , 631 ) . Since the rate of receptor downregulation and MVB target - ing typically correlates with the extent of receptor ubiquiti - nation in endosomes , interference with this posttransla - tional processing enhances signaling , such as for mutants in EGFR ubiquitination sites ( 335 ) . Similarly , RNA or genetic interference with the UB adaptor HRS in mammalian cells or in Drosophila results in enhanced signaling by various RTKs , including EGFR and VEGFR ( 286 , 471 , 860 ) . The opposite effect ( signal impairment of various RTKs ) is ob - served in conditional mouse knockouts of the deubiquiti - nating enzyme UBPY / USP8 ( 555 ) . Furthermore , genetic dis - ruption of members of the ESCRT complexes , which are required for membrane ﬁssion events , including those that lead to endosomal intraluminal vesicle formation , leads to sustained EGFR signaling in mice ( 35 , 491 ) , and , in Dro - sophila , to NOTCH hyperactivation and neoplastic trans - formation ( 788 ) . This latter observation underscores the emerging involvement of endosomal sorting , and endocyto - sis in general , in tumorigenesis ( for recent reviews , see Refs . 425 , 538 and also sect . VIII B ) . VI . INTEGRATING THE PARTNERSHIP : SYSTEMS BIOLOGY OF THE ENDOCYTIC NETWORK Even when considering “isolated” signaling circuitries , i . e . , under conditions in which reactions and cascades are mod - eled in a “well - stirred space , ” there is a consensus that intuition alone will often fall short of providing realistic accounts and interpretations of the results . When space constraints and spatiotemporal dynamics are factored in , systems approaches become indispensable . A true under - standing of the integration between endocytosis and signal - ing circuitries therefore requires systems biology . In this section , we review some of the most recent advances in the ﬁeld of endocytosis from a systems perspective . We will cover two rather different , though complementary , ap - proaches to the analysis of molecular networks . The ﬁrst , the top - down approach , addresses the property of large ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 295 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m networks , generally obtained with high - throughput data . Such data are generally static and are analyzed with the tools of network biology ( 44 ) . Following a general trend , we will also include , in our discussion , papers reporting high - throughput data per se without network analysis . The second brand of systems biology , the bottom - up approach , deals with the analysis of much smaller networks generated by molecular biology and genetics techniques . In this case , the approach involves the formulation of mathematical models and their numerical simulations . Endocytosis has been analyzed both via top - down and bottom - up ap - proaches . In recent years , reviews have discussed the bot - tom - up approaches of systems biology ( in particular , see Refs . 29 , 64 ) , while top - down approaches have not been systematically compared . Here , we will present an overview of both approaches , with particular emphasis on results produced in recent years . A . Top - Down and High - Throughput Studies The analysis of the CME interactome was one of the ﬁrst examples of network analysis applied to an endocytic path - way ( 690 ; see also Ref . 889 for a further network - based analysis ) . The CME network analysis draws on the exten - sive amount of biochemical , structural , and proteomic data relating to CME and collected over the last 20 years or so ( reviewed in Refs . 173 , 185 , 371 , 781 ) . These studies were integrated with RNA interference screenings that provided a functional characterization of this pathway ( 132 , 315 , 334 , 539 , 597 ) . In addition , the advent of mass spectrome - try coupled to organelle puriﬁcation has recently produced a large amount of quantitative data ( see , for instance , Refs . 69 , 75 , 94 , 256 ) , which not only gives information on the identity of the associated proteins , but also on stoichiome - try of interaction and extent of contamination by other compartments , particularly in the case of comparative mass spectrometry techniques ( for exhaustive reviews , see Refs . 26 , 514 ) . RNAi - based screening and mass spectrometry studies were also recently applied to identify components of various NCE pathways ( 203 , 327 , 597 ) . The CME interactome revealed that clathrin and AP - 2 are two important hubs of the pathway ( i . e . , highly connected nodes that regulate the organization of the network ) and provided a ﬁrst framework to understand the properties of the CME network in terms of robustness , adaptability , and evolution of the pathway ( 690 ) . One characteristic of the network is its modularity : small modules can be plugged - in and accommodated at the level of hubs still using the same overall network . This is the case for alternative cargo adap - tors that are added to the network by binding to the AP - 2 and clathrin hubs for the internalization of speciﬁc cargoes ( see below and sect . II ) . Importantly , the interactions are frequently of low afﬁnity , and multiple interactions ensure avidity , thus stabilizing the network ( 322 , 620 ) . This gives rise to a dynamic instability of the network , and a certain number of interactions are required to allow network as - sembly and pathway progression . Importantly , many of the accessory factors interact with AP - 2 and clathrin in a mu - tually exclusive manner . Indeed , biochemical experiments revealed that the clathrin hub displaces the AP - 2 hub , en - suring the timing and directionality of the process ( 689 ) . It is therefore crucial that network analysis takes into account the dynamic nature of the pathway , where at each step there are signiﬁcant changes in the interactome picture ( 690 ) . Modularity of the pathway also emerges by looking at the conservation of the CME network : hubs are conserved across species , while other nodes are sometimes lost in spe - cies distant to mammals . In addition , clathrin and AP - 2 have maintained their specialized functions across evolu - tion : a non - self - polymerizing cargo recognition module ( AP - 2 ) , and a cage - forming module ( clathrin ) . This allows ﬂexibility in cargo repertoire and ensures in - built ﬁdelity . Dynamin forms another important hub . In this case , the connectivity relying on this protein might have even more far - reaching implications for cell physiology . Dynamins in - tersect a variety of pathways . For instance , dynamin is re - quired both for CME and for some forms of NCE ( see sect . II and TABLE 1 ) . However , it is also crucial for actin dynam - ics ( reviewed in Ref . 71 ; see also sect . VII B ) , directed cell migration ( sect . VII B ) , centrosome cohesion at mitosis ( sect . VIID ) , cytokinesis ( sect . VII D ) , and apoptosis ( not reviewed here , but see Refs . 219 , 747 ) . Thus the intercon - nectivity exerted by the dynamin hub might reﬂect a higher level of integration among different ( or perhaps only appar - ently different , see sect . X ) territories of cellular regulation . Another interesting example of network analysis applied to a proteomic screening is provided by the recently obtained EGF - regulated UB proteome ( 22 ) . This study revealed that in addition to well - established liaisons with endocytosis - related pathways , the EGF - Ubiproteome intersects many circuitries of intracellular signaling involved in DNA dam - age checkpoint regulation , cell - to - cell adhesion mecha - nisms , and actin remodeling . Moreover , the EGF - Ubipro - teome was enriched in hubs , and a signiﬁcant overlap was observed between the EGF - Ubiproteome and published EGF - induced pY - proteomes ( 66 , 287 , 578 ) . Pathway anal - ysis of UB / pY - containing proteins revealed a signiﬁcant en - richment in endocytic and signal transduction pathways , while “hub analysis” revealed that UB / pY - containing pro - teins are enriched in highly connected proteins to an even greater extent than UB - containing proteins alone . These data point to a complex interplay between the UB - and pY - networks and suggest that the ﬂow of information from the receptor to downstream signaling molecules is driven by two complementary and interlinked enzymatic cascades : kinases / phosphatases and E3 ligases / DUBs . One very important implication of network analysis that is potentially relevant to the design of new therapies for hu - SIGISMUND ET AL . 296 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m man diseases is that , in addition to acting as critical inter - connections between signaling pathways , hubs are also points of fragility of signaling networks ( 11 ) . As such , they represent ideal targets for pharmacological intervention . Identifying a protein in the network as a “hub” or as a “regular node” has important implications in term of pre - dictions of biological outcomes . Depletion of a hub is pre - dicted to eliminate the pathway [ this is the case , for in - stance , of clathrin hub depletion ( 334 , 539 ) ] , while deple - tion of regular nodes is predicted to have a lesser impact , as a consequence of pathway redundancy [ as in the case of accessory factors such as epsins , EPS15 / R , or intersectins ( 309 , 334 , 722 ) ] . An interesting example in this sense is the depletion of the AP - 2 hub , which affects CME to different extents , depending on the type of cargo ( 315 , 334 , 423 , 539 ) . In this case , alternative clathrin adaptors ( “regular nodes” ) confer robustness to the network , allowing speciﬁc cargoes to be internalized in an alternative AP - 2 - indepen - dent manner ( discussed in sect . II ) . Detailed molecular knowledge of the mechanisms of inter - connectivity of hubs is indispensable to predict the results of “hub interference . ” Recent systems analysis studies aimed to achieve this goal , focusing on the identiﬁcation of new components of the endocytic network from a functional perspective , employing large RNAi screening and high con - tent analysis . A siRNA screening study for genes involved in endocytosis in C . elegans , led to the identiﬁcation of genes coding for the PAR - complex , required for asymmetric cell division , and thus for the establishment and maintenance of polarity in embryos and epithelial tissues ( 40 ) . A similar approach was taken by Zerial and colleagues ( 132 ) who developed a siRNA screening for identifying genes involved in endocytosis , and also their contribution to 10 speciﬁc phenotypes of endocytosis which were rigorously quanti - ﬁed ( number of endosomes , distance from the nucleus , size of endosomes , etc . ) . This group used a quantitative multipa - rametric image analysis approach to assess the variation of the 10 selected phenotypes in cells treated with both EGF and TF for 10 min . Their study showed that cells can adjust endosome size , number , and location ( distance from the nucleus ) . The study also demonstrated that genes regulating EGF endocytosis , and thus cargo uptake , were different from those involved in TF endocytosis , and thus in cargo recycling . Finally , they conﬁrmed a strong feedback be - tween endocytosis and signal transduction pathways . To be understood at the mechanistic level , these high - throughput data need to be integrated into mathematical models of signaling , which we will brieﬂy review in the next section . We shall see that the gap between these two approaches has been narrowed , as high - throughput data have become more quantitative and as models have started to keep track of both spatial and time resolved signaling cues . B . Bottom - Up Approaches Endocytosis has been described in mathematical models of two speciﬁc subjects : 1 ) signal transduction pathways and 2 ) the formation of polarized structures during asymmetric cell division . While the role of endocytosis in setting the timing of the different events has always been thoroughly investigated , the spatial dimension , that is more difﬁcult to address mathematically , has received less attention . 1 . Signal transduction pathways Models of signal transduction pathways were produced well before the term systems biology was coined . These were among the ﬁrst of only a handful of successful models coupled to experimental results that led to new ideas and experimental tools , such as the endocytic rate constant , a measure that is still widely used by experimental biologists to quantify internalization ( 845 , 846 ) . Over the years , new molecular details have been introduced into signal trans - duction pathway models , particularly for EGF signaling , to produce some of the most detailed models developed by systems biologists so far , involving a large number of reac - tions and molecular players , and generally described by ordinary differential equations ( 73 , 548 , 692 ) . These mod - els primarily focus on the timing of signal transduction pathways . Their broad view of signaling necessarily omits a precise and accurate description of endocytosis ( described simply as the ﬁrst element of the transduction pathway ) and endomembranes such as endosomes and lysosomes [ in - cluded , if at all , as intermediate steps for receptor recycling at the PM and / or degradation ( 647 ) ] . Both the dynamics of endomembranes and endocytosis , though , are well described by speciﬁc models devoted to their particular analysis . The original model of Heinrich and Rapoport that describes the vesicular transport system ( 303 ) was updated by more recent models that have ad - dressed the transition from early to late endosomes . This process involves the so - called RAB conversion , whereby early endosomes , carrying a high density of the small GTP - ase RAB5 , are irreversibly transformed into late endo - somes , with RAB7 being the prevailing species ( see sect . IV A2 ) . The presence of a positive - feedback loop in the in - teraction between RAB5 and its guanine nucleotide ex - change factor ( GEF ) RABEX - 5 has been identiﬁed as an important source of nonlinearity that underlies the switch . The positive - feedback loop guarantees the enrichment of RAB5 in the early endosomes and needs to be inactivated during the conversion to late , RAB7 - enriched , endosomes . To this aim , a negative - feedback loop whereby RAB5 acti - vates RAB7 which inactivates RAB5 has been invoked ( 155 ) . More recently , SAND - 1 ( the C . elegans ortholog of mammalian MON1A and MON1B ) has been identi - ﬁed as the molecular switch underlying the conversion ( FIGURE 5 A ) ( 618 , 800 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 297 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m As for endocytosis itself , a recent biophysical model of en - docytosis in yeast has stressed the importance of the inter - play between chemical reactions and mechanical deforma - tions of the PM ( 465 , 466 ) . The model is based on data describing the recruitment of different molecular players to the PM before and during endocytosis . Here again , positive - feedback loops have been proposed to be required for the process ( FIGURE 5 B ) . This time , the loops are based on the interaction between enzymes that control pulling forces and pinching of the membranes , and the resulting membrane curvature that enhances the activity of the enzymes . Along these lines , a recent study in mammalian cells supports the model with respect to the generation of PIP 2 - depleted do - mains on the PM , created through the coupling of speciﬁc phosphatases with molecular machinery capable of sensing membrane curvature ( 115 ; see also sect . III A3 ) . The dependency of signaling on space and time has been modeled by the group of Boris Kholodenko who pioneered the study of the role of spatial gradients in signaling ( 87 ) . Their results showed how in the presence of constant inac - tivating signals distributed all over the cytoplasm , a very steep gradient of signals would form if signal transduction pathways were to deliver their signal simply by free diffu - sion . Using sensible parameters for diffusion coefﬁcients , they demonstrated that in some instances it is the signaling endosomal compartments that permit the signal to pass through this cytoplasmic inactivating barrier for delivery to the nucleus ( 395 ) . A further step towards the integration of time , space , and signaling ( see Refs . 396 , 402 for a general discussion ) which includes also endocytosis , exocytosis , and endomembranes has recently been developed by the group of Philippe Basti - aens , using both mathematical models and experimental measurements . The most thorough analysis produced so far addresses the activation of H - and N - RAS ( which we will refer to globally as RAS ) following growth factor treatment ( 478 ) , whose presence activates a signal differentiated both in time and in space : while RAS activation at the PM is fast and quickly disappears , signaling continues for a longer time from the Golgi . With a combination of models and single - cell live cell measurements , it was shown that two overlapping dynamics contribute to guarantee the spatial - SIGISMUND ET AL . 298 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m temporal dynamics of RAS activity after growth factor treatment in MDCK cells . The ﬁrst is the so - called acylation cycle , which controls RAS localization . Growth factors in - duce the recruitment of activated RAS to the PM , from where it is internalized . Ubiquitous depalmitoylation de - creases the afﬁnity of RAS for endomembranes , thus in - creasing its diffusion rate , while repalmitoylation , operated at the Golgi , stabilizes RAS in this compartment . In this way , RAS localizes preferentially to the Golgi , from which it is sent back to the PM via the secretory pathway . Besides localization of RAS , the localization of GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPs ) and GEFs contributes to the particular spa - tially and temporally resolved activation of RAS , its regu - lators being absent from the Golgi but present in the ER , the intermediate “stop” between the PM and the Golgi . Arguably , systems biologists working from a bottom - up perspective on endocytosis will have to introduce space as a fundamental component of their models to further under - stand the intricate connection between endocytosis and sig - naling . Along this line , it will be possible to make use of the data obtained by the high - throughput studies of endocyto - sis described above ( 132 ) . 2 . Polarization Cell polarization is a ﬁeld that requires the contribution of endocytosis to be necessarily described both in space and time . Saccharomyces cerevisiae has successfully been used for the development of models to analyze the establishment and maintenance of polarity in cells . In particular , the pro - cess of bud formation , typical of yeast , has been analyzed with systems biology approaches that have underlined the role of endocytosis in creating one single focus of budding precursors on the PM . A proposed model suggests that the symmetry breaking , taking place during bud development , is triggered by a positive - feedback loop whereby CDC42 , a small RHO GTPase required for budding , favors the posi - tioning of actin cables which in turn contribute to cluster CDC42 on the membrane ( 496 ) . The removal of CDC42 from the membrane via endocytosis plays a key role in this mechanism , as it guarantees that the protein is not equally redistributed all over the PM ( FIGURE 5 C ) . In this sense , the interplay between endocytosis and delivery to the PM via actin cables , to generate a spatially uneven distribution of CDC42 , resembles the above - mentioned acylation cycle of RAS . This result has been challenged by stochastic models that explicitly include vesicle ﬂuxes by endocytosis and ex - ocytosis at the PM . Results of stochastic stimulations sug - gest that integral membrane proteins , which have slow dif - fusion rates , do become polarized as a result of actin - depen - dent endo / exocytic trafﬁc provided they are actively concentrated in both endocytic and exocytic vesicles . Con - versely , loosely associated membrane transducers , includ - ing CDC42 , have much faster diffusion rates that , coupled with actin - directed vesicle trafﬁc , are predicted to hinder , rather than to reinforce , polarization in yeast ( 429 ) . Thus a CDC42 / actin positive - feedback loop is probably not solely responsible for polarization . Both experimentalists and the - oreticians have suggested an alternative and not exclusive mechanism based on the fast diffusion of BEM1 , a scaffold protein that recruits CDC24 , a GEF for CDC42 , to the PM , thus leading to CDC42 activation and anchoring on the membrane ( 263 , 326 , 408 ) . In this latter scenario , endocy - tosis does not play a role in the establishment of cell polarity ( FIGURE 5 D ) . However , the actin / CDC42 positive - feedback loop could still apply in the presence of other factors limit - ing CDC42 rapid diffusion rate . One of these components FIGURE 5 . Positive - feedback loops playing a role in systems level properties related to endocytosis . A : during the conversion from early ( red ) to late endosomes ( blue ) , the GTPase RAB5 is replaced by RAB7 . Two positive - feedback loops ( shown as “ (cid:3) ” in the ﬁgure ) help the endosomes to maintain their enrichment in either of the two RABs . The ﬁrst loop involves RAB5 and its GEF - complex ( Rabaptin - 5 / RABEX - 5 ) , while the second involves RAB7 and the class C VPS / HOPS complex ( GEF in the picture ) . To explain the switch from early to late endosomes , a negative - feedback loop has been hypothesized whereby RAB7 inhibits RAB5 ( not shown ) in the so - called “cut - out model . ” According to this model , after RAB5 reaches a critical level , it triggers the RAB7 feedback loop , which leads to both an enrichment in RAB7 and to the silencing of the RAB5 enrichment loop . More recently , it was reported that SAND - 1 is involved both in the recruitment of RAB7 to endosomes , and in the inhibition of RAB5 activity ( likely through the inhibition of RABEX - 5 ) . Thus SAND - 1 might be the molecular switch driving endosomal RAB conversion . B : positive - feedback loops have also been invoked to explain the mechanical process of endocytosis . The model , originally developed for yeast , applies in general to eukaryotes . As actin remodeling leads to PM invagination , a ﬁrst positive - feedback loop is created by BAR domain - containing proteins ( RVS167 in yeast , shown as BDPs - BAR domain proteins , in the ﬁgure ) , which envelop the membrane , creating a curvature that further helps BDP binding to the tubular structure that has formed . The presence of BDPs protects part of the membrane from the activity of a PIP 2 phosphatase ( PPase ) , which can act on the free part of the invagination ( i . e . , the bud ) . A second positive - feedback loop has been proposed whereby the effect of PIP 2 depletion from the bud increases the curvature at the interface between the bud and the tubule covered by BDPs , and PPase activity is further reinforced by this increase in curvature ( not shown ) . As a result , the bud is eventually pinched off . C : during bud formation in budding yeast , CDC42 accumulates at the bud site . The asymmetric distribution of the protein has been proposed to be driven by two overlapping positive - feedback loops . In the ﬁrst , slower , loop , the localization of CDC42 favors the accumulation of actin ﬁlaments , which in turn deliver more CDC42 to the site . Free diffusion on the membrane and endocytosis allow the redistribution of CDC42 away from the bud - site , while active transport along actin ﬁlament reverses this process . In this model , the transition between active CDC42 ( CDC42 - GTP ) and inactive CDC42 ( CDC42 - GDP ) is not affected by the distribution of CDC42 ; thus , in the ﬁgure , we do not specify the species to which CDC42 is bound . D : in the second , faster , positive - feedback loop , the activation / inactivation of CDC42 plays a key role . GTP - bound CDC42 is stably localized at the PM , whereas GDP - bound CDC42 shuttles freely between PM and cytoplasm . The presence of a pool of active CDC42 ( CDC42 - GTP ) triggers a positive - feedback loop because it recruits the scaffold protein BEM1 and the GEF CDC24 to the PM . At the PM , CDC24 causes the activation of more CDC42 , which in turn recruits more BEM1 : CDC24 complexes , thereby producing a positive - feedback loop in the activation of CDC42 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 299 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m may be represented by molecules , such as septin , that set a diffusion barrier on the plasma membrane , thereby limiting lateral diffusion of CDC42 along the cell cortex . Consis - tently , septins , which are small GTPases enriched at the bud site of a dividing yeast ( reviewed in Ref . 113 ) , have recently been shown to provide a barrier function that is required to counteract the dispersal of CDC42 ( 572 ) . In the daughter cell , this event is necessary to maintain CDC42 polarized localization , which may be initiated by directed exocytic vesicle delivery . Thus a synergic action between membrane trafﬁcking and septins may operate to maintain the dy - namic polarization of CDC42 during asymmetric growth in yeast . VII . INTEGRATING THE PARTNERSHIP : BIOLOGICAL PROGRAMS CONTROLLED BY ENDOCYTOSIS In this section , we tackle the issue of how endocytosis and signaling are integrated during the execution of complex biological programs . From what we have reviewed so far , it should be evident that all proliferative , differentiative , ap - optotic , metabolic , and developmental cellular programs controlled by membrane receptors are also governed by endocytosis . We do not dwell , therefore , on biological as - pects that are evident consequences of endocytic control over signaling at the circuitry level ; rather , we try to provide an account of biological programs in which the impact of endocytosis is ( or was ) less obvious and more complex . We will start by reviewing knowledge on an endocytic organ - elle , the caveola , whose study is unveiling surprising over - lapping levels of complexity in the interconnection between endocytosis and signaling . We then move to the description of cellular programs in which the impact of endocytosis is paramount , i . e . , in the control of 1 ) polarized motility func - tions , 2 ) cell fate determination , 3 ) mitosis , 4 ) cellular re - programming and biogenesis of miRNAs , and 5 ) transcrip - tion . The examples we provide are organized according to a “gradient” of functions that are progressively more and more distant from membrane dynamics , up to the point of representing apparently “noncanonical” functions of endo - cytosis . A . Caveolae : An Example of a Multifunctional Integrator of Endocytosis and Signaling Caveolae are small ( 60 – 80 nm in diameter ) , ﬂask - shaped , invaginations of the PM . Despite having been ﬁrst observed more than half a century ago ( 579 ) , their function is still the object of intense investigation and debate . They have been implicated in NCE , cell adhesion , signal transduction , re - dox signaling , lipid and cholesterol regulation , mechano - sensing , and possibly even in the regulation of transcription . Thus , despite the incompleteness of available knowledge , we feel that they represent an almost paradigmatic example of how a single “endocytic” organelle might integrate di - verse biological functions ( for recent reviews , see Refs . 50 , 173 , 290 , 517 ) . 1 . Structure of caveolae Caveolae are enriched in certain sphingolipids , cholesterol , and PIP 2 ( 235 , 236 , 574 , 612 ) . They represent therefore a subset of membrane ( lipid ) rafts . For this reason , the caveo - lar pathway of endocytosis is frequently referred to as “caveolar / raft endocytosis . ” This nomenclature is perhaps misleading , since caveolae - independent endocytosis of rafts can also occur ( for reviews on membrane rafts and on the relationships between caveolae and rafts , see Refs . 724 and 422 , respectively ) . Caveolae are associated with microtu - bules ( 302 , 649 ) and with the actin cytoskeleton , this latter connection possibly being mediated by ﬁlamin ( 755 ) . Two families of protein components are crucial structural and regulatory components of caveolae : caveolins ( caveolin - 1 through - 3 ) and cavins ( cavin - 1 through - 4 ) . The relevance of caveolins to the biogenesis of caveolae was established through the genetic disruption of caveolin - 1 gene , which resulted in mice lacking caveolae ( 181 ) , and by overexpression of caveolin - 1 in caveolae - deﬁcient cells , which resulted in caveolae formation ( 462 ) . The interaction between caveolin - 1 and cholesterol is critical for the oli - gomerization of the former ( 544 ) , and this is probably im - portant for the ability of caveolin to inﬂuence membrane curvature by inducing or stabilizing it ( 358 , 596 , 662 ) . The exact structural role of caveolins in the formation of cave - olae is still the object of investigation and debate ( see Refs . 50 , 173 , 290 , 517 ) , as is its functional role in caveolar endocytosis ( see below ) . In addition to caveolins , four cavins are also critical for the formation of caveolae at the PM ( 49 , 289 , 314 , 468 , 512 ) . Cavins form a multiprotein complex ( 298 ) that is recruited by caveolin - 1 to the PM , in a cavin - 1 - dependent manner ( 49 ) , where it stabilizes cave - olae . Interestingly , cavin - 1 does not associate with other pools of caveolin - 1 ( for instance , that present in the Golgi , Refs . 298 , 314 ) , indicating that it recognizes a PM - speciﬁc form of caveolin - 1 , possibly in association with other com - ponents of the caveolin - 1 enriched surface domain . In this contention , it is of note that cavins bind to phosphatidyl - serine in vitro and that caveolins might generate phosphati - dylserine - enriched domains at the PM ( 815 ) . While the in - terested reader will ﬁnd a wealth of additional information on cavins in recent reviews ( 50 , 290 ) , it is of interest that cavin - 1 was originally identiﬁed as a transcription termina - tion factor , named PTRF ( polymerase I and transcript re - lease factor , Ref . 357 ) ( see below ) . 2 . Functions of caveolae Caveolae have been implicated in the endocytosis of several ligands , including integrins , glycosphingolipids , and certain SIGISMUND ET AL . 300 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m viruses , such as polyoma and SV40 ( reviewed in Refs . 125 , 517 ) . Caveolar endocytosis might be tightly linked to the process of cell adhesion , as supported by ﬁndings that , in the case of caveolae - mediated SV40 internalization ( 598 , 599 ) , several kinases regulating the process are also in - volved in cell adhesion ( 597 ) . In addition , integrin activa - tion might regulate caveolar endocytosis , and in turn , caveolar internalization might remove integrins from the cell surface , suggesting bidirectional communication be - tween the two processes ( 704 ) . True enough , evidence sup - porting opposite contentions , stimulation versus inhibition of caveolar endocytosis by integrins , has been provided ( 156 , 728 , reviewed in Ref . 50 ; see also sect . VII B2 for a speciﬁc example ) ; however , while differences need to be resolved , the concept of connection between caveolae and adhesion seems established . It should also be said that the exact endocytic function of caveolae remains the object of debate in the ﬁeld . First , many proteins that enter the cell through caveolae might also be internalized through differ - ent portals . Second , caveolae are by - and - large relatively im - mobile and stable structures at the PM ( 596 , 600 , 774 ; but see also below for a recent revisitation of this concept ) , and also caveolins and cavins are remarkably long - lived pro - teins undergoing very slow turn over ( 298 , 299 ) . Indeed , caveolin - 1 has even been proposed to function as a negative regulator of caveolae endocytosis , by slowing down their turnover and stabilizing them at the PM ( 435 ) . Finally , even SV40 , a traditional caveolar cargo , was recently also found in noncaveolar vesicles ( 201 ) , and it was shown to be inter - nalized with faster kinetics in caveolin - 1 - null cells ( 148 ) . A stimulating account of the debate on the endocytic function of caveolae can be found in Reference 173 . While the above evidence does not deny the endocytic na - ture of caveolae , it draws attention to the facts that 1 ) probably not all internalization events thought to be exe - cuted through caveolae are really as such , and 2 ) even bona ﬁde caveolar internalization events must be stringently reg - ulated to account for the rather nondynamic nature of these organelles . A recent study unveils the regulation at the basis of caveolae and caveolin - 1 assembly , disassembly , and deg - radation ( 299 ) . Indeed , by altering the balance of core cave - olae components ( caveolin - 1 , cavins , and cholesterol ) , it is possible to accelerate caveolin turnover , by inducing cave - olae disassembly , and caveolin ubiquitination and degrada - tion into the lysosome ( 299 ) . It was proposed that this pro - cess might be involved in the normal life cycle of caveolae : trafﬁcking to early endosomes following internalization might cause the disassembly of the caveolar scaffold due to cavin loss , followed by caveolin - 1 degradation ( 299 ) . In this contention , a recent paper unveils a more dynamic nature of caveolae than previously thought ( 77 ) . Caveolae have been reported to exist in two pools at the PM , a static predomi - nant one and a minor highly mobile one which undergoes continuous rapid release and transient fusion with the PM without full collapse of the vesicle ( “kiss - and - run” behav - ior ) ( 596 , 600 , 774 ) . By monitoring caveolae for long peri - ods of time , it was found , however , that the vast majority of caveolae are dynamic with lifetimes ranging from a few seconds to several minutes . Thus probably two pools of caveolae exist : a short - lived and a long - lived one ( 77 ) . In - terestingly , the dynamics of caveolae are affected during mitosis , when the arrival and departure of caveolae , at the PM , becomes skewed towards the latter , causing a redistri - bution of caveolin - 1 from the PM to intracellular compart - ments : an observation that adds to the involvement of en - docytic dynamics in mitosis ( see sect . VII D ) , although its exact role remains to be determined ( 77 ) . Caveolae have also traditionally been regarded as assembly platforms for signal transduction machinery . This property has been largely ascribed to the protein - protein interaction abilities of caveolin - 1 , which can act as a scaffold for a surprisingly large number of signaling proteins , such as growth factor receptors and their downstream transducers , SRC - like tyrosine kinases , G proteins , GTPases , GPCRs , steroid hormone receptors , and the endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( eNOS ) ( reviewed in Ref . 590 ) . While not all of these interactions are validated at a high level of resolution and functional certainty , together they deﬁne the idea that caveolin - 1 , and , by association , caveolae , function as a plat - form to regulate signaling . New developments in the ﬁeld , however , compel some reevaluation of these ﬁndings . It is clear now that caveolins are expressed in cells that do not show caveolae , such as neurons , in which they control sig - naling by neurotrophins and synaptogenesis , or leukocytes , where they exert control over inﬂammatory responses and T - cell activation ( reviewed in Ref . 301 ) . In addition , a wealth of evidence ( reviewed in Ref . 301 ) shows that caveo - lins can act as scaffolds to organize signaling ( and other ) proteins in both caveolar and noncaveolar regions on the PM , even in cells that possess caveolae . Thus the scaffolding and signaling properties of caveolin - 1 cannot be automati - cally extended to caveolae , and case - by - case validation is needed . One such case is eNOS , whose association with caveolae is well established ( 250 , 748 ) . The interaction of eNOS with caveolin - 1 inhibits the function of eNOS ( 90 , 250 ) , as also supported by ﬁndings in caveolin - 1 - deﬁcient mice that display increased nitric oxide production ( 642 ) . Importantly , the connection between eNOS and caveolae is part of a larger emerging role of these organelles in the compartmentalization of redox signaling machinery in cells , which includes binding and regulation also of NADPH oxygenase , heme oxygenase , and other redox sys - tems ( reviewed in Ref . 589 ) . Caveolae are also involved in lipid homeostasis . While we will not cover this aspect of caveolar function in detail ( for reviews , see Refs . 433 , 545 , 608 ) , available evidence sup - ports an important role for caveolae in fatty acid uptake and storage in lipid droplets , in adipocytes , as well as a role in regulating the levels of free cholesterol and cholesterol ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 301 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m export . Studies of caveolin - 1 knockout mice and cells fur - ther support a role in lipid and cholesterol regulation , as these mice show reduced body fat , reduced cholesterol in adipocytes , and resistance to diet - induced obesity ( 434 , 641 ) . Of note , these ﬁndings correlate with the presence of mutations in the caveolin - 1 gene in human lipodystrophies ( 100 , 398 ) . Finally , recent developments implicate caveolae in cellular mechanosensing . It was previously known that caveolin - 1 ( and henceforth probably , but not necessarily , caveolae ) was required for cellular responses to hyposmotic shock ( 784 ) and for the mechanosensitive activation of PI3K and AKT ( 695 ) . In addition , based on theoretical modeling , it was proposed that changes in the mechanical tension of composite lipid membranes are buffered by the invagina - tion of membrane domains ( 698 ) . Support for the relevance of this concept to caveolae was brought by ﬁndings that caveolae act as membrane reserves that attenuate swelling in hyposmotic conditions , thereby limiting the mechano - sensitive activation of some ion channels ( 407 ) . A recent study provides a mechanistic framework for the idea that the membrane reservoir represented by caveolae allows the cell to readily respond to mechanical stress ( 729 ) . It was found that cells react to cell stretching or osmotic swelling through the rapid ﬂattening of caveolae into the PM and their disassembly . This ability is intrinsic to the caveolar structure , being independent of ATP and actin . On the con - trary , the reassembly of caveolae after stress is assisted by ATP and actin remodeling . Caveolae indeed promptly reas - semble when the mechanical stress is relaxed , suggesting the existence of a mechanosensitive signaling pathway that me - diates this response ( 729 ) . It has been proposed that caveo - lar components , such as caveolins and cavins , which are released upon caveolae ﬂattening / disassembly , may act as signal transducers to mediate long - term cell response to mechanical stress ( 508 , 729 ) . One intriguing possibility is that cavin - 1 / PTRF after release is translocated into the nu - cleus where it might activate a transcriptional program nec - essary for caveolae neosynthesis ( 508 ) . In conclusion , while caveolae still hold onto a number of their secrets after almost 60 years of research , their function is emerging as that of a critical signal integrator regulated by membrane dynamics and endocytosis . B . Endocytosis and Motility Cells of unicellular and multicellular organisms must rec - ognize and process spatial information . This is achieved by adapting cytoskeletal and membrane components and sig - naling molecules , so as to acquire and maintain an asym - metric architectural organization and a polarized distribu - tion of signaling molecules whose output , thus , becomes spatially restricted . One way to confer spatial and temporal dimensions to signaling is through EECs . Endocytic inter - nalization of membrane and membrane - associated proteins is , indeed , frequently accompanied by recycling of these factors back to the PM . While EECs serve to replenish li - gand - free receptor for the next round of signaling and trans - port , they can also redirect and conﬁne signaling molecules to specialized and distinct areas of the PM , such as the apical and basal membranes of polarized epithelial mono - layers ( reviewed in Ref . 88 ) . This function can also act as a positive - feedback mechanism to maintain the polarization state of critical signaling molecules ( see sect . VI B2 and Refs . 496 , 792 ) as long as they feature slow diffusion rates , such as integral membrane cargo proteins ( see sect . VI B2 and Ref . 429 ) . Spatial restriction of signaling has , thus , emerged as a critical device for the execution of a number of polar - ized cellular functions , including directed cell migration , cell - fate decisions , epithelial - cell polarization , growth cone movement , tissue morphogenesis during development , and cell invasion by metastatic cells into their surrounding tis - sues ( reviewed in Ref . 170 ) . At the molecular level , a com - plex network of different pathways orchestrates the trans - mission of signals in both space and time , enabling cells to initiate movement in response to speciﬁc extracellular cues , and also to arrest precisely at target sites . Not surprisingly , there are multiple mechanisms through which trafﬁcking of membrane and membrane - associated motogenic transduc - ers directly impinge on cell migration ( see also FIGURE 2 B ) . 1 . EEC and membrane ﬂow A default mechanism linked to EEC that potentially has direct consequences on polarity phenotypes is the genera - tion of membrane ﬂow . By analogy with actin tread - milling , the ﬂow of internalized and recycled membrane was pro - posed more than a decade ago either to generate forces for the extension of migratory protrusions ( 84 ) , or to promote the rearward movement of molecules bound to the surface of these protrusions during cell motility . Results consistent with membrane ﬂow have been obtained in various cell types ( 83 , 323 , 691 , 699 ) , although , for other motile cell types , a number of experiments failed to detect any signiﬁ - cant rearward membrane ﬂow ( 415 , 437 ) . Thus membrane ﬂow may not be a universal property of moving cells , al - though it may be important for some of them . This notwith - standing , the requirement for a continuous ﬂow of mem - branes propelled by endocytic molecules is essential for the highly dynamic changes of cell shape that occur during directional , chemotactic migration of the amoeba Dyctios - telium discoideum , a professional mover ( 782 , 836 ) . Clath - rin - null Dyctiostelium mutants , in addition to displaying dysfunctional cytokinesis , are characterized by increased roundness , defective polarity , reduced cell velocity , and in - efﬁcient chemotaxis ( 836 ) . This was originally proposed to be due to an impaired ability to extend polarized cell pro - trusions at the front of the cell . More recent evidence sug - gests , instead , that an intact clathrin - dependent EEC of membrane is necessary for a moving cell to adjust its cell surface area to match changes in cell shape . Lack of this SIGISMUND ET AL . 302 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m adaptation system thus severely impairs cell locomotion ( 782 ) . 2 . EEC spatially restricts signals for directional migration One instance where the processing of spatial information through EEC becomes critical is during chemotactic cell migration . Under these conditions , cells must reorient di - rectionally by polarizing PM sensors according to the direc - tion of travel . One obvious way to achieve signal polariza - tion and directional motility is through localized redis - tribution , via EEC , of signaling molecules in response to extracellular cues . The ﬁrst genetic evidence in support of this concept was produced in Drosophila melanogaster . Disruption of typical endocytic regulators , such as the E3 UB ligase CBL , or the RAB5 activator SPRINT ( the ho - molog of mammalian RIN1 ) resulted in aberrant cell migra - tion in response to stimulation ( 362 ; see also sect . III A1 ) , by affecting the EEC of the motogenic RTKs of the EGFR and PVR ( PDGF / VEGF receptor ) families . Thus endocytic path - ways , particularly those impinging on RAB5 , are required to ensure the spatial resolution of chemotactic signaling emanating from different RTKs , to regulate actin - based , polarized protrusive activity and motility . There is evidence that a similar circuitry also operates in mammalian cells to modulate polarized cellular function ( 111 ) . Endocytic trafﬁcking of RAC and its recycling to the PM is required for the transduction and spatial resolution of information emanating from motogenic stimuli ( 580 ) . As occurs in Drosophila , an endocytic RAB5 - based circuitry is pivotal . By activating endocytosis , RAB5 causes internal - ization of RAC , its activation in recycling endosomes , and its subsequent delivery through ARF6 - dependent routes to speciﬁc regions of the PM . Once redelivered to the mem - brane , polarized RAC - dependent functions take place , leading to the formation of migratory protrusions that promote a mesenchymal mode of cell motility ( 580 ) ( FIGURE 2 B ) . The importance of endosomal recycling routes for direc - tional migration is highlighted by various studies in differ - ent mammalian cells . There is evidence , for example , that inhibition of the slow recycling pathway by expression of dominant negative RAB11 or truncated myosin Vb or RAB11 - FIP , an effector of RAB11 , impairs cell migration ( 492 ) and chemotaxis of basophilic leukemia cells ( 207 ) . These latter results have been recently conﬁrmed in epithe - lial PtK1 cells , where , however , interference with the RAB11 recycling pathway increased random motility and impaired directional and persistent migration , possibly as a consequence of the delocalized formation of protrusive la - mellipodia ( 621 ) . Thus polarized endosomal recycling is not required for cell locomotion per se , but rather , it ap - pears to be critical for the maintenance of the polarity of cell migration , which when disrupted leads to disorganized mo - tility . A similar endo / exocytic cycle appears to control the cellular trafﬁcking of integrins . These major cell surface adhesion receptors play a critical role in cell migration . Several dif - ferent mechanisms control their activity , including expres - sion and subunit heterodimerization patterns , clustering and lateral diffusion in the plane of the PM , and interaction with the actin cytoskeleton and the inside of cells ( reviewed in Ref . 97 ) . In addition to this , many integrins are continu - ally internalized from the PM into endosomal compart - ments and are subsequently recycled , prompting the pro - posal that spatially polarized EEC of these adhesion recep - tors is essential to control various aspects of cell locomotion ( reviewed in Refs . 112 , 841 ) . Consistent with this view , for instance , the blockade of integrin (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 recycling by func - tional interference with the integrin - associated RAB25 , a member of the RAB11 family of proteins that control en - dosomal recycling , impaired the formation of “pseudopo - dal protrusions” ( mesenchymal motility ) and directional motility during three - dimensional cell migration ( 111 ) ( FIGURE 2 B ) . Mechanistically , one important question that these ﬁndings raise is how signaling molecules are recycled to speciﬁc regions of the PM ( as opposed to the bulk PM ) to execute spatially restricted signaling . In the case of RAC and integ - rins , one possible answer came from recent studies connect - ing localized RAC activation with integrin - mediated adhe - sion and lipid raft internalization ( FIGURE 2 B ) . These stud - ies suggested that RAC positioning at , and trafﬁcking from and to speciﬁc locations of the PM may be regulated through raft - dependent endocytosis . This process is needed , in turn , to specify the localization of RAC activity for the execution of relevant biological processes . Thus , upon ac - tivation of integrins , sites of high RAC afﬁnity become available on the PM , preventing RAC internalization , which only occurs following cell detachment in a dynamin - and caveolin - 1 - dependent manner ( 157 ) . Indeed , caveolin - 1 - deﬁcient cells show increased RAC activation , which however is not spatially conﬁned , leading to loss of direc - tional migration ( 268 ) . The RAC / integrin EEC and target - ing circuitry appears to require the coordinated action of two different routes of endocytosis [ clathrin dependent ( 580 ) and raft mediated ( 156 ) ] . Within this context , ARF6 - dependent recycling appears to be the critical factor con - trolling not only the redelivery of RAC ( 580 ) and integrins ( 156 – 158 ) , but also of lipid rafts , back to the PM , ulti - mately coordinating RAC signaling and directional migra - tion with adhesion - dependent cell growth ( 39 ) ( FIGURE 2 B ) . One additional attractive hypothesis to account for how various endocytic routes may promote directional migra - tion in a coordinated fashion is based on observations that caveolar endocytosis frequently occurs only at the trailing ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 303 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m edges of migrating cells ( 581 ) , while CME , coupled to fast recycling , is restricted to the advancing leading edges ( for a review , see Ref . 220 ) . These ﬁndings suggest that polarized locomotion may be facilitated by a front - rear distribution of diverse endocytic routes . This notion has recently been extended to include clathrin - and raft - independent endo - cytic routes as well as macropinocytosis . The clathrin - inde - pendent carrier ( CLIC ) internalization pathway has been shown to be responsible for the vast majority of bulk endo - cytosis in lamellipodia and to be required for directional cell migration by promoting rapid non - clathrin - mediated EEC of focal adhesion cargoes ( 327 ) . Conversely , macropinocy - tosis induced by PDGF was shown to promote the rapid redistribution of both (cid:1) 1 and (cid:1) 3 integrins to circular dorsal rufﬂes , their subsequent internalization through macropi - nosomes , and redelivery to nascent focal adhesions at the leading edge of migratory ﬁbroblasts ( 275 ) , ultimately pro - moting cell locomotion . In the case of integrin trafﬁcking , questions that still remain to be addressed are as follows : 1 ) whether integrins that undergo EEC are the active ones bound to their ECM li - gand , and 2 ) whether their activation status affects their endocytic routes and intracellular fate . One recent report shed lights on these issues , further providing evidence in support of the notion that proper targeting of activated integrins to lysosomal degradation is required for cell mo - tility ( 474 ) ( FIGURE 2 B ) . A sizable fraction of internalized ﬁbronectin ( FN ) - bound (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 integrin dimers are speciﬁ - cally directed to lysosomes for degradation through a mech - anism involving integrin ubiquitination and recognition by the ESCRT machinery . Cells expressing an (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 integrin mutant , that could no longer be ubiquitinated , were se - verely impaired in cell migration , suggesting that FN - integ - rin complex turnover is essential for locomotion . Since FN degradation is also required for cell migration ( 318 ) , it is possible that the FN - integrin complex must be degraded , instead of being continuously recycled , to avoid the forma - tion of dysfunctional adhesion sites that would result in increased adhesion and buildup of extracellular matrix , both of which would hinder cell migration . Alternatively , degradation , as opposed to or in equilibrium with recycling , may be required for the proper attenuation of integrin sig - naling to have an impact on migration . 3 . Endocytosis acts locally A key aspect of directional migration of well - adherent cells is the establishment of transient attachments to the extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) through integrin clusters that form plaques known as focal adhesions . Focal adhesions estab - lish a connection between the ECM and the actin cytoskel - eton and serve as points of traction for the cell . The con - traction of focal adhesion - associated actin stress ﬁbers is thought to propel the cell body forward . During migration , there is a constant turnover of focal adhesions that form at the leading edge , often as focal complexes that mature into focal adhesions as tension builds up , and that are then disassembled , allowing for tail retraction , and integrin de - tachment from the ECM ( reviewed in Ref . 650 ) . While the mechanisms of adhesion assembly have been largely de - ﬁned , focal adhesion disassembly still remains unclear . Given the importance of integrins in adhesion and the role of integrin trafﬁcking in migration , a prevailing idea is that the formation and disassembly of focal adhesions during cell migration are coupled to the endo / exocytic cycles of integrins ( 111 , 558 , 601 ) . In keeping with this notion , focal adhesion disassembly was shown to be dependent on the activity of dynamin , which can form a complex with the kinase FAK and the adaptor GRB2 , and is essential for microtubule - dependent focal adhesion disassembly ( 205 , 823 ) . Additionally , clathrin and various clathrin accessory proteins can accumulate at focal adhesion sites where , fol - lowing targeting by microtubules , they promote the local - ized internalization of integrin and focal adhesion disassem - bly ( 116 , 117 , 204 ) ( FIGURE 2 B ) . Thus , while integrin EEC may globally serve as a device to maintain a spatially con - ﬁned front - to - back gradient of adhesion receptors , focal adhesion - restricted CME may terminate mechanosignaling , suggesting that membrane trafﬁcking is a versatile system for the temporal and spatial control of motogenic inputs . Endocytosis is also emerging as a critical factor for the spatial control of biological processes in the morphogenesis of polarized epithelial tissues . To form functional and or - ganized tissues , cells need to control their morphology , es - pecially during certain development stages . Epithelial cells can , for example , lose attachments to each other , depolarize and undergo a process called epithelial - mesenchymal tran - sition ( EMT ) ( 377 , 770 ) . At other stages during develop - ment , epithelial tissues must change their shape as the result of a coordinated rearrangement and movement of individ - ual cells . Under these conditions , epithelial cells maintain their polarized features , but dynamically remodel their con - tacts with neighboring cells . A wealth of recent evidence has demonstrated a crucial role for endocytosis and recycling of cell adhesion molecules , and in particular of E - cadherin , during each of these developmental processes . We cannot cover here all these ﬁndings , so we refer the reader to a recent review ( 271 ) . We note , however , a recent study that exempliﬁes the importance of coordinating spatially re - stricted junctional E - cadherin endocytosis with intracellu - lar actomyosin - based tension to ensure proper epithelial morphogenesis . In the early Drosophila embryo , myosin II controls the planar polarized remodeling of cell junctions to enable convergent tissue extension , which is a process whereby the epithelial layer that forms the thorax and ab - domen of the embryo narrows along the vertical axis and lengthens in the perpendicular , horizontal axis ( 405 , 499 ) . The distribution of E - cadherin is also planarly polarized along “vertical” junctions ( that are oriented along the dor - soventral axis of the developing embryo ) , but complemen - tary to that of the myosin II , which is restricted primarily to SIGISMUND ET AL . 304 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m horizontal junctions ( oriented along the anteroposterior axis of the embryo ) . Remarkably , such a precise spatial organization depends on the restricted and polarized distri - bution of endocytic factors , such as dynamin , clathrin , and AP2 ( 447 ) . Blocking CME of E - cadherin results in an alter - ation of the epithelial morphogenetic programs in Dro - sophila embryos , causing intercalation ( a process during which mediolateral cells converge along the dorsoventral axis intercalating with neighboring cells ) defects . Endocytic molecules are kept planarly polarized by the concerted ac - tion of actin and myosin regulatory factors , including the formin mDia and myosin II , which generate actomyosin ﬁlaments along the ventrolateral region and in “vertical” junctions during cell intercalation of a developing Drosoph - ila embryo . These contractile structures favor the clustering of E - cadherins , the recruitment of endocytic components , and ultimately promote laterally localized CME that is , in turn , essential to establish and maintain the planar distri - bution of E cadherins . 4 . Cross - talk between PM receptors within the endocytic network An additional emerging level through which PM motogenic receptors , including mechanosensors , such as integrins , and canonical signal transducers , such as RTKs , inﬂuence cell migration is by exerting a reciprocal control over their traf - ﬁcking routes . It is well established that RTK and integrin signaling are inextricably linked in such a way that full activation of various RTK pathways can be achieved only if cell adhesion is engaged , while inside - out integrin activation is frequently promoted by growth factors in a variety of cellular pro - cesses ranging from cell spreading , epithelial cell morpho - genesis , and cell migration ( reviewed in Ref . 483 ) . One mechanism to initiate inside - out signaling is through the mobilization of the endosomal pool of integrin het - erodimers for rapid redelivery to the PM ( reviewed in Ref . 112 ) . PDGF selectively promotes the recycling of integrin (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 , but not of integrin (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 , through RAB4 - dependent endosomal routes , enhancing cell adhesion and spreading ( 653 , 854 ) . Endocytic and signaling pathways are deeply integrated as indicated by the observation that integrin (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 primarily activates RAC , which is essential for the formation of lamellipodia and focal complexes , and which drives directional cell migration , while integrin (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 con - trols RHOA - dependent stress ﬁber formation and cell con - traction ( 149 ) . The selective activation of integrin het - erodimers , therefore , inﬂuences the balance of their signal - ing to RHO - GTPases , ultimately controlling the mode of cell motility . Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 ( FGFR1 ) and cell - cell adhesion molecules display a similar mode of interaction . For example , neural cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM ) associates with FGFR1 ( 227 ) . FGF induces endo - cytosis and degradation of FGFR1 , while NCAM instead promotes stabilization of the receptor , which is recycled to the cell surface in a RAB11 - and SRC - dependent manner , resulting in sustained signaling . This promotes NCAM - in - duced cell migration , and presumably , also accounts for the NCAM proinvasive role during tumor progression ( re - viewed in Ref . 875 ) . There is accumulating molecular evidence of interactions between different integrin heterodimers along the endocytic routes and of integrin regulation of RTK trafﬁcking ( re - viewed in Refs . 112 , 841 ) . A speciﬁc case in point is pro - vided by studies linking integrins (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 and (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 with EGFR trafﬁcking networks . Upon (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 ECM ligand en - gagement , the heterodimer is actively routed to RAB11 re - cycling compartments through its interaction with RAB - coupling protein , RCP ( 839 ) . Disruption of (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 function causes RCP to dissociate from (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 integrin and to bind (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 instead . This mechanism results in efﬁcient rerouting of integrin (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 back to the PM , effectively accomplishing an integrin heterodimer switch that enhances RHOA sig - naling with concomitant enhanced turnover of lamellipo - dial extension and increased random cell migration . Impor - tantly , disruption of (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 by cyclic peptidomimetic drugs not only drives the recruitment of RCP to the cytoplasmic tail of (cid:1) 1 integrin , but also enables RCP to associate with EGFR ( 839 ) . (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 Integrin and EGFR thus coordinately recycle to the PM , with a striking effect on EGFR and in - tegrin signaling that enhances the invasiveness of various epithelial tumor cells ( 839 ) . The “endocytic interaction” of integrins with RTKs is not limited to this speciﬁc example . In endothelial cells , pharmacological inactivation of (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 results in enhanced VEGFR2 recycling through a RAB4 - dependent pathway , diverting this receptor away from deg - radation , while boosting VEGFR2 cell surface levels , endo - thelial sprouting , and tubulation , ultimately resulting in neoangiogenesis ( 648 ) . This is the opposite effect to that originally predicted for (cid:4) v (cid:1) 3 interfering drugs , such as Cil - iengitide , highlighting the importance of understanding en - docytic networks in regulating complex pathophysiological processes . C . Endocytosis and the Determination of Cell Fate While the majority of cell divisions generate two identical daughter cells , in a number of cases the two progenies as - sume different fates ; in these instances , one of the two daughters might retain the mother cell fate , or both daugh - ters can assume fates that are different from the mother and from each other . These events are crucial in development and in the maintenance of stem cell ( SC ) compartments in adult life . Furthermore , their subversion is thought to play a central role in cancer ( reviewed in Refs . 19 , 239 , 261 , 553 , 787 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 305 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m The phenomenon deﬁned as asymmetric cell division ( ACD ) sits at the heart of the process of cell fate determina - tion . ACD can be inﬂuenced by intrinsic and extrinsic mech - anisms . In the former case , the unequal partitioning of mo - lecular machinery at mitosis gives rise to daughters that are intrinsically different . In the latter , the inﬂuence of external stimuli , for instance , a SC niche , imparts different cues to the two progenies , helping shaping their fates . Endocytosis plays a paramount role in both intrinsic and extrinsic mech - anisms , and it is one of the major programs ( arguably , the major ) through which ACD , and ensuing cell speciﬁcation , is achieved . 1 . Lessons from genetics : the SOP system in the fruit ﬂy The most advanced mechanistic knowledge of how endocy - tosis impacts on ACD derives from studies in the fruit ﬂy , and in particular on the bristle sensory organ . This organ is formed by four cells that originate from a mother cell ( the sensory organ precursor , SOP , cell ) through a pattern of ACDs . The SOP cell ( FIGURE 6 A ) divides asymmetrically along the anteroposterior axis to originate an anterior pIIb cell and a posterior pIIa cell . The pIIb and pIIa cells give rise , through further ACDs , to the ﬁnal four cells of the organ , the sheath cell and the neuron ( from the pIIb ) , and the socket and shaft ( hair ) cells ( from pIIa ) ( for details , see Refs . 261 , 553 ) . Although the SOP cells do not constitute a bona ﬁde SC compartment , being devoid of self - renewal ability , the study of the divisions it undergoes to form the pIIa and pIIb cells has enormously advanced our knowledge of the intrinsic mechanism of ACD . It has been known for many years that a protein called NUMB partitions asymmetrically at one of the poles of the dividing SOP , thereby being inherited almost exclusively by the pIIb cell and imparting cell speciﬁcation ( for extensive reviews of the mechanism of the asymmetric partitioning of NUMB , and of several other cell fate determinants identi - ﬁed in Drosophila , see Ref . 553 ) . Genetically , NUMB coun - teracts the action of the signaling receptor NOTCH ( 277 , 749 , 750 , 879 ) . It has also been known for several years that , in Drosophila neurogenesis , the signaling function of NOTCH requires dynamin , and therefore presumably en - docytosis ( 700 ) . These two observations , however , were not rationalized together until the discovery that NUMB was an endocytic protein ( 679 , 683 ) . It was then discovered that NUMB binds to the major endocytic adaptor AP - 2 ( 58 , 683 ) and determines its asymmetrical segregation in the pIIb cell ( FIGURE 6 A ) . A ﬂurry of papers subsequently de - ﬁned how a series of differential endocytic / recycling events , taking place in the pIIb and pIIa cell , creates sufﬁcient asym - metry in the repertoire of signaling molecules , at the PM and in intracellular signaling compartment , to allow direc - tional signaling from the pIIb cell ( which behaves as a sig - nal - sending cell ) to the pIIa cell ( the signaling - receiving cell ) . At least four endocytic - based circuitries concur to cre - ate this asymmetry ( FIGURE 6 B ) : 1 ) Numb ( and / or AP - 2 ) - dependent endocytosis in the pIIb cell of NOTCH or of SANPODO , a positive regulator of NOTCH signaling during ACDs in Drosophila ( 58 , 341 , 658 ) . It is of note that recent evidence in mammalian cells argues for a role of NUMB as an inhibitor of NOTCH recycling to the PM ( 510 ) , rather than as a positive modu - lator of internalization , suggesting that the function of NUMB in the pIIb cell might be that of preventing NOTCH recycling to the PM , favoring its commitment to degrada - tion . Whatever the case , the presence of NUMB determines a functional NOTCH - null ( or attenuated ) situation in the pIIb cell ( FIGURE 6 B ) . 2 ) DELTA activation by neuralized - dependent endocytosis in the pIIb cell . The UB - ligase neuralized is also asymmet - rically segregated during SOP cell mitosis , being preferen - tially partitioned into the pIIb cell , where it ubiquitinates the NOTCH ligand DELTA , thereby promoting its inter - nalization ( 419 , 430 ) . In this case , internalization functions as an “activation” strategy , as it is known that the internal - ization of DELTA and its recycling to the PM ( through as yet unknown molecular mechanisms ) are necessary for the ability of DELTA to engage NOTCH on neighboring cells ( 349 , 582 , 822 ) . Neuralized might actually promote endo - cytosis of DELTA through a particular pIIb - speciﬁc path - way . Indeed , DELTA is trafﬁcked differently in pIIa and pIIb cells . In the latter , it is routed through RAB11 - positive recycling endosomes , and probably recycled to the PM . In pIIa cells , conversely , RAB11 endosomes do not form , and DELTA cannot be recycled and is presumably destined to degradation ( 191 ) . This mechanism would ensure that the expression of DELTA ( and possibly of “activated” DELTA ) at the PM is skewed towards the pIIb ( signal - sending ) cell . These results reinforce the notion of recycling as an impor - tant aspect of the mechanisms of cell fate speciﬁcation , as also supported by the involvement of SEC15 , a component of the exocyst ( a complex involved in tethering and spatially targeting exocytic and recycling vesicles to the PM ) , in the ACD of SOP cells ( 355 ) ( FIGURE 6 B ) . 3 ) Recycling - and actin - dependent topological segregation of signaling molecules . In NUMB or (cid:4) - ADAPTIN SOP mu - tants , SANPODO is enriched at the pIIa - pIIb cell interface ( 777 ) . In addition , it has been recently reported that the apical surface of pIIa and pIIb cells display actin - rich mi - crovillar structures , to which DELTA is preferentially recy - cled . The formation of these structures depends of the pres - ence of the actin nucleator complex ARP2 / 3 , and the pres - ence of ARP3 is required in the signal - sending pIIb cell for fate speciﬁcation ( 632 ) . In a system in which both ligands and receptors are membrane - tethered , the PM region within the area of cell - to - cell contact is clearly the most relevant for directional signaling . This suggests that the SIGISMUND ET AL . 306 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m overall PM level of effector molecules ( SANPODO , NOTCH , or DELTA ) might not matter as much as their levels within deﬁned signaling domains , which in the case of pIIa and pIIb might be represented by microvillar structures that would greatly amplify the surface area available for cell - cell contacts ( FIGURE 6 B ) . 4 ) Asymmetric partitioning of SARA - endosomes . The asymmetric partitioning of entire endocytic compartments also plays an important role in cell fate speciﬁcation . Un - equal distribution of endosomes between daughter cells is observed frequently during ACD , for instance , at the ﬁrst cleavage of the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo ( 13 ) , or dur - FIGURE 6 . Endocytic circuitries in asymmetric cell division . A : ACDs in the Drosophila SOP lineage . The SOP lineage is shown . All divisions are asymmetric and entail directional ( DELTA to NOTCH ) signaling between daughter cells ( depicted by red arrows ) . The ﬁrst division ( from SOP to pIIa and pIIb ) is shown in detail . The plane of division with orientations is indicated . Asymmetrically partitioned molecular machinery ( NUMB , AP - 2 , and SARA endosomes ) is also shown . B : endocytosis regulates the creation of asymmetry in pIIa and pIIb cells . a : NOTCH is nonfunctional in pIIb cells , because it is internalized / degraded or because SANPODO is internal - ized . While the internalization of SANPODO is established , it is not clear whether NOTCH is actually preferen - tially / internalized degraded in the pIIb cell ( indicated by a “ ? ” ) . However , recent evidence in mammals indicates that NUMB might be an inhibitor of NOTCH recycling , rather than a positive modulator of internalization . Thus , in the pIIb cell , the function of NUMB may be to prevent NOTCH recycling to the PM , so favoring its degradation . b : DELTA - related events in pIIb . The E3 ligase Neuralized is asymmetrically partitioned in pIIb , allowing endocytosis of DELTA . DELTA is trafﬁcked by epsin to a RAB11 / SEC15 - positive endosome ( this event might be preceded by a ﬁrst pass onto the PM to ”activate“ DELTA , see FIGURE 1 A ) . These endosomes are then directed , for cargo release , along a branched ARP2 / 3 - dependent actin network to a microvillar - dense region of the apical membrane of the pIIb . This region has been shown to contract extensive interactions with a similar region of the pIIa cell . c : DELTA - related events in pIIa . DELTA is also internalized in the pIIa cell through a Neuralized and UB - independent mechanism . In this cell , however , the recycling to the PM is blocked and DELTA is destined to degradation , because the RAB11 - positive endosomal compartment cannot form , possibly because a critical RAB11 partner ( Nuclear fallout / Arfophilin 1 ) is inactivated by as yet unclear mechanisms . DELTA might also be internalized before mitosis of the SOP cell ; in pIIb , it could be recycled to the PM , whereas in pIIa it might be destined to a degradative pathway . d : Asymmetric partitioning of SARA - endosomes . In the SOP cell , both NOTCH and DELTA are trafﬁcked to SARA endosomes before ACD . These endosomes are then directionally transported to the nascent pIIa cell , thereby contributing to asymmetry . The described events are not necessarily ”all or none“ situations . They might occur in both cells , with a cell - speciﬁc bias in favor of one of them that is further ampliﬁed through reinforcement / extinction events that lead from a quasi - symmetric situation to the ﬁnal DELTA / NOTCH asymmetry needed for directional signaling ( e ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 307 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ing ACD of mammalian hematopoietic SCs ( 55 ) . In SOP cells , both NOTCH and DELTA are trafﬁcked to SARA endosomes before ACD ( 138 ) ( FIGURE 6 B ) . These endo - somes are then directionally transported to the nascent pIIa cell ( 138 ) . This is functionally important , since mistargeting of SARA endosomes to the pIIb cell causes ectopic activa - tion of NOTCH in that cell ( 138 ) . These ﬁndings deﬁne a mechanism , operating in the pIIa cell that acts synergisti - cally with the other described mechanisms towards the gen - eration of asymmetry . 2 . Endocytosis and stem cells ACD is crucial in the maintenance of adult SC compart - ments , in which SCs divide asymmetrically to give rise to a daughter cell that retains the mother fate ( i . e . , becomes a SC and withdraws into quiescence ) and to a daughter , the progenitor , which undergoes multiple rounds of cell division to generate a vast progeny that eventually differ - entiates . Most of what we know about the role of endo - cytosis and SC compartments revolves , not surprisingly , around the role of NUMB as an intrinsic determinant of ACD in SCs . Such a role has been demonstrated , both in lower organisms and in mammals , in neuroblasts ( 451 , 607 , 640 , 707 , 750 , 879 ) , retinal neuroepithelial cells ( 114 ) , muscle satellite cells ( 104 , 134 , 670 ) , hematopoi - etic SCs ( 848 , 858 ) , and mammary SCs ( 127 , 594 ) . We have recently reviewed this topic in depth , and therefore refer the reader to that review ( 592 ) . At the mechanistic level , one issue deserves additional comments , since it has been shown that in neuroblasts , NUMB might couple with different signaling pathways , in a context - depen - dent manner . One such pathway involves ACBD3 , a NUMB - interacting Golgi protein , which undergoes changes in its subcellular distribution during the cell cy - cle ( 881 ) . When ACBD3 is redistributed in the cytosol after Golgi fragmentation at mitosis , it acts synergisti - cally with NUMB in specifying a SC fate , whereas , when it is associated with the Golgi during interphase , it can promote neuronal differentiation in postmitotic neurons ( 881 ) . The evidence reviewed so far concerns a role for endocy - tosis in the intrinsic mechanism of cell fate determina - tion . There are also , however , indications of an impact of endocytosis on extrinsic mechanisms , in particular in de - termining cues imparted by osteoblasts of the hematopoi - etic niche to hematopoietic SCs . In this case , a specialized membrane domain of the hematopoietic SC is trans - endocytosed by the osteoblast and trafﬁcked to SARA endosomes where it remains ( without being degraded ) and triggers signaling pathways leading to attenuation of the SMAD2 / 3 pathway and to expression of chemokines promoting hematopoietic SCs homing ( 255 ) . Mechanis - tically , this aspect of non - cell autonomous endocytic con - trol in cell fate speciﬁcation can be viewed as a variation on the theme of the wider impact of endocytosis on the reprogramming of adjacent cells , reviewed in section VII E . D . Endocytosis and Cell Division Emerging evidence points to a critical role for the endocytic machinery in cell division ( reviewed in Refs . 238 , 694 ) . Two levels of regulation have been described and will be re - viewed in this section : 1 ) endocytosis is required for the dramatic reshaping of the PM that occurs during mitosis , and 2 ) several components of the endocytic machinery seem to play a direct role in chromosome segregation and cyto - kinesis . During mitosis , cells need to change their surface area rapidly ( 79 , 280 , 522 ) . First , they reduce their PM , which permits cell shrinkage and detachment from the sub - strate . Later , cells increase their surface at the level of the cytokinetic furrow , to allow newly formed daughter cells to spread out . Plant biologists have long known that internalization and recycling of PM at mitosis play a crucial role in these remodeling events , with membrane trafﬁcking representing a critical event for the comple - tion of cell division . Now , however , it is becoming ap - parent that plant and animal cytokinesis hold many sim - ilarities in this respect ( reviewed in Refs . 41 , 238 ) . In - deed , in contrast to the previous idea that animal cells shut down endocytosis during mitosis ( 59 , 60 , 674 ) , it was recently found that CME remains active throughout the cell cycle ( 78 ) . However , the recycling pathway is regulated at two levels during mitosis . 1 ) Entry into meta - phase is associated with a dramatic decrease in recycling events ( 78 , 830 ) . The net outcome of continuous inter - nalization in the absence of recycling is a reduction of PM area and a concomitant accumulation of an intracellular pool of vesicles . One of the consequences of this phenom - enon is PM depletion of TFR and an apparent decrease in its internalization : events that were erroneously inter - preted in the past as a general shut down of internaliza - tion ( 674 ) . 2 ) At telophase , the recycling pathway recov - ers : endosomes and late endocytic compartments are re - cycled to the midbody and fused to the cytokinetic furrow , allowing the two daughter cells to divide . This polarized recycling towards the midbody is regulated by different components of recycling endosomes ( RAB11 , ARF6 , RAB35 ) and of the secretory machinery ( SNARES ) , and is directed by plus - end - oriented microtu - bular motor proteins ( FIGURE 7 B ) . At the midbody , fusion events of endosomes to the PM mediated by SNARE protein complexes ( such as syntax - ins , Refs . 80 , 273 ) generate distinct membrane sub - domains , with speciﬁc lipid compositions , that work as signaling platforms to allow the completion of the mi - totic process . For instance , PI3P localization during cy - tokinesis is spatially restricted at the midbody ( 675 ) , SIGISMUND ET AL . 308 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m where it helps to recruit a centrosomal protein , FYVE - CENT , required for progression through cytokinesis . In - deed , through FYVE - CENT and its partner TTC19 , CHMP4B , a component of the ESCRT - III complex , is able to engage at the midbody ( 675 ) ( FIGURE 7 A ) . This complex , which participates in the inward membrane budding events involved in MVB sorting , has been re - cently shown to be involved in virus budding and mid - body abscission ; all three events involve cleavage of membrane necks with similar unconventional membrane topologies ( for a review , see Ref . 338 ) . Several studies have shown that cytokinesis requires both ESCRT - III components and VPS4 as well as ESCRT - I and ALIX in differing degrees , to mediate constriction of midbody membranes ( 103 , 537 , 753 ) . This process has been con - served across species , and indeed is found even in a subset of Archaea ( 103 , 460 ) . A recent study ( 190 ) employed imaging techniques to characterize the organization and dynamics of ESCRTs during cytokinesis . Remarkably , ESCRTs are recruited at the midbody center following the same scheme of sequential recruitment thought to operate at the endosome / MVB . In particular , the levels of ESCRT - III peak closely to abscission , followed by VPS4 , when ESCRT - III becomes concentrated in the narrow constriction site where abscission takes place ( 190 ) . It is also of note that dynamin is a midbody protein , required for cytokinesis ( 213 , 733 , 773 , 842 ) , and that a number of functional RNAi screens have identiﬁed it as a player in cell division , suggesting that this GTPase coor - dinates the membrane remodeling events that occur dur - ing cytokinesis ( 184 , 188 , 378 , 397 ; reviewed in Ref . 71 ) . Although the mechanistic details of how all these endo - cytic events are regulated and coordinated with mitotic progression remain elusive , there is no doubt that this evolutionarily conserved mechanism is crucial to orches - trate cell division in space and time . Finally , the master endocytic regulator RAB5 is involved in nuclear membrane breakdown at mitosis , as depletion of this GTPase in C . elegans leads to multiple defects in nu - clear envelope disassembly ( 27 ) . In this case , the role of RAB5 is part of a wider function in maintaining the struc - ture of the ER , of which the nuclear membrane represents a functional district ( 27 ) . Although the molecular mecha - nisms are unclear , it has been proposed that RAB5 might act in trans , while localized on endosomes , by interacting with effectors on the ER membrane to induce their homo - typic fusion . Evidence has also been provided that such a mechanism might be conserved in mammals ( 27 ) . Beyond cytokinesis , several endocytic factors ( e . g . , clath - rin , dynamin , ARH , RAB6A , ARR ) have been found to colocalize with and regulate different components of the chromosome segregation machinery , namely , centro - somes and the mitotic spindle , as brieﬂy summarized be - low ( FIGURE 7 B ) . 1 ) Clathrin heavy chain has been found at the mitotic spindle ( 498 , 569 ) . Depletion of clathrin heavy chain causes destabi - lization of kinetochore ﬁbers , leading to chromosome mis - alignment , persistent activation of the spindle checkpoint , and a consequent delay in mitotic progression ( 667 ) . Structure - function reconstitution experiments revealed that stabilization of the kinetochore ﬁbers was dependent on the capability of clathrin to trimerize , indicating that this function of clathrin depends on its unique structural features ( 667 , 668 ) . In addi - tion , the clathrin heavy chain was recently found to mediate recruitment to mitotic spindles of phosphorylated TACC3 ( transforming acidic coiled - coil - containing protein 3 ) , a sub - strate of the kinase AURORA - A required for mitotic spindle stability ( 232 , 456 ) . 2 ) RAB6A is recruited to the kinetochores during meta - phase , where it cooperates with the MAD2 - dependent spindle - checkpoint pathway to ensure the attachment of the spindle microtubules to the kinetochores ( 529 ) . 3 ) The GTPase dynamin was shown to bind to (cid:3) - tubulin and to be required for centrosome cohesion , as its depletion causes centrosome separation ( 368 , 772 ) . 4 ) The endocytic adaptor ARH has been proposed to be involved in dynein - mediated transport to the centro - somes , since it can bind to dynein and since it is found to localize ﬁrst at centrosomes and then at kinetochores , as cells progress from interphase to metaphase . In agree - ment with this , ARH - null ﬁbroblasts have smaller cen - trosomes than their wild - type counterparts ( 444 ) . 5 ) The membrane bending activity of epsin - 1 is required for mitotic membrane organization and proper spindle mor - phogenesis in Xenopus laevis egg extracts . Interestingly , this function seems to be independent of the molecular mechanism of action of epsin during endocytosis that oc - curs during interphase ( 470 ) . 6 ) Intersectin 2 , which regulates CDC42 activation during epithelial morphogenesis , has been observed to be centro - somally localized . Both intersectin 2 and CDC42 are re - quired for normal positioning of the mitotic spindle ( 656 ) . 7 ) Finally , ARRs have been found associated with centro - somes ( 534 , 703 ) , and their knockdown triggers multi - nucleation , centrosome ampliﬁcation , and mitotic defects ( 703 ) . Despite the accumulating evidence , more work is needed to clarify whether these endocytic players conserve their “en - docytic” mechanisms of action during cell division , or whether they display a “split personality , ” acquiring addi - ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 309 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m SIGISMUND ET AL . 310 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tional modes of action during mitosis , as will be further discussed later . E . Endocytosis , Genetic Reprogramming of the Microenvironment , and Regulation of miRNAs Recent developments have highlighted another complex mechanism through which endocytosis can control signal - ing , i . e . , through genetic reprogramming of the cellular mi - croenvironment . Quite surprisingly , in this case , the cellular target of the process is not the cell in which endocytosis occurs , but its neighbors . This is achieved by endocytic - controlled cell - cell communication via exosomes . Exo - somes are small vesicles ( 40 – 100 nm in diameter ) , essen - tially constituted from the intraluminal vesicles of MVBs . MVBs typically fuse with lysosomes , delivering their cargo for degradation . However , they can also fuse with the PM , in an exocytic fashion , to release their vesicular content , the exosomes , extracellularly . These are recognized by surface proteins on the surrounding cells ( 531 , 561 ) , thus allowing their endocytosis . Studies of exosomes have traditionally concentrated on their protein content , with implications for several physiological functions , such as the shedding of the TFR during the maturation of reticulocytes into red blood cells , the release of decoy receptors , or the process of anti - gen presentation during the immune response ( reviewed in Ref . 725 ) . Recently , a DSL ligand has been shown to be secreted via exosomes , thus activating NOTCH from a dis - tance , in the absence of cell - cell contacts ( 706 ) . However , the relevance of exosomes is not limited to their protein - carrying ability , as it has been shown recently that they can also contain and deliver genetic material , thus functioning as a potential vehicle for genetic reprogramming of the re - cipient cell . Mast cells , for instance , secrete exosomes that contain more than a 1 , 000 mRNA species and more than 100 types of microRNAs ( miRNAs ) , both of which can genetically reprogram a cell when taken up ( 789 ) . Genetic reprogramming by exosomes can be exploited by cells for highly selective targeting functions , as recently shown by the unidirectional transfer of miRNA - containing exosomes by T cells to antigen - presenting cells at the level of the immunological synapse ( 530 ) . The process becomes ex - tremely relevant if one considers that exosomes can deliver miRNAs to the recipient cell . miRNAs are endowed with extensive regulatory capacity , since a single miRNA species can control the expression of scores of target mRNAs and proteins ( see , for instance , Refs . 352 , 412 , 730 and refer - ences therein ) . Thus there is potential for extensive non - cell - autonomous regulation , through exosome - mediated trans - fer of miRNAs . It was found that subunits of the ESCRT - II complex can selectively bind to mRNAs ( 346 ) . The role of ESCRT - II in mRNA binding , however , seems to be independent of its role in endosomal sorting ( 346 , 780 ) . Indeed , it was shown that at least one population of ILVs / exosomes buds into MVBs by an ESCRT - independent mechanism , i . e . , through the action of ceramide , produced by neutral sphingomyeli - nase at the cytosolic face of late endosomes ( 780 ) . In this case , therefore , the endocytic ( ESCRT ) machinery in the donor cell does not constitute the “hardware” of exosome production , but possibly a tool for the selection of exosomal cargo for secretion . Whether this is a general principle that applies to many mRNA and / or miRNA species remains to be established . Similarly , it is unknown how ( and if ) the process of ESCRT - dependent recognition of mRNAs is co - ordinated with the ESCRT - independent mechanism of ILV / exosome budding . An alternative possibility is that the ES - CRT - mediated localization of mRNAs can be part of the assembly of miRNA processing complexes , as reviewed be - low . The liaison between endocytosis and miRNAs is even more articulated and might extend beyond exosomes , as it has been recently shown that endosomes and MVBs might ac - FIGURE 7 . Endocytic proteins in the control of cell division A : three phases of mitosis are represented in a temporal order ( interphase , metaphase , and telophase ) . The internalization rate ( red line ) remains constant along the entire mitotic event . During interphase , internalization is balanced by high rate of recycling ( green line ) . During metaphase , recycling decreases while internalization remains sustained . This leads to the accumulation of an intracellular pool of vesicles and endosomes , and to a reduction of the cell surface area . At telophase , recycling recovers and is polarized towards the midbody . In the blow up , the molecular details of polarized recycling towards the midbody are depicted . PI3P - enriched endosomes are recycled towards the midbody in a microtubule - dependent manner . Recycling is mediated by RAB11 ( as depicted in the picture , but also by RAB35 and ARF6 , not depicted for simplicity ) . SNAREs mediate fusion events at the cytokinetic furrow . PI3P is enriched at this latter site , and this permits the recruitment of FYVE - CENT ( FYVE - C ) . FYVE - C binds to TTC19 and CHMP4B , a component of the ESCRT - III complex , to allow midbody constriction . B : a mitotic cell in metaphase is depicted . Chromatids ( green ) are aligned on the metaphase plate and are connected to spindle microtubules by kinetochores ( red ) . At the cell poles , centrosomes are depicted in blue . As discussed in the main text , different endocytic proteins bind to some of these mitotic structures : dynamin , intersectin 2 ( INT - 2 ) , and CDC42 bind to centrosomes ; ARH binds to dynein at kinetochores and is involved in transport to centrosomes ; RAB6A is recruited to kinetochores ; and clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) binds to spindle poles where it recruits TACC3 , a substrate of the AURORA A kinase . In the bottom panels , a depiction is shown of the effects of depletion of various endocytic proteins on centrosomes and mitotic spindle organization : dynamin depletion causes centrosome separation , ARH - null ﬁbroblasts have smaller centrosomes , ARR depletion causes centrosome duplication , INT - 2 / CDC42 depletion causes aberrant spindle orientation , and epsin - 1 - depleted cells show aberrant organization of the mitotic spindle . In the right panels , the effects are depicted of the depletion of various endocytic proteins on chromosome attachment and alignment : depletion of CHC causes chromosome misalignment , while RAB6 depletion causes detachment of the spindle microtubules from the kinetochores . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 311 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tually represent platforms for the assembly of miRNA pro - cessing complexes ( 254 , 442 ) . Small regulatory RNAs ( which include miRNAs and small interfering RNAs , siRNAs ) are associated with Argonaute ( AGO ) proteins in the so - called RISC ( RNA - induced silencing complexes ) , which directs the degradation or translational repression of target mRNAs . Components of RISC , including AGO pro - teins and GW182 , are enriched in endosomes and MVBs ( 254 , 442 ) . The association has functional signiﬁcance since blocking the formation of MVBs from early endosomes decreases RISC activity . Conversely , by inhibiting the fu - sion of MVBs with the lysosome , and thereby reducing the disposal of RISC through lysosomal degradation , RISC ac - tivity is increased . These results are compatible with a model in which the MVB membrane is a platform for the assembly of miRNA processing complexes ( 254 , 442 , 731 ) ( FIGURE 3 D ) . The connection between endocytosis and microenviron - ment reprogramming through exosomes has important im - plications not only for physiology , but also for human dis - eases , such as neurodegenerative disease ( see Ref . 805 and references therein ) . Indeed , recent ﬁndings have demon - strated that (cid:4) - synuclein , a protein central in the pathogen - esis of Parkinson’s disease , is secreted via exosomes and probably serves to amplify and propagate the disease ( 192 ) . Even more signiﬁcantly , cancer cells secrete exosomes that can deliver RNAs , angiogenic proteins , and even mutated cancer proteins to the surrounding normal cells , thus pro - moting tumor growth ( 7 , 394 , 518 , 568 , 732 , 834 ) . Fur - thermore , cancer cells apparently secrete more exosomes than their normal counterparts , suggesting the idea that the exosome cycle can be hijacked by mutated cancer proteins to obtain genetic reprogramming of adjacent cells , much in the same way as exogenous pathogens , such as HIV1 and prions , ensure their release ( FIGURE 3 D ) . F . Endocytosis and Transcription An intriguing facet of endocytosis is the frequent detection of endocytic proteins in the nucleus . This inevitably leads to questions of how and why endocytosis , an all - cytoplasmic event , might be connected to the regulation of nuclear events . Above , we have reviewed evidence that endocytic proteins are involved in mitosis and cytokinesis . This con - nection , albeit unexpected , is still rationalizable , at least in part , within the context of the dynamics of biomembranes , since some mitotic events , such as spindle formation , are deeply interconnected with biomembranes , which probably provide an elastic module to support microtubules during spindle assembly ( 10 , 30 , 470 , 833 ) . In other cases , such as those reviewed below and dealing with the control of tran - scriptional events , the involvement of endocytic proteins appears to constitute a true noncanonical function of these proteins , not immediately linked to membrane dynamics . In the following paragraphs , we will provide some general principles of how endocytic proteins control transcription and then we will analyze in more detail two cases , those of ARRs and of the multilayered involvement of TP53 with the endocytic machinery . A word of caution : in this section a number of connections between the endocytic and tran - scriptional machineries are described . The evidence for the functional relevance of these connections is not always ﬁrmly established . Whenever such evidence is present in the literature , we report a brief description of it . In the other cases , it is implicit that the relevance remains to be ascer - tained . 1 . Modalities through which endocytic proteins inﬂuence transcription Various clathrin adaptors and endosomal proteins undergo nuclear translocation , and operate in the nucleus to regulate transcription ( 342 , 619 , 803 , 821 ; also reviewed in Refs . FIGURE 8 . The endocytic machinery controls transcription . Examples of endocytic proteins shuttling in and out of the nucleus , thereby affecting gene expression , are shown . A : subunits of the ESCRT - II complex activate RNA polymerase II ( Pol - II ) - dependent transcription . B : APPL1 / 2 and ESCRT - III components bind to chromatin remodeling complexes . C : HIP1 and the ESCRT - I component TSG101 bind to two known transcription factors ( TFs ) , the androgen receptor ( AR ) and the glucocorticoid receptor ( GR ) , respectively , to transactivate transcription at their sites ( ARE , androgen responsive element ; GRE , glucocorticoid responsive element ) . TSG101 can also either activate or inhibit AR transcription , through different mechanisms depending on the cellular context . D : ARR transactivates transcription either by binding to promoters directly or by binding to p300 histone deacetylase . Additional endocytic proteins depicted in the picture ( EPS15 , EPS15R , epsin , CALM , and clathrin ) shuttle into the nucleus and affect transcription either by binding to TFs or to chromatin remodeling complexes ( not depicted for simplicity ) . Endocytosis also delivers cargo to the inner nuclear membrane , by way of a retrograde transport mechanism . Two examples are shown . In the ﬁrst , two membrane - anchored growth factors , pro - AR ( precursor of amphiregulin ) and pro - HB - EGF ( precursor of the heparin - binding EGF - like factor ) , are delivered in a signaling - dependent and endocytosis - dependent manner to the inner nuclear membrane , where they sequester transcriptional repressors ( E , in the case of pro - HB - EGF ) or function as chromatin - remodeling agents ( F , in the case of pro - AREG ) . In the second , the EGFR ( G ) is retro - transported via endocytosis in a complex with Importin (cid:1) , which facilitates its translocation through the nuclear pore complex and its delivery to the inner nuclear membrane . Here , the receptor interacts with the translocon SEC61 (cid:1) , which catalyzes its membrane extraction and delivery to the nucleoplasm , where it activates transcription ( G ) , either by direct binding to promoters or by binding to TFs . Finally , TP53 is controlled by the endocytic protein NUMB . NUMB inhibits the ubiquitination of TP53 by MDM2 , thereby preventing its degradation , leading to increased TP53 levels and increased p53 transcriptional activity ( H ) . Because the MDM2 : NUMB complex shuttles in and out of the nucleus , it is not clear whether the regulation of TP53 by NUMB occurs in the cytosol or in the nucleus . In the mammary stem cell compartment ( I ) , NUMB partitions into the daughter cell that adopts the stem - cell fate . One intriguing possibility is that this might drive high levels of TP53 in the daughter stem cell and its withdrawal into quiescence . SIGISMUND ET AL . 312 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 74 , 628 ) . Transcriptional regulation by endocytic proteins occurs at multiple levels ( FIGURE 8 ) : 1 ) Control of RNA polymerase , exerted by subunits of the ESCRT - II complex ( FIGURE 8 A ) . Indeed , in mammals , the ESCRT - II complex was initially identiﬁed as a group of proteins that increases the catalytic rate of transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II in vitro ( 379 , 717 ) . 2 ) Chromatin remodeling , regulated by APPL1 / 2 ( 42 , 523 ; see sect . III C3 ) and ESCRT - III proteins ( 756 ) , which bind to chromatin remodeling complexes ( FIGURE 8 B ) . The involvement of both ESCRT - II ( see above ) and ES - CRT - III components in the regulation of transcription is particularly interesting and also supported by recent net - work analysis studies which evidenced tight high - conﬁdence functional interactions between nuclear and vesicular proteins , especially those related to the UB modiﬁcation , such as ESCRTs ( 806 ) . 3 ) Regulation of transcription initiation , by endocytic pro - teins that act as transcriptional coregulators by binding known transcription factors ( FIGURE 8 C ) . TSG101 , a sub - unit of the endosomal ESCRT - I complex , interacts with the androgen receptor and the glucocorticoid receptor ( both representing transcription factors ) ( 92 , 316 , 347 , 761 ) . Binding to the androgen receptor has been reported to elicit either stabilization of the receptor with ensuing enhanced transcriptional activity ( 92 ) , or further association with the transcriptional cofactor P300 with attenuation of the tran - scriptional activity of the androgen receptor ( 761 ) . Thus , while the transcriptional activity of TSG101 is established , the details of its function remain unclear , and possibly con - text dependent . Another case is represented by HIP1 , which ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 313 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m works in endocytosis at the interface between CME and actin dynamics . HIP1 also interacts and increases the tran - scriptional activity of the androgen receptor ( 359 , 525 ) . These latter ﬁndings are particularly relevant in light of the demonstrated involvement of HIP1 in cancer , and in par - ticular in prostate cancer in which the role of androgen receptor is paramount ( 636 , 637 ) . Finally , the clathrin heavy chain also can be found in the nucleus , where it speciﬁcally enhances TP53 - dependent transactivation by binding to the TP53 - responsive promoter and stabilizing the interaction between TP53 and P300 histone acetyltrans - ferase ( 193 , 567 ) . 4 ) Retrograde delivery of transcriptionally relevant cargo ( FIGURE 8 , E – G ) . A number of membrane - anchored growth factor receptors and growth factors display nu - clear localization , and their presence in that location has been linked to control of transcription ( reviewed in Ref . 106 , 827 ) . Evidence is particularly compelling for mem - bers of the EGFR family and for their cognate ligands . The major question , in this case , is how membrane - bound protein can be delivered to the nucleus . Evidence has been provided that two membrane - anchored growth factors of the EGF family , proAR and pro - HB - EGF , are delivered , in a signaling - and endocytosis - dependent manner , to the inner nuclear membrane ( INM ) , through a retrograde transport pathway , whose molecular work - ings have however not been clariﬁed ( FIGURE 8 , E AND F ) . Once on the INM , they can act as chromatin remodeling agents or sequesterers of transcriptional repressors , re - spectively ( 312 , 348 ) ( FIGURE 8 , E AND F ) . The situation is more complex for the EGFR itself , which also exhibits nuclear localization and possibly acts as a transcription factor ( 459 ) ( FIGURE 8 G ) . This property , which is also shared by other members of the EGFR family of recep - tors , relies both on the ability of the EGFR to bind di - rectly to a number of promoters and to transactivate them , or to bind to well - known transcription factors ( e . g . , STAT3 , E2F1 , STAT5 ) ( reviewed in Ref . 827 ) . The surprising fact is that EGFR appears to localize to the nucleoplasm , i . e . , in a non - membrane - anchored state . A number of pieces of evidence are compatible with a model in which EGFR trafﬁcs to the nuclear pore com - plex in a membrane - bound environment , through some form of retrograde transport . However , it does so in association with importin (cid:1) , which interacts with puta - tive nuclear localization sequences in the EGFR ( and in the related receptor ERBB - 2 ) ( 257 , 472 ) . Importin (cid:1) is responsible for nuclear translocation , by directly associ - ating with components of the nuclear pore , and might therefore aid in the translocation of the EGFR through the pore onto the INM . Interestingly , the translocon SEC61 (cid:1) also resides on the INM , where it associates with EGFR , and might be responsible for the extraction of the receptor from the membrane and its release in the nucle - oplasm ( 828 ) ( FIGURE 8 G ) . One general question is whether the regulation of nuclear events represents a “moonlighting” function of some endo - cytic proteins or betrays a deeper level of integration be - tween these cellular functions , enabling , for instance , the efﬁcient transfer of extracellular information to the nucleus . In some instances , the endocytic and nuclear functions ap - pear to be mutually exclusive , such as in the case of HIP1 ( 525 ) . Furthermore , the transcriptional activity of the clath - rin heavy chain does not require its trimerization domain , which is instead indispensable for its endocytic coat protein function ( 567 ) , again arguing in favor of distinct endocytic and nuclear functions . On the other hand , there are in - stances in which the endocytic and the nuclear transcrip - tional functions are linked , as it is the case for ARRs ( see below , and FIGURE 8 D ) or for APPL , which , upon ligand stimulation , travel through the endocytic routes as bona ﬁde trafﬁcking molecules , and eventually translocate to the nucleus to regulate transcription ( 523 ) , or for membrane - anchored growth factor and receptors for which retrograde transport directly implicates endocytosis as the vehicle of nuclear delivery of transcriptionally relevant cargo . As we will discuss at the end of the review , scenarios can also be envisioned in which the apparent heterogeneity of the func - tions of some endocytic proteins can be reconciled . 2 . ARRs and the control of transcriptional programs The ARRs were originally discovered for their role in the desensitization of GPCRs . GPCR , once activated by their ligands , essentially work as GEFs for heterotrimeric G pro - teins ( FIGURE 1 A ) ; this activity constitutes one of their major modality of signal transmission . Following activation , how - ever , these receptors also become serine and / or threonine phosphorylated , which allows high - afﬁnity binding of ARRs . The binding of ARRs precludes the receptor from further coupling with G proteins ( desensitization ) . Further - more , ARRs bind to clathrin and clathrin adaptors , thereby removing the receptor from the cell surface . Thus ARR - mediated desensitization and endocytosis represent short - and long - term mechanisms of GPCR attenuation , respec - tively ( reviewed in Ref . 485 ; see also FIGURE 1 A ) . Recent ﬁndings have considerably changed this relatively simple outlook . It was found that ARRs have a dual role , as attenuator and propagators of signaling . This “signaling” role is in part connected to the endocytic role ( along the lines and the principles reviewed in sections III , A and D , and V B ) , but largely constitutes an effector role in itself . The current view , therefore , is that GPCRs switch between two modalities of signaling : G protein - dependent signaling and ARR - dependent signaling , with the latter modality also being capable of attenuating the former . ARR - mediated signaling impinges on a number of relevant circuitries , in - cluding regulation of non - receptor tyrosine kinases , of ERKs and of E3 ligases ( not reviewed in detail here , but see Ref . 485 and references therein ) . SIGISMUND ET AL . 314 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m A sizable part of the effector function of ARRs is connected to their ability to modulate transcription . In some cases , this is the consequence of their regulation of transcriptionally relevant signaling pathways . For example , ARRs negatively regulate transcription activated by the ERK ( 252 , 438 , 835 ) , NF (cid:5) B ( 208 , 246 , 482 , 826 , 850 ) , and STAT1 ( 532 ) pathways , by titering out critical components of these path - ways . In other cases , the transcriptional role seems more directly connected with the modulation of real transcription factors . ARR binding to MDM2 , the major E3 ligase re - sponsible for TP53 degradation , inhibits the ubiquitination of TP53 , therefore stabilizing it , with ensuing enhancement of TP53 signaling ( 820 ) . Even more importantly , perhaps , it has been shown that ARRs undergo nucleocytoplasmic shuttling , exhibiting a distinct nuclear phase ( FIGURE 8 D ) . The shuttling is directly controlled by signaling ( it follows activation of GPCRs ) and leads to the formation of ARR - based complexes that con - tain the P300 histone acetyltransferase . Since ARRs can also directly bind to promoters ( such as the P27 , the FOS , or the BCL2 promoter ) , they might work as chaperones for P300 , allowing increased local histone H4 acetylation and stimulating transcription ( 380 , 552 , 714 ) ( FIGURE 8 D ) . In addition , in zebraﬁsh , it has been shown that ARRs bind and sequester the polycomb group recruiter YY1 , in turn leading to a release of the polycomb - mediated repression of the CDX4 - HOX pathway , involved in the speciﬁcation of the hematopoietic lineage ( 873 ) . These studies have proba - bly uncovered only the tip of the iceberg , as a recent pro - teomic study revealed that around one - third of the ARR interactome consists of nucleic acid - binding proteins ( 861 ) . Thus ARR - controlled transcriptional regulation is an area in which we should witness important and surprising prog - ress in the near future . The signaling role of ARRs ( including its transcriptional role ) is very relevant not only to biology , but also to medicine . Currently , perhaps half of all drugs in clinical use are directed to modulate GPCR function . In addition , there is evidence that the two major signaling modalities of GPCRs ( G proteins and ARRs ) can be pharmacologi - cally uncoupled , leading to the possibility that “biased GPCR drugs” might be developed for clinical use in many diseases . 3 . Multiple points of contact between TP53 and endocytosis We have reviewed evidence that clathrin and ARRs can control the transcriptional activity of TP53 . Recently , one additional connection emerged , as it was shown that NUMB ( an endocytic protein , reviewed in sect . VII C1 ) con - trols the cellular levels of TP53 ( 131 ) . This action of NUMB is determined by its ability to bind to and inhibit the E3 - ligase MDM2 , in a circuitry reminiscent of the ARR / TP53 one ( 820 ) . The regulation of MDM2 by NUMB occurs in the context of a NUMB / TP53 / MDM2 tricomplex ( FIGURE 8 H ) ( 131 ) . The functional ablation of NUMB , in a model of normal human mammary epithelial cells , results in reduced TP53 levels and activity , with impaired apoptosis , DNA - damage , and cell cycle checkpoint activation response ( 131 ) . The potential relevance of these ﬁndings is that they project a role for the NUMB : TP53 axis in the maintenance of the SC compartment , a cellular territory in which the impact of endocytosis and recycling is paramount , as discussed . Inves - tigations of the role of TP53 in SCs has so far focused on the induction of cellular senescence by TP53 , which in turn can be linked to the depletion of SCs and to organism aging ( reviewed in Ref . 884 ) . However , a role for TP53 as a cell - autonomous asymmetric kinetics control gene has been proposed ( 712 ) , which might be due to its involvement in regulating immortal DNA strand cosegregation , a phenom - enon that is closely linked to ACD ( 634 ) . This function might be directly connected to the asymmetric inheritance of NUMB , as supported by ﬁndings that : 1 ) NUMB is a critical determinant of ACD , 2 ) NUMB directly controls the level of TP53 ( 131 ) , and 3 ) in mammary SCs , the genetic removal of TP53 skews the cell division from an asymmetric to a symmetric mode , with both daughter cells acquiring a proliferative destiny ( FIGURE 8 I ) ( 127 ) . One major question remains to be resolved : Does the con - trol of NUMB over TP53 occur in the nucleus , since NUMB also shuttles in and out of the nucleus ( 373 ) , or in the cytosol , possibly in association with biomembranes . This latter occurrence is not implausible , since a number of non - nuclear functions of TP53 are known , mostly connected with autophagy and apoptosis ( reviewed in Ref . 270 ) . In addition , in section IV B , we have reviewed evidence arguing for transcriptional and nontranscriptional functions of TP53 in endocytosis and trafﬁc ; thus , based on available knowledge , the existence of a feedback loop linking endo - cytosis ¡ TP53 ¡ endocytosis is not inconceivable . In such a case , the analysis of the connections between endocytic pathways and TP53 will be an important area of future developments . VIII . ENDOCYTOSIS AND DISEASES The pervasiveness of endocytosis in virtually every program of cell regulation predicts that alterations of the endocytic machinery , or of intracellular sorting mechanisms at large , should play an important role in several human pathologi - cal conditions . This is indeed the case , and the pathogenesis of many diseases can be traced back to subversion of intra - cellular trafﬁc . Here , we will brieﬂy highlight the impact of endocytosis on human diseases , with particular emphasis on genetic diseases and cancer . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 315 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m A . Endocytic Trafﬁcking and Human Genetic Diseases Alterations of intracellular trafﬁc have been described in a vast array of human diseases . They include defects at the level of the membrane - associated protein sorting and lipid trafﬁcking machineries . Essentially all stations of the endo - cytic pathway are affected , from the internalization step to endosomal sorting , to lysosomal biogenesis and function . The endocytic proteins involved can be mutated or altered in their level of expression ( overexpressed or underex - pressed ) or become the target of autoimmune responses . This , in turn , results in a role for endocytic proteins in several inherited , neurological , metabolic , autoimmune , in - fectious , and hyperproliferative diseases , among which there are many pathologies of high social impact such as Alzheimer’s disease , diabetes , or cancer ( reviewed in Refs . 16 , 425 , 856 , respectively ) . A comprehensive discussion of endocytic alterations and human diseases is impossible here ; however , the interested reader is referred to reviews on this speciﬁc subject in which a systematic classiﬁcation of endocytosis ( or trafﬁc ) - related pathologies has been de - scribed ( 23 , 24 , 624 ) ; in addition , the journal Trafﬁc main - tains a collection of published papers on this topic in a virtual issue “Diseases of membrane trafﬁc” ( http : / / www . trafﬁc . dk / virtual _ issues . asp ) . In TABLE 2 , we report an updated list of alterations of en - docytic genes in Mendelian disorders , obtained by search - ing the OMIM ( Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ) and the GENE databases at NCBI with a manually curated list of 339 genes encoding “endocytic / trafﬁcking and actin reg - ulator / dynamics proteins” [ 277 “endocytic / trafﬁcking pro - teins , including structural / accessory endocytic proteins , ARF GTPases and their effectors , endocytic and non - endo - cytic RABs , proteins belonging to the ESCRT complexes , SNARE proteins , sorting nexins and synaptotagmins , pro - teins associated with lysosomes or endosomes and impor - tant for their biogenesis or function , and 62 ”actin regula - tor / dynamics proteins“ ( see legend to TABLE 2 for details ) ] . Not surprisingly , a sizable number of alterations affect RAB proteins and RAB regulators / effectors , underscoring the pivotal master regulator role of these GTPases in the main - tenance of endocytic and trafﬁcking homeostasis . What is remarkable , however , is the frequency of alteration of en - docytic genes in monogenic ( Mendelian ) disease . Of the 339 genes of our list , 289 are present in OMIM , as of May 2011 . Of these 289 genes , 72 are responsible for monogenic dis - eases , corresponding to a frequency of (cid:4) 25 % ( FIGURE 9 A ) . We sought to compare this frequency to that of the altera - tion of all human genes in Mendelian disorders . This is not a straightforward task , since public databases do not con - tain a downloadable list of all human genes responsible for monogenic diseases . Several efforts have been published , however , to produce such a manually curated list . In the most recent one , published in May 2009 ( 95 ) , genes were retrieved from OMIM if labeled as disease - causing muta - tions and then ”contaminants , “ such as non - disease genes and genes not annotated as ”susceptibility genes , “ were ﬁltered out . This yielded a list of 2011 genes ( 95 ) . A more thorough effort of manual curation of a list of human monogenic disease genes ( always using the OMIM database as a starting point ) was reported a year earlier in June 2008 ( 68 ) : this list contained 1 , 039 distinct genes . While differ - ences in the two lists likely reﬂect those in the selection of the curation criteria , one can reasonably assume that (cid:4) 1 , 000 genes and (cid:4) 2 , 000 genes represent the lower and the upper limit of human Mendelian disease genes , respec - tively , at the present state of knowledge . These genes can be compared with the total number of human genes ( (cid:4) 20 , 000 ) , or more conservatively to the number of genes listed in the OMIM database ( (cid:4) 14 , 000 as of May 2011 ) . This creates a number of scenarios , depicted in FIGURE 9 A , in which the fraction of all human genes responsible for monogenic diseases ranges from 5 to 14 % . In all cases how - ever , the frequency of alteration of endocytic genes is vastly ( and very signiﬁcantly , FIGURE 9 A ) superior to that of all human genes : from approximately two - to ﬁvefold more . The question arises therefore as to what is the meaning of the enrichment in monogenic disease genes of the class of ”endocytic“ genes . Several characteristics , which distin - guish disease genes from non - disease genes , have been re - ported . First , Mendelian disease genes are under strong functional constraints , as it has been shown that they evolve more slowly than complex disease genes and non - disease genes as the result of stronger purifying selection ( 68 , 95 ) . In addition , disease genes are expressed more heteroge - neously across tissues than non - disease genes ( 95 ) . It was proposed ( 95 ) that disease genes , on the whole , are assigned to more essential functions than non - disease genes , thus explaining the strong purifying selection . At the same time , restrictions in the expression patterns allow their mutant alleles to go through germ - line without causing embryonic lethality . What is perhaps even more interesting is that dis - ease genes tend to be older than non - disease genes ( 95 , 175 ) . Once again , a hierarchy might exist with Mendelian disease genes being older than complex disease genes , which are in turn older than non - disease genes ( 95 ) . The fact that endocytic genes are a class strongly enriched in Mendelian disease genes , therefore , might mean that they are , on the average , older and more essential than other genes , a pos - sibility that would ﬁt well with the major thesis on this review , i . e . , that they shape the eukaryotic cell plan , as will be discussed in section X . We directly tested this hypothesis by analyzing the ”age“ distribution of endocytic genes , with respect to all other human genes , using the gene classes identiﬁed by Cai et al . ( 95 ) . As shown in FIGURE 9 B , endo - cytic genes were remarkably , and very signiﬁcantly , en - riched in old genes and depleted in the classes of middle - aged and young genes . SIGISMUND ET AL . 316 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . Alterations of endocytic / trafﬁcking proteins and of actin regulators in human Mendelian disorders ( source : OMIM database , Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ) GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . ACTA1 ( * ) Actin , alpha 1 , skeletal muscle 102610 Nemaline myopathy 3 ( 161800 ) 421 , 564 The ACTA1 gene encodes skeletal muscle alpha - actin , the principal actin isoform in adult skeletal muscle Congenital ﬁber - type disproportion myopathy ( 255310 ) ACTA2 ( * ) Actin , alpha 2 , smooth muscle , aorta 102620 Aortic aneurysm , familial thoracic 6 ( 611788 ) 276 This actin is an alpha actin that is found in smooth muscle ACTC1 ( * ) Actin , alpha , cardiac muscle 102540 Dilated cardiomyopathy ( 613424 ) 504 , 533 , 571 This actin is an alpha actin that is found in cardiac muscle Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ( 612098 ) Atrial septal defect ( 612794 ) ACTB ( * ) Actin , beta 102630 Dystonia , juvenile - onset ( 607371 ) 622 Actin , beta is a cytoplasmic actin found in nonmuscle cells ACTG1 ( * ) Actin , gamma - 1 102560 Deafness , autosomal dominant 20 ( 604717 ) 646 Actin , gamma 1 is a cytoplasmic actin found in nonmuscle cells ALS2 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 2 ( juvenile ) 606352 Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - 2 ( 205100 ) 202 , 282 , 869 GEF for RAB5 ( also contains a RHO - GEF domain ) Juvenile primary lateral sclerosis ( 606353 ) Infantile - onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis ( 607225 ) AP3B1 Adaptor - related protein complex 3 , beta 1 subunit 603401 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome type 2 ( 608233 ) 221 Component of the AP - 3 clathrin adaptor complex AP1S2 Adaptor - related protein complex 1 , sigma 2 subunit 300629 X - linked recessive mental retardation ( 300630 ) 107 , 766 Component of the AP - 1 adaptor complex ARL6 ADP - ribosylation factor - like 6 608845 Bardet - Biedl syndrome # 3 ( 209900 ) 209 Small GTPase of the ARF subfamily BIN1 Bridging integrator 1 ( amphiphysin II ) 601248 Autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy ( 255200 ) 554 MYC - interacting protein . Involved in synaptic vesicle endocytosis ; and interacts with dynamin , synaptojanin , endophilin , and clathrin BLOC1S3 Biogenesis of lysosomal organelles complex - 1 , subunit 3 609762 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 535 Component of the BLOC1 complex , required for normal biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal - lysosomal system CAV1 Caveolin 1 601047 Lipodystrophy , congenital generalized , type 3 also known as Berardinelli - Seip syndrome ( 612526 ) 398 Caveolin - 1 , the major component of caveolae Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 317 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . CAV3 Caveolin 3 601253 Long QT syndrome 9 ( 611818 ) 102 , 526 , 802 , 811 Caveolin - 3 , a muscle - speciﬁc isoform of caveolin Rippling Muscle Disease ( 606072 ) HyperCKemia ( 123320 ) Muscular Dystrophy , limb - girdle , type 1C ( 607801 ) CBL Cas - Br - M ecotropic retroviral transforming sequence 165360 Noonan syndrome - like disorder ( 613563 ) 501 , 605 E3 UB ligase CHM Choroideremia ( RAB escort protein 1 ) 300390 Choroideremia ( 300390 ) 793 ( REP - 1 ) Component A of the RAB geranylgeranyl transferase holoenzyme . Binds unprenylated RAB GTPases and then presents them to the catalytic RAB GGTase subunit CHMP4B Chromatin modifying protein 4B 610897 Autosomal dominant progressive childhood posterior subcapsular cataract , CTPP3 ( 605387 ) 715 Component of ESCRT - III complex CUBN Cubilin 602997 Megaloblastic anemia - 1 ( 261100 ) 411 Intestinal receptor for the endocytosis of intrinsic factor - vitamin B12 DIAPH1 ( * ) Diaphanous homolog 1 ( Drosophila ) 602121 Deafness , autosomal dominant 1 ( 124900 ) 486 DIAPH1 have a role in the regulation of actin polymerization in hair cells of the inner ear . DNM2 Dynamin - 2 602378 Dominant intermediate Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease ( 606482 ) 65 , 182 , 887 GTPase involved in vesicle ﬁssion Autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy ( 160150 ) FLNA ( * ) Filamin A , alpha 300017 Heterotopia , periventricular , X - linked dominant ( 300049 ) 47 , 251 , 417 , 654 , 655 , 786 FLNA is an actin - binding protein that regulates reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton by interacting with integrins and transmembrane receptor complexes Otopalatodigital syndrome types I ( 311300 ) and II ( 304120 ) X - linked cardiac valvular dysplasia ( 314400 ) FG syndrome - 2 ( 300321 ) Frontometaphyseal dysplasia ( 305620 Melnick - Needles syndrome ( 309350 ) Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction ( 300048 ) Terminal osseous dysplasia ( 300244 ) Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 318 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . FLNB ( * ) Filamin B , beta 603381 Spondylocarpotarsal syndrome ( 272460 ) 63 , 409 FLNB is an actin binding protein that interacts with glycoprotein Ib alpha as part of the process to repair vascular injuries Autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome ( 150250 ) Type 1 atelosteogenesis ( 108720 ) Type 3 atelosteogenesis ( 108721 ) Boomerang dysplasia ( 112310 ) FLNC ( * ) Filamin C , gamma 102565 Myopathy , myoﬁbrillar , ﬁlamin c - related ( 609524 ) . 812 FLNC , as other ﬁlamin proteins , is an actin - binding protein that regulates reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton GDI1 GDP dissociation inhibitor 1 300104 Nonspeciﬁc , x - linked mental retardation ( 300104 ) 146 ( RABGD1A ) Slows the rate of dissociation of GDP from RAB proteins and release GDP from membrane - bound RABs GSN ( * ) Gelsolin 137350 Amyloidosis , Finnish type ( 105120 ) 506 Gelsolin binds to the “plus” ends of actin monomers and ﬁlaments and functions in both assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments HFE Hemochromatosis 613609 Hereditary hemochromatosis ( 235200 ) 211 Membrane protein that associates with (cid:1) 2 - microglobulin and regulates the interaction of the TFR with TF HPS1 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 1 604982 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 566 Component of the BLOC3 , 4 , and 5 complexes , required for normal biogenesis of specialized organelles of the endosomal - lysosomal system HPS3 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 3 606118 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 15 Contains a potential clathrin - binding motif , consensus dileucine signals , and tyrosine - based sorting signals . May play a role in organelle biogenesis HPS4 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 4 606682 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 762 This protein appears to be important in organelle biogenesis and is similar to the mouse “light ear” ( “LE” or HSP4 ) protein Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 319 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . HPS5 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 5 607521 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 877 This protein may play a role in organelle . It interacts with Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 6 protein and may interact with the cytoplasmic domain of integrin , (cid:4) 3 HPS6 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 6 607522 Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome ( 203300 ) 877 This protein may play a role in organelle biogenesis . It interacts with Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome 5 protein INF2 ( * ) Inverted formin 2 610982 Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 5 ( 613237 ) 86 IFN2 functions in polymerization and depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments . LAMP2 Lysosomal - associated membrane protein 2 309060 Danon disease ( 300257 ) 559 This glycoprotein provides selectins with carbohydrate ligands . It may also function in the protection , maintenance , and adhesion of the lysosome LDLR Low - density lipoprotein receptor 606945 Familial hypercholesterolemia ( 143890 ) 150 , 443 Low - density lipoprotein receptor LDLRAP1 Low - density lipoprotein receptor adaptor protein 1 605747 Familial autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( 603813 ) 20 , 249 ( ARH ) Clathrin adaptor LYST Lysosomal trafﬁcking regulator 606897 Chediak - Higashi syndrome ( 214500 ) 45 Regulates intracellular protein trafﬁcking to and from the lysosome MLPH Melanophilin 606526 Griscelli syndrome type 3 ( 609227 ) 515 RAB27A effector . Forms a ternary complex with GTP - RAB27A and myosin Va MCOLN1 Mucolipin 1 605248 Mucolipidosis IV ( 252650 ) 46 Member of the transient receptor potential ( TRP ) cation channel family . It localizes to intracellular vesicular membranes , and functions in the late endocytic pathway and in lysosomal exocytosis MYO1A , Myosins ( IA , VI , and XVA ) 601478 Autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness . ( 607841 , 606346 , 600316 ) 176 , 313 , 816 MYO6 , Molecular motors 600970 MYO15A 602666 MYO5A Myosin VA 160777 Griscelli syndrome type 1 ( 214450 ) 515 Molecular motor Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 320 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . MYO7A Myosin VIIA 276903 Usher syndrome type I ( 276900 ) 4 Molecular motor NDRG1 N - myc downstream regulated 1 605262 Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease , type 4d ( 601455 ) 337 , 376 RAB4A effector protein involved in E - cadherin recycling NPC1 Niemann - Pick disease , type C1 and C2 607623 Niemann - Pick type C ( NPC ) . Approximately 95 % of cases are caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene ( 257220 ) ; 5 % are caused by mutations in the NPC2 gene ( 607625 ) 798 NPC2 Related proteins that reside in the limiting membrane of endosomes and lysosomes and mediate intracellular cholesterol trafﬁcking via binding of cholesterol to their NH 2 - terminal domain 601015 OTOF Otoferlin 603681 Neurosensory nonsyndromic recessive deafness 9 ( 601071 ) 799 Otoferlin is the key calcium ion sensor involved in the Ca 2 (cid:3) - triggered synaptic vesicle - PM fusion and in the control of neurotransmitter release at these output synapses PLEKHM1 Pleckstrin homology domain containing , family M ( with RUN domain ) member 1 611466 Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis 6 ( 611497 ) 797 PLEKHM1 colocalizes with RAB7 to late endosomal / lysosomal vesicles , and may have critical function in vesicular transport PSEN1 Presenilin 1 104311 Early - onset familial Alzheimer disease - 3 ( 607822 ) 713 Presenilins regulate APP and NOTCH processing through their effects on (cid:3) - secretase PTRF ( CAVIN1 ) Polymerase I and transcript release factor 603198 Lipodystrophy , congenital generalized , type 4 ( 613327 ) 297 The PTRF gene encodes cavin , an essential factor in the biogenesis of caveolae RAB7A RAB7A , member RAS oncogene family 602298 Charcot - Marie - Tooth Type 2B ( 602298 ) 752 Small GTPase of the RAB subfamily RAB23 RAB23 , member RAS oncogene family 606144 Carpenter syndrome ( 201000 ) 363 Small GTPase of the RAB subfamily RAB27A RAB27A , member RAS oncogene family 603868 Griscelli syndrome type 2 ( 607624 ) ( 6 Small GTPase of the RAB subfamily RAB39B RAB39B , member RAS oncogene family 300774 X - linked mental retardation ( 300271 ) 253 Small GTPase of the RAB subfamily Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 321 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . RAB3GAP1 RAB3 GTPase activating protein subunit 1 ( catalytic ) 602536 Warburg Micro syndrome ( 600118 ) 8 Catalytic subunit of a RAB GTPase activating protein ; it speciﬁcally regulates the activity of members of the RAB3 subfamily RIMS1 Regulating synaptic membrane exocytosis 1 603649 Cone - rod dystrophy - 7 ( 603649 ) 367 RAB3 - interacting protein molecule 1 . Likely functions as protein scaffolds that help regulate vesicle exocytosis during short - term plasticity RIN2 RAS and RAB interactor 2 610222 Macrocephaly , alopecia , cutis laxa , and scoliosis ( MACS ) syndrome ( 613075 ) 48 Member of the RIN family of RAS interaction - interference proteins , which are binding partners to RAB5 . It functions as a RAB5GEF ROBLD3 Roadblock domain containing 3 610389 Primary immunodeﬁciency ( 610798 ) 70 ( MAPBPIP / P14 ) Associated with the cytoplasmic face of late endosomes and lysosomes . Interacts with MAPK scaffold protein 1 . Possible role in endosome biogenesis SEC23A Sec23 homolog A 610511 Craniolenticulosutural dysplasia ( 607812 ) 81 Essential component of coat protein complex II ( COPII ) - involved in ER to GA transport SNAP25 Synaptosomal - associated protein , 25 kDa 600322 Attention deﬁcit - hyperactivity disorder ( 143465 ) 214 Involved in vesicle membrane docking and fusion ( SNARE ) SNAP29 Synaptosomal - associated protein , 29 kDa 604202 Cerebral dysgenesis , neuropathy , ichthyosis , and palmoplantar keratoderma ( CEDNIK ) syndrome ( 609528 ) 754 Member of the SNAP25 family ( SNAREs ) , involved in vesicle membrane docking and fusion SPG20 Spastic paraplegia 20 ( Troyer syndrome ) 607111 Troyer syndrome or autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 20 ( 275900 ) 588 This protein contains a MIT ( microtubule interacting and trafﬁcking molecule ) domain , and it is implicated in regulating endosomal trafﬁcking and mitochondria function . Also shown to function in the degradation and intracellular trafﬁcking of EGFR Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 322 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . STX11 Syntaxin 11 605014 Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 4 ( 603552 ) 669 Involved in vesicle membrane docking and fusion ( SNARE ) STXBP1 Syntaxin binding protein 1 602926 Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 4 ( 612164 ) 677 Neural - speciﬁc , syntaxin - binding protein STXBP2 Syntaxin binding protein 2 601717 Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis 5 ( 613101 ) 137 Member of the STXBP / UNC - 18 / SEC1 family . Involved in protein trafﬁcking from the Golgi apparatus to the PM . STXBP2 interacts with STX11 SYN1 Synapsin I 313440 Epilepsy , X - linked , with variable learning disabilities and behavior disorders ( 300491 ) 248 Member of the synapsin family , neuronal phosphoproteins which associate with the cytoplasmic surface of synaptic vesicles and modulate neurotransmitter release SYNJ1 Synaptojanin 1 604297 Chromosome 21q22 - linked bipolar disorder ( 125480 ) 676 A phosphoinositide phosphatase that regulates levels of membrane PIP 2 TSC2 Tuberous sclerosis 2 191092 Tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) . (cid:4) 10 - 30 % of cases of TSC are due to mutations in the TSC1 gene , the remainder to mutations in the TSC2 gene ( 613254 ) 120 Regulator of the MTOR pathway VAMP7 Vesicle - associated membrane protein 7 300053 Bipolar disorder , an X - linked form of manic - depressive illness that affects females and causes a deﬁciency of male - to - male transmission ( 309200 ) 541 SNARE protein . Localizes to late endosomes and lysosomes and is involved in the fusion of transport vesicles to their target membranes VAPB VAMP ( vesicle - associated membrane protein ) - associated protein B and C 605704 ALS8 , an atypical form of ALS ( amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ) ( 608627 ) 557 Member of the vesicle - associated membrane protein ( VAMP ) - associated protein ( VAP ) family . Interacts with VAMP1 and VAMP2 ( SNAREs ) and may be involved in vesicle trafﬁcking VPS13B Vacuolar protein sorting 13 homolog B 607817 Cohen syndrome ( 216550 ) 403 Possible role in vesicle - mediated sorting and intracellular protein trafﬁcking Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 323 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m B . Alterations of the Endocytic Machinery in Cancer Several lines of evidence support a role for endocytosis in cancer , and these are mostly connected to its role as a reg - ulator of signaling events . Indeed , a wealth of studies have shown how alteration of the endocytic machinery can in - duce transformation in several model systems , including mammalian cells in vitro ( reviewed in Refs . 425 , 538 ) and developmental model systems ( especially Drosophila ) ( re - viewed in Refs . 139 , 787 ) . With reference to naturally oc - curring tumors in humans , a synthetic list of the connec - FIGURE 9 . Endocytic genes in Mendelian ( monogenic ) diseases and in cancer . A : endocytic genes and Mendelian diseases . A list of 339 genes , including 277 genes encoding proteins involved in endocytosis and trafﬁc and 62 proteins involved in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , was used to screen the OMIM and GENE databases ( see TABLE 2 for details ) for their mutations in Mendelian diseases . Of these genes , 289 were present in OMIM , and 72 were listed as the cause of at least one disease ( the complete list is in TABLE 2 ) , indicating a frequency of mutation of 24 . 9 % ( red bar ) . This value was compared with the frequency of Mendelian disease genes among all human genes . An upper and lower limit for this frequency is shown ( blue bars ) , calculated as detailed in the main text . Signiﬁcance of the enrichments was tested by hypergeometric tests . The P values were obtained using the phyper function from the R statistical language ( http : / / www . R - project . org / ) . B : endocytic genes are enriched in ”old genes . “ Data relative to the phylogenetic age of all genes were downloaded from the Phylopat Database ( www . cmbi . ru . nl / phylopat / ) . The three age groups ( old , middle , young ) were deﬁned as from Cai et al . ( 95 ) . The relative distribution in the three age groups of all human genes ( blue bars ) and of the endocytic genes ( red bars ) is shown . P values were calculated with chi - square test . C : mutations of endocytic genes in the COSMIC database . Of the 339 genes ( described in A ) , 160 harbored at least one mutation in at least one type of cancer . On the top of each bar , the number of genes harboring the number of mutations indicated on the x - axis is shown . For the ”frequently mutated (cid:5) genes ( (cid:1) 5 total mutations ) , the gene symbol is also shown ( details are in TABLE 4 ) . D : mutations of CBL in cancer and Mendelian diseases . In the middle of the panel , a schematic of the CBL protein is shown with its functional domains ( TKB , tyrosine kinase binding domain ; LR , linker region ; RF , ring - ﬁnger domain ; UBA , UB - binding domain ) . The ruler underneath shows amino acid positions . On the top , the position and the frequency of the mutations detected in myeloproliferative diseases are shown by solid circles , aligned with the amino acid sequence . At the bottom , the position of the mutations detected in NSCLC and in the Noonan - like syndrome is shown by red and green arrows , respectively . In NSCLC , the mutation at position 391 was detected in two tumors ( shown as x2 ) . In the Mendelian syndrome , four of ﬁve mutations affect the same resides ( 371 , 367 , 382 , 420 ) as in myeloproliferative diseases . Table 2 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function OMIMMutation Genetic Syndrome ( OMIM number ) Reference Nos . VPS33B Vacuolar protein sorting 33 homolog B 608552 ARC syndrome ( arthrogryposis , renal dysfunction , and cholestasis ) ( 208085 ) 356 Member of the Sec - 1 domain family , homologous to the yeast class C Vps33 protein . Predominantly associated with late endosomes / lysosomes , may mediate vesicle trafﬁcking steps in the endosome / lysosome pathway WASP ( * ) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein 300392 Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( 301000 ) 159 , 162 , 809 The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) family of proteins are involved in transduction of signals from receptors on the cell surface to the actin cytoskeleton . Thrombocytopenia 1 ( 313900 ) X - linked recessive congenital neutropenia ( 300299 ) List of endocytic , trafﬁcking , and organelle - associated genes found mutated and causative of speciﬁc disease . We searched for mutations in genetic syndromes of 277 “endocytic genes” ( the list was manually curated and is available upon request ) encoding for : structural / accessory endocytic proteins , ARF GTPases and their effectors ; endocytic and nonendocytic RABs ; proteins belonging to the ESCRT complexes ; SNARE proteins ; sorting nexins and synaptotagmins ; proteins associated to lysosomes or endosomes and important for their biogenesis or function , and of 62 genes encoding actin regulator / dynamics proteins [ these latter genes are identiﬁed by ( * ) in the “Gene symbol” column ] . Databases searched were the OMIM and the GENE database at NCBI ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / omim and http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gene ) . Shown are the ofﬁcial gene symbol and gene name , the protein function ( as from the OMIM and GENE databases , supplemented with information derived from literature ) , and the OMIM numbers for the mutation and the genetic syndrome . SIGISMUND ET AL . 324 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 325 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m tions between endocytosis and cancer would include ( due to space limitations , we cannot be as comprehensive as this topic would require , and we refer to more exhaustive re - views , cited along with each item below , on speciﬁc issues ) . 1 ) Endocytosis is an important regulator of RTK signaling , which is frequently subverted in cancer ( see below and Refs . 538 , 742 ) . 2 ) Endocytosis is involved in the activation of oncogenic receptors , such as NOTCH , by regulating the accessibility of both receptors and ligands ( 237 ) . 3 ) Endocytosis is a major regulator of cell fate determina - tion , and of the maintenance of SC compartments ( see sect . VII C ) . This may be highly relevant to cellular transforma - tion , in light of increasing support for the SC theory of cancer ( 128 , 139 , 238 , 278 ) . 4 ) As we extensively described in section VII B , endocytosis is involved in the spatial restriction of signals needed for directed cell movement , and for the switch between motility strategies ( amoeboid vs . mesenchymal ) adopted by meta - static cells , thus implicating endocytosis in tumor progres - sion . 5 ) Related to this , endocytosis and trafﬁcking of adhesion molecules ( cadherins and integrins ) is often misregulated during cancer progression ( 110 ) . This represents a crucial mechanism that cooperates with transcriptional programs leading to the acquisition by cultured epithelial cells of a mesenchymal - like and SC - like motile phenotype , a transi - tion required for metastatic dissemination and possibly for reversion of progenitor cells into SCs during cancer devel - opment ( 377 , 727 , 785 ) . 6 ) Autophagy , a degradative pathway that involves the de - livery of cytoplasmic cargo to the lysosome , is linked to tumor suppression and tumor promotion ( 82 , 448 ) . The relationship between autophagy and endocytosis is still largely undeﬁned , although some connections are starting to emerge ( 144 , 281 ) , and this area might witness important developments in the future . 7 ) As we discussed in section VII , endocytic proteins are involved in the regulation of diverse cellular processes such cell cycle , mitosis , apoptosis , and genetic reprogramming that are known to be involved in cancer . 8 ) Finally , there is growing direct evidence for genetic alter - ations , or for subversion of their regulation , of endocytic / trafﬁcking proteins in human tumors ( 425 , 538 ) . In the remainder of this section , we focus on two aspects of the connection between endocytosis and cancer : 1 ) a sys - tematic analysis of alterations of endocytic / trafﬁcking pro - teins and of actin regulators in human cancers , as obtained by extensive mining of public databases and of published literature , and 2 ) a survey of the alterations of the endocytic determinants in signaling cargoes in cancer . 1 . An atlas of the alterations of ”endocytic“ proteins in human cancers To investigate the impact of deregulation of the endocytic and trafﬁcking machinery in cancer , we used the same list of 339 ”endocytic and actin regulator proteins“ employed in TABLE 2 , to screen the OMIM and GENE databases and published literature for alterations in cancer . In TABLE 3 , we show all the identiﬁed alterations for which high - resolution studies are available . In addition , high - throughput studies are identifying a wealth of somatic mutations of endocytic proteins , whose impact remains , however , to be estab - lished . This latter series of potential alterations is reported in TABLE 4 , as obtained by searching the COSMIC ( Cata - logue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer ) database , using the list of 339 ”endocytic and actin regulator proteins . “ In this latter case , we found that 160 genes ( 47 % ) harbor at least one mutation in one tumor type ( excluding silent muta - tions , which are also reported in the COSMIC database ) . A close analysis of the high - throughput approach gene list of TABLE 4 revealed several interesting features , especially in light of the fact that high - resolution studies ( TABLE 3 ) con - centrated mostly on alterations in the expression of endo - cytic genes and comparatively less on their mutations . We focused on those genes displaying more than ﬁve total mu - tations ( henceforth ”frequently mutated , “ see TABLE 4 and FIGURE 9 C ) . In all these cases , the number of tumors screened is large enough ( from 75 to 3 , 475 tumors ) to allow for some tentative conclusions . In the case of CBL , for instance , COSMIC data conﬁrm , on a much wider scale , conclusions present in the literature about mutations of this gene in neoplastic diseases of the myeloid lineage . The vast number of cases permits the es - tablishment of a frequency of (cid:4) 6 % for CBL alterations in myeloid malignancies . Interestingly , CBL was also mutated in (cid:4) 3 % of lung cancers ( non - small - cell lung carcinoma , NSCLC ; note that the mutations of CBL in NSCLC in the COSMIC database are those reported by Ref . 765 ) . In my - eloid malignancies , mutations are clustered in ( or very close to ) the Ring Finger region of CBL , which is essential for binding to E2 conjugating enzymes and , therefore , for the E3 ligase activity of CBL ( 680 , 685 ) ( FIGURE 9 D ) . Interest - ingly , mutations in NSCLCs display a more widespread distribution , being present also in the TKB region ( which is responsible for CBL binding to pY residues in RTKs , see sect . V A ) and in the COOH - terminal region of the protein . Thus , although the real impact of its mutations in lung tumorigenesis remains to be established , CBL might partic - ipate in neoplastic transformation with different cell - spe - ciﬁc molecular mechanisms . SIGISMUND ET AL . 326 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . Alterations of endocytic / trafﬁcking proteins and of actin regulators in cancer GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . ABI1 ( * ) Abl - interactor 1 Loss / downregulation in gastric and prostate cancer . Overexpression in breast and ovarian cancer . Possible tumor suppressor activity : downregulation correlates with the progression of gastric cancer . Oncogenic properties : overexpressionassociateswith early recurrence and worse survival in breast and ovarian cancers . 121 , 145 , 489 , 817 ABI1 forms a complex with EPS8 / SOS1 , and is involved in signaling from RAS to RAC . It is also a critcal component of the WAVEs ( WASFs ) - actin nucleator promoting complex . ARHGEF7 Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) 7 Overexpression in breast cancer . Necessary for v - SRC - induced transformation including tumor formation in nude mice . 5 GEF for RHO - GTPases C3ORF10 ( * ) Chromosome 3 open reading frame 10 Overexpressed in node positive lung squamous cell carcinoma . Genetic loss is protective in clear cell carcinoma . Genetic loss or inhibition of C3ORF10 is likely to be protective against tumor development due to proliferation and motility defects in affected cells . Loss of the HSPC300 gene confers protection against renal clear cell carcinoma . 96 , 109 , 197 C3ORF10 , also known as HSPC300 or BRK1 , is a component of the WAVEs ( WASFs ) actin nucleator promoting complex involved in actin polymerization in migratory cells . CAPG ( * ) Gelsolin - like capping protein Overexpressed in ovarian cancer , oral squamous cell carcinoma , breast cancer , ocular melanomas , glioblastomas , and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas . Overexpression enhances the invasiveness and metastasizing potential of cancer cells . 562 , 584 , 771 , 795 Actin capper , controls actin - based motility in nonmuscle cells CAPZA2 ( * ) Capping protein ( actin ﬁlament ) muscle Z - line , alpha 2 Overexpressed in breast cancer and possibly in glioblastomas . Unclear 540 , 576 Alpha subunit of the barbed - end actin binding protein Cap Z . CAV1 Caveolin 1 Downregulation and sporadic mutations in breast cancer . Upregulation in multiple cancers types ; positively correlates with high tumor grade and poor clinical outcome . Ampliﬁcation in aggressive breast carcinomas . Expression inversely correlates with cell cycle progression and transformation . However , ectopic expression suppresses oncogene - induced apoptosis and confers resistance to anoikis . 705 Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 327 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . Essential component of caveolae CBL Cas - Br - M ecotropic retroviral transforming sequence Point mutations ( e . g . , R420Qin RING ) , insertions , deletions and fusions in AML . Mutations in NSCLC . Inhibits ubiquitination and downregulation of several receptor protein tyrosine kinases . 1 , 99 , 231 , 680 , 685 , 765 E3 UB ligase CLTC Clathrin , heavy chain CHC - ALK fusion in IMT and large B - cell lymphoma . CHC - TFE3 fusion in pediatric renal carcinoma . Constitutive activation of ALK . Aberrant transcription factor activity . 85 Principal coat protein CTTN Cortactin Ampliﬁcation at gene locus ( 11q13 ) and protein overexpression in primary breast carcinomas and head and neck squamous carcinomas . Overexpression inhibits ligand - induced EGFR endocytosis ; knockdown accelerates receptor downregulation in HNSCC cell lines . 91 Coordinates actin polymerization at endocytic sites ; ARP2 / 3 activator ; binds F - actin and dynamin CYFIP1 ( * ) Cytoplasmic FMR1 interacting protein 1 Deleted in epithelial cancers . Deletion of CYFIP1 alters normal epithelial morphogenesis in vitro and cooperated with oncogenic RAS to produce invasive carcinomas in vivo . 723 Interacts with RAC1 and is a key component of the WAVEs ( WASFs ) - actin nucleator promoting complex . DAB2 Disabled homolog 2 Downregulation in ovarian , prostate , bladder , breast , esophageal , and colorectal carcinomas . Increased expression suppresses growth of choriocarcinoma and prostate cancer cells . 381 Cargo - selective clathrin adaptor ; recruits myosin VI to clathrin - coated structures ENAH ( * ) Enabled homolog Overexpressed in breast cancer . Promotes tumor invasion . 264 , 664 Belongs to the ENA / VASP family of proteins that bundle and elongate linear actin ﬁlaments . It potentiates EGF - induced membrane protrusion and increases the matrix degradation activity of tumor cells . EPS8 ( * ) Epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8 Overexpressed in colon , pancreatic , ovarian cancer and oral squamous cell carcinoma . Promotes cell proliferation in colon carcinoma , and SRC - transformed cells . Enhanceschemoresistance in cervical cancer patients . Promotes cell migration and invasion of ovarian and oral squamous cell carcinoma . 121 , 123 , 469 , 487 , 503 , 819 , 870 Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 328 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . Participates in both EGFR signaling through RAC and EGFR trafﬁcking through RAB5 . It also acts as an actin capping protein when bound to ABI1 , and as a bundler when it is associated with BAIAP2 . EPS15 Epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 15 EPS15 – MLL fusion in AML . EPS15 coiled - coil domain mediates oligomerization of MLL , a DNA - binding histonemethyltransferase . 737 Endocytic accessory protein EVL ( * ) Enah / Vasp - like Overexpressed in breast cancer . EVL may be implicated in invasion and / or metastasis of breast cancer . 331 Belongs to the ENA / VASP family of proteins . FLNA ( * ) Filamin A , alpha Overexpression together with MET in adenocarcinomas . FLNA is one of the important regulators of MET signaling and HGF induced tumor cell migration . 880 FLNA is an actin - binding protein that crosslinks actin ﬁlaments and links actin ﬁlaments to membrane glycoproteins . FMNL2 ( * ) Formin - like 2 Overexpression in metastatic cell lines and colorectal carcinoma . FMNL2 is involved in epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) maintenance in human colorectal carcinoma cells . 452 , 882 FMNL2 is a member of diaphanous - related formins that control actin - dependent processes such as cell motility and invasion by promoting linear ﬁlament elongation . FNBP1L ( * ) Formin binding protein 1 - like Fusion partner of MLL in acute myeloid leukemias ( AML ) . Unclear 233 It promotes CDC42 - induced actin polymerization . GSN ( * ) Gelsolin Downregulated in breast , stomach , colon , bladder and lung cancers May function as a tumor suppressor by regulating a G2 checkpoint function of cancer cells through phosphoinositol lipid metabolism . 25 , 179 , 673 Caps the “plus” ends of actin monomers and ﬁlaments to prevent monomer exchange and regulates both assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . IQSEC1 IQ motif and Sec7 domain 1 Overexpression in invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast . Knockdown inhibits metastasis formation by breast cancer cells in nude mice . 536 Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 329 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . ARF6 GEF ; interacts with activated EGFR HAX1 HCLS1 associated protein X - 1 Overexpression in advanced oral carcinoma . Knockdown inhibits endocytosis of integrin (cid:4) v (cid:1) 6 and migration of oral carcinoma cells . 635 Regulates clathrin - mediated integrin endocytosis HIP1HIP1R Huntingtin interacting protein 1 Huntingtin interacting protein 1 - related HIP1 - PDGFBR fusion in CMML . Overexpression in primary epithelial tumors and gliomas . Induce cytokine - independent growth . Transform mouse ﬁbroblasts to induce colonies in soft agar and tumors in nude mice . 636 , 661 Coordinate actin remodeling during formation of clathrin - coated vesicles MTSS1 ( * ) Metastasis suppressor 1 Downregulated in breast and ovarian cancer . Overexpressed in colorectal cancer . Overexpression of MTSS1 suppresses the invasive , migratory , growth and adherence properties of a human breast cancer cell line . High levels of MTSS1 correlated with an increased patient overall survival and disease - free survival in breast cancer . Overexpression of MTSS1 in colorectal cancer tissues was signiﬁcantly correlated to poor differentiation , tissue invasion , lymph node metastasis and high TNM stage . Loss of expression is signiﬁcantly associated with poorly differentiated tumors , large tumor size , deep invasion level , nodal metastases and advanced disease stage in gastric cancer . 441 , 467 , 583 , 818 Possesses an I - BAR domain that deforms the PM and binds actin through its WH2 domain . Overexpression of Mtss1 causes formation of abnormal actin structures . NUMB Numb homolog ( Drosophila ) NUMB expression is lost in about 50 % of human mammary carcinomas and nonsmall cell lung carcinomas . NOTCH antagonist . Tumor suppressor activity attributed to stabilization of TP53 . 131 , 593 , 838 Regulates internalization and recycling of several PM - resident proteins Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 330 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . PARD3 Par - 3 partitioning defective 3 homolog ( C . elegans ) Downregulation in HCC . Associations with tumor suppressors ( VHL and PTEN ) and oncogenes ( e . g . , ERBB2 ) impinge on regulation of cell polarity . 210 PARD3 proteins , which were ﬁrst identiﬁed in C . elegans , are essential for asymmetric cell division and polarized growth . PARD3 controls endocytosis and recycling in clathrin - dependent and independent pathways PRKCDBP ( CAVIN3 ) Protein kinase C , delta binding protein Epigenetic inactivation . Epigenetic inactivation of PRKCDBP , due to aberrant promoter hypermethylation , is a common event and might be implicated in human ovarian tumorigenesis ( possible tumor suppressor ) . 776 Cavin - 3 , a component of caveolae RAB25 RAB25 , member RAS oncogene family Ampliﬁcation of genomic locus ( 1q22 ) in advanced ovarian and breast cancers . Overexpression promotes increased anchorage - independent growth and tumor cell invasion . 124 Small GTPase of the RAB subfamily . Regulates receptor recycling . Promotes invasion by delivery of integrin (cid:4) 5 (cid:1) 1 to the leading edge SCIN ( * ) Scinderin Lack of expression in megakaryoblastic leukemia cells , but is present in normal megakaryocytes and platelets . Cell proliferation and cell ability to form tumors in nude mice are inhibited by the expression of scinderin . 888 Scinderin is a Ca 2 (cid:3) - dependent actin - severing and - capping protein . SH3GL1 SH3 - domain GRB2 - like 1 ( EEN , endophilin II ) EEN - MLL fusion in AML . EEN coiled coil - dependent dimerization and oncogenic activation of MLL . 464 Endocytic accessory protein , induces membrane curvature during vesicle formation SNAP91 Synaptosomal - associated protein , 91 kDa homolog SNAP91 - AF10 fusion in ALL and AML . Fusion comprising clathrin - binding domain of SNAP91and putative transcription factor AF10 . 21 Clathrin - binding adaptor ; involved in assembly of clathrin coats Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 331 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . SPRY1SPRY2 Sprouty homolog 1 , antagonist of FGF signaling and Sprouty homolog 2 Deregulation of SPRY1 and SPRY2 in breast and prostate cancers . As a tumor suppressor it acts as an antagonist of RAS - ERK pathway : SPRY1 and SPRY2 overexpression in osteosarcoma and prostate cancer cells , respectively , inhibits cell proliferation and invasion . As a putative oncogene it functions as an inhibitor of EGFR downregulation by targeting both the CBL and CIN85 pathways . 283 , 473 SPRY1 and SPRY2 inhibit the transcriptional events mediated by growth factor signaling and the induction of FOS . They compete with RTKs for CBL binding and prevent receptor degradation TNK2 ( ACK1 ) Tyrosine kinase , nonreceptor , 2 Gene ampliﬁcation in advanced - stage primary tumors and metastases derived from prostate and breast . Enhances tumorigenesis in nude mice . Promotes degradation of tumor suppressor protein WWOX . 794 Binds clathrin and activated EGFR ; promotes receptor degradation TRIP10 ( * ) Thyroid hormone receptor interactor 10 TRIP10 is hypermethylated in brain tumor and breast cancer , but hypomethylated in liver cancer . TRIP10 regulates cancer cell growth and death in a cancer type - speciﬁc manner . Differential DNA methylation of TRIP10 can either promote cell survival or cell death in a cell type - dependent manner . 328 It is a F - BAR - containing protein involved in CDC42 , Dynamin and WASP - dependent endocytic processes . VIL1 ( * ) Villin 1 Overexpressed and ampliﬁed in cervical adenocarcinomas . Cervical carcinomas show variability in the expression and genomic copy number of Villin1 ( VIL1 ) . Kaplan - Meier survival curves revealed worse disease - free survival in VIL1 - positive tumors . 549 Encodes a member of a family of calcium - regulated actin - binding proteins that can cap , sever , or bundle actin ﬁlaments . VPS37A Vacuolar protein sorting 37 homolog A Downregulation in hepatocellular carcinoma . Knockdown strongly stabilizes EGFR . 863 Component of ESCRT - I complex ; promotes down - regulation of ubiquitinated receptors Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 332 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Another eight endocytic and actin regulator genes were fre - quently mutated in the COSMIC database . Of these , only CYFIP1 was previously implicated in cancer through high - resolution studies ( 723 ) . For the other seven ( VPS13B , CUBN , LYST , TSC2 , FLNB , RIMS1 , FLNC ) , the involvement in can - cer was previously unsuspected ( see TABLE 3 ) . We caution that in several tumors , the number of analyzed cases is too low to draw meaningful conclusions . In addition , the high frequency of mutations in ovarian cancers is suspect because too many genes were mutated at high frequency . Despite these limita - tions , in the case of breast cancer , the number of analyzed cases ( 30 – 50 ) and the frequency of mutation of the ”fre - quently mutated genes“ ( in some cases as high as 10 – 12 % ) suggest a signiﬁcant impact of subversion of endocytosis in this type of neoplasm ( TABLE 4 ) . There is one additional reason to suspect that mutations of the ”frequently mutated genes“ have a causal role in cancer . We noticed a singular overlap between endocytic genes that are mutated in Mendelian diseases ( as from TABLE 2 ) and those that are frequently mutated in cancer . TABLE 4 shows that , already by visual inspection , a clustering of Mendelian genes is evident towards the top of the Table , where the frequently mutated genes are . In particular , eight of nine genes frequently mutated in cancer ( (cid:1) 5 total mutations ) are also monogenic disease genes . The calculated P for this event is highly signiﬁcant ( P : 0 . 0005 ) ; in addition , this is an exclusive property of the ”frequently mutated genes , “ since the overlap between the entire two sets of genes ( all the genes of TABLE 2 and TABLE 4 ) is not signiﬁcant ( P : 0 . 5 ) . This argues for the fact that a subset of endocytic genes are highly sensitive to mutations ( meaning that they are sufﬁ - ciently important for mutations to cause disease pheno - types ) , possibly for the reasons already discussed at the end of section VII A . Under this scenario , mutated alleles of these genes would give rise to Mendelian diseases or to cancer when mutated in the germ line or in somatic cells , respec - tively . This hypothesis is supported by the analysis of the CBL mutations in the Noonan syndrome - like disorder ( the monogenic disease in which CBL is implicated ) and in can - cer . The mutations in the genetic syndrome ( 501 , 605 ) clus - ter in the Ring Finger region of CBL , and in several cases they affect exactly the same residue as in myeloid diseases ( FIGURE 9 D ) . Indeed , in the case of CBL , the tight relation - ship between cancer and monogenic diseases is established at the human genetics level by the fact that individuals with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia harboring CBL muta - tions also show phenotypic traits of a Noonan syndrome - Table 3 . — Continued GeneSymbol Gene Name / Protein Function Type of Alteration Oncogenic Properties Reference Nos . WASF2 ( * ) WAS protein family , member 2 Overexpression of WAVE2 ( WASF2 ) was seen in node - positive as well as in moderately and poorly differentiated breast cancer , and in colon cancer with respect to normal colonic epithelial cells . High levels of WAVE2 expression were associated with death due to disease in breast cancer patients . Colocalization of Arp2 and WAVE2 has been found as an independent risk factor for liver metastasis of colorectal carcinoma . 216 , 353 Forms a WAVEs ( WASFs ) actin nucleator promoting complex that links receptor kinases to actin dynamics . WASF3 ( * ) WAS protein family , member 3 Overexpression in prostate cancer . WAVE3 is pivotal in controlling the invasiveness of prostate cancer cells . 217 This gene encodes a member of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein family and has similar function to its homologues WASF1 and 2 We searched for mutations or deregulation in cancer in a list of 277 “endocytic genes” and of 62 genes encoding actin regulator / dynamics proteins [ these latter genes are identiﬁed by ( * ) in the “Gene symbol” column ] ( same as in Table 2 ) . Databases searched were the OMIM and the GENE database at NCBI ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / omim and http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gene ) , supplemented with ad hoc literature searches . Shown are the ofﬁcial gene symbol and gene name , the protein function ( as from the OMIM and GENE databases , supplemented with information derived from literature ) , the type of alteration detected in cancer and a description of the oncogenic properties of the protein ( as obtained from the literature ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 333 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 4 . Mutations in genes encoding endocytic / trafﬁcking proteins and actin regulators in cancer in the COSMIC database GENE SYMBOL BR CNS HAE KID COL LIV LUN OVA PAN MEL URI TOT MEND . CBL 2 ( 447 ) 133 ( 2322 ) 9 ( 318 ) 144 X VPS13B 1 ( 48 ) 2 ( 23 ) 3 ( 11 ) 6 ( 7 ) 1 ( 2 ) 4 ( 6 ) 17 X CUBN 4 ( 48 ) 1 ( 22 ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 37 ) 6 ( 9 ) 2 ( 2 ) 15 X LYST 4 ( 30 ) 2 ( 22 ) 5 ( 6 ) 11 X TSC2 4 ( 22 ) 3 ( 338 ) 2 ( 22 ) 9 X CYFIP1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 4 ( 4 ) 3 ( 2 ) 8 FLNB ( * ) 6 ( 49 ) 2 ( 3 ) 8 X RIMS1 1 ( 30 ) 5 ( 7 ) 1 ( 2 ) 7 X FLNC ( * ) 2 ( 33 ) 2 ( 32 ) 2 ( 2 ) 6 X ALS2 1 ( 30 ) 4 ( 6 ) 5 X FMN2 ( * ) 1 ( 32 ) 2 ( 4 ) 2 ( 3 ) 5 KIF16B 1 ( 48 ) 1 ( 101 ) 1 ( 38 ) 1 ( 11 ) 1 ( 6 ) 5 OTOF 2 ( 48 ) 3 ( 3 ) 5 X AP1M1 1 ( 48 ) 3 ( 3 ) 4 BIN1 2 ( 447 ) 1 ( 2 ) 1 ( 6 ) 4 X DIAPH2 ( * ) 1 ( 11 ) 3 ( 3 ) 4 FHOD3 ( * ) 2 ( 30 ) 1 ( 32 ) 1 ( 1 ) 4 HIP1 1 ( 447 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 ( 2 ) 4 HPS3 1 ( 37 ) 3 ( 5 ) 4 X MYO15A 1 ( 22 ) 1 ( 2 ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 1 ) 4 X SEC23A 4 ( 4 ) 4 X SNX19 2 ( 11 ) 2 ( 2 ) 4 SNX25 2 ( 30 ) 2 ( 2 ) 4 SVIL ( * ) 4 ( 5 ) 4 SYT6 1 ( 22 ) 2 ( 3 ) 1 ( 1 ) 4 AMPH 1 ( 1 ) 2 ( 3 ) 3 AP3B2 2 ( 3 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 DAAM2 ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 EVL ( * ) 2 ( 37 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 FLNA ( * ) 3 ( 30 ) 3 X GGA1 2 ( 48 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 GSN ( * ) 2 ( 48 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 X ITSN2 2 ( 412 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 MYO5A 1 ( 22 ) 2 ( 3 ) 3 X MYO7A 1 ( 30 ) 2 ( 3 ) 3 X NDRG1 3 ( 4 ) 3 X SNX13 2 ( 447 ) 1 ( 101 ) 3 SNX4 2 ( 13 ) 1 ( 1 ) 3 SYT3 1 ( 48 ) 2 ( 2 ) 3 DIAPH3 ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 2 EPS8 ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 2 EPS8L3 ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 2 FHOD1 ( * ) 2 ( 48 ) 2 FMNL2 ( * ) 2 ( 446 ) 2 FMNL3 ( * ) 2 ( 1 ) 2 NCKAP1 ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 2 SCIN ( * ) 2 ( 2 ) 2 WASF2 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 2 ) 2 AP1G1 2 ( 2 ) 2 AP1M2 2 ( 2 ) 2 AP2A1 2 ( 2 ) 2 Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 334 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 4 . — Continued GENE SYMBOL BR CNS HAE KID COL LIV LUN OVA PAN MEL URI TOT MEND . CHMP4A 2 ( 2 ) 2 CHMP4C 2 ( 2 ) 2 GGA3 1 ( 48 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 HPS5 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 X LAMP1 2 ( 446 ) 2 LDLR 2 ( 2 ) 2 X MYO1A 1 ( 2 ) 1 ( 2 ) 2 X RAB36 1 ( 23 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 RAB3C 1 ( 23 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 RAB5C 1 ( 38 ) 1 ( 6 ) 2 SH3GL3 1 ( 22 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 SNX21 1 ( 48 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 SNX27 2 ( 2 ) 2 SNX7 2 ( 2 ) 2 STAM 1 ( 37 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 STAMBP 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 STX12 1 ( 48 ) 1 ( 22 ) 2 STX3 2 ( 1 ) 2 STX5 1 ( 48 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 SYNJ1 2 ( 1 ) 2 SYT14 1 ( 1 ) 1 ( 1 ) 2 X SYT7 2 2 SYTL4 2 2 ABI1 ( * ) 1 ( 447 ) 1 ACTG1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 X AP1B1 1 ( 1 ) 1 AP1G2 1 ( 1 ) 1 AP2B1 1 ( 1 ) 1 ARF5 1 ( 1 ) 1 AVIL ( * ) 1 ( 446 ) 1 BAIAP2L ( * ) 1 1 ( 1 ) 1 BAIAP2L2 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 CAPZA3 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 CHM 1 ( 1 ) 1 X CHMP4B 1 ( 1 ) 1 X CHMP6 1 ( 1 ) 1 CYFIP2 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 DAAM1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 DNM1 1 ( 1 ) 1 DNM2 1 ( 1 ) 1 X EEA1 1 ( 1 ) 1 EPS8L2 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 FMN1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 ITSN1 1 ( 1 ) 1 LAMP2 1 ( 1 ) 1 X MCOLN1 1 ( 48 ) 1 X MLPH 1 ( 1 ) 1 X MTSS1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 MURC 1 ( 1 ) 1 MYO6 1 ( 1 ) 1 X NPC1 1 ( 1 ) 1 X Continued ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 335 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Table 4 . — Continued GENE SYMBOL BR CNS HAE KID COL LIV LUN OVA PAN MEL URI TOT MEND . PDCD6IP 1 ( 6 ) 1 PICALM 1 ( 1 ) 1 PSEN1 1 ( 102 ) 1 X PTRF 1 ( 48 ) 1 X RAB10 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB15 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB28 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB2B 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB31 1 ( 6 ) 1 RAB37 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB38 1 ( 38 ) 1 RAB3B 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB3D 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB41 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB43 1 ( 200 ) 1 RAB4A 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB4B 1 ( 6 ) 1 RAB6C 1 ( 200 ) 1 RAB7L1 1 ( 1 ) 1 RAB8A 1 ( 6 ) 1 RAB8B 1 ( 101 ) 1 RAB9A 1 ( 1 ) 1 RIN1 1 ( 188 ) 1 RIN2 1 ( 1 ) 1 X SDPR 1 ( 1 ) 1 SH3GL1 1 ( 1 ) 1 SNAP91 1 ( 1 ) 1 SNX16 1 ( 1 ) 1 SNX2 1 ( 101 ) 1 SNX20 1 ( 1 ) 1 SNX29 1 ( 1 ) 1 SNX5 1 ( 38 ) 1 SNX8 1 ( 38 ) 1 STAM2 1 ( 1 ) 1 STX11 1 ( 1 ) 1 X STX16 1 ( 1 ) 1 STX17 1 ( 37 ) 1 STX6 1 ( 1 ) 1 STXBP2 1 ( 22 ) 1 X SYN1 1 ( 1 ) 1 X SYT1 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT10 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT11 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT12 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT13 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT16 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT17 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT2 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYT9 1 ( 37 ) 1 SYTL1 1 ( 1 ) 1 SYTL2 1 ( 32 ) 1 Continued SIGISMUND ET AL . 336 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m like disorder ( 605 ) . In the case of the other ”frequently mutated in cancer“ endocytic genes , the connection be - tween mutations causing cancer and Mendelian diseases is more elusive . This can be due to the low number of cancer mutations presently available and to the fact that , in many cases , the genetics of the paired conditions ( cancer : Mende - lian disease for each gene ) might be different ( dominant or recessive ) , suggesting different molecular pathogenesis . Whatever the case , the highly signiﬁcant overlap between the two sets and the CBL paradigm suggest that the com - parative analysis of alterations in cancer and in genetic dis - ease might help to identify driver mutations in cancer , a possibility that we suspect might extend beyond the subset of endocytic genes herein analyzed . 2 . Alterations of the endocytic determinants in signaling cargoes in cancer Not only endocytic proteins , but also PM cargoes are fre - quently mutated in human cancers , in speciﬁc determinants that alter their vesicular trafﬁc . In this instance , alterations usually affect the ability of the receptor to be properly ubi - quitinated and downregulated , therefore causing sustained signaling . This is the case for several RTKs , like EGFR ( reviewed in Ref . 609 ) , MET ( reviewed in Ref . 418 ) , and KIT ( 876 ) . The most frequent genetic alterations , in these occurrences , consist of deletions that affect the region en - coding portions of the intracellular domains of RTKs , usu - ally encompassing the binding region for CBL , the major E3 ligase involved in RTK ubiquitination . In addition to this , other mechanisms are exploited by can - cer cells to evade endocytosis - mediated desensitization . For instance , somatic mutations in the kinase domain of the EGFR have been reported in non - small - cell lung cancers , and they have been shown in vitro to cause reduced receptor phosphorylation at Y1045 , the major CBL binding site and , consequently , defective receptor downregulation ( 240 , 719 ) . Similarly , EGFRvIII , an oncogenic deletion mutant of the EGFR , frequently observed in glioblastoma , shows hy - pophosphorylation of Y1045 and reduced degradation ( 267 , 288 ; see also Ref . 538 for more detailed explana - tions ) . An endocytic - dependent mechanism has been proposed to contribute to the transforming effects of ERBB - 2 over - expression in breast cancer . ERBB - 2 belongs to the EGFR family of RTKs ; at variance with EGFR , however , ERBB - 2 is internalization impaired ( 52 , 741 ) . Het - erodimerization of ERBB - 2 with ligand - occupied EGFRs seems to inﬂuence the endocytic trafﬁcking of both ERBB - 2 and EGFR . Indeed , it has been shown that EGFR - ERBB - 2 heterodimers display delayed endocyto - sis , are not efﬁciently sorted to lysosomes , and are pref - erentially recycled back to the cell surface , causing aber - rant signaling ( 28 , 307 , 445 , 855 ) . One possibility is that EGFR and ERBB - 2 are not fully ubiquitinated in the heterodimers . Indeed , while activated ERBB - 2 can recruit CBL , this recruitment is less efﬁcient compared with EGFR ( 449 ) . An alternative possibility is that het - erodimers display reduced afﬁnity for EGF and dissociate from the ligand in endosomes , due to the release of the ligand in the acidic environment of endosomes , being recycled back to the surface ( 445 ) . However , computa - tional modeling of the trafﬁcking of EGFR - ERBB - 2 het - erodimers predicted that elevated dissociation of ligand in endosomes could not explain the observed trafﬁcking patterns of the heterodimers ( 308 ) . Rather , the reduced degradation of EGFR might be explained by a mecha - nism through which ERBB - 2 directly competes with Table 4 . — Continued GENE SYMBOL BR CNS HAE KID COL LIV LUN OVA PAN MEL URI TOT MEND . TRIP10 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 USP8 1 ( 11 ) 1 VIL1 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 VPS24 1 ( 22 ) 1 VPS4B 1 ( 1 ) 1 WAS ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 WASF3 ( * ) 1 ( 1 ) 1 Total 46 32 133 8 17 2 23 184 26 19 1 491 We searched for mutations in cancer ( in the COSMIC database , Version 53 , www . sanger . ac . uk / perl / genetics / CGP / cosmic ) in a list of 277 “endocytic genes” and of 62 genes encoding actin regulator / dynamics proteins [ these latter genes are identiﬁed by ( * ) ] ( same as in Table 2 ) . Genes are ranked by the total number of mutations found . Shown are the ofﬁcial gene symbol and frequency of mutations ( total number of mutations and number of analyzed cases in parentheses ) within each tumor type . Silent mutations were not computed . Type of tumor : BR , breast ; CNS , central nervous system ; HAE , tumors of hematological and lymphoid tissues ; KID , kidney ; COL , colon - rectum ; LIV , liver ; OVA , ovary ; PAN , pancreas ; MEL , melanomas ; URI , urinary tract . In column “MEND , ” we report ( by an X ) whether the listed genes are also mutated in Mendelian diseases ( as from Table 2 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 337 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m EGFR for a stoichiometrically limited quantity of endo - somal retention components , thereby reducing endo - somal retention and degradation of EGFR ( 308 ) . What - ever the case , it appears that altered trafﬁcking of EGFR might be one mechanism through which ERBB - 2 exerts its oncogenic potential . In addition to RTKs , many GPCRs are overexpressed in human cancers and contribute to tumor progression ( re - viewed in Ref . 178 ) . Recent work has revealed that dereg - ulated trafﬁcking of CXCR4 and PAR1 through the endo - somal - lysosomal station leads to increased surface expres - sion of these cargoes in breast cancer cells , contributing to cancer progression ( 72 , 199 , 200 , 453 ) . Interplay with ERBB - 2 seems to have a role in breast cancers that display elevated CXCR4 surface levels . Indeed , ERBB - 2 overex - pression seems to enhance CXCR4 levels both by increasing protein synthesis and by impairing CXCR4 ubiquitination and lysosomal degradation mediated by AIP4 , the E3 ligase involved in this process ( 453 ) . It has been proposed that in this case the mechanism may involve CISK , a Ser / Thr kinase downstream of PI3K signaling , which phosphorylates and inactivates AIP4 , thereby contributing to the increased CXCR4 levels ( 734 ) . In conclusion , while we have had to necessarily limit our - selves to the description of a few paradigmatic cases , it is evident that subversion of endocytosis might be involved in cancer in multiple ways . Given this , a deeper analysis of the endocytic process is predicted not only to advance our un - derstanding of cell regulation and how it connects to the pathogenetic mechanisms of cancer , but should also help to identify novel targets for molecular therapies and clinically relevant biomarkers for prognostic , diagnostic , and thera - peutic purposes . IX . EVOLUTION OF ENDOCYTOSIS In this section , we review knowledge and hypotheses re - garding the origin of endocytosis . We will do so , initially , with the underlying assumption that endocytosis evolved as a tool to increase ﬁtness through the more efﬁcient uptake of nutrients from the extracellular milieu ( see sect . I and Ref . 151 ) . An evolutionary perspective is , in our opinion , indispensable to understand how and why endocytosis has become what we know today . In the next section ( sect . X ) , we will then try to put forward models that explain speculatively how a relatively simple device might have evolved to become a cornerstone of the eu - karyotic cellular plan . Even the simple ”will work for food“ outlook on endo - cytosis requires rather sophisticated tools , such as a func - tional system of endomembranes , the presence of acces - sory proteins that give plasticity to the membrane system ( i . e . , coat and transport / trafﬁcking proteins ) , and an ac - tive cytoskeleton . Indeed , it is widely assumed that an internal and dynamic endomembrane system comprising a nuclear envelope , ER , Golgi system , endosomes , phago - somes , lysosomes , autophagosomes , peroxisomes , and mitochondria ( chloroplast ) must have been present in the last eukaryote common ancestor ( LECA ) . In addition , until recently , the cytoskeleton , endomembranes , and en - docytic accessory proteins were thought to be exclusive to eukaryotes . The picture has started to change , how - ever , in the last few years with the realization that a number of elements of the system were already in place much earlier in evolution , in prokaryotic organisms . This bears important consequences on our understanding of how endocytosis came into being , and , as we will see , of how its ”simple“ beginnings already had embedded in them the prerequisites for it subsequent ”explosion“ in eukaryotic homeostasis . A . Actin in Prokaryotes Actin ﬁlaments serve as a scaffold for motor proteins , e . g . , in the distribution of mobile cellular elements such as trans - port vesicles and organelles . On the other hand , actin ﬁla - ment polymerization is the driving force in cellular shape changes such as the formation of pseudopods and amoe - boid movement of cells . Actin homologs have been identi - ﬁed in prokaryotes ( see Refs . 101 and 701 for a complete review ) . Both the actin homolog ( Ta0583 ) of the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum and the eubacterial actin ho - molog ( MREB ) in Bacillus subtilis have been shown to pos - sess biochemical and structural properties equivalent to those of eukaryotic actin ( 198 , 293 , 399 , 657 ) . The major - ity of the proteins involved in actin remodeling have no prokaryotic homologs or display only distant connections ( such as a common structural fold ) at the level of individual domains . In particular , no prokaryotic homologs were de - tected for the accessory subunits of the ARP2 / 3 complex that is highly conserved in all eukaryotes and serves as a nucleator of monomeric actin units to initiate polymeriza - tion ( 874 ) . However , the presence of common structural features in ARP2 / 3 proteins and in the archaeal actins sug - gests that the common ancestors of the archaeal and eu - karyotic actins were capable of forming branched ﬁlaments . In addition , the family of RHO GTPases , that are ubiqui - tous regulators of actin dynamics in eukaryotes , appears to be of bacterial origin ( 874 ) . Bacterial actin - like proteins have been shown to perform essential functions in several aspects of cellular physiol - ogy . They control cell growth , cell shape , chromosome segregation , and polar localization of proteins and local - ize as helical ﬁlaments underneath the cell membrane . MREB forms dynamic helical structures and is required for the maintenance of a rod - shaped morphology . It has been shown to form spirals that traverse along the longi - tudinal axis of Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli cells . SIGISMUND ET AL . 338 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m It has also been shown that the bacterial cytoskeleton and cell shape - determining proteins , such as MREB , function in concert to orchestrate the localization of cell wall syn - thetic complexes ( 171 ) . In addition , MREB is involved in chromosome segregation . Eukaryotic cells use the tubu - lin - based cytoskeleton to segregate their chromosomes during mitosis . In bacteria , this task is accomplished by the actin homolog MREB , which speciﬁcally binds to and segregates the replication origin of the bacterial chromo - some ( 414 ) . Bacillus subtilis MREB and MBL ( a second actin ortholog ) have been shown to perform dynamic motor - like movements within cells ( 154 ) . A proposed mechanism is that polymerization of MREB from the middle of the cells toward the cell poles pushes replicated regions on the chromosomes toward the poles ( 746 ) . Thus a primordial actin - like cytoskeleton is present al - ready in prokaryotes , ready to be harnessed ( in evolu - tion ) by the future endomembrane system . B . Endomembranes and Coat Proteins in Prokaryotes While the assumption that LECA possessed a well - devel - oped endomembrane system is widely accepted , there is no established consensus regarding its origin and evolution . There are several models for the origin of endomembranes , which have been put forward mainly with the intent of explaining the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus and , the nuclear envelope itself ( 360 , 500 ) . Three major models are considered : 1 ) a symbiontic scenario , which posits that the nucleus evolved from a symbiont ( an archaeabacterium or enveloped virus ) ; 2 ) a de novo scenario , postulating that membrane genesis was gained by spontaneous lipid vesicle assembly ; and 3 ) an autogenous scenario , in which endo - membranes evolved via the inward budding of a prokary - otic ancestor’s PM . A series of ﬁndings obtained with Planctomycetes ( 461 ) argues that an endomembrane system and compartmental - ized cell organization , in an ancestral organism , could have developed without the need for contributions from cells of other domains of life . Indeed , a simple but functional sys - tem of endomembranes is present already in bacteria , in the phyla of Planctomycetes ( reviewed in Ref . 234 ) . Notably , the planctomycete Gemmata obscuriglobus , one of the few compartmentalized bacteria , seem to possess three distinct compartments ; a “nucleoid” containing the DNA , a “ribo - plasm” a ribosome - containing cytoplasm , and a ribosome - free cytoplast , the “paryphoplasm” ( 461 ) . In addition , in several members of this phylum , cytosolic membrane coat - like ( MC ) proteins were found , and for some of them a clear membrane - bound localization was observed ( 682 ) . Finally , Gemmata obscuriglobus has the ability to uptake proteins present in the external environment in an energy - dependent process analogous to eukaryotic endocytosis , and the inter - nalized proteins are associated with the membranes of in - ternal vesicle ( 477 ) . Thus an internal membrane system , responsible for endocytosis , has evolved within a simple prokaryotic cell and without the involvement of a symbi - ont . The existence of Planctomycetes MCs can be viewed in light of another interesting concept that emerged from eukary - otic studies , that of the “protocoatomer . ” In eukaryotes , the biogenesis of transport containers , which shuttle cargo between endomembranes and / or to and from the PM , is mediated primarily by coat protein complexes . These in - clude the coat protein complex II ( COPII ) that mediates , ER - to - Golgi vesicular trafﬁcking , coat protein complex I ( COPI ) that mediates intra - Golgi and Golgi - to - ER trafﬁck - ing , and the clathrin - based protein complexes that are in - volved in endocytosis and trafﬁcking between the Golgi , lysosomes , and endosomes . The core coat protein machin - eries are not only highly conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution , but also all evolutionarily related . An evolution - ary link between the components of the COPI and clathrin adaptor complexes ( AP - 1 , AP - 2 , and AP - 3 ) has been dem - onstrated ( 688 ) , as also supported by structural and bio - chemical comparisons of COPI and AP - 2 or AP - 1 / AP - 3 sub - units ( 320 ) . These ﬁndings support the idea that all eukary - otic coat proteins share some common ancestor , which is operationally deﬁned as a “protocoatomer . ” The question now is as to relationships between the Planc - tomycetes MCs and the hypothetical eukaryotic proto - coatomer , and more in general between endocytosis in Planctomycetes and in eukaryotes . No signiﬁcant sequence similarity can be detected between the bacterial and eukary - otic coat proteins . Although this seems to indicate that the two sets of proteins are unrelated , it is noteworthy that their core architecture is conserved and that sequence similarity is often lost during long periods of evolution ( e . g . , FtsZ and tubulin or MreB and actin ) . Indeed , low or no sequence similarity can be detected between the eukaryotic coat pro - teins themselves , despite a common origin and signiﬁcant structural similarity . This leaves us with a number of pos - sibilities . On the one hand , endocytosis , as found in Planc - tomycetes , may be an example of a parallel evolutionary development of an analog of the eukaryotic process . In other words , it is possible that both eukaryotic and bacte - rial membrane - coat proteins appeared separately , i . e . , by convergent evolution . The alternative is that the two pro - cesses are the result of divergent evolution , in which the process originated in prokaryotes and then was either selec - tively lost in some branches of bacteria and in Archaea , or laterally transferred to Eukarya ( see Ref . 222 for a more detailed discussion ) . The possibility also exists that bacteria of the superphylum Planctinomycetes - Verrucomicrobia - Chlamydiae ( PVC ) represent an intermediate evolutionary step between bacteria and a common eukaryotic and ar - chaeal ancestor ( 161 ) . Regardless , there is one fundamental lesson from the Planctomycetes studies , i . e . , that generating ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 339 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m an endomembrane system might not be that difﬁcult after all . In the PVC superphylum , MC - like proteins are found only in those bacteria that possess a compartmentalized cell plan , i . e . , with intracytoplasmic membranes ( 682 ) . This might mean that the simple presence of a membrane - bend - ing protein is enough to lead to the generation of an endo - membrane system . C . From Prokaryotes to Eukaryotes A system of endomembranes , an actin - like cytoskeleton and a repertoire of coat proteins mostly likely allowed , during evolution , the development of an internal trafﬁcking sys - tem . As we have seen , all of these elements are already present at least in some prokaryotic cells . One could postu - late that the loss of the cell wall in a prokaryote created the initial condition of membrane plasticity necessary for endo - cytosis . The development of protocoatomers allowed for membrane bending , and the harnessing of a primordial ac - tin cytoskeleton provided the mechanical force to tubulate or vesiculate the PM . Ribosomes that were initially attached to the PM then became internalized but stayed attached to a membrane , giving rise to a primitive endomembrane sys - tem , the rough ER , and ﬁnally to the nuclear envelope ( 152 , 500 ) . The acquisition of mitochondria then had a decisive impact on eukaryotic cell architecture . While such an out - look is obviously far from being proven ( see Refs . 361 and 874 , particularly in the Reviewers’ Comments sections ) , it provides a plausible scenario under which an endocytic sys - tem might not only have evolved before eukaryote separa - tion as a distinct lineage , but can also be considered a pre - requisite for the formation of the endomembrane system , of the nuclear envelope , and mitochondrial acquisition , which are the fundamental features of all eukaryotes . One important ﬁnding in favor of this model is the fact that membrane coat proteins and nuclear pore complex proteins are evolutionarily related at the structural level ( 160 ) . Nu - clear pores and vesicle - coating complexes may share these folds because both complex types originated from a com - mon ancestor . In this scenario , a single protocoatomer would have been the progenitor for numerous vesicle coat - ing complexes , as well as nuclear pore proteins . This model links vesicle coats and the nuclear pore protein complexes through a common ancestor , suggesting an evolutionary continuity of the corresponding membrane domains , i . e . , the PM , the ER , the Golgi , and the nuclear envelope , and strongly argues that a secretory / endocytic compartment and its actively budding coated vesicles would predate the origin of the nucleus , and thus of eukaryotes ( 279 , 360 ) . The sum of all data reviewed above , therefore , strongly support the autogenous scenario ( see sect . IX B ) for the or - igin of an endomembrane system and of the nuclear enve - lope via the inward budding of a prokaryotic ancestor’s PM . While the driving evolutionary force might very well have been “competition for food , ” there is one major im - plication of this outlook ( regardless of the driving force ) , i . e . , that the starting point of any further molecular evolu - tion in the endomembrane system must have been proteins originally associated with the PM , as supported by the re - lationship between coats and nuclear pores , an issue that will be further developed in section X . X . OUTLOOK : BEYOND THE PARTNERSHIP It seems that endocytosis pops up at every stone that we turn in the cell . In this section we will speculate on why this might be so . Our leitmotiv is that endocytosis initially evolved as a simple stand - alone process in the competition for nutrients . However , the peculiar design of the system , even in its very primordial version , implicated a number of latent properties that created the enabling conditions for the explosion of a number of other features ( FIGURE 10 ) . These latent properties do not appear strictly related to the initial selective advantage provided by endocytosis and are thus true “emerging properties” of the system . They led to the development of a completely novel cellular plan , based on a novel system of cell logistics : the logistics provided by en - docytosis and the eukaryotic cell plan . While , for ease of understanding we will frequently use colloquial expressions such as “the cell learns , ” or “mole - cules learn , ” or the “purpose” of something , it goes without saying that these are not proper evolutionary terms . Our aim , though , is to present an intuitively understandable pic - ture of how such a novel cellular plan may have come to be . A . A Logic for Logistics ? At the beginning of this review we provided a rather un - usual deﬁnition for endocytosis : “Endocytosis is the logis - tics of the cell . ” It is now time to explain , in light of all the facts that we reviewed , what we mean by that . From the evolutionary point of view , it does not take a large stretch of the imagination to see how the cell might have very rapidly learned how to exploit for other purposes , a system that originally developed under the simple pressure of competi - tion for nutrients . The appearance of receptor - mediated endocytosis is a ﬁrst case in point . This is a process present in all eukaryotic cells and , therefore , must have been present in the LECA already . From the evolutionary viewpoint , it must have provided a considerable advantage , since it allows a switch in feeding habits from “sampling the milieu through bulk endocyto - sis” to “capturing and concentrating the nutrients . ” Thus it might have evolved under the same selective pressure that allowed the development of endocytosis . And yet , the pro - cess came with an unexpected property : it modulated the composition of the PM , allowing for a higher level of mo - SIGISMUND ET AL . 340 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m lecular plasticity in the relationships between the intracel - lular and extracellular compartments . Recycling is another example . One could easily envision a scenario under which recycling evolved as a simple tool to replenish the PM of components that were depleted during the internalization process . Similarly , when the cell learned how to employ receptor - mediated endocytosis , the ability to recycle receptors to the PM must have constituted a strong selective advantage in the competition for food . However , once the system was in place , it should not have taken much tinkering to develop a system of homing devices to obtain selective recycling to speciﬁc areas of the PM , as opposed to the bulk PM . The result of such a process is the ability to concentrate PM - resident molecules , such as recep - tors , in restricted areas of the PM , a prerequisite for the FIGURE 10 . The endocytic matrix . A conceptual drawing of the endocytic matrix is displayed . Starting from the primordial functions of endocytosis ( green ) , connected with competition for food , a series of additional functions ( yellow ) became associated with the endomembrane system during evolution . These functions ( yellow ) were the consequence of 1 ) emerging properties of the system , such as size of endosomes , physical separation of signaling compartments ( PM and endosomes ) , and origin of the nuclear envelope from endo - membranes ( see sect . IX B and X A ) ; 2 ) early convergence of endocytosis with other cellular functions and subsequent coevolution , as in the case of actin cytoskeleton and of the ubiquitination system ( see sects . IX A and X A ) ; and 3 ) late convergence of endocytosis with other systems , such as pY - based signaling and the PAR complex ( see sect . X , A and B ) . The consequence of these events is the pervasive presence of endocytosis and trafﬁcking in virtually every cellular aspect of cell regulation ( blue ) , and in the control of several cellular phenotypes ( purple ) . The molecular ( blue ) and biological ( purple ) characteristics of this control are described in detail in the main text , with the exception of the role of endocytosis in neurotransmission , in particular at the synapse , which is not herein reviewed ( for reviews on this issue , see Refs . 371 , 720 , 760 ) . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 341 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m execution of polarized functions . In other words , the cell might have learned , by exploiting an emerging property of the system , that the quickest and most efﬁcient way to move things around on the PM , was to move them away from the PM , and then back to it , through recycling . In this way the endocytic system might have been harnessed for the execu - tion of a number of spatially restricted functions , such as directed cellular motility . Another obvious emerging property of a vesicular system resides in the size of vesicles . The PM is a vast surface in which signaling molecules , which have been brought to - gether to achieve effective concentrations required by the law of mass action , can rapidly diffuse away if not pre - vented from doing so by some energy - consuming mecha - nism . If signaling molecules , initially concentrated in a re - gion of the PM , are internalized and sequestered in a vesicle , they simply have nowhere to go , and cannot diffuse away . This would create the conditions for sustained signaling and for “further improvements” such as the development ( or the optimization ) of “coincidence detectors , ” i . e . , molecu - lar functions needing two or more simultaneous , relatively weak interactions to exert their function . Such a process , exempliﬁed for instance by the simultaneous interaction of the endosomal protein EEA1 with RAB5 and PI3P ( 726 ) , would obviously be favored on a small vesicle , with respect to the bulk PM . The physical separation of a primary and secondary membranous compartment ( the PM and the en - dosomes ) might additionally have allowed the cell to inter - pret time - resolved signals , by converting an orderly tempo - ral sequence into an orderly spatial sequence of compart - ments . This development would again represent an emerging property of the system that could readily be ex - ploited to add complexity to signal deconvolution . As we have already mentioned in the previous section , the likely origin of the cell nucleus from a PM - originated system of endomembranes carried the almost obligatory conse - quence of developing “nuclear” functions by tinkering with what was available , i . e . , PM - originated proteins . In many cases ( such as for coat proteins and nuclear pores ) , gene duplication and functional divergence might have been part of the evolutionary strategy . In others , one might imagine ( an admittedly speculative scenario ) that some proteins sim - ply “learned” how to do additional things in the new envi - ronment , while retaining the original function . This in turn might help us rationalize why some endocytic proteins ap - pear to perform moonlighting jobs in the nucleus ( see sect . VII , D and E ) . It should be also considered that some cellular processes were harnessed by endocytosis early in evolution , and there - fore must have co - evolved with it from that point on . This is the case , as discussed already , for the actin cytoskeleton . Co - evolution would easily explain the numerous and bidi - rectional liaisons between endocytosis and actin dynamics . Another circuitry that must have been recruited to endocy - tosis in its early days is ubiquitination . Ubiquitination is certainly one of the distinctive , and highly conserved , fea - tures of eukaryotes ; however , its ancestry can now be traced back to bacteria , both in terms of UB - like molecules and in terms of enzymatic molecular machinery ( unfortunately , we cannot cover this fascinating story here , but see the beauti - ful review by M . Hochstrasser , Ref . 317 ) . In addition , ubiq - uitination is ﬁrmly rooted in endocytic routes in all eukary - otic organisms , starting from yeast ( see sect . V and Ref . 446 for a recent review ) . Therefore , we can postulate that there must have been very early mingling of endocytic and ubiq - uitination pathways leading to their subsequent co - evolu - tion . Signaling through phosphotyrosine ( pY ) might instead be a case of later convergence . This regulatory mechanism is relatively recent in evolution and can be traced back to (cid:4) 600 million years ago just prior to the appearance of metazoans , during the transition from unicellular to pluri - cellular eukaryotes ( reviewed in Ref . 455 ) . In particular , while some elements of the system might be of rather old ancestry ( 455 ) , tyrosine kinases ( TKs ) have been found only starting from choanoﬂaggelates , which probably are the closest unicellular relative of metazoans ( 400 , 401 , 696 ) . In choanoﬂaggelates , TKs appear in rather explosive fashion , with (cid:4) 120 TK domains in Monosiga brevicollis ( 401 ) , and many of them already displaying the typical RTK conﬁgu - ration known in metazoans . This might mean that , from the very beginning , the evolution of pY signaling was con - strained by the topology of an endomembrane system . In other words , what is considered the most distinctive signal - ing feature of metazoans ( pY and TKs ) might have been “forced” to evolve in a certain way because of its associa - tion ab initio with a preexisting system of spatial con - straints . The vast interconnection between the UB and pY system , especially at the level of hubs ( 22 ) , might very well have been directed and / or facilitated by the fact that the two signaling systems shared the same spatial platform ( endo - membranes ) . In summary , a mixture of emerging properties , almost obligatory consequences , and coevolution of early and late convergent pathways might have transformed endocytosis from its primordial trade into something rather different : a powerful communication and compartmentalization infra - structure or , in essence , what we deﬁne as “the cell logistics of the cell . ” B . A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Words The evolution from prokaryotes to eukaryotes might have , therefore , been marked by a transition from an intracellular environment , in which communication was determined largely by free diffusion , to one in which a specialized in - frastructure became available . The networking abilities of SIGISMUND ET AL . 342 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m this infrastructure might have vastly transcended those re - quired by the original “purpose” because of a number of emerging properties . To illustrate how this might have been a turning point in evolution , so powerful as to become one of the founding blocks in the development of a completely new cell plan ( the eukaryotic cell plan ) , we propose an analogy with the road system of the ancient Romans ( 694 ) . There is little doubt that the might of Rome rested to a great extent on their road system . This system ( some 50 , 000 miles ) was built essen - tially for military purposes . Its emerging properties , how - ever , were such that the system became central to the vital - ity of the Empire , as it fostered commerce , economy , the mail system , and prompted the development of new tech - nology to maintain and develop the system itself for pur - poses different from the original ones . One property of the system that is of great relevance to our analogy is that it allowed the transfer not only of “hardware” ( a legion , a payload , a letter ) , but also of “software” ( laws , customs , religion ) . In the Internet era this might not appear to be a great accomplishment , but it is indeed the basis of civiliza - tion as we know it . By analogy , the infrastructure that we call endocytosis ( in - cluding all aspects of trafﬁcking and of derivatives of endo - cytosis , such as the development of a cell nucleus ) allows the intracellular movement of hardware ( e . g . , a nutrient ) or of software ( e . g . , instructions on how to make a cell move directionally ) and allow cell compartmentalization , regard - less of how and why it came into being . As with all transport systems , there are structural components ( all proteins needed for the actual functioning of the system , i . e . , the majority of what we call endocytic proteins ) and passengers ( other molecules ) that use the service . Passengers can be of different kinds : commuters would be the regular passengers ( cargoes and associated machinery ) for which the system was initially designed or that learned how to associate with it for the speciﬁc purpose of being carried around either to be delivered to a destination or to deliver the information that it is associated with them . Hitchhikers would be mol - ecules that associate with the system ( i . e . , they hitch a free ride ) , for purposes unrelated to endocytosis , without alter - ing the functioning of the system . One advantage that a hitchhiker might gain by doing so is , for instance , to remain physically segregated and blocked ( or regulated ) until the time is right for the execution of its function . The concept of hitchhiking is perhaps best visualized by considering its de - viations , represented by hijackers . These are violent hitch - hikers that sidetrack the system , causing its malfunction . Pathogens , such as viruses and bacteria , are examples of this situation ( not reviewed here , but see Refs . 274 , 517 ) . In addition , increasing evidence ( see sect . VII , A and B ) indi - cates that cancer proteins might usurp the endocytic system to confer a proliferative advantage to the transformed cell . Of course , there is no sharp demarcation to distinguish commuters from hitchhikers . This would essentially depend on whether the association with the endocytic system is part of the “core” function of the molecule ( as it would be the case of a receptor for a nutrient , e . g . , the TFR , a true com - muter ) or an “accessory” one that helps the optimization of the function of the hitchhiker . Furthermore , hitchhikers ( and to some extent also commuters ) might very likely not maintain their status for long ( in evolutionary time ) , as they might acquire , as a result of continuous evolutionary tin - kering , some endocytic role , and thus start to contribute to the functioning of the endocytic system , while retaining their original occupation ( we refer to this situation as that of ticket holders , i . e . , of molecules that start to pay a price for the ride ) . Some structural components of the endocytic machinery might actually ﬁnd themselves in a similar con - dition , in which they learn how to do things unrelated to their primary endocytic function , simply because they inter - act with hitchhikers on the endomembrane system . These “new jobs” might be so unrelated to the original ones , as to appear to be moonlighting jobs , thus explaining a number of instances in which endocytic proteins appear to execute completely unrelated functions . The question is whether there is experimental support for this scenario . We believe so . For instance , the endocytic function of clathrin becomes increasingly important in evo - lution , from yeast to mammals ( 374 , 778 ) , suggesting in - creasing participation in endocytic events . A similar situa - tion occurs in the case of clathrin adaptors , such as AP - 2 , that seems to have a limited function in endocytosis in yeast ( 108 ) , but is pivotal in mammals ( reviewed in Ref . 135 ) . In the case of dynamin , it has been suggested that the primor - dial function of this GTPase is related to the regulation of mitochondrial inheritance . During evolution , some dy - namins were “recruited” to the endocytic pathway to exe - cute vesicle ﬁssion . Interestingly , this event seems to have happened through convergent evolution during the ciliate and metazoan radiation ( 189 ) , thus indicating that the en - rollment of dynamin to the endocytic machinery occurred more than once , and independently , during evolution . Re - cently , putative endocytic functions have been attributed to known tumor suppressor genes , such as MERLIN / NF2 , VHL , and TP53 ( 194 , 329 , 490 ) , which might further cor - roborate the idea of “recruitment” to the endocytic path - way of growth regulators . The best example , however , is probably the protein NUMB ( see sect . VII , C and F3 ) . There appear to be three basic cellular functions intersected by Numb : 1 ) endocytosis , and in particular recycling ; 2 ) the regulation of the UB network ; and 3 ) cell polarity , in connection with the PAR polarity complex ( reviewed in Ref . 592 ) . Numb appears in evolution roughly with bilateral animals ( 592 ) . By this time , two of the functions to which Numb participates , endocytosis and ubiquitination , are already ﬁrmly planted , and intercon - ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 343 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m nected , in the eukaryotic cell’s make - up ( see above ) . It is unlikely , therefore , that Numb might have evolved in direct conjunction with these processes . However , the appearance of Numb roughly coincides with the appearance of the PAR complex . While polarity ( and the related event of differen - tial inheritance ) is perhaps as old as cellular life ( for a re - view , see Ref . 488 ) , a clear existence of proteins of the PAR complex can be traced back in animals only until roughly 500 million years ago , probably with the emergence of an - cestors of bilateral animals ( e . g . , nematodes , ﬂies , and mammals ) ( reviewed in Ref . 260 ) . It is possible , therefore , that Numb evolved ( or co - evolved ) together with the PAR complex , although it is impossible to say whether it would have been connected speciﬁcally to one of the multiple func - tions of the PAR complex in animal cell polarization . Re - gardless , Numb might represent ( and might have evolved to be ) a critical connector between polarization and endocy - tosis . Why this should be so is , obviously , a matter of spec - ulation . However , many of the functions of the PAR com - plex , e . g . , in the maintenance of epithelial cell polarity or in cell migration or in ACD , do require a tight coregulation with vesicular intracellular transport ( discussed in Ref . 260 ) and , as discussed earlier in the context of SARA - containing endosomes , there is emerging evidence that unequal inher - itance of endosomes might play a crucial role in ACD ( see sect . VII C1 ) . Thus Numb might have evolved with an orig - inal role in polarity , and because of its membrane location might subsequently have acquired additional roles in the connected endocytic / UB networks , liaising them with the hardware of polarity as well as participating with them in a polarity - independent fashion : in essence the characteristics that we expect of a ticket holder . C . Deconvoluting the “Matrix” In the previous two paragraphs we have tried to depict a possible scenario to explain the fact that the present picture of endocytosis , as derived from a wealth of experimental evidence , is that of a very pervasive program that permeates basically every aspect of cell physiology and regulation . In our opinion , the simplest explanation for this is that endo - cytosis ( in its wider meaning of cell’s logistics ) evolved not so much as a “stand alone” process that subsequently inﬁl - trated other processes , but rather that it represented a quantum leap in cellular organization that allowed the de - velopment of a completely new cellular plan : the eukaryotic cell plan . In other words , what we call endocytosis is just one particular facet of a vaster code that supports the eu - karyotic cell plan . “Endocytosis” in the classical sense is therefore one viewpoint of the code : the one that we initially discovered , and possibly the one that constituted the initial advantage for its selection . We have coined the term endo - cytic matrix to help visualize this concept ( 694 ) ( FIGURE 10 ) . The term matrix might be understood here roughly in the sense of computer sciences , to indicate the network of intersections between input and output functioning as a decoder . This might render justice to all the intersections between endocytosis and signaling , but is perhaps too lim - ited . What we really had in mind was the science ﬁction movie “The Matrix” in which a hidden program ( the Ma - trix ) controls the life of an entire society . The program is paradoxically inconspicuous because society is so deeply built on it as to become unthinkable in the absence of the Matrix . So , we have moved , in little more than a decade , from a view of endocytosis as a tool for transporting nutrients to a view in which endocytosis is so deeply interconnected with sig - naling that the two processes are impossible to distinguish , to the extent that they should be conceptualized as a single process . In previous work we deﬁned this as “an insepara - ble partnership” ( 165 ) . Perhaps it is time now to move to the next level of understanding , beyond the partnership , to the level of the endocytic matrix as the cornerstone ( or one of the cornerstones ) of the eukaryotic cell plan . In this new outlook , endocytosis and signaling are no longer “simply” two deeply ingrained processes , but are instead two facets of an even wider program ( FIGURE 10 ) . The major value of the concept of matrix is , in our opinion , heuristic , in that it provides guidance for what we need to do to unravel its workings . The properties of the matrix are , in what we propose , at the systems level ; thus its deconvo - lution needs to be at this level . With this , we certainly do not mean to say that high - resolution mechanistic approaches are not essential . We will need , for instance , mechanistic - reductionistic knowledge to build a “reference” map of the endocytic matrix . This map can be obtained through the in vitro reconstitution of individual steps of the endocytic pro - cess coupled to single molecule resolution imaging , to add spatial and temporal aspects . Such a map will deﬁne the molecular workings of both core and accessory endocytic machinery . We will need to do this in a very quantitative way , to obtain parameters to feed into bottom - up mathe - matical modeling efforts . This will allow the incorporation of kinetics aspects and membrane constraints and dynamics into models of signal transduction . At the same time , sys - tems approaches through probabilistic modeling will deﬁne the impact of single cell heterogeneity on various endocytic steps ( see , for instance , Ref . 735 ) . Yet , the impact of endocytosis and trafﬁc on cellular and organismal homeostasis might not be decoded solely through high - resolution studies ( even if integrated by bot - tom - up modeling ) , and will probably require systematic strategies . This approach , pioneered by the group of Ma - rino Zerial ( 132 , 597 ) , has been directed so far to the un - derstanding of how the perturbation of genes affects endo - cytosis and trafﬁc . We predict that an even higher level of knowledge might come from systematic studies of the im - pact of the endocytic machinery on nonendocytic pheno - types . This “functional map” , complemented by the various SIGISMUND ET AL . 344 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m ongoing interactome studies , will provide us with a starting point to understand the full impact of the endocytic pro - gram and will be propedeutic to any attempt to reverse - engineer the eukaryotic cell plan . The vast involvement of subversion of endocytosis in human diseases forecasts that the eventual deconvolution of the endocytic matrix will be important not only for cell physiology , but also for our ability to ﬁght diseases . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We apologize to all those colleagues whose primary refer - ences or important discoveries could not be properly ac - knowledged . We are in debt to Pascale R . Romano for critically editing the manuscript . We thank Prof . Dmitri A . Petrov for helping us with information relative to the clas - siﬁcation of human genes on the basis of their age . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : P . P . Di Fiore , IFOM , Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare , Via Adamello 16 , 20139 Milan , Italy ( e - mail : pierpaolo . diﬁore @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ) . GRANTS Work in the authors’ lab is supported by grants from the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro ( to P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo , G . Scita , A . Ciliberto ) , the European Com - munity ( FP6 and FP7 ) ( to P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo ) , the Euro - pean Research Council ( to P . P . Di Fiore ) , the Italian Min - istries of Education - University - Research ( MIUR ) and of Health ( to P . P . Di Fiore , G . Scita ) , the Association for International Cancer Research ( to G . Scita ) , the Ferrari Foundation ( to P . P . Di Fiore ) , the Monzino Foundation ( to P . P . Di Fiore ) , and the CARIPLO Foundation ( to P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo , A . Ciliberto ) . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the authors . REFERENCES 1 . Abbas S , Rotmans G , Lowenberg B , Valk PJ . Exon 8 splice site mutations in the gene encoding the E3 - ligase CBL are associated with core binding factor acute myeloid leukemias . Haematologica 93 : 1595 – 1597 , 2008 . 2 . Abou - Kheir W , Isaac B , Yamaguchi H , Cox D . Membrane targeting of WAVE2 is not sufﬁcient for WAVE2 - dependent actin polymerization : a role for IRSp53 in mediating the interaction between Rac and WAVE2 . J Cell Sci 121 : 379 – 390 , 2008 . 3 . Aghamohammadzadeh S , Ayscough KR . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 1039 – 1042 , 2009 . 4 . Ahmed ZM , Riazuddin S , Riazuddin S , Wilcox ER . The molecular genetics of Usher syndrome . Clin Genet 63 : 431 – 444 , 2003 . 5 . Ahn SJ , Chung KW , Lee RA , Park IA , Lee SH , Park DE , Noh DY . Overexpression of betaPix - a in human breast cancer tissues . Cancer Lett 193 : 99 – 107 , 2003 . 6 . Aksu G , Kutukculer N , Genel F , Vergin C , Omowaire B . Griscelli syndrome without hemophagocytosis in an eleven - year - old girl : expanding the phenotypic spectrum of Rab27A mutations in humans . Am J Med Genet 116A : 329 – 333 , 2003 . 7 . Al - Nedawi K , Meehan B , Micallef J , Lhotak V , May L , Guha A , Rak J . Intercellular transfer of the oncogenic receptor EGFRvIII by microvesicles derived from tumour cells . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 619 – 624 , 2008 . 8 . Aligianis IA , Johnson CA , Gissen P , Chen D , Hampshire D , Hoffmann K , Maina EN , Morgan NV , Tee L , Morton J , Ainsworth JR , Horn D , Rosser E , Cole TR , Stolte - Dijkstra I , Fieggen K , Clayton - Smith J , Megarbane A , Shield JP , Newbury - Ecob R , DobynsWB , GrahamJMJr , KjaerKW , WarburgM , BondJ , TrembathRC , HarrisLW , Takai Y , Mundlos S , Tannahill D , Woods CG , Maher ER . Mutations of the catalytic subunitofRAB3GAPcauseWarburgMicrosyndrome . NatGenet 37 : 221 – 223 , 2005 . 9 . AllenLA , AderemA . Moleculardeﬁnitionofdistinctcytoskeletalstructuresinvolvedin complement - andFcreceptor - mediatedphagocytosisinmacrophages . JExpMed 184 : 627 – 637 , 1996 . 10 . Altan - Bonnet N , Sougrat R , Liu W , Snapp EL , Ward T , Lippincott - Schwartz J . Golgi inheritance in mammalian cells is mediated through endoplasmic reticulum export activities . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 990 – 1005 , 2006 . 11 . AmitI , WidesR , YardenY . Evolvablesignalingnetworksofreceptortyrosinekinases : relevance of robustness to malignancy and to cancer therapy . Mol Syst Biol 3 : 151 , 2007 . 12 . Anderson RG , Brown MS , Goldstein JL . Role of the coated endocytic vesicle in the uptake of receptor - bound low density lipoprotein in human ﬁbroblasts . Cell 10 : 351 – 364 , 1977 . 13 . Andrews R , Ahringer J . Asymmetry of early endosome distribution in C . elegans embryos . PLoS One 2 : e493 , 2007 . 14 . Angers S , Moon RT . Proximal events in Wnt signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 468 – 477 , 2009 . 15 . Anikster Y , Huizing M , White J , Shevchenko YO , Fitzpatrick DL , Touchman JW , Compton JG , Bale SJ , Swank RT , Gahl WA , Toro JR . Mutation of a new gene causes a unique form of Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome in a genetic isolate of central Puerto Rico . Nat Genet 28 : 376 – 380 , 2001 . 16 . AntonescuCN , FotiM , SauvonnetN , KlipA . Ready , set , internalize : mechanismsand regulation of GLUT4 endocytosis . Biosci Rep 29 : 1 – 11 , 2009 . 17 . Araki N , Egami Y , Watanabe Y , Hatae T . Phosphoinositide metabolism during mem - brane rufﬂing and macropinosome formation in EGF - stimulated A431 cells . Exp Cell Res 313 : 1496 – 1507 , 2007 . 18 . Araki N , Johnson MT , Swanson JA . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in the com - pletion of macropinocytosis and phagocytosis by macrophages . J Cell Biol 135 : 1249 – 1260 , 1996 . 19 . Aranda V , Nolan ME , Muthuswamy SK . Par complex in cancer : a regulator of normal cell polarity joins the dark side . Oncogene 27 : 6878 – 6887 , 2008 . 20 . Arca M , Zuliani G , Wilund K , Campagna F , Fellin R , Bertolini S , Calandra S , Ricci G , Glorioso N , Maioli M , Pintus P , Carru C , Cossu F , Cohen J , Hobbs HH . Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia in Sardinia , Italy , mutations in ARH : a clinical and molecular genetic analysis . Lancet 359 : 841 – 847 , 2002 . 21 . ArganiP , LuiMY , CouturierJ , BouvierR , FournetJC , LadanyiM . AnovelCLTC - TFE3 genefusioninpediatricrenaladenocarcinomawitht ( X ; 17 ) ( p11 . 2 ; q23 ) . Oncogene 22 : 5374 – 5378 , 2003 . 22 . ArgenzioE , BangeT , OldriniB , BianchiF , PeesariR , MariS , DiFiorePP , MannM , Polo S . AproteomicsnapshotoftheEGF - inducedubiquitinnetwork . MolSystBiol . Inpress . 23 . Aridor M , Hannan LA . Trafﬁc jam : a compendium of human diseases that affect intracellular transport processes . Trafﬁc 1 : 836 – 851 , 2000 . 24 . Aridor M , Hannan LA . Trafﬁc jams II : an update of diseases of intracellular transport . Trafﬁc 3 : 781 – 790 , 2002 . 25 . Asch HL , Winston JS , Edge SB , Stomper PC , Asch BB . Down - regulation of gelsolin expressioninhumanbreastductalcarcinomainsituwithandwithoutinvasion . Breast Cancer Res Treat 55 : 179 – 188 , 1999 . 26 . Au CE , Bell AW , Gilchrist A , Hiding J , Nilsson T , Bergeron JJ . Organellar proteomics to create the cell map . Curr Opin Cell Biol 19 : 376 – 385 , 2007 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 345 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 27 . Audhya A , Desai A , Oegema K . A role for Rab5 in structuring the endoplasmic retic - ulum . J Cell Biol 178 : 43 – 56 , 2007 . 28 . Austin CD , De Maziere AM , Pisacane PI , van Dijk SM , Eigenbrot C , Sliwkowski MX , KlumpermanJ , SchellerRH . EndocytosisandsortingofErbB2andthesiteofactionof cancer therapeutics trastuzumab and geldanamycin . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 5268 – 5282 , 2004 . 29 . Avraham R , Yarden Y . Feedback regulation of EGFR signalling : decision making by early and delayed loops . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 : 104 – 117 , 2011 . 30 . Axelsson MA , Warren G . Rapid , endoplasmic reticulum - independent diffusion of the mitotic Golgi haze . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 1843 – 1852 , 2004 . 31 . Babst M , Katzmann DJ , Estepa - Sabal EJ , Meerloo T , Emr SD . Escrt - III : an endosome - associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for mvb sorting . Dev Cell 3 : 271 – 282 , 2002 . 32 . Babst M , Katzmann DJ , Snyder WB , Wendland B , Emr SD . Endosome - associated complex , ESCRT - II , recruits transport machinery for protein sorting at the multive - sicular body . Dev Cell 3 : 283 – 289 , 2002 . 33 . Babuke T , Ruonala M , Meister M , Amaddii M , Genzler C , Esposito A , Tikkanen R . Hetero - oligomerization of reggie - 1 / ﬂotillin - 2 and reggie - 2 / ﬂotillin - 1 is required for their endocytosis . Cell Signal 21 : 1287 – 1297 , 2009 . 34 . Bache KG , Brech A , Mehlum A , Stenmark H . Hrs regulates multivesicular body for - mation via ESCRT recruitment to endosomes . J Cell Biol 162 : 435 – 442 , 2003 . 35 . Bache KG , Stuffers S , Malerod L , Slagsvold T , Raiborg C , Lechardeur D , Walchli S , Lukacs GL , Brech A , Stenmark H . The ESCRT - III subunit hVps24 is required for degradation but not silencing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 2513 – 2523 , 2006 . 36 . BaiM , GadH , TuracchioG , CocucciE , YangJS , LiJ , BeznoussenkoGV , NieZ , LuoR , FuL , CollawnJF , KirchhausenT , LuiniA , HsuVW . ARFGAP1promotesAP - 2 - depen - dent endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 559 – 567 , 2011 . 37 . Bailly M , Wyckoff J , Bouzahzah B , Hammerman R , Sylvestre V , Cammer M , Pestell R , Segall JE . Epidermal growth factor receptor distribution during chemotactic re - sponses . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 3873 – 3883 , 2000 . 38 . BairstowSF , LingK , SuX , FirestoneAJ , CarbonaraC , AndersonRA . TypeIgamma661 phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase directly interacts with AP2 and regulates en - docytosis . J Biol Chem 281 : 20632 – 20642 , 2006 . 39 . Balasubramanian N , Scott DW , Castle JD , Casanova JE , Schwartz MA . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafﬁcking of lipid rafts . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1381 – 1391 , 2007 . 40 . Balklava Z , Pant S , Fares H , Grant BD . Genome - wide analysis identiﬁes a general requirement for polarity proteins in endocytic trafﬁc . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1066 – 1073 , 2007 . 41 . Baluska F , Menzel D , Barlow PW . Cytokinesis in plant and animal cells : endosomes “shut the door . ” Dev Biol 294 : 1 – 10 , 2006 . 42 . Banach - Orlowska M , Pilecka I , Torun A , Pyrzynska B , Miaczynska M . Functional characterization of the interactions between endosomal adaptor protein APPL1 and the NuRD co - repressor complex . Biochem J 423 : 389 – 400 , 2009 . 43 . BaoJ , AlroyI , WatermanH , SchejterED , BrodieC , GruenbergJ , YardenY . Threonine phosphorylation diverts internalized epidermal growth factor receptors from a deg - radative pathway to the recycling endosome . J Biol Chem 275 : 26178 – 26186 , 2000 . 44 . Barabasi AL , Oltvai ZN . Network biology : understanding the cell’s functional organi - zation . Nat Rev Genet 5 : 101 – 113 , 2004 . 45 . BarbosaMD , BarratFJ , TchernevVT , NguyenQA , MishraVS , ColmanSD , PasturalE , Dufourcq - Lagelouse R , Fischer A , Holcombe RF , Wallace MR , Brandt SJ , de Saint Basile G , Kingsmore SF . Identiﬁcation of mutations in two major mRNA isoforms of the Chediak - Higashi syndrome gene in human and mouse . Hum Mol Genet 6 : 1091 – 1098 , 1997 . 46 . Bargal R , Avidan N , Ben - Asher E , Olender Z , Zeigler M , Frumkin A , Raas - Rothschild A , GlusmanG , LancetD , BachG . Identiﬁcationofthegenecausingmucolipidosistype IV . Nat Genet 26 : 118 – 123 , 2000 . 47 . Baroncini A , Castelluccio P , Morleo M , Soli F , Franco B . Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects : clinical description of a new family . Am J Med Genet A 143 : 51 – 57 , 2007 . 48 . Basel - VanagaiteL , SarigO , HershkovitzD , Fuchs - TelemD , RapaportD , GatA , Isman G , ShiraziI , ShohatM , EnkCD , BirkE , KohlhaseJ , Matysiak - ScholzeU , MayaI , Knopf C , Peffekoven A , Hennies HC , Bergman R , Horowitz M , Ishida - Yamamoto A , SprecherE . RIN2deﬁciencyresultsinmacrocephaly , alopecia , cutislaxa , andscoliosis : MACS syndrome . Am J Hum Genet 85 : 254 – 263 , 2009 . 49 . Bastiani M , Liu L , Hill MM , Jedrychowski MP , Nixon SJ , Lo HP , Abankwa D , Luetter - forst R , Fernandez - Rojo M , Breen MR , Gygi SP , Vinten J , Walser PJ , North KN , Hancock JF , Pilch PF , Parton RG . MURC / Cavin - 4 and cavin family members form tissue - speciﬁc caveolar complexes . J Cell Biol 185 : 1259 – 1273 , 2009 . 50 . Bastiani M , Parton RG . Caveolae at a glance . J Cell Sci 123 : 3831 – 3836 , 2010 . 51 . Bauerfeind R , Takei K , De Camilli P . Amphiphysin I is associated with coated endo - cytic intermediates and undergoes stimulation - dependent dephosphorylation in nerve terminals . J Biol Chem 272 : 30984 – 30992 , 1997 . 52 . BaulidaJ , KrausMH , AlimandiM , DiFiorePP , CarpenterG . AllErbBreceptorsother thantheepidermalgrowthfactorreceptorareendocytosisimpaired . JBiolChem 271 : 5251 – 5257 , 1996 . 53 . BeattieEC , HoweCL , WildeA , BrodskyFM , MobleyWC . NGFsignalsthroughTrkA to increase clathrin at the plasma membrane and enhance clathrin - mediated mem - brane trafﬁcking . J Neurosci 20 : 7325 – 7333 , 2000 . 54 . Beattie EC , Zhou J , Grimes ML , Bunnett NW , Howe CL , Mobley WC . A signaling endosomehypothesistoexplainNGFactions : potentialimplicationsforneurodegen - eration . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 61 : 389 – 406 , 1996 . 55 . Beckmann J , Scheitza S , Wernet P , Fischer JC , Giebel B . Asymmetric cell division within the human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell compartment : identiﬁca - tion of asymmetrically segregating proteins . Blood 109 : 5494 – 5501 , 2007 . 56 . Benovic JL , Pike LJ , Cerione RA , Staniszewski C , Yoshimasa T , Codina J , Caron MG , Lefkowitz RJ . Phosphorylation of the mammalian beta - adrenergic receptor by cyclic AMP - dependent protein kinase . Regulation of the rate of receptor phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by agonist occupancy and effects on coupling of the receptor tothestimulatoryguaninenucleotideregulatoryprotein . JBiolChem 260 : 7094 – 7101 , 1985 . 57 . Benovic JL , Strasser RH , Caron MG , Lefkowitz RJ . Beta - adrenergic receptor kinase : identiﬁcationofanovelproteinkinasethatphosphorylatestheagonist - occupiedform of the receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83 : 2797 – 2801 , 1986 . 58 . Berdnik D , Torok T , Gonzalez - Gaitan M , Knoblich JA . The endocytic protein alpha - Adaptinisrequiredfornumb - mediatedasymmetriccelldivisionin Drosophila . DevCell 3 : 221 – 231 , 2002 . 59 . Berlin RD , Oliver JM . Surface functions during mitosis . II . Quantitation of pinocytosis and kinetic characterization of the mitotic cycle with a new ﬂuorescence technique . J Cell Biol 85 : 660 – 671 , 1980 . 60 . Berlin RD , Oliver JM , Walter RJ . Surface functions during Mitosis I : phagocytosis , pinocytosis and mobility of surface - bound Con A . Cell 15 : 327 – 341 , 1978 . 61 . Bhalla V , Daidie D , Li H , Pao AC , LaGrange LP , Wang J , Vandewalle A , Stockand JD , Staub O , Pearce D . Serum - and glucocorticoid - regulated kinase 1 regulates ubiquitin ligase neural precursor cell - expressed , developmentally down - regulated protein 4 - 2 by inducing interaction with 14 – 3 - 3 . Mol Endocrinol 19 : 3073 – 3084 , 2005 . 62 . BhandariD , RobiaSL , MarcheseA . TheE3ubiquitinligaseatrophininteractingprotein 4bindsdirectlytothechemokinereceptorCXCR4viaanovelWWdomain - mediated interaction . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 1324 – 1339 , 2009 . 63 . Bicknell LS , Morgan T , Bonafe L , Wessels MW , Bialer MG , Willems PJ , Cohn DH , KrakowD , RobertsonSP . MutationsinFLNBcauseboomerangdysplasia . JMedGenet 42 : e43 , 2005 . 64 . BirtwistleMR , KholodenkoBN . Endocytosisandsignalling : ameetingwithmathemat - ics . Mol Oncol 3 : 308 – 320 , 2009 . 65 . Bitoun M , Durieux AC , Prudhon B , Bevilacqua JA , Herledan A , Sakanyan V , Urtiz - berea A , Cartier L , Romero NB , Guicheney P . Dynamin 2 mutations associated with human diseases impair clathrin - mediated receptor endocytosis . Hum Mutat 30 : 1419 – 1427 , 2009 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 346 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 66 . Blagoev B , Ong SE , Kratchmarova I , Mann M . Temporal analysis of phosphotyrosine - dependent signaling networks by quantitative proteomics . Nat Biotechnol 22 : 1139 – 1145 , 2004 . 67 . Blagoveshchenskaya AD , Thomas L , Feliciangeli SF , Hung CH , Thomas G . HIV - 1 Nef downregulates MHC - I by a PACS - 1 - and PI3K - regulated ARF6 endocytic pathway . Cell 111 : 853 – 866 , 2002 . 68 . Blekhman R , Man O , Herrmann L , Boyko AR , Indap A , Kosiol C , Bustamante CD , Teshima KM , Przeworski M . Natural selection on genes that underlie human disease susceptibility . Curr Biol 18 : 883 – 889 , 2008 . 69 . Blondeau F , Ritter B , Allaire PD , Wasiak S , Girard M , Hussain NK , Angers A , Leg - endre - GuilleminV , RoyL , BoismenuD , KearneyRE , BellAW , BergeronJJ , McPherson PS . Tandem MS analysis of brain clathrin - coated vesicles reveals their critical involve - ment in synaptic vesicle recycling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 3833 – 3838 , 2004 . 70 . Bohn G , Allroth A , Brandes G , Thiel J , Glocker E , Schaffer AA , Rathinam C , Taub N , Teis D , Zeidler C , Dewey RA , Geffers R , Buer J , Huber LA , Welte K , Grimbacher B , KleinC . Anovelhumanprimaryimmunodeﬁciencysyndromecausedbydeﬁciencyof the endosomal adaptor protein p14 . Nat Med 13 : 38 – 45 , 2007 . 71 . Bonner MK , Skop AR . Cell division screens and dynamin . Biochem Soc Trans 36 : 431 – 435 , 2008 . 72 . BoodenMA , EckertLB , DerCJ , TrejoJ . Persistentsignalingbydysregulatedthrombin receptor trafﬁcking promotes breast carcinoma cell invasion . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 1990 – 1999 , 2004 . 73 . Borisov N , Aksamitiene E , Kiyatkin A , Legewie S , Berkhout J , Maiwald T , Kaimach - nikov NP , Timmer J , Hoek JB , Kholodenko BN . Systems - level interactions between insulin - EGF networks amplify mitogenic signaling . Mol Syst Biol 5 : 256 , 2009 . 74 . Borlido J , Zecchini V , Mills IG . Nuclear trafﬁcking and functions of endocytic proteins implicated in oncogenesis . Trafﬁc 10 : 1209 – 1220 , 2009 . 75 . Borner GH , Harbour M , Hester S , Lilley KS , Robinson MS . Comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 175 : 571 – 578 , 2006 . 76 . BorroniV , BarrantesFJ . Cholesterolmodulatestherateandmechanismofacetylcho - line receptor internalization . J Biol Chem 286 : 17122 – 17132 , 2011 . 77 . Boucrot E , Howes MT , Kirchhausen T , Parton RG . Redistribution of caveolae during mitosis . J Cell Sci 124 : 1965 – 1972 , 2011 . 78 . Boucrot E , Kirchhausen T . Endosomal recycling controls plasma membrane area during mitosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 7939 – 7944 , 2007 . 79 . Boucrot E , Kirchhausen T . Mammalian cells change volume during mitosis . PLoS One 3 : e1477 , 2008 . 80 . BoutteY , Frescatada - RosaM , MenS , ChowCM , EbineK , GustavssonA , JohanssonL , Ueda T , Moore I , Jurgens G , Grebe M . Endocytosis restricts Arabidopsis KNOLLE syntaxin to the cell division plane during late cytokinesis . EMBO J 29 : 546 – 558 , 2010 . 81 . BoyadjievSA , FrommeJC , BenJ , ChongSS , NautaC , HurDJ , ZhangG , HamamotoS , Schekman R , Ravazzola M , Orci L , Eyaid W . Cranio - lenticulo - sutural dysplasia is caused by a SEC23A mutation leading to abnormal endoplasmic - reticulum - to - Golgi trafﬁcking . Nat Genet 38 : 1192 – 1197 , 2006 . 82 . Brech A , Ahlquist T , Lothe RA , Stenmark H . Autophagy in tumour suppression and promotion . Mol Oncol 3 : 366 – 375 , 2009 . 83 . BretscherMS . Distributionofreceptorsfortransferrinandlowdensitylipoproteinon the surface of giant HeLa cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80 : 454 – 458 , 1983 . 84 . BretscherMS . Movingmembraneuptothefrontofmigratingcells . Cell 85 : 465 – 467 , 1996 . 85 . BridgeJA , KanamoriM , MaZ , PickeringD , HillDA , LydiattW , LuiMY , ColleoniGW , Antonescu CR , Ladanyi M , Morris SW . Fusion of the ALK gene to the clathrin heavy chaingene , CLTC , ininﬂammatorymyoﬁbroblastictumor . AmJPathol 159 : 411 – 415 , 2001 . 86 . BrownEJ , SchlondorffJS , BeckerDJ , TsukaguchiH , TonnaSJ , UscinskiAL , HiggsHN , Henderson JM , Pollak MR . Mutations in the formin gene INF2 cause focal segmental glomerulosclerosis . Nat Genet 42 : 72 – 76 , 2010 . 87 . BrownGC , KholodenkoBN . Spatialgradientsofcellularphospho - proteins . FEBSLett 457 : 452 – 454 , 1999 . 88 . Bryant DM , Mostov KE . From cells to organs : building polarized tissue . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 887 – 901 , 2008 . 89 . Bucci C , Parton RG , Mather IH , Stunnenberg H , Simons K , Hoﬂack B , Zerial M . The smallGTPaserab5functionsasaregulatoryfactorintheearlyendocyticpathway . Cell 70 : 715 – 728 , 1992 . 90 . Bucci M , Gratton JP , Rudic RD , Acevedo L , Roviezzo F , Cirino G , Sessa WC . In vivo delivery of the caveolin - 1 scaffolding domain inhibits nitric oxide synthesis and re - duces inﬂammation . Nat Med 6 : 1362 – 1367 , 2000 . 91 . BudayL , DownwardJ . Rolesofcortactinintumorpathogenesis . BiochimBiophysActa 1775 : 263 – 273 , 2007 . 92 . Burgdorf S , Leister P , Scheidtmann KH . TSG101 interacts with apoptosis - antagoniz - ing transcription factor and enhances androgen receptor - mediated transcription by promoting its monoubiquitination . J Biol Chem 279 : 17524 – 17534 , 2004 . 93 . Burke P , Schooler K , Wiley HS . Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling by endocytosis and intracellular trafﬁcking . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1897 – 1910 , 2001 . 94 . Burre J , Beckhaus T , Schagger H , Corvey C , Hofmann S , Karas M , Zimmermann H , VolknandtW . Analysisofthesynapticvesicleproteomeusingthreegel - basedprotein separation techniques . Proteomics 6 : 6250 – 6262 , 2006 . 95 . Cai JJ , Borenstein E , Chen R , Petrov DA . Similarly strong purifying selection acts on human disease genes of all evolutionary ages . Genome Biol Evol 1 : 131 – 144 , 2009 . 96 . Cai X , Xiao T , James SY , Da J , Lin D , Liu Y , Zheng Y , Zou S , Di X , Guo S , Han N , Lu YJ , Cheng S , Gao Y , Zhang K . Metastatic potential of lung squamous cell carcinoma associated with HSPC300 through its interaction with WAVE2 . Lung Cancer 65 : 299 – 305 , 2009 . 97 . Calderwood DA . Integrin activation . J Cell Sci 117 : 657 – 666 , 2004 . 98 . Calebiro D , Nikolaev VO , Gagliani MC , de Filippis T , Dees C , Tacchetti C , Persani L , Lohse MJ . Persistent cAMP - signals triggered by internalized G - protein - coupled re - ceptors . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000172 , 2009 . 99 . Caligiuri MA , Briesewitz R , Yu J , Wang L , Wei M , Arnoczky KJ , Marburger TB , Wen J , Perrotti D , Bloomﬁeld CD , Whitman SP . Novel c - CBL and CBL - b ubiquitin ligase mutations in human acute myeloid leukemia . Blood 110 : 1022 – 1024 , 2007 . 100 . Cao H , Alston L , Ruschman J , Hegele RA . Heterozygous CAV1 frameshift mutations ( MIM601047 ) inpatientswithatypicalpartiallipodystrophyandhypertriglyceridemia . Lipids Health Dis 7 : 3 , 2008 . 101 . Carballido - Lopez R . The bacterial actin - like cytoskeleton . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 70 : 888 – 909 , 2006 . 102 . CarboneI , BrunoC , SotgiaF , BadoM , BrodaP , MasettiE , PanellaA , ZaraF , Bricarelli FD , Cordone G , Lisanti MP , Minetti C . Mutation in the CAV3 gene causes partial caveolin - 3 deﬁciency and hyperCKemia . Neurology 54 : 1373 – 1376 , 2000 . 103 . Carlton JG , Martin - Serrano J . Parallels between cytokinesis and retroviral budding : a role for the ESCRT machinery . Science 316 : 1908 – 1912 , 2007 . 104 . Carmena A , Murugasu - Oei B , Menon D , Jimenez F , Chia W . Inscuteable and numb mediate asymmetric muscle progenitor cell divisions during Drosophila myogenesis . Genes Dev 12 : 304 – 315 , 1998 . 105 . Caron E , Hall A . Identiﬁcation of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 : 1717 – 1721 , 1998 . 106 . CarpenterG , LiaoHJ . Trafﬁckingofreceptortyrosinekinasestothenucleus . ExpCell Res 315 : 1556 – 1566 , 2009 . 107 . Carpenter NJ , Brown WT , Qu Y , Keenan KL . Regional localization of a nonspeciﬁc X - linked mental retardation gene ( MRX59 ) to Xp21 . 2 - p22 . 2 . Am J Med Genet 85 : 266 – 270 , 1999 . 108 . CarrollSY , StirlingPC , StimpsonHE , GiesselmannE , SchmittMJ , DrubinDG . Ayeast killer toxin screen provides insights into a / b toxin entry , trafﬁcking , and killing mech - anisms . Dev Cell 17 : 552 – 560 , 2009 . 109 . Cascon A , Escobar B , Montero - Conde C , Rodriguez - Antona C , Ruiz - Llorente S , Osorio A , Mercadillo F , Leton R , Campos JM , Garcia - Sagredo JM , Benitez J , Malum - bresM , RobledoM . LossoftheactinregulatorHSPC300resultsinclearcellrenalcell carcinomaprotectioninVonHippel - Lindaupatients . HumMutat 28 : 613 – 621 , 2007 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 347 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 110 . Caswell P , Norman J . Endocytic transport of integrins during cell migration and inva - sion . Trends Cell Biol 18 : 257 – 263 , 2008 . 111 . Caswell PT , Spence HJ , Parsons M , White DP , Clark K , Cheng KW , Mills GB , Humphries MJ , Messent AJ , Anderson KI , McCaffrey MW , Ozanne BW , Norman JC . Rab25 associates with alpha5beta1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev Cell 13 : 496 – 510 , 2007 . 112 . Caswell PT , Vadrevu S , Norman JC . Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic trans - port . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 843 – 853 , 2009 . 113 . Caudron F , Barral Y . Septins and the lateral compartmentalization of eukaryotic membranes . Dev Cell 16 : 493 – 506 , 2009 . 114 . Cayouette M , Whitmore AV , Jeffery G , Raff M . Asymmetric segregation of Numb in retinal development and the inﬂuence of the pigmented epithelium . J Neurosci 21 : 5643 – 5651 , 2001 . 115 . Chang - Ileto B , Frere SG , Chan RB , Voronov SV , Roux A , Di Paolo G . Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane ﬁssion . Dev Cell 20 : 206 – 218 , 2011 . 116 . ChaoWT , AshcroftF , DaquinagAC , VadakkanT , WeiZ , ZhangP , DickinsonM , Kunz J . Type I PIP kinase beta regulates focal adhesion disassembly by promoting beta1 integrin endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 2010 . 117 . Chao WT , Kunz J . Focal adhesion disassembly requires clathrin - dependent endocy - tosis of integrins . FEBS Lett 583 : 1337 – 1343 , 2009 . 118 . Chappie JS , Acharya S , Leonard M , Schmid SL , Dyda F . G domain dimerization con - trols dynamin’s assembly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 : 435 – 440 , 2010 . 119 . Chavrier P , Parton RG , Hauri HP , Simons K , Zerial M . Localization of low molecular weight GTP binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compartments . Cell 62 : 317 – 329 , 1990 . 120 . Cheadle JP , Reeve MP , Sampson JR , Kwiatkowski DJ . Molecular genetic advances in tuberous sclerosis . Hum Genet 107 : 97 – 114 , 2000 . 121 . Chen H , Wu X , Pan ZK , Huang S . Integrity of SOS1 / EPS8 / ABI1 tri - complex deter - mines ovarian cancer metastasis . Cancer Res 70 : 9979 – 9990 , 2010 . 122 . Chen YG , Wang Z , Ma J , Zhang L , Lu Z . Endoﬁn , a FYVE domain protein , interacts with Smad4 and facilitates TGF - beta signaling . J Biol Chem 2007 . 123 . Chen YJ , Shen MR , Maa MC , Leu TH . Eps8 decreases chemosensitivity and affects survival of cervical cancer patients . Mol Cancer Ther 7 : 1376 – 1385 , 2008 . 124 . Cheng KW , Lahad JP , Kuo WL , Lapuk A , Yamada K , Auersperg N , Liu J , Smith - McCune K , Lu KH , Fishman D , Gray JW , Mills GB . The RAB25 small GTPase deter - mines aggressiveness of ovarian and breast cancers . Nat Med 10 : 1251 – 1256 , 2004 . 125 . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Marks DL , Pagano RE . Membrane microdomains , caveolae , and caveolar endocytosis of sphingolipids . Mol Membr Biol 23 : 101 – 110 , 2006 . 126 . Choudhury R , Noakes CJ , McKenzie E , Kox C , Lowe M . Differential clathrin binding and subcellular localization of OCRL1 splice isoforms . J Biol Chem 284 : 9965 – 9973 , 2009 . 127 . Cicalese A , Bonizzi G , Pasi CE , Faretta M , Ronzoni S , Giulini B , Brisken C , Minucci S , DiFiorePP , PelicciPG . Thetumorsuppressorp53regulatespolarityofself - renewing divisions in mammary stem cells . Cell 138 : 1083 – 1095 , 2009 . 128 . Clarke MF , Fuller M . Stem cells and cancer : two faces of eve . Cell 124 : 1111 – 1115 , 2006 . 129 . Clayton EL , Evans GJ , Cousin MA . Bulk synaptic vesicle endocytosis is rapidly trig - gered during strong stimulation . J Neurosci 28 : 6627 – 6632 , 2008 . 130 . Clayton EL , Sue N , Smillie KJ , O’Leary T , Bache N , Cheung G , Cole AR , Wyllie DJ , SutherlandC , RobinsonPJ , CousinMA . DynaminIphosphorylationbyGSK3controls activity - dependent bulk endocytosis of synaptic vesicles . Nat Neurosci 13 : 845 – 851 , 2010 . 131 . ColalucaIN , TosoniD , NuciforoP , Senic - MatugliaF , GalimbertiV , VialeG , PeceS , Di FiorePP . NUMBcontrolsp53tumoursuppressoractivity . Nature 451 : 76 – 80 , 2008 . 132 . Collinet C , Stoter M , Bradshaw CR , Samusik N , Rink JC , Kenski D , Habermann B , Buchholz F , Henschel R , Mueller MS , Nagel WE , Fava E , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M . Systems survey of endocytosis by multiparametric image analysis . Nature 464 : 243 – 249 , 2010 . 133 . Colucci - Guyon E , Niedergang F , Wallar BJ , Peng J , Alberts AS , Chavrier P . A role for mammalian diaphanous - related formins in complement receptor ( CR3 ) - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . Curr Biol 15 : 2007 – 2012 , 2005 . 134 . Conboy IM , Rando TA . The regulation of Notch signaling controls satellite cell acti - vationandcellfatedeterminationinpostnatalmyogenesis . DevCell 3 : 397 – 409 , 2002 . 135 . Conibear E . Converging views of endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 513 – 518 , 2010 . 136 . ConnollyJL , GreenSA , GreeneLA . Comparisonofrapidchangesinsurfacemorphol - ogy and coated pit formation of PC12 cells in response to nerve growth factor , epidermal growth factor , and dibutyryl cyclic AMP . J Cell Biol 98 : 457 – 465 , 1984 . 137 . Cote M , Menager MM , Burgess A , Mahlaoui N , Picard C , Schaffner C , Al - Manjomi F , Al - HarbiM , AlangariA , LeDeistF , GenneryAR , PrinceN , CariouA , NitschkeP , Blank U , El - Ghazali G , Menasche G , Latour S , Fischer A , de Saint Basile G . Munc18 – 2 deﬁciency causes familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5 and impairs cytotoxic granule exocytosis in patient NK cells . J Clin Invest 119 : 3765 – 3773 , 2009 . 138 . Coumailleau F , Furthauer M , Knoblich JA , Gonzalez - Gaitan M . Directional Delta and Notch trafﬁcking in Sara endosomes during asymmetric cell division . Nature 458 : 1051 – 1055 , 2009 . 139 . CoumailleauF , Gonzalez - GaitanM . Fromendocytosistotumorsthroughasymmetric cell division of stem cells . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 : 462 – 469 , 2008 . 140 . Countaway JL , Nairn AC , Davis RJ . Mechanism of desensitization of the epidermal growth factor receptor protein - tyrosine kinase . J Biol Chem 267 : 1129 – 1140 , 1992 . 141 . Cremona ML , Matthies HJ , Pau K , Bowton E , Speed N , Lute BJ , Anderson M , Sen N , RobertsonSD , VaughanRA , RothmanJE , GalliA , JavitchJA , YamamotoA . Flotillin - 1is essential for PKC - triggered endocytosis and membrane microdomain localization of DAT . Nat Neurosci 14 : 469 – 477 , 2011 . 142 . CremonaO , DiPaoloG , WenkMR , LuthiA , KimWT , TakeiK , DaniellL , NemotoY , Shears SB , Flavell RA , McCormick DA , De Camilli P . Essential role of phosphoinosi - tide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 99 : 179 – 188 , 1999 . 143 . Cselenyi CS , Jernigan KK , Tahinci E , Thorne CA , Lee LA , Lee E . LRP6 transduces a canonical Wnt signal independently of Axin degradation by inhibiting GSK3’s phos - phorylation of beta - catenin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 8032 – 8037 , 2008 . 144 . Csikos G , Lippai M , Lukacsovich T , Juhasz G , Henn L , Erdelyi M , Maroy P , Sass M . A novel role for the Drosophila epsin ( lqf ) : involvement in autophagy . Autophagy 5 : 636 – 648 , 2009 . 145 . Cui M , Yu W , Dong J , Chen J , Zhang X , Liu Y . Downregulation of ABI1 expression affects the progression and prognosis of human gastric carcinoma . Med Oncol 27 : 632 – 639 , 2010 . 146 . D’AdamoP , MenegonA , LoNigroC , GrassoM , GulisanoM , TamaniniF , BienvenuT , Gedeon AK , Oostra B , Wu SK , Tandon A , Valtorta F , Balch WE , Chelly J , Toniolo D . Mutations in GDI1 are responsible for X - linked non - speciﬁc mental retardation . Nat Genet 19 : 134 – 139 , 1998 . 147 . D’Souza - SchoreyC , ChavrierP . ARFproteins : rolesinmembranetrafﬁcandbeyond . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 347 – 358 , 2006 . 148 . DammEM , PelkmansL , KartenbeckJ , MezzacasaA , KurzchaliaT , HeleniusA . Clath - rin - andcaveolin - 1 - independentendocytosis : entryofsimianvirus40intocellsdevoid of caveolae . J Cell Biol 168 : 477 – 488 , 2005 . 149 . Danen EH , van Rheenen J , Franken W , Huveneers S , Sonneveld P , Jalink K , Sonnen - bergA . IntegrinscontrolmotilestrategythroughaRho - coﬁlinpathway . JCellBiol 169 : 515 – 526 , 2005 . 150 . Davis CG , Lehrman MA , Russell DW , Anderson RG , Brown MS , Goldstein JL . The JD mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia : amino acid substitution in cytoplas - mic domain impedes internalization of LDL receptors . Cell 45 : 15 – 24 , 1986 . 151 . De Duve C . Blueprint For a Cell : The Nature and Origin of Life . Burlington , NC : Patter - son , 1991 . 152 . DeDuveC . Theoriginofeukaryotes : areappraisal . NatRevGenet 8 : 395 – 403 , 2007 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 348 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 153 . Decker SJ . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - alpha induce differential processing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 166 : 615 – 621 , 1990 . 154 . Defeu Soufo HJ , Graumann PL . Bacillus subtilis actin - like protein MreB inﬂuences the positioning of the replication machinery and requires membrane proteins MreC / D and other actin - like proteins for proper localization . BMC Cell Biol 6 : 10 , 2005 . 155 . Del Conte - Zerial P , Brusch L , Rink JC , Collinet C , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M , Deutsch A . Membrane identity and GTPase cascades regulated by toggle and cut - out switches . Mol Syst Biol 4 : 206 , 2008 . 156 . Del Pozo MA , Alderson NB , Kiosses WB , Chiang HH , Anderson RG , Schwartz MA . IntegrinsregulateRactargetingbyinternalizationofmembranedomains . Science 303 : 839 – 842 , 2004 . 157 . Del Pozo MA , Balasubramanian N , Alderson NB , Kiosses WB , Grande - Garcia A , Anderson RG , Schwartz MA . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated mem - brane domain internalization . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 901 – 908 , 2005 . 158 . DelPozoMA , KiossesWB , AldersonNB , MellerN , HahnKM , SchwartzMA . Integrins regulate GTP - Rac localized effector interactions through dissociation of Rho - GDI . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 232 – 239 , 2002 . 159 . DerryJM , OchsHD , FranckeU . IsolationofanovelgenemutatedinWiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Cell 78 : 635 – 644 , 1994 . 160 . Devos D , Dokudovskaya S , Alber F , Williams R , Chait BT , Sali A , Rout MP . Compo - nents of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a common molecular architecture . PLoS Biol 2 : e380 , 2004 . 161 . Devos DP , Reynaud EG . Evolution . Intermediate steps . Science 330 : 1187 – 1188 , 2010 . 162 . DevriendtK , KimAS , MathijsG , FrintsSG , SchwartzM , VanDenOordJJ , VerhoefGE , BoogaertsMA , FrynsJP , YouD , RosenMK , VandenbergheP . Constitutivelyactivating mutation in WASP causes X - linked severe congenital neutropenia . Nat Genet 27 : 313 – 317 , 2001 . 163 . DeWire SM , Ahn S , Lefkowitz RJ , Shenoy SK . Beta - arrestins and cell signaling . Annu Rev Physiol 69 : 483 – 510 , 2007 . 164 . Dharmawardhane S , Schurmann A , Sells MA , Chernoff J , Schmid SL , Bokoch GM . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 3341 – 3352 , 2000 . 165 . Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P . Endocytosis and signaling . An inseparable partnership . Cell 106 : 1 – 4 , 2001 . 166 . DiGuglielmoGM , BaassPC , OuWJ , PosnerBI , BergeronJJ . Compartmentalizationof SHC , GRB2 and mSOS , hyperphosphorylation of Raf - 1 by EGF but not insulin in liver parenchyma . EMBO J 13 : 4269 – 4277 , 1994 . 167 . Di Guglielmo GM , Le Roy C , Goodfellow AF , Wrana JL . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - beta receptor signalling and turnover . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 410 – 421 , 2003 . 168 . Di Paolo G , De Camilli P . Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane dynam - ics . Nature 443 : 651 – 657 , 2006 . 169 . Dikic I , Wakatsuki S , Walters KJ . Ubiquitin - binding domains : from structures to func - tions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 659 – 671 , 2009 . 170 . Disanza A , Frittoli E , Palamidessi A , Scita G . Endocytosis and spatial restriction of cell signaling . Mol Oncol 3 : 280 – 296 , 2009 . 171 . Divakaruni AV , Baida C , White CL , Gober JW . The cell shape proteins MreB and MreC control cell morphogenesis by positioning cell wall synthetic complexes . Mol Microbiol 66 : 174 – 188 , 2007 . 172 . Doherty GJ , Lundmark RG . RAF1 - dependent endocytosis . Biochem Soc Trans 37 : 1061 – 1065 , 2009 . 173 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 , 2009 . 174 . Doitsidou M , Reichman - Fried M , Stebler J , Koprunner M , Dorries J , Meyer D , Es - guerraCV , LeungT , RazE . Guidanceofprimordialgermcellmigrationbythechemo - kine SDF - 1 . Cell 111 : 647 – 659 , 2002 . 175 . Domazet - Loso T , Tautz D . An ancient evolutionary origin of genes associated with human genetic diseases . Mol Biol Evol 25 : 2699 – 2707 , 2008 . 176 . Donaudy F , Ferrara A , Esposito L , Hertzano R , Ben - David O , Bell RE , Melchionda S , Zelante L , Avraham KB , Gasparini P . Multiple mutations of MYO1A , a cochlear - expressed gene , in sensorineural hearing loss . Am J Hum Genet 72 : 1571 – 1577 , 2003 . 177 . Dormann D , Weijer CJ . Chemotactic cell movement during development . Curr Opin Genet Dev 13 : 358 – 364 , 2003 . 178 . Dorsam RT , Gutkind JS . G - protein - coupled receptors and cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 7 : 79 – 94 , 2007 . 179 . Dosaka - Akita H , Hommura F , Fujita H , Kinoshita I , Nishi M , Morikawa T , Katoh H , Kawakami Y , Kuzumaki N . Frequent loss of gelsolin expression in non - small cell lung cancers of heavy smokers . Cancer Res 58 : 322 – 327 , 1998 . 180 . Doyon JB , Zeitler B , Cheng J , Cheng AT , Cherone JM , Santiago Y , Lee AH , Vo TD , Doyon Y , Miller JC , Paschon DE , Zhang L , Rebar EJ , Gregory PD , Urnov FD , Drubin DG . Rapid and efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis revealed in genome - edited mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 331 – 337 , 2011 . 181 . DrabM , VerkadeP , ElgerM , KasperM , LohnM , LauterbachB , MenneJ , LindschauC , Mende F , Luft FC , Schedl A , Haller H , Kurzchalia TV . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 : 2449 – 2452 , 2001 . 182 . Durieux AC , Prudhon B , Guicheney P , Bitoun M . Dynamin 2 and human diseases . J Mol Med 88 : 339 – 350 , 2010 . 183 . Ebner R , Derynck R . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - alpha : differential intracellular routing and processing of ligand - receptor complexes . Cell Regul 2 : 599 – 612 , 1991 . 184 . EchardA , HicksonGR , FoleyE , O’FarrellPH . Terminalcytokinesiseventsuncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr Biol 14 : 1685 – 1693 , 2004 . 185 . Edeling MA , Smith C , Owen D . Life of a clathrin coat : insights from clathrin and AP structures . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 32 – 44 , 2006 . 186 . Eden ER , White IJ , Tsapara A , Futter CE . Membrane contacts between endosomes and ER provide sites for PTP1B - epidermal growth factor receptor interaction . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 267 – 272 , 2010 . 187 . Egea J , Klein R . Bidirectional Eph - ephrin signaling during axon guidance . Trends Cell Biol 17 : 230 – 238 , 2007 . 188 . Eggert US , Kiger AA , Richter C , Perlman ZE , Perrimon N , Mitchison TJ , Field CM . Parallel chemical genetic and genome - wide RNAi screens identify cytokinesis inhibi - tors and targets . PLoS Biol 2 : e379 , 2004 . 189 . Elde NC , Morgan G , Winey M , Sperling L , Turkewitz AP . Elucidation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in tetrahymena reveals an evolutionarily convergent recruit - ment of dynamin . PLoS Genet 1 : e52 , 2005 . 190 . Elia N , Sougrat R , Spurlin TA , Hurley JH , Lippincott - Schwartz J . Dynamics of endo - somal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery during cytokinesis and its role in abscission . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 4846 – 4851 , 2011 . 191 . Emery G , Hutterer A , Berdnik D , Mayer B , Wirtz - Peitz F , Gaitan MG , Knoblich JA . Asymmetric Rab 11 endosomes regulate delta recycling and specify cell fate in the Drosophila nervous system . Cell 122 : 763 – 773 , 2005 . 192 . Emmanouilidou E , Melachroinou K , Roumeliotis T , Garbis SD , Ntzouni M , Margaritis LH , Stefanis L , Vekrellis K . Cell - produced alpha - synuclein is secreted in a calcium - dependent manner by exosomes and impacts neuronal survival . J Neurosci 30 : 6838 – 6851 , 2010 . 193 . Enari M , Ohmori K , Kitabayashi I , Taya Y . Requirement of clathrin heavy chain for p53 - mediated transcription . Genes Dev 20 : 1087 – 1099 , 2006 . 194 . EndoY , SugiyamaA , LiSA , OhmoriK , OhataH , YoshidaY , ShibuyaM , TakeiK , Enari M , Taya Y . Regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis by p53 . Genes Cells 13 : 375 – 386 , 2008 . 195 . Engel S , Heger T , Mancini R , Herzog F , Kartenbeck J , Hayer A , Helenius A . Role of endosomes in simian virus 40 entry and infection . J Virol 85 : 4198 – 4211 , 2011 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 349 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 196 . Erdmann KS , Mao Y , McCrea HJ , Zoncu R , Lee S , Paradise S , Modregger J , Biemes - derfer D , Toomre D , De Camilli P . A role of the Lowe syndrome protein OCRL in early steps of the endocytic pathway . Dev Cell 13 : 377 – 390 , 2007 . 197 . Escobar B , de Carcer G , Fernandez - Miranda G , Cascon A , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Mon - toya MC , Robledo M , Canamero M , Malumbres M . Brick1 is an essential regulator of actin cytoskeleton required for embryonic development and cell transformation . Cancer Res 70 : 9349 – 9359 , 2010 . 198 . Esue O , Wirtz D , Tseng Y . GTPase activity , structure , and mechanical properties of ﬁlaments assembled from bacterial cytoskeleton protein MreB . J Bacteriol 188 : 968 – 976 , 2006 . 199 . Even - Ram S , Uziely B , Cohen P , Grisaru - Granovsky S , Maoz M , Ginzburg Y , Reich R , Vlodavsky I , Bar - Shavit R . Thrombin receptor overexpression in malignant and phys - iological invasion processes . Nat Med 4 : 909 – 914 , 1998 . 200 . Even - RamSC , MaozM , PokroyE , ReichR , KatzBZ , GutweinP , AltevogtP , Bar - Shavit R . Tumor cell invasion is promoted by activation of protease activated receptor - 1 in cooperation with the alpha vbeta 5 integrin . J Biol Chem 276 : 10952 – 10962 , 2001 . 201 . EwersH , RomerW , SmithAE , BaciaK , DmitrieffS , ChaiW , ManciniR , KartenbeckJ , Chambon V , Berland L , Oppenheim A , Schwarzmann G , Feizi T , Schwille P , Sens P , Helenius A , Johannes L . GM1 structure determines SV40 - induced membrane invagi - nation and infection . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 11 – 18 , 2010 . 202 . Eymard - Pierre E , Lesca G , Dollet S , Santorelli FM , di Capua M , Bertini E , Boespﬂug - Tanguy O . Infantile - onset ascending hereditary spastic paralysis is associated with mutations in the alsin gene . Am J Hum Genet 71 : 518 – 527 , 2002 . 203 . Eyster CA , Higginson JD , Huebner R , Porat - Shliom N , Weigert R , Wu WW , Shen RF , Donaldson JG . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 590 – 599 , 2009 . 204 . Ezratty EJ , Bertaux C , Marcantonio EE , Gundersen GG . Clathrin mediates integrin endocytosisforfocaladhesiondisassemblyinmigratingcells . JCellBiol 187 : 733 – 747 , 2009 . 205 . Ezratty EJ , Partridge MA , Gundersen GG . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disas - sembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 581 – 590 , 2005 . 206 . Fallon L , Belanger CM , Corera AT , Kontogiannea M , Regan - Klapisz E , Moreau F , Voortman J , Haber M , Rouleau G , Thorarinsdottir T , Brice A , van Bergen En He - negouwen PM , Fon EA . A regulated interaction with the UIM protein Eps15 impli - cates parkin in EGF receptor trafﬁcking and PI ( 3 ) K - Akt signalling . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 834 – 842 , 2006 . 207 . Fan GH , Lapierre LA , Goldenring JR , Sai J , Richmond A . Rab11 - family interacting protein 2 and myosin Vb are required for CXCR2 recycling and receptor - mediated chemotaxis . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2456 – 2469 , 2004 . 208 . Fan H , Luttrell LM , Tempel GE , Senn JJ , Halushka PV , Cook JA . Beta - arrestins 1 and 2differentiallyregulateLPS - inducedsignalingandpro - inﬂammatorygeneexpression . Mol Immunol 44 : 3092 – 3099 , 2007 . 209 . FanY , EsmailMA , AnsleySJ , BlacqueOE , BoroevichK , RossAJ , MooreSJ , BadanoJL , May - Simera H , Compton DS , Green JS , Lewis RA , van Haelst MM , Parfrey PS , Baillie DL , Beales PL , Katsanis N , Davidson WS , Leroux MR . Mutations in a member of the Ras superfamily of small GTP - binding proteins causes Bardet - Biedl syndrome . Nat Genet 36 : 989 – 993 , 2004 . 210 . Fang CM , Xu YH . Down - regulated expression of atypical PKC - binding domain de - leted asip isoforms in human hepatocellular carcinomas . Cell Res 11 : 223 – 229 , 2001 . 211 . Feder JN , Gnirke A , Thomas W , Tsuchihashi Z , Ruddy DA , Basava A , Dormishian F , Domingo R Jr , Ellis MC , Fullan A , Hinton LM , Jones NL , Kimmel BE , Kronmal GS , Lauer P , Lee VK , Loeb DB , Mapa FA , McClelland E , Meyer NC , Mintier GA , Moeller N , Moore T , Morikang E , Prass CE , Quintana L , Starnes SM , Schatzman RC , Brunke KJ , Drayna DT , Risch NJ , Bacon BR , Wolff RK . A novel MHC class I - like gene is mutated in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis . Nat Genet 13 : 399 – 408 , 1996 . 212 . Felder S , LaVin J , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J . Kinetics of binding , endocytosis , and recy - cling of EGF receptor mutants . J Cell Biol 117 : 203 – 212 , 1992 . 213 . Feng B , Schwarz H , Jesuthasan S . Furrow - speciﬁc endocytosis during cytokinesis of zebraﬁsh blastomeres . Exp Cell Res 279 : 14 – 20 , 2002 . 214 . FengY , CrosbieJ , WiggK , PathareT , IckowiczA , SchacharR , TannockR , RobertsW , MaloneM , SwansonJ , KennedyJL , BarrCL . TheSNAP25geneasasusceptibilitygene contributing to attention - deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder . Mol Psychiatry 10 : 998 – 1005 , 1973 , 2005 . 215 . FergusonSM , RaimondiA , ParadiseS , ShenH , MesakiK , FergusonA , DestaingO , Ko G , Takasaki J , Cremona O , EOT , De Camilli P . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteinsupstreamofdynaminatendocyticclathrin - coatedpits . DevCell 17 : 811 – 822 , 2009 . 216 . Fernando HS , Davies SR , Chhabra A , Watkins G , Douglas - Jones A , Kynaston H , Mansel RE , Jiang WG . Expression of the WASP verprolin - homologues ( WAVE mem - bers ) in human breast cancer . Oncology 73 : 376 – 383 , 2007 . 217 . Fernando HS , Sanders AJ , Kynaston HG , Jiang WG . WAVE3 is associated with inva - siveness in prostate cancer cells . Urol Oncol 28 : 320 – 327 , 2010 . 218 . Ferrandon S , Feinstein TN , Castro M , Wang B , Bouley R , Potts JT , Gardella TJ , Vilardaga JP . Sustained cyclic AMP production by parathyroid hormone receptor endocytosis . Nat Chem Biol 5 : 734 – 742 , 2009 . 219 . Fish KN , Schmid SL , Damke H . Evidence that dynamin - 2 functions as a signal - trans - ducing GTPase . J Cell Biol 150 : 145 – 154 , 2000 . 220 . Fletcher SJ , Rappoport JZ . Moving forward : polarised trafﬁcking in cell migration . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 71 – 78 , 2010 . 221 . Fontana S , Parolini S , Vermi W , Booth S , Gallo F , Donini M , Benassi M , Gentili F , Ferrari D , Notarangelo LD , Cavadini P , Marcenaro E , Dusi S , Cassatella M , Facchetti F , Grifﬁths GM , Moretta A , Notarangelo LD , Badolato R . Innate immunity defects in Hermansky - Pudlak type 2 syndrome . Blood 107 : 4857 – 4864 , 2006 . 222 . Forterre P , Gribaldo S . Bacteria with a eukaryotic touch : a glimpse of ancient evolu - tion ? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 12739 – 12740 , 2010 . 223 . FortiniME . Notchsignaling : thecorepathwayanditsposttranslationalregulation . Dev Cell 16 : 633 – 647 , 2009 . 224 . FortiniME , BilderD . EndocyticregulationofNotchsignaling . CurrOpinGenetDev 19 : 323 – 328 , 2009 . 225 . Fotin A , Cheng Y , Grigorieff N , Walz T , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . Structure of an auxilin - bound clathrin coat and its implications for the mechanism of uncoating . Na - ture 432 : 649 – 653 , 2004 . 226 . FotinA , ChengY , SlizP , GrigorieffN , HarrisonSC , KirchhausenT , WalzT . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 432 : 573 – 579 , 2004 . 227 . Francavilla C , Cattaneo P , Berezin V , Bock E , Ami D , de Marco A , Christofori G , Cavallaro U . The binding of NCAM to FGFR1 induces a speciﬁc cellular response mediated by receptor trafﬁcking . J Cell Biol 187 : 1101 – 1116 , 2009 . 228 . Frangioni JV , Beahm PH , Shifrin V , Jost CA , Neel BG . The nontransmembrane ty - rosine phosphatase PTP - 1B localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum via its 35 amino acid C - terminal sequence . Cell 68 : 545 – 560 , 1992 . 229 . French AR , Tadaki DK , Lauffenburger DA . Intracellular trafﬁcking of epidermal growthfactorfamilyligandsisdirectlyinﬂuencedbythepHsensitivityofthereceptor / ligand interaction . J Biol Chem 270 : 4334 – 4340 , 1995 . 230 . FrickM , BrightNA , RientoK , BrayA , MerriﬁedC , NicholsBJ . Coassemblyofﬂotillins induces formation of membrane microdomains , membrane curvature , and vesicle budding . Curr Biol 17 : 1151 – 1156 , 2007 . 231 . Fu JF , Hsu JJ , Tang TC , Shih LY . Identiﬁcation of CBL , a proto - oncogene at 11q23 . 3 , asanovelMLLfusionpartnerinapatientwithdenovoacutemyeloidleukemia . Genes Chromosomes Cancer 37 : 214 – 219 , 2003 . 232 . Fu W , Tao W , Zheng P , Fu J , Bian M , Jiang Q , Clarke PR , Zhang C . Clathrin recruits phosphorylated TACC3 to spindle poles for bipolar spindle assembly and chromo - some alignment . J Cell Sci 123 : 3645 – 3651 , 2010 . 233 . FuchsU , RehkampG , HaasOA , SlanyR , KonigM , BojesenS , BohleRM , Damm - Welk C , Ludwig WD , Harbott J , Borkhardt A . The human formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) interactswithsortingnexin , SNX2 , isanMLL - fusionpartnerinacutemyelo - geneous leukemia . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 8756 – 8761 , 2001 . 234 . Fuerst JA . Intracellular compartmentation in planctomycetes . Annu Rev Microbiol 59 : 299 – 328 , 2005 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 350 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 235 . Fujimoto T , Hayashi M , Iwamoto M , Ohno - Iwashita Y . Crosslinked plasmalemmal cholesterol is sequestered to caveolae : analysis with a new cytochemical probe . J Histochem Cytochem 45 : 1197 – 1205 , 1997 . 236 . Fujita A , Cheng J , Tauchi - Sato K , Takenawa T , Fujimoto T . A distinct pool of phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in caveolae revealed by a nanoscale labeling tech - nique . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 9256 – 9261 , 2009 . 237 . Furthauer M , Gonzalez - Gaitan M . Endocytic regulation of notch signalling during development . Trafﬁc 10 : 792 – 802 , 2009 . 238 . Furthauer M , Gonzalez - Gaitan M . Endocytosis and mitosis : a two - way relationship . Cell Cycle 8 : 3311 – 3318 , 2009 . 239 . Furthauer M , Gonzalez - Gaitan M . Endocytosis , asymmetric cell division , stem cells and cancer : unus pro omnibus , omnes pro uno . Mol Oncol 3 : 339 – 353 , 2009 . 240 . Furukawa M , Nagatomo I , Kumagai T , Yamadori T , Takahashi R , Yoshimura M , Yoneda T , Takeda Y , Goya S , Matsuoka H , Kijima T , Yoshida M , Osaki T , Tachibana I , Greene MI , Kawase I . Geﬁtinib - sensitive EGFR lacking residues 746 – 750 exhibits hypophosphorylation at tyrosine residue 1045 , hypoubiquitination , and impaired en - docytosis . DNA Cell Biol 26 : 178 – 185 , 2007 . 241 . FutterCE , FelderS , SchlessingerJ , UllrichA , HopkinsCR . AnnexinIisphosphorylated in the multivesicular body during the processing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Cell Biol 120 : 77 – 83 , 1993 . 242 . Gad H , Ringstad N , Low P , Kjaerulff O , Gustafsson J , Wenk M , Di Paolo G , Nemoto Y , CrunJ , EllismanMH , DeCamilliP , ShupliakovO , BrodinL . Fissionanduncoatingof synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 : 301 – 312 , 2000 . 243 . Gaidarov I , Keen JH . Phosphoinositide - AP - 2 interactions required for targeting to plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Biol 146 : 755 – 764 , 1999 . 244 . GallagherE , GaoM , LiuYC , KarinM . ActivationoftheE3ubiquitinligaseItchthrough aphosphorylation - inducedconformationalchange . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 103 : 1717 – 1722 , 2006 . 245 . Galletta BJ , Cooper JA . Actin and endocytosis : mechanisms and phylogeny . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 20 – 27 , 2009 . 246 . Gao H , Sun Y , Wu Y , Luan B , Wang Y , Qu B , Pei G . Identiﬁcation of beta - arrestin2 as a G protein - coupled receptor - stimulated regulator of NF - kappaB pathways . Mol Cell 14 : 303 – 317 , 2004 . 247 . Gao S , von der Malsburg A , Paeschke S , Behlke J , Haller O , Kochs G , Daumke O . Structural basis of oligomerization in the stalk region of dynamin - like MxA . Nature 465 : 502 – 506 , 2010 . 248 . Garcia CC , Blair HJ , Seager M , Coulthard A , Tennant S , Buddles M , Curtis A , Good - ship JA . Identiﬁcation of a mutation in synapsin I , a synaptic vesicle protein , in a family with epilepsy . J Med Genet 41 : 183 – 186 , 2004 . 249 . Garcia CK , Wilund K , Arca M , Zuliani G , Fellin R , Maioli M , Calandra S , Bertolini S , CossuF , GrishinN , BarnesR , CohenJC , HobbsHH . Autosomalrecessivehypercho - lesterolemiacausedbymutationsinaputativeLDLreceptoradaptorprotein . Science 292 : 1394 – 1398 , 2001 . 250 . Garcia - CardenaG , MartasekP , MastersBS , SkiddPM , CouetJ , LiS , LisantiMP , Sessa WC . Dissecting the interaction between nitric oxide synthase ( NOS ) and caveolin . Functional signiﬁcance of the nos caveolin binding domain in vivo . J Biol Chem 272 : 25437 – 25440 , 1997 . 251 . Gargiulo A , Auricchio R , Barone MV , Cotugno G , Reardon W , Milla PJ , Ballabio A , Ciccodicola A , Auricchio A . Filamin A is mutated in X - linked chronic idiopathic intes - tinal pseudo - obstruction with central nervous system involvement . Am J Hum Genet 80 : 751 – 758 , 2007 . 252 . Gesty - Palmer D , El Shewy H , Kohout TA , Luttrell LM . beta - Arrestin 2 expression determines the transcriptional response to lysophosphatidic acid stimulation in mu - rine embryo ﬁbroblasts . J Biol Chem 280 : 32157 – 32167 , 2005 . 253 . Giannandrea M , Bianchi V , Mignogna ML , Sirri A , Carrabino S , D’Elia E , Vecellio M , RussoS , CogliatiF , LarizzaL , RopersHH , TzschachA , KalscheuerV , Oehl - Jaschkow - itz B , Skinner C , Schwartz CE , Gecz J , Van Esch H , Raynaud M , Chelly J , de Brouwer AP , TonioloD , D’AdamoP . MutationsinthesmallGTPasegeneRAB39Barerespon - sible for X - linked mental retardation associated with autism , epilepsy , and macro - cephaly . Am J Hum Genet 86 : 185 – 195 , 2010 . 254 . Gibbings DJ , Ciaudo C , Erhardt M , Voinnet O . Multivesicular bodies associate with components of miRNA effector complexes and modulate miRNA activity . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 1143 – 1149 , 2009 . 255 . Gillette JM , Larochelle A , Dunbar CE , Lippincott - Schwartz J . Intercellular transfer to signalling endosomes regulates an ex vivo bone marrow niche . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 303 – 311 , 2009 . 256 . Girard M , Allaire PD , McPherson PS , Blondeau F . Non - stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed by quantitative comparative pro - teomics of clathrin - coated vesicles from brain and liver . Mol Cell Proteomics 4 : 1145 – 1154 , 2005 . 257 . Giri DK , Ali - Seyed M , Li LY , Lee DF , Ling P , Bartholomeusz G , Wang SC , Hung MC . Endosomal transport of ErbB - 2 : mechanism for nuclear entry of the cell surface receptor . Mol Cell Biol 25 : 11005 – 11018 , 2005 . 258 . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . Flotillin - 1 deﬁnes a clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 46 – 54 , 2006 . 259 . GohLK , HuangF , KimW , GygiS , SorkinA . Multiplemechanismscollectivelyregulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Cell Biol 189 : 871 – 883 , 2010 . 260 . Goldstein B , Macara IG . The PAR proteins : fundamental players in animal cell polar - ization . Dev Cell 13 : 609 – 622 , 2007 . 261 . GonczyP . Mechanismsofasymmetriccelldivision : ﬂiesandwormspavetheway . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 355 – 366 , 2008 . 262 . Goode BL , Drubin DG , Barnes G . Functional cooperation between the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 63 – 71 , 2000 . 263 . Goryachev AB , Pokhilko AV . Dynamics of Cdc42 network embodies a Turing - type mechanism of yeast cell polarity . FEBS Lett 582 : 1437 – 1443 , 2008 . 264 . Goswami S , Philippar U , Sun D , Patsialou A , Avraham J , Wang W , Di Modugno F , NisticoP , GertlerFB , CondeelisJS . Identiﬁcationofinvasionspeciﬁcsplicevariantsof thecytoskeletalproteinMenapresentinmammarytumorcellsduringinvasioninvivo . Clin Exp Metastasis 26 : 153 – 159 , 2009 . 265 . Gould GW , Lippincott - Schwartz J . New roles for endosomes : from vesicular carriers to multi - purpose platforms . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 . 266 . Govers R , ten Broeke T , van Kerkhof P , Schwartz AL , Strous GJ . Identiﬁcation of a novel ubiquitin conjugation motif , required for ligand - induced internalization of the growth hormone receptor . EMBO J 18 : 28 – 36 , 1999 . 267 . Grandal MV , Zandi R , Pedersen MW , Willumsen BM , van Deurs B , Poulsen HS . EGFRvIII escapes down - regulation due to impaired internalization and sorting to lysosomes . Carcinogenesis 28 : 1408 – 1417 , 2007 . 268 . Grande - Garcia A , Echarri A , de Rooij J , Alderson NB , Waterman - Storer CM , Val - divielso JM , del Pozo MA . Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional mi - gration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases . J Cell Biol 177 : 683 – 694 , 2007 . 269 . Granseth B , Odermatt B , Royle SJ , Lagnado L . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the dominant mechanism of vesicle retrieval at hippocampal synapses . Neuron 51 : 773 – 786 , 2006 . 270 . GreenDR , KroemerG . Cytoplasmicfunctionsofthetumoursuppressorp53 . Nature 458 : 1127 – 1130 , 2009 . 271 . Green KJ , Getsios S , Troyanovsky S , Godsel LM . Intercellular junction assembly , dynamics , and homeostasis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 : a000125 , 2010 . 272 . GrimesML , ZhouJ , BeattieEC , YuenEC , HallDE , VallettaJS , ToppKS , LaVailJH , Bunnett NW , Mobley WC . Endocytosis of activated TrkA : evidence that nerve growth factor induces formation of signaling endosomes . J Neurosci 16 : 7950 – 7964 , 1996 . 273 . GromleyA , YeamanC , RosaJ , RedickS , ChenCT , MirabelleS , GuhaM , SillibourneJ , Doxsey SJ . Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and SNARE complexes at the midbody is required for secretory - vesicle - mediated abscission . Cell 123 : 75 – 87 , 2005 . 274 . Gruenberg J . Viruses and endosome membrane dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 582 – 588 , 2009 . 275 . GuZ , NossEH , HsuVW , BrennerMB . Integrinstrafﬁcrapidlyviacirculardorsalrufﬂes and macropinocytosis during stimulated cell migration . J Cell Biol 193 : 61 – 70 , 2011 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 351 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 276 . Guo DC , Papke CL , Tran - Fadulu V , Regalado ES , Avidan N , Johnson RJ , Kim DH , Pannu H , Willing MC , Sparks E , Pyeritz RE , Singh MN , Dalman RL , Grotta JC , Marian AJ , Boerwinkle EA , Frazier LQ , LeMaire SA , Coselli JS , Estrera AL , Saﬁ HJ , Veera - raghavan S , Muzny DM , Wheeler DA , Willerson JT , Yu RK , Shete SS , Scherer SE , RamanCS , BujaLM , MilewiczDM . Mutationsinsmoothmusclealpha - actin ( ACTA2 ) cause coronary artery disease , stroke , and Moyamoya disease , along with thoracic aortic disease . Am J Hum Genet 84 : 617 – 627 , 2009 . 277 . Guo M , Jan LY , Jan YN . Control of daughter cell fates during asymmetric division : interaction of Numb and Notch . Neuron 17 : 27 – 41 , 1996 . 278 . Gupta PB , Chaffer CL , Weinberg RA . Cancer stem cells : mirage or reality ? Nat Med 15 : 1010 – 1012 , 2009 . 279 . Gurkan C , Koulov AV , Balch WE . An evolutionary perspective on eukaryotic mem - brane trafﬁcking . Adv Exp Med Biol 607 : 73 – 83 , 2007 . 280 . Habela CW , Sontheimer H . Cytoplasmic volume condensation is an integral part of mitosis . Cell Cycle 6 : 1613 – 1620 , 2007 . 281 . Haberman AS , Akbar MA , Ray S , Kramer H . Drosophila acinus encodes a novel regu - lator of endocytic and autophagic trafﬁcking . Development 137 : 2157 – 2166 , 2010 . 282 . Hadano S , Hand CK , Osuga H , Yanagisawa Y , Otomo A , Devon RS , Miyamoto N , Showguchi - Miyata J , Okada Y , Singaraja R , Figlewicz DA , Kwiatkowski T , Hosler BA , SagieT , SkaugJ , NasirJ , BrownRHJr , SchererSW , RouleauGA , HaydenMR , IkedaJE . AgeneencodingaputativeGTPaseregulatorismutatedinfamilialamyotrophiclateral sclerosis 2 . Nat Genet 29 : 166 – 173 , 2001 . 283 . Haglund K , Schmidt MH , Wong ES , Guy GR , Dikic I . Sprouty2 acts at the Cbl / CIN85 interface to inhibit epidermal growth factor receptor downregulation . EMBO Rep 6 : 635 – 641 , 2005 . 284 . HaglundK , ShimokawaN , SzymkiewiczI , DikicI . Cbl - directedmonoubiquitinationof CIN85 is involved in regulation of ligand - induced degradation of EGF receptors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 12191 – 12196 , 2002 . 285 . Haj FG , Verveer PJ , Squire A , Neel BG , Bastiaens PI . Imaging sites of receptor de - phosphorylation by PTP1B on the surface of the endoplasmic reticulum . Science 295 : 1708 – 1711 , 2002 . 286 . Hammond DE , Carter S , McCullough J , Urbe S , Vande Woude G , Clague MJ . Endo - somaldynamicsofMetdeterminesignalingoutput . MolBiolCell 14 : 1346 – 1354 , 2003 . 287 . Hammond DE , Hyde R , Kratchmarova I , Beynon RJ , Blagoev B , Clague MJ . Quantita - tive analysis of HGF and EGF - dependent phosphotyrosine signaling networks . J Pro - teome Res 9 : 2734 – 2742 , 2010 . 288 . Han W , Zhang T , Yu H , Foulke JG , Tang CK . Hypophosphorylation of residue Y1045 leads to defective downregulation of EGFRvIII . Cancer Biol Ther 5 : 1361 – 1368 , 2006 . 289 . Hansen CG , Bright NA , Howard G , Nichols BJ . SDPR induces membrane curvature and functions in the formation of caveolae . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 807 – 814 , 2009 . 290 . Hansen CG , Nichols BJ . Exploring the caves : cavins , caveolins and caveolae . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 177 – 186 , 2010 . 291 . Hansen CG , Nichols BJ . Molecular mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . J Cell Sci 122 : 1713 – 1721 , 2009 . 292 . Hanyaloglu AC , von Zastrow M . Regulation of GPCRs by endocytic membrane traf - ﬁcking and its potential implications . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 48 : 537 – 568 , 2008 . 293 . Hara F , Yamashiro K , Nemoto N , Ohta Y , Yokobori S , Yasunaga T , Hisanaga S , YamagishiA . Anactinhomologofthearchaeon Thermoplasmaacidophilum thatretains the ancient characteristics of eukaryotic actin . J Bacteriol 189 : 2039 – 2045 , 2007 . 294 . Haugh JM , Huang AC , Wiley HS , Wells A , Lauffenburger DA . Internalized epidermal growth factor receptors participate in the activation of p21 ( ras ) in ﬁbroblasts . J Biol Chem 274 : 34350 – 34360 , 1999 . 295 . Haugh JM , Meyer T . Active EGF receptors have limited access to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) in endosomes : implications for phospholipase C and PI 3 - kinase signaling . J Cell Sci 115 : 303 – 310 , 2002 . 296 . Haugsten EM , Malecki J , Bjorklund SM , Olsnes S , Wesche J . Ubiquitination of ﬁbro - blast growth factor receptor 1 is required for its intracellular sorting but not for its endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 3390 – 3403 , 2008 . 297 . Hayashi YK , Matsuda C , Ogawa M , Goto K , Tominaga K , Mitsuhashi S , Park YE , NonakaI , Hino - FukuyoN , HaginoyaK , SuganoH , NishinoI . HumanPTRFmutations cause secondary deﬁciency of caveolins resulting in muscular dystrophy with gener - alized lipodystrophy . J Clin Invest 119 : 2623 – 2633 , 2009 . 298 . Hayer A , Stoeber M , Bissig C , Helenius A . Biogenesis of caveolae : stepwise assembly of large caveolin and cavin complexes . Trafﬁc 11 : 361 – 382 , 2010 . 299 . Hayer A , Stoeber M , Ritz D , Engel S , Meyer HH , Helenius A . Caveolin - 1 is ubiquiti - nated and targeted to intralumenal vesicles in endolysosomes for degradation . J Cell Biol 191 : 615 – 629 , 2010 . 300 . HayesS , ChawlaA , CorveraS . TGFbetareceptorinternalizationintoEEA1 - enriched early endosomes : role in signaling to Smad2 . J Cell Biol 158 : 1239 – 1249 , 2002 . 301 . Head BP , Insel PA . Do caveolins regulate cells by actions outside of caveolae ? Trends Cell Biol 17 : 51 – 57 , 2007 . 302 . Head BP , Patel HH , Roth DM , Murray F , Swaney JS , Niesman IR , Farquhar MG , Insel PA . Microtubules and actin microﬁlaments regulate lipid raft / caveolae localization of adenylyl cyclase signaling components . J Biol Chem 281 : 26391 – 26399 , 2006 . 303 . Heinrich R , Rapoport TA . Generation of nonidentical compartments in vesicular transport systems . J Cell Biol 168 : 271 – 280 , 2005 . 304 . Heisermann GJ , Wiley HS , Walsh BJ , Ingraham HA , Fiol CJ , Gill GN . Mutational removal of the Thr669 and Ser671 phosphorylation sites alters substrate speciﬁcity and ligand - induced internalization of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Biol Chem 265 : 12820 – 12827 , 1990 . 305 . Helenius A , Mellman I , Wall D , Hubbard A . Endosomes . Trends Biochem Sci 8 : 245 – 250 , 1983 . 306 . Helin K , Beguinot L . Internalization and downregulation of the human epidermal growth factor receptor are regulated by the carboxyl - terminal tyrosines . J Biol Chem 266 : 8363 – 8368 , 1991 . 307 . Hendriks BS , Opresko LK , Wiley HS , Lauffenburger D . Coregulation of epidermal growthfactorreceptor / humanepidermalgrowthfactorreceptor2 ( HER2 ) levelsand locations : quantitativeanalysisofHER2overexpressioneffects . CancerRes 63 : 1130 – 1137 , 2003 . 308 . Hendriks BS , Wiley HS , Lauffenburger D . HER2 - mediated effects on EGFR endo - somal sorting : analysis of biophysical mechanisms . Biophys J 85 : 2732 – 2745 , 2003 . 309 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 : 1281 – 1284 , 2010 . 310 . Hicke L , Riezman H . Ubiquitination of a yeast plasma membrane receptor signals its ligand - stimulated endocytosis . Cell 84 : 277 – 287 , 1996 . 311 . Hicks C , Ladi E , Lindsell C , Hsieh JJ , Hayward SD , Collazo A , Weinmaster G . A secreted Delta1 - Fc fusion protein functions both as an activator and inhibitor of Notch1 signaling . J Neurosci Res 68 : 655 – 667 , 2002 . 312 . HiedaM , IsokaneM , KoizumiM , HigashiC , TachibanaT , ShudouM , TaguchiT , Hieda Y , Higashiyama S . Membrane - anchored growth factor , HB - EGF , on the cell surface targeted to the inner nuclear membrane . J Cell Biol 180 : 763 – 769 , 2008 . 313 . Hilgert N , Topsakal V , van Dinther J , Offeciers E , Van de Heyning P , Van Camp G . A splice - site mutation and overexpression of MYO6 cause a similar phenotype in two families with autosomal dominant hearing loss . Eur J Hum Genet 16 : 593 – 602 , 2008 . 314 . Hill MM , Bastiani M , Luetterforst R , Kirkham M , Kirkham A , Nixon SJ , Walser P , Abankwa D , Oorschot VM , Martin S , Hancock JF , Parton RG . PTRF - Cavin , a con - served cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 : 113 – 124 , 2008 . 315 . Hinrichsen L , Harborth J , Andrees L , Weber K , Ungewickell EJ . Effect of clathrin heavychain - andalpha - adaptin - speciﬁcsmallinhibitoryRNAsonendocyticaccessory proteins and receptor trafﬁcking in HeLa cells . J Biol Chem 278 : 45160 – 45170 , 2003 . 316 . HittelmanAB , BurakovD , Iniguez - LluhiJA , FreedmanLP , GarabedianMJ . Differential regulation of glucocorticoid receptor transcriptional activation via AF - 1 - associated proteins . EMBO J 18 : 5380 – 5388 , 1999 . 317 . HochstrasserM . Originandfunctionofubiquitin - likeproteins . Nature 458 : 422 – 429 , 2009 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 352 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 318 . Hocking DC , Chang CH . Fibronectin matrix polymerization regulates small airway epithelial cell migration . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 285 : L169 – L179 , 2003 . 319 . Hoeller D , Crosetto N , Blagoev B , Raiborg C , Tikkanen R , Wagner S , Kowanetz K , Breitling R , Mann M , Stenmark H , Dikic I . Regulation of ubiquitin - binding proteins by monoubiquitination . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 163 – 169 , 2006 . 320 . Hoffman GR , Rahl PB , Collins RN , Cerione RA . Conserved structural motifs in intra - cellular trafﬁcking pathways : structure of the gammaCOP appendage domain . Mol Cell 12 : 615 – 625 , 2003 . 321 . Honegger A , Dull TJ , Bellot F , Van Obberghen E , Szapary D , Schmidt A , Ullrich A , Schlessinger J . Biological activities of EGF - receptor mutants with individually altered autophosphorylation sites . EMBO J 7 : 3045 – 3052 , 1988 . 322 . HoningS , RicottaD , KraussM , SpateK , SpolaoreB , MotleyA , RobinsonM , Robinson C , Haucke V , Owen DJ . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate regulates sorting signal recognition by the clathrin - associated adaptor complex AP2 . Mol Cell 18 : 519 – 531 , 2005 . 323 . Hopkins CR , Gibson A , Shipman M , Strickland DK , Trowbridge IS . In migrating ﬁbro - blasts , recycling receptors are concentrated in narrow tubules in the pericentriolar area , then routed to the plasma membrane of the leading lamella . J Cell Biol 125 : 1265 – 1274 , 1994 . 324 . Howe CL , Mobley WC . Long - distance retrograde neurotrophic signaling . Curr Opin Neurobiol 15 : 40 – 48 , 2005 . 325 . Howe CL , Valletta JS , Rusnak AS , Mobley WC . NGF signaling from clathrin - coated vesicles : evidence that signaling endosomes serve as a platform for the Ras - MAPK pathway . Neuron 32 : 801 – 814 , 2001 . 326 . Howell AS , Savage NS , Johnson SA , Bose I , Wagner AW , Zyla TR , Nijhout HF , Reed MC , Goryachev AB , Lew DJ . Singularity in polarization : rewiring yeast cells to make two buds . Cell 139 : 731 – 743 , 2009 . 327 . Howes MT , Kirkham M , Riches J , Cortese K , Walser PJ , Simpson F , Hill MM , Jones A , Lundmark R , Lindsay MR , Hernandez - Deviez DJ , Hadzic G , McCluskey A , Bashir R , Liu L , Pilch P , McMahon H , Robinson PJ , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG . Clathrin - independentcarriersformahighcapacityendocyticsortingsystemattheleadingedge of migrating cells . J Cell Biol 190 : 675 – 691 , 2010 . 328 . HsuCC , LeuYW , TsengMJ , LeeKD , KuoTY , YenJY , LaiYL , HungYC , SunWS , Chen CM , ChuPY , YehKT , YanPS , ChangYS , HuangTH , HsiaoSH . Functionalcharacter - ization of Trip10 in cancer cell growth and survival . J Biomed Sci 18 : 12 , 2011 . 329 . Hsu T , Adereth Y , Kose N , Dammai V . Endocytic function of von Hippel - Lindau tumor suppressor protein regulates surface localization of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 1 and cell motility . J Biol Chem 281 : 12069 – 12080 , 2006 . 330 . Hsu VW , Prekeris R . Transport at the recycling endosome . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 528 – 534 , 2010 . 331 . Hu LD , Zou HF , Zhan SX , Cao KM . EVL ( Ena / VASP - like ) expression is up - regulated in human breast cancer and its relative expression level is correlated with clinical stages . Oncol Rep 19 : 1015 – 1020 , 2008 . 332 . Huang F , Goh LK , Sorkin A . EGF receptor ubiquitination is not necessary for its internalization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 16904 – 16909 , 2007 . 333 . Huang F , Jiang X , Sorkin A . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the beta2 subunit of clathrin adaptor complex AP - 2 reveals the role of a di - leucine motif in the epidermal growth factor receptor trafﬁcking . J Biol Chem 278 : 43411 – 43417 , 2003 . 334 . HuangF , KhvorovaA , MarshallW , SorkinA . Analysisofclathrin - mediatedendocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J Biol Chem 279 : 16657 – 16661 , 2004 . 335 . Huang F , Kirkpatrick D , Jiang X , Gygi S , Sorkin A . Differential regulation of EGF receptor internalization and degradation by multiubiquitination within the kinase do - main . Mol Cell 21 : 737 – 748 , 2006 . 336 . Huang F , Sorkin A . Growth factor receptor binding protein 2 - mediated recruitment of the RING domain of Cbl to the epidermal growth factor receptor is essential and sufﬁcient to support receptor endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 1268 – 1281 , 2005 . 337 . HunterM , BernardR , FreitasE , BoyerA , MorarB , MartinsIJ , TournevI , JordanovaA , Guergelcheva V , Ishpekova B , Kremensky I , Nicholson G , Schlotter B , Lochmuller H , Voit T , Colomer J , Thomas PK , Levy N , Kalaydjieva L . Mutation screening of the N - myc downstream - regulated gene 1 ( NDRG1 ) in patients with Charcot - Marie - Tooth Disease . Hum Mutat 22 : 129 – 135 , 2003 . 338 . Hurley JH , Hanson PI . Membrane budding and scission by the ESCRT machinery : it’s all in the neck . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 556 – 566 , 2010 . 339 . Hurley JH , Stenmark H . Molecular mechanisms of ubiquitin - dependent membrane trafﬁc . Annu Rev Biophys 40 : 119 – 142 , 2011 . 340 . Hussain NK , Jenna S , Glogauer M , Quinn CC , Wasiak S , Guipponi M , Antonarakis SE , KayBK , StosselTP , Lamarche - VaneN , McPhersonPS . Endocyticproteinintersectin - l regulates actin assembly via Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 927 – 932 , 2001 . 341 . Hutterer A , Knoblich JA . Numb and alpha - Adaptin regulate Sanpodo endocytosis to specify cell fate in Drosophila external sensory organs . EMBO Rep 6 : 836 – 842 , 2005 . 342 . Hyman J , Chen H , Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P , Brunger AT . Epsin 1 undergoes nucleo - cytosolic shuttling and its eps15 interactor NH ( 2 ) - terminal homology ( ENTH ) do - main , structurallysimilartoArmadilloandHEATrepeats , interactswiththetranscrip - tion factor promyelocytic leukemia Zn 2 (cid:3) ﬁnger protein ( PLZF ) . J Cell Biol 149 : 537 – 546 , 2000 . 343 . IbanezCF . Messageinabottle : long - rangeretrogradesignalinginthenervoussystem . Trends Cell Biol 17 : 519 – 528 , 2007 . 344 . Ichimura T , Yamamura H , Sasamoto K , Tominaga Y , Taoka M , Kakiuchi K , Shinkawa T , Takahashi N , Shimada S , Isobe T . 14 - 3 - 3 proteins modulate the expression of epithelial Na (cid:3) channels by phosphorylation - dependent interaction with Nedd4 – 2 ubiquitin ligase . J Biol Chem 280 : 13187 – 13194 , 2005 . 345 . InsallRH , MacheskyLM . Actindynamicsattheleadingedge : fromsimplemachineryto complex networks . Dev Cell 17 : 310 – 322 , 2009 . 346 . Irion U , St Johnston D . Bicoid RNA localization requires speciﬁc binding of an endo - somal sorting complex . Nature 445 : 554 – 558 , 2007 . 347 . Ismaili N , Blind R , Garabedian MJ . Stabilization of the unliganded glucocorticoid re - ceptor by TSG101 . J Biol Chem 280 : 11120 – 11126 , 2005 . 348 . Isokane M , Hieda M , Hirakawa S , Shudou M , Nakashiro K , Hashimoto K , Hamakawa H , Higashiyama S . Plasma - membrane - anchored growth factor pro - amphiregulin bindsA - typelaminandregulatesglobaltranscription . JCellSci 121 : 3608 – 3618 , 2008 . 349 . Itoh M , Kim CH , Palardy G , Oda T , Jiang YJ , Maust D , Yeo SY , Lorick K , Wright GJ , Ariza - McNaughton L , Weissman AM , Lewis J , Chandrasekharappa SC , Chitnis AB . Mind bomb is a ubiquitin ligase that is essential for efﬁcient activation of Notch signaling by Delta . Dev Cell 4 : 67 – 82 , 2003 . 350 . Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev Cell 9 : 791 – 804 , 2005 . 351 . Itoh T , Koshiba S , Kigawa T , Kikuchi A , Yokoyama S , Takenawa T . Role of the ENTH domain in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate binding and endocytosis . Science 291 : 1047 – 1051 , 2001 . 352 . Ivey KN , Srivastava D . MicroRNAs as regulators of differentiation and cell fate deci - sions . Cell Stem Cell 7 : 36 – 41 , 2010 . 353 . Iwaya K , Oikawa K , Semba S , Tsuchiya B , Mukai Y , Otsubo T , Nagao T , Izumi M , Kuroda M , Domoto H , Mukai K . Correlation between liver metastasis of the colocal - ization of actin - related protein 2 and 3 complex and WAVE2 in colorectal carcinoma . Cancer Sci 98 : 992 – 999 , 2007 . 354 . JacksonLP , KellyBT , McCoyAJ , GaffryT , JamesLC , CollinsBM , HoningS , EvansPR , Owen DJ . A large - scale conformational change couples membrane recruitment to cargo binding in the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . Cell 141 : 1220 – 1229 , 2010 . 355 . Jafar - Nejad H , Andrews HK , Acar M , Bayat V , Wirtz - Peitz F , Mehta SQ , Knoblich JA , Bellen HJ . Sec15 , a component of the exocyst , promotes notch signaling during the asymmetric division of Drosophila sensory organ precursors . Dev Cell 9 : 351 – 363 , 2005 . 356 . Jang JY , Kim KM , Kim GH , Yu E , Lee JJ , Park YS , Yoo HW . Clinical characteristics and VPS33B mutations in patients with ARC syndrome . J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 48 : 348 – 354 , 2009 . 357 . Jansa P , Mason SW , Hoffmann - Rohrer U , Grummt I . Cloning and functional charac - terization of PTRF , a novel protein which induces dissociation of paused ternary transcription complexes . EMBO J 17 : 2855 – 2864 , 1998 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 353 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 358 . Jansen M , Pietiainen VM , Polonen H , Rasilainen L , Koivusalo M , Ruotsalainen U , JokitaloE , IkonenE . Cholesterolsubstitutionincreasesthestructuralheterogeneityof caveolae . J Biol Chem 283 : 14610 – 14618 , 2008 . 359 . Jasavala R , Martinez H , Thumar J , Andaya A , Gingras AC , Eng JK , Aebersold R , Han DK , WrightME . Identiﬁcationofputativeandrogenreceptorinteractionproteinmod - ules : cytoskeleton and endosomes modulate androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer cells . Mol Cell Proteomics 6 : 252 – 271 , 2007 . 360 . JekelyG . Originofeukaryoticendomembranes : acriticalevaluationofdifferentmodel scenarios . Adv Exp Med Biol 607 : 38 – 51 , 2007 . 361 . Jekely G . Origin of phagotrophic eukaryotes as social cheaters in microbial bioﬁlms . Biol Direct 2 : 3 , 2007 . 362 . Jekely G , Sung HH , Luque CM , Rorth P . Regulators of endocytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in guided migration . Dev Cell 9 : 197 – 207 , 2005 . 363 . Jenkins D , Seelow D , Jehee FS , Perlyn CA , Alonso LG , Bueno DF , Donnai D , Josifova D , Mathijssen IM , Morton JE , Orstavik KH , Sweeney E , Wall SA , Marsh JL , Nurnberg P , Passos - Bueno MR , Wilkie AO . RAB23 mutations in Carpenter syndrome imply an unexpected role for hedgehog signaling in cranial - suture development and obesity . Am J Hum Genet 80 : 1162 – 1170 , 2007 . 364 . Jiang X , Huang F , Marusyk A , Sorkin A . Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF recep - tors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 858 – 870 , 2003 . 365 . Jiang X , Sorkin A . Epidermal growth factor receptor internalization through clathrin - coated pits requires Cbl RING ﬁnger and proline - rich domains but not receptor polyubiquitylation . Trafﬁc 4 : 529 – 543 , 2003 . 366 . JohannessenLE , PedersenNM , PedersenKW , MadshusIH , StangE . Activationofthe epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor induces formation of EGF receptor - and Grb2 - containing clathrin - coated pits . Mol Cell Biol 26 : 389 – 401 , 2006 . 367 . JohnsonS , HalfordS , MorrisAG , PatelRJ , WilkieSE , HardcastleAJ , MooreAT , Zhang K , Hunt DM . Genomic organisation and alternative splicing of human RIM1 , a gene implicatedinautosomaldominantcone - roddystrophy ( CORD7 ) . Genomics 81 : 304 – 314 , 2003 . 368 . JoshiS , PereraS , GilbertJ , SmithCM , MarianaA , GordonCP , SakoffJA , McCluskeyA , Robinson PJ , Braithwaite AW , Chircop M . The dynamin inhibitors MiTMAB and Oc - TMAB induce cytokinesis failure and inhibit cell proliferation in human cancer cells . Mol Cancer Ther 9 : 1995 – 2006 , 2010 . 369 . Jost M , Simpson F , Kavran JM , Lemmon MA , Schmid SL . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate is required for endocytic coated vesicle formation . Curr Biol 8 : 1399 – 1402 , 1998 . 370 . Jovic M , Sharma M , Rahajeng J , Caplan S . The early endosome : a busy sorting station for proteins at the crossroads . Histol Histopathol 25 : 99 – 112 , 2010 . 371 . Jung N , Haucke V . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis at synapses . Trafﬁc 8 : 1129 – 1136 , 2007 . 372 . Jura N , Scotto - Lavino E , Sobczyk A , Bar - Sagi D . Differential modiﬁcation of Ras proteins by ubiquitination . Mol Cell 21 : 679 – 687 , 2006 . 373 . Juven - Gershon T , Shifman O , Unger T , Elkeles A , Haupt Y , Oren M . The Mdm2 oncoproteininteractswiththecellfateregulatorNumb . MolCellBiol 18 : 3974 – 3982 , 1998 . 374 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 , 2005 . 375 . KaksonenM , ToretCP , DrubinDG . Harnessingactindynamicsforclathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 404 – 414 , 2006 . 376 . KalaydjievaL , GreshamD , GoodingR , HeatherL , BaasF , deJongeR , BlechschmidtK , Angelicheva D , Chandler D , Worsley P , Rosenthal A , King RH , Thomas PK . N - myc downstream - regulated gene 1 is mutated in hereditary motor and sensory neuropa - thy - Lom . Am J Hum Genet 67 : 47 – 58 , 2000 . 377 . Kalluri R , Weinberg RA . The basics of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J Clin Invest 119 : 1420 – 1428 , 2009 . 378 . Kamath RS , Fraser AG , Dong Y , Poulin G , Durbin R , Gotta M , Kanapin A , Le Bot N , MorenoS , SohrmannM , WelchmanDP , ZipperlenP , AhringerJ . Systematicfunctional analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi . Nature 421 : 231 – 237 , 2003 . 379 . KamuraT , BurianD , KhaliliH , SchmidtSL , SatoS , LiuWJ , ConradMN , ConawayRC , Conaway JW , Shilatifard A . Cloning and characterization of ELL - associated proteins EAP45andEAP20 . AroleforyeastEAP - likeproteinsinregulationofgeneexpression by glucose . J Biol Chem 276 : 16528 – 16533 , 2001 . 380 . Kang J , Shi Y , Xiang B , Qu B , Su W , Zhu M , Zhang M , Bao G , Wang F , Zhang X , Yang R , FanF , ChenX , PeiG , MaL . Anuclearfunctionofbeta - arrestin1inGPCRsignaling : regulation of histone acetylation and gene transcription . Cell 123 : 833 – 847 , 2005 . 381 . Karam JA , Shariat SF , Huang HY , Pong RC , Ashfaq R , Shapiro E , Lotan Y , Sagalowsky AI , WuXR , HsiehJT . DecreasedDOC - 2 / DAB2expressioninurothelialcarcinomaof the bladder . Clin Cancer Res 13 : 4400 – 4406 , 2007 . 382 . Kasahara K , Nakayama Y , Sato I , Ikeda K , Hoshino M , Endo T , Yamaguchi N . Role of Src - family kinases in formation and trafﬁcking of macropinosomes . J Cell Physiol 211 : 220 – 232 , 2007 . 383 . KassenbrockCK , HunterS , GarlP , JohnsonGL , AndersonSM . InhibitionofSrcfamily kinases blocks epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - induced activation of Akt , phosphory - lationofc - Cbl , andubiquitinationoftheEGFreceptor . JBiolChem 277 : 24967 – 24975 , 2002 . 384 . Katz M , Shtiegman K , Tal - Or P , Yakir L , Mosesson Y , Harari D , Machluf Y , Asao H , JovinT , SugamuraK , YardenY . Ligand - independentdegradationofepidermalgrowth factorreceptorinvolvesreceptorubiquitylationandHgs , anadaptorwhoseubiquitin - interacting motif targets ubiquitylation by Nedd4 . Trafﬁc 3 : 740 – 751 , 2002 . 385 . Katzmann DJ , Babst M , Emr SD . Ubiquitin - dependent sorting into the multivesicular body pathway requires the function of a conserved endosomal protein sorting com - plex , ESCRT - I . Cell 106 : 145 – 155 , 2001 . 386 . Kazazic M , Roepstorff K , Johannessen LE , Pedersen NM , van Deurs B , Stang E , Madshus IH . EGF - induced activation of the EGF receptor does not trigger mobiliza - tion of caveolae . Trafﬁc 7 : 1518 – 1527 , 2006 . 387 . Kelly BT , McCoy AJ , Spate K , Miller SE , Evans PR , Honing S , Owen DJ . A structural explanation for the binding of endocytic dileucine motifs by the AP2 complex . Nature 456 : 976 – 979 , 2008 . 388 . KellyBT , OwenDJ . Endocyticsortingoftransmembraneproteincargo . CurrOpinCell Biol 2011 . 389 . Kelly E , Bailey CP , Henderson G . Agonist - selective mechanisms of GPCR desensiti - zation . Br J Pharmacol 153 Suppl 1 : S379 – S388 , 2008 . 390 . KermorgantS , ParkerPJ . Receptortrafﬁckingcontrolsweaksignaldelivery : astrategy used by c - Met for STAT3 nuclear accumulation . J Cell Biol 182 : 855 – 863 , 2008 . 391 . Kerr MC , Teasdale RD . Deﬁning macropinocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 364 – 371 , 2009 . 392 . Kessels MM , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Drubin DG , Qualmann B . Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J Cell Biol 153 : 351 – 366 , 2001 . 393 . Keyel PA , Mishra SK , Roth R , Heuser JE , Watkins SC , Traub LM . A single common portalforclathrin - mediatedendocytosisofdistinctcargogovernedbycargo - selective adaptors . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 4300 – 4317 , 2006 . 394 . Khan S , Jutzy JM , Aspe JR , McGregor DW , Neidigh JW , Wall NR . Survivin is released from cancer cells via exosomes . Apoptosis 2010 . 395 . Kholodenko BN , Birtwistle MR . Four - dimensional dynamics of MAPK information processing systems . Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 1 : 28 – 44 , 2009 . 396 . KholodenkoBN , HancockJF , KolchW . Signallingballetinspaceandtime . NatRevMol Cell Biol 11 : 414 – 426 , 2010 . 397 . Kiger AA , Baum B , Jones S , Jones MR , Coulson A , Echeverri C , Perrimon N . A functional genomic analysis of cell morphology using RNA interference . J Biol 2 : 27 , 2003 . 398 . Kim CA , Delepine M , Boutet E , El Mourabit H , Le Lay S , Meier M , Nemani M , Bridel E , LeiteCC , BertolaDR , SempleRK , O’RahillyS , DugailI , CapeauJ , LathropM , Magre J . Association of a homozygous nonsense caveolin - 1 mutation with Berardinelli - Seip congenital lipodystrophy . J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93 : 1129 – 1134 , 2008 . 399 . Kim SY , Gitai Z , Kinkhabwala A , Shapiro L , Moerner WE . Single molecules of the bacterialactinMreBundergodirectedtreadmillingmotioninCaulobactercrescentus . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 10929 – 10934 , 2006 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 354 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 400 . King N , Carroll SB . A receptor tyrosine kinase from choanoﬂagellates : molecular insights into early animal evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 15032 – 15037 , 2001 . 401 . King N , Westbrook MJ , Young SL , Kuo A , Abedin M , Chapman J , Fairclough S , Hell - sten U , Isogai Y , Letunic I , Marr M , Pincus D , Putnam N , Rokas A , Wright KJ , Zuzow R , Dirks W , Good M , Goodstein D , Lemons D , Li W , Lyons JB , Morris A , Nichols S , Richter DJ , Salamov A , Sequencing JG , Bork P , Lim WA , Manning G , Miller WT , McGinnis W , Shapiro H , Tjian R , Grigoriev IV , Rokhsar D . The genome of the cho - anoﬂagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans . Nature 451 : 783 – 788 , 2008 . 402 . Kinkhabwala A , Bastiaens PI . Spatial aspects of intracellular information processing . Curr Opin Genet Dev 20 : 31 – 40 , 2010 . 403 . Kolehmainen J , Black GC , Saarinen A , Chandler K , Clayton - Smith J , Traskelin AL , PerveenR , Kivitie - KallioS , NorioR , WarburgM , FrynsJP , delaChapelleA , Lehesjoki AE . Cohen syndrome is caused by mutations in a novel gene , COH1 , encoding a transmembrane protein with a presumed role in vesicle - mediated sorting and intra - cellular protein transport . Am J Hum Genet 72 : 1359 – 1369 , 2003 . 404 . Kolling R , Hollenberg CP . The ABC - transporter Ste6 accumulates in the plasma membrane in a ubiquitinated form in endocytosis mutants . EMBO J 13 : 3261 – 3271 , 1994 . 405 . KolschV , SeherT , Fernandez - BallesterGJ , SerranoL , LeptinM . Controlof Drosophila gastrulation by apical localization of adherens junctions and RhoGEF2 . Science 315 : 384 – 386 , 2007 . 406 . Kopan R , Ilagan MX . The canonical Notch signaling pathway : unfolding the activation mechanism . Cell 137 : 216 – 233 , 2009 . 407 . Kozera L , White E , Calaghan S . Caveolae act as membrane reserves which limit mechanosensitive I ( Cl , swell ) channel activation during swelling in the rat ventricular myocyte . PLoS One 4 : e8312 , 2009 . 408 . KozubowskiL , SaitoK , JohnsonJM , HowellAS , ZylaTR , LewDJ . Symmetry - breaking polarization driven by a Cdc42p GEF - PAK complex . Curr Biol 18 : 1719 – 1726 , 2008 . 409 . KrakowD , RobertsonSP , KingLM , MorganT , SebaldET , BertolottoC , Wachsmann - Hogiu S , Acuna D , Shapiro SS , Takafuta T , Aftimos S , Kim CA , Firth H , Steiner CE , Cormier - Daire V , Superti - Furga A , Bonafe L , Graham JM Jr , Grix A , Bacino CA , Allanson J , Bialer MG , Lachman RS , Rimoin DL , Cohn DH . Mutations in the gene encodingﬁlaminBdisruptvertebralsegmentation , jointformationandskeletogenesis . Nat Genet 36 : 405 – 410 , 2004 . 410 . Krauss M , Kukhtina V , Pechstein A , Haucke V . Stimulation of phosphatidylinositol kinasetypeI - mediatedphosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphatesynthesisbyAP - 2mu - cargo complexes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 11934 – 11939 , 2006 . 411 . Kristiansen M , Aminoff M , Jacobsen C , de La Chapelle A , Krahe R , Verroust PJ , MoestrupSK . CubilinP1297Lmutationassociatedwithhereditarymegaloblasticane - mia1causesimpairedrecognitionofintrinsicfactor - vitaminB ( 12 ) bycubilin . Blood 96 : 405 – 409 , 2000 . 412 . Krol J , Loedige I , Filipowicz W . The widespread regulation of microRNA biogenesis , function and decay . Nat Rev Genet 11 : 597 – 610 , 2010 . 413 . Krueger EW , Orth JD , Cao H , McNiven MA . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 1085 – 1096 , 2003 . 414 . KruseT , GerdesK . BacterialDNAsegregationbytheactin - likeMreBprotein . Trends Cell Biol 15 : 343 – 345 , 2005 . 415 . Kucik DF , Elson EL , Sheetz MP . Cell migration does not produce membrane ﬂow . J Cell Biol 111 : 1617 – 1622 , 1990 . 416 . Kumari S , Mayor S . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 30 – 41 , 2008 . 417 . Kyndt F , Gueffet JP , Probst V , Jaafar P , Legendre A , Le Bouffant F , Toquet C , Roy E , McGregor L , Lynch SA , Newbury - Ecob R , Tran V , Young I , Trochu JN , Le Marec H , Schott JJ . Mutations in the gene encoding ﬁlamin A as a cause for familial cardiac valvular dystrophy . Circulation 115 : 40 – 49 , 2007 . 418 . Lai AZ , Abella JV , Park M . Crosstalk in Met receptor oncogenesis . Trends Cell Biol 19 : 542 – 551 , 2009 . 419 . LaiEC , DeblandreGA , KintnerC , RubinGM . Drosophila neuralizedisaubiquitinligase thatpromotestheinternalizationanddegradationofdelta . DevCell 1 : 783 – 794 , 2001 . 420 . Lai WH , Cameron PH , Doherty JJ , 2nd Posner BI , Bergeron JJ . Ligand - mediated autophosphorylationactivityoftheepidermalgrowthfactorreceptorduringinternal - ization . J Cell Biol 109 : 2751 – 2760 , 1989 . 421 . Laing NG , Clarke NF , Dye DE , Liyanage K , Walker KR , Kobayashi Y , Shimakawa S , Hagiwara T , Ouvrier R , Sparrow JC , Nishino I , North KN , Nonaka I . Actin mutations are one cause of congenital ﬁbre type disproportion . Ann Neurol 56 : 689 – 694 , 2004 . 422 . LajoieP , NabiIR . Lipidrafts , caveolae , andtheirendocytosis . IntRevCellMolBiol 282 : 135 – 163 , 2010 . 423 . Lakadamyali M , Rust MJ , Zhuang X . Ligands for clathrin - mediated endocytosis are differentiallysortedintodistinctpopulationsofearlyendosomes . Cell 124 : 997 – 1009 , 2006 . 424 . LamazeC , DujeancourtA , BabaT , LoCG , BenmerahA , Dautry - VarsatA . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - indepen - dent endocytic pathway . Mol Cell 7 : 661 – 671 , 2001 . 425 . LanzettiL , DiFiorePP . Endocytosisandcancer : an“insider”networkwithdangerous liaisons . Trafﬁc 9 : 2011 – 2021 , 2008 . 426 . Lanzetti L , Palamidessi A , Areces L , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature 429 : 309 – 314 , 2004 . 427 . Lanzetti L , Rybin V , Malabarba MG , Christoforidis S , Scita G , Zerial M , Di Fiore PP . The Eps8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafﬁcking through Rab5 . Nature 408 : 374 – 377 , 2000 . 428 . Lauwers E , Erpapazoglou Z , Haguenauer - Tsapis R , Andre B . The ubiquitin code of yeast permease trafﬁcking . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 196 – 204 , 2010 . 429 . Layton AT , Savage NS , Howell AS , Carroll SY , Drubin DG , Lew DJ . Modeling vesicle trafﬁc reveals unexpected consequences for Cdc42p - mediated polarity establish - ment . Curr Biol 21 : 184 – 194 , 2011 . 430 . Le Borgne R , Schweisguth F . Unequal segregation of neuralized biases Notch activa - tion during asymmetric cell division . Dev Cell 5 : 139 – 148 , 2003 . 431 . Le Clainche C , Carlier MF . Regulation of actin assembly associated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev 88 : 489 – 513 , 2008 . 432 . Le Clainche C , Pauly BS , Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Cunningham K , Drubin DG . A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J 26 : 1199 – 1210 , 2007 . 433 . Le Lay S , Blouin CM , Hajduch E , Dugail I . Filling up adipocytes with lipids . Lessons from caveolin - 1 deﬁciency . Biochim Biophys Acta 1791 : 514 – 518 , 2009 . 434 . Le Lay S , Hajduch E , Lindsay MR , Le Liepvre X , Thiele C , Ferre P , Parton RG , KurzchaliaT , SimonsK , DugailI . Cholesterol - inducedcaveolintargetingtolipiddrop - lets in adipocytes : a role for caveolar endocytosis . Trafﬁc 7 : 549 – 561 , 2006 . 435 . Le PU , Guay G , Altschuler Y , Nabi IR . Caveolin - 1 is a negative regulator of caveolae - mediated endocytosis to the endoplasmic reticulum . J Biol Chem 277 : 3371 – 3379 , 2002 . 436 . Lee H , Volonte D , Galbiati F , Iyengar P , Lublin DM , Bregman DB , Wilson MT , Cam - pos - Gonzalez R , Bouzahzah B , Pestell RG , Scherer PE , Lisanti MP . Constitutive and growth factor - regulated phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 occurs at the same site ( Tyr - 14 ) in vivo : identiﬁcation of a c - Src / Cav - 1 / Grb7 signaling cassette . Mol Endocrinol 14 : 1750 – 1775 , 2000 . 437 . LeeJ , GustafssonM , MagnussonKE , JacobsonK . Thedirectionofmembranelipidﬂow in locomoting polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Science 247 : 1229 – 1233 , 1990 . 438 . Lee MH , El - Shewy HM , Luttrell DK , Luttrell LM . Role of beta - arrestin - mediated desensitization and signaling in the control of angiotensin AT1a receptor - stimulated transcription . J Biol Chem 283 : 2088 – 2097 , 2008 . 439 . Lee S , Tsai YC , Mattera R , Smith WJ , Kostelansky MS , Weissman AM , Bonifacino JS , Hurley JH . Structural basis for ubiquitin recognition and autoubiquitination by Ra - bex - 5 . Nat Struct Mol Biol 13 : 264 – 271 , 2006 . 440 . LeeSH , DominguezR . Regulationofactincytoskeletondynamicsincells . MolCells 29 : 311 – 325 , 2010 . 441 . Lee YG , Macoska JA , Korenchuk S , Pienta KJ . MIM , a potential metastasis suppressor gene in bladder cancer . Neoplasia 4 : 291 – 294 , 2002 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 355 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 442 . LeeYS , PressmanS , AndressAP , KimK , WhiteJL , CassidyJJ , LiX , LubellK , LimdoH , Cho IS , Nakahara K , Preall JB , Bellare P , Sontheimer EJ , Carthew RW . Silencing by small RNAs is linked to endosomal trafﬁcking . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 1150 – 1156 , 2009 . 443 . Lehrman MA , Goldstein JL , Brown MS , Russell DW , Schneider WJ . Internalization - defective LDL receptors produced by genes with nonsense and frameshift mutations that truncate the cytoplasmic domain . Cell 41 : 735 – 743 , 1985 . 444 . LehtonenS , ShahM , NielsenR , IinoN , RyanJJ , ZhouH , FarquharMG . Theendocytic adaptorproteinARHassociateswithmotorandcentrosomalproteinsandisinvolved in centrosome assembly and cytokinesis . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 2949 – 2961 , 2008 . 445 . Lenferink AE , Pinkas - Kramarski R , van de Poll ML , van Vugt MJ , Klapper LN , Tzahar E , Waterman H , Sela M , van Zoelen EJ , Yarden Y . Differential endocytic routing of homo - and hetero - dimeric ErbB tyrosine kinases confers signaling superiority to re - ceptor heterodimers . EMBO J 17 : 3385 – 3397 , 1998 . 446 . Leon S , Haguenauer - Tsapis R . Ubiquitin ligase adaptors : regulators of ubiquitylation and endocytosis of plasma membrane proteins . Exp Cell Res 315 : 1574 – 1583 , 2009 . 447 . Levayer R , Pelissier - Monier A , Lecuit T . Spatial regulation of Dia and Myosin - II by RhoGEF2 controls initiation of E - cadherin endocytosis during epithelial morphogen - esis . Nat Cell Biol 2011 . 448 . Levine B , Kroemer G . Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease . Cell 132 : 27 – 42 , 2008 . 449 . Levkowitz G , Klapper LN , Tzahar E , Freywald A , Sela M , Yarden Y . Coupling of the c - Cbl protooncogene product to ErbB - 1 / EGF - receptor but not to other ErbB pro - teins . Oncogene 12 : 1117 – 1125 , 1996 . 450 . LevkowitzG , WatermanH , EttenbergSA , KatzM , TsygankovAY , AlroyI , LaviS , Iwai K , ReissY , CiechanoverA , LipkowitzS , YardenY . Ubiquitinligaseactivityandtyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol Cell 4 : 1029 – 1040 , 1999 . 451 . LiHS , WangD , ShenQ , SchonemannMD , GorskiJA , JonesKR , TempleS , JanLY , Jan YN . Inactivation of Numb and Numblike in embryonic dorsal forebrain impairs neu - rogenesis and disrupts cortical morphogenesis . Neuron 40 : 1105 – 1118 , 2003 . 452 . Li Y , Zhu X , Zeng Y , Wang J , Zhang X , Ding YQ , Liang L . FMNL2 enhances invasion ofcolorectalcarcinomabyinducingepithelial - mesenchymaltransition . MolCancerRes 8 : 1579 – 1590 , 2010 . 453 . LiYM , PanY , WeiY , ChengX , ZhouBP , TanM , ZhouX , XiaW , HortobagyiGN , Yu D , Hung MC . Upregulation of CXCR4 is essential for HER2 - mediated tumor metas - tasis . Cancer Cell 6 : 459 – 469 , 2004 . 454 . Liberali P , Kakkonen E , Turacchio G , Valente C , Spaar A , Perinetti G , Bockmann RA , Corda D , Colanzi A , Marjomaki V , Luini A . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropi - nosomes requires the phosphorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . EMBO J 27 : 970 – 981 , 2008 . 455 . Lim WA , Pawson T . Phosphotyrosine signaling : evolving a new cellular communica - tion system . Cell 142 : 661 – 667 , 2010 . 456 . Lin CH , Hu CK , Shih HM . Clathrin heavy chain mediates TACC3 targeting to mitotic spindles to ensure spindle stability . J Cell Biol 189 : 1097 – 1105 , 2010 . 457 . Lin CH , MacGurn JA , Chu T , Stefan CJ , Emr SD . Arrestin - related ubiquitin - ligase adaptors regulate endocytosis and protein turnover at the cell surface . Cell 135 : 714 – 725 , 2008 . 458 . Lin DC , Quevedo C , Brewer NE , Bell A , Testa JR , Grimes ML , Miller FD , Kaplan DR . APPL1 associates with TrkA and GIPC1 and is required for nerve growth factor - mediated signal transduction . Mol Cell Biol 26 : 8928 – 8941 , 2006 . 459 . Lin SY , Makino K , Xia W , Matin A , Wen Y , Kwong KY , Bourguignon L , Hung MC . Nuclear localization of EGF receptor and its potential new role as a transcription factor . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 802 – 808 , 2001 . 460 . Lindas AC , Karlsson EA , Lindgren MT , Ettema TJ , Bernander R . A unique cell division machinery in the Archaea . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 18942 – 18946 , 2008 . 461 . Lindsay MR , Webb RI , Strous M , Jetten MS , Butler MK , Forde RJ , Fuerst JA . Cell compartmentalisation in planctomycetes : novel types of structural organisation for the bacterial cell . Arch Microbiol 175 : 413 – 429 , 2001 . 462 . Lipardi C , Mora R , Colomer V , Paladino S , Nitsch L , Rodriguez - Boulan E , Zurzolo C . Caveolin transfection results in caveolae formation but not apical sorting of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins in epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 140 : 617 – 626 , 1998 . 463 . Liu AP , Aguet F , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Local clustering of transferrin receptors promotes clathrin - coated pit initiation . J Cell Biol 191 : 1381 – 1393 , 2010 . 464 . Liu H , Chen B , Xiong H , Huang QH , Zhang QH , Wang ZG , Li BL , Chen Z , Chen SJ . Functional contribution of EEN to leukemogenic transformation by MLL - EEN fusion protein . Oncogene 23 : 3385 – 3394 , 2004 . 465 . Liu J , Sun Y , Drubin DG , Oster GF . The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000204 , 2009 . 466 . Liu J , Sun Y , Oster GF , Drubin DG . Mechanochemical crosstalk during endocytic vesicle formation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 36 – 43 , 2010 . 467 . Liu K , Wang G , Ding H , Chen Y , Yu G , Wang J . Downregulation of metastasis sup - pressor 1 ( MTSS1 ) is associated with nodal metastasis and poor outcome in Chinese patients with gastric cancer . BMC Cancer 10 : 428 , 2010 . 468 . Liu L , Pilch PF . A critical role of cavin ( polymerase I and transcript release factor ) in caveolae formation and organization . J Biol Chem 283 : 4314 – 4322 , 2008 . 469 . Liu PS , Jong TH , Maa MC , Leu TH . The interplay between Eps8 and IRSp53 contrib - utes to Src - mediated transformation . Oncogene 29 : 3977 – 3989 , 2010 . 470 . Liu Z , Zheng Y . A requirement for epsin in mitotic membrane and spindle organiza - tion . J Cell Biol 186 : 473 – 480 , 2009 . 471 . Lloyd TE , Atkinson R , Wu MN , Zhou Y , Pennetta G , Bellen HJ . Hrs regulates endo - somemembraneinvaginationandtyrosinekinasereceptorsignalingin Drosophila . Cell 108 : 261 – 269 , 2002 . 472 . LoHW , Ali - SeyedM , WuY , BartholomeuszG , HsuSC , HungMC . Nuclear - cytoplas - mic transport of EGFR involves receptor endocytosis , importin beta1 and CRM1 . J Cell Biochem 98 : 1570 – 1583 , 2006 . 473 . Lo TL , Fong CW , Yusoff P , McKie AB , Chua MS , Leung HY , Guy GR . Sprouty and cancer : the ﬁrst terms report . Cancer Lett 242 : 141 – 150 , 2006 . 474 . Lobert VH , Brech A , Pedersen NM , Wesche J , Oppelt A , Malerod L , Stenmark H . Ubiquitination of alpha 5 beta 1 integrin controls ﬁbroblast migration through lyso - somal degradation of ﬁbronectin - integrin complexes . Dev Cell 19 : 148 – 159 , 2010 . 475 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G . Measuring the hierarchy of molecular events during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trafﬁc 2011 . 476 . Longva KE , Blystad FD , Stang E , Larsen AM , Johannessen LE , Madshus IH . Ubiquiti - nationandproteasomalactivityisrequiredfortransportoftheEGFreceptortoinner membranes of multivesicular bodies . J Cell Biol 156 : 843 – 854 , 2002 . 477 . Lonhienne TG , Sagulenko E , Webb RI , Lee KC , Franke J , Devos DP , Nouwens A , Carroll BJ , Fuerst JA . Endocytosis - like protein uptake in the bacterium Gemmata obscuriglobus . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 12883 – 12888 , 2010 . 478 . Lorentzen A , Kinkhabwala A , Rocks O , Vartak N , Bastiaens PI . Regulation of Ras localizationbyacylationenablesamodeofintracellularsignalpropagation . SciSignal 3 : ra68 , 2010 . 479 . Lorenzi R , Brickell PM , Katz DR , Kinnon C , Thrasher AJ . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is necessary for efﬁcient IgG - mediated phagocytosis . Blood 95 : 2943 – 2946 , 2000 . 480 . Lu A , Tebar F , Alvarez - Moya B , Lopez - Alcala C , Calvo M , Enrich C , Agell N , Naka - mura T , Matsuda M , Bachs O . A clathrin - dependent pathway leads to KRas signaling on late endosomes en route to lysosomes . J Cell Biol 184 : 863 – 879 , 2009 . 481 . Lu Q , Hope LW , Brasch M , Reinhard C , Cohen SN . TSG101 interaction with HRS mediatesendosomaltrafﬁckingandreceptordown - regulation . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 100 : 7626 – 7631 , 2003 . 482 . Luan B , Zhang Z , Wu Y , Kang J , Pei G . Beta - arrestin2 functions as a phosphorylation - regulated suppressor of UV - induced NF - kappaB activation . EMBO J 24 : 4237 – 4246 , 2005 . 483 . LuoBH , CarmanCV , SpringerTA . Structuralbasisofintegrinregulationandsignaling . Annu Rev Immunol 25 : 619 – 647 , 2007 . 484 . LupbergerJ , ZeiselMB , XiaoF , ThumannC , FofanaI , ZonaL , DavisC , MeeCJ , Turek M , Gorke S , Royer C , Fischer B , Zahid MN , Lavillette D , Fresquet J , Cosset FL , SIGISMUND ET AL . 356 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Rothenberg SM , Pietschmann T , Patel AH , Pessaux P , Doffoel M , Raffelsberger W , Poch O , McKeating JA , Brino L , Baumert TF . EGFR and EphA2 are host factors for hepatitisCvirusentryandpossibletargetsforantiviraltherapy . NatMed 17 : 589 – 595 , 2011 . 485 . Luttrell LM , Gesty - Palmer D . Beyond desensitization : physiological relevance of ar - restin - dependent signaling . Pharmacol Rev 62 : 305 – 330 , 2010 . 486 . Lynch ED , Lee MK , Morrow JE , Welcsh PL , Leon PE , King MC . Nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 associated with mutation of a human homolog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous . Science 278 : 1315 – 1318 , 1997 . 487 . Maa MC , Lee JC , Chen YJ , Lee YC , Wang ST , Huang CC , Chow NH , Leu TH . Eps8 facilitates cellular growth and motility of colon cancer cells by increasing the expres - sion and activity of focal adhesion kinase . J Biol Chem 282 : 19399 – 19409 , 2007 . 488 . Macara IG , Mili S . Polarity and differential inheritance : universal attributes of life ? Cell 135 : 801 – 812 , 2008 . 489 . Macoska JA , Xu J , Ziemnicka D , Schwab TS , Rubin MA , Kotula L . Loss of expression of human spectrin src homology domain binding protein 1 is associated with 10p loss in human prostatic adenocarcinoma . Neoplasia 3 : 99 – 104 , 2001 . 490 . Maitra S , Kulikauskas RM , Gavilan H , Fehon RG . The tumor suppressors Merlin and Expanded function cooperatively to modulate receptor endocytosis and signaling . Curr Biol 16 : 702 – 709 , 2006 . 491 . Malerod L , Stuffers S , Brech A , Stenmark H . Vps22 / EAP30 in ESCRT - II mediates endosomal sorting of growth factor and chemokine receptors destined for lysosomal degradation . Trafﬁc 8 : 1617 – 1629 , 2007 . 492 . Mammoto A , Ohtsuka T , Hotta I , Sasaki T , Takai Y . Rab11BP / Rabphilin - 11 , a down - streamtargetofrab11smallGproteinimplicatedinvesiclerecycling . JBiolChem 274 : 25517 – 25524 , 1999 . 493 . MaoY , BalkinDM , ZoncuR , ErdmannKS , TomasiniL , HuF , JinMM , HodsdonME , De CamilliP . APHdomainwithinOCRLbridgesclathrin - mediatedmembranetrafﬁcking to phosphoinositide metabolism . EMBO J 28 : 1831 – 1842 , 2009 . 494 . Marchese A , Benovic JL . Agonist - promoted ubiquitination of the G protein - coupled receptor CXCR4 mediates lysosomal sorting . J Biol Chem 276 : 45509 – 45512 , 2001 . 495 . Marchese A , Paing MM , Temple BR , Trejo J . G protein - coupled receptor sorting to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 48 : 601 – 629 , 2008 . 496 . Marco E , Wedlich - Soldner R , Li R , Altschuler SJ , Wu LF . Endocytosis optimizes the dynamic localization of membrane proteins that regulate cortical polarity . Cell 129 : 411 – 422 , 2007 . 497 . Marks B , McMahon HT . Calcium triggers calcineurin - dependent synaptic vesicle re - cycling in mammalian nerve terminals . Curr Biol 8 : 740 – 749 , 1998 . 498 . Maro B , Johnson MH , Pickering SJ , Louvard D . Changes in the distribution of mem - branous organelles during mouse early development . J Embryol Exp Morphol 90 : 287 – 309 , 1985 . 499 . Martin AC , Kaschube M , Wieschaus EF . Pulsed contractions of an actin - myosin net - work drive apical constriction . Nature 457 : 495 – 499 , 2009 . 500 . Martin W . Archaebacteria ( Archaea ) and the origin of the eukaryotic nucleus . Curr Opin Microbiol 8 : 630 – 637 , 2005 . 501 . Martinelli S , De Luca A , Stellacci E , Rossi C , Checquolo S , Lepri F , Caputo V , Silvano M , Buscherini F , Consoli F , Ferrara G , Digilio MC , Cavaliere ML , van Hagen JM , ZampinoG , vanderBurgtI , FerreroGB , MazzantiL , ScrepantiI , YntemaHG , Nillesen WM , Savarirayan R , Zenker M , Dallapiccola B , Gelb BD , Tartaglia M . Heterozygous germline mutations in the CBL tumor - suppressor gene cause a Noonan syndrome - like phenotype . Am J Hum Genet 87 : 250 – 257 , 2010 . 502 . Mathie A . Neuronal two - pore - domain potassium channels and their regulation by G protein - coupled receptors . J Physiol 578 : 377 – 385 , 2007 . 503 . Matoskova B , Wong WT , Salcini AE , Pelicci PG , Di Fiore PP . Constitutive phosphor - ylationofeps8intumorcelllines : relevancetomalignanttransformation . MolCellBiol 15 : 3805 – 3812 , 1995 . 504 . Matsson H , Eason J , Bookwalter CS , Klar J , Gustavsson P , Sunnegardh J , Enell H , Jonzon A , Vikkula M , Gutierrez I , Granados - Riveron J , Pope M , Bu’Lock F , Cox J , Robinson TE , Song F , Brook DJ , Marston S , Trybus KM , Dahl N . Alpha - cardiac actin mutations produce atrial septal defects . Hum Mol Genet 17 : 256 – 265 , 2008 . 505 . Mattera R , Bonifacino JS . Ubiquitin binding and conjugation regulate the recruitment of Rabex - 5 to early endosomes . EMBO J 27 : 2484 – 2494 , 2008 . 506 . Maury CP , Kere J , Tolvanen R , de la Chapelle A . Finnish hereditary amyloidosis is caused by a single nucleotide substitution in the gelsolin gene . FEBS Lett 276 : 75 – 77 , 1990 . 507 . May RC , Caron E , Hall A , Machesky LM . Involvement of the Arp2 / 3 complex in phagocytosis mediated by FcgammaR or CR3 . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 246 – 248 , 2000 . 508 . Mayor S . Need tension relief fast ? Try caveolae . Cell 144 : 323 – 324 , 2011 . 509 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 603 – 612 , 2007 . 510 . McGill MA , Dho SE , Weinmaster G , McGlade CJ . Numb regulates post - endocytic trafﬁcking and degradation of Notch1 . J Biol Chem 284 : 26427 – 26438 , 2009 . 511 . McLaughlinS , MurrayD . Plasmamembranephosphoinositideorganizationbyprotein electrostatics . Nature 438 : 605 – 611 , 2005 . 512 . McMahonKA , ZajicekH , LiWP , PeytonMJ , MinnaJD , HernandezVJ , Luby - PhelpsK , Anderson RG . SRBC / cavin - 3 is a caveolin adapter protein that regulates caveolae function . EMBO J 28 : 1001 – 1015 , 2009 . 513 . McNivenMA , KimL , KruegerEW , OrthJD , CaoH , WongTW . Regulatedinteractions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J Cell Biol 151 : 187 – 198 , 2000 . 514 . McPherson PS . Proteomic analysis of clathrin - coated vesicles . Proteomics 10 : 4025 – 4039 , 2010 . 515 . MenascheG , HoCH , SanalO , FeldmannJ , TezcanI , ErsoyF , HoudusseA , FischerA , de Saint Basile G . Griscelli syndrome restricted to hypopigmentation results from a melanophilin defect ( GS3 ) or a MYO5A F - exon deletion ( GS1 ) . J Clin Invest 112 : 450 – 456 , 2003 . 516 . Mercer J , Helenius A . Virus entry by macropinocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 510 – 520 , 2009 . 517 . Mercer J , Schelhaas M , Helenius A . Virus entry by endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 79 : 803 – 833 , 2010 . 518 . MerendinoAM , BucchieriF , CampanellaC , MarcianoV , RibbeneA , DavidS , Zummo G , Burgio G , Corona DF , Conway de Macario E , Macario AJ , Cappello F . Hsp60 is actively secreted by human tumor cells . PLoS One 5 : e9247 , 2010 . 519 . Merriﬁeld CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagina - tion , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 , 2005 . 520 . Mettlen M , Loerke D , Yarar D , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Cargo - and adaptor - speciﬁc mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 188 : 919 – 933 , 2010 . 521 . Mettlen M , Pucadyil T , Ramachandran R , Schmid SL . Dissecting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem Soc Trans 37 : 1022 – 1026 , 2009 . 522 . MeyersJ , CraigJ , OddeDJ . Potentialforcontrolofsignalingpathwaysviacellsizeand shape . Curr Biol 16 : 1685 – 1693 , 2006 . 523 . Miaczynska M , Christoforidis S , Giner A , Shevchenko A , Uttenweiler - Joseph S , Hab - ermann B , Wilm M , Parton RG , Zerial M . APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment . Cell 116 : 445 – 456 , 2004 . 524 . Miele AE , Watson PJ , Evans PR , Traub LM , Owen DJ . Two distinct interaction motifs in amphiphysin bind two independent sites on the clathrin terminal domain beta - propeller . Nat Struct Mol Biol 11 : 242 – 248 , 2004 . 525 . Mills IG , Gaughan L , Robson C , Ross T , McCracken S , Kelly J , Neal DE . Huntingtin interactingprotein1modulatesthetranscriptionalactivityofnuclearhormonerecep - tors . J Cell Biol 170 : 191 – 200 , 2005 . 526 . MinettiC , SotgiaF , BrunoC , ScartezziniP , BrodaP , BadoM , MasettiE , MazzoccoM , EgeoA , DonatiMA , VolonteD , GalbiatiF , CordoneG , BricarelliFD , LisantiMP , Zara F . Mutations in the caveolin - 3 gene cause autosomal dominant limb - girdle muscular dystrophy . Nat Genet 18 : 365 – 368 , 1998 . 527 . MininaS , Reichman - FriedM , RazE . Controlofreceptorinternalization , signalinglevel , and precise arrival at the target in guided cell migration . Curr Biol 17 : 1164 – 1172 , 2007 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 357 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 528 . MirandaM , SorkinA . Regulationofreceptorsandtransportersbyubiquitination : new insights into surprisingly similar mechanisms . Mol Interv 7 : 157 – 167 , 2007 . 529 . Miserey - Lenkei S , Couedel - Courteille A , Del Nery E , Bardin S , Piel M , Racine V , Sibarita JB , Perez F , Bornens M , Goud B . A role for the Rab6A’ GTPase in the inactivation of the Mad2 - spindle checkpoint . EMBO J 25 : 278 – 289 , 2006 . 530 . Mittelbrunn M , Gutierrez - Vazquez C , Villarroya - Beltri C , Gonzalez S , Sanchez - Cabo F , Gonzalez MA , Bernad A , Sanchez - Madrid F . Unidirectional transfer of microRNA - loaded exosomes from T cells to antigen - presenting cells . Nat Commun 2 : 282 , 2011 . 531 . Miyanishi M , Tada K , Koike M , Uchiyama Y , Kitamura T , Nagata S . Identiﬁcation of Tim4 as a phosphatidylserine receptor . Nature 450 : 435 – 439 , 2007 . 532 . MoW , ZhangL , YangG , ZhaiJ , HuZ , ChenY , ChenX , HuiL , HuangR , HuG . Nuclear beta - arrestin1 functions as a scaffold for the dephosphorylation of STAT1 and mod - erates the antiviral activity of IFN - gamma . Mol Cell 31 : 695 – 707 , 2008 . 533 . Mogensen J , Klausen IC , Pedersen AK , Egeblad H , Bross P , Kruse TA , Gregersen N , Hansen PS , Baandrup U , Borglum AD . Alpha - cardiac actin is a novel disease gene in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . J Clin Invest 103 : R39 – R43 , 1999 . 534 . Molla - Herman A , Boularan C , Ghossoub R , Scott MG , Burtey A , Zarka M , Saunier S , ConcordetJP , MarulloS , BenmerahA . Targetingofbeta - arrestin2tothecentrosome and primary cilium : role in cell proliferation control . PLoS One 3 : e3728 , 2008 . 535 . Morgan NV , Pasha S , Johnson CA , Ainsworth JR , Eady RA , Dawood B , McKeown C , Trembath RC , Wilde J , Watson SP , Maher ER . A germline mutation in BLOC1S3 / reducedpigmentationcausesanovelvariantofHermansky - Pudlaksyndrome ( HPS8 ) . Am J Hum Genet 78 : 160 – 166 , 2006 . 536 . MorishigeM , HashimotoS , OgawaE , TodaY , KotaniH , HiroseM , WeiS , Hashimoto A , YamadaA , YanoH , MazakiY , KodamaH , NioY , ManabeT , WadaH , KobayashiH , SabeH . GEP100linksepidermalgrowthfactorreceptorsignallingtoArf6activationto induce breast cancer invasion . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 85 – 92 , 2008 . 537 . Morita E , Sandrin V , Chung HY , Morham SG , Gygi SP , Rodesch CK , Sundquist WI . HumanESCRTandALIXproteinsinteractwithproteinsofthemidbodyandfunction in cytokinesis . EMBO J 26 : 4215 – 4227 , 2007 . 538 . MosessonY , MillsGB , YardenY . Derailedendocytosis : anemergingfeatureofcancer . Nat Rev Cancer 8 : 835 – 850 , 2008 . 539 . Motley A , Bright NA , Seaman MN , Robinson MS . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 909 – 918 , 2003 . 540 . MuellerHW , MichelA , HeckelD , FischerU , TonnesM , TsuiLC , SchererS , ZangKD , Meese E . Identiﬁcation of an ampliﬁed gene cluster in glioma including two novel ampliﬁed genes isolated by exon trapping . Hum Genet 101 : 190 – 197 , 1997 . 541 . Muller DJ , Schulze TG , Jahnes E , Cichon S , Krauss H , Kesper K , Held T , Maier W , Propping P , Nothen MM , Rietschel M . Association between a polymorphism in the pseudoautosomalX - linkedgeneSYBL1andbipolaraffectivedisorder . AmJMedGenet 114 : 74 – 78 , 2002 . 542 . Muller PAJ , Caswell PY , Doyle B , Iwanicki MP , Tan EH , Karim S , Lukashchuk N , Gillespie DA , Ludwig RL , Gosselin P , Cromer A , Brugge JS , Sansom OJ , Norman JC , Vousden KH . Mutant p53 drives invasion by promoting integrin recycling . Cell 139 : 1327 – 1341 , 2009 . 543 . MundellSJ , LuoJ , BenovicJL , ConleyPB , PooleAW . Distinctclathrin - coatedpitssort different G protein - coupled receptor cargo . Trafﬁc 7 : 1420 – 1431 , 2006 . 544 . MurataM , PeranenJ , SchreinerR , WielandF , KurzchaliaTV , SimonsK . VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 10339 – 10343 , 1995 . 545 . Murphy S , Martin S , Parton RG . Lipid droplet - organelle interactions : sharing the fats . Biochim Biophys Acta 1791 : 441 – 447 , 2009 . 546 . Nabi IR . Cavin fever : regulating caveolae . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 789 – 791 , 2009 . 547 . Nada S , Hondo A , Kasai A , Koike M , Saito K , Uchiyama Y , Okada M . The novel lipid raftadaptorp18controlsendosomedynamicsbyanchoringtheMEK - ERKpathwayto late endosomes . EMBO J 28 : 477 – 489 , 2009 . 548 . Nakakuki T , Birtwistle MR , Saeki Y , Yumoto N , Ide K , Nagashima T , Brusch L , Ogunnaike BA , Okada - Hatakeyama M , Kholodenko BN . Ligand - speciﬁc c - Fos ex - pression emerges from the spatiotemporal control of ErbB network dynamics . Cell 141 : 884 – 896 , 2010 . 549 . Nakamura E , Iwakawa M , Furuta R , Ohno T , Satoh T , Nakawatari M , Ishikawa K , Imadome K , Michikawa Y , Tamaki T , Kato S , Kitagawa T , Imai T . Villin1 , a novel diagnosticmarkerforcervicaladenocarcinoma . CancerBiolTher 8 : 1146 – 1153 , 2009 . 550 . NakatsuF , PereraRM , LucastL , ZoncuR , DominJ , GertlerFB , ToomreD , DeCamilli P . Theinositol5 - phosphataseSHIP2regulatesendocyticclathrin - coatedpitdynamics . J Cell Biol 190 : 307 – 315 , 2010 . 551 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : membranecargoandlipidrequirements . MolBiolCell 15 : 3542 – 3552 , 2004 . 552 . Neuhaus EM , Mashukova A , Barbour J , Wolters D , Hatt H . Novel function of beta - arrestin2 in the nucleus of mature spermatozoa . J Cell Sci 119 : 3047 – 3056 , 2006 . 553 . NeumullerRA , KnoblichJA . Dividingcellularasymmetry : asymmetriccelldivisionand its implications for stem cells and cancer . Genes Dev 23 : 2675 – 2699 , 2009 . 554 . Nicot AS , Toussaint A , Tosch V , Kretz C , Wallgren - Pettersson C , Iwarsson E , Kings - ton H , Garnier JM , Biancalana V , Oldfors A , Mandel JL , Laporte J . Mutations in am - phiphysin 2 ( BIN1 ) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy . Nat Genet 39 : 1134 – 1139 , 2007 . 555 . Niendorf S , Oksche A , Kisser A , Lohler J , Prinz M , Schorle H , Feller S , Lewitzky M , Horak I , Knobeloch KP . Essential role of ubiquitin - speciﬁc protease 8 for receptor tyrosinekinasestabilityandendocytictrafﬁckinginvivo . MolCellBiol 27 : 5029 – 5039 , 2007 . 556 . Nikko E , Sullivan JA , Pelham HR . Arrestin - like proteins mediate ubiquitination and endocytosis of the yeast metal transporter Smf1 . EMBO Rep 9 : 1216 – 1221 , 2008 . 557 . Nishimura AL , Al - Chalabi A , Zatz M . A common founder for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 8 ( ALS8 ) in the Brazilian population . Hum Genet 118 : 499 – 500 , 2005 . 558 . Nishimura T , Kaibuchi K . Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev Cell 13 : 15 – 28 , 2007 . 559 . Nishino I , Fu J , Tanji K , Yamada T , Shimojo S , Koori T , Mora M , Riggs JE , Oh SJ , Koga Y , Sue CM , Yamamoto A , Murakami N , Shanske S , Byrne E , Bonilla E , Nonaka I , DiMauro S , Hirano M . Primary LAMP - 2 deﬁciency causes X - linked vacuolar cardio - myopathy and myopathy ( Danon disease ) . Nature 406 : 906 – 910 , 2000 . 560 . Nobes C , Marsh M . Dendritic cells : new roles for Cdc42 and Rac in antigen uptake ? Curr Biol 10 : R739 – R741 , 2000 . 561 . Nolte - ’tHoenEN , BuschowSI , AndertonSM , StoorvogelW , WaubenMH . Activated TcellsrecruitexosomessecretedbydendriticcellsviaLFA - 1 . Blood 113 : 1977 – 1981 , 2009 . 562 . Nomura H , Uzawa K , Ishigami T , Kouzu Y , Koike H , Ogawara K , Siiba M , Bukawa H , Yokoe H , Kubosawa H , Tanzawa H . Clinical signiﬁcance of gelsolin - like actin - capping protein expression in oral carcinogenesis : an immunohistochemical study of prema - lignant and malignant lesions of the oral cavity . BMC Cancer 8 : 39 , 2008 . 563 . NomuraR , FujimotoT . Tyrosine - phosphorylatedcaveolin - 1 : immunolocalizationand molecular characterization . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 975 – 986 , 1999 . 564 . NowakKJ , WattanasirichaigoonD , GoebelHH , WilceM , PelinK , DonnerK , JacobRL , Hubner C , Oexle K , Anderson JR , Verity CM , North KN , Iannaccone ST , Muller CR , Nurnberg P , Muntoni F , Sewry C , Hughes I , Sutphen R , Lacson AG , Swoboda KJ , Vigneron J , Wallgren - Pettersson C , Beggs AH , Laing NG . Mutations in the skeletal musclealpha - actingeneinpatientswithactinmyopathyandnemalinemyopathy . Nat Genet 23 : 208 – 212 , 1999 . 565 . Ogunjimi AA , Briant DJ , Pece - Barbara N , Le Roy C , Di Guglielmo GM , Kavsak P , Rasmussen RK , Seet BT , Sicheri F , Wrana JL . Regulation of Smurf2 ubiquitin ligase activity by anchoring the E2 to the HECT domain . Mol Cell 19 : 297 – 308 , 2005 . 566 . OhJ , HoL , Ala - MelloS , AmatoD , ArmstrongL , BellucciS , CarakushanskyG , EllisJP , FongCT , GreenJS , HeonE , LegiusE , LevinAV , NieuwenhuisHK , PinckersA , Tamura N , WhitefordML , YamasakiH , SpritzRA . MutationanalysisofpatientswithHerman - sky - Pudlak syndrome : a frameshift hot spot in the HPS gene and apparent locus heterogeneity . Am J Hum Genet 62 : 593 – 598 , 1998 . 567 . OhmoriK , EndoY , YoshidaY , OhataH , TayaY , EnariM . Monomericbutnottrimeric clathrin heavy chain regulates p53 - mediated transcription . Oncogene 27 : 2215 – 2227 , 2008 . 568 . OhshimaK , InoueK , FujiwaraA , HatakeyamaK , KantoK , WatanabeY , MuramatsuK , Fukuda Y , Ogura S , Yamaguchi K , Mochizuki T . Let - 7 microRNA family is selectively SIGISMUND ET AL . 358 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m secreted into the extracellular environment via exosomes in a metastatic gastric cancer cell line . PLoS One 5 : e13247 , 2010 . 569 . Okamoto CT , McKinney J , Jeng YY . Clathrin in mitotic spindles . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 279 : C369 – C374 , 2000 . 570 . Oksvold MP , Thien CB , Widerberg J , Chantry A , Huitfeldt HS , Langdon WY . Serine mutations that abrogate ligand - induced ubiquitination and internalization of the EGF receptordonotaffectc - Cblassociationwiththereceptor . Oncogene 22 : 8509 – 8518 , 2003 . 571 . OlsonTM , MichelsVV , ThibodeauSN , TaiYS , KeatingMT . Actinmutationsindilated cardiomyopathy , a heritable form of heart failure . Science 280 : 750 – 752 , 1998 . 572 . Orlando K , Sun X , Zhang J , Lu T , Yokomizo L , Wang P , Guo W . Exo - endocytic trafﬁcking and the septin - based diffusion barrier are required for the maintenance of Cdc42p polarization during budding yeast asymmetric growth . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 624 – 633 , 2011 . 573 . Orlichenko L , Huang B , Krueger E , McNiven MA . Epithelial growth factor - induced phosphorylationofcaveolin1attyrosine14stimulatescaveolaeformationinepithelial cells . J Biol Chem 281 : 4570 – 4579 , 2006 . 574 . OrtegrenU , KarlssonM , BlazicN , BlomqvistM , NystromFH , GustavssonJ , Fredman P , StralforsP . Lipidsandglycosphingolipidsincaveolaeandsurroundingplasmamem - brane of primary rat adipocytes . Eur J Biochem 271 : 2028 – 2036 , 2004 . 575 . Orth JD , Krueger EW , Weller SG , McNiven MA . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and internalization . Cancer Res 66 : 3603 – 3610 , 2006 . 576 . Ou K , Yu K , Kesuma D , Hooi M , Huang N , Chen W , Lee SY , Goh XP , Tan LK , Liu J , Soon SY , Bin Abdul Rashid S . , Putti TC , Jikuya H , Ichikawa T , Nishimura O , Salto - Tellez M , Tan P . Novel breast cancer biomarkers identiﬁed by integrative proteomic and gene expression mapping . J Proteome Res 7 : 1518 – 1528 , 2008 . 577 . OvedS , MosessonY , ZwangY , SantonicoE , ShtiegmanK , MarmorMD , Kochupurak - kal BS , Katz M , Lavi S , Cesareni G , Yarden Y . Conjugation to Nedd8 instigates ubiq - uitylationanddown - regulationofactivatedreceptortyrosinekinases . JBiolChem 281 : 21640 – 21651 , 2006 . 578 . Oyama M , Kozuka - Hata H , Tasaki S , Semba K , Hattori S , Sugano S , Inoue J , Yamamoto T . Temporal perturbation of tyrosine phosphoproteome dynamics re - veals the system - wide regulatory networks . Mol Cell Proteomics 8 : 226 – 231 , 2009 . 579 . Palade GE . Fine structure of blood capillaries . J Appl Physiol 24 : 1424 , 1953 . 580 . PalamidessiA , FrittoliE , GarreM , FarettaM , MioneM , TestaI , DiasproA , LanzettiL , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Endocytic trafﬁcking of Rac is required for its activation and for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 : 135 – 147 , 2008 . 581 . Parat MO , Anand - Apte B , Fox PL . Differential caveolin - 1 polarization in endothelial cells during migration in two and three dimensions . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 3156 – 3168 , 2003 . 582 . Parks AL , Klueg KM , Stout JR , Muskavitch MA . Ligand endocytosis drives receptor dissociation and activation in the Notch pathway . Development 127 : 1373 – 1385 , 2000 . 583 . Parr C , Jiang WG . Metastasis suppressor 1 ( MTSS1 ) demonstrates prognostic value and anti - metastatic properties in breast cancer . Eur J Cancer 45 : 1673 – 1683 , 2009 . 584 . Partheen K , Levan K , Osterberg L , Claesson I , Fallenius G , Sundfeldt K , Horvath G . Four potential biomarkers as prognostic factors in stage III serous ovarian adenocar - cinomas . Int J Cancer 123 : 2130 – 2137 , 2008 . 585 . PartonRG , HowesMT . Revisitingcaveolintrafﬁcking : theendofthecaveosome . JCell Biol 191 : 439 – 441 , 2010 . 586 . PartonRG , SimonsK . Themultiplefacesofcaveolae . NatRevMolCellBiol 8 : 185 – 194 , 2007 . 587 . Pasternak SH , Bagshaw RD , Guiral M , Zhang S , Ackerley CA , Pak BJ , Callahan JW , MahuranDJ . Presenilin - 1 , nicastrin , amyloidprecursorprotein , andgamma - secretase activity are co - localized in the lysosomal membrane . J Biol Chem 278 : 26687 – 26694 , 2003 . 588 . Patel H , Cross H , Proukakis C , Hershberger R , Bork P , Ciccarelli FD , Patton MA , McKusick VA , Crosby AH . SPG20 is mutated in Troyer syndrome , an hereditary spastic paraplegia . Nat Genet 31 : 347 – 348 , 2002 . 589 . Patel HH , Insel PA . Lipid rafts and caveolae and their role in compartmentation of redox signaling . Antioxid Redox Signal 11 : 1357 – 1372 , 2009 . 590 . Patel HH , Murray F , Insel PA . Caveolae as organizers of pharmacologically relevant signal transduction molecules . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 48 : 359 – 391 , 2008 . 591 . Payne CK , Jones SA , Chen C , Zhuang X . Internalization and trafﬁcking of cell surface proteoglycans and proteoglycan - binding ligands . Trafﬁc 8 : 389 – 401 , 2007 . 592 . Pece S , Confalonieri S , Romano PR , Di Fiore PP . NUMB - ing down cancer by more than just a NOTCH . Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 . 593 . Pece S , Serresi M , Santolini E , Capra M , Hulleman E , Galimberti V , Zurrida S , Mai - sonneuve P , Viale G , Di Fiore PP . Loss of negative regulation by Numb over Notch is relevant to human breast carcinogenesis . J Cell Biol 167 : 215 – 221 , 2004 . 594 . Pece S , Tosoni D , Confalonieri S , Mazzarol G , Vecchi M , Ronzoni S , Bernard L , Viale G , Pelicci PG , Di Fiore PP . Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers correlates with their cancer stem cell content . Cell 140 : 62 – 73 , 2010 . 595 . Pei Z , Baker NE . Competition between Delta and the Abruptex domain of Notch . BMC Dev Biol 8 : 4 , 2008 . 596 . Pelkmans L , Burli T , Zerial M , Helenius A . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctionaltransportandsortingdevicesinendocyticmembranetrafﬁc . Cell 118 : 767 – 780 , 2004 . 597 . Pelkmans L , Fava E , Grabner H , Hannus M , Habermann B , Krausz E , Zerial M . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated en - docytosis . Nature 436 : 78 – 86 , 2005 . 598 . PelkmansL , KartenbeckJ , HeleniusA . Caveolarendocytosisofsimianvirus40reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 473 – 483 , 2001 . 599 . PelkmansL , PuntenerD , HeleniusA . Localactinpolymerizationanddynaminrecruit - ment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 : 535 – 539 , 2002 . 600 . PelkmansL , ZerialM . Kinase - regulatedquantalassembliesandkiss - and - runrecycling of caveolae . Nature 436 : 128 – 133 , 2005 . 601 . Pellinen T , Ivaska J . Integrin trafﬁc . J Cell Sci 119 : 3723 – 3731 , 2006 . 602 . Penengo L , Mapelli M , Murachelli AG , Confalonieri S , Magri L , Musacchio A , Di Fiore PP , Polo S , Schneider TR . Crystal structure of the ubiquitin binding domains of ra - bex - 5 reveals two modes of interaction with ubiquitin . Cell 124 : 1183 – 1195 , 2006 . 603 . Pennock S , Wang Z . Stimulation of cell proliferation by endosomal epidermal growth factor receptor as revealed through two distinct phases of signaling . Mol Cell Biol 23 : 5803 – 5815 , 2003 . 604 . PereraRM , ZoncuR , LucastL , DeCamilliP , ToomreD . Twosynaptojanin1isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 19332 – 19337 , 2006 . 605 . Perez B , Mechinaud F , Galambrun C , Ben Romdhane N , Isidor B , Philip N , Derain - CourtJ , CassinatB , LachenaudJ , KaltenbachS , SalmonA , DesireeC , PereiraS , Menot ML , RoyerN , FenneteauO , BaruchelA , ChomienneC , VerloesA , CaveH . Germline mutations of the CBL gene deﬁne a new genetic syndrome with predisposition to juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia . J Med Genet 47 : 686 – 691 , 2010 . 606 . Peschard P , Fournier TM , Lamorte L , Naujokas MA , Band H , Langdon WY , Park M . Mutation of the c - Cbl TKB domain binding site on the Met receptor tyrosine kinase converts it into a transforming protein . Mol Cell 8 : 995 – 1004 , 2001 . 607 . Petersen PH , Zou K , Hwang JK , Jan YN , Zhong W . Progenitor cell maintenance requires numb and numblike during mouse neurogenesis . Nature 419 : 929 – 934 , 2002 . 608 . Pilch PF , Souto RP , Liu L , Jedrychowski MP , Berg EA , Costello CE , Gygi SP . Cellular spelunking : exploring adipocyte caveolae . J Lipid Res 48 : 2103 – 2111 , 2007 . 609 . Pines G , Kostler WJ , Yarden Y . Oncogenic mutant forms of EGFR : lessons in signal transduction and targets for cancer therapy . FEBS Lett 584 : 2699 – 2706 , 2010 . 610 . PitcherJ , LohseMJ , CodinaJ , CaronMG , LefkowitzRJ . Desensitizationoftheisolated beta 2 - adrenergic receptor by beta - adrenergic receptor kinase , cAMP - dependent protein kinase , and protein kinase C occurs via distinct molecular mechanisms . Bio - chemistry 31 : 3193 – 3197 , 1992 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 359 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 611 . Pitcher JA , Payne ES , Csortos C , DePaoli - Roach AA , Lefkowitz RJ . The G - protein - coupled receptor phosphatase : a protein phosphatase type 2A with a distinct subcel - lular distribution and substrate speciﬁcity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 8343 – 8347 , 1995 . 612 . Pitto M , Brunner J , Ferraretto A , Ravasi D , Palestini P , Masserini M . Use of a photo - activable GM1 ganglioside analogue to assess lipid distribution in caveolae bilayer . Glycoconj J 17 : 215 – 222 , 2000 . 613 . Pol A , Calvo M , Enrich C . Isolated endosomes from quiescent rat liver contain the signal transduction machinery . Differential distribution of activated Raf - 1 and Mek in the endocytic compartment . FEBS Lett 441 : 34 – 38 , 1998 . 614 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 , 2003 . 615 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 , 2009 . 616 . PoloS , SigismundS , FarettaM , GuidiM , CapuaMR , BossiG , ChenH , DeCamilliP , Di Fiore PP . A single motif responsible for ubiquitin recognition and monoubiquitination in endocytic proteins . Nature 416 : 451 – 455 , 2002 . 617 . Porat - ShliomN , KloogY , DonaldsonJG . AuniqueplatformforH - Rassignalinginvolv - ing clathrin - independent endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 765 – 775 , 2008 . 618 . Poteryaev D , Datta S , Ackema K , Zerial M , Spang A . Identiﬁcation of the switch in early - to - late endosome transition . Cell 141 : 497 – 508 , 2010 . 619 . Poupon V , Polo S , Vecchi M , Martin G , Dautry - Varsat A , Cerf - Bensussan N , Di Fiore PP , Benmerah A . Differential nucleocytoplasmic trafﬁcking between the related en - docytic proteins Eps15 and Eps15R . J Biol Chem 277 : 8941 – 8948 , 2002 . 620 . Praefcke GJ , Ford MG , Schmid EM , Olesen LE , Gallop JL , Peak - Chew SY , Vallis Y , Babu MM , Mills IG , McMahon HT . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J 23 : 4371 – 4383 , 2004 . 621 . Prigozhina NL , Waterman - Storer CM . Decreased polarity and increased random motility in PtK1 epithelial cells correlate with inhibition of endosomal recycling . J Cell Sci 119 : 3571 – 3582 , 2006 . 622 . Procaccio V , Salazar G , Ono S , Styers ML , Gearing M , Davila A , Jimenez R , Juncos J , Gutekunst CA , Meroni G , Fontanella B , Sontag E , Sontag JM , Faundez V , Wainer BH . A mutation of beta - actin that alters depolymerization dynamics is associated with autosomaldominantdevelopmentalmalformations , deafness , anddystonia . AmJHum Genet 78 : 947 – 960 , 2006 . 623 . Pryor PR , Luzio JP . Delivery of endocytosed membrane proteins to the lysosome . Biochim Biophys Acta 1793 : 615 – 624 , 2009 . 624 . Puertollano R . Endocytic trafﬁcking and human diseases . In : Endososmes , edited by Dikic I . New York : Springer - Verlag , 2006 , p . 119 – 131 . 625 . Puri C , Tosoni D , Comai R , Rabellino A , Segat D , Caneva F , Luzzi P , Di Fiore PP , TacchettiC . RelationshipsbetweenEGFRsignaling - competentandendocytosis - com - petent membrane microdomains . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 2704 – 2718 , 2005 . 626 . Puthenveedu MA , Lauffer B , Temkin P , Vistein R , Carlton P , Thorn K , Taunton J , Weiner OD , Parton RG , von Zastrow M . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdomains . Cell 143 : 761 – 773 , 2010 . 627 . Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 127 : 113 – 124 , 2006 . 628 . Pyrzynska B , Pilecka I , Miaczynska M . Endocytic proteins in the regulation of nuclear signaling , transcription and tumorigenesis . Mol Oncol 2009 . 629 . Quinones GA , Jin J , Oro AE . I - BAR protein antagonism of endocytosis mediates directional sensing during guided cell migration . J Cell Biol 189 : 353 – 367 , 2010 . 630 . Raiborg C , Malerod L , Pedersen NM , Stenmark H . Differential functions of Hrs and ESCRTproteinsinendocyticmembranetrafﬁcking . ExpCellRes 314 : 801 – 813 , 2008 . 631 . Raiborg C , Stenmark H . The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature 458 : 445 – 452 , 2009 . 632 . Rajan A , Tien AC , Haueter CM , Schulze KL , Bellen HJ . The Arp2 / 3 complex and WASp are required for apical trafﬁcking of Delta into microvilli during cell fate spec - iﬁcation of sensory organ precursors . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 815 – 824 , 2009 . 633 . Ramachandran R , Schmid SL . Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dy - namin’s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J 27 : 27 – 37 , 2008 . 634 . Rambhatla L , Ram - Mohan S , Cheng JJ , Sherley JL . Immortal DNA strand cosegrega - tion requires p53 / IMPDH - dependent asymmetric self - renewal associated with adult stem cells . Cancer Res 65 : 3155 – 3161 , 2005 . 635 . Ramsay AG , Keppler MD , Jazayeri M , Thomas GJ , Parsons M , Violette S , Weinreb P , Hart IR , Marshall JF . HS1 - associated protein X - 1 regulates carcinoma cell migration andinvasionviaclathrin - mediatedendocytosisofintegrinalphavbeta6 . CancerRes 67 : 5275 – 5284 , 2007 . 636 . Rao DS , Bradley SV , Kumar PD , Hyun TS , Saint - Dic D , Oravecz - Wilson K , Kleer CG , Ross TS . Altered receptor trafﬁcking in Huntingtin Interacting Protein 1 - transformed cells . Cancer Cell 3 : 471 – 482 , 2003 . 637 . RaoDS , HyunTS , KumarPD , MizukamiIF , RubinMA , LucasPC , SandaMG , RossTS . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 is overexpressed in prostate and colon cancer and is critical for cellular survival . J Clin Invest 110 : 351 – 360 , 2002 . 638 . Rapoport I , Miyazaki M , Boll W , Duckworth B , Cantley LC , Shoelson S , Kirchhausen T . Regulatory interactions in the recognition of endocytic sorting signals by AP - 2 complexes . EMBO J 16 : 2240 – 2250 , 1997 . 639 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM . Endocytic trafﬁcking of activated EGFR is AP - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots . J Cell Sci 122 : 1301 – 1305 , 2009 . 640 . RasinMR , GazulaVR , BreunigJJ , KwanKY , JohnsonMB , Liu - ChenS , LiHS , JanLY , Jan YN , Rakic P , Sestan N . Numb and Numbl are required for maintenance of cadherin - based adhesion and polarity of neural progenitors . Nat Neurosci 10 : 819 – 827 , 2007 . 641 . Razani B , Combs TP , Wang XB , Frank PG , Park DS , Russell RG , Li M , Tang B , Jelicks LA , Scherer PE , Lisanti MP . Caveolin - 1 - deﬁcient mice are lean , resistant to diet - induced obesity , and show hypertriglyceridemia with adipocyte abnormalities . J Biol Chem 277 : 8635 – 8647 , 2002 . 642 . Razani B , Engelman JA , Wang XB , Schubert W , Zhang XL , Marks CB , Macaluso F , Russell RG , Li M , Pestell RG , Di Vizio D , Hou H Jr , Kneitz B , Lagaud G , Christ GJ , Edelmann W , Lisanti MP . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hy - perproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J Biol Chem 276 : 38121 – 38138 , 2001 . 643 . RaziM , FutterCE . DistinctrolesforTsg101andHrsinmultivesicularbodyformation and inward vesiculation . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 3469 – 3483 , 2006 . 644 . Reichman - Fried M , Minina S , Raz E . Autonomous modes of behavior in primordial germ cell migration . Dev Cell 6 : 589 – 596 , 2004 . 645 . Reider A , Wendland B . Endocytic adaptors : social networking at the plasma mem - brane . J Cell Sci 124 : 1613 – 1622 , 2011 . 646 . RendtorffND , ZhuM , FagerheimT , AntalTL , JonesM , TeslovichTM , GillandersEM , Barmada M , Teig E , Trent JM , Friderici KH , Stephan DA , Tranebjaerg L . A novel missense mutation in ACTG1 causes dominant deafness in a Norwegian DFNA20 / 26 family , butACTG1mutationsarenotfrequentamongfamilieswithhereditaryhearing impairment . Eur J Hum Genet 14 : 1097 – 1105 , 2006 . 647 . Resat H , Ewald JA , Dixon DA , Wiley HS . An integrated model of epidermal growth factor receptor trafﬁcking and signal transduction . Biophys J 85 : 730 – 743 , 2003 . 648 . Reynolds AR , Hart IR , Watson AR , Welti JC , Silva RG , Robinson SD , Da Violante G , GourlaouenM , SalihM , JonesMC , JonesDT , SaundersG , KostourouV , Perron - Sierra F , Norman JC , Tucker GC , Hodivala - Dilke KM . Stimulation of tumor growth and angiogenesis by low concentrations of RGD - mimetic integrin inhibitors . Nat Med 15 : 392 – 400 , 2009 . 649 . Richter T , Floetenmeyer M , Ferguson C , Galea J , Goh J , Lindsay MR , Morgan GP , Marsh BJ , Parton RG . High - resolution 3D quantitative analysis of caveolar ultrastruc - ture and caveola - cytoskeleton interactions . Trafﬁc 9 : 893 – 909 , 2008 . 650 . Ridley AJ , Schwartz MA , Burridge K , Firtel RA , Ginsberg MH , Borisy G , Parsons JT , HorwitzAR . Cellmigration : integratingsignalsfromfronttoback . Science 302 : 1704 – 1709 , 2003 . 651 . Ringstad N , Nemoto Y , De Camilli P . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : bindingpartnersforsynaptojaninanddynaminviaaGrb2 - likeSrchomology3domain . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 8569 – 8574 , 1997 . 652 . RinkJ , GhigoE , KalaidzidisY , ZerialM . Rabconversionasamechanismofprogression from early to late endosomes . Cell 122 : 735 – 749 , 2005 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 360 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 653 . Roberts M , Barry S , Woods A , van der Sluijs P , Norman J . PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of alphavbeta3 integrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and spreading . Curr Biol 11 : 1392 – 1402 , 2001 . 654 . Robertson SP . Filamin A : phenotypic diversity . Curr Opin Genet Dev 15 : 301 – 307 , 2005 . 655 . Robertson SP , Twigg SR , Sutherland - Smith AJ , Biancalana V , Gorlin RJ , Horn D , Ken - wrickSJ , KimCA , MoravaE , Newbury - EcobR , OrstavikKH , QuarrellOW , Schwartz CE , Shears DJ , Suri M , Kendrick - Jones J , Wilkie AO . Localized mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein ﬁlamin A cause diverse malformations in humans . Nat Genet 33 : 487 – 491 , 2003 . 656 . Rodriguez - FraticelliAE , VergarajaureguiS , EastburnDJ , DattaA , AlonsoMA , Mostov K , Martin - Belmonte F . The Cdc42 GEF intersectin 2 controls mitotic spindle orien - tation to form the lumen during epithelial morphogenesis . J Cell Biol 189 : 725 – 738 , 2010 . 657 . Roeben A , Koﬂer C , Nagy I , Nickell S , Hartl FU , Bracher A . Crystal structure of an archaeal actin homolog . J Mol Biol 358 : 145 – 156 , 2006 . 658 . Roegiers F , Jan LY , Jan YN . Regulation of membrane localization of Sanpodo by lethal giant larvae and neuralized in asymmetrically dividing cells of Drosophila sensory or - gans . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 3480 – 3487 , 2005 . 659 . Romer W , Pontani LL , Sorre B , Rentero C , Berland L , Chambon V , Lamaze C , Bassereau P , Sykes C , Gaus K , Johannes L . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorga - nization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 : 540 – 553 , 2010 . 660 . RossJL , AliMY , WarshawDM . Cargotransport : molecularmotorsnavigateacomplex cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 20 : 41 – 47 , 2008 . 661 . RossTS , BernardOA , BergerR , GillilandDG . FusionofHuntingtininteractingprotein 1 to platelet - derived growth factor beta receptor ( PDGFbetaR ) in chronic myelo - monocytic leukemia with t ( 5 ; 7 ) ( q33 ; q11 . 2 ) . Blood 91 : 4419 – 4426 , 1998 . 662 . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 : 673 – 682 , 1992 . 663 . Rotin D , Kumar S . Physiological functions of the HECT family of ubiquitin ligases . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 398 – 409 , 2009 . 664 . Roussos ET , Wang Y , Wyckoff JB , Sellers RS , Wang W , Li J , Pollard JW , Gertler FB , Condeelis JS . Mena deﬁciency delays tumor progression and decreases metastasis in polyoma middle - T transgenic mouse mammary tumors . Breast Cancer Res 12 : R101 , 2010 . 665 . Roux A , Uyhazi K , Frost A , De Camilli P . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin impli - cates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 : 528 – 531 , 2006 . 666 . Roy S , Wyse B , Hancock JF . H - Ras signaling and K - Ras signaling are differentially dependent on endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 22 : 5128 – 5140 , 2002 . 667 . Royle SJ , Bright NA , Lagnado L . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 434 : 1152 – 1157 , 2005 . 668 . Royle SJ , Lagnado L . Trimerisation is important for the function of clathrin at the mitotic spindle . J Cell Sci 119 : 4071 – 4078 , 2006 . 669 . Rudd E , Goransdotter Ericson K , Zheng C , Uysal Z , Ozkan A , Gurgey A , Fadeel B , Nordenskjold M , Henter JI . Spectrum and clinical implications of syntaxin 11 gene mutations in familial haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis : association with disease - free remissions and haematopoietic malignancies . J Med Genet 43 : e14 , 2006 . 670 . Ruiz Gomez M , Bate M . Segregation of myogenic lineages in Drosophila requires numb . Development 124 : 4857 – 4866 , 1997 . 671 . Sadowski L , Pilecka I , Miaczynska M . Signaling from endosomes : Location makes a difference . Exp Cell Res 2008 . 672 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 7 : e1000191 , 2009 . 673 . Sagawa N , Fujita H , Banno Y , Nozawa Y , Katoh H , Kuzumaki N . Gelsolin suppresses tumorigenicity through inhibiting PKC activation in a human lung cancer cell line , PC10 . Br J Cancer 88 : 606 – 612 , 2003 . 674 . Sager PR , Brown PA , Berlin RD . Analysis of transferrin recycling in mitotic and interphase HeLa cells by quantitative ﬂuorescence microscopy . Cell 39 : 275 – 282 , 1984 . 675 . Sagona AP , Nezis IP , Pedersen NM , Liestol K , Poulton J , Rusten TE , Skotheim RI , Raiborg C , Stenmark H . PtdIns ( 3 ) P controls cytokinesis through KIF13A - mediated recruitment of FYVE - CENT to the midbody . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 362 – 371 , 2010 . 676 . SaitoT , GuanF , PapolosDF , LauS , KleinM , FannCS , LachmanHM . Mutationanalysis of SYNJ1 : a possible candidate gene for chromosome 21q22 - linked bipolar disorder . Mol Psychiatry 6 : 387 – 395 , 2001 . 677 . SaitsuH , KatoM , MizuguchiT , HamadaK , OsakaH , TohyamaJ , UrunoK , KumadaS , Nishiyama K , Nishimura A , Okada I , Yoshimura Y , Hirai S , Kumada T , Hayasaka K , FukudaA , OgataK , MatsumotoN . DenovomutationsinthegeneencodingSTXBP1 ( MUNC18 – 1 ) causeearlyinfantileepilepticencephalopathy . NatGenet 40 : 782 – 788 , 2008 . 678 . Salani B , Passalacqua M , Mafﬁoli S , Briatore L , Hamoudane M , Contini P , Cordera R , MaggiD . IGF - IRinternalizeswithcaveolin - 1andPTRF / CavininHaCatcells . PLoSOne 5 : e14157 , 2010 . 679 . Salcini AE , Confalonieri S , Doria M , Santolini E , Tassi E , Minenkova O , Cesareni G , Pelicci PG , Di Fiore PP . Binding speciﬁcity and in vivo targets of the EH domain , a novel protein - protein interaction module . Genes Dev 11 : 2239 – 2249 , 1997 . 680 . Sanada M , Suzuki T , Shih LY , Otsu M , Kato M , Yamazaki S , Tamura A , Honda H , Sakata - Yanagimoto M , Kumano K , Oda H , Yamagata T , Takita J , Gotoh N , Nakazaki K , Kawamata N , Onodera M , Nobuyoshi M , Hayashi Y , Harada H , Kurokawa M , Chiba S , Mori H , Ozawa K , Omine M , Hirai H , Nakauchi H , Koefﬂer HP , Ogawa S . Gain - of - functionofmutatedC - CBLtumoursuppressorinmyeloidneoplasms . Nature 460 : 904 – 908 , 2009 . 681 . Sandvig K , Torgersen ML , Engedal N , Skotland T , Iversen TG . Protein toxins from plantsandbacteria : probesforintracellulartransportandtoolsinmedicine . FEBSLett 584 : 2626 – 2634 , 2010 . 682 . Santarella - MellwigR , FrankeJ , JaedickeA , GorjanaczM , BauerU , BuddA , MattajIW , Devos DP . The compartmentalized bacteria of the Planctomycetes - verrucomicrobia - chlamydiae superphylum have membrane coat - like proteins . PLoS Biol 8 : e1000281 , 2010 . 683 . Santolini E , Puri C , Salcini AE , Gagliani MC , Pelicci PG , Tacchetti C , Di Fiore PP . Numb is an endocytic protein . J Cell Biol 151 : 1345 – 1352 , 2000 . 684 . Sardiello M , Palmieri M , di Ronza A , Medina DL , Valenza M , Gennarino VA , Di Malta C , DonaudyF , EmbrioneV , PolishchukRS , BanﬁS , ParentiG , CattaneoE , BallabioA . A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function . Science 325 : 473 – 477 , 2009 . 685 . Sargin B , Choudhary C , Crosetto N , Schmidt MH , Grundler R , Rensinghoff M , Thies - sen C , Tickenbrock L , Schwable J , Brandts C , August B , Koschmieder S , Bandi SR , DuysterJ , BerdelWE , Muller - TidowC , DikicI , ServeH . Flt3 - dependenttransforma - tion by inactivating c - Cbl mutations in AML . Blood 110 : 1004 – 1012 , 2007 . 686 . Sauvonnet N , Dujeancourt A , Dautry - Varsat A . Cortactin and dynamin are required fortheclathrin - independentendocytosisofgammaccytokinereceptor . JCellBiol 168 : 155 – 163 , 2005 . 687 . Schafer DA , D’Souza - Schorey C , Cooper JA . Actin assembly at membranes con - trolled by ARF6 . Trafﬁc 1 : 892 – 903 , 2000 . 688 . Schledzewski K , Brinkmann H , Mendel RR . Phylogenetic analysis of components of the eukaryotic vesicle transport system reveals a common origin of adaptor protein complexes 1 , 2 , 3 and the F subcomplex of the coatomer COPI . J Mol Evol 48 : 770 – 778 , 1999 . 689 . Schmid EM , Ford MG , Burtey A , Praefcke GJ , Peak - Chew SY , Mills IG , Benmerah A , McMahonHT . RoleoftheAP2beta - appendagehubinrecruitingpartnersforclathrin - coated vesicle assembly . PLoS Biol 4 : e262 , 2006 . 690 . Schmid EM , McMahon HT . Integrating molecular and network biology to decode endocytosis . Nature 448 : 883 – 888 , 2007 . 691 . Schmoranzer J , Kreitzer G , Simon SM . Migrating ﬁbroblasts perform polarized , mi - crotubule - dependentexocytosistowardstheleadingedge . JCellSci 116 : 4513 – 4519 , 2003 . 692 . Schoeberl B , Eichler - Jonsson C , Gilles ED , Muller G . Computational modeling of the dynamicsoftheMAPkinasecascadeactivatedbysurfaceandinternalizedEGFrecep - tors . Nat Biotechnol 20 : 370 – 375 , 2002 . ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 361 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 693 . Schweitzer JK , Sedgwick AE , D’Souza - Schorey C . ARF6 - mediated endocytic recy - clingimpactscellmovement , celldivisionandlipidhomeostasis . SeminCellDevBiol 22 : 39 – 47 , 2011 . 694 . Scita G , Di Fiore PP . The endocytic matrix . Nature 463 : 464 – 473 , 2010 . 695 . Sedding DG , Hermsen J , Seay U , Eickelberg O , Kummer W , Schwencke C , Strasser RH , TillmannsH , Braun - DullaeusRC . Caveolin - 1facilitatesmechanosensitiveprotein kinase B ( Akt ) signaling in vitro and in vivo . Circ Res 96 : 635 – 642 , 2005 . 696 . Segawa Y , Suga H , Iwabe N , Oneyama C , Akagi T , Miyata T , Okada M . Functional development of Src tyrosine kinases during evolution from a unicellular ancestor to multicellular animals . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 12021 – 12026 , 2006 . 697 . Sehat B , Andersson S , Girnita L , Larsson O . Identiﬁcation of c - Cbl as a new ligase for insulin - like growth factor - I receptor with distinct roles from Mdm2 in receptor ubiq - uitination and endocytosis . Cancer Res 68 : 5669 – 5677 , 2008 . 698 . Sens P , Turner MS . Budded membrane microdomains as tension regulators . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 73 : 031918 , 2006 . 699 . Sesaki H , Ogihara S . Protrusion of cell surface coupled with single exocytotic events of secretion of the slime in Physarum plasmodia . J Cell Sci 110 : 809 – 818 , 1997 . 700 . SeugnetL , SimpsonP , HaenlinM . RequirementfordynaminduringNotchsignalingin Drosophila neurogenesis . Dev Biol 192 : 585 – 598 , 1997 . 701 . Shaevitz JW , Gitai Z . The structure and function of bacterial actin homologs . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 : a000364 , 2010 . 702 . Shajahan AN , Timblin BK , Sandoval R , Tiruppathi C , Malik AB , Minshall RD . Role of Src - induced dynamin - 2 phosphorylation in caveolae - mediated endocytosis in endo - thelial cells . J Biol Chem 279 : 20392 – 20400 , 2004 . 703 . Shankar H , Michal A , Kern RC , Kang DS , Gurevich VV , Benovic JL . Non - visual arres - tinsareconstitutivelyassociatedwiththecentrosomeandregulatecentrosomefunc - tion . J Biol Chem 285 : 8316 – 8329 , 2010 . 704 . Sharma DK , Brown JC , Cheng Z , Holicky EL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . The glycosphin - golipid , lactosylceramide , regulates beta1 - integrin clustering and endocytosis . Cancer Res 65 : 8233 – 8241 , 2005 . 705 . Shatz M , Liscovitch M . Caveolin - 1 : a tumor - promoting role in human cancer . Int J Radiat Biol 84 : 177 – 189 , 2008 . 706 . SheldonH , HeikampE , TurleyH , DragovicR , ThomasP , OonCE , LeekR , Edelmann M , Kessler B , Sainson RC , Sargent I , Li JL , Harris AL . New mechanism for Notch signaling to endothelium at a distance by Delta - like 4 incorporation into exosomes . Blood 116 : 2385 – 2394 , 2010 . 707 . Shen Q , Zhong W , Jan YN , Temple S . Asymmetric Numb distribution is critical for asymmetric cell division of mouse cerebral cortical stem cells and neuroblasts . Devel - opment 129 : 4843 – 4853 , 2002 . 708 . Shenoy SK , Barak LS , Xiao K , Ahn S , Berthouze M , Shukla AK , Luttrell LM , Lefkowitz RJ . Ubiquitination of beta - arrestin links seven - transmembrane receptor endocytosis and ERK activation . J Biol Chem 282 : 29549 – 29562 , 2007 . 709 . Shenoy SK , McDonald PH , Kohout TA , Lefkowitz RJ . Regulation of receptor fate by ubiquitination of activated beta 2 - adrenergic receptor and beta - arrestin . Science 294 : 1307 – 1313 , 2001 . 710 . Shenoy SK , Modi AS , Shukla AK , Xiao K , Berthouze M , Ahn S , Wilkinson KD , Miller WE , Lefkowitz RJ . Beta - arrestin - dependent signaling and trafﬁcking of 7 - transmem - brane receptors is reciprocally regulated by the deubiquitinase USP33 and the E3 ligase Mdm2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 6650 – 6655 , 2009 . 711 . Shenoy SK , Xiao K , Venkataramanan V , Snyder PM , Freedman NJ , Weissman AM . Nedd4mediatesagonist - dependentubiquitination , lysosomaltargeting , anddegrada - tion of the beta2 - adrenergic receptor . J Biol Chem 283 : 22166 – 22176 , 2008 . 712 . Sherley JL , Stadler PB , Johnson DR . Expression of the wild - type p53 antioncogene induces guanine nucleotide - dependent stem cell division kinetics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 136 – 140 , 1995 . 713 . SherringtonR , RogaevEI , LiangY , RogaevaEA , LevesqueG , IkedaM , ChiH , LinC , Li G , Holman K . Cloning of a gene bearing missense mutations in early - onset familial Alzheimer’s disease . Nature 375 : 754 – 760 , 1995 . 714 . ShiY , FengY , KangJ , LiuC , LiZ , LiD , CaoW , QiuJ , GuoZ , BiE , ZangL , LuC , Zhang JZ , Pei G . Critical regulation of CD4 (cid:3) T cell survival and autoimmunity by beta - arrestin 1 . Nat Immunol 8 : 817 – 824 , 2007 . 715 . Shiels A , Bennett TM , Knopf HL , Yamada K , Yoshiura K , Niikawa N , Shim S , Hanson PI . CHMP4B , a novel gene for autosomal dominant cataracts linked to chromosome 20q . Am J Hum Genet 81 : 596 – 606 , 2007 . 716 . Shih SC , Katzmann DJ , Schnell JD , Sutanto M , Emr SD , Hicke L . Epsins and Vps27p / Hrs contain ubiquitin - binding domains that function in receptor endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 389 – 393 , 2002 . 717 . ShilatifardA . IdentiﬁcationandpuriﬁcationoftheHolo - ELLcomplex . Evidenceforthe presence of ELL - associated proteins that suppress the transcriptional inhibitory ac - tivity of ELL . J Biol Chem 273 : 11212 – 11217 , 1998 . 718 . Shimizu K , Chiba S , Saito T , Takahashi T , Kumano K , Hamada Y , Hirai H . Integrity of intracellular domain of Notch ligand is indispensable for cleavage required for release of the Notch2 intracellular domain . EMBO J 21 : 294 – 302 , 2002 . 719 . ShtiegmanK , KochupurakkalBS , ZwangY , PinesG , StarrA , VexlerA , CitriA , KatzM , Lavi S , Ben - Basat Y , Benjamin S , Corso S , Gan J , Yosef RB , Giordano S , Yarden Y . Defective ubiquitinylation of EGFR mutants of lung cancer confers prolonged signal - ing . Oncogene 26 : 6968 – 6978 , 2007 . 720 . Shupliakov O , Brodin L . Recent insights into the building and cycling of synaptic vesicles . Exp Cell Res 316 : 1344 – 1350 , 2010 . 721 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP . Clathrin - medi - ated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for deg - radation . Dev Cell 15 : 209 – 219 , 2008 . 722 . SigismundS , WoelkT , PuriC , MasperoE , TacchettiC , TransidicoP , DiFiorePP , Polo S . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 2760 – 2765 , 2005 . 723 . Silva JM , Ezhkova E , Silva J , Heart S , Castillo M , Campos Y , Castro V , Bonilla F , Cordon - Cardo C , Muthuswamy SK , Powers S , Fuchs E , Hannon GJ . Cyﬁp1 is a putative invasion suppressor in epithelial cancers . Cell 137 : 1047 – 1061 , 2009 . 724 . Simons K , Gerl MJ . Revitalizing membrane rafts : new tools and insights . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 688 – 699 , 2010 . 725 . Simons M , Raposo G . Exosomes : vesicular carriers for intercellular communication . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 . 726 . Simonsen A , Lippe R , Christoforidis S , Gaullier JM , Brech A , Callaghan J , Toh BH , Murphy C , Zerial M , Stenmark H . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 : 494 – 498 , 1998 . 727 . Singh A , Settleman J . EMT , cancer stem cells and drug resistance : an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer . Oncogene 2010 . 728 . SinghRD , HolickyEL , ChengZJ , KimSY , WheatleyCL , MarksDL , BittmanR , Pagano RE . Inhibition of caveolar uptake , SV40 infection , and beta1 - integrin signaling by a nonnatural glycosphingolipid stereoisomer . J Cell Biol 176 : 895 – 901 , 2007 . 729 . Sinha B , Koster D , Ruez R , Gonnord P , Bastiani M , Abankwa D , Stan RV , Butler - BrowneG , VedieB , JohannesL , MoroneN , PartonRG , RaposoG , SensP , LamazeC , Nassoy P . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 : 402 – 413 , 2011 . 730 . Siomi H , Siomi MC . On the road to reading the RNA - interference code . Nature 457 : 396 – 404 , 2009 . 731 . Siomi H , Siomi MC . RISC hitches onto endosome trafﬁcking . Nat Cell Biol 11 : 1049 – 1051 , 2009 . 732 . SkogJ , WurdingerT , vanRijnS , MeijerDH , GaincheL , Sena - EstevesM , CurryWTJr , . Carter BS , Krichevsky AM , Breakeﬁeld XO . Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and proteins that promote tumour growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 1470 – 1476 , 2008 . 733 . SkopAR , LiuH , YatesJ , 3rdMeyerBJ , HealdR . Dissectionofthemammalianmidbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms . Science 305 : 61 – 66 , 2004 . 734 . Slagsvold T , Marchese A , Brech A , Stenmark H . CISK attenuates degradation of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 via the ubiquitin ligase AIP4 . EMBO J 25 : 3738 – 3749 , 2006 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 362 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 735 . Snijder B , Sacher R , Ramo P , Damm EM , Liberali P , Pelkmans L . Population context determinescell - to - cellvariabilityinendocytosisandvirusinfection . Nature 461 : 520 – 523 , 2009 . 736 . Snyder PM . Down - regulating destruction : phosphorylation regulates the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 – 2 . Sci Signal 2 : pe41 , 2009 . 737 . So CW , Lin M , Ayton PM , Chen EH , Cleary ML . Dimerization contributes to onco - genic activation of MLL chimeras in acute leukemias . Cancer Cell 4 : 99 – 110 , 2003 . 738 . Sobota A , Strzelecka - Kiliszek A , Gladkowska E , Yoshida K , Mrozinska K , Kwiat - kowska K . Binding of IgG - opsonized particles to Fc gamma R is an active stage of phagocytosis that involves receptor clustering and phosphorylation . J Immunol 175 : 4450 – 4457 , 2005 . 739 . SoldatiT , SchliwaM . Poweringmembranetrafﬁcinendocytosisandrecycling . NatRev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 897 – 908 , 2006 . 740 . Sonnichsen B , De Renzis S , Nielsen E , Rietdorf J , Zerial M . Distinct membrane do - mains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J Cell Biol 149 : 901 – 914 , 2000 . 741 . Sorkin A , Di Fiore PP , Carpenter G . The carboxyl terminus of epidermal growth factorreceptor / erbB - 2chimeraeisinternalizationimpaired . Oncogene 8 : 3021 – 3028 , 1993 . 742 . Sorkin A , Goh LK . Endocytosis and intracellular trafﬁcking of ErbBs . Exp Cell Res 315 : 683 – 696 , 2009 . 743 . Sorkin A , Mazzotti M , Sorkina T , Scotto L , Beguinot L . Epidermal growth factor receptor interaction with clathrin adaptors is mediated by the Tyr974 - containing internalization motif . J Biol Chem 271 : 13377 – 13384 , 1996 . 744 . Sorkin A , von Zastrow M . Endocytosis and signaling : intertwining molecular net - works . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . In press . 745 . Sorkin A , Waters C , Overholser KA , Carpenter G . Multiple autophosphorylation site mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Analysis of kinase activity and endocytosis . J Biol Chem 266 : 8355 – 8362 , 1991 . 746 . Soufo HJ , Graumann PL . Actin - like proteins MreB and Mbl from Bacillus subtilis are required for bipolar positioning of replication origins . Curr Biol 13 : 1916 – 1920 , 2003 . 747 . Soulet F , Schmid SL , Damke H . Domain requirements for an endocytosis - indepen - dent , isoform - speciﬁc function of dynamin - 2 . Exp Cell Res 312 : 3539 – 3545 , 2006 . 748 . SowaG , PypaertM , SessaWC . Distinctionbetweensignalingmechanismsinlipidrafts vs . caveolae . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 : 14072 – 14077 , 2001 . 749 . Spana EP , Doe CQ . Numb antagonizes Notch signaling to specify sibling neuron cell fates . Neuron 17 : 21 – 26 , 1996 . 750 . Spana EP , Kopczynski C , Goodman CS , Doe CQ . Asymmetric localization of numb autonomouslydeterminessiblingneuronidentityinthe Drosophila CNS . Development 121 : 3489 – 3494 , 1995 . 751 . Spang A . On the fate of early endosomes . Biol Chem 390 : 753 – 759 , 2009 . 752 . Spinosa MR , Progida C , De Luca A , Colucci AM , Alifano P , Bucci C . Functional characterization of Rab7 mutant proteins associated with Charcot - Marie - Tooth type 2B disease . J Neurosci 28 : 1640 – 1648 , 2008 . 753 . Spitzer C , Schellmann S , Sabovljevic A , Shahriari M , Keshavaiah C , Bechtold N , Her - zog M , Muller S , Hanisch FG , Hulskamp M . The Arabidopsis elch mutant reveals functions of an ESCRT component in cytokinesis . Development 133 : 4679 – 4689 , 2006 . 754 . Sprecher E , Ishida - Yamamoto A , Mizrahi - Koren M , Rapaport D , Goldsher D , Indel - man M , Topaz O , Chefetz I , Keren H , O’Brien TJ , Bercovich D , Shalev S , Geiger D , Bergman R , Horowitz M , Mandel H . A mutation in SNAP29 , coding for a SNARE protein involved in intracellular trafﬁcking , causes a novel neurocutaneous syndrome characterized by cerebral dysgenesis , neuropathy , ichthyosis , and palmoplantar ker - atoderma . Am J Hum Genet 77 : 242 – 251 , 2005 . 755 . Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . Identiﬁcation of ﬁlamin as a novel ligand for caveolin - 1 : evidence for the organization of caveolin - 1 - associated membrane domains by the actin cytoskeleton . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 325 – 337 , 2000 . 756 . Stauffer DR , Howard TL , Nyun T , Hollenberg SM . CHMP1 is a novel nuclear matrix protein affecting chromatin structure and cell - cycle progression . J Cell Sci 114 : 2383 – 2393 , 2001 . 757 . Stenmark H . Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle trafﬁc . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 513 – 525 , 2009 . 758 . StringerDK , PiperRC . AsingleubiquitinissufﬁcientforcargoproteinentryintoMVBs in the absence of ESCRT ubiquitination . J Cell Biol 192 : 229 – 242 , 2011 . 759 . StuffersS , SemWegnerC , StenmarkH , BrechA . Multivesicularendosomebiogenesis in the absence of ESCRTs . Trafﬁc 10 : 925 – 937 , 2009 . 760 . Sudhof TC . The synaptic vesicle cycle . Annu Rev Neurosci 27 : 509 – 547 , 2004 . 761 . Sun Z , Pan J , Hope WX , Cohen SN , Balk SP . Tumor susceptibility gene 101 protein represses androgen receptor transactivation and interacts with p300 . Cancer 86 : 689 – 696 , 1999 . 762 . Suzuki T , Li W , Zhang Q , Karim A , Novak EK , Sviderskaya EV , Hill SP , Bennett DC , Levin AV , Nieuwenhuis HK , Fong CT , Castellan C , Miterski B , Swank RT , Spritz RA . Hermansky - PudlaksyndromeiscausedbymutationsinHPS4 , thehumanhomologof the mouse light - ear gene . Nat Genet 30 : 321 – 324 , 2002 . 763 . Swanson JA . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropinosomes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 639 – 649 , 2008 . 764 . Taelman VF , Dobrowolski R , Plouhinec JL , Fuentealba LC , Vorwald PP , Gumper I , Sabatini DD , De Robertis EM . Wnt signaling requires sequestration of glycogen syn - thase kinase 3 inside multivesicular endosomes . Cell 143 : 1136 – 1148 , 2010 . 765 . Tan YH , Krishnaswamy S , Nandi S , Kanteti R , Vora S , Onel K , Hasina R , Lo FY , El - Hashani E , Cervantes G , Robinson M , Hsu HS , Kales SC , Lipkowitz S , Karrison T , Sattler M , Vokes EE , Wang YC , Salgia R . CBL is frequently altered in lung cancers : its relationshiptomutationsinMETandEGFRtyrosinekinases . PLoSOne 5 : e8972 , 2010 . 766 . Tarpey PS , Stevens C , Teague J , Edkins S , O’Meara S , Avis T , Barthorpe S , Buck G , Butler A , Cole J , Dicks E , Gray K , Halliday K , Harrison R , Hills K , Hinton J , Jones D , Menzies A , Mironenko T , Perry J , Raine K , Richardson D , Shepherd R , Small A , Tofts C , Varian J , West S , Widaa S , Yates A , Catford R , Butler J , Mallya U , Moon J , Luo Y , DorkinsH , ThompsonD , EastonDF , WoosterR , BobrowM , CarpenterN , Simensen RJ , SchwartzCE , StevensonRE , TurnerG , PartingtonM , GeczJ , StrattonMR , Futreal PA , Raymond FL . Mutations in the gene encoding the Sigma 2 subunit of the adaptor protein 1 complex , AP1S2 , cause X - linked mental retardation . Am J Hum Genet 79 : 1119 – 1124 , 2006 . 767 . TaylorMJ , PerraisD , MerriﬁeldCJ . Ahighprecisionsurveyofthemoleculardynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000604 , 2011 . 768 . Theos AC , Truschel ST , Tenza D , Hurbain I , Harper DC , Berson JF , Thomas PC , Raposo G , Marks MS . A lumenal domain - dependent pathway for sorting to intralu - menalvesiclesofmultivesicularendosomesinvolvedinorganellemorphogenesis . Dev Cell 10 : 343 – 354 , 2006 . 769 . Thieman JR , Mishra SK , Ling K , Doray B , Anderson RA , Traub LM . Clathrin regulates the association of PIPKIgamma661 with the AP - 2 adaptor beta2 appendage . J Biol Chem 284 : 13924 – 13939 , 2009 . 770 . Thiery JP , Acloque H , Huang RY , Nieto MA . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell 139 : 871 – 890 , 2009 . 771 . ThompsonCC , AshcroftFJ , PatelS , SaragaG , VimalachandranD , PrimeW , Campbell F , Dodson A , Jenkins RE , Lemoine NR , Crnogorac - Jurcevic T , Yin HL , Costello E . Pancreatic cancer cells overexpress gelsolin family - capping proteins , which contrib - ute to their cell motility . Gut 56 : 95 – 106 , 2007 . 772 . ThompsonHM , CaoH , ChenJ , EuteneuerU , McNivenMA . Dynamin2bindsgamma - tubulin and participates in centrosome cohesion . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 335 – 342 , 2004 . 773 . Thompson HM , Skop AR , Euteneuer U , Meyer BJ , McNiven MA . The large GTPase dynaminassociateswiththespindlemidzoneandisrequiredforcytokinesis . CurrBiol 12 : 2111 – 2117 , 2002 . 774 . Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafﬁcking . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 238 – 250 , 2002 . 775 . Tong J , Taylor P , Peterman SM , Prakash A , Moran MF . Epidermal growth factor receptor phosphorylation sites Ser991 and Tyr998 are implicated in the regulation of ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 363 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m receptor endocytosis and phosphorylations at Ser1039 and Thr1041 . Mol Cell Pro - teomics 8 : 2131 – 2144 , 2009 . 776 . Tong SY , Ki KD , Lee JM , Kang MJ , Ha TK , Chung SI , Chi SG , Lee SK . Frequent inactivation of hSRBC in ovarian cancers by promoter CpG island hypermethylation . Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 89 : 629 – 635 , 2010 . 777 . Tong X , Zitserman D , Serebriiskii I , Andrake M , Dunbrack R , Roegiers F . Numb independently antagonizes Sanpodo membrane targeting and Notch signaling in Dro - sophila sensory organ precursor cells . Mol Biol Cell 21 : 802 – 810 , 2010 . 778 . Toret CP , Drubin DG . The budding yeast endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci 119 : 4585 – 4587 , 2006 . 779 . Tosoni D , Puri C , Confalonieri S , Salcini AE , De Camilli P , Tacchetti C , Di Fiore PP . TTP speciﬁcally regulates the internalization of the transferrin receptor . Cell 123 : 875 – 888 , 2005 . 780 . TrajkovicK , HsuC , ChiantiaS , RajendranL , WenzelD , WielandF , SchwilleP , Brugger B , Simons M . Ceramide triggers budding of exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes . Science 319 : 1244 – 1247 , 2008 . 781 . Traub LM . Tickets to ride : selecting cargo for clathrin - regulated internalization . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 583 – 596 , 2009 . 782 . Traynor D , Kay RR . Possible roles of the endocytic cycle in cell motility . J Cell Sci 120 : 2318 – 2327 , 2007 . 783 . Tsukazaki T , Chiang TA , Davison AF , Attisano L , Wrana JL . SARA , a FYVE domain protein that recruits Smad2 to the TGFbeta receptor . Cell 95 : 779 – 791 , 1998 . 784 . Ullrich N , Caplanusi A , Brone B , Hermans D , Lariviere E , Nilius B , Van Driessche W , Eggermont J . Stimulation by caveolin - 1 of the hypotonicity - induced release of taurine and ATP at basolateral , but not apical , membrane of Caco - 2 cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 290 : C1287 – C1296 , 2006 . 785 . Ulrich F , Heisenberg CP . Trafﬁcking and cell migration . Trafﬁc 10 : 811 – 818 , 2009 . 786 . Unger S , Mainberger A , Spitz C , Bahr A , Zeschnigk C , Zabel B , Superti - Furga A , Morris - Rosendahl DJ . Filamin A mutation is one cause of FG syndrome . Am J Med Genet A 143 : 1876 – 1879 , 2007 . 787 . VaccariT , BilderD . Atthecrossroadsofpolarity , proliferationandapoptosis : theuse of Drosophila to unravel the multifaceted role of endocytosis in tumor suppression . Mol Oncol 3 : 354 – 365 , 2009 . 788 . Vaccari T , Lu H , Kanwar R , Fortini ME , Bilder D . Endosomal entry regulates Notch receptor activation in Drosophila melanogaster . J Cell Biol 180 : 755 – 762 , 2008 . 789 . Valadi H , Ekstrom K , Bossios A , Sjostrand M , Lee JJ , Lotvall JO . Exosome - mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange be - tween cells . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 654 – 659 , 2007 . 790 . Valdez G , Akmentin W , Philippidou P , Kuruvilla R , Ginty DD , Halegoua S . Pincher - mediated macroendocytosis underlies retrograde signaling by neurotrophin recep - tors . J Neurosci 25 : 5236 – 5247 , 2005 . 791 . ValdezG , PhilippidouP , RosenbaumJ , AkmentinW , ShaoY , HalegouaS . Trk - signaling endosomes are generated by Rac - dependent macroendocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 12270 – 12275 , 2007 . 792 . Valdez - TaubasJ , PelhamHR . Slowdiffusionofproteinsintheyeastplasmamembrane allows polarity to be maintained by endocytic cycling . Curr Biol 13 : 1636 – 1640 , 2003 . 793 . VandenHurkJA , SchwartzM , vanBokhovenH , vandePolTJ , BogerdL , PinckersAJ , Bleeker - Wagemakers EM , Pawlowitzki IH , Ruther K , Ropers HH , Cremers FP . Mo - lecular basis of choroideremia ( CHM ) : mutations involving the Rab escort protein - 1 ( REP - 1 ) gene . Hum Mutat 9 : 110 – 117 , 1997 . 794 . Van der Horst EH , Degenhardt YY , Strelow A , Slavin A , Chinn L , Orf J , Rong M , Li S , See LH , Nguyen KQ , Hoey T , Wesche H , Powers S . Metastatic properties and genomic ampliﬁcation of the tyrosine kinase gene ACK1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 15901 – 15906 , 2005 . 795 . Van Ginkel PR , Gee RL , Walker TM , Hu DN , Heizmann CW , Polans AS . The identi - ﬁcation and differential expression of calcium - binding proteins associated with ocular melanoma . Biochim Biophys Acta 1448 : 290 – 297 , 1998 . 796 . VanKerkhofP , PuttersJ , StrousGJ . TheubiquitinligaseSCF ( betaTrCP ) regulatesthe degradation of the growth hormone receptor . J Biol Chem 282 : 20475 – 20483 , 2007 . 797 . VanWesenbeeckL , OdgrenPR , CoxonFP , FrattiniA , MoensP , PerduB , MacKayCA , Van Hul E , Timmermans JP , Vanhoenacker F , Jacobs R , Peruzzi B , Teti A , Helfrich MH , RogersMJ , VillaA , VanHulW . InvolvementofPLEKHM1inosteoclasticvesicular transport and osteopetrosis in incisors absent rats and humans . J Clin Invest 117 : 919 – 930 , 2007 . 798 . VanceJE . Lipidimbalanceintheneurologicaldisorder , Niemann - PickCdisease . FEBS Lett 580 : 5518 – 5524 , 2006 . 799 . Varga R , Kelley PM , Keats BJ , Starr A , Leal SM , Cohn E , Kimberling WJ . Non - syn - dromic recessive auditory neuropathy is the result of mutations in the otoferlin ( OTOF ) gene . J Med Genet 40 : 45 – 50 , 2003 . 800 . Vartak N , Bastiaens P . Spatial cycles in G - protein crowd control . EMBO J 29 : 2689 – 2699 , 2010 . 801 . Vasudevan NT , Mohan ML , Gupta MK , Hussain AK , Prasad SV . Inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A activity by PI3Kgamma regulates beta - adrenergic receptor function . Mol Cell 41 : 636 – 648 , 2011 . 802 . Vatta M , Ackerman MJ , Ye B , Makielski JC , Ughanze EE , Taylor EW , Tester DJ , Balijepalli RC , Foell JD , Li Z , Kamp TJ , Towbin JA . Mutant caveolin - 3 induces persis - tent late sodium current and is associated with long - QT syndrome . Circulation 114 : 2104 – 2112 , 2006 . 803 . Vecchi M , Polo S , Poupon V , van de Loo JW , Benmerah A , Di Fiore PP . Nucleocyto - plasmic shuttling of endocytic proteins . J Cell Biol 153 : 1511 – 1517 , 2001 . 804 . Veiga E , Cossart P . The role of clathrin - dependent endocytosis in bacterial internal - ization . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 499 – 504 , 2006 . 805 . Vella LJ , Sharples RA , Nisbet RM , Cappai R , Hill AF . The role of exosomes in the processing of proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases . Eur Biophys J 37 : 323 – 332 , 2008 . 806 . Venancio TM , Balaji S , Iyer LM , Aravind L . Reconstructing the ubiquitin network : cross - talk with other systems and identiﬁcation of novel functions . Genome Biol 10 : R33 , 2009 . 807 . Vieira AV , Lamaze C , Schmid SL . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 : 2086 – 2089 , 1996 . 808 . VieiraOV , BotelhoRJ , RamehL , BrachmannSM , MatsuoT , DavidsonHW , Schreiber A , Backer JM , Cantley LC , Grinstein S . Distinct roles of class I and class III phosphati - dylinositol 3 - kinases in phagosome formation and maturation . J Cell Biol 155 : 19 – 25 , 2001 . 809 . Villa A , Notarangelo L , Macchi P , Mantuano E , Cavagni G , Brugnoni D , Strina D , Patrosso MC , Ramenghi U , Sacco MG . X - linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome are allelic diseases with mutations in the WASP gene . Nat Genet 9 : 414 – 417 , 1995 . 810 . Vonderheit A , Helenius A . Rab7 associates with early endosomes to mediate sorting and transport of Semliki forest virus to late endosomes . PLoS Biol 3 : e233 , 2005 . 811 . Vorgerd M , Bolz H , Patzold T , Kubisch C , Malin JP , Mortier W . Phenotypic variability in rippling muscle disease . Neurology 52 : 1453 – 1459 , 1999 . 812 . Vorgerd M , van der Ven PF , Bruchertseifer V , Lowe T , Kley RA , Schroder R , Lochmuller H , Himmel M , Koehler K , Furst DO , Huebner A . A mutation in the dimerization domain of ﬁlamin c causes a novel type of autosomal dominant myoﬁ - brillar myopathy . Am J Hum Genet 77 : 297 – 304 , 2005 . 813 . Wada I , Lai WH , Posner BI , Bergeron JJ . Association of the tyrosine phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptor with a 55 - kD tyrosine phosphorylated protein at the cell surface and in endosomes . J Cell Biol 116 : 321 – 330 , 1992 . 814 . Walseng E , Bakke O , Roche PA . Major histocompatibility complex class II - peptide complexes internalize using a clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis path - way . J Biol Chem 283 : 14717 – 14727 , 2008 . 815 . WanaskiSP , NgBK , GlaserM . Caveolinscaffoldingregionandthemembranebinding region of SRC form lateral membrane domains . Biochemistry 42 : 42 – 56 , 2003 . 816 . WangA , LiangY , FridellRA , ProbstFJ , WilcoxER , TouchmanJW , MortonCC , Morell RJ , Noben - TrauthK , CamperSA , FriedmanTB . Associationofunconventionalmyosin MYO15 mutations with human nonsyndromic deafness DFNB3 . Science 280 : 1447 – 1451 , 1998 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 364 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 817 . Wang C , Tran - Thanh D , Moreno JC , Cawthorn TR , Jacks LM , Wang DY , McCready DR , Done SJ . Expression of Abl interactor 1 and its prognostic signiﬁcance in breast cancer : a tissue - array - based investigation . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010 . 818 . WangD , XuMR , WangT , LiT , ZhuJW . MTSS1overexpressioncorrelateswithpoor prognosis in colorectal cancer . J Gastrointest Surg . In press . 819 . Wang H , Patel V , Miyazaki H , Gutkind JS , Yeudall WA . Role for EPS8 in squamous carcinogenesis . Carcinogenesis 30 : 165 – 174 , 2009 . 820 . WangP , GaoH , NiY , WangB , WuY , JiL , QinL , MaL , PeiG . Beta - arrestin2functions as a G - protein - coupled receptor - activated regulator of oncoprotein Mdm2 . J Biol Chem 278 : 6363 – 6370 , 2003 . 821 . Wang P , Wu Y , Ge X , Ma L , Pei G . Subcellular localization of beta - arrestins is deter - mined by their intact N domain and the nuclear export signal at the C terminus . J Biol Chem 278 : 11648 – 11653 , 2003 . 822 . Wang W , Struhl G . Drosophila Epsin mediates a select endocytic pathway that DSL ligands must enter to activate Notch . Development 131 : 5367 – 5380 , 2004 . 823 . WangY , CaoH , ChenJ , McNivenMA . AdirectinteractionbetweenthelargeGTPase Dynamin2 and FAK regulate focal adhesion dynamics in response to active Src . Mol Biol Cell 2011 . 824 . WangY , PennockSD , ChenX , KazlauskasA , WangZ . Platelet - derivedgrowthfactor receptor - mediated signal transduction from endosomes . J Biol Chem 279 : 8038 – 8046 , 2004 . 825 . Wang Y , Roche O , Yan MS , Finak G , Evans AJ , Metcalf JL , Hast BE , Hanna SC , Wondergem B , Furge KA , Irwin MS , Kim WY , Teh BT , Grinstein S , Park M , Marsden PA , Ohh M . Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen - sensing pathway . Nat Med 15 : 319 – 324 , 2009 . 826 . Wang Y , Tang Y , Teng L , Wu Y , Zhao X , Pei G . Association of beta - arrestin and TRAF6 negatively regulates Toll - like receptor - interleukin 1 receptor signaling . Nat Immunol 7 : 139 – 147 , 2006 . 827 . Wang YN , Yamaguchi H , Hsu JM , Hung MC . Nuclear trafﬁcking of the epidermal growth factor receptor family membrane proteins . Oncogene 29 : 3997 – 4006 , 2010 . 828 . Wang YN , Yamaguchi H , Huo L , Du Y , Lee HJ , Lee HH , Wang H , Hsu JM , Hung MC . The translocon SEC61 (cid:1) localized in the inner nuclear membrane transports mem - brane - embedded EGF receptor to the nucleus . J Biol Chem 2010 . 829 . Wang Z , Tung PS , Moran MF . Association of p120 ras GAP with endocytic compo - nents and colocalization with epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor in response to EGF stimulation . Cell Growth Differ 7 : 123 – 133 , 1996 . 830 . Warren G , Davoust J , Cockcroft A . Recycling of transferrin receptors in A431 cells is inhibited during mitosis . EMBO J 3 : 2217 – 2225 , 1984 . 831 . Waterman H , Katz M , Rubin C , Shtiegman K , Lavi S , Elson A , Jovin T , Yarden Y . A mutant EGF - receptor defective in ubiquitylation and endocytosis unveils a role for Grb2 in negative signaling . EMBO J 21 : 303 – 313 , 2002 . 832 . Waterman H , Sabanai I , Geiger B , Yarden Y . Alternative intracellular routing of ErbB receptors may determine signaling potency . J Biol Chem 273 : 13819 – 13827 , 1998 . 833 . Waterman - Storer CM , Sanger JW , Sanger JM . Dynamics of organelles in the mitotic spindles of living cells : membrane and microtubule interactions . Cell Motil Cytoskele - ton 26 : 19 – 39 , 1993 . 834 . Webber J , Steadman R , Mason MD , Tabi Z , Clayton A . Cancer exosomes trigger ﬁbroblast to myoﬁbroblast differentiation . Cancer Res 70 : 9621 – 9630 , 2010 . 835 . Wei H , Ahn S , Barnes WG , Lefkowitz RJ . Stable interaction between beta - arrestin 2 and angiotensin type 1A receptor is required for beta - arrestin 2 - mediated acti - vationofextracellularsignal - regulatedkinases1and2 . JBiolChem 279 : 48255 – 48261 , 2004 . 836 . WesselsD , ReynoldsJ , JohnsonO , VossE , BurnsR , DanielsK , GarrardE , O’Halloran TJ , Soll DR . Clathrin plays a novel role in the regulation of cell polarity , pseudopod formation , uropod stability and motility in Dictyostelium . J Cell Sci 113 : 21 – 36 , 2000 . 837 . West MA , Prescott AR , Eskelinen EL , Ridley AJ , Watts C . Rac is required for consti - tutive macropinocytosis by dendritic cells but does not control its downregulation . Curr Biol 10 : 839 – 848 , 2000 . 838 . Westhoff B , Colaluca IN , D’Ario G , Donzelli M , Tosoni D , Volorio S , Pelosi G , Spag - giari L , Mazzarol G , Viale G , Pece S , Di Fiore PP . Alterations of the Notch pathway in lung cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 22293 – 22298 , 2009 . 839 . White DP , Caswell PT , Norman JC . alpha v beta3 and alpha5beta1 integrin recycling pathways dictate downstream Rho kinase signaling to regulate persistent cell migra - tion . J Cell Biol 177 : 515 – 525 , 2007 . 840 . White IJ , Bailey LM , Aghakhani MR , Moss SE , Futter CE . EGF stimulates annexin 1 - dependent inward vesiculation in a multivesicular endosome subpopulation . EMBO J 25 : 1 – 12 , 2006 . 841 . Wickstrom SA , Fassler R . Regulation of membrane trafﬁc by integrin signaling . Trends Cell Biol 2011 . 842 . Wienke DC , Knetsch ML , Neuhaus EM , Reedy MC , Manstein DJ . Disruption of a dynamin homologue affects endocytosis , organelle morphology , and cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 225 – 243 , 1999 . 843 . Wiesner S , Ogunjimi AA , Wang HR , Rotin D , Sicheri F , Wrana JL , Forman - Kay JD . Autoinhibition of the HECT - type ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 through its C2 domain . Cell 130 : 651 – 662 , 2007 . 844 . WildeA , BeattieEC , LemL , RiethofDA , LiuSH , MobleyWC , SorianoP , BrodskyFM . EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake . Cell 96 : 677 – 687 , 1999 . 845 . Wiley HS , Cunningham DD . A steady state model for analyzing the cellular binding , internalization and degradation of polypeptide ligands . Cell 25 : 433 – 440 , 1981 . 846 . Wiley HS , Cunningham DD . The endocytotic rate constant . A cellular parameter for quantitating receptor - mediated endocytosis . J Biol Chem 257 : 4222 – 4229 , 1982 . 847 . Wilkin M , Tongngok P , Gensch N , Clemence S , Motoki M , Yamada K , Hori K , Tani - guchi - Kanai M , Franklin E , Matsuno K , Baron M . Drosophila HOPS and AP - 3 complex genes are required for a Deltex - regulated activation of notch in the endosomal traf - ﬁcking pathway . Dev Cell 15 : 762 – 772 , 2008 . 848 . Wilson A , Ardiet DL , Saner C , Vilain N , Beermann F , Aguet M , Macdonald HR , Zilian O . Normal hemopoiesis and lymphopoiesis in the combined absence of numb and numblike . J Immunol 178 : 6746 – 6751 , 2007 . 849 . WindlerSL , BilderD . Endocyticinternalizationroutesrequiredfordelta / notchsignal - ing . Curr Biol 20 : 538 – 543 , 2010 . 850 . Witherow DS , Garrison TR , Miller WE , Lefkowitz RJ . beta - Arrestin inhibits NF - kap - paB activity by means of its interaction with the NF - kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 8603 – 8607 , 2004 . 851 . Woelk T , Oldrini B , Maspero E , Confalonieri S , Cavallaro E , Di Fiore PP , Polo S . Molecular mechanisms of coupled monoubiquitination . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 1246 – 1254 , 2006 . 852 . Wollert T , Hurley JH . Molecular mechanism of multivesicular body biogenesis by ESCRT complexes . Nature 464 : 864 – 869 , 2010 . 853 . Wollert T , Wunder C , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hurley JH . Membrane scission by the ESCRT - III complex . Nature 458 : 172 – 177 , 2009 . 854 . WoodsAJ , WhiteDP , CaswellPT , NormanJC . PKD1 / PKCmupromotesalphavbeta3 integrin recycling and delivery to nascent focal adhesions . EMBO J 23 : 2531 – 2543 , 2004 . 855 . Worthylake R , Opresko LK , Wiley HS . ErbB - 2 ampliﬁcation inhibits down - regulation and induces constitutive activation of both ErbB - 2 and epidermal growth factor re - ceptors . J Biol Chem 274 : 8865 – 8874 , 1999 . 856 . Wu F , Yao PJ . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis and Alzheimer’s disease : an update . Ageing Res Rev 8 : 147 – 149 , 2009 . 857 . Wu M , Huang B , Graham M , Raimondi A , Heuser JE , Zhuang X , De Camilli P . Cou - pling between clathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - dependent tubula - tion in a cell - free system . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 902 – 908 , 2010 . 858 . WuM , KwonHY , RattisF , BlumJ , ZhaoC , AshkenaziR , JacksonTL , GaianoN , Oliver T , Reya T . Imaging hematopoietic precursor division in real time . Cell Stem Cell 1 : 541 – 554 , 2007 . 859 . Wunderlich W , Fialka I , Teis D , Alpi A , Pfeifer A , Parton RG , Lottspeich F , Huber LA . A novel 14 - kilodalton protein interacts with the mitogen - activated protein kinase ENDOCYTOSIS AND SIGNALING 365 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m scaffold mp1 on a late endosomal / lysosomal compartment . J Cell Biol 152 : 765 – 776 , 2001 . 860 . Wurdinger T , Tannous BA , Saydam O , Skog J , Grau S , Soutschek J , Weissleder R , Breakeﬁeld XO , Krichevsky AM . miR - 296 regulates growth factor receptor overex - pression in angiogenic endothelial cells . Cancer Cell 14 : 382 – 393 , 2008 . 861 . Xiao K , McClatchy DB , Shukla AK , Zhao Y , Chen M , Shenoy SK , Yates JR 3rd , Lefkowitz RJ . Functional specialization of beta - arrestin interactions revealed by pro - teomic analysis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 12011 – 12016 , 2007 . 862 . XuL , LubkovV , TaylorLJ , Bar - SagiD . FeedbackregulationofRassignalingbyRabex - 5 - mediated ubiquitination . Curr Biol 2010 . 863 . Xu Z , Liang L , Wang H , Li T , Zhao M . HCRP1 , a novel gene that is downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma , encodes a growth - inhibitory protein . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 311 : 1057 – 1066 , 2003 . 864 . YamadaH , OhashiE , AbeT , KusumiN , LiSA , YoshidaY , WatanabeM , TomizawaK , Kashiwakura Y , Kumon H , Matsui H , Takei K . Amphiphysin 1 is important for actin polymerization during phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 18 : 4669 – 4680 , 2007 . 865 . Yamamoto H , Sakane H , Michiue T , Kikuchi A . Wnt3a and Dkk1 regulate distinct internalization pathways of LRP6 to tune the activation of beta - catenin signaling . Dev Cell 15 : 37 – 48 , 2008 . 866 . Yan H , Jahanshahi M , Horvath EA , Liu HY , Pﬂeger CM . Rabex - 5 ubiquitin ligase activityrestrictsRassignalingtoestablishpathwayhomeostasisin Drosophila . CurrBiol 2010 . 867 . YanM , CollinsRF , GrinsteinS , TrimbleWS . Coronin - 1functionisrequiredforphago - some formation . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 3077 – 3087 , 2005 . 868 . Yang SD , Fong YL , Benovic JL , Sibley DR , Caron MG , Lefkowitz RJ . Dephosphoryla - tion of the beta 2 - adrenergic receptor and rhodopsin by latent phosphatase 2 . J Biol Chem 263 : 8856 – 8858 , 1988 . 869 . Yang Y , Hentati A , Deng HX , Dabbagh O , Sasaki T , Hirano M , Hung WY , Ouahchi K , Yan J , Azim AC , Cole N , Gascon G , Yagmour A , Ben - Hamida M , Pericak - Vance M , Hentati F , Siddique T . The gene encoding alsin , a protein with three guanine - nucle - otide exchange factor domains , is mutated in a form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Nat Genet 29 : 160 – 165 , 2001 . 870 . Yap LF , Jenei V , Robinson CM , Moutasim K , Benn TM , Threadgold SP , Lopes V , Wei W , Thomas GJ , Paterson IC . Upregulation of Eps8 in oral squamous cell carcinoma promotes cell migration and invasion through integrin - dependent Rac1 activation . Oncogene 28 : 2524 – 2534 , 2009 . 871 . YararD , Waterman - StorerCM , SchmidSL . Adynamicactincytoskeletonfunctionsat multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 964 – 975 , 2005 . 872 . Yu X , Riley T , Levine AJ . The regulation of the endosomal compartment by p53 the tumor suppressor gene . FEBS Lett 276 : 2201 – 2212 , 2009 . 873 . YueR , KangJ , ZhaoC , HuW , TangY , LiuX , PeiG . Beta - arrestin1regulateszebraﬁsh hematopoiesis through binding to YY1 and relieving polycomb group repression . Cell 139 : 535 – 546 , 2009 . 874 . Yutin N , Wolf MY , Wolf YI , Koonin EV . The origins of phagocytosis and eukaryogen - esis . Biol Direct 4 : 9 , 2009 . 875 . Zecchini S , Cavallaro U . Neural cell adhesion molecule in cancer : expression and mechanisms . Adv Exp Med Biol 663 : 319 – 333 , 2010 . 876 . ZengS , XuZ , LipkowitzS , LongleyJB . Regulationofstemcellfactorreceptorsignaling by Cbl family proteins ( Cbl - b / c - Cbl ) . Blood 105 : 226 – 232 , 2005 . 877 . Zhang Q , Zhao B , Li W , Oiso N , Novak EK , Rusiniak ME , Gautam R , Chintala S , O’BrienEP , ZhangY , RoeBA , ElliottRW , EicherEM , LiangP , KratzC , LegiusE , Spritz RA , O’SullivanTN , CopelandNG , JenkinsNA , SwankRT . Ru2andRuencodemouse orthologsofthegenesmutatedinhumanHermansky - Pudlaksyndrometypes5and6 . Nat Genet 33 : 145 – 153 , 2003 . 878 . Zhong H , De Marzo AM , Laughner E , Lim M , Hilton DA , Zagzag D , Buechler P , Isaacs WB , Semenza GL , Simons JW . Overexpression of hypoxia - inducible factor 1alpha in common human cancers and their metastases . Cancer Res 59 : 5830 – 5835 , 1999 . 879 . Zhong W , Feder JN , Jiang MM , Jan LY , Jan YN . Asymmetric localization of a mamma - lian numb homolog during mouse cortical neurogenesis . Neuron 17 : 43 – 53 , 1996 . 880 . Zhou AX , Toylu A , Nallapalli RK , Nilsson G , Atabey N , Heldin CH , Boren J , Bergo MO , Akyurek LM . Filamin a mediates HGF / c - MET signaling in tumor cell migration . Int J Cancer 128 : 839 – 846 , 2011 . 881 . Zhou Y , Atkins JB , Rompani SB , Bancescu DL , Petersen PH , Tang H , Zou K , Stewart SB , Zhong W . The mammalian Golgi regulates numb signaling in asymmetric cell division by releasing ACBD3 during mitosis . Cell 129 : 163 – 178 , 2007 . 882 . Zhu XL , Liang L , Ding YQ . Overexpression of FMNL2 is closely related to metastasis of colorectal cancer . Int J Colorectal Dis 23 : 1041 – 1047 , 2008 . 883 . Zhu Y , Xu J , Heinemann SF . Two pathways of synaptic vesicle retrieval revealed by single - vesicle imaging . Neuron 61 : 397 – 411 , 2009 . 884 . Zilfou JT , Lowe SW . Tumor suppressive functions of p53 . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1 : a001883 , 2009 . 885 . ZoncuR , PereraRM , BalkinDM , PirruccelloM , ToomreD , DeCamilliP . Aphospho - inositideswitchcontrolsthematurationandsignalingpropertiesofAPPLendosomes . Cell 136 : 1110 – 1121 , 2009 . 886 . ZoncuR , PereraRM , SebastianR , NakatsuF , ChenH , BallaT , AyalaG , ToomreD , De Camilli PV . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphati - dylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 3793 – 3798 , 2007 . 887 . Zuchner S , Noureddine M , Kennerson M , Verhoeven K , Claeys K , De Jonghe P , Merory J , Oliveira SA , Speer MC , Stenger JE , Walizada G , Zhu D , Pericak - Vance MA , NicholsonG , TimmermanV , VanceJM . Mutationsinthepleckstrinhomologydomain of dynamin 2 cause dominant intermediate Charcot - Marie - Tooth disease . Nat Genet 37 : 289 – 294 , 2005 . 888 . Zunino R , Li Q , Rose SD , Romero - Benitez MM , Lejen T , Brandan NC , Trifaro JM . Expression of scinderin in megakaryoblastic leukemia cells induces differentiation , maturation , and apoptosis with release of plateletlike particles and inhibits prolifera - tion and tumorigenesis . Blood 98 : 2210 – 2219 , 2001 . 889 . ZwangY , YardenY . Systemsbiologyofgrowthfactor - inducedreceptorendocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 349 – 363 , 2009 . SIGISMUND ET AL . 366 Physiol Rev (cid:127) VOL 92 (cid:127) JANUARY 2012 (cid:127) www . prv . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 21 , 2017 h tt p : / / ph ys r e v . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m