Potassium - dependent Assembly of Coated Pits : New Coated Pits Form as Planar Clathrin Lattices Janet M . Larkin , William C . DonzeU , and Richard G . W . Anderson Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , Southwestern Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences , The University of Texas Health Science Center at Dallas , Dallas , Texas 75235 . Dr . Larkin ' s present address is Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut 06510 . Abstract . Previous studies have shown that when hu - man fibroblasts are depleted of intracellular K ÷ , coated pits disappear from the cell surface and the receptor - mediated endocytosis of low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) is inhibited . We have now used the K + depletion pro - tocol to study several aspects of coated pit function . First , since coated pits rapidly form when K÷ - depleted fibroblasts are incubated in the presence of 10 mM KCI , we studied the sequence of assembly of coated pits as visualized in carbon - platinum replicas of inner membrane surfaces from cells that had been incubated in the presence of K ÷ for various times . New coated pits initially appeared as planar clathrin lattices that increased in size by the formation of polygons at the margin of the lattice . Once the lattice reached a criti - cal size it invaginated to form coated vesicles . Second , we determined that LDL - ferritin can induce clustering of LDL receptors over noncoated membrane on the surface of K + - depleted fibroblasts ; however , when these cells are subsequently incubated in the presence of K ÷ , these clusters become associated with newly formed coated pits and are internalized . Finally , we determined that K ÷ depletion inhibits the assembly of coated pits , but that existing coated pits in K÷ - depleted cells are able to internalize LDL . These results sug - gest that the clathrin lattice of coated pits is actively involved in membrane shape change during endocyto - sis and that the structural proteins of the lattice are cy - clically assembled and disassembled in the process . C OATED pits are the ubiquitous cell surface specializa - tion that mediate the receptor - dependent endocytosis of a wide variety of macromolecules ( 7 , 9 ) . In many tissue culture cells , coated pits occupy (cid:127)2 % of the cell surface ( 4 ) and can contain as much as 70 % of the cell sur - face receptors for ligands such as low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) ~ ( 3 ) . Two important functions have been ascribed to these regions of plasma membrane . ( a ) Their molecular architecture specifies the clustering of certain membrane receptors ; and ( b ) they are directly or indirectly responsible for controlling the invagination of plasma membrane to form endocytic vesicles ( 4 ) . The cytoplasmic portion of the transmembrane receptor for LDL appears to contain information that causes the receptor to cluster over coated pits . This segment of the mol - ecule contains the 50 - amino acid COOH - terminal sequence ( 18 ) . Four different mutant LDL receptors that are unable to cluster in coated pits all have defects in this region of the mol - ecule ( 6 , 14 , 15 ) . The most revealing of these mutants is one where the tyrosine at positions 807 is changed to a cysteine ( 6 ) . The aberrant behavior of a receptor with a single amino acid substitution suggests that clustering depends upon the precise interaction of the cytoplasmic tail with some molecu - lar component ( s ) of the coated pit . 1 . Abbreviation used in this paper : LDL , low density lipoprotein . For a ligand to be internalized during receptor - mediated endocytosis , portions of plasma membrane that contain the ligand - receptor complex must invaginate to form endocytic vesicles ( 7 ) . Numerous morphologic studies have provided evidence that the coated pit is responsible for invagination ( 4 ) . Heuser and Evans ( 11 ) proposed that the polygonal clathrin lattice of the coated pit undergoes a molecular rear - rangement that converts planar coated pits into invaginated coated pits , which subsequently bud from the membrane . However , there is not any direct evidence that a coated pit can undergo this shape transformation ; moreover , candidate molecules that might be responsible for this reaction have yet to be identified . Recently we reported that when human fibroblasts were depleted of intracellular K ÷ the number of coated pits de - clined by 80 - 90 % and there was a corresponding inhibition of LDL internalization ( 12 , 13 ) . Although these results im - plied that cells without coated pits are unable to internalize receptor - bound macromolecules , the K + depletion protocol may have nonspecifically inhibited endocytosis . However , Moya et al . ( 17 ) have recently shown that when Hep2 cells are depleted of intracellular K + the endocytosis of t25I - transferrin by coated pits is blocked , but 125I - ricin toxin con - tinues to be internalized . Therefore , cells that lack K ÷ can internalize selected molecules even though coated pits are absent . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 86 / 12 / 2619 / 9 $ 1 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 103 ( No . 6 , Pt . 2 ) , Dec . 1986 2619 - 2627 2619 Although we do not know why low intracellular K ÷ has such a dramatic effect on coated pits ( 13 ) , we have used this technique to obtain new information about the function of coated pits in receptor clustering and plasma membrane in - vagination . First , since coated pits rapidly reform when K ÷ - depleted ceils are incubated in the presence of K ÷ , we have mapped the sequence of events in coated pit assembly as visualized in carbon - platinum replicas of the inner mem - brane surface . Second , we have used t2SI - LDL and LDL - ferritin as probes for the LDL receptor to determine both the distribution of the ligand - receptor complex on the surface of cells that lack coated pits and how the complex is internalized when new coated pits form . Finally , we have used this pro - tocol to show that coated pit structural proteins recycle dur - ing endocytosis . Materials and Methods Materials Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle ' s medium ( DME ; No . 320 - 1885 ) and Dulbecco ' s phosphate - buffered saline ( No . 310 - 4190 ) were purchased from Gibco ( Grand Island , NY ) . A mixture of insulin , transferrin , and selenium ( ITS Premix ) was purchased from Collaborative Research , Inc . ( Lexington , MA ) . Human LDL ( d = 1 . 019 - 1 . 063 g / ml ) and lipoprotein - deficient serum ( d > 1 . 215 g / ml ) were prepared by uitracentrifugation of plasma ( 8 ) . LDL was radiolabeled with 12sI as described ( 8 ) . LDL was covalently coupled to ferritin as previously described ( 2 ) . Epon was obtained from Ladd Research Industries , Inc . ( Burlington , VT ) . Poly - / - lysine ( No . P1524 ) was from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) , amyl acetate ( No . 45950 ) from Fluka ( Hauppauge , NY ) , and bone dry CO2 ( No . 131303 ) from Liquid Air Corp . ( San Francisco , CA ) . All fixatives were from Electron Microscopy Sciences ( Fort Washington , PA ) . Other supplies were obtained from sources as previ - ously reported ( 12 ) . The buffers used were as follows : buffer A , 50 mM Hepes , 100 mM NaC1 , pH 7 . 4 ; buffer B , 50 mM Hepes , 100 mM NaCI , 1 mM CaCI2 , 10 % lipoprotein - deficient serum , pH 7 . 4 ; and buffer C , 20 mM Hepes , 100 mM KCI , 5 mM MgCI2 , 3 mM EGTA , pH 6 . 8 . Cell Culture Cultured fibroblasts were derived from a skin biopsy obtained from a nor - mal subject . Cells were grown in monolayer and set up for experiments ac - cording to a standard format . On day 0 , 3 - 4 x 104 cells were seeded into each petri dish ( 60 x 15 mm ) containing 3 ml DME supplemented with 100 U / m1 penicillin , 100 mg / ml streptomycin , and 10 % vol / vol fetal calf serum . Fresh medium of the same composition was added on day 3 . On day 5 of cell growth , each monolayer received 2 ml DME supplemented with peni - cillin , streptomycin , 5 ~ g / ml insulin , 5 ~ tg / ml transferrin , 5 mg / mi selenium ( ITS Premix ) , and 10 % vol / vol human lipoprotein - deficient serum . Experi - ments were performed on day 7 after 48 h of incubation in lipoprotein - deficient serum . Protocols for Preparing K÷ - depleted Fibroblasts Cells were depleted of K + at 37°C using the hypotonic shock procedure ( 12 ) . On day 7 of cell growth , the medium was discarded and each mono - layer was washed in 3 ml of buffer A . Each monolayer was then incubated for 5 min in 2 ml of hypotonic medium ( DME / water , 1 : 1 ) , followed by a 10 - min incubation in buffer A . The medium was discarded and the cells were incubated for the indicated time in 2 ml of buffer B . To deplete cells of K + at 4°C , each monolayer of fibroblasts was sub - jeered to the following sequential incubations on day 7 of cell growth : ( a ) 5 rain of incubation in hypotonic medium at 37°C ; ( b ) 10 rain of incubation in buffer A at 37°C ; and ( c ) 180 min of incubation in buffer B at 4°C . Labeling of Cells with tz ~ I - LDL Each monolayer received a direct addition of 125I - LDL ( 12 ~ tg / ml ) in the in - dicated buffer in the absence or presence of 500 I . tg / ml of unlabeled LDL . After incubation for the indicated times , receptor - bound or internalized ' 2SI - LDL was measured by the dextran sulfate release assay ( 8 ) . Values for specific binding or internalization were calculated by subtracting the amount of t2SI - LDL bound or internalized in the presence of unlabeled LDL ( nonspecific ) from that bound or internalized in the absence of unlabeled LDL ( total ) . The values for nonspecific binding or internalization in control incubations were < 5 % of the total values . Each value shown in the figures represents the average of duplicate incubations . Labeling of Cells with LDL - Ferritin Each monolayer received a direct addition of LDL - ferritin ( 50 - 65 I . tg / ml LDL protein ) , in the presence or absence of 500 Ixg / ml of unlabeled LDL , in the indicated buffer . After incubation for the indicated times at the appro - priate temperature , the monolayers were washed at 4°C to remove nonspe - cifically bound LDL - ferritin ( 2 ) . Cells were fixed and processed for elec - tron microscopy ( see below ) . The distribution of LDL - ferritin on the cell surface or within the cell was quantified as previously described ( 2 , 3 ) . Preparation of Carbon - Platinum Replicas of the l ~ broblast Inner Cell Surface Carbon - platinum replicas were prepared according to the method of Ag - geler et al . ( 1 ) . On day 7 of cell growth , fibroblasts grown on coverslips were subjected to the sequential incubations indicated in the figure legends . At the end of the incubation , the monolayers were washed twice with ice - cold Dulbecco ' s PBS and once with ice - cold buffer C at 4°C . The coverslip con - raining the monolayer was then overlayed with a second coverslip that had been coated with poly - l - lysine ( 1 mg / ml > 300 , 000 mol wt , in distilled water for 1 h ) . The ovedayed coverslip was tapped gently to bind the cells to the poly - / - lysine and then the two coverslips were separated in ice - cold buffer C . The poly - / - lysine - coa ~ d coverslip , which contained membranes from the upper surface of the cell , was fixed with 1 % vol / vol glutaraldehyde plus 1 % vol / vol formaldehyde in buffer C for 30 min . The coverslips were then fixed for 30 rain with 0 . 5 % OsO4 in buffer C , dehydrated into amyl acetate , and critically point dried in a critical point dryer ( model CPD020 ; Balzers , Hudson , NH ) using bone dry CO2 . 7 . 5 - nm thick carbon - platinum replicas of the membranes were made in a freeze fracture machine ( model 301 ; Bal - zers ) equipped with a rotating cold stage ( 120 rpm ) , at a shadow angle of 28 ° . After reinforcing the replicas with carbon ( D - am thick ) they were floated free of the coverslip in a distilled water bath and digested with Clorox for 2 min before mounting on Formvar - coated grids . Electron Microscopy Fibroblast monolayers were fixed with 3 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate ( pH 7 . 3 ) for 30 min at room temperature . The fixed cells were postfixed with 2 % OsO4 in 0 . 1 M sodium cocadylate , pH 7 . 2 , and embed - ded directly on the dish in Epon ( 2 ) . Sections were prepared for quantifica - tion as previously described ( 2 ) . Sections were cut with an ultramicrotome ( MT - 2B ; DuPont Co . , SorvaU Instruments Div . , Newton , CT ) and viewed with a JEOL 100 CX electron microscope . Other Assays The content of intracellular K + was determined by flame photometry ( 12 ) . The content of cellular protein was measured by the Lowry method ( 16 ) . Results New Coated Pits Form as Planar Clathrin Lattices The three - dimensional organization of coated pits is revealed in carbon - platinum replicas of the inner membrane surface ( 1 , 11 ) . The electron microscopic images of these replicas al - low the unambiguous identification of clathrin lattices and give information about the relationship between the polygon arrangement within the lattice and the curvature of the coated pit . Therefore , we used this technique to study the initial stages of coated pit formation that take place when K + - de - pleted human fibroblasts are incubated in the presence of K + for different lengths of time . We restricted our analysis to the upper plasma membrane of the cultured human fibroblast where coated pit - mediated The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 103 , 1986 2620 Figure 1 . Carbon - platinum replica of the inner cell surface of normal human fibroblasts . Fibroblasts were grown on coverslips , and on day 7 the upper cell surface was attached to a poly - l - lysine - coated coverslip and processed as described . ( A ) A low magnification view of the inner cell surface : open arrowheads , small planar coated pits ; solid arrowheads , breaks in lattice of large planar coated pits ; curved arrow , irregular shaped , invaginated coated pit . ( B , C , and D ) High magnification view of irregularly shaped , invaginated coated pits . ( E ) A low magnification view of the inner cell surface : open arrowheads , small planar coated pits ; solid arrowheads , breaks in lattice of large planar coated pits ; circles , uniformly curved , invaginated coated pits ; brackets , one coated pit with two domains that have different degrees of curvature . Bars : ( A and E ) 0 . 5 Ixm ; ( B , C , and D ) 0 . 2 gm . Larkin et al . Potassium - dependent Assembly of Coated Pits 2621 Figure 2 . Carbon - platinum replica of the inner cell surface of a K + - depleted human fibroblast . Fibroblasts grown on coverslips were sub - jected to the following sequential incubations at 37°C : ( a ) a 5 - min hypotonic shock followed by a 10 - min incubation in isotonic K + - free buffer A ; and ( b ) a 30 - min incubation in K + - free buffer B . The upper plasma membrane was removed and replicas prepared as described . ( A ) A region of the surface between two stress fibers . Numerous microcoated pits are present ( arrows ) . ( B ) A high magnification view of several microcoated pits showing the presence of a coat material that has the appearance of a polygonal lattice . Bars : ( A and B ) 0 . 2 Ixm . endocytosis is an active process ( 3 , 7 ) . Fig . 1 shows several replica images of the cytoplasmic surface of membrane from untreated fibroblasts . Usually there were several bundles of filaments that had the appearance of actin - containing stress fibers spaced along the membrane ( Fig . 1 , A and E ) . Be - tween the stress fibers were numerous coated pits that varied in size ( 200 - 850 nm in diameter ) and degree of curvature . The majority of these coated pits consisted of planar ( flat ) or slightly curved clathrin lattices ( open arrowheads , Fig . 1 , A and E ) . The larger planar lattices usually were subdivided into irregularly sized domains by breaks in the lattice ( solid arrowheads , Fig . 1 , A and E ) . Each domain appeared to function independently of the adjacent domain within the same coated region because they often had different degrees of curvature ( brackets , Fig . 1 E ) . Another striking feature of the coated pits on the surface of untreated fibroblast was the pleomorphic shape of the invaginated clathrin lattices . Some of the different shapes encountered are illustrated in Fig . 1 ( curved arrow , Fig . 1 A and Fig . 1 , B - D ) . In addition , uniformly curved invaginated areas were also seen ( circles , Fig . 1 E ) . As judged by indirect immunofluorescence using anti - clathrin IgG or by thin - section electron microscopy , K÷ - de - pleted human fibroblasts have few coated pits ( 12 ) . This was also found to be the case in carbon - platinum replicas of membranes from K÷ - depleted cells ( Fig . 2 A ) . The stress fiber arrangement was normal in these membranes , but the portions of membrane between the fibers were virtually de - void of coated pits . A unique feature of the K + - depleted membrane , however , was the presence of numerous small membrane blebs ( arrows , Fig . 2 A ) that measured 60 - 70 nm in diameter , which at high magnification appeared to be decorated with a polygonal lattice ( Fig . 2 B ) . Due to the ex - treme curvature of these blebs , often only the outline of a po - lygonal network could be resolved . Although we can not be sure that these blebs are coated with clathrin , for future dis - cussion ( see below ) we refer to these structures as micro - coated pits because they were 3 to 14 times smaller than the coated pits that were present in untreated membranes . The first evidence of coated pit formation was seen in replicas of membranes from K + - depleted cells that had been incubated in the presence of 10 mM KCI for 2 to 5 min . At this time , small planar clathrin lattices , consisting of five or more distinct polygons , were found randomly distributed across the membrane ( circles , Fig . 3 A ) . The size of these lattices was quite variable but usually contained < 20 poly - gons . Several structural features of coated pit assembly are illustrated in Fig . 3 , B , C , and D . Assembly appeared to begin with the formation of several polygons at focal sites on the membrane ( Fig . 3 B ) . At the margins of these completed lat - tices , partially assembled polygons were found to emanate from fully formed polygons , which suggests that growth in the size of the lattice involves the progressive assembly of new polygons from the sides of existing polygons . In Fig . 3 B , forming polygons with two sides ( arrow 1 ) , four sides ( ar - row 2 ) and five sides ( arrow 3 ) are seen . In some cases , two lattices began to form adjacent to each other ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . These two lattices either merged into one lattice by the formation of new polygons in the region between each com - pleted lattice ( arrows , Fig . 3 C ) or the two lattices did not merge with each other ( arrows , Fig . 3 D ) , which most likely accounts for the presence of the discontinuous lattices seen in untreated cells ( solid arrowheads , Fig . 1 A ) . In all cases , forming lattices were composed predominantly of hexagons . The images in Fig . 3 also show that usually one or more microcoated pits were associated with the forming coated pits . Usually these structures were near the margin of the coated pit , but occasionally they were seen in the middle of The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 103 , 1986 2622 Figure 3 . Carbon - platinum replica of the inner cell surface of a K + - depleted human fibroblast that had been incubated in the presence of K ÷ for either 2 min ( B , C , D ) or 5 min ( A ) . Fibroblasts were depleted of K ÷ as described in Fig . 2 and then incubated for the indicated time in the presence of buffer B that contained 10 mM KCI . Replicas were prepared of the inner surface of the upper cell membrane as described . ( A ) A view of the inner membrane surface . Several planar coated pits ( circles ) are distributed across the surface . ( B ) During lattice assembly , incomplete polygons were found at the margin of the lattice . Arrows indicate incomplete polygons that had two sides ( 1 ) , four sides ( 2 ) , and five sides ( 3 ) . ( C and D ) When two lattices were initiated next to each other , sometimes the two merged by the assembly of polygons ( arrows , C ) and other times they did not ( arrows , D ) . Bars : ( A ) 0 . 5 lxm ; ( B , C , and D ) 0 . 1 Ima . a partially assembled lattice . However , on the same segment of membrane there were also many microcoated pits that were not associated with forming coated regions . The coated pits in K÷ - depleted cells that had been in - cubated for longer times in the presence of K ÷ were larger and appeared to be more completely assembled ( arrows , Fig . 4 ) . In addition , by 5 to 10 min of K ÷ repletion , deeply in - vaginated coated pits were evident ( circles , Fig . 4 ) . After 15 - 30 min of K ÷ repletion , the distribution and appearance of coated pits was similar to control cells ( data not shown ) . The number of microcoated pits steadily declined over this period of time so that by 15 - 30 min they were rarely seen . Formation of Coated Pits Is Coupled to the Internalization of LDL An important test of whether this assembly sequence repre - sents a normal pathway for coated pit formation is to deter - mine if these coated pits are capable of internalizing macro - molecules . We have addressed this question by comparing the kinetics of coated pit formation with the kinetics of LDL internalization during K + repletion . The kinetics of coated pit disappearance and reappearance in response to K + was determined by quantitative thin - section electron microscopy . Human fibroblasts were treated with hypertonic medium and then incubated in K + - free buffer B for 45 rain . At this time , buffer B was replaced with DME and the cells were incubated for an additional 45 min . Cells were fixed at regular time intervals during the incuba - tions and processed for quantitative electron microscopic analysis . During the 45 - min incubation in the absence of K + ( Fig . 5 ) , there was a steady decline in the number of coated pits , reaching zero per millimeter of cell surface at 45 min . The half - time for loss of coated pits was 22 . 5 min . When the K + - free buffer was replaced with DME , there was a rapid increase in the number of coated pits . The half - time for coated pit recovery was 5 min . The kinetics of coated pit recovery determined with this technique was in agreement with the time it took for new coated pits to appear when Larkin et al . Potassium - dependent Assembly of Coated Pits 2623 visualized by the carbon - platinum replica technique ( see Figs . 3 and 4 ) . To assess the K + - dependent return of coated pit function , K + - depleted fibroblasts were labeled with mI - LDL at 37°C . The cells were washed to remove nonspecifieaUy bound 125I - LDL , one set was incubated for various times in the presence of 10 mM KCI and a companion set was incubated in the absence of KC1 . As seen in Fig . 6 , K ÷ caused a rapid loss of surface bound 12SI - LDL ( Fig . 6 A ) and a correspond - ing increase in internalized ~ I - LDL ( Fig . 6 B ) . Cells that were incubated in the absence of K + did not internalize 125I - LDL . The half - time for K + - dependent internalization was 7 min . Therefore , the kinetics of LDL internalization was nearly the same as the kinetics of coated pit formation ( Fig . 5 ) . The close correspondence between the return of coated pits and the internalization of pre - bound t25I - LDL in re - sponse to K + suggested that newly formed coated pits were functional . Therefore , we used electron microscopy to visu - alize the initial phases of LDL internalization when K + - de - pleted fibroblasts that had been labeled with LDL - ferritin were incubated in the presence of K + for various times . Immediately after the incubation of K + - depleted cells in the presence of LDL - ferritin , ferritin was found to be clustered in groups of 5 to 10 cores and the clusters were randomly dis - tributed on the cell surface ( Fig . 7 A ) . Although the few re - maining coated pits were labeled ( Table I ) , most of the LDL - ferritin clusters were over noncoated membrane . After 5 min in the presence of K + , however , large clusters of ferritin were found over coated pits ( Fig . 7 B ) but only a modest amount of LDL - ferritin had been internalized ( Table I ) . Af - ter further time in the presence of K ÷ , there was an increase Figure 4 . Carbon - platinum replica of the inner cell surface after K + - depleted human fibroblasts were incubated in the presence of K + for 10 min . Fibroblasts were depleted of K + as described in Fig . 2 and then incubated for the indicated time in the presence of buffer B that contained 10 mM KCI . Replicas of the inner surface of the upper cell membrane were prepared as described . Planar lat - tices had increased in size ( arrows ) and deeply invaginated lattices ( circles ) were frequently present . Bar , 1 tma . LO C . ) 18 , . ~ o co 15 ~ k W o 12 3 s , , , , 0 10 20 30 40 50 6 ; 70 80 90 TIME ( minutes ) Figure 5 . Kinetics of coated pit disappearance and reappearance in response to intracellular K ÷ . Fibroblast monolayers were sub - jected to the following sequential incubations at 37°C : ( a ) a 5 - min hypotonic shock followed by a 10 - min incubation in isotonic K + - free buffer A ( shock + wash ) ; ( b ) a 30 - min incubation in K + - free buffer B followed by a 40 - min incubation in DME . At the indicated times , samples were fixed with 3 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M Na cocadylate , pH 7 . 3 , and processed for electron microscopy . The number of coated pits per millimeter of cell surface were tabulated as previously described ( 2 ) . in the number of coated pits , a decline in surface - bound LDL - ferritin , and an increase in internalized LDL - ferritin ( Table I ) . K + - depletion Inhibits Coated Pit Assembly Our results suggest that in the potassium - depleted cell , coated pits are disassembled and the clathrin subunits are poised for re - assembly once potassium levels are restored . Coated pits could be disassembled in these cells either be - cause low concentrations of intracellular K + promotes the dissociation of the clathrin lattice from the cell membrane or because K + is required for coated pit assembly . The first explanation predicts that coated pits in K + - depleted cells would not internalize macromoleeules because they disas - semble before internalization . However , if the second expla - nation is correct , then existing coated pits would internalize , but the number of coated pits would decline due to the lack of new coated pit formation . To distinguish between these two possibilities , conditions were established where coated pit function could be measured in K + - depleted cells . This was accomplished by depleting cells of K + at 4°C , labeling them with LDL - ferritin , and assessing internalization of LDL - ferritin when the cells were shifted to 37°C in the ab - sence of K + . Cells that were K + - depleted at 4°C and then labeled with LDL - ferritin had normal numbers of coated pits and 50 % of the ferritin was clustered over these regions of membrane ( Table II ) . When these cells were incubated for 15 min at 37°C in the absence of K + , however , there was a dramatic decrease in both the number of coated pits and the amount of surface - bound LDL - ferritin . Coated pits and surface - bound LDL - ferritin declined further by 30 min at 37°C ; moreover , these cells had internalized ~ 50 % of the LDL - ferritin that was initially bound to the cell surface at 4°C ( Ta - ble II ) , which corresponds to the amount of LDL - ferritin The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 103 , 1986 2624 LA RECEPTOR - BOUND ~ - + KC , o 100 o . un E 0 i i i i i i , - B INTRACELLULAR v . J 500 ~ + KCI 400 " ~ o 30O 2001 ~ ~ ¢No KCI 100 r 0 ( ~ I I I I I i 5 10 15 20 25 30 TIME ( minutes ) Figure 6 . Kinetics of 12SI - LDL internalization during K + recovery . Fibroblast monolayers were subjected to the following sequential incubations at 37°C : ( a ) a 5 - min hypotonic shock followed by a 10 - min incubation in isotonic K + - free buffer A ; ( b ) a 60 - min incu - bation in K + - free buffer B ; ( c ) a 30 - min incubation in K + - free buffer B that contained 15 Ixg / ml 125I - LDL in the presence and ab - sence of 500 Ixg / ml LDL ; ( d ) an incubation for the indicated times in buffer B that either contained no K ÷ ( solid circle ) or 10 mM KC1 ( open circle ) , after which receptor - bound t25I - LDL ( A ) and intracellular uSI - LDL ( B ) were measured as described . present in coated pits at 4°C . During the incubation period , intracellular K ÷ levels were nearly undetectable ( Table II ) . In contrast to the behavior of K + - depleted cells , cells in the same experiment that were not subject to the K + - deple - Table L Internalization of LDL - Ferritin in Response to the Return of Coated Pits to the Cell Surface Time after Surface Ferritin Internalized addition of Coated LDL - in coated LDL - 10 mM KCI pits ferritin pits ferritin rain No . ~ ram No . / ram % No . ~ ram 0 3 1 , 063 2 24 5 6 1 , 141 5 300 15 15 144 30 764 30 10 24 42 1 , 255 Fibroblast monolayers were subjected to the following incubations at 37°C : ( a ) a 5 - min hypotonic shock followed by a 10 - rain incubation in K * - free buffer A ; ( b ) a 30 - min incubation in K + - free buffer B ; ( c ) a 60 - min incubation in K + - free buffer B plus 60 tig / ml LDL - ferritin ; and ( d ) incubation with buffer B that contained 10 m _ M KCI for the indicated times . Cells were processed for electron microscopy and the quantification was performed as previously de - scribed ( 3 ) . Values were normalized to 1 mm of cell surface . tion protocol but treated identically were able to internalize all of the pre - bound LDL - ferritin and to maintain normal levels of coated pits . K + levels declined during the 4°C in - cubation but returned to near normal after 15 min at 37°C . Discussion The K + depletion technique continues to provide important information about the structure and function of coated pits . From the current work , we draw three major conclusions about the physiology of this specialized membrane . ( a ) The polygonal lattice of the coated pit , by actively changing shape , is involved in the conversion of planar segments of plasma membrane into endocytic vesicles . ( b ) LDL can in - duce receptor clustering in the absence of coated pits but these clusters rapidly associate with newly formed coated pits when endocytosis resumes after the restoration of nor - mal K + levels . ( c ) The clathrin subunits ( triskelions ) and as - socia ~ _ xi proteins recycle during endocytosis and K + is re - quired for the assembly phase of the cycle . Coated Pit Assembly Heuser and Evans ( 11 ) and Aggeler et al . ( 1 ) introduced the use of carbon - platinum replicas to study the three - dimen - sional organization of coated pits in cultured cells . Our use of this technique revealed that coated pits in human fibro - blasts assume a variety of shapes and sizes . A visual in - spection of these images suggests that at any time during en - Figure 7 . Distribution of LDL - ferritin on the surface of K + - depleted human fibroblasts before ( . 4 ) and after ( B ) a 5 - min incubation in the presence of K + . Human fibroblasts were depleted of intracellular K + as described in Fig . 2 and incubated for 1 h at 37°C in the pres - ence of 50 Ixg / ml LDL - ferritin in K + - free buffer B . One set of cells was fixed immediately ( A ) and the other was incubated in the presence of buffer B that contained 10 mM KCI for 5 min before fixation ( B ) . Samples were prepared for electron microscopy as described . Bar , 0 . 2 Ixm . Larkin et al . Potassium - dependent Assembly of Coated Pits 2625 Table II . Internalization of Pre - bound LDL - Ferritin by K÷ - depleted Fibroblasts Surface - bound Internalized Ferritin in Coated pits LDL - ferritin LDL - ferritin coated pits Intracellular K * Time at 37 ° - KCI + KC1 - KCI + KC1 - KCI + KC1 - KCI + KCI - KCI + KCI min No . / mm No . / mm No . / mm No . / mm No . / mm No . / mm % % neg / mg protein neg / mg proem 0 35 21 496 246 - - - - 48 52 12 87 15 7 26 176 39 - - - - 14 28 n . d . 618 30 2 12 105 11 253 255 2 11 16 826 Fibroblast monolayers were subjected to the following sequential incubations : ( a ) a 5 - rain hypotonic shock followed by a 10 - min incubation in isotonic K + - free buffer A at 37 * ; ( b ) a 180 - min incubation in buffer B containing either no KC1 or 10 mM KCI at 4°C ; and ( c ) a 60 - min incubation at 4°C in the respective buffer B to which 50 txg / ml of LDL - ferritin was added . The cells were washed in buffer B at 4°C and incubated at 37°C for the indicated times in buffer B containing either no KCI or 10 mM KC1 before being fixed and processed for electron microscopy . Quantification was performed as previously described ( 3 ) . Each value is normalized to 1 mm of cell surface . The no shock control cells , incubated in buffer B containing 10 mM KCI for 240 rain at 37 and 4°C , had K - ~ contents of 887 and 82 neg / mg protein , respectively . docytosis the majority of the coated pits have a planar configuration . Most of the invaginated coated pits were uni - formly curved but with different degrees of curvature . How - ever , there were also many invaginated areas that were irregularly shaped . This latter category of coated pits dra - matically illustrates that the clathrin lattice is very plastic . Heuser and Evans ( 11 ) proposed that planar coated pits can transform into invaginated coated pits by the introduction of pentagons into a polygonal lattice that is composed primarily of hexagons ( however , see Harrison and Kirchhausen 10 for an alternative interpretation ) . If this model is correct , then the shape of an invaginated area may be determined by where in the lattice the hexagons are converted to pentagons . If pen - tagons form simultaneously around the planar lattice at a constant distance from the margin , then a uniformly curved invagination will form . However , if pentagons are introduced into the lattice unevenly , puckers or bulges in the lattice may form , giving rise to the various shapes that were seen . Although the images in Fig . 1 imply that the clathrin lat - tice is a dynamic structure capable of assuming a variety of shapes in response to specific stimuli , they do not reveal the sequence of events during endocytosis . On the other hand , the K÷ - dependent assembly experiments indicate that pla - nar coated pits correspond to newly formed lattices and that the invaginated pits are formed from these lattices . Since coated pits that assembled in response to K ÷ were able to internalize LDL , it is most likely that the clathrin lattice plays an active role in the conversion of plasma membrane into endocytic vesicles . When new coated pits formed in response to K ÷ , there was not any obvious preferential site of assembly ; moreover , we could not detect any morphological specialization of the membrane at sites where the lattices were forming . The first visible sign of a new coated pit was the presence of two or three polygons . The coated pit appeared to grow in size by the ordered formation of new polygons at the margin of the planar lattice , and once it reached a critical size , invagination began . This assembly sequence suggests that there are ( a ) sites on the plasma membrane that initiate lattice assembly ; ( b ) factors that control the size of the lattice ; and ( c ) factors that rearrange the lattice to cause the invagination of mem - brane . A completely unexpected finding was the appearance of microcoated pits on the surface of both K÷ - depleted ceils and cells that were actively engaged in coated pit assembly . These highly curved regions of membrane appeared to be covered with a polygonal lattice , which suggests that they are coated with clathrin . However , future immunocytochemical studies with clathrin - specific antibodies will be needed to identify the molecular composition of this material . Their close association with forming coated pits suggests that they may be an assembly precursor , possibly a form of clathrin that appears in response to the absence of K + in these cells . LDL Receptors Can Cluster in the Absence of Coated Pits Although the cytoplasmic tail of the LDL receptor directs the receptor to the coated pit ( 9 ) , there has not been a way to de - termine how LDL influences receptor clustering indepen - dently of the coated pit . With the K÷ - depleted cell , how - ever , we found that LDL - ferritin was capable of inducing receptor clustering in the absence of coated pits . Clustering was temperature - dependent because when binding was car - ried out at 4°C , LDL - ferritin was not clustered on the sur - face of the K + - depleted cell ( data not shown ) . Therefore , LDL can influence the surface dynamics of its receptor , which may contribute to a more efficient internalization when cells are grown in the presence of LDL . Recycling of Coated Pit Structural Proteins Just as the experimental disruption of intracellular pH gradi - ents proved to be a useful tool for studying receptor recycling during receptor - mediated endocytosis ( 5 ) , the K ÷ - depletion method has provided direct evidence that the structural pro - teins of coated pits also recycle . K + appears to be required for this recycling because in its absence existing coated pits can internalize normally but coated pit assembly stops . This new information provides a more complete under - standing of the receptor - mediated endocytosis cycle . A coated pit begins life as a small planar clathrin lattice that consists of several polygons . These planar lattices increase in size as more polygons assemble . Eventually the planar lat - tices become curved , by either the introduction of pentagons into the hexagonal lattice or the formation of pentagons at the edge of the lattice , and the subtending plasma membrane in - vaginates . The LDL receptor , as well as other receptors in - volved in receptor - mediated endocytosis , are trapped in the invaginating coated pits and carried into the cell by the trans - formation of the coated pit into a coated vesicle . The struc - tural proteins of the coated vesicle lattice dissociate from the membrane and are competent to re - assemble into coated pits The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 103 , 1986 2626 at the cell surface . The LDL receptor , on the other hand , is sorted from LDL and returns to the cell surface in a recycling vesicle . Whereas receptor recycling depends upon the presence of a low pH in the endosome , coated pit structural proteins recycle independently of endosomal pH ( 5 ) . In contrast , coated pit assembly is K + - dependent , but LDL receptor re - cycling to the cell surface proceeds in the absence of intracel - lular K + ( 12 ) . Therefore , the recycling of receptors and coated pit proteins are sensitive to different intracellular ionic conditions . Moreover , the movement of receptors from the endosome to the cell surface may not involve a coated vesicle intermediate . In conclusion , even though we have identified the K ÷ - dependent step during endocytosis , these studies do not re - veal how K ÷ acts on the assembly processes . Nevertheless , we have uncovered a potential site for cellular regulation of coated pit - mediated endocytosis . There is considerable evi - dence that certain cells can regulate the formation of coated pits and coated vesicles ( 4 ) ; maybe the K + - dependent step is a regulatory site that cells normally use to control endocy - tosis . We ~ uld like to thank Deborah Noble - Schlessinger and Edith Womack for technical assistance . This research was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( HL - 209 - 48 ) . References 1 . Aggeler , J . , R . Takemura , and Z . Werb . 1983 . High resolution three - dimensional views of membrane - associated clathrin and cytoskeleton in critical - point - dried macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1452 - 1458 . 2 . Anderson , R . G . W . , J . L . Goldstein , and M . S . Brown . 1976 . Localiza - tion of low density lipoprotein receptors on plasma membrane of normal human fibroblasts and their absence in ceils from a familial hypercholesterolemia homozygate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 73 : 2434 - 2438 . 3 . Anderson , R . G . W . , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1977 . Role of the coated endocytic vesicle in the uptake of receptor - bound low density lipoprotein in human fibroblasts . Cell . 10 : 351 - 364 . 4 . Anderson , R . G . W . , and J . Kaplan . 1983 . Receptor - mediated endocyto - sis . Mod . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 52 . 5 . Brown , M . S . , R . G . W . Anderson , and J . L . Goldstein . 1983 . Recycling receptors : the round - trip itinerary of migrant membrane proteins . Cell . 32 : 663 - 667 . 6 . Davis , C . G . , M . A . Lehrman , D . W . Russell , R . G . W . Anderson , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1986 . The J . D . mutation in familial hyper - cholesterolemia : amino acid substitution in cytoplasmic domain impedes inter - nalization of LDL receptors . Cell . 45 : 15 - 24 . 7 . Goldstein , J . L . , R . G . W . Anderson , and M . S . Brown . 1979 . Coated pits , coated vesicles , and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 279 : 679 - 685 . 8 . Goldstein , J . L . , S . K . Basu , and M . S . Brown . 1983 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of LDL in cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 98 : 241 - 260 . 9 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis : concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 39 . 10 . Harrison , S . C . , and T . Kirchhausen . 1983 . Clathrin , cages , and coated vesicles . Cell . 33 : 650 - 652 . 11 . Heuser , J . , and L . Evans . 1980 . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 560 - 583 . 12 . Larkin , J . M . , M . S . Brown , J . L . Goldstein , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1983 . Depletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis in fibroblasts . Cell . 33 : 273 - 285 . 13 . Larkin , J . M . , W . C . Donzell , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1985 . Modula - tion of intracellular potassium and ATP : effects on coated pit function in fibro - blasts and hepatocytes . J . Cell . Physiol . 124 : 372 - 378 . 14 . Lehrman , M . A . , J . L . Goldstein , M . S . Brown , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Internalization - defective LDL receptors produced by genes with nonsense and frameshift mutations that truncate the cytoplasmic do - main . Cell . 41 : 735 - 743 . 15 . Lehrman , M . A . , W . J . Schneider , T . C . Sudhof , M . S . Brown , J . L . Goldstein , and D . W . Russell . 1986 . Mutation in LDL receptor : AIu - AIu recombination deletes exons encoding transmembrane and cytoplasmic do - mains . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 227 : 140 - 146 . 16 . Lowry , O . H . , N . J . Rosebrough , A . L . Farr , and R . J . Randall . 1951 . Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent . J . Biol . Chem . 193 : 265 - 275 . 17 . Moya , M . , A . Dautry - Varsat , B . Gould , D . Louvard , and P . Boguet . 1985 . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep7 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of Diptheria toxin but not that of Ricin toxin . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 548 - 559 . 18 . Yamamoto , T . , C . G . Davis , M . S . Brown , W . J . Schneider , M . L . Casey , J . L . Gotdstein , and D . W . Russell . 1984 . The human LDL receptor : a cysteine - rich protein with multiple Alu sequences in its mRNA . Cell . 39 : 27 - 38 . Larkin et al . Potassium - dependent Assembly of Coated Pits 2627