Cultivating Diversity , Justice , Resilience & Health Annual Report 2016 – 2017 2 The Berkeley Food Institute seeks to transform food systems to expand access to healthy , affordable food and promote sustainable and equitable food production . We empower new leaders with the capacity to cultivate diverse , just , resilient , and healthy food systems . Our Mission BFI Student Fellows Dennis Uyat , Melina Packer , and Hortencia Rodríguez . Photo by Jonathan Fong . 3 The Berkeley Food Institute seeks to transform food systems to expand access to healthy , affordable food and promote sustainable and equitable food production . We empower new leaders with the capacity to cultivate diverse , just , resilient , and healthy food systems . At UC Berkeley , we pride ourselves not only on providing outstanding academics , but on always striving to make a difference in the world , especially with innovative inter - disciplinary research . Justice and public service have always been at the core of Berkeley’s values , representing who we are as an institution and the kind of leaders we seek to cultivate . In the face of current global challenges—including emerging climate change , political volatility , and structural inequities—there is a deep need for this brand of interdisciplinary leadership to guide transformative food systems change . The Berkeley Food Institute ( BFI ) serves as the hub of food work on campus . Since its founding in 2013 , BFI has enhanced the campus capacity for food and agriculture leadership while using that expertise to drive meaningful change both on and off campus . BFI is a distinct model at UC Berkeley , bringing together experts and activists across seven schools ( Business , Environmental Design , Journalism , Law , Natural Resources , Public Health , and Public Policy ) and countless disciplines , endowing it with a unique capacity to influence and transform food systems . This past year has been one of political turbulence , encouraging BFI to focus on what is most core to its mission : increasing the capacity of emerging food systems leaders through research , education , and outreach . In this report , you will see highlights from our work with faculty , students , policymakers , and community partners . We are proud of BFI’s achievements from the past year , and we look forward to the meaningful progress in years to come . Contents Our Mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 Who We Are . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 What We Do . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Empowering Leaders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Funding Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Experiential Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Urban Agriculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Collaborations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Systems Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Looking Forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 Financials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Donors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 On Leadership Henry E . Brady Berkeley Food Institute Executive Committee Chair Dean of the Goldman School of Public Policy L . Ann Thrupp Berkeley Food Institute Executive Director 4 The Berkeley Food Institute is a partnership among seven schools at the University of California , Berkeley and serves as the hub of food and agriculture work on campus —helping to build connections throughout the web of food systems leaders and changemakers . Who We Are STUDENTS RESEARCHERS & EDUCATORS FOOD BUSINESSES POLICYMAKERS & AGENCIES WORKERS’ GROUPS FARMERS & RANCHERS MEDIA NGOS & CIVIL SOCIETY PUBLIC HEALTH NATURAL RESOURCES PUBLIC POLICY ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN OTHER DISCIPLINES BUSINESS JOURNALISM YOU LAW Red = UC Berkeley Schools and Colleges 5 What We Do We work with food systems leaders . . . . . . to ultimately transform food systems . On five core programs that support and share UC Berkeley learning . . . In pursuit of three main goals . . . • Promote equitable access to good food • Advance fair and healthy jobs in food systems • Accelerate the adoption of agroecology ( applying ecological principles to agriculture to support sustainability ) Faculty Students Policy - makers Community Partners Research Education Policy Community Engagement Communi - cations 6 The Berkeley Food Institute is . . . Photo by Berkeley Student Food Collective . 7 We engage policymakers in pursuit of food systems change at the local , state , and national levels by connecting them to our faculty and their research . We worked directly with undergraduate and graduate students this year 67 empowering food systems Students Faculty Policymakers Community We provide educational opportunities for students through experiential learning , professional development , research opportunities , policy engagement , and support of student - led food groups . We enhance faculty capacity by funding research and providing policy and media training . We partner with and learn from our community of people , organizations , and businesses . We host public events featuring leaders from diverse sectors and fund community engagement work for students . LEADERS We partnered with affiliated faculty / staff in disciplines 141 60 8 supporting interdisciplinary RESEARCH In 2016 – 17 , six BFI - supported research teams completed their projects : Food Security for Urban Youth Auerswald and Ozer This community - based project collaborated with San Francisco youth living in permanent supportive housing to develop an understanding of the barriers to obtaining adequate levels of healthy food . Growing Cultural Foods Sowerwine and Kelly This project surveyed the diversity of cultural foods growing in East Bay community gardens and developed an interactive GIS map for communities to promote seed and plant sharing . Millets as a Healthful Grain Option Hazra and Lemaux The Millet Project tested five millet varieties for drought tolerance , nutritional content , and farming profitability . The results are helping farmers grow millet—a hardy , gluten - free cereal grain . To learn more about BFI’s research projects through video presentations , visit : food . berkeley . edu / programs / research / seed - grants 9 Soda Tax and Oral Health Sokal - Gutierrez This project evaluated the health impacts of Berkeley’s tax on sugar - sweetened beverages and identified opportunities to incorporate oral health themes into new communication strategies . Indigenous Farmworker Safety Teran and Balmes Researchers worked with indigenous farmworkers who identified low wages ; wage theft ; and a sense of vulnerability due to immigration status , language , and fear of retaliation by crew leaders as important concerns . Better Farm Labor Conditions Getz and Strochlic The Equitable Food Initiative ( EFI ) is a new voluntary certification program promoting greater food safety and improved farm labor conditions . Researchers found high levels of satisfaction among both growers and workers and developed indicators to guide future assessments . 2016 – 2017 New Research Funding Committed 2013 – 2017 Cumulative Research Funding Awarded $ 591 , 000 $ 154 , 000 “BFI’s grant allowed us to put together an innovative and interdisciplinary team of academics and practitioners to begin to help growers measure the costs of improved farm labor practices . Our findings have already been of use to a number of non - profit organizations , and we were able to leverage the seed grant to obtain funding for two follow - up projects . ” – CHRISTY GETZ , ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES , POLICY , AND MANAGEMENT 10 Professional Development Fellowships Research Advisory Council in community engagement and leadership fellowships provided directly to students students engaged in research , including work on the UC Berkeley Foodscape Map project . ( see page 16 ) student - led food groups participated in the BFI Advisory Council , a collective that provides input and feedback to BFI throughout the year . students worked at BFI and gained valuable experience in policy , communications , and project management . 18 12 19 $ 32K “The Food Systems Minor was the reason I chose Berkeley . These classes have inspired me ! ” – FIRST - YEAR STUDENT “Being able to have the freedom to create a project that meets the need of a food justice collective and also learn so much about the processes behind the collective was an amazing opportunity . ” – BFI COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT FELLOW promoting experiential LEARNING $ 121K in direct support for students through wages , fellowships , and funding BFI supported the following student opportunities this year : A student - led DeCal course at the UC Gill Tract Community Farm . 11 BFI Student Fellows Agnes Zhu and Grace Lihn . 12 supporting urban AGRICULTURE FOOD SECURITY & Examples of UC Berkeley gardens represented by size of food harvest . Visualization created for the UC Berkeley Foodscape Map by Tiger Fu . 13 A 2016 study found that 40 percent of all UC students experience food insecurity . In response , BFI collaborated with the Basic Needs Security Committee—students , staff , faculty , administrators , and community experts working on food , housing , and wellness security of the UC Berkeley campus— to initiate a campus gardens program in recognition of the connection between student - led urban agriculture and basic needs security . In the past six months , the Campus Gardens Coordinator , a new BFI position , has supported existing student - led urban agriculture efforts , increased communication among gardens , coordinated between the gardens and the Basic Needs efforts , and facilitated a participatory strategic planning process for campus gardens . In 2016 – 17 , we increased our support of campus gardens and farms . As an urban public land - grant university , we seek solutions that promote both environmental and social resilience by harnessing the unique strengths of our community . Within the Basic Needs framework , BFI is supporting efforts to better connect the farms and gardens with student needs through experiential learning and access to good food . PREVENTION CRISIS Emergency Loans Housing CalFresh Financial Skills Cooking & Nutrition Skills Food Waste & Recovery Farms & Gardens UC Berkeley Food Pantry 2 . 3 . 4 . Pantry user needs inform programming and production on gardens and farms . The farms and gardens provide an opportunity for students to learn food production skills . Farms produce vegetables for the food pantry and cooking and nutrition skills program . Food recovery efforts reduce food waste and provide food to the pantry . 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 1 . 2 . 14 building more equitable food systems through COLLABORATION Farm Bill Symposium BFI collaborated with American University to host a full day forum on the 2018 Farm Bill , attracting more than 150 people and featuring Congresswoman Chellie Pingree as a speaker . The forum successfully brought together academics , policymakers , activists , and students to discuss the upcoming legislation . Hill Briefing BFI convened a briefing at Capitol Hill on federal funding for sustainable agriculture . Joined by researchers from leading universities , BFI Executive Director Ann Thrupp encouraged congressional leaders to maintain and expand funding for sustainable agriculture research . BFI convened policy discussions in Washington , DC . “Grassroots leaders from across the food system gathered to discuss policy , politics , and potential—and specifically which issues should be included in this next farm bill , with a focus on those that are traditionally left out of the bill . ” - LEAH DOUGLAS , CIVIL EATS 15 We brought together academics , community members , students , and policymakers on topics ranging from equity and inclusion in food work on campus , to farmworkers’ rights in the wake of the national election . “There was definitely food for thought and a challenge for UC researchers working in communities of color . ” - BLACK LIBERATION AND THE FOOD MOVEMENT EVENT ATTENDEE ( UC BERKELEY STAFF ) Black Liberation and the Food Movement In November 2016 , BFI collaborated with more than 10 partner organizations to host a community forum on Black Liberation and the Food Movement . The keynote speaker was Judy Juanita , a former leader with the Black Panthers , and more than 150 attendees joined from across the Bay Area . Líderes Campesinas Listening Session In the spring of 2017 , BFI hosted two events focused on the rights and working conditions of California farmworkers : 1 ) a listening session with the women of Líderes Campesinas , a farmworker advocacy organization , and 2 ) a panel discussion featuring researchers , legislators , business representatives , and labor advocates about California farmworkers’ rights . “The entire session was beautiful . I was very moved by the video and found their presence powerful . The ‘realness’ of their work is what is lacking in academic settings . ” - LÍDERES CAMPESINAS EVENT ATTENDEE ( UC BERKELEY GRADUATE STUDENT ) BFI created a platform for local leaders to share their expertise . 13 887 2016 – 17 Events events attendees 16 pursuing systems CHANGE Structural change is required to improve food systems for everyone . Our work toward systems change is two - fold : to bring policy priorities to UC Berkeley and to bring UC Berkeley expertise to policy . Building a campus model for analyzing food systems Round Tables We hosted a round table discussion with Assem - blyman Richard Bloom and Berkeley experts on the soda tax , health , and obesity . Briefings We facilitated meetings with legislators in Sacra - mento for our seed grant recipients to learn more about current political priorities . Mentorship We led discussions with UC Berkeley students about important legislative processes , like the 2018 Farm Bill . Facilitating exchange between policymakers and UC Berkeley experts To better understand the complexity of the UC Berkeley food system and to address issues of equity and inclusion in food , we engaged more than 90 people in contributing to the first “UC Berkeley Foodscape Map . ” The map identifies food insecurity , accessibility of research spaces , food courses and food studies history , narratives and demographics of those involved in food , and the power structures that make campus decisions about food . The project will continue in 2017 – 18 , ultimately aimed to contribute to a campus food policy platform . A sample geographic representation of food - related services , organizations , and departments on campus . To view more , visit food . berkeley . edu / foodscape / map 17 Monterey County Supervisor Luis Alejo presenting at a BFI event on agriculture labor issues . Photo by Jonathan Fong . 18 looking FORWARD In 2017 – 18 , BFI is launching three new targeted research projects to increase our impact on our main goals . Soil Health Innovations Due to the increased frequency and magnitude of major droughts and deluges across the country in recent years , a surge of interest in “soil health” has emerged . Our project will analyze the barriers , motivations , and innovations that affect the ability of Californian farmers to implement diversified farming practices that benefit and advance long - term soil health , with the goal of influencing agricultural policies and industries . Farm Labor Certification Models What are the similarities and differences among various agricultural social certification initiatives ? And how do they differentially impact farm - workers and influence brand perception of the grower throughout the supply chain ? Our research will shed critical light on the effectiveness of voluntary social certification as a market - based effort to improve farm labor conditions in the US . Urban Agriculture and Food Security Thousands of urban dwellers suffer from poor health due to lack of access to healthy , nutri - tious , and affordable food . Urban farming is a promising way to help address this challenge . Our research aims to increase the sustainability and economic viability of urban farming and to improve food distribution systems to reduce food waste on farms and meet the food needs of low - income urban consumers . 19 And last but not least , we are launching a new podcast ! Just Food : Cultivating Justice and Health BFI and the Graduate School of Journalism collaborated on a new podcast called Just Food . The six episode series will be released in Fall 2017 and can be found on iTunes , SoundCloud , or the BFI website . Episodes will feature UC Berkeley researchers and their collaborators sharing human stories that illustrate efforts to build healthier , more equitable food systems . Three new policy briefs to be released in 2017 : School Food Systems Reform Hutson and Corburn Oakland Unified School District ( OUSD ) is addressing food access , health , educational , environmental , and social issues through a meal reform plan to benefit its students and local food systems . By examining how OUSD is over - coming financial , social , and political hurdles , this research will inform other school districts to help reform school food programs . Gender , Immigration , and SNAP Sacks and Strochlic This research explores gender dynamics as a barrier to participation in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) among eligible Latino immigrant households in California . Anecdotal reports show that immigrant Latina women often do not enroll due to opposition from their husbands who may be concerned about stigma and impacts on immigration status . This research will contribute to more effective policies and outreach strategies to increase SNAP enrollment rates in California . Seed grant projects launched in 2015 will be completing their research : The Right to a Living Wage for Restaurant Workers : The Role of Service Charge Regulation Urban Farms : Bringing Innovations in Agriculture and Food Security to the City Urban Foraging in Municipal Parks and Public Schools : Opportunities for Policymakers Photo by Diane Villadsen . Episode 1 : Harvesting Equitable Food Find our pilot episode on iTunes or at food . berkeley . edu / the - justfood - podcast 20 Our Team Staff ( pictured from left to right ) Meg Prier , Campus Gardens Coordinator Louisa Brown , Communications Specialist L . Ann Thrupp , Executive Director Claire Kremen , Founding Faculty Co - Director Alastair Iles , Founding Faculty Co - Director Nina F . Ichikawa , Policy Director Amy Regan , Development and Grant Officer Rosalie Z . Fanshel , Program Manager Executive Committee Sarah Bell , 11th Hour Project , Schmidt Family Foundation Stefano Bertozzi , Dean , School of Public Health Henry Brady , Dean , Goldman School of Public Policy Annette Doornbos , Goldman School of Public Policy Maria Echaveste , Center for Latin American Studies Bob Epstein , Espstein / Roth Foundation Lia Fernald , School of Public Health Christy Getz , Cooperative Extension J . Keith Gilless , Dean , College of Natural Resources Alastair Iles , College of Natural Resources Charlie James , Haas School of Business Claire Kremen , College of Natural Resources Richard Lyons , Dean , Haas School of Business Kathryn Moriarty Baldwin , College of Natural Resources Michael Pollan , Graduate School of Journalism Stephen Sugarman , Berkeley Law L . Ann Thrupp , Berkeley Food Institute Sarah Ting , Goldman School of Pubic Policy David Tuller , School of Public Health and Graduate School of Journalism Edward Wasserman , Dean , Graduate School of Journalism Jennifer Wolch , Dean , College of Environmental Design BFI Welcoming New Faculty Director in 2017 After five years of service , Alastair Iles and Claire Kremen are stepping down as Faculty Co - Directors to rotate leadership to other partner schools . We are grateful for their service and thrilled to announce that Kristine Madsen , MD , MPH from the School of Public Health will be taking on the role of in Fall 2017 . 21 Affiliates Charisma Acey David Ackerly Patricia Algara Barbara Allen - Díaz Ronald Amundson Michael Anderson Colette Auerswald Maximilian Auffhammer Jill Bakehorn Janaki Bakhle Dennis Baldocchi John R . Balmes Stefano Bertozzi Asa Bradman Henry Brady Justin Brashares Jennifer Brooks Danielle Callegari Ruben Canedo Sanchez Thomas J . Carlson Claudia Carr Federico Castillo Ignacio Chapela Karen Chapple Renee Chow Jason Corburn Patricia Crawford Paolo D’Odorico Kent Daane Rene C . Davids Kathryn De Master Edwin Dobb Lori Dorfman Troy Duster Maria Echaveste Elsadig Elsheikh Laura Enriquez Brenda Eskenazi Daniel A . Farber Lia Fernald Paul Fine Mary Firestone Robert Fischer Laurel Fletcher Hildy Fong Louise Fortmann Harrison Fraker Gordon Frankie Bill Frost Christy Getz J . Keith Gilless Wendi Gosliner Ted Grantham Sylvia Guendelman Kim Guess Junko Habu Sarah Hake Christine Hastorf Seth Holmes Hilary Hoynes Solomon Hsiang Lynn Huntsinger Malo André Hutson Alastair Iles Saru Jayaraman Michael Jerrett Mio Katayama Owens Maggi Kelly Dacher Keltner Kendra Klein Claire Kremen George Lakoff Kim Jarboe LaPean Shawn LaPean Barbara Laraia Peggy G . Lemaux Ethan A . Ligon Sheng Luan Deborah Lustig Kristine Madsen Robin Marsh Jane Mauldon Mikelle McCoin Kellie McElhaney Rebecca M . McLennan Adina Merenlender Nicholas Mills Kathleen Moran Rachel Morello - Frosch Louise Mozingo Clara I . Nicholls Michael O’Hare Moira O’Neill Dara O’Rourke Emily J . Ozer Céline Pallud John Paulas Nancy Lee Peluso Jeffrey Perloff Michael Pollan Claudia Polsky Matthew Potts john a . powell David Presti Kristen Rasmussen Trish Ratto Kristiana Raube Isha Ray Robert Reich Jean Retzinger Lorrene Ritchie Paul Rogé Omar Romero - Hernandez Jeffrey Romm William Rosenzweig Boris Rubinsky Tina Sacks Jaspal Sandhu Nathan Sayre Mark Schapiro Seth B . C . Shonkoff Whendee Silver Lok Siu Karen Sokal - Gutierrez Jennifer Sowerwine Garrison Sposito Philip Stark Laura Stock Robert Strand Ron Strochlic Kim Stryker Stephen D . Sugarman Suzanne Teran Margaret S . Torn David Tuller Molly Van Houweling Sofia B . Villas - Boas Edward Wasserman David Winickoff Jennifer Wolch David Zilberman The Berkeley Food Institute has 141 affiliated faculty and staff members at UC Berkeley , representing seven schools and nearly 60 disciplines . Food systems work is inherently multidisciplinary , and our unique strength comes from the breadth of food systems expertise on campus . 22 Financials Growth Since 2013 , the Berkeley Food Institute has grown in both programming and staff . FY2016 – 2017 Revenue Sources Expenses In - Kind Support While the majority of Berkeley Food Institute’s revenue is from private sources , BFI receives significant in - kind support from the University of California , Berkeley in the form of office space and support staff . REVENUE EXPENSES Individuals Other ( 1 % ) Foundations University of California Funding Research Education & Community Engagement Policy Communications $ 1 , 269 , 559 $ 1 , 058 , 753 BFI’s revenue consistently exceeds expenses , putting BFI in a position of financial strength . Administration & Strategy Staffing FY14 – 15 FY15 – 16 FY16 – 17 FY13 – 14 Annual Budget FY14 – 15 FY15 – 16 FY16 – 17 FY13 – 14 $ 580K $ 864K $ 878K $ 1 . 06M 2 FTE 3 FTE 3 . 5 FTE 5 . 3 FTE 38 % 47 % 14 % 19 % 17 % 21 % 24 % 19 % 23 Our Donors The Berkeley Food Institute relies on the generous support and partnership of the people and organizations who invest in our work . This list comprises donors who gave between July 1 , 2016 , and June 30 , 2017 . We regret any errors or omissions . $ 100 , 000 + 11th Hour Project of the Schmidt Family Foundation Epstein / Roth Foundation Clarence E . Heller Charitable Foundation Eric and Wendy Schmidt UC Global Food Initiative $ 10 , 000 to $ 99 , 999 Bruce Aidells and Nancy Oakes Annie’s Homegrown , Inc . The California Endowment Sheila Duignan and Mike Wilkins Haas School of Business The Stephen M . Silberstein Foundation Kristen and Tom Stoever Threshold Foundation UC Berkeley Basic Needs Security Committee UNFI Foundation $ 1 , 000 to $ 9 , 999 John and Lolita Casazza Cindy Daniel and Doug Lipton Hinkle Charitable Foundation Claire Kremen and Charles Fineman Nora Norback and Darrel Hess Bryna and Daryl Ross Jeanine and Guy Saperstein $ 500 to $ 999 Anonymous Diana Chen Randall Goldstein Lisa Holmes Julie Hooper Phyllis and David Rothman RSF Social Finance Maria Sandoval Judith Tuller Under $ 500 Anonymous ( 9 ) Melvia Ahmed Jill Bakehorn Dale Baum and Seonghee Lim Pam and Jan Behrsin Joshua Blatt Gretchen Braren Louisa Brown Maria Deloso Nagarajan Duraisamy Nora Fanshel Ann FitzSimmons Judy Fried and Bob Scowcroft Christopher Gardner Robert Goodwin Natasha Granoff William Grant Alastair Iles Charlie James Mary - Lucile Kaems Marjory Keenan Michelle Knudson KW Botanicals Sheryl Lee Bill Leland Marguerite Matthews Jonathan McKinley Kathryn Moriarty Baldwin Abbey Myszka Francis Pao and Christina Ng Shanti Prasad Laurel Przybylski Amy Regan Viola Rodriguez Carlos Rodriguez Vidal Jennifer Rosoff Jessica Siegel Beth Spitler John Steggall Ann Thrupp Julia Tubert Katherine Walsh Chikong Wong Annie’s Homegrown , Inc . CS Fund National Science Foundation Research & Engineering Apprenticeship of the Army Educational Outreach Program The Robert van den Bosch Scholarship USDA - NIFA : Bioenergy , Natural Resources , and Environment Program The Walker Fund The following funders supported research of the Center for Diversified Farming Systems , housed within BFI : 24 food . berkeley . edu University of California , Berkeley 23 Giannini Hall # 3100 , Berkeley , CA 94720 foodinstitute @ berkeley . edu