! ! ? ! ConferenceCompsnion * CHI’940 Boston , Massachusetts USA * April24 - 28 , 1994 Tutorials Computer - Supported Cooperative Work and Groupware Steven Poltrock Boeing Computer Services PO BOX 24346 M / S 7L - 44 Seattle , WA 98124 Tel : + 1 ( 206 ) 865 - 3270 E - ma - l : poltrock @ atc . hoeing . com ABSTRACT This course describes the origin and composition of work in CSCW and groupware , then discusses eight significant behavioral and social ( as contrasted with technical ) challenges to successful development . Recent research prototypes and commercial products are covered , focusing on advances in supporting communication , ccmrdination , and collaboration . Finally , we describe several approaches to addressing the behavioral and social obstacles . Video illustrations of systems and issues are used throughout the tutorial . KEYWORDS Computer - mediated communication , collaborative work , CSCW , groupware , electronic mail , computer - supported meetings , desktop conferencing , video conferencing , coordination , workflow , organizational design , evaluation DEFINING CSCW AND GROUPWARE Computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) is a broad designation that focuses on work—the tasks that people carry out , their workplaces , and technology that does or could provide support . CSCW thus reaches from sociological analyses and anthropological descriptions of work to the technological foundations of systems . Groupware is more specifically focused on the technology , software designed with groups in mind . Pushing further to identify key areas , issues , or technologies , we find considerable disagreement over what to include . To make senseof these differences , this tutorial provides an overview of the historical , demographic , geographical , and linguistic influences on the formation of the CSCW enterprise . Commercial off - the - shelf software developers focus more on technology and small applications ; large organizational systems prompt greater concern with organizational and social factors . The Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or dmtnbuted for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and tits date appear , and ncmce is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To COPV otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee aodlor spectfw pmmtss , on . CH194 Companion - 4 / 94 Boston , Massachusetts USA @ 1994 ACM 0 - 89791 - 651 - 4 / 94 / 0355 . . . $ 3 . 50 Jonathan Grudin Information and Computer Science Department University of California at Irvine Irvine , CA 92717 ‘Tel : + 1 ( 714 ) 856 - 8674 E - mail : grudin @ ics . uci . edu European CSCW focus is broader and more theoretical , the U . S . and Japrmew contributions are more empirical . Some , notably those in telecommunications , focus more on computer - mediated communication . One challenge is to apply lessons and technologies from one domain to others [ 3 ] . CHALLENGES IN DESIGN AND EVALUATION Our observation and experience is that successfully overcoming technical hurdles is far from a guarantee of success [ 2 ] . In this tutorial we focus on the behavioral and social phenomena operating in user and developer organizations that frequently undermine technically impressive projects . These challenges are unfamiliar to application developers experienced with single - user applications and are encountered under conditions unfamiliar to those experienced with large systems . The eight challenges [ 4 ] are : disparities in who does work to make an application succeed and who benefits from ic challenges in obtaining a critical mass of users ; socird , political , and motivational currents that software must navigate ; providing the flexibility required by often surprisingly variable work routines ; the challenge of designing infrequently used features to be unobtrusive but accessible when needed , the difficulty of learning from experience , of evaluating groupware ; our lack of intuition for the needs of groups and their diverse members and the need to make acceptance management part of the design and development job . This seetion concludes by examining groupware successesto seehow they avoided Ihesepitfalls . SURVEY OF GROUPWARE TECHNOLOGY This section surveys three categories of groupware : communication , cooperation , and coordinaticm . Videos are used to illustmte how products and prototypes from these categories support collaborative work . Each category offers unique design challenges , and an evolutionary history shows how these challenges have been met . Communication Five trends are visible in the evolution of communication groupware . ( : 1 ) Capabilities for communication are improving within a given medium . ( 2 ) Multiple media are being integrated within single communication systems . ( 3 ) 355 Tutorials CHI’94 - “CelebratingInterdependence”oConferenceCompanionI ! E ! ! ! ! The user interfaces of communication tools are strongly influenced by metaphors , and these metaphors are often the basis of social control . ( 4 ) Structure is added to communication media to support performing tasks . ( 5 ) Standards are emerging and solidifying to support both platform and application interoperability . Electronic mail , desktop conferencing , and video conferencing are changing both personal and business communications . Businesses use email to accelerate the flow of information and reduce coordination costs [ 71 . Video conferencing is used for group communication within geographically distributed companies and between corporate partners . Desktop conferencing focuses communication on work products . Each type of communication groupware offers unique advantages , and new technologies achieve all the advantages by integrating email and conferencing features . Cooperation Groupware supports cooperation by enabling interaction through a shared document or collection of documents . For example , document management systems help teams collaborate by providing access and version control , document search , and status tracking . Application development environments such as Oval and Lotus Notes customize the structure and functionality of the system to the task . These environments integrate both communication and coordination features on a core of cooperation support [ 5 ] . Meeting support products and prototypes enable all participants to collaborate in the production of a shared document or documents . The strength of these systems is generation of alternatives [ 6 ] . In a brainstorming session all users can enter as many ideas as they want anonymously . A recent study of the benefits of a meeting system found that it saved 91 % of the work flow time over 64 meetings . Coordination Businesses are attempting to incmse quality and reduce cost by modeling and improving their internal processes . Coordination groupware can capture and coordinate these processes . Work flow management systems model the sequence of subtasks in a work process and the roles performed by each individurd . When each subtask is completed , the work is automatically routed to the person responsible for the next subtask . Coordination groupware can also support group work that does not conform to a formal process . Ad hoc coordination is supported by groupware that accommodates the informal rules of communication that occur in the workplace . The theoretical foundation for these technologies is Speech Act Theory [ 1 ] . APPROACHES TO DESIGN AND EVALUATION Several approaches are used or being developed to address behavioral and social challenges to groupware development . First , certain principles for designing interactive systems in general apply to groupwanx focus early and continually on the eventual users , design iteratively , and consider all aspects of usability together . But these are never easy to apply and even harder with groupware . Also , market research and consultants are likely to be of limited help for these new technologies . “Scandinavian approaches” to the design of systems through collaboration of designers and users have received considerable attention . People are working to adapt these techniques in new settings . Traditional social science and management studies can be scaled down from organizational to group settings . Anthrcqmlogical studies of workplaces have also drawn increasing attention . We conclude with two experimental approaches : Contextual research , pioneered at Digital , focuses on an interview that takes place during ongoing work practice , permitting some disruptiveness in the quest for a greater degree of shared understanding . And several researchers are studying the use and evolution of specific objects to obtain a specific understanding of what in their design leads to success or failure , a search for understanding good design in place of a searchfor design principles . REFERENCES 1 . Flores , F . , Graves , M . , Ha . rt . field , B . and Winograd , T . Computer systems and the design of organizational interaction . ACM Transactions on Ofice Information Systems , 6 , 2 , 1988 , 153 - 172 . 2 . Grudin , J . Why groupware applications fail : Problems in design and evaluation . Oj ? ce : Technology and People , 4 , 3 , 1989 , 245 - 264 . 3 . Grudin , J . CSCW : The convergence of two development contexts . Proc . CHS91 Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1991 , 91 - 97 . 4 . Grudin , J . Groupware and social dynamics : Eight challenges for developers . Communications of the ACM , in press . 5 . Malone , T . W . and Lai , K - Y . Toward intelligent tools for information sharing and collaboration . In R . P . Bostrom , R . T . Watson & S . T . Kinney ( ’Eds . ) , Computer Augmented Teamwork : A Guided Tour . Van Nostrand Reinhold , New Yodc , NY , 1992 . 6 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S , , Vogel , D . R . , and George , J . F . Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Communications of the ACM , 34 , 1991 , 30 - 61 . 7 . Sproull , L , and Kiesler , S . Connections : New ways of working in the networked organization . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1991 . 356