Caveolin Moves from Caveolae to the Golgi Apparatus in Response to Cholesterol Oxidation Eric J . Smart , Yun - Shu Ying , Patricia A . Conrad , and Richard G . W . Anderson Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas 75235 Abstract . Caveolae are a membrane specialization used to internalize molecules by potocytosis . Caveolin , an integral membrane protein , is associated with the striated coat present on the cytoplasmic surface of the caveolae membrane . We now report that oxidation of caveolar cholesterol with cholesterol oxidase rapidly displaces the caveolin from the plasma membrane to intracellular vesicles that colocalize with Golgi appara - tus markers . After the enzyme is removed from the medium , caveolin returns to caveolae . When untreated cells are gently homogenized , caveolin on the plasma membrane is accessible to both anti - caveolin IgG and trypsin . After cholesterol oxidase treatment , however , Golgi - associated caveolin is inaccessible to both of these molecules . Brefeldin A , which inhibits ER to Golgi trafficking , blocks the appearance of caveolin in the Golgi apparatus but does not prevent caveolin from leaving the plasma membrane . Indirect immunogold localization experiments show that in the presence of cholesterol oxidase caveolin leaves the plasma mem - brane and becomes associated with endoplasmic retic - ulum and Golgi compartments . Surprisingly , the loss of caveolin from the plasma membrane does not affect the number or morphology of the caveolae . C AVEOLAE are a membrane specialization found on the surface of many different cells ( 23 , 36 ) . There is considerable evidence that they are an endocytic organelle that internalizes substances by forming plasma - lemmal vesicles ( 24 ) . In some cases these vesicles transport molecules across the cell ( 32 ) while at other times they de - liver low molecular weight molecules and ions to the cyto - plasm by a process called potocytosis ( 1 ) . The cytoplasmic surface of each caveola is decorated with a characteristic coat material that appears to be composed of integral mem - brane components ( 28 ) . One of the proteins associated with this coat is caveolin ( 28 ) . The caveolae coat may play a role in controlling membrane invagination . Potocytosis was discovered by studying receptor - coupled transport of folate in MA104 cells ( 15 ) . At physiological con - centrations of 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate , the efficient delivery of the vitamin to the cytoplasm of cells is dependent on a high affinity receptor that is anchored to the membrane by glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) 1 . The GPI - anchor causes the receptor to cluster in caveolae ( 30 ) where it becomes se - questered from the extracellular space each time a caveolae closes . Sequestered folate rapidly dissociates from the re - ceptor and crosses the membrane by an anion carrier ( 16 ) . Address all correspondence to Eric J . Smart , Dept . of Cell Biology and Neuroscience , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas 75235 . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : DNE dinitrophenol ; GPI , glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ; PKC , protein kinase C . Caveolae then open and another round of potocytosis begins . Recently we showed ( 34 ) that activators of protein kinase C ( PKC ) inhibit potocytosis by preventing the invagination of caveolae . Caveolin was originally identified as a 22 - kD tyrosine phosphoprotein in chick embryo fibroblasts infected with the Rous sarcoma virus ( 11 ) . Immunogold cytochemistry showed that over 90 % of the caveolin in the plasma membrane is as - sociated with caveolae and that small amounts of caveolin are also found in the Golgi apparatus ( 28 ) . Independently , Kurz - chalia et al . ( 17 ) showed that a protein of the same molecular weight as caveolin ( designated VIP21 ) is prominent in Golgi - derived vesicles destined for the apical cell surface . Cloning of the cDNA , first for VIP21 ( 17 ) and then for caveolin ( 10 ) , revealed that they are the same protein . The sequence pre - dicts that it is an integral membrane protein synthesized without a leader peptide . The exact orientation of the protein in the plasma membrane is still not clear . Some evidence suggests that the protein forms a hairpin loop in the mem - brane such that both ends are in the cytoplasm ( 9 ) . Other evi - dence ( 21 ) favors the view that it is a type II transmembrane protein . The function of caveolin is not known . The association of this protein with the caveolar coat suggested that it might have a structural role in maintaining the shape of the or - ganelle ( 28 ) . In polarized epithelial cells , caveolin first as - sociates with clusters of GPI - anchored membrane proteins in the Golgi apparatus ( 6 , 21 ) before moving to the cell sur - face in transport vesicles ( 17 ) . Therefore , caveolin may target GPI - anchored proteins and associated glycolipids to the api - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 94 / 12 / 1185 / 13 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , Number 5 , December 1994 1185 - 1197 1185 cal cell surface ( 17 , 21 ) . There is not any evidence , however , that plasmalemmal vesicles move from the cell surface to the Golgi apparatus as part of an internalization cycle . Both the structure ( 28 ) and the function ( 7 ) of caveolae are absolutely dependent on membrane cholesterol . Exposure of membranes to sterol - binding drugs such as filipin cause the caveolar coat to disassemble , invaginated caveolae to be - come flat , and the GPI - anchored proteins to uncluster ( 28 ) . Likewise , cells that are depleted of membrane cholesterol have unclustered GPI - anchored proteins , a reduced number of visible caveolae and potocytosis is impaired ( 7 ) . These results are in agreement with the observation that caveolae have a much higher concentration of cholesterol than the sur - rounding plasma membrane ( 33 ) . Oxidation of cholesterol has been implicated as a risk fac - tor in the development of atherosclerosis ( 14 , 25 ) . The es - sential role of cholesterol in caveola function suggests that it may be a plasma membrane domain that is especially sen - sitive to oxidative damage . To investigate this possibility , we used cholesterol oxidase to enzymatically oxidize fibroblast membrane cholesterol in situ . Surprisingly , this treatment caused caveolin to migrate to the Golgi region of the cell without there being a change in the number of caveolae . Cav - eolin recycles back to the plasma membrane after cholesterol oxidase is removed from the media and the level of oxidized cholesterol in the membrane declines . Materials and Methods Materials Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle ' s medium , glutamine , trypsin - EDTA , and peni - cillin / streptomycin were from Gibco Laboratories ( Grand Island , NY ) . Fe - tal calf serum was from Hazleton Research Products , Inc . ( Lenexa , KS ) . The analytical silica gel thin - layer chromatography plates and the following solvents were from J . T . Baker , Inc . ( Philllpsburg , NJ ) : heptane , petroleum ether , ethyl ether , acetic acid , and 2 - propanoL 3Hacetate was obtained from DuPont ( Wilmington , DE ) with a specific activity of approximately 4 . 13 Ci / mmol . Trans - 35S - label was from ICN ( Costa Mesa , CA ) . Cho - lesterol oxidase ( Nocardia erythropolis ) , cholesterol and cholestenone were from Boehrinser Mannheim Biochemicals ( Indianapolis , IN ) . The sulfuric - dichromate spray was from Supelco Inc . ( Bellefonte , PA ) . Protein A - Seph - arose ( CL - 4B ) was from Pharmacla ( Alameda , CA ) . Antibodies were ob - tained from the following sources : anti - caveolln IgG ( mAb 2234 ) was a gift from Dr . John Glenney ( Glentech , Inc . , Lexington , ICO ; rabbit anti - BiP IgG was from David Bole ( University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI ) ( 4 ) ; rabbit anti - galactosyltransferase IgG was from E . G . Berger ( Physiolo - gisches Institute Universitat Zurich , Switzerland ) ( 3 ) ; goat anti - mouse IgG conjugated to peroxidase was from Organon Tekuika Corp ( West Chester , PA ) ; goat anti - rabbit IgG conjugated to gold ( 10 rim ) was from Biocell ( Ted Pella , Redding , CA ) ; mouse anti - dinitrophenol IgG was from Oxford Bio - medical ( Oxford , MI ) ; goat anti - mouse IgG conjugated to gold ( 10 nm ) was from Energy Beam Sciences ( A _ gawam , MA ) . All other reagents were from Sigma Chem . Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Me ~ o ~ Cell Culture . Cultured fibroblasts were derived from a skin biopsy obtained from a normal patient . Cells were grown in a monolayer and set up accord - ing to a standard format ( 12 ) . On day zero , 2 . 5 x 105 cells were seeded into 100 - ram Petri dishes with 3 ml of Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle ' s medium supplemented with penicillin , streptomycin , 10 % ( vol / vol ) human lipopro - rein deficient serum . Cells were fed with fresh medium on day 3 and day 5 . Cells were labeled with 75 # Ci of 3H - acetate on day six and used on day 7 . Thin - layer Chromatography . The thin - layer chromatography experi - ments were carried out as previously described ( 22 ) . Three confluent 100 - mm dishes of fibroblasts were used for each sample . The labeled cells were washed extensively in PBS and then placed in 3 ml of buffer ( DMEM , 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 ) before the indicated treatments . The caveolae then were isolated on sucrose gradients ( see below ) . Each gradient fraction was ad - justed to 1 ml final volume and treated with 30 % tanrodeoxycbolate , 2 ml Dole reagent ( 2 - propanol , 78 % : beptane , 20 % : water , 2 % ) , and I rni of heptane . The samples were vortexed and spun in a table top centrifuge for 10 min ( 3000 g ) . The heptane phase ( upper ) contained lipids and was used for thin - layer chromatography . The aqueous phase ( bottom ) contained pro - teins and was used for immunoblots . The heptane phase was dried under N2 and suspended in 50 t ~ l of the solvent system ( 80 : 20 : 1 ; petroleum ether / ethyl ether / acetic acid ) . Pure cholesterol and pure cholestenone were dissolved in the solvent system and used as standards ( 5 / tg / spot ) . The lipids were spotted onto a silica gel G plate and developed in the solvent system . Lipids were visualized by charring with sulfuric acid - dichromate and heat - ing at 180°C for 10 min . Unlabeled cholesterol and cholestenone were added to each fraction to facilitate visualization . The appropriate spots were scraped and the amount of radiation quantified by liquid scintillation counting . Caveolae Isolation . Caveolae were isolated as described by Sargiacomo and colleagues ( 31 ) . Three confluent , 100 - ram dishes of human fibroblasts ( 10 nag protein ) were used for each sample . All of the solutions contained a cocktail of protease inhibitors consisting of : ieupeptin ( 10 / ~ M ) , benzami - dine ( 0 . 5 raM ) , soybean trypsin inhibitor ( 10 / ~ g / ml ) , pepstatin A ( 1 / ~ g / ml ) , and PMSF ( 0 . 2 mg / ml ) . Each dish was washed briefly with MBS ( 25 mM MES , pH 6 . 5 ; NaCI , 0 . 15 M ) at room temperature . MBS plus 0 . 02 % ED ' I ' A was added to each dish for 10 min on ice . The cells were pelleted in a table top centrifuge for 5 min , 1400 g , 4 °C . Cells were suspended with a pipette tip in 1 . 0 ml MBS containing 1 % Triton X - 100 . The samples were incubated on ice for 20 min and then dounced 20x in a I ml tight dounce . The samples were diluted with an equal volume of 85 % sucrose . The mixed material was placed at the bottom of a centrifuge tube ( TH641 ; Sorvaii Instruments , Newton , CT ) and a 10 - 30 % linear sucrose gradient was layered on top . The samples were centrifuged at 143 , 200 g for 4 h at 4°C . After centrifugation the gradient was fractionated in 0 . 65 - ml fractions before analysis . Triton Solubility . Three 100 - ram dishes of confluent fibroblasts were used for each sample . Cells were grown 22 h in methionine - free media that contained 300 ~ tCi of 35Smethionine ( sp act 1132 Ci / mmol ) , washed three times with DMEM and then incubated for 5 h in the presence of 50 ftg / ml of cycloheximide . The cells were washed extensively in PBS and sub - jected to the indicated treatments , all in the presence of cyclobeximide . Cells were released from the dish by incubating in MBS plus 0 . 02 % EDTA for 10 rain on ice . The cells were collected by centrifuging for 5 min , 1400 g at 4°C . The pellets were suspended in 1 . 0 ml of MBS plus 1 % Triton X - 100 and incubated on ice for 20 rain . The samples were dounced 20 times and spun in a mierofuge for 5 rain , 16000 g at 4°C . The supernatant fraction was collected and designated as the Triton - soluble fraction . The pellet was suspended in MBS plus 1 % Triton and designated the Triton - insoluble frac - tion . Caveolin was immunoprecipitated from each of these fractions as de - scribed below . Immunoprecipitation of Caveolin . Protein A - scpbarose beads were first blocked by incubating them for 4 h at 4oc with human fibroblast cell lysate ( 200 / tg / ml ) plus 30 mg / ml of BSA in MBS buffer that contained 1 % Triton X - 100 and 60 mM octylgiucoside ( MBSD buffer ) . Blocked beads were used to pre - clear the Triton X - 100 soluble and insoluble fractions that had been suspended in MBSD . Pre - cleared fractious were then incubated for 19 h at 4°C with a 1 : 400 dilution of mAb anti - caveolin before adding blocked , Protein A - scpharose beads and incubating an additional 2 h at 4°C . Beads were removed by centrifugation , dissolved in sample buffer ( 18 ) , and proteins separated by electrophoresis . The autoradiograph was exposed for 48 h . Protease Protection . Two 100 - mm dishes of confluent fibroblasts were used for each sample . Cells that had been preincubated for 5 h in the pres - ence of 50 / ~ g / ml of cycloheximide were washed extensively in PBS and sub - jected to the indicated treatments , all in the presence of cycloheximide . At the end of the treatments , cells were removed from the dish with Trypsin - EDTA . Cells were collected by centrifugation at 1400 g for 5 rain and then washed in 5 ml of lysis buffer ( 1 mM NaHCO3 ; 1 ram MgC12 ; 10 mM KC1 ; 5 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 5 ; 0 . 3 M sucrose ) . Cells were pelleted at 1400 g for 5 rain and then suspended in 0 . 5 ml of ice cold lysis buffer . Cells were broken by douncing 20 times with a 1 ml type A dounce homogenizer . The appropriate samples were incubated with 300 / ~ g of trypsin for 30 win on ice . Soybean trypsin inhibitor ( 300 ~ g ) was then added and the sample was centrifuged for 1 rain at 600 g to remove unbroken cells . The remaining suspension was centrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 60 min at 4°C . The pellet was suspended in lysis buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting . Electrophoresis and Immunoblots . Protein concentrations were deter - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1186 mined by the BioRad Bradford assay ( 5 ) or the BioRad D . C . assay ( Bio - Rad Labs , Richmond , CA ) . Proteins were concentrated by trichloroacetic acid precipitation . Pellets were dissolved in sample buffer and heated at 95°C for 3 min before being loaded onto gels . Proteins were separated in a 12 . 5 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel using the method of Laemmli ( 18 ) . Separated pro - teins were then transferred to nylon by the method of Towbin ( 35 ) . The ny - lon was blocked in TBST ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 6 ; 137 mM NaC1 ; 0 . 5 % Tween - 20 ) plus 3 % dry milk for 1 h at room temperature . Anti - caveolin mAb 2234 diluted 1 / 500 in TBST + 1 % dry milk was added for 1 h at room temperature . After incubating with the primary antibody , the nylon was washed four times , 10 win each in TBST plus 1 % dry milk . The secondary antibody ( goat anti - mouse conjugated to horseradish peroxidase ) was di - luted 1 / 30 , 000 and added for 1 h at room temperature . The nylon was then washed and bands visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence . Indirect Immunofluorescence . Cells grown on glass coverslips were washed three times with PBS . After the indicated treatment , the cells were washed in PBS and fixed for 45 min at room temperature either with 3 % ( wt / vol ) paraformaldehyde in PBS or with a fixative that contained 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde , 70 mM Lysine - HCl , and 10 mM NaIO4 in 20 mM MES buffered saline ( pH 7 . 0 ) . After fixation , the cells were rinsed with PBS and incubated in 100 mM NI - I4CI - PBS for 10 min at room temperature . Cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 7 min on ice and washed extensively in PBS . Cells were then incubated sequentially with PBS plus 0 . 5 % BSA for 1 h at room temperature , anti - caveolin mAb 2234 diluted 1 / 350 in PBS plus 0 . 2 % BSA for 1 h at room temperature and finally with 20 / xg / ml F1TC - goat anti - mouse IgG plus 0 . 2 % BSA for 1 h at room temperature . Cells were washed three times with PBS after each incubation . To colocalize caveolin and galaetosyltransferase , the primary antibody incu - bation contained a mixture of mAb 2234 and polyclonal anti - galactosyl - transferase ( 1 : 350 ) . The secondary antibody incubation contained a mixture of RITC - goat anti - mouse IgG and FITC - goat anti - rabbit IgG . The concen - tration of the individual antibodies in the mixtures was the same as when they were used alone . Cells were then washed briefly in distilled water and mounted in a 2 . 5 % solution of 1 , 4 - diazabicyclo - ( 2 . 2 . 2 ) oetane . Cells were photographed using a Zeiss Photomicroscope HI . Iramunoelectron Microscopy . Cells were washed quickly with EM buffer ( 100 mM sodium phosphate , pH 7 . 6 , 3 mM KC1 , 3 mM MgCi2 ) and then fixed with 3 % ( wt / vol ) paraformaldehyde plus 3 mM trinitrophenol in EM buffer for 45 rain at room temperature . The cells were rinsed with EM buffer for 10 rain and then incubated for 20 min with 100 mM NI - I4CI in EM buffer at 4°C . Cells were rinsed with EM buffer for 10 min and then incubated with EM buffer that contained 0 . 15 % bovine serum albumin and 0 . 01 % saponln for 30 min at 4°C . Samples were incubated either with anti - caveolin mAb 2234 ( 1 / 100 ) or control mAb 2001 ( 20 t ~ g / ml ) , rinsed , and then incubated with 20 ~ tg / ml goat anti - mouse IgG conjugated to dinitro - phenol ( DNP ) ; all with EM buffer plus 0 . 15 % BSA and 0 . 01 % saponin . All antibody incubations were 1 h at 4°C . Cells were fixed with 2 % glutaralde - hyde in EM buffer and incubated with 100 mM NI - IaCI in EM buffer before post - fixation with 1 % OsO4 containing 1 . 5 % potassium ferrieyanide in 100 mM sodium phosphate ( pH 7 . 6 ) . Samples were then dehydrated , embedded in Eponate , sectioned and processed to localize DNP groups by immuno - gold labeling as previously described ( 26 ) . Immunogold quantification was carried out using a modification of a previously described method ( 30 ) . Briefly , electron microscopic negatives were obtained by randomly photo - graphing 60 regions from 40 different cells in each experimental treatment . The negatives were enlarged using a hand held magnifier and the surface length of the cell , the number of caveolae and the number of gold particles were measured directly . Results Cholesterol oxidase converts plasma membrane cholesterol to cholestenone without penetrating the lipid bilayer and en - tering the cell ( 19 ) . To determine how much of the surface cholesterol in a living human fibroblast was accessible to the enzyme , we first metabolically labeled the cholesterol with tritium by growing the cells for 16 h in the presence of 36 / zM 3Hacetate ( 4 . 13 Ci / mmol ) . We then incubated the cells in the presence or absence of 0 . 5 U / ml cholesterol oxi - dase for 1 h at 37°C . The radiolabeled lipids were extracted from the cell with organic solvents , separated by TLC , and measured with a liquid scintillation counter . Cholesterol oxi - dase reproducibly converted 5 - 7 % of the total cellular cho - lesterol to cholestenone . 1 - 2 h after removal of the enzyme from the culture medium , all of the radiolabeled choleste - none disappeared from the cell . Caveolae are easily isolated from cultured cells because they are insoluble in Triton X - 100 and , as a consequence , can be separated from other membranes by flotation on a sucrose gradient ( 31 ) . We used this procedure to measure the amount of caveolin , 3H - cholesterol and 3H - cholestenone that was in caveolae before and after exposure of the cells to cho - lesterol oxidase . Untreated ceils that had been homogenized in detergent were loaded on the bottom of a 10 to 30 % su - crose gradient and centrifuged at 143 , 200 g for 4 h ( Fig . 1 A ) . Immunoblots ( Fig . 1 A , Immunoblot ) showed that the majority of the caveolin was in fraction 10 , which is well separated from the starting material in fraction 14 . Frac - tion 10 contained only 6 % of the total 3H - cholesterol ( Fig . 1 A , 1 ) , with the remainder in fractions 12 - 14 . 3H - cholestenone was not present in any of the fractions ( Fig . 1 A , < 3 ) . A dramatically different profile was seen after cho - lesterol oxidase treatment ( Fig . 1 B ) . Virtually all of the 3H - cholesterol in fraction 10 ( Fig . 1 B , l ) had been replaced by 3H - cholestenone ( Fig . 1 B , o ) . This was the exclusive location of oxidized cholesterol in these cells . More remarkably , caveolin was no longer in fraction 10 ( Fig . 1 B , Immunoblot ) but remained in the starting material ( Fig . 1 B , Fraction 14 ) . The quantitative conversion of the choles - terol in fraction 10 to cholestenone suggests that all of the oxidase - sensitive cholesterol in a living fibroblast is in the caveolae . The caveolin may have remained in the starting material after cholesterol oxidase treatment because oxidized sterols render the protein soluble in Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 2 ) . To test this idea , we first grew cells overnight in 35Smethionine to metabolically label caveolin . Protein synthesis was stopped by adding cycloheximide to the media for 5 h and the cells were incubated in the presence or absence of 0 . 5 U / ml cho - lesterol oxidase for 1 h at 37°C . We then homogenized the cells in Triton X - 100 , separated the soluble ( Fig . 2 , Triton Soluble ) and insoluble ( Fig . 2 , Triton Insoluble ) material by centrifugation , and immunoprecipitated each fraction with mAb anti - caveolin IgG . All of the caveolin in untreated cells was in the insoluble fraction ( Fig . 2 , NT ) . After 60 min of cholesterol oxidase treatment , however , all of the caveolin was in the soluble fraction ( Fig . 2 , CO ) . Removal of the cho - lesterol oxidase from the culture medium caused a progres - sive return of caveolin to the insoluble fraction ( Fig . 2 , chase ) . 90 min after removal of oxidase , all of the caveolin was Triton insoluble ( Fig . 2 , 90 min ) . Separate experiments showed that cholestenone disappeared from the cells within 60 min after cholesterol oxidase was removed from the medium ( data not shown ) . We observed a quantitative ( Fig . 2 , compare band intensities ) return of the Triton soluble cav - colin to the insoluble fraction after cholesterol oxidase was removed from the media even though protein synthesis was blocked during this time . Caveolin Reversibly Moves to the Golgi Apparatus These results suggested that cholesterol oxidase caused the caveolin to leave the caveolae without changing the physical integrity of the caveolar membrane . Indirect immunofluores - Smart et al . Caveolin Traffic to Golgi Region 1187 Figure 1 . Distribution of cho - lesterol , cholestenone and caveolin in caveolae isolated from either untreated ( A ) or cholesterol oxidase - treated ( B ) ceils . Human fibroblasts were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in the presence of either medium alone ( A ) or medium that contained 0 . 5 U / ml of cholesterol oxidase ( B ) . Both sets of cells were solubilized in 1 % Triton X - 100 and caveo - lae isolated by flotation in a sucrose gradient . Fourteen fractions from the gradient were analyzed for the pres - ence of caveolin ( Immuno - blot ) , cholesterol ( I ) and cholestenone ( o ) as described in Materials and Methods . The arrow indicates the caveo - lae fraction . cence ( Fig . 3 , A , C , and E ) and immunogold electron mi - croscopy ( Fig . 3 , B , D , and F ) confirmed this interpretation . The anti - caveolin IgG immunofluorescence staining pattern of untreated cells is shown in Fig . 3 A . The caveolin was pri - marily on the surface , concentrated in patches along the edge and over the body of the cell ( Fig . 3 A ) . Immunogold labeling showed that nearly all of the caveolin was associated with in - Figure 2 . Effects of cholesterol oxidase on the Triton X - 100 solubil - ity of caveolin . Human fibroblasts were incubated in the presence of trans - [ 35S ] - label overnight , washed and further incubated in cold media that contained 50 # g / ml of cycloheximide for 5 h . They were then incubated for 1 h in the presence of either medium alone ( ART ) or medium that contained 0 . 5 U / ml of cholesterol oxidase ( CO and chase ) . One set of cholesterol oxidase treated cells ( chase ) was incubated further for the indicated time in medium that did not contain any enzyme . Cycloheximide was present during all incuba - tions . After each treatment , cells were removed from the dish with 1 % Triton X - IO0 and the soluble ( Triton soluble ) and insoluble ( Triton insoluble ) fractions separated by centrifugation . Caveolin was immunoprecipitated from each fraction as described in Ma - terials and Methods . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1188 Figure 3 . Immunoltuorescence ( A , C , and E ) and immunogold ( B , D , and F ) localization of caveolin in untreated ( A and B ) and cholesterol oxidase - treated ( C - F ) cells . Human fibroblasts were incubated fo 1 h at 37°C in either medium alone ( A and B ) or medium that contained 0 . 5 U / ml of cholesterol oxidase ( C - F ) . One set of cholesterol oxidase - treated cells ( E and F ) was incubated an additional 1 h in medium that did not contain any enzyme . At the end of the incubations , cells were processed to localize caveolin using either immunofluorescence ( A , C , and E ) or immunogold ( B , D , and F ) immunocytochemistry . Bar , ( a , c , and e ) 5 . 7 # m ; ( b , d , and f ) 0 . 4 # m . vaginated caveolae at the cell surface ( Fig . 3 B , bottom ) and that very little was present in the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 3 B , top ) . A 1 - h treatment with cholesterol oxidase at 37°C dra - matically changed this distribution . The caveolin now ap - peared in numerous vesicles that were concentrated near the nucleus of the cell ( Fig . 3 C ) . Examination of treated cells with the electron microscope ( Fig . 3 D ) showed that in re - sponse to oxidation of cholesterol , cells accumulated numer - ous vesicles that were associated with the Golgi apparatus . The lumen of many of these vesicles was heavily labeled with anti - caveolin IgG - gold ( Fig . 3 D , top [ * ] ) . There also was a dramatic reduction in the amount of gold in caveolae ( Fig . 3 D , bottom ) although caveolar morphology was unchanged . Quantification of the gold particles ( Table I A ) showed that cholesterol oxidase caused a , , o60 % decrease in the number of gold particles associated with caveolae . By contrast , there was only a 10 % decline in the number of caveolae . Most of the caveolin returned to the cell surface ( Fig . 3 E ) after removal of cholesterol oxidase for 1 h at 37°C . The Golgi re - gion returned to a more normal appearance , although some Smart et al . Caveolin Tra ~ c to Golgi Region 1189 Table L Distribution of Caveolin After Cholesterol Oxidase Treatment A . Cholesterol Oxidase at 37 " C % Labeled Total Gold / labeled Treatment caveolae Total gold caveolae caveola Caveolae / I0 t ~ m Control 47 1519 635 4 . 4 Cholesterol oxidase 29 632 632 3 . 6 B . Cholesterol Oxidase at 18 " C then Warmed ( ~ ) to 370C % Labeled Total Gold / labeled Treatment caveolae Total gold caveolae caveola 1 . 65 1 . 47 Control @ 18°C 65 5710 473 4 . 15 CO @ 18°C 41 4489 421 4 . 17 co @ 18 " c ; 48 3394 560 3 . 92 37°c 30 min CO @ 18 " C 4 31 1927 525 3 . 22 37°C 90 min Human fibroblasts were subjected to the same conditions as described in the legend to Fig . 3 ( for A ) or Fig . 7 ( for B ) and then processed for quantification of anti - caveolin mAb gold as described . of the trans - most cisternae appeared to be dilated ( Fig . 3 F , top * ) . Very little immunogold was present in these cister - nae . The quantity of caveolae - associated gold returned to normal levels ( Fig . 3 F , bottom ) . The return of caveolin to caveolae paralleled the decline in membrane cholestenone . Indirect immunofluorescence was used to determine if caveolin moved to the Golgi apparatus under conditions where protein synthesis was inhibited ( Fig . 4 ) . Cyclohexi - mide was added to cells 5 h before the experiment and kept present throughout the incubations . Cells were either not treated ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) , incubated in the presence of cho - lesterol oxidase ( Fig , 4 , C and D ) , or exposed to cholesterol oxidase and then further incubated 1 h in the absence of the enzyme ( Fig . 4 , E and F ) . We then used immunofluores - cence to colocalize caveolin ( Fig . 4 , A , C , and E ) and the Golgi marker ( 3 ) , galactosyltransferase ( Fig . 4 , B , D , and F ) . Normal surface membrane and Golgi apparatus staining was observed for the two markers in untreated cells ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . After incubation in the presence of cholesterol oxi - dase , however , anti - caveolin IgG and anti - galactosyltrans - ferase IgG staining were superimposed , indicating that cav - colin had migrated to the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Just as we observed with the electron microscope ( Fig . 3 ) , the Golgi apparatus appeared to be enlarged after cholesterol oxidation ( compare Fig . 4 , B with D ) . When the cholesterol oxidase was removed from the media and the cells incubated 1 h , anti - caveolin IgG staining was normal ( Fig . 4 , E and F ) , which indicates that caveolin had returned to caveolae . There - fore , cholesterol oxidase causes caveolin to move to the Golgi apparatus but the same molecules can return once the enzyme is removed . The appearance of anti - caveolin IgG within the lumen of the Golgi cisternae after cholesterol oxidase treatment sug - gested that this integral membrane protein could move from the inside surface of the plasma membrane across the Golgi membrane . Therefore , we used two other standard methods to assess the topology of caveolin : antibody accessibility and protease protection . At the proper temperature and concentration , digitonin will permeabilize the plasma membrane but leave the ER and Golgi membranes intact ( 2 ) . We used indirect immunofluo - rescence with an antibody against the resident ER protein BiP ( immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein , 4 ) to determine the conditions for selective permeabilization of human fibroblasts ( Fig . 5 , D - F ) . We found that 15 # g / ml of digitonin did not allow the antibody access to the BiP ( Fig . 5 E ) but treatment with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 gave a typical anti - BiP IgG staining pattern ( Fig . 5 D ) . We then incubated cells in the presence of cholesterol oxidase and sequentially treated them with 15 t ~ g / ml of digitonin and Triton X - 100 . These cells displayed a typical anti - BiP staining pattern ( compare Fig . 5 , F with D ) . When untreated cells were per - meabilized with 15 # g / ml of digitonin and stained with anti - caveolin IgG , the staining pattern was normal ( Fig . 5 A ) . By contrast , when we incubated the cells in the presence of cho - lesterol oxidase and then permeabilized them with digitonin , anti - caveolin IgG did not bind ( Fig . 5 B ) . Antibody accessi - bility was restored after the cholesterol oxidase treated cells were sequentially treated with digitonin and Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 5 C ) . Protease protection experiments also indicated that cave , o - lin was crossing the ER - Golgi membrane system in choles - terol oxidase - treated cells ( Fig . 6 ) . Cells grown in cyclohexi - mide to prevent protein synthesis were subjected to the different treatments and then gently homogenized in an iso - tonic buffer to preserve the integrity of intracellular or - ganelles . We added either 300 ftg / ml of trypsin or buffer alone directly to the homogenate and incubated the mixture for 30 min on ice . The proteins were separated by elec - trophoresis and immunoblotted with anti - caveolin IgG ( Fig . 6 ) . Untreated cells that were not exposed to the protease showed a distinct caveolin band ( Fig . 6 , NT ) . The addition of trypsin to untreated cell homogenates caused this band to disappear ( Fig . 6 , NT + T ) . Cholesterol oxidase - treated cells that were not exposed to trypsin also had a single im - munoreactive band ( Fig . 6 , CO ) . In contrast to untreated The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1190 Figure 4 . Reversible movement of caveolin to the Golgi apparatus in response to cholesterol oxidase . Human fibroblasts were incubated for 5 h in the presence of 50 tzg / ml of cycloheximide . Ceils were then either not treated ( A and B ) , incubated in the presence of 0 . 5 U / ml of cholesterol oxidase for 1 h at 37°C ( C and D ) , or incubated in the presence of cholesterol oxidase followed by incubation in the absence of the enzyme for 1 h at 37°C ( E and F ) . Cycloheximide was present during all of the incubations . At the end of the incubations , the cells were fixed and processed to co - localize eaveolin ( A , C , and E ) and the Golgi apparatus marker , galactosyltransferase ( B , D , and F ) by indirect immunofluorescence . All ceils were fixed with periodate - lysine - paraformaldehyde fixative . Bar , 5 . 0 ~ m . cells , this band was only slightly reduced in intensity when trypsin was added to the homogenate ( Fig . 6 , CO + T ) . The protected portion of caveolin was degraded when Triton X - 100 was added to permeabilize membranes ( Fig . 6 , CO + T + Triton ) . Caveolin became completely protease sensi - tive after the cholesterol oxidase was removed from the medium and the cells incubated an additional 1 h ( Fig . 6 , R + T ) even though protein synthesis was inhibited . Low Temperatures and BFA Block Movement of Caveolin We next carried out a series of experiments to identify the route that caveolin takes to get to the Golgi membrane . Since Golgi membrane and endosomal membrane traffic are both blocked at 18°C ( 8 , 13 ) , we incubated cells in the presence of cholesterol oxidase at this temperature and looked at the distribution of caveolin . Immunofluorescence showed ( Fig . Smart ¢t al . Caveolin Tragic to Golgi Region 1191 Figure 5 . Effect of cholesterol oxidase on accessibility of caveolin to anti - caveolin IgG after digitonin permeabilization . Cells were incubated in the presence ( B , C , E , and F ) or absence ( A and D ) of cholesterol oxidase as described in Fig . 3 . Cells stained with anti - BiP IgG ( D - F ) were permeabilized either with Triton X - 100 ( D ) , digitonin ( E ) , or digitonin plus Triton X - 100 ( F ) . Cells stained with anti - caveolin IgG were permeabilized either with digitonin ( A and B ) or digitonin followed by Triton X - 100 ( C ) . All cells were fixed with periodate - lysine - paraformaldehyde fixative . Bar , 4 . 8 # m . 7 ) that most of the caveolin remained associated with the cell surface ( compare Fig . 7 , A with B ) . This temperature had no effect on the conversion of cholesterol to cholestenone ( 6 % ) . When we shifted the 18°C - treated cells to 37°C for 30 min , almost all of the caveolin staining was in the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 7 C ) . 90 min after the shift , the caveolin was predominantly in vesicles near the cell center and in small vesicles distributed throughout the cell ( Fig . 7 D ) . We also found that once caveolin had migrated to the Golgi region it would not return to the cell surface at 18°C ( Fig . 7 ) . Caveolin was induced to move by treating the cells with cholesterol oxidase at 37°C . The cells were washed to re - move the enzyme and further incubated 1 h at 18°C . Fig . 7 E shows that the caveolin remained in the Golgi region . Cel - lular cholestenone levels also remained constant during the incubation . By contrast , caveolin promptly returned to the cell surface when cells were incubated at 37°C for 1 h ( Fig . 7 F ) . We took advantage of the 18°C block and used im - munogold labeling to follow caveolin from the cell surface to the Golgi region after shifting the temperature to 37°C ( Fig . 8 ) . Incubating cells at 18°C in the absence of choles - terol oxidase had no eff - eet on the amount of anti - cave , olin specific immunogold in either the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 8 A ) The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1192 Figure 6 . Effect of cholesterol oxidase on trypsin sensitivity of caveolin . Human fibro - blasts that had been preincu - bated in the presence of 50 # g / ml of cycloheximide for 5 h were incubated either ; in the absence of cholesterol oxidase ( NT ) , in the presence of 0 . 5 U / ml of cholesterol oxidase ( CO ) for 1 h , or in the presence of choles - terol oxidase for I h followed by an additional 1 h in medium alone ( R ) . Cells were homogenized as described in Materials and Meth - ods and treated with 300 / ~ g / ml of trypsin ( NT + T , CO + T , R + T , and CO + T + Triton ) for 30 min on ice . One set ofhomogenates from cholesterol oxidase treated cells was mixed with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( CO + T + Triton ) to allow trypsin access to the sequestered protein . After each treatment , the presence of caveolin was deter - mined by immunoblot as described in Materials and Methods . or the ER compartments ( Fig . 8 B ) . With cholesterol oxi - dase present at this temperature , however , there was a sub - stantial amount of immunogold associated with the rough ER ( Fig . 8 D [ * ] ) while the amount of gold label in the Golgi region remained unchanged ( Fig . 8 C ) . Cells shifted to 37°C for 30 min had an increased amount of immunogold in the ER ( Fig . 8 F ) with a pronounced shift in distribution towards the smooth ER ( Fig . 8 F [ * ] ) . Smooth ER could be recog - nized because often it was in continuity with the rough ER ( Fig . 8 , F and H ; arrows ) and the two ER compartments both contained a similar flocculent material in the lumen . Heavily labeled , dilated smooth ER was also found associated with the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 8 E [ * ] ) . After 90 min at 37°C , rough ER labeling declined ( Fig . 8 , G and H ) but there was still good labeling of both smooth ER ( Fig . 8 H ) and Golgi - associated compartments ( Fig . 8 G ) . Figure 7 . Effect of temperature on the distribution of caveolin in cholesterol oxidase treated cells . Human fibroblasts were incubated under the following conditions : ( A ) no cholesterol oxidase at 18°C ; ( B ) 0 . 5 U / ml cholesterol oxidase at 18°C ; ( C ) cholesterol oxidase at 18°C followed by cholesterol oxidase at 37°C for 30 min ; ( D ) cholesterol oxidase at 18°C followed by cholesterol oxidase at 37°C for 90 rain ; ( E ) cholesterol oxidase at 37°C followed by medium alone at 18°C ; ( F ) cholesterol oxidase at 37°C followed by medium alone at 37°C . At the end of the incubations , the cells were fixed and processed to localize caveolin by indirect immunofluorescence . Bar , 5 . 7 # m . Smart et al . Caveolin Tmffw to Golgi Region I l°B Figure 8 . Immunogold localization of caveolin during its migration to the Golgi region of the cell in cholesterol oxidase treated cells . Human fibroblasts were either incubated in the presence ( C and D ) or absence ( A and B ) of 0 . 5 U / mi of cholesterol oxidase at 18°C or they were incubated in the presence of cholesterol oxidase at 18°C and then warmed to 37°C in the presence of cholesterol oxidase for the indicated time ( E - H ) . At the end of the incubations , cells were fixed and processed for immunogold localization of caveolin as described . Representa - tive areas of the Golgi region ( A , C , E , and G ) and ER ( B , D , F , and H ) compartments are shown for each treatment . Bar , 0 . 4 pro . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1194 Quantitative electron microscopy confirmed these visual results ( Table I B ) . Incubation in the presence of cholesterol oxidase at 18°C alone caused a 12 % decline in the amount of immunogold that was associated with caveolae . After the temperature was shifted to 37°C , there was a progressive loss of caveolin from caveolae until at 90 min 70 % had migrated away from this compartment . The dispersed arrangement of the ER in fibroblasts made it impossible to determine quan - titatively if all of the caveolin had moved to the ER - Golgi compartment . These results suggest that the rough ER may be involved in the movement of caveolin to the Golgi region of the cell . If this is the pathway , then brefeldin A ( BFA ) should block the accumulation of caveolin in the Golgi area because this drug disrupts membrane traffic between ER and Golgi com - partments ( 20 ) . Incubation of human fibroblasts in the pres - ence of BFA had no effect on the distribution of caveolin ( Fig . 9 A ) . When we switched these cells to medium that con - tained cholesterol oxidase and BFA ( Fig . 9 B ) , anti - caveolin IgG labeling at the cell surface markedly declined . Instead , the staining pattern appeared as small , thin tubules that were diffusely distributed throughout the cell . When the BFA was removed in the presence of cholesterol oxidase , the caveolin migrated to the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 9 C ) . Caveolin returned to the cell surface after 1 h of incubation in the ab - sence of both BFA and cholesterol oxidase ( Fig . 9 D ) . Discussion Previous immunogold localization studies showed that cav - eolin was a component of the spiral coat that decorates the inside surface of the plasma membrane ( 28 ) . The coat be - haves as if it is constructed from integral membrane proteins ( 28 ) , and the amino acid sequence of caveolin predicts that it belongs to this class of molecules ( 10 , 17 ) . The migratory behavior of caveolin now suggests that it is not a structural molecule of caveolae because the morphology of caveolae appears normal after most of the caveolin moves to the Golgi region . Therefore , caveolae can apparently exist in the ab - sence of caveolin . This raises the possibility that there are tissue cells that have functional caveolae but no caveolin . Caveolin and Membrane Cholesterol The integrity of caveolae appears to depend on cholesterol ( 7 ) . Previous electron microscopic studies have shown that caveolae are enriched in this sterol ( 33 ) . We have also shown that depletion of intracellular cholesterol in MA104 cells causes a 10 - fold reduction in the number of invaginated cav - eolae ( 29 ) and a significant inhibition of potocytosis ( 7 ) . In addition , treatment of cells with cholesterol - binding drugs such as filipin causes invaginated caveolae to become fiat ( 29 ) . These results suggested that potocytosis and , conse - quently the opening and closing of the caveolae , are con - trolled by the lipid phase of the caveolar membrane . Cholesterol oxidase has long been used to distinguish be - tween plasma membrane and intraceUular cholesterol pools ( 19 ) . We can use the conversion of cholesterol to choleste - none by cholesterol oxidase to calculate that (cid:127)6 - 7 % of the total cellular cholesterol is in caveolae . If90 % of the choles - terol is in the plasma membrane ( 19 ) and caveolae occupy 1 - 2 % of this surface ( 30 , 37 ) , then caveolae membranes have Figure 9 . BFA prevents cholesterol oxidase - induced migration of caveolin to the Golgi region of the cell . Human fibroblasts were subjected to the following treatments at 37°C : ( A ) 1 h in 18 # M ( BFA ) ( B ) 1 h pretreatment with BFA followed by 1 h in 0 . 5 U / ml cholesterol oxidase plus BFA ; ( C ) 1 h in BFA plus cholesterol oxidase followed by cholesterol oxidase alone for 1 h ; ( D ) BFA plus cholesterol oxidase for 1 h followed by 1 h in medium alone . At the end of the incubations , the cells were fixed and processed to localize caveolin by indirect immunofluorescence . Bar , 5 . 7 # m . Smart et al . Caveolin Tragic to Golgi Region 1195 four - to eightfold more cholesterol than the surrounding plasma membrane . Our results suggest that caveolin may play a role in main - taining the proper cholesterol environment in the caveolae . Upon oxidation of caveolar cholesterol the caveolin leaves the plasma membrane and moves to the Golgi region of the cell . Ordinarily caveolin is not seen in the Golgi region be - cause it spends most of the time on the cell surface . Oxida - tion of cholesterol perturbs this balance so that caveolin spends more time in the Golgi apparatus , which allows de - tection by indirect immunofluorescence . The cholestenone remains in the caveolae but the caveolae regain the normal amount of cholesterol as the caveolin returns to the plasma membrane . The fate of the cholestenone is not known . In polarized epithelial cells caveolin associates with GPI - anchored proteins , glycolipids , and cholesterol in the Golgi apparatus ( 6 , 21 ) . The caveolin - lipid complex then moves to the cell surface in Golgi - derived transport vesicles ( 17 ) . The cycling of caveolin between the plasma membrane and the Golgi apparatus may allow the cell to specifically control the level of cholesterol in the caveolae and consequently their function . Caveolin is not the only protein that migrates to the Golgi apparatus in response to oxysterols . The cytoplasmic oxy - sterol - binding protein ( OSBP ) also moves to the Golgi ap - paratus ( 27 ) when complexed with 25 - hydroxycholesterol . OSBP is normally diffuse in the cytoplasm but after cells are incubated in the presence of 25 - hydroxycholesterol it be - comes associated with the Golgi apparatus . Our finding that caveolin moves to the Golgi apparatus suggests that the Golgi apparatus may have a general role to play in cholesterol homeostasis . Caveolin Can Move from the Cell Surface to the Golgi Apparatus The most remarkable observation in this study was the finding that caveolin , which is an integral membrane protein , can move to the Golgi apparatus region of the cell . The num - ber of caveolae on the surface of the cell changed very little after cholesterol oxidase treatment , which may mean that the caveolin is not moving to the Golgi apparatus in plasmalem - rnal vesicles that have formed from caveolae . We also were unable to detect caveolin in any type of transport vesicle . While there are other explanations for the observations we have presented , two of the experimental results suggest that the ER has some role to play in the movement of caveolin to the Golgi apparatus : ( a ) oxidation of cholesterol at 18°C caused immunogold - detectable caveolln to first appear as - sociated with the rough ER and this was followed by the progressive appearance of gold labeling in the Gelgi appara - tus after the cells were warmed to 370C for various times ( Fig . 8 ) ; ( b ) brefeldin A , which inhibits membrane traffic be - tween the ER and Golgi apparatus ( 20 ) , did not prevent the initial movement of caveolln into the cell but did prevent it from reaching the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 9 ) . Further work will be required to determine exactly how the endoplasmic reticulum participates in caveolin transport to the Golgi ap - paratus . The movement of caveolin to the Golgi region was revers - ible . Within one hour after cholesterol oxidase was removed from the medium , caveolin returned to the Triton X - 100 - insoluble fraction ( Fig . 2 ) and to the cell surface ( Fig . 4 ) even when protein synthesis was blocked with cyclohexi - mide . This means that the same molecule of eaveolin can travel between these compartments in a cycle . We do not know how caveolin returns to caveolae . The identification of a novel cycling system for caveolin that is revealed by the oxidation of caveolar cholesterol sup - ports previous findings that cholesterol is critical for the nor - mal function of this membrane specialization ( 7 , 29 ) . The potential existence of a new pathway between the caveolae and the Golgi apparatus has broad implications for under - standing the function of normal and diseased cells . We would like to thank Mr . William Donzell for his important contribution in carrying out the immunofluorescence experiments . We are also grateful to Ms . Grace Liao for technical assistance . This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health , HL 20948 , GM 43169 , and GM 15631 and the Perot Family Foun - dation . Received for publication 15 August 1994 and in revised form 7 September 1994 . References 1 . Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . ' G . Rothberg , and S . W . Lacey . 1992 . Potocytosis : sequestration and tran ~ rt of small molecules by cav - eolae . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 255 : 410 - 411 . 2 . Balch , W . E . , W . G . Dunphy , W . A . Braell , and J . E . Rothnmn . 1984 . Reconstitotion of the transport of protein between successive compart - ments of the Golgi measured by the coupled incorporation of N - acetylgin - cosamine . Cell . 39 : 405 - 416 . 3 . Berger , E . G . , U . Muller , E . Aegerter , and G . J . Strous . 1987 . Biology of galactosyltransferase : recent developments . Biochera . Soc . Trans . 15 : 610 - 613 . 4 . Bole , D . G . , L . M . Hendershot , andJ . F . Kearney . 1986 . Posttranslational association of immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein with nascent heavy chains in nonsecreting and secreting hybridomas . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1558 - 1566 . 5 . Bradford , M . M . 1976 . A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein - dye binding . Anal . Biochem . 72 : 248 - 254 . 6 . Brown , D . A . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell . 68 : 533 - 544 . 7 . Chang , W . - J . , K . G . Rothberg , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Lowering the cholesterol content of MA 104 cells inhibits receptor mediated transport of folate . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 63 - 69 . 8 . Dunn , W . A . , A . L . Hubbard , and N . N . J . Aronson . 1980 . Low tempera - ture selectively inhibits fusion between pinocytic vesicles and lysosomes during heterophagy of 125I - asialofetuin by the perfused rat liver . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 5971 - 5978 . 9 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia ~ and K . Simons . 1993 . Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Org . ) J . 12 : 1597 - 1605 . 10 . Glenney , J . R . 1992 . The sequence of human caveolin reveals identity with VIP21 , a component of transport vesicles . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 314 : 45 - 48 . 11 . Glenney , J . R . , and L . Zokas . 1989 . Novel tyrosine kinase substrates from Rous Sarcoma Virus transformed cells are present in the membrane skele - ton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2401 - 2408 . 12 . Goldstein , J . L . , S . K . Basu , and M . S . Brown . 1983 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of LDL in cultured cells . Methods Enzyraol . 98 : 241 - 260 . 13 . Haylett , T . , and L . Thilo . 1991 . Endosome - lysosome fusion at low temper - ature . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 8322 - 8327 . 14 . Hubbard , R . W . , Y . Ono , and A . Sanchez . 1989 . Atherogenic effect of oxi - dized products of cholesterol . Prog . Food & Nutr . Sci . 13 : 17 - 44 . 15 . Kamen , B . A . , and A . Capdevila . 1986 . Receptor - mediated folate accumu - lation is regulated by the cellular folate content . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 5983 - 5987 . 16 ~ Kamen , B . A . , A . K . Smith , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1991 . The folate receptor works in tandem with a probenecid - sensitive anion carrier . J . Clin . Invest . 87 : 1442 - 1449 . 17 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , P . Dupree , R . G . Patton , R . Kellner , H . Virta , M . Leh - nert , and K . Simons . 1992 . VIP21 , a 21 - kD membrane protein is an inte - gral component of trans - Goigi - network - derived transport vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1003 - 1014 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1196 18 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of strnctural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage 1 " 4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . 19 . Lange , Y . , M . H . Swaisgood , B . V . Ramos , andT . L . Steel 1989 . Plasma membranes contain half the phospholipid and 90 % of the cholesterol and sphingomyelin in cultured human fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 3786 - 3793 . 20 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , L . C . Yuan , J . S . Bonifacino , and J . D . Klausner . 1989 . Rapid redistribution of Goigi proteins into the ER in cells treated with brefeldin A : Evidence for membrane cycling from Golgi to ER . Cell . 56 : 801 - 813 . 21 . Lisanti , M . P . , Z . Tang , and M . Sargiacomo . 1993 . Caveolin forms a hetero - oligomeric protein complex that interacts with an apical GPI - linked protein : Implications for the biogenesis of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 595 - 604 . 22 . Moore , N . F . , E . J . Patzer , Y . Barenholz , and R . R . Wagner . 1977 . Effect of phospholipase C and cholesterol oxidase on membrane integrity , microviscosity and infectivity of vesicular stomatitis virus . Biochemistry . 16 : 4708 - 4715 . 23 . Palade , G . E . 1953 . Fine structure of blood capillaries . J . Appl . Physiol . 24 : 1424 . 24 . Palade , G . E . , and R . R . Brnns . 1968 . Structural modulations of plas - malemmal vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 37 : 633 - 649 . 25 . Parthasarathy , S . , D . Steinberg , and J . L . Witztum . 1992 . The role of oxi - dized low - density lipoproteins in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis . Annu . Rev . Med . 43 : 219 - 225 . 26 . Pathak , R . K . , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1989 . The use of dinitrophenol - IgG conjugates to detect sparse antigens by immunogold labeling . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 37 : 69 - 74 . 27 . Ridgway , N . D . , P . A . Dawson , Y . K . Ho , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Gold - stein . 1992 . Translocation of oxysterol binding protein to Golgi apparatus triggered by ligand binding . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 307 - 319 . 28 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . - S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveo - lae membrane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . 29 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . - S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , andR . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Cholesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored membrane receptor for 5 - methylietrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . 11 : 2931 - 2938 . 30 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . - S . Ying , J . F . Kolhouse , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . The glycophospholipid - linked folate receptor internal - izes folate without entering the clathrin - coated pit endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 637 - 649 . 31 . Sargiacomo , M . , M . Sudol , Z . Tang , and M . P . Lisanti . 1993 . Signal trans - ducing molecules and GPI - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 789 - 808 . 32 . Simionescu , N . 1983 . Cellular aspects oftranscapillary exchange . Physiol . Rev . 63 : 1536 - 1560 . 33 . Simionescu , N . , F . Lupu , and M . Simionescu . 1983 . Rings of membrane sterols surround the openings of vesicles and fenestrae , in capillary en - dothelium . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1592 - 1600 . 34 . Smart , E . J . , D . C . Foster , Y . - S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Ander - son . 1994 . Protein kinase C activators inhibit receptor - mediated - poto - cytosis by preventing internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 307 - 313 . 35 . Towbin , H . , T . Staehelin , and J . Gordon . 1979 . Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets : procedure and some applications . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 76 : 4350 - 4354 . 36 . Yamada , E . 1955 . The fine structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 : 445 - 458 . 37 . Ying , Y . - S . , R . G . W . Anderson , andK . G . Rothberg . 1992 . Each caveola contains multiple glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored membrane pro - teins . Cold Spring Harbor Symp . Quant . Biol . 57 : 593 - 604 . Smart et al . Caveolin Tragic to Golgi Region 1197