Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor Helena C . Christianson a , Mattias Belting a , b , ⁎ a Department of Clinical Sciences , Section of Oncology , Lund University , Lund , Sweden b Skåne University Hospital & Oncology Clinic , Lund , Sweden a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Available online xxxx Keywords : Exosomes Drug delivery Glycosaminoglycan Macromolecules Membrane transport How various macromolecules are exchanged between cells and how they gain entry into recipient cells are fundamentalquestionsincell biology with important implications e . g . non - viraldrug delivery , infectious disease , metabolic disorders , and cancer . The role of heparan sulfate proteoglycan ( HSPG ) as a cell - surface receptor of diverse macromolecular cargo has recently been manifested . Exosomes , cell penetrating peptides , polycation – nucleic acid complexes , viruses , lipoproteins , growth factors and morphogens among other ligands enter cells throughHSPG - mediatedendocytosis . Key questions that partially havebeen unraveledoverrecent yearsinclude therespectiverolesofHSPGcoreproteinandHSchainstructurespeci ﬁ cityformacromolecularcargoendocytosis , thedown - stream intracellularsignaling events involved inHSPG - dependent membraneinvagination and vesicle formation , and the biological signi ﬁ cance of the HSPG transport pathway . Here , we discuss the intriguing role of HSPGs as a major entry pathway of macromolecules in mammalian cells with emphasis on recent in vitro and in vivo data that provide compelling evidence of HSPG as an autonomous endocytosis receptor . © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . HSPG diversity Heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( HSPGs ) encompass a diverse class of proteins de ﬁ ned by the substitution with HS glycosaminoglycan ( GAG ) polysaccharide chains . HS is a polymer of repeating N - acetyl gluco - samine ( GlcNAc ) - D - glucuronic acid ( GlcA ) disaccharide units . General modi ﬁ cations occurring in the synthesis of an HS chain are : N - deacetylation / N - sulfation of GlcNAc residues ; epimerization of GlcA to L - iduronic acid ( IdoA ) ; sulfation at the 2 - O position of IdoA ; and sulfation at 6 - O and 3 - O positions of GlcNAc . The abundant carboxyl and sulfate groups of HS signi ﬁ cantly contribute to the polyanionic nature presented by mammalian cells to their neighboring cells and extracellular environment . Accordingly , several nucleic acid binding molecules interact with HS that exert their functions via association with nucleic acids once internalized through an HSPG - dependent mechanism ( Belting , 2003 ; Sarrazin et al . , 2011 ) . HScan be conjugated onto a varietyof proteinswith different spatial distributions , e . g . perlecan in the extracellular matrix , and cell - surface associatedsyndecans ( SDCs ) andglypicans ( GPCs ) , whichfurtherdeter - mines the biological outcome of HS ligand binding . Notably , whereas SDCs are transmembrane proteins , GPCs are associated with the plasma membrane via aglycosyl – phosphatidyl – inositol ( GPI ) anchor . Depending on the repertoire of other membrane proteins , perhaps most importantly integrin and lipoprotein receptors , cell - surface HSPGs may be located to various plasma membrane domains . Notably , the topographical loca - lization of HS chains on core proteins differs ; GPC HS chains are attached tothecoreproteinclosetotheplasmamembrane , whereasSDCHSchains are attached at more peripheral sites . Moreover , the status of the HS biosynthesis , modi ﬁ cation and degradation machineries set the stage for how cells bind to a wide variety of extracellular , polybasic ligands . Thus , an interesting and challenging study subject is the biological relevance of HS - ligand interactions . 1 . 2 . HSPG endocytosis diversity The exact role of HSPGs in the uptake of macromolecular cargo has been controversial . For long , the prevailing model was that cell - surface ligand binding by HSPG resulted in ligand conformational alteration followed by presentation to “ speci ﬁ c ” , high - af ﬁ nity endo - cytosis receptors . Endocytosis can broadly be divided into clathrin dependent and independent internalization , of which the latter can be further classi ﬁ edinto caveolin - mediated endocytosis , macropinocytosis and caveolin - independent pathways involving lipid rafts ( Howes et al . , 2010 ) . Differential modes of membrane attachment of SDCs and GPCs ( see above ) may preferentially sort them to clathrin - coated and lipid raft plasma membrane domains , respectively . Numerous HS - binding ligands , including FGF2 , DNA - peptide polyplexes , anti - HS antibody - conjugated nanoparticles and VLDL ( Tkachenko et al . , 2004 ; Wilsie et al . , 2006 ; Paris et al . , 2008 ; Wittrup et al . , 2010 ) appear to utilize lipid raft - mediated pathways . Uptake of GPC - bound ligands may proceed primarily through caveolin - dependent endocytosis ( Cheng Matrix Biology xxx ( 2013 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Correspondingauthorat : LundUniversity , Departmentof ClinicalSciences , Sectionof Oncology , Barngatan 2B , SE - 221 85 , Lund , Sweden . E - mail address : Mattias . Belting @ med . lu . se ( M . Belting ) . MATBIO - 00999 ; No of Pages 5 0945 - 053X / $ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Matrix Biology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / matbio Please cite this article as : Christianson , H . C . , Belting , M . , Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor , Matrix Biol . ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004 etal . , 2002 ) . ThesmallRhoGTPasedynaminwasproposedtohavearole inHSPG - mediateduptakeofcationicpolymersandpolypeptides ( Payne et al . , 2007 ) , whereasFGF2and anti - HSantibodyuptakeweredynamin - independent ( Tkachenko et al . , 2004 ; Wittrup et al . , 2010 ) . Other small GTPases , e . g . Cdc42 , Rac1 , RhoA , RhoG and ARF6 as well as actin micro ﬁ lament interactions may also regulate HSPG internalization ( Zimmermann et al . , 2005 ; Bass et al . , 2007 ) , e . g . SDC - 4 was found to orchestrate the activation of all four GTPases during endocytosis and recycling of α 5 β 1 - integrin ( Brooks et al . , 2012 ) . HSPG endocytosis is thus not restricted to one particular pathway , and varies depending on the cellular context and type of extracellular ligand . A key remaining question is how the endocytic route used in conjunction with ligand characteristics dictates the intracellular sorting and fate of internalized cargo , e . g . lysosomal degradation , recycling , endosomal escape into the cytosol , or fusion into multivesicular bodies and exosomes for extra - cellular secretion . In addition , how HSPG expression and localization are modulated according to the cell ' s need to internalize extracellular ligands still remains ill - de ﬁ ned . However , it was demonstrated that cells made dependent on the uptake of exogenous polyamines display cell - surface HSPGs with increased polyamine af ﬁ nity ( Belting et al . , 1999 ) . Also , abnormal insulin and fatty acid exposure of hepatocytes triggered theexchange of CSfor HSon SDC , whichresulted in decreased af ﬁ nity for lipoprotein particles possibly contributing to insulin resistance - associated dyslipidemia ( Olsson et al . , 2001 ) . Later in vivo studies , however , indicated that HS structure remained unaltered in hepatocytes of diabetic as compared with non - diabetic mice ( Bishop et al . , 2010 ) . Future studies will have to clarify how various environmental factors regulate HS structure and HSPG - dependent endocytosis . 1 . 3 . Regulatory role of HSPG shedding Shedding of HSPGs from the cell - surface represents another level of regulation of HSPG - mediated endocytosis . GPCs can be shed by GPI - speci ﬁ c lipases , whereas SDCs are enzymatically released by a variety of matrix proteinases ( Fransson et al . , 2004 ; Nam and Park , 2012 ) . Several pathogens have been shown to release proteases that induce shedding of SDC - 1 from host cells , which may represent a general defense mechanism against microbial internalization and HS - binding antimicrobial peptides . Moreover , injection of lipopolysaccharide into mice induced shedding of hepatic SDC - 1 , resulting in impaired VLDL catabolism and hypertriglyceridemia ( Deng et al . , 2012 ) . HSPG shedding can thus down regulate HSPG - dependent functions by sequestration of HS binding ligands , making them unavailable for cellular uptake . How - ever , it remains to be investigated how shed HSPG – ligand complexes are further metabolized ; in analogy with serglycin ( Raja et al . , 2005 ) , shed HSPG may actually act as an extracellular chaperone that transfers ligands in a paracrine manner to cell - surface HSPGs on neighboring cells for internalization . 2 . Regulation of HSPG - mediated endocytosis 2 . 1 . HS structural speci ﬁ city in macromolecular uptake Almost half a century ago , it was shown that polybasic peptides greatly enhance protein uptake by cultured cells ( Ryser and Hancock , 1965 ) ; however , the mechanism of this phenomenon remained unknown until 1996 , when Mislick and Baldeschwieler suggested that poly - lysinescanmediateDNAuptakethrougharoutestrictlydependent on intact HSPG biosynthesis in target cells , and an optimum peptide - DNA complex charge ratio of + 1 . 5 ( Mislick and Baldeschwieler , 1996 ) . Our group could demonstrate that uptake of HIV - Tat peptide ( GRKKRRQRRRPPQ ) – DNA complexes with a charge ratio of N 1 was strictly dependent on HSPGs , whereas HSPG de ﬁ ciency in recipient cells favored the uptake of complexes with a net negative charge ( Sandgren et al . , 2002 ) . It soon became established that HSPG has a general role in the uptake of polyarginines , polylysines , and arginine / lysine hybrid peptides ( Belting , 2003 ) . More recently , it was shown that tryptophan interspersed between basic amino acids could trigger HS - dependent endocytosis through the formation of beta - sheet stable aggregates . Interestingly , peptide internalization was more ef ﬁ cient in cells de ﬁ cient in sialic acid , i . e . another class of cell - surface polyanion that may sequester and prevent peptides from interacting with internalizing HSPG ( Bechara et al . , 2013 ) . The abundance of such domains and peptide stretches in naturally occurring proteins is con - sistent with HSPG ligand promiscuity , as mentioned above ( Belting , 2003 ; Sarrazin et al . , 2011 ; Raff et al . , 2013 ) . Further , therapeutic antibody cationization has been associated with increased target tissue retention and increased clearance from the circulation , including transport over the blood brain barrier , potentially owing to enhanced HSPG - mediated transcytosis ( Boswell et al . , 2010 ) . KeyquestionsarewhetherHSPGis atrue internalizingreceptor , part of a multi - receptor complex , or merely an initial attachment site during macromolecular delivery , and whether HSPGs of both the SDC and GPC type are involved . To address this , the internalizing activity of a library of phage display derived anti - HS antibodies ( α HS ) was explored . Among several α HS clones , only one was shown to ef ﬁ ciently enter cells , through a process dependent on 2 - O - sulfated but not N - sulfated HS . Using metabolic labeling of HSPGs and internalization of α HS - conjugated superparamagnetic nanoparticles , it was concluded that HSPG acts as an independent , internalizing receptor of macromolecular cargo ( Wittrup et al . , 2009 ) . Notably , the strict dependence on HSPG for α HS internalization as opposed to other HS - binding ligands , e . g . growth factors and lipoproteins that may utilize alternative receptors , allowed speci ﬁ c isolation of HSPG - derived endosomes . Further , HSPGs of both the SDC and GPC type were able to mediate nanoparticle uptake and resided in the same vesicular compartment during early steps of endocytosis . Plasma membrane situated proteins with key regulatory functions during uptake of HS - binding cargo remain to be de ﬁ ned . One such component , Glucose Regulated Protein 75 ( GRP75 ) , was identi ﬁ ed using the magnetic nanoparticle approach ( Fig . 1 ) to isolate HSPG - associated endocytic vesicles ( Wittrup et al . , 2010 ) . Together , the sorting of HSPG to endocytic vesicles may be determined by 2 - O - sulfated iduronic acid - containing HS domains that can be carried by both SDC and GPC proteins . Inlinewiththestudiesabove , conditionalknockoutmicede ﬁ cientin 2 - O - sulfotransferase , but not in 6 - O - sulfotransferase , showed delayed clearance of lipoproteins in the liver ( Stanford et al . , 2010 ) . On the otherhand , type2diabeticmiceexhibitedincreasedsulfatase - 2activity , which is known to remove 6 - O - sulfate groups , resulting in decreased lipoprotein clearance ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) . Inhibition of sulfatase - 2 expression in thediabetic mouse modelrestored VLDL - bindingcapacity in hepatocytes and normalized triglyceride levels ( Hassing et al . , 2012 ) . These and other studies point at the importance of HSPG as an indepen - dent receptor during hepatic lipoprotein clearance in vivo , and suggest that the functional role of speci ﬁ c HS sulfation modi ﬁ cations , e . g . 2 - O and 6 - O - sulfation , may depend on whether they occur during initial synthesis or once HSPGs have arrived at the plasma membrane for post - synthetic processing . 2 . 2 . HSPG core protein speci ﬁ city in macromolecular uptake Speci ﬁ c roles of individual HSPG core proteins have been proposed , e . g . by in vivo studies providing evidence of a speci ﬁ c and independent role of SDC - 1 in lipoprotein uptake by hepatocytes ( Stanford et al . , 2009 ) . Mouse hepatocytes expressed a variety of SDCs and GPCs , and it remains unclear why only SDC - 1 depletion was associated with perturbed lipoprotein uptake . The SDC transmembrane domains have a tendency to form dimers and / or oligomers due to a conserved GxxxG dimerization motif . Although SDCs have a conserved trans - membrane domain sequence , the homodimerization was shown to be weak for SDC - 1 , strong for SDC - 3 and SDC - 4 , and very strong for SDC - 2 H . C . Christianson , M . Belting / Matrix Biology xxx ( 2013 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Christianson , H . C . , Belting , M . , Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor , Matrix Biol . ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004 2 transmembrane domains ( Dews and Mackenzie , 2007 ) . Different levels of self - association suggest that dimerization of speci ﬁ c SDC core proteins may play different roles in directing membrane clustering following ligand binding . The cytoplasmic domain of SDCs contains two highly conserved regions ( C1 and C2 ) and a variable region ( V ) , situated between C1 and C2 , that is unique to each SDC . The C2 region of all four SDCs terminates in an EFYA sequence , which can interact with proteins containing PDZ domains , e . g . syntenin ( Grembecka et al . , 2006 ) . Syntenin can bind both SDC - 4 and PIP2 , and its lipid binding function has been shown to be essential for recycling of SDC / syntenin from endosomal compartments to the cell surface ( Zimmermann et al . , 2005 ) . Two additional PDZ domain partners for SDCs are GIPC / synectin and synbindin . GIPC / synectin was suggested to be involved in removal of SDC - 4 from the cell surface to endocytic vesicles ( Naccache et al . , 2006 ) , and synbidin – SDC - 2 interactions seem to have a role in the recruitment of intracellular vesicles to postsynaptic sites ( Ethell et al . , 2000 ) . More recently , it was reported that SDC - 1 follows a raft - mediated endocytic pathway dependent on a conserved motif , MKKK , in its cytoplasmic domain ( Chen and Williams , 2013 ) . It was further suggested that upon ligand binding , rapid , MKKK - dependent ERK activation triggers the dissociation of SDC - 1 from tubulin . Down - stream signaling events may involve Src family kinases that trigger SDC - 1 phosphorylation , recruitment of cortactin , and actin - dependent endocytosis . Whether MKKK - dependent ERK / Src signaling activation is a general mechanism of SDC - 1 mediated macromolecular uptake remains to be determined . It is less obvious how ligand interaction with GPI - linked GPCs can trigger endocytic signaling . An established view has been that GPI - linked proteins have preference for and assemble in cholesterol - rich raft membrane domains , as exempli ﬁ ed by co - internalization of GPC - 1 and the GPI - anchored prion protein ( Cheng et al . , 2006 ) . However , GPC - 4 was shown to regulate Wnt signalingwhen localized bothwithin and outside of lipid raft domains ( Sakane et al . , 2012 ) . GPI - linked proteins may indeed be sorted to coated pits for clathrin - mediated endocytosis via co - association with low density lipoprotein receptor related protein - 1 ( LRP - 1 ) . LRP - 1 represents a promiscuous receptor of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of macromolecular ligands . A recent study proposed a model in which sonic Hedgehog uptake through GPC - 3 operates via a mechanism where the role of the HS chain is to co - associate GPC - 3 with LRP - 1 in coated pits ( Capurro et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the spatial distribution of speci ﬁ c HS epitopes , e . g . close to or distant from the core protein linkage region , may provide a favorable steric situation to trigger HSPG / co - receptor clustering , down - stream signaling activation and membrane invagination . In this way , the balance between SDC and GPC isoforms and HS structure together may determine the intracellular fate of endocytosed cargo molecules . 3 . Functional regulation of HSPG - mediated ligand internalization Studies of morphogen gradients in Drosophila and mice highlight the importance of GPC endocytosis in the regulation of Hedgehog ( Hh ) signaling . Interestingly , the outcome of GPC - mediated endocytosis was opposite in the two species ( Beckett et al . , 2008 ) . The GPC analog Dally like protein ( Dlp ) was required for ef ﬁ cient binding of Hh to its receptor Patched ( Ptc ) in Drosophila ( Gallet et al . , 2008 ) . Hh – Ptc binding was followed by cellular internalization aided by Dlp that , in turn , alleviated the inhibition of Smoothened and activated downstream signaling . In mice , GPC - 3 - mediated endocytosis of Sonic Hh ( Shh ) negatively regulated signaling activation by continuous removal of Shh from the cell surface ( Capurro et al . , 2008 ) . As another example , intracellular traf ﬁ cking and endosomal processing of GPC - 1 were suggested to have a role in the turn - over of scrapie prion protein ( PrP Sc ) . PrP Sc may trigger GPC - 1 co - internalization followed by autoprocessing and subsequent HS degradation and prion clearance , whereas GPC - 1 silencing may elevate the levels of intracellular prion aggregates ( Lofgren et al . , 2008 ) . More - over , constitutive endocytosis and lysosomal accumulation of SDC - 1 were demonstrated in poorly differentiated cancer cell lines , and expression of intracellular SDC - 1 correlated with an aggressive tumor phenotype ( Burbach et al . , 2003 ) . Rapid SDC - 1 turnover may serve as a means for constitutive delivery of extracellular cargo , adhesion and / or signaling molecules . Surface availability of cell adhesion and signaling molecules can also be regulated by syntenin - mediated SDC recycling , which has been suggested to control intracellular integrin turnover and cell spreading ( Zimmermann et al . , 2005 ) . The mode of internalization and the biological response to endocytosed growth factors may be in ﬂ uenced by HSPG interactions . This notion was supported by a report on the nuclear co - localization of HSPG and FGF - 2 where HSPG was proposed to function as a shuttle for the nuclear transport of the growth factor ( Hsia et al . , 2003 ) . Interestingly , even though nuclear targeting of FGF - 2 required initial binding to FGFR - 1 , the high af ﬁ nity receptor and HSPG did not seem to share the same transport route , as FGFR - 1 instead accumulated in perinuclear vesicles . More recently , the distinct contributions of FGFR - 1 and SDC - 4 in the endothelial response to FGF - 2 were investigated ( Elfenbein et al . , 2012 ) . The data suggested that SDC - 4 - mediated macropinocytosis of an FGFR - 1 – SDC - 4 – FGF - 2 signaling complex determined the kinetics and magnitude of down - stream MAPK activation . Interestingly , disruption of SDC - 4 resulted in increased endocytosis and MAPK activation , suggesting that the signaling output to FGF - 2 stimulation is regulated by differential endocytosis dependent on the regulatory role of SDC - 4 . Work by others ( Uhrig et al . , 2012 ) demonstrated that non - HSPG binding adeno - associated virus vectors enter recipient cells through clathrin - dependent endocytosis more Incubation with anti - HS conjuated magnetic particles Cell disruption Non - ligand - containingvesicles Ligand - containingvesicles Magnetic separation Fig . 1 . Schematic presentation of magnetic nanoparticle - based isolation of HSPGendocytic vesicles . Cells are incubatedwith anti - HS antibody conjugated superparamagnetic beadsthat accumulate inendocyticvesicles . Intactcellsaredisruptedleavingintracellularvesiclesintact , followedbyseveralroundsofmagneticseparationintonon - ligandcontainingvesiclesand ligand - containing vesicles , as shown by electron microscopy ( right panels ) . 3 H . C . Christianson , M . Belting / Matrix Biology xxx ( 2013 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Christianson , H . C . , Belting , M . , Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor , Matrix Biol . ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004 ef ﬁ ciently resulting in higher transgene expression as compared to clathrin - independent uptake of HSPG - binding vectors . It is thus clear that all levels of HSPG regulation , including HS structure , mode of internalization and compartmentalization , contribute to the biological effects of internalized ligands ( Fig . 2 ) . 4 . Therapeutic implications of HSPG - mediated internalization Severaltherapeutic approachestocapitalizeon thefunctional role of HSPG as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor have been explored . For example , conjugating β - glucuronidase with the cationic HIV - TAT peptide , or guanidinylated neomycin utilized the high capacity of HSPG - mediated uptake to decrease storage defects in experimental models of lysosomal storage disease ( Grubb et al . , 2010 ) . HSPG - mediated transport of both viral and non - viral vectors of nucleic acid delivery has long been the subject of intense research for gene therapy purposes . A more detailed picture of the mechanism of HSPG - mediated , nucleic acid delivery has emerged ; lipoplexes and nucleic acid polyplexes were captured by SDC clustered on actin - rich plasma membrane extensions prior to cell entry , followed by actin cytoskeleton retrograde ﬂ ow , moving the polyplexes towards the cell body ( Ur - Rehman et al . , 2012 ) . Notably , contrasting roles of individual HSPGs in gene delivery were suggested using polyethyleneimines ( PEI ) – DNA complexes ; whereas SDC - 1 ef ﬁ ciently mediated PEI – DNA endocytosis and promoted gene expression , and SDC - 2 had an inhibitory effect ( Paris et al . , 2008 ) . A recent study suggested that baculoviruses in analogy with lipoproteins speci ﬁ cally rely on SDC - 1 , but not on other SDCs or GPCs for binding and entry in vertebrate cells with implications for the further development of these vectors in gene delivery ( Makkonen et al . , 2013 ) . Polyamines are essential for normal cell growth and development and elevated levels have been associated with various malignant conditions . They are synthesized de novo or enter cells through HSPG - mediated uptake ( Belting et al . , 1999 ) . Accordingly , pharmacological inhibition of polyamine synthesis in combination with perturbed HSPG synthesis had anti - tumor effects in vivo ( Belting et al . , 2002 ) . Further studies with HIV - TAT peptide ( Mani et al . , 2007 ) and a phage display anti - HS antibody ( Welch et al . , 2008 ) revealed that competitive inhibition of HSPG - dependent poly - amine uptake can inhibit tumor growth . Finally , inothercasesitmaybedesirabletoachieveHSPG - detargeting modi ﬁ cations to reduce off - target sequestration and toxicity by gene delivery vectors . Strategies to retarget adenoviruses include genetic modi ﬁ cations to incorporate peptide ligands directed against alternative target cell surface antigens simultaneously with genetic or chemical ablation of native , HSPG - binding determinants ( Coughlan et al . , 2010 ) . 5 . Conclusions HSPG clearly represents a highly versatile receptor for the uptake of macromolecular cargo . It may be anticipated that future discoveries will reveal new and exciting functions of HSPG - mediated endocytosis . The emerging ﬁ eldofextracellularvesicles , includingexosomes , microvesicles and microparticles as “ endogenous viruses ” with the capacity to transfer genetic material between cells represents one interesting area where HSPGs may prove to have an important role ( Christianson et al . , 2013 ) . Although recent studies have identi ﬁ ed speci ﬁ c biological functions of HSPGs in virus infection , lipid metabolism and cancer , therapeutic strategiesdirectedatHSPG - mediatedendocytosisarestillfarfromclinical implementation . The development of more speci ﬁ c and ef ﬁ cient HS - mimicking drugs and HSPG inhibitors should pave the way for such interventions . Acknowledgments We apologize to all those authors whose important work could not be cited in this short overview due to space restrictions . This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Cancer Fund ; the Swedish Research Council ; the Gunnar Nilsson Cancer Foundation , the Anna Lisa and Sven Eric Lundgren Foundation , and the Kamprad Family Foundation ; the Skåne University Hospital donation funds ; and the Governmental funding of clinical research within the national health services ( ALF ) . References Bass , M . D . , Roach , K . A . , Morgan , M . R . , Mostafavi - Pour , Z . , Schoen , T . , Muramatsu , T . , Mayer , U . , Ballestrem , C . , Spatz , J . P . , Humphries , M . J . , 2007 . Syndecan - 4 - dependent Rac1 regulation determines directional migration in response to the extracellular matrix . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 527 – 538 . Bechara , C . , Pallerla , M . , Zaltsman , Y . , Burlina , F . , Alves , I . D . , Lequin , O . , Sagan , S . , 2013 . Tryptophan within basic peptide sequences triggers glycosaminoglycan - dependent endocytosis . FASEB J . 27 , 738 – 749 . Beckett , K . , Franch - Marro , X . , Vincent , J . P . , 2008 . Glypican - mediated endocytosis of Hedgehog has opposite effects in ﬂ ies and mice . Trends Cell Biol . 18 , 360 – 363 . Belting , M . , 2003 . Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a plasma membrane carrier . Trends Biochem . Sci . 28 , 145 – 151 . Belting , M . , Persson , S . , Fransson , L . A . , 1999 . Proteoglycan involvement in polyamine uptake . Biochem . J . 338 ( Pt 2 ) , 317 – 323 . Belting , M . , Borsig , L . , Fuster , M . M . , Brown , J . R . , Persson , L . , Fransson , L . A . , Esko , J . D . , 2002 . Tumorattenuationbycombinedheparansulfateandpolyaminedepletion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 371 – 376 . Bishop , J . R . , Foley , E . , Lawrence , R . , Esko , J . D . , 2010 . Insulin - dependentdiabetesmellitusin mice does not alter liver heparan sulfate . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 14658 – 14662 . Boswell , C . A . , Tesar , D . B . , Mukhyala , K . , Theil , F . P . , Fielder , P . J . , Khawli , L . A . , 2010 . Effects of charge on antibody tissue distribution and pharmacokinetics . Bioconjug . Chem . 21 , 2153 – 2163 . Brooks , R . , Williamson , R . , Bass , M . , 2012 . Syndecan - 4 independently regulates multiple small GTPases to promote ﬁ broblast migration duringwoundhealing . Small GTPases 3 , 73 – 79 . Burbach , B . J . , Friedl , A . , Mundhenke , C . , Rapraeger , A . C . , 2003 . Syndecan - 1 accumulates in lysosomes of poorly differentiated breast carcinoma cells . Matrix Biol . 22 , 163 – 177 . Capurro , M . I . , Xu , P . , Shi , W . , Li , F . , Jia , A . , Filmus , J . , 2008 . Glypican - 3 inhibits Hedgehog signaling during development by competing with patched for Hedgehog binding . Dev . Cell 14 , 700 – 711 . Capurro , M . I . , Shi , W . , Filmus , J . , 2012 . LRP1 mediates Hedgehog - induced endocytosis of the GPC3 – Hedgehog complex . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 3380 – 3389 . Core protein domains GTPases Kinases Nucleartransport Endodomalescape Lysosomaltransport Recycling Endocytosis Degradation Lipid catabolism InternalizationSignaling Epitope specificity Sulfation Shedding Receptor turnover Cell migration Transgene expression Virus infection Lipid raft Ligand HSPG Cytoskeleton HS Adaptor / GPI - protein Fig . 2 . Schematic presentation of HSPG ligand internalization and sorting . Cell - surface HSPGs of both the SDC and GPC type cluster and assemble in membrane lipid rafts upon ligand binding that may be HS epitope speci ﬁ c . Post - synthetic modi ﬁ cation of HS structure by sulfatases and heparanase , and core protein shedding represent extracellular processes that modulate HSPG internalizing activity . Membrane invagination , and endosome formationinvolvetheactivityofseveralsmallGTPases , intracellularkinases , andremodeling of the cytoskeleton . Internalized cargo can be sorted for lysosomal degradation ( “ off ” mechanism ) , escapeintothecytosol e . g . nucleartranslocation , orrecyclebacktotheplasma membrane . Notably , bothSDCsandGPCscanalsofollowaclathrin - dependentuptakeroute , as exempli ﬁ ed by GPC - mediated uptake of Wnt5a and Hedgehog ( Capurro et al . , 2012 ; Sakane et al . , 2012 ) . 4 H . C . Christianson , M . Belting / Matrix Biology xxx ( 2013 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Christianson , H . C . , Belting , M . , Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor , Matrix Biol . ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004 Chen , K . , Williams , K . J . , 2013 . Molecular mediators for raft - dependent endocytosis of syndecan - 1 , a highly conserved , multifunctional receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 13988 – 13999 . Chen , K . , Liu , M . L . , Schaffer , L . , Li , M . , Boden , G . , Wu , X . , Williams , K . J . , 2010 . Type 2 diabetes in mice induces hepatic overexpression of sulfatase 2 , a novel factor that suppresses uptake of remnant lipoproteins . Hepatology 52 , 1957 – 1967 . Cheng , F . , Mani , K . , vandenBorn , J . , Ding , K . , Belting , M . , Fransson , L . A . , 2002 . Nitricoxide - dependent processing of heparan sulfate in recycling S - nitrosylated glypican - 1 takes place in caveolin - 1 - containing endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 44431 – 44439 . Cheng , F . , Lindqvist , J . , Haigh , C . L . , Brown , D . R . , Mani , K . , 2006 . Copper - dependent co - internalization of the prion protein and glypican - 1 . J . Neurochem . 98 , 1445 – 1457 . Christianson , H . C . , Svensson , K . J . , vanKuppevelt , T . H . , Li , J . P . , Belting , M . , 2013 . Cancer cell exosomes depend on cell - surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans for their internalization and functional activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 17380 – 17385 . Coughlan , L . , Alba , R . , Parker , A . L . , Bradshaw , A . C . , McNeish , I . A . , Nicklin , S . A . , Baker , A . H . , 2010 . Tropism - modi ﬁ cation strategies for targeted gene delivery using adenoviral vectors . Viruses 2 , 2290 – 2355 . Deng , Y . , Foley , E . M . , Gonzales , J . C . , Gordts , P . L . , Li , Y . , Esko , J . D . , 2012 . Shedding of syndecan - 1 from human hepatocytes alters very low density lipoprotein clearance . Hepatology 55 , 277 – 286 . Dews , I . C . , Mackenzie , K . R . , 2007 . Transmembrane domains of the syndecan family of growth factor coreceptors display a hierarchy of homotypic and heterotypic interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 20782 – 20787 . Elfenbein , A . , Lanahan , A . , Zhou , T . X . , Yamasaki , A . , Tkachenko , E . , Matsuda , M . , Simons , M . , 2012 . Syndecan 4 regulates FGFR1 signaling in endothelial cells by directing macropinocytosis . Sci . Signal . 5 , ra36 . Ethell , I . M . , Hagihara , K . , Miura , Y . , Irie , F . , Yamaguchi , Y . , 2000 . Synbindin , a novel syndecan - 2 - binding protein in neuronal dendritic spines . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 53 – 68 . Fransson , L . A . , Belting , M . , Cheng , F . , Jonsson , M . , Mani , K . , Sandgren , S . , 2004 . Novel aspects of glypican glycobiology . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 61 , 1016 – 1024 . Gallet , A . , Staccini - Lavenant , L . , Therond , P . P . , 2008 . Cellular traf ﬁ cking of the glypican Dally - like is required for full - strength Hedgehog signaling and wingless transcytosis . Dev . Cell 14 , 712 – 725 . Grembecka , J . , Cierpicki , T . , Devedjiev , Y . , Derewenda , U . , Kang , B . S . , Bushweller , J . H . , Derewenda , Z . S . , 2006 . The bindingof thePDZ tandem of synteninto target proteins . Biochemistry 45 , 3674 – 3683 . Grubb , J . H . , Vogler , C . , Sly , W . S . , 2010 . Newstrategiesforenzymereplacementtherapyfor lysosomal storage diseases . Rejuvenation Res . 13 , 229 – 236 . Hassing , H . C . , Mooij , H . , Guo , S . , Monia , B . P . , Chen , K . , Kulik , W . , Dallinga - Thie , G . M . , Nieuwdorp , M . , Stroes , E . S . , Williams , K . J . , 2012 . Inhibition of hepatic sulfatase - 2 invivo : a novel strategy to correct diabetic dyslipidemia . Hepatology55 , 1746 – 1753 . Howes , M . T . , Mayor , S . , Parton , R . G . , 2010 . Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 519 – 527 . Hsia , E . , Richardson , T . P . , Nugent , M . A . , 2003 . Nuclear localization of basic ﬁ broblast growth factor is mediated by heparan sulfate proteoglycans through protein kinase C signaling . J . Cell . Biochem . 88 , 1214 – 1225 . Lofgren , K . , Cheng , F . , Fransson , L . A . , Bedecs , K . , Mani , K . , 2008 . Involvement of glypican - 1 autoprocessing in scrapie infection . Eur . J . Neurosci . 28 , 964 – 972 . Makkonen , K . E . , Turkki , P . , Laakkonen , J . P . , Yla - Herttuala , S . , Marjomaki , V . , Airenne , K . J . , 2013 . 6 - O sulfated and N - sulfated Syndecan - 1 promotes baculovirus binding and entry into mammalian cells . J . Virol . 87 , 11148 – 11159 . Mani , K . , Sandgren , S . , Lilja , J . , Cheng , F . , Svensson , K . , Persson , L . , Belting , M . , 2007 . HIV - Tat protein transduction domain speci ﬁ cally attenuates growth of polyamine deprived tumor cells . Mol . Cancer Ther . 6 , 782 – 788 . Mislick , K . A . , Baldeschwieler , J . D . , 1996 . Evidence for the role of proteoglycans in cation - mediated gene transfer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 12349 – 12354 . Naccache , S . N . , Hasson , T . , Horowitz , A . , 2006 . BindingofinternalizedreceptorstothePDZ domainofGIPC / synectinrecruitsmyosinVItoendocyticvesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 12735 – 12740 . Nam , E . J . , Park , P . W . , 2012 . Shedding of cell membrane - bound proteoglycans . Methods Mol . Biol . 836 , 291 – 305 . Olsson , U . , Egnell , A . C . , Lee , M . R . , Lunden , G . O . , Lorentzon , M . , Salmivirta , M . , Bondjers , G . , Camejo , G . , 2001 . Changes inmatrix proteoglycansinduced byinsulinandfattyacids in hepatic cells may contribute to dyslipidemia of insulin resistance . Diabetes 50 , 2126 – 2132 . Paris , S . , Burlacu , A . , Durocher , Y . , 2008 . Opposing roles of syndecan - 1 and syndecan - 2 in polyethyleneimine - mediated gene delivery . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 7697 – 7704 . Payne , C . K . , Jones , S . A . , Chen , C . , Zhuang , X . , 2007 . Internalization and traf ﬁ cking of cell surface proteoglycans and proteoglycan - binding ligands . Traf ﬁ c 8 , 389 – 401 . Raff , A . B . , Woodham , A . W . , Raff , L . M . , Skeate , J . G . , Yan , L . , Da Silva , D . M . , Schelhaas , M . , Kast , W . M . , 2013 . The evolving ﬁ eld of human papillomavirus receptor research : a review of binding and entry . J . Virol . 87 , 6062 – 6072 . Raja , S . M . , Metkar , S . S . , Honing , S . , Wang , B . , Russin , W . A . , Pipalia , N . H . , Menaa , C . , Belting , M . , Cao , X . , Dressel , R . , Froelich , C . J . , 2005 . A novel mechanism for protein delivery : granzyme B undergoes electrostatic exchange from serglycin to target cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 20752 – 20761 . Ryser , H . J . , Hancock , R . , 1965 . Histones and basicpolyamino acids stimulate theuptake of albumin by tumor cells in culture . Science 150 , 501 – 503 . Sakane , H . , Yamamoto , H . , Matsumoto , S . , Sato , A . , Kikuchi , A . , 2012 . Localization of glypican - 4 in different membrane microdomains is involved in the regulation of Wnt signaling . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 449 – 460 . Sandgren , S . , Cheng , F . , Belting , M . , 2002 . Nucleartargetingofmacromolecularpolyanions by an HIV - Tat derived peptide . Role for cell - surface proteoglycans . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 38877 – 38883 . Sarrazin , S . , Lamanna , W . C . , Esko , J . D . , 2011 . Heparan sulfate proteoglycans . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect Biol . 3 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a004952 . Stanford , K . I . , Bishop , J . R . , Foley , E . M . , Gonzales , J . C . , Niesman , I . R . , Witztum , J . L . , Esko , J . D . , 2009 . Syndecan - 1 is the primary heparan sulfate proteoglycan mediating hepatic clearance of triglyceride - rich lipoproteins in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 119 , 3236 – 3245 . Stanford , K . I . , Wang , L . , Castagnola , J . , Song , D . , Bishop , J . R . , Brown , J . R . , Lawrence , R . , Bai , X . , Habuchi , H . , Tanaka , M . , Cardoso , W . V . , Kimata , K . , Esko , J . D . , 2010 . Heparansulfate2 - O - sulfotransferaseisrequiredfortriglyceride - richlipoproteinclearance . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 286 – 294 . Tkachenko , E . , Lutgens , E . , Stan , R . V . , Simons , M . , 2004 . Fibroblast growth factor 2 endocytosis in endothelial cells proceed via syndecan - 4 - dependent activation of Rac1 and a Cdc42 - dependent macropinocytic pathway . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 3189 – 3199 . Uhrig , S . , Coutelle , O . , Wiehe , T . , Perabo , L . , Hallek , M . , Buning , H . , 2012 . Successful target cell transduction of capsid - engineered rAAV vectors requires clathrin - dependent endocytosis . Gene Ther . 19 , 210 – 218 . Ur - Rehman , Z . , Sjollema , K . A . , Kuipers , J . , Hoekstra , D . , Zuhorn , I . S . , 2012 . Nonviral gene delivery vectors use syndecan - dependent transport mechanisms in ﬁ lopodia to reach the cell surface . ACS Nano 6 , 7521 – 7532 . Welch , J . E . , Bengtson , P . , Svensson , K . , Wittrup , A . , Jenniskens , G . J . , Ten Dam , G . B . , Van Kuppevelt , T . H . , Belting , M . , 2008 . Single chain fragment anti - heparan sulfate antibody targets the polyamine transport system and attenuates polyamine - dependent cell proliferation . Int . J . Oncol . 32 , 749 – 756 . Wilsie , L . C . , Gonzales , A . M . , Orlando , R . A . , 2006 . Syndecan - 1 mediates internalization of apoE - VLDL through a low density lipoprotein receptor - related protein ( LRP ) - independent , non - clathrin - mediated pathway . Lipids Health Dis . 5 , 23 . Wittrup , A . , Zhang , S . H . , ten Dam , G . B . , van Kuppevelt , T . H . , Bengtson , P . , Johansson , M . , Welch , J . , Morgelin , M . , Belting , M . , 2009 . ScFv antibody - induced translocation of cell - surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan to endocytic vesicles : evidencefor heparan sulfate epitope speci ﬁ city and role of both syndecan and glypican . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 32959 – 32967 . Wittrup , A . , Zhang , S . H . , Svensson , K . J . , Kucharzewska , P . , Johansson , M . C . , Morgelin , M . , Belting , M . , 2010 . Magnetic nanoparticle - based isolation of endocytic vesicles reveals a role of the heat shock protein GRP75 in macromolecular delivery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 13342 – 13347 . Zimmermann , P . , Zhang , Z . , Degeest , G . , Mortier , E . , Leenaerts , I . , Coomans , C . , Schulz , J . , N ' Kuli , F . , Courtoy , P . J . , David , G . , 2005 . Syndecan recycling [ corrected ] is controlled by syntenin - PIP2 interaction and Arf6 . Dev . Cell 9 , 377 – 388 . 5 H . C . Christianson , M . Belting / Matrix Biology xxx ( 2013 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Christianson , H . C . , Belting , M . , Heparan sulfate proteoglycan as a cell - surface endocytosis receptor , Matrix Biol . ( 2013 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2013 . 10 . 004