Citation for published version : Evans , I , Ghai , P , Urbani , V , Tan , KL & Wood , W 2013 , ' SCAR / WAVE - mediated processing of engulfed apoptotic corpses is essential for effective macrophage migration in Drosophila ' , Cell Death and Differentiation , vol . 20 , no . 5 , pp . 709 - 720 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2012 . 166 DOI : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2012 . 166 Publication date : 2013 Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Link to publication Publisher Rights CC BY - NC - ND University of Bath General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Download date : 05 . May . 2019 SCAR / WAVE - mediated processing of engulfed apoptotic corpses is essential for effective macrophage migration in Drosophila IR Evans 1 , PA Ghai 1 , V Urbancˇicˇ 2 , K - L Tan 1 and W Wood * , 1 In vitro studies have shown that SCAR / WAVE activates the Arp2 / 3 complex to generate actin ﬁlaments , which in many cell types are organised into lamellipodia that are thought to have an important role in cell migration . Here we demonstrate that SCAR is utilised by Drosophila macrophages to drive their developmental and inﬂammatory migrations and that it is regulated via the Hem / Kette / Nap1 - containing SCAR / WAVE complex . SCAR is also important in protecting against bacterial pathogens and in wound repair as SCAR mutant embryos succumb more readily to both sterile and infected wounds . However , in addition to driving the formation of lamellipodia in macrophages , SCAR is required cell autonomously for the correct processing of phagocytosed apoptotic corpses by these professional phagocytes . Removal of this phagocytic burden by preventing apoptosis rescues macrophage lamellipodia formation and partially restores motility . Our results show that efﬁcient processing of phagosomes is critical for effective macrophage migration in vivo . These ﬁndings have important implications for the resolution of macrophages from chronic wounds and the behaviour of those associated with tumours , because phagocytosis of debris may serve to prolong the presence of these cells at these sites of pathology . Cell Death and Differentiation ( 2013 ) 20 , 709 – 720 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2012 . 166 ; published online 18 January 2013 Numerous in vitro studies have shown SCAR / WAVE to have an important role in the generation of actin - based structures thought to be required for cell motility ; 1 fewer studies have addressed its role in vivo , particularly dynamically and in the context of individually migrating cells . Drosophila embryonic macrophages ( hemocytes ) are highly migratory and represent a relevant cell type to probe the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , 2 not least because of their evolutionary relation - ship to vertebrate macrophages , in terms of their speciﬁca - tion , 3 conserved mechanisms utilised to detect and engulf apoptotic cells 4 and their potent inﬂammatory responses to wounds . 5 Hemocyte dispersal is crucial to embryogenesis as these cells are largely responsible for secretion of matrix 6 and removal of apoptotic corpses , 7 much like their vertebrate counterparts . 8 With dispersal controlled by PDGF - and Vegf - related factors ( Pvfs ) , 9 matrix 10 and contact inhibition 11 and their ability to respond to apoptotic corpses , wounds and pathogens , hemocytes represent a tractable genetic system to probe signal integration , 2 , 12 understanding which would be of enormous assistance in developing therapies against diseases involving immune cell dysfunction . Despite recent studies showing roles for Fascin and Ena in regulating the hemocyte actin cytoskeleton , 13 , 14 it remains an open question as to how the structures these actin regulators act on are generated in these cells . Previous studies using Drosophila S2 cells indicated a requirement for SCAR in the formation of actin - rich lamellae downstream of Nck and Rac ; 15 – 17 nonetheless a role within hemocytes has not yet been shown . Drosophila SCAR / WAVE belongs to the WASp family of actin nucleation promoters . Diverse upstream signals activate WASp family members to activate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerisation ; SCAR / WAVE is regulated as part of a pentameric complex downstream of Rac , phosphatidyl inosi - tide lipids and the adaptor Nck . 18 Several studies suggest phosphorylation of SCAR is important , with phosphorylation of the C - terminal tail recently shown to modulate its activity in Dictyostelium . 19 Analysis of SCAR mutants in Drosophila previously revealed it to have an essential role in processes including oogenesis , cell division , gastrulation , axonal guidance and muscle development . 20 , 21 Here we investigate the role of SCAR in hemocyte migration within the Drosophila embryo . SCAR is required by hemo - cytes for the formation of lamellipodia and efﬁcient migration , including to epithelial wounds . Surprisingly , SCAR mutant hemocytes become highly vacuolated because of numerous phagocytic corpses within their cell bodies , uncovering a novel role in apoptotic cell clearance . Most importantly , removing this defect by blocking apoptotic cell death helped restore hemocyte motility , revealing that apoptotic cells can modulate the dynamic behaviour of macrophages in vivo . 1 Department of Biology and Biochemistry , University of Bath , Claverton Down , Bath , UK * Corresponding author : W Wood , Department of Biology and Biochemistry , University of Bath , Claverton Down , Bath , BA2 7AY , UK . Tel : 01225 - 386261 ; Fax : 01225 - 386779 ; E - mail : w . wood @ bath . ac . uk 2 Current address : Department of Physiology , Development and Neuroscience , University of Cambridge , Downing Street , Cambridge CB2 3DY , UK Received 24 . 8 . 12 ; revised 9 . 11 . 12 ; accepted 26 . 11 . 12 ; Edited by H Steller ; published online 18 . 1 . 13 Keywords : apoptosis ; macrophage ; Drosophila ; SCAR / WAVE ; migration ; hemocyte Abbreviations : H 2 O 2 , hydrogen peroxide ; Pvf , PDGF - and Vegf - related factor ; Pvr , PDGF - and Vegf - related receptor ; VNC , ventral nerve cord Cell Death and Differentiation ( 2013 ) 20 , 709 – 720 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 1350 - 9047 / 13 www . nature . com / cdd Results SCAR is required autonomously within hemocytes for their developmental dispersal . The dispersal of hemo - cytes during embryogenesis is co - dependent on develop - ment of the ventral nerve cord ( VNC ) 22 and the dynamics of these cells is strongly inﬂuenced by their surrounding environment . 13 Previously , Zallen et al . 21 found that maternal and zygotic ( M / Z ) SCAR D 37 mutants exhibited early embryo - nic lethality because of defects during blastodermal stages , whereas even M / Z mutants of the weak SCAR k13811 allele gave rise to a highly deformed VNC by stage 14 / 15 . Therefore , to analyse the role of SCAR in hemocyte motility within a relatively unperturbed environment , hemocyte migration was probed in zygotic SCAR D 37 mutants . By stage 13 of embryonic development , hemocytes normally occupy the length of the VNC ( Figure 1a ) , 23 however , in SCAR D 37 mutants they were absent from the ventral side of several neuromeres ( segments of the VNC ) , indicating a failure in their dispersal ( Figure 1b ) . Hemocytes move along the VNC from both anterior and posterior ends , the latter population having ﬁrst penetrated the germ band before its retraction ; 24 dynamic imaging revealed that hemocytes from these two populations make contact at the boundary between seg - ments 6 and 7 ( 4 / 10 movies ) or 7 and 8 ( 6 / 10 movies ) during stage 13 in wild types ( Figures 1f and g ; Supplementary Movie 1 ) . In contrast , both posterior and anterior hemocytes were retarded in SCAR D 37 embryos , suggesting a general defect in hemocyte progression along the VNC ( Figures 1f – h ; Supplementary Movie 1 ) . To test whether SCAR was required cell autonomously , dominant - negative GFP - SCAR ( dn SCAR ) 20 was speciﬁcally expressed within hemocytes . Dn SCAR expression phe - nocopied the defects in hemocyte dispersal observed in SCAR D 37 mutants ( Figures 1c – f ) , including the delay in both anterior and posterior populations . The presence of two copies of the dn SCAR transgene further enhanced this phenotype ( Figures 1e and f ) . In addition , hemocyte - speciﬁc expression of wild - type SCAR completely rescued develop - mental migration defects in a SCAR D 37 mutant background ( SCAR rescue ) , further demonstrating an autonomous requirement for SCAR ( Figures 1d – f ) . Hemocyte migration along the VNC is controlled by separation of the VNC from the epithelium and PDGF - and Vegf - related receptor ( Pvr ) signalling in response to Pvf ligands expressed at the midline . 9 , 22 , 25 , 26 Heterozygous Pvr 1 mutants displayed defects in VNC progression ; this pheno - type was signiﬁcantly enhanced in SCAR D 37 / Pvr 1 transheter - ozygotes , revealing a strong genetic interaction between SCAR and Pvr ( Figure 1i ) , consistent with SCAR operating downstream of Pvr during this phase of migration . SCAR is required for the inﬂammatory response and motility of hemocytes . Drosophila hemocytes mount rapid inﬂammatory responses to laser - induced epithelial wounds , responding to hydrogen peroxide ( H 2 O 2 ) . 5 , 27 To test whether SCAR is necessary for this process , we laser wounded the ventral epithelium of stage 15 embryos just laterally to the midline , and assessed hemocyte recruitment 1 h later , ﬁnding a substantial reduction in hemocytes recruited to wounds in SCAR D 37 mutants compared with wild types ( Figures 2a – d ) , demonstrating that SCAR is an important regulator of this in vivo inﬂammatory migration . Dynamic imaging indicated that the few hemocytes that did migrate to wounds in SCAR D 37 mutants did so at a reduced rate , but displayed an identical directionality to wild types ( Figure 2e ) . This suggests SCAR does not have an important role in guiding hemocytes or sensing wound - induced damage cues , but instead powers their migration in response to those signals . Decreased hemocyte recruitment was not a con - sequence of an overall reduction in hemocyte numbers since by stage 15 there was a comparable number of hemocytes on the ventral midline in SCAR D 37 and wild - type embryos ( data not shown ; also see Figure 7 ) . We also found no signiﬁcant difference in the numbers of hemocytes in the ﬁeld of view in wild - type and SCAR mutants immediately post - wounding when normalised according to the area of the ﬁeld of view . Importantly , a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in the numbers of hemocytes at wounds was maintained when these values were normalised against both wound size and density of hemocytes present immediately after wounding ( data not shown ) , comparable to the decrease presented in Figure 2d . Hemocytes remain motile following their dispersal , exhibit - ing contact - dependent repulsion at stage 15 . 11 Tracking SCAR D 37 mutant hemocyte movement at this stage revealed a dramatic reduction in motility compared with wild types ( Figures 3a , b and f ) ; once again hemocyte directionality was unaffected by loss of SCAR ( data not shown ) . Expression of wild - type SCAR speciﬁcally in hemocytes in a SCAR D 37 mutant background ( SCAR rescue ) signiﬁcantly rescued hemocyte speed , demonstrating a cell autonomous require - ment of SCAR for effective migration . Thus , SCAR is important in driving hemocyte motility during three crucial behaviours : dispersal , patrolling and inﬂammation . SCAR regulates hemocyte morphology in vivo . SCAR is an important activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex that has a key role in the formation of lamellipodia in vitro , structures considered to drive cell motility in many cell types . 1 To examine the inﬂuence of SCAR on morphology we imaged GFP - and mCherry - moesin - labelled hemocytes live . Wild - type hemocytes typically extend large , dynamic , F - actin - rich lamellipodia at stage 15 of development ( Figures 3a’ and a’’ ) . These lamellipodia contain Ena at their tips and Fascin - enriched F - actin bundles / microspikes extending radially from the cell body towards the periphery ; 13 , 14 some of these microspikes extend beyond the leading edge to form ﬁlopodia ( Figure 3a’’ ) . SCAR D 37 hemocytes exhibited a dramatic loss of lamellipodia and were instead dominated by long , motile ﬁlopodia - like protrusions ( Figures 3b’ and b’’ ; Supplementary Movie 2 ) , giving rise to a stellate morphology strongly reminiscent of SCAR - depleted S2 cells in culture . 15 – 17 The effects of SCAR D 37 on lamellipodia were cell autono - mous as lamellipodial area could be restored to wild - type levels in SCAR rescue hemocytes ( Figures 3c’ , c’’ and g ) . In addition , lamellipodial area was reduced in hemocytes expressing dn SCAR ( Figure 3d and g ) , with a more severe phenotype observed in those carrying two copies of this transgene ( Figure 3e ) . SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 710 Cell Death and Differentiation Other members of the WASp family of nucleation promoting factors could be responsible for the formation of residual lamellipodia observed in SCAR D 37 mutants , particularly as WASp itself is recruited to Dictyostelium pseudopods in SCAR’s absence . 28 However , neither WASp nor WASH appeared necessary for these residual lamellipodia because both SCAR D 37 ; WASp EY06238 and SCAR D 37 ; WASH D 185 double mutants were indistinguishable from SCAR D 37 mutants in Figure 1 SCAR is required by migrating macrophages for their developmental dispersal and interacts genetically with Pvr . ( a – d ) Lateral views of stage 13 / 14 embryos immunostained to show distribution of GFP - labelled hemocytes . Hemocytes migrate from the head to form a single line atop the VNC in wild - type ( WT ) embryos ( a ) ; shown between arrows . Hemocytes failed to migrate as far in SCAR D 37 zygotic mutants ( b ) or when dominant - negative SCAR ( dn SCAR ) was speciﬁcally expressed in hemocytes ( c ) . Regions between arrowheads indicate absence of hemocytes ( b and c ) . Expression of wild - type SCAR speciﬁcally in hemocytes in a SCAR D 37 background ( SCAR rescue ) rescued this defect ( d ) . ( e ) Quantiﬁcation showing mean number of empty segments in ﬁxed embryos at st13 / 14 ; each SCAR mutant , with the exception of SCAR rescue embryos , was signiﬁcantly different from wild types ( P r 0 . 001 , Kruskal – Wallis test , Dunn’s multiple comparison post test , n Z 29 embryos per genotype ) , whereas hemocyte - speciﬁc expression of the anti - apoptotic gene p35 in a SCAR D 37 mutant background ( SCAR þ p35 ) failed to rescue . N . B . 2x dn SCAR represents a 50 : 50 mix of embryos with hemocytes expressing from 1 or 2 copies of UAS - dn SCAR ( see Materials and methods section ) . ( f ) Quantiﬁcation of mean position of lead hemocytes for anterior and posterior populations from ﬁxed embryos ; where hemocytes were present all along the VNC they were assumed to have met at segment 7 . 6 , a value that corresponds to the meanmeeting point taken from ten movies of WTembryos . ( g and h ) Projectionsof all time points of 3h - long movies of WT and SCAR D 37 mutant embryos with red stinger - labelled hemocytes ( see also Supplementary Movie 1 ) revealed that hemocytes from both posterior and anterior populations were retarded in SCAR D 37 mutants ; hemocytes of these two populations met at the arrowhead in ( g ) ; representative of at least three movies per genotype . ( i ) Mean number of empty segments per embryo in SCAR D 37 / þ and Pvr 1 / þ heterozygotes and SCAR D 37 / Pvr 1 transheterozygotes showing genetic interaction between Pvr 1 and SCAR D 37 . Each genotype is signiﬁcantly different from the others ( P r 0 . 05 , Kruskal – Wallis test , Dunn’s multiple comparison post test , n Z 35 embryos per genotype ) . Anterior is to the right and ventral is up in all images ; scale bars represent 50 m m ; error bars represent the S . D . SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 711 Cell Death and Differentiation terms of lamellipodial area ( Supplementary Figures 1 and 2 ) . Any remaining lamellipodia may therefore be driven by maternal SCAR or a partially redundant mechanism . Loss of SCAR function leads to defective phagosome processing . As hemocytes disperse through the embryo they engulf dying cells , 7 consequently containing numerous vacuoles by stage 15 ( Figures 3a , h and 4a ) . Both SCAR D 37 mutant and dn SCAR hemocytes exhibited striking increases in the number of vacuoles per cell , especially when two copies of the dn SCAR transgene were present ( compare Figure 3d and e ) , whereas SCAR rescue hemocytes were no more vacuolated than wild types ( Figures 3c’ and h ) . Acridine orange staining of wild - type and SCAR D 37 mutants showed the majority of these vacuoles contained apoptotic corpses ( Figure 4b and f ) ; this was validated by the absence of both vacuoles and acridine orange staining from apoptosis - null H99 mutant embryos ( Figure 4c and d ) , which lack the pro - apoptotic genes hid , reaper and grim . 29 – 31 This increase in engulfed apoptotic corpses was not due to increased levels of apoptosis because it was also observed in dn SCAR hemocytes and there was no increase in cell death in SCAR D 37 mutant embryos ( Supplementary Figures 3a and b ) . Furthermore , hemocyte nuclei appeared morpholo - gically similar to those in wild types and hemocyte - speciﬁc expression of the caspase inhibitor p35 ( which can block autophagy and apoptosis ) 32 failed to rescue vacuolation , lamellipodia and dispersal phenotypes in SCAR D 37 mutants ( Figures 1e and 3h ; Supplementary Figures 3c – g ) . In summary , increased vacuolation in SCAR D 37 mutants was not a consequence of hemocyte death or gross increases in apoptosis , thus uncovering a novel function for SCAR in the processing of phagocytosed apoptotic corpses . To probe this role in phagocytic processing , a dominant - negative form of Rab5 was speciﬁcally expressed within hemocytes ; 33 the Rab family of GTPases have important roles in trafﬁcking , with Rab5 involved in phagosome maturation . 34 Dn Rab5 - expressing hemocytes became highly vacuolated , phenocopying SCAR D 37 mutants ( Figure 4g ) . Furthermore , the fraction of vacuoles within both dn Rab5 and SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes that stained positively using LysoTracker , an indicator of phagosome acidiﬁcation , was reduced compared with wild types ( Figure 4h ) . In contrast , we found no striking accumulation of mCherry - Moesin around the persistent vacuoles observed in SCAR mutants suggesting that a failure to remove F - actin from the surfaces of vesicles , a process that precedes both Rab5 activation and subsequent acidiﬁcation steps , 35 does not contribute to phagosomal maturation defects ( Figure 4e ; data not shown ) , whereas the dynamics of this process also appeared unaffected ( data not shown ) . In summary , these results show SCAR as critical for the normal maturation and acidiﬁcation of phagocytosed apoptotic corpses in macrophages in vivo . Loss of the SCAR / WAVE complex component Hem phenocopies SCAR defects . The activity , stability and localisation of SCAR is regulated via incorporation into the evolutionarily conserved SCAR / WAVE complex , one com - ponent of which is Hem ( also referred to as Kette or Nap1 in Drosophila ) . 16 , 17 Drosophila Hem mutants exhibit defects in Figure 2 SCAR drives inﬂammatory migration of hemocytes . ( a and b ) Stage 15 wild - type ( a ) and SCAR D 37 mutant embryos ( b ) with GFP - labelled hemocytes ( green ) were wounded and imaged 1h later ( purple borders show wound position ) . ( c and d ) Scatter ( c ) and box and whisker plots ( d ) reveal that signiﬁcantly fewer hemocytes were present per m m 2 of wound area in SCAR D 37 mutants ( P r 0 . 001 , t - test , n Z 20 embryos per genotype ) . ( e , e’ ) Box and whisker plots of hemocyte speed ( e ) and directionality ( e’ ) show that SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes migrated to wounds signiﬁcantly more slowly ( P r 0 . 001 , t - test , 50 WT and 20 SCAR D 37 tracks taken from seven movies of each genotype ) , but as directionally as wild types ( NS , not signiﬁcant ) . Scale bars represent 20 m m . Lines represent the median , whereasboxes and whiskers show the interquartile and 2 . 5 – 97 . 5 percentile ranges , respectively , in these and all subsequent box and whisker plots SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 712 Cell Death and Differentiation axonal wiring and muscle cell fusion . 36 , 37 The same complex operates in vertebrates ; in particular an almost exclusively haematopoietic - speciﬁc mouse homologue of Hem has a key role in neutrophil migration in vitro . 38 To verify the vacuola - tion phenotype and further understand the regulation of SCAR in hemocytes , we tested the role of Hem in hemocyte function . Analysis of Hem J4 - 48 and Hem 03335 mutants revealed Hem is necessary for normal dispersal ( Figures 5a and b ) , migration at stage 15 ( Figures 5c – e ) and lamellipodia formation by hemocytes ( Figures 5f – k ) . Similarly to SCAR D 37 mutants , Hem mutant hemocytes became highly vacuolated ( Figures 5f – k ) . These data strongly suggest that SCAR is regulated via the SCAR / WAVE complex in hemocytes . SCAR drives phagocytosis of bacteria and is necessary for efﬁcient clearance of pathogens and damage repair to promote survival . One of the ﬁrst functions ascribed to SCAR was in phagocytosis ; 39 indeed SCAR is important in this regard in larval hemocytes . 40 To test whether SCAR Figure 3 SCARdriveshemocyte migrationandis necessaryfornormalhemocytemorphology . ( a – c ) Hemocytetracksrepresentingmigrationfor30minat stage15 in WT ( a ) , SCAR D 37 ( b ) and SCAR rescue embryos ( c ) ; arrows show position of ventral midline . ( a’ – c’ ) Morphology of GFP - labelled hemocytes at stage 15 on the ventral midline ; arrowheads illustrate large lamellipodia , asterisks indicate spindly protrusions . ( a’’ – c’’ ) F - actin morphology of hemocytes at the ventral midline shown via mCherry - moesin expression . ( d and e ) Hemocytes expressing GFP and dn SCAR from one UAS construct showed a mild reduction in lamellipodia ( d ) , but a more severe phenotype was frequentlyseeninembryosthatexpresseddnSCARfromeither1or2copiesoftheUASinsertion ( e ) . ( f – h ) Boxandwhiskersplotsshowingquantiﬁcationofhemocytespeeds ( f ; n Z 100 hemocytes from Z 7 embryos per genotype ) and lamellipodial area ( g ; n Z 25 hemocytes from Z 15 embryos per genotype ) and numbers of vacuoles per hemocyte ( h ; n Z 34 hemocytes from Z 13 embryos per genotype ) ; each category is signiﬁcantly different from the rest ( P r 0 . 05 , one - way ANOVA , Bonferroni’s post test ) , except where indicated ( NS not signiﬁcant ) . All scale bars represent 20 m m SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 713 Cell Death and Differentiation carries out a similar function within embryos , RFP - expres - sing E . coli were microinjected into SCAR D 37 and wild - type stage 15 embryos containing GFP - labelled hemocytes . Live imaging 1 h post - injection revealed that SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes phagocytosed E . coli at substantially reduced levels compared with wild types ( Figures 6a – c ) . Non - phagocytosed bacteria were frequently observed adhered to the surface of SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes , suggesting defects in phagocytosis rather than detection of bacteria . The biological cost of defective clearance was probed by monitoring viability 24h post - injection with the pathogenic bacteria Erwinia carotovora carotovora 15 ( ecc15 ) . Infection with ecc15 caused an increase in mortality in both wild types and SCAR D 37 mutants on top of that observed in PBS - injected Figure 4 SCAR mutant hemocytes contain numerous apoptotic corpses and have defective phagosome processing . ( a and b ) Maximum projections ( a ) and zooms of single confocal slices from indicated box region ( a’ ) reveal that vacuoles within mCherry - moesin - labelled ( ch moe ) wild - type ( WT ) hemocytes appear as regions excluding this F - actin marker ( asterisks indicate examples ) ; co - staining with acridine orange ( ao ¼ red and / or green spheres , arrowheads indicate examples ; red ¼ ch moe ) shows that the majority of these vacuoles contain apoptotic corpses ( b ) . ( c and d ) H99 mutants neither contained vacuoles ( c – c’ ) , nor stained with acridine orange ( d ) . ( e and f ) SCAR D 37 mutants were highly vacuolated ( e – e’ ) and the majority of vacuoles stained positively for acridine orange ( f ) . ( g ) Stage 15 hemocytes co - expressing dominant - negative Rab5 and GFP also became highly vacuolated , although they retained lamellipodia ( indicated by arrows in zoomed region ) . ( h ) Quantiﬁcation revealed that the mean fraction of vacuoles positively labelled with LysoTracker red within hemocytes per embryo was signiﬁcantly reduced in both SCAR D 37 homozygotes and embryos that contained dn Rab - expressing hemocytes at stage 15 compared with wild types ( P r 0 . 01 , one - way ANOVA , Bonferroni’s post test , n Z 12 embryos per genotype ) ; error bars represent the S . D . ; scale bars show 10 m m . NS , not signiﬁcant SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 714 Cell Death and Differentiation controls , but crucially this mortality was signiﬁcantly enhanced in SCAR D 37 mutants ( Figure 6d ) , indicating that failures in SCAR - dependent phagocytosis substantially compromised innate immune responses . Interestingly , there was a sig - niﬁcant reduction in the viability of SCAR D 37 mutants when non - injected and PBS - injected embryos were compared ( Figure 6d ) , paralleling the defects in larval healing observed on RNAi of SCAR , 41 and suggesting that SCAR has an important role in repair processes . To further conﬁrm that ecc15 and not simply the injection process itself accounted for Figure 5 The SCAR complex component Hem is also required for lamellipodial formation and hemocyte migrations . ( a ) Immunostained stage 13 / 14 Hem J4 - 48 mutant embryo with GFP - labelled hemocytes ; hemocytes failed to occupy the entire length of the VNC ( region bounded by arrowheads ) . ( b ) Quantiﬁcation showing average number of segments devoid of hemocytes at stage 13 / 14 in Hem 03335 heterozygotes and Hem 03335 and Hem J4 - 48 mutant embryos ; error bars represent S . D . ; each population is signiﬁcantly different from the others ( P r 0 . 01 Kruskal – Wallis test , Dunn’s post test , n Z 30 embryos per genotype ) . ( c and d ) Tracks of red stinger - labelled hemocytes migrating for30minovertheVNCatstage15inwild - type ( c ) and Hem J4 - 48 mutantembryos ( d ) . ( e ) Boxandwhiskersplotshowingaveragespeedperhemocyte ; speedswere signiﬁcantly different ( P r 0 . 0001 , t - test , n Z 92 hemocytes from six embryos per genotype ) . ( f – k ) GFP and GMA - labelled hemocytes at stage 15 at the ventral midline in indicated genotypes revealing that Hem is required for lamellipodia and its absence leads to vacuolation ; anterior is up . Scale bars represent 50 m m ( a ) , 20 m m ( c and d , f - h ) and 10 m m ( i – k ) SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 715 Cell Death and Differentiation the enhanced drop in survival , we normalised according to the appropriate PBS - injected control , which conclusively showed that , despite a decreased tolerance to the injection process , there was a further drop in survival because of the presence of ecc15 ( Figure 6d’ ) and presumably its defective clearance . Separating vacuolation and lamellipodial phenotypes in SCAR mutants . Loss of SCAR results in two clear defects : failure in the processing of apoptotic corpses and dramatic reductions in lamellipodial area . To investigate the contribu - tion of the failure in phagosome processing to lamellipodial and motility defects in SCAR D 37 mutants we analysed SCAR D 37 ; H99 double mutants , which lack all apoptosis . Strikingly , removal of the apoptotic clearance burden rescued both migration along the VNC and lamellipodial area to the levels observed in wild - type and H99 mutant hemocytes ( Figures 7a – f ) . SCAR ; H99 double mutant hemocytes moved signiﬁcantly faster than SCAR D 37 mutants at stage 15 , but did not move as quickly as either SCAR rescue hemocytes ( compare speeds with Figure 3g ) or H99 mutants ( Figure 7g ) . Importantly , this partial rescue of hemocyte migration at stage 15 in SCAR D 37 ; H99 double mutants revealed that , whereas vacuo - lation is a major contributing factor to the hemocyte motility defects observed in SCAR D 37 mutants , it cannot be the sole explanation . In order to examine the nature of the rescued lamellipodia in more detail , the rate of lamellipodial area change was calculated from timelapse movies of wild - type hemocytes , the occasional SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes that possessed large lamellipodia and SCAR D 37 ; H99 double mutant hemo - cytes at stage 15 . Of those hemocytes analysed , there was no difference in average lamellipodial areas ( data not shown ) , however , SCAR D 37 mutant lamellipodia were more dynamic with greater changes in lamellipodial area over time , indicating a reduction in their stability . Surprisingly , the presence of the H99 deﬁciency reverted lamellipodial behaviour in these SCAR mutant cells to that observed in wild types ( Figure 7h ) . Therefore , even the occasional lamellipodia that appear morphologically normal in SCAR D 37 mutant hemo - cytes behave very differently to wild - type lamellipodia and this altered behaviour can be dramatically rescued simply by removing apoptosis , further highlighting the delicate balance between the machineries controlling phagosome processing and migration . Discussion SCAR has long been thought to drive the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex to generate actin structures to drive migra - tion . Here , we show that SCAR is crucial for the generation of lamellipodia in macrophages in vivo , structures whose presence is critical for effective motility of these cells to a variety of cues including H 2 O 2 and Pvfs . SCAR is necessary for inﬂammatory responses and hemocyte dispersal , a process necessary for embryogenesis and immune surveil - lance . However , lamellipodial defects aside , the absence of SCAR causes an extreme vacuolation phenotype , which appears to be a consequence of a failure to adequately process ingested material , resulting in a build - up of undi - gested apoptotic corpses . Suppression of apoptosis and the consequent relief of this clearance burden prevents vacuola - tion and in turn completely rescues lamellipodia and partially restores normal migration speeds . How might increased vacuolation suppress cell motility in SCAR mutants ? One potential explanation might involve sequestration / titration of Figure 6 SCAR mutantsexhibitdefectsinclearanceofbacteriaanddamagerepairandhaveenhancedsusceptibilitytopathogens . ( a and b ) Stage15embryoswithGFP - labelled hemocytes ( green ) were injected with RFP - labelled E . coli ( red ) and imaged 1h later ( a and b ) , revealing a defect in phagocytosis in SCAR D 37 mutants ( b ) compared with wild types ( a ) . ( c ) Bar graph showing mean ratio of phagocytosed E . coli : total E . coli in ﬁeld of view at 1h post - injection ; there was a signiﬁcant reduction in the amount of E . coli phagocytosed in SCAR D 37 mutants ( P o 0 . 01 , Mann – Whitney test , n Z 4 per genotype ) . ( d ) Bar graph showing mean viability of non - injectedcontrols ( NI ) and embryos injected with PBS or ecc15 ; each column is signiﬁcantly different ( P o 0 . 01 , one - way ANOVA , Bonferroni’s post test , n ¼ 3 - 4 with Z 100 embryos injected per experiment ) , except where indicated ( NS ) , suggesting that SCAR D 37 mutants exhibit defects in repair of damage caused by injection and are more susceptible to ecc15 - induced death . ( d’ ) Normalisingaccordingtothepercentage ofembryosthathatchfollowinginjectionwithPBSandthenexpressingthisvaluerelativetotheWT þ ecc15 conditionshowsthat theenhancedlethality of SCAR mutantson injectionwith ecc15 wasnot a consequence oftheirincreasedsusceptibilitytodamage ( P o 0 . 05 , Student’s t - test ) . Scale and error bars represent 5 m m and the S . D . , respectively . NS , not signiﬁcant SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 716 Cell Death and Differentiation components that would otherwise be able to rescue these defects . Proteomic characterisation of phagosomes has shown recruitment of SCAR and Ena 42 and the latter regulates lamellipodial dynamics and migration in hemo - cytes . 13 However , unlike the H99 deﬁciency , overexpression of Ena in SCAR mutants failed to rescue migration along the VNC , whereas ena GC1 failed to interact genetically with SCAR in transheterozygous embryos ( data not shown ) . It remains possible that rescue is via the presence of low levels of maternal SCAR that would otherwise be held at vacuoles . An alternative hypothesis is that competition for the Arp2 / 3 complex by another activator on the surface of vacuoles might prevent lamellipodial formation via residual SCAR . WASH is another member of the WASp family and can activate Arp2 / 3 downstream of Rho1 ; 43 in Dictyostelium WASH has a role in the removal of V - ATPase to facilitate neutralisation of vacuoles before expulsion of indigestible waste 44 and there - fore blocking phagosome maturation could drive WASH’s accumulation on vacuoles . However , SCAR ; WASH double mutants showed no rescue of lamellipodia appearing to rule this hypothesis out . We were also unable to ﬁnd any obvious hemocyte dispersal or morphological defects in WASH D 185 mutants ( Supplementary Figure 2 ) . Similarly , SCAR ; WASp double mutants neither rescued nor further perturbed lamelli - podia in hemocytes . Other potential explanations as to how vacuolation might suppress migration include a reduced availability of mem - brane to add to protrusions , cell signalling feedback mechanisms or even steric hindrance of migration through constricted spaces . Alternatively , increased ingested mate - rial to process ( for instance cholesterol ) or other changes in cellular lipid composition / distribution ( e . g . , phosphoinosi - tides ) could underlie migratory defects associated with vacuolation in SCAR mutants . Further investigation is required to determine the precise molecular mechanisms underpinning this intriguing balance of power . The fact that the removal of the apoptotic clearance burden only partially restores migration speeds in SCAR mutant hemocytes demonstrates that none of these explanations can fully explain the motility defects in SCAR mutants and that SCAR is indeed necessary in cells that utilise lamellipodia to move as quickly as possible . Figure 7 Removing apoptosis rescues lamellipodia and partially rescues speed in SCAR mutant hemocytes . ( a – d ) GFP expression in hemocytes at stage 15 in wild - type ( a ) , SCAR D 37 ( b ) , SCAR D 37 ; H99 double mutant ( c ) and H99 mutant ( d ) embryos revealed that the H99 deﬁciency rescued lamellipodia ( arrows ) . Regions with reduced levels of GFP in cell bodies in ( c ) and ( d ) are nuclei ( asterisks ) ; scale bars represent 20 m m . ( e ) Bar graph showing mean number of segments lacking hemocytes at stage 13 ; error bars represent the S . D . SCAR D 37 mutants exhibited a signiﬁcant defect compared with the other genotypes ( P r 0 . 01 ; Kruskal – Wallis test , Dunn’s multiple comparison post test , n Z 15 embryos per genotype ) , whereas there were no signiﬁcant differences amongst the remaining comparisons . ( f – h ) Box and whisker plots of hemocyte lamellipodial area ( f ; n 4 50hemocytesfrom Z 12embryospergenotype ) , speed ( g ; n Z 90hemocytesfrom Z 5 embryospergenotype ) andrateoflamellipodialchangeperhemocyteper min ( h ; 4 12hemocyteswereanalysedfromthreedifferentmovies ) atstage15 . Asterisksindicateasigniﬁcantdifference between SCAR D 37 mutantsandtheothergenotypes in ( f ) ( P r 0 . 001 ) and with WT and SCAR ; H99 in ( h ) ( P r 0 . 01 ) . P - values determined by one - way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post test ( f – h ) SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 717 Cell Death and Differentiation The severely defective lamellipodia observed on loss of SCAR function suggests that Arp2 / 3’s primary activator in hemocytes is SCAR . That some F - actin persists and migration remains possible in the absence of SCAR see - mingly indicates that other actin nucleators operate within hemocytes , but that the network that other actin regulators inﬂuence is overwhelmingly Arp2 / 3 dependent . A loss of lamellipodia on depletion of Arp2 / 3 has recently been demonstrated in vitro in ﬁbroblasts , correlating with a reduction in their migratory capabilities . 45 , 46 Interestingly , cells lacking Arp2 / 3 moved more slowly but still chemotaxed efﬁciently towards soluble PDGF , 45 paralleling the slower but highly directional routes SCAR mutant hemocytes take towards H 2 O 2 at wounds . In addition , Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells exhibited increased protrusion and retraction rates , 46 con - sistent with the increased lamellipodial dynamism of SCAR mutant hemocytes ( Figure 7h ) . The phagocytic processing defect in SCAR mutants has not been reported previously , although a potentially related role for both SCAR and WASp downstream of Cip4 / Toca in actin comet - driven movement of vesicles from the plasma mem - brane has been shown in S2 cells . 47 Cells in other assays of SCAR / WAVE function are unlikely to have been exposed to as many apoptotic corpses as hemocytes are during devel - opment ; alternatively upstream roles in phagocytosis may have hidden downstream functions of SCAR in processing . Our results highlight a ﬁne balance between processing of phagocytosed debris and formation of actin - rich protrusions necessary for driving migration within macrophages . It has been well documented that exposure to apoptotic corpses can switch phagocytes from pro - inﬂammatory to anti - inﬂamma - tory phenotypes 48 , 49 and we have previously shown that apoptotic cells can dictate the direction in which macrophages will migrate and represent their most highly prioritised cue in the Drosophila embryo . 27 Here , we demonstrate that even after engulfment apoptotic corpses can inﬂuence the migra - tion machinery in an inﬂammatory cell , highjacking key components of that machinery if the clearance burden becomes too great and thereby disabling the macrophages’ migration programme . In light of these ﬁndings , it is now critical to understand further the mechanisms underlying this crosstalk between debris clearance and migration if we are to design therapeutics to stimulate macrophage resolution away from areas such as chronic wounds or tumours where levels of debris and cell death may be very high . Materials and Methods Fly genetics . Twi - Gal4 and Gal4 - independent ﬂuorescent balancers 50 , 51 were used to maintain mutant lines and discriminate homozygous mutant embryos . Fly lines were previously generated in the lab or obtained from the Bloomington Stock Centre ( University of Indiana , IN , USA ) ; lines unavailable from Bloomington were kindly sent by the labs that originally made them ( see references below ) . Srp - Gal4 ( ref . 25 ) , crq - Gal4 ( ref . 26 ) and pxn - Gal4 ( ref . 5 ) were used to drive expression of UAS constructs speciﬁcally in hemocytes . UAS - GFP - SCAR 20 and UAS - Rab5 dn 33 were used as dominant - negative constructs ; UAS - p35 ( ref . 52 ) and UAS - SCAR 21 were used as rescue constructs ; insertions of UAS - GFP , UAS - mCherry - Moesin 53 and UAS - red stinger 11 were used to visualise hemocyte morphology and dynamics . Mutant alleles used were SCAR D 37 ( ref . 21 ) , Hem J4 - 48 ( ref . 36 ) , Hem 03335 ( ref . 54 ) and Df ( 3L ) H99 ( ref . 31 ) , WASp EY06238 ( ref . 55 ) and WASH D 185 ( ref . 56 ) ; see Supplementary Table 1 for a full list of genotypes used . SCAR D 37 was recombined with srp - Gal4 ( Figures 1 – 6 ) or srp - Gal4 , UAS - GFP and srp - Gal4 , UAS - red stinger ( Figure 7 ) . Quantiﬁcation of developmental migration . Fixation and subsequent immunostaining of embryos was carried out as per Evans et al . 22 , using rabbit anti - GFP ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) as a primary antibody . The presence or absence of GFP - or red stinger - labelled hemocytes on the ventral side of the VNC was scored by eye in either live or ﬁxed and immunostained embryos using a Leica MZ16F ﬂuorescent dissection microscope with a 5X / 0 . 50 PL APO objective ( Leica , Wetzlar , Germany ) . Low magniﬁcation images of representative embryos were taken on the same microscope . Live imaging . Embryos were mounted on slides via Scotch double - sided sticky tape ( 3M , Maplewood , MN , USA ) in voltalef oil as previously described ; 22 halocarbon oil 700 ( Sigma , St Louis , MO , USA ) may be used as an alternative as voltalef oil is no longer commercially available . All live imaging was carried out at 22 ± 1 1 C . Timelapse movies of red stinger - labelled hemocytes at stage 15 were taken of ventrally orientated embryos on a Leica DMIRB inverted microscope ﬁtted with an HCX PL APO 40X objective , with a z - stack of three slices that captured red stinger - labelledhemocytesmovingbetweentheepidermisandVNCcollectedevery30sfor30minusingImageProsoftware ( Media Cybernetics , Bethesda , MD , USA ) . Movies to determine when anterior and posterior hemocytes met were taken on the same set - up using a Leica HC PL APO 20X / 0 . 70 multi - immersion objective lens ( with oil ) ; embryos were mounted laterally at mid - stage 12 and a z - stack of ﬁve slices was taken every 2min to capture hemocyte progression along the VNC . Laser ablation of epithelial cells was performed as previously 13 on a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope with a Zeiss FLUAR 40X / 1 . 3 oil DIC objective ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . The number of GFP - labelled hemocytes at or in contact with the wound margin was quantiﬁed 1h post - ablation , with wound area measured from wideﬁeld images of transmitted laser light ( channel D ) in NIH ImageJ ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / index . html ) . To determine speed and directionality of migration movies were taken immediately after wounding with a z - stack of ﬁve images collected every 2min for 1h . All tracking was performed on maximal projections of timelapse movies using ImageJ ( manual tracking and chemotaxis tool plugins ) . Stills of ﬂuorescently labelled hemocytes on the ventral midline were taken of ventrally orientated , stage 15 embryos on either a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope with a Zeiss FLUAR 40X / 1 . 3oil immersion DIC objectiveor a Leica DMI 6000B UltraVIEW VoX spinning disk confocal imaging system with an HCX PL APO 40X / 1 . 30 oil immersion objective ; images were captured using Volocity ( Perkin Elmer , Waltham , MA , USA ) . The latter set - up was also used to determine lamellipodial dynamics with GFP - labelled hemocytes between the epidermis and VNC imaged every 30s for 10min . Acridine orange and LysoTracker staining . Dechorionated embryos were transferred to a glass vial containing 500ml heptane ( Sigma ) plus 500ml 5 m g / ml acridine orange ( Sigma ) or 50n M LysoTracker red DND - 99 ( Molecular Probes , Life Technologies , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) in PBS ( Sigma ) and agitated for 5 or 30min , respectively . Embryos were then removed from the interface in a minimal volume of ﬂuid to halocarbon oil 700 and subsequently transferred in a small oil droplet to slides for immediate imaging . We found that acridine orange and LysoTracker both produced highly variable intensity of staining between embryos , even within the same treatment . It was therefore necessary to use different exposure times during image capture to avoid under / overexposure . Images were collected on the spinning disk system outlined above . To quantify acidiﬁcation of phagosomes , the fraction of vacuoles 4 1 . 5 m m in diameter within hemocytes with clear LysoTracker labelling was determined from single confocal slices ( LysoTracker positive vacuoles / total vacuoles in ﬁeld of view ) . Image quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis . Lamellipodial area ( total area (cid:2) cell body area ) was measured manually in ImageJ from contrast - enhanced maximum projections of confocal stacks of hemocytes expressing cytoplasmic GFP ; vitelline membrane autoﬂuoresence was manually removed from more superﬁcial ( ventral ) confocal slices where it obscured hemocyte morphology before assembly of projections . Only hemocytes lying in the pseudo - 2D plane between epidermis and VNC , bounded by the edges of the VNC , which could be distinguished from their neighbours were analysed . The values herein are likely an under representation of SCAR phenotypes as the most severely affected hemocytes tended to clump together and thus eluded analysis . Vacuole numbers per hemocyte were determined by scanning though z - stacks of confocal images . Lamellipodial dynamics were calculated as follows : the lamellipodial area of individual GFP - labelled hemocytes was determined every 30s over the course of a SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 718 Cell Death and Differentiation 10min movie ( as described above ) . The absolute change in area ( i . e . , the modulus ) between subsequent timepoints was then averaged per hemocyte and this was normalised according to the average lamellipodial area for that hemocyte over the entire movie to take into account differences in hemocyte size . For this analysis only SCAR D 37 mutant hemocytes with large lamellipodia were quantiﬁed . Statistical analysis was performed using Graph Pad Prism for Mac ( Graph Pad Software , La Jolla , CA , USA ) . In the box and whiskers plots , the lines represent the medians , whereas the boxes and whiskers show the interquartile and 2 . 5 – 97 . 5 percentile ranges , respectively . Bacterial injections . DH5 a E . coli and ecc15 bacteria were grown for 18h to stationary phase at 37 and 30 1 C , respectively . After washing in sterile endotoxin - free PBS ( Sigma ) , cultures were adjusted to the appropriate density ( OD ¼ 10 for E . coli and OD ¼ 0 . 1 for ecc15 ) and microinjected into stage 15 embryos as per Vlisidou et al . , 57 injection of sterile , endotoxin - free PBS was used as a negative control . For analysis of phagocytosis , a coverslip was mounted over injected embryos and z - stacks with a 1 m m spacing of GFP - labelled hemocytes and RFP - labelled E . coli taken at 1h post - injection using a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope and a PL APO 63X / 1 . 4 oil immersion objective . These z - stacks were then used to calculate the percentage of phagocytosed E . coli per embryo . For viability studies , injected embryos were transferred to apple juice agar plates and stored at 25 1 C in humid conditions . Viability was scored at 24h post - injection based on larval hatching or movement . Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . Acknowledgements . We thank Eyal Schejter ( Weizman Institute of Science , Israel ) , Sergio Simoes and Jennifer Zallen ( Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Centre , USA ) , and Sven Bogdan ( University of Munster , Germany ) for ﬂy lines ; Isabella Vlisidou ( University of Bath , UK ) and Bruno Lemaitre ( EPFL , Switzerland ) kindly provided bacterial strains for this study . Guy Wiedermann ( University of Dundee , UK ) and James Lightfoot ( University of Bristol , UK ) performed preliminary characterisation of SCAR phenotypes as project students in the lab . This work wouldnotbepossiblewithouttheuseoftheBioimagingfacilitymaintainedbyAdrianRogers ( CEOS , University of Bath , UK ) , the Bloomington Stock Centre ( University ofIndiana , USA ) andFlybase . WethankBrianStramer ( KingsCollegeLondon , UK ) , Paul Whitley and Andrew Chalmers ( University of Bath , UK ) for helpful comments and advice . WW’s lab is funded by the Wellcome Trust . 1 . Insall RH , Machesky LM . Actin dynamics at the leading edge : from simple machinery to complex networks . Dev Cell 2009 ; 17 : 310 – 322 . 2 . EvansIR , WoodW . Understandinginvivobloodcellmigration – Drosophilahemocyteslead the way . Fly 2011 ; 5 : 110 – 114 . 3 . Evans CJ , Hartenstein V , Banerjee U . Thicker than blood : conserved mechanisms in Drosophila and vertebrate hematopoiesis . Dev Cell 2003 ; 5 : 673 – 690 . 4 . Franc NC . Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in mammals , Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster : molecular mechanisms and physiological consequences . Front Biosci - Landmrk 2002 ; 7 : D1298 – D1313 . 5 . Stramer B , Wood W , Galko MJ , Redd MJ , Jacinto A , Parkhurst SM et al . Live imaging of wound inﬂammation in Drosophila embryos reveals key roles for small GTPases during in vivo cell migration . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 168 : 567 – 573 . 6 . Olofsson B , Page DT . Condensation of the central nervous system in embryonic Drosophila is inhibited by blocking hemocyte migration or neural activity . Dev Biol 2005 ; 279 : 233 – 243 . 7 . Sears HC , Kennedy CJ , Garrity PA . Macrophage - mediated corpse engulfment is required for normal Drosophila CNS morphogenesis . Development 2003 ; 130 : 3557 – 3565 . 8 . Hopkinson - WoolleyJ , HughesD , GordonS , MartinP . Macrophagerecruitmentduringlimb development and wound healing in the embryonic and foetal mouse . J Cell Sci 1994 ; 107 ( Pt 5 ) : 1159 – 1167 . 9 . Cho NK , Keyes L , Johnson E , Heller J , Ryner L , Karim F et al . Developmental control of blood cell migration by the Drosophila VEGF pathway . Cell 2002 ; 108 : 865 – 876 . 10 . Urbano JM , Torgler CN , Molnar C , Tepass U , Lopez - Varea A , Brown NH et al . Drosophila laminins act as key regulators of basement membrane assembly and morphogenesis . Development 2009 ; 136 : 4165 – 4176 . 11 . Stramer B , Moreira S , Millard T , Evans I , Huang CY , Sabet O et al . Clasp - mediated microtubule bundling regulates persistent motility and contact repulsion in Drosophila macrophages in vivo . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 189 : 681 – 689 . 12 . Wood W , Jacinto A . Drosophila melanogaster embryonic haemocytes : masters of multitasking . Nature reviews . Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 542 – 551 . 13 . Tucker PK , Evans IR , Wood W . Ena drives invasive macrophage migration in Drosophila embryos . Disease Models Mechanisms 2011 ; 4 : 126 – 134 . 14 . Zanet J , Stramer B , Millard T , Martin P , Payre F , Plaza S . Fascin is required for blood cell migration during Drosophila embryogenesis . Development 2009 ; 136 : 2557 – 2565 . 15 . Biyasheva A , Svitkina T , Kunda P , Baum B , Borisy G . Cascade pathway of ﬁlopodia formation downstream of SCAR . J Cell Sci 2004 ; 117 ( Pt 6 ) : 837 – 848 . 16 . Kunda P , Craig G , Dominguez V , Baum B . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr Biol 2003 ; 13 : 1867 – 1875 . 17 . Rogers SL , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale RD . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 162 : 1079 – 1088 . 18 . Campellone KG , Welch MD . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nature reviews . Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 237 – 251 . 19 . Ura S , Pollitt AY , Veltman DM , Morrice NA , Machesky LM , Insall RH . Pseudopod growth andevolutionduringcellmovementiscontrolledthroughSCAR / WAVEdephosphorylation . Curr Biol 2012 ; 22 : 553 – 561 . 20 . GildorB , MassarwaR , ShiloBZ , SchejterED . TheSCARandWASpnucleation - promoting factors act sequentially to mediate Drosophila myoblast fusion . EMBO Rep 2009 ; 10 : 1043 – 1050 . 21 . Zallen JA , CohenY , Hudson AM , CooleyL , WieschausE , Schejter ED . SCARisa primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 689 – 701 . 22 . EvansIR , HuN , SkaerH , WoodW . Interdependenceofmacrophagemigrationandventral nerve cord development in Drosophila embryos . Development 2010 ; 137 : 1625 – 1633 . 23 . Tepass U , Fessler LI , Aziz A , Hartenstein V . Embryonic origin of hemocytes and their relationship to cell death in Drosophila . Development 1994 ; 120 : 1829 – 1837 . 24 . Siekhaus D , Haesemeyer M , Mofﬁtt O , Lehmann R . RhoL controls invasion and Rap1 localization during immune cell transmigration in Drosophila . Nat Cell Biol 2010 ; 12 : 605 – 610 . 25 . Bruckner K , Kockel L , Duchek P , Luque CM , Rorth P , Perrimon N . The PDGF / VEGF receptor controls blood cell survival in Drosophila . Dev Cell 2004 ; 7 : 73 – 84 . 26 . Wood W , Faria C , Jacinto A . Distinct mechanisms regulate hemocyte chemotaxis during development and wound healing in Drosophila melanogaster . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 173 : 405 – 416 . 27 . Moreira S , Stramer B , Evans I , Wood W , Martin P . Prioritizationof competing damage and developmental signals by migrating macrophages in the Drosophila embryo . Curr Biol 2010 ; 20 : 464 – 470 . 28 . Veltman DM , King JS , Machesky LM , Insall RH . SCAR knockouts in Dictyostelium : WASP assumes SCAR’s position and upstream regulators in pseudopods . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 198 : 501 – 508 . 29 . Chen P , Nordstrom W , Gish B , Abrams JM . grim , a novel cell death gene in Drosophila . Genes Dev 1996 ; 10 : 1773 – 1782 . 30 . GretherME , Abrams JM , Agapite J , WhiteK , Steller H . Theheadinvolutiondefective gene of Drosophila melanogaster functions in programmed cell death . Genes Dev 1995 ; 9 : 1694 – 1708 . 31 . White K , Grether ME , Abrams JM , Young L , Farrell K , Steller H . Genetic control of programmed cell death in Drosophila . Science 1994 ; 264 : 677 – 683 . 32 . Lee CY , Baehrecke EH . Steroid regulation of autophagic programmed cell death during development . Development 2001 ; 128 : 1443 – 1455 . 33 . ZhangJ , SchulzeKL , HiesingerPR , SuyamaK , WangS , FishM et al . Thirty - one ﬂavorsof Drosophila rab proteins . Genetics 2007 ; 176 : 1307 – 1322 . 34 . Kinchen JM , Ravichandran KS . Phagosome maturation : going through the acid test . Nature reviews . Mol Cell Biol 2008 ; 9 : 781 – 795 . 35 . Kitano M , Nakaya M , Nakamura T , Nagata S , Matsuda M . Imaging of Rab5 activity identiﬁes essential regulators for phagosome maturation . Nature 2008 ; 453 : 241 – 245 . 36 . Hummel T , Leifker K , Klambt C . The Drosophila HEM - 2 / NAP1 homolog KETTE controls axonal pathﬁnding and cytoskeletal organization . Genes Dev 2000 ; 14 : 863 – 873 . 37 . Schroter RH , Lier S , Holz A , Bogdan S , Klambt C , Beck L et al . kette and blown fuse interact genetically during the second fusion step of myogenesis in Drosophila . Development 2004 ; 131 : 4501 – 4509 . 38 . Weiner OD , Rentel MC , Ott A , Brown GE , Jedrychowski M , Yaffe MB et al . Hem - 1 complexes are essential for Rac activation , actin polymerization , and myosin regulation during neutrophil chemotaxis . PLoS Biol 2006 ; 4 : e38 . 39 . SeastoneDJ , HarrisE , TemesvariLA , BearJE , SaxeCL , CardelliJ . TheWASp - likeprotein scar regulates macropinocytosis , phagocytosis and endosomal membrane ﬂow in Dictyostelium . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 ( Pt 14 ) : 2673 – 2683 . 40 . Pearson AM , Baksa K , Ramet M , Protas M , McKee M , Brown D et al . Identiﬁcation of cytoskeletal regulatory proteins required for efﬁcient phagocytosis in Drosophila . Microbes Infection / Institut Pasteur 2003 ; 5 : 815 – 824 . 41 . LeschC , JoJ , WuY , FishGS , GalkoMJ . AtargetedUAS - RNAiscreeninDrosophilalarvae identiﬁes wound closure genes regulating distinct cellular processes . Genetics 2010 ; 186 : 943 – 957 . 42 . Stuart LM , Boulais J , Charriere GM , Hennessy EJ , Brunet S , Jutras I et al . A systems biology analysis of the Drosophila phagosome . Nature 2007 ; 445 : 95 – 101 . SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 719 Cell Death and Differentiation 43 . Liu R , Abreu - Blanco MT , Barry KC , Linardopoulou EV , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM . Wash functions downstream of Rho and links linear and branched actin nucleation factors . Development 2009 ; 136 : 2849 – 2860 . 44 . Carnell M , Zech T , Calaminus SD , Ura S , Hagedorn M , Johnston SA et al . Actin polymerization driven by WASH causes V - ATPase retrieval and vesicle neutralization before exocytosis . J Cell Biol 2011 ; 193 : 831 – 839 . 45 . Wu C , Asokan SB , Berginski ME , Haynes EM , Sharpless NE , Grifﬁth JD et al . Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 2012 ; 148 : 973 – 987 . 46 . Suraneni P , Rubinstein B , Unruh JR , Durnin M , Hanein D , Li R . The Arp2 / 3 complex is requiredforlamellipodiaextensionanddirectionalﬁbroblastcellmigration . JCellBiol 2012 ; 197 : 239 – 251 . 47 . Fricke R , Gohl C , Dharmalingam E , Grevelhorster A , Zahedi B , Harden N et al . Drosophila Cip4 / Toca - 1 integrates membrane trafﬁcking and actin dynamics through WASP and SCAR / WAVE . Curr Biol 2009 ; 19 : 1429 – 1437 . 48 . FadokVA , BrattonDL , KonowalA , FreedPW , WestcottJY , HensonPM . Macrophagesthat have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinﬂammatory cytokine production through autocrine / paracrine mechanisms involving TGF - beta , PGE2 , and PAF . J Clin Invest 1998 ; 101 : 890 – 898 . 49 . Voll RE , Herrmann M , Roth EA , Stach C , Kalden JR , Girkontaite I . Immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells . Nature 1997 ; 390 : 350 – 351 . 50 . HalfonMS , GisselbrechtS , LuJ , EstradaB , KeshishianH , MichelsonAM . Newﬂuorescent proteinreportersforusewiththeDrosophilaGal4expressionsystemandforvitaldetection of balancer chromosomes . Genesis 2002 ; 34 : 135 – 138 . 51 . Le T , Liang Z , Patel H , Yu MH , Sivasubramaniam G , Slovitt M et al . A new family of Drosophila balancer chromosomes with a w - dfd - GMR yellow ﬂuorescent protein marker . Genetics 2006 ; 174 : 2255 – 2257 . 52 . Hay BA , Wolff T , Rubin GM . Expression of baculovirus P35 prevents cell death in Drosophila . Development 1994 ; 120 : 2121 – 2129 . 53 . MillardTH , Martin P . Dynamic analysis of ﬁlopodial interactions during the zippering phase of Drosophila dorsal closure . Development 2008 ; 135 : 621 – 626 . 54 . Baumgartner S , Martin D , Chiquet - Ehrismann R , Sutton J , Desai A , Huang I et al . The HEM proteins : anovelfamilyoftissue - speciﬁctransmembraneproteinsexpressedfrominvertebrates through mammals with an essential function in oogenesis . J Mol Biol 1995 ; 251 : 41 – 49 . 55 . Li W , Baker NE . Engulfment is required for cell competition . Cell 2007 ; 129 : 1215 – 1225 . 56 . Linardopoulou EV , Parghi SS , Friedman C , Osborn GE , Parkhurst SM , Trask BJ . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . Plos Genet 2007 ; 3 : e237 . 57 . Vlisidou I , Dowling AJ , Evans IR , Waterﬁeld N , ffrench - Constant RH , Wood W . Drosophila embryosasmodelsystemsformonitoringbacterialinfectioninrealtime . PlosPathog 2009 ; 5 : e1000518 . This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - No Derivative Works 3 . 0 Unported License . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on Cell Death and Differentiation website ( http : / / www . nature . com / cdd ) SCAR drives phagosome processing and migration IR Evans et al 720 Cell Death and Differentiation