234 I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI SHEENA ERETE ∗ , DePaul University , USA YOLANDA A . RANKIN ∗ , Florida State University , USA JAKITA O . THOMAS ∗ , Auburn University , USA In this paper , three Black women in HCI and CSCW share their experiences of being Black women academics enduring a global pandemic that is disportionately impacting the Black community while simultaneously experiencing the civil unrest due to racial injustice and police brutality . Using Black feminist epistemologies as a theoretical framework and auto - ethnography and testimonial authority as both methodology and epistemic resistance , the authors exercise epistemic agency to testify to their lived intersectional experiences and the various fronts on which they fight to be seen , to be heard , and to live . Additionally , they advocate for more inclusionary policies of Black women and other marginalized populations within the CSCW and HCI communities . We conclude with a call to action for both communities to : 1 ) stand in solidarity with Blacks in computing ; and 2 ) acknowledge , disavow , and dismantle Whiteness and oppressive power structures in the field of computing , specifically HCI and CSCW . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Collaborative and social computing . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Black feminist thought ; Black women ; intersectionality ; race ACM Reference Format : Sheena Erete , Yolanda A . Rankin , and Jakita O . Thomas . 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW3 , Article 234 ( December 2020 ) , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432933 1 INTRODUCTION On February 23 , 2020 , Ahmaud Arbery , a Black man , was jogging in Brunswick , Georgia when a white father and son decided to stalk , shoot , and kill him , because he looked “suspicious” to them [ 5 ] . Ahmaud’s death was captured on a phone video recording that was widely shared . After much national outrage , including a memorial where thousands of people ran 2 . 23 miles in honor of Ahmaud’s birthday , the police finally arrested the father and son on May 7 , 2020 , more than two months after the murder occurred . In New York City on May 25 , 2020 , Amy Cooper , a White woman , called the police on Christian Cooper , another Black man , because he asked her to obey a local ordinance by putting her dog on a leash in Central Park [ 6 ] . After she informed Christian that she would call the police and say a Black man was threatening her life , Christian used his phone to video record her lying to 911 emergency officials , pleading that her life was being threatened by a Black man though clearly she was not in danger . In an attempt to excuse her blatant use of White privilege , she identifies herself as a financial contributor to former President Obama’s campaign ∗ All authors contributed equally and are recognized as first authors of this paper . Authors’ addresses : Sheena Erete , DePaul University , Chicago , IL , USA , 60604 ; Yolanda A . Rankin , Florida State University , Tallahassee , FL , USA , 32306 ; Jakita O . Thomas , Auburn University , Auburn , AL , USA , 36849 . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2020 / 12 - ART234 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432933 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 2 Sheena Erete et al . in defense of her actions [ 6 ] . On March 13 , 2020 , Breonna Taylor , a Black woman and emergency room technician , and her boyfriend awoke in the middle of the night to the sound of someone bashing through their front door , which turned out to be the police executing a " no - knock " warrant . Not knowing that it was the police , Breonna’s boyfriend fired one shot and hit an officer in the leg— the police responded by shooting Breonna 5 times , killing her , and firing at random into the apartment [ 90 ] . On May 25 , 2020 , George Floyd , a 46 - year old Black man , was publicly murdered by four Minnesota police officers during an arrest for alleged counterfeit currency [ 87 ] . Within a few days , a series of protests , rioting , looting , and other mayhem erupted across the nation in response to the no longer deniable systemic racism that daily plagues the lives of every Black person in the United States [ 87 ] . Before these incidents of racial violence / weaponized Whiteness and police brutality , the global pandemic of COVID - 19 was already disproportionately affecting Black communities in the U . S . , culminating in higher mortality rates of Black people as compared to White people across the country due to health disparities ( e . g . , higher percentage of Black people lack access to quality health care ) and pre - existing health conditions ( e . g . , diabetes , high blood pressure , heart disease ) [ 101 ] . The combination of George Floyd’s homicide and the fallout of COVID - 19 ( e . g . , loss of loved ones , loss of jobs , evictions ) burdening Black and Brown communities created a perfect storm in which Americans and people from around the world from diverse backgrounds ( e . g , those who identify as Black , White , Hispanic , Latinx , Native / Indigenous , LGBTQIA , people with disabilities ) joined together to protest the relentless and blatant police violence against Black people , which is evidence of the systemic racism that permeates the very foundation of the United States . All of these events take place in a short time frame , which as Black women women in CSCW and HCI , we experience as an eternity . For us , these events are just the tip of the iceberg in terms of what we deal with on a daily basis . Research shows that Black women , even those with higher levels of education and employment , experience higher levels of stress and depression than White women [ 46 , 121 ] . During these turbulent times , it is extremely difficult to focus on conducting research , analyzing data , writing manuscripts , or submitting papers for publications when our world is burning down around us , literally in some cases . Not to negate the emotional turmoil that our White colleagues or self - identified allies may be experiencing , but being a Black person who deals with injustices day in and day out leads to another level of mourning and trauma when those injustices come to a head . As Black women in the academy , we are compelled to share our lived experiences as evidence of the systemic gendered racism and discrimination that lies beneath the surface of a community of researchers who claim to embrace diversity and inclusion but in reality invoke differential treatment towards those who are not White . As an act of epistemic resistance and agency , this paper represents the work that Black women are doing to push the boundaries of social justice and activism research within the CSCW and HCI communities . Given that both communities recognize activist scholarship as legitimate research and a catalyst for social change [ 2 , 26 , 35 – 37 , 43 , 44 , 47 , 58 , 67 , 77 ] , we deem this paper as being appropriate for the larger CSCW community . For us , there is no separation between our scholarly lives and systemic oppression . Using autoethnography [ 39 , 48 ] and testimonial authority [ 21 ] as methodological approaches to reflect , we share our experiences being Black women academics enduring a pandemic that is disproportionately impacting our communities and civil unrest due to racial injustice . This paper is meant to be a reflection that highlights our lived experiences , not the lived experiences of all Black women and / or Black people . We bring forth our individual uniqueness and stress that our shared racial identities do not equate to a monolithic experience that speaks for all Black women and / or Black people . Frequently , individual Black voices are interpreted as representing all Black people , which is an expectation that creates stress and perpetuates trauma that hinders our ability to share our personal truths [ 21 ] . Furthermore , we write this with the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 3 understanding that the vast majority of our colleagues in research , practice , and academia will never understand how speaking out about these experiences could lead to retaliation that threatens our careers [ 74 ] . Despite the potential negative consequence to our careers and livelihoods , we testify and share our experiences as a form of activism [ 21 , 98 ] , where we speak to the impact of structural injustice in society and in our field during this time . Our intention in sharing our experiences is that those in our field , who claim that inclusion , diversity , and empathy are the pillars of our field , will reflect on their daily ( in ) actions to combat racial injustice . Moreover , we hope that this reflection will lead to ways that everyone can engage in anti - racist actions [ 76 ] on a daily basis . This paper contributes raw , though polished , reflections into the lives of Black women in academia , extending prior HCI work that focuses on storytelling as a method of critical reflection regarding race [ 89 ] . In addition , we call on people with White privilege to truly listen to our stories and take them as truth , even if they do not resonate with your experiences and to sit with and explore any discomfort that our stories elicit . Furthermore , we provide insights into the ways that HCI and CSCW could better support Black scholars in the field , though we acknowledge that the structure of unjust systems were not created for or by those who are minoritized and marginalized . Therefore , these systems of oppression must be dismantled by the White , affluent , and privileged for whom these systems were designed . It is not the responsibility of the minoritized and marginalized to educate others about their oppression , nor is it the duty of the oppressed to fix it [ 76 , 82 ] . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 Black Feminist Theory and Intersectionality Collins & Bilge [ 22 ] define intersectionality as : " 1 ) an approach to understanding human life and behavior rooted in the experiences of disenfranchised people ; 2 ) an important tool linking theory with practice that can aid in the empowerment of communities and individuals " [ 22 , p . 36 ] . This definition implies that intersectionality serves as a mechanism for understanding and elevating the experiences of those who have been relegated to the outer fringes of society . Although intersectionality has begun to gain traction within the CSCW and HCI communities [ 31 , 108 , 122 ] , one of the common misconceptions about intersectionality lies in understanding its origins . Though Crenshaw [ 28 ] was credited for being the first scholar to use the term intersectionality , intersectionality first emerged in the 19th century , advanced by Black women activists such as Sojourner Truth , Harriet Tubman , Francis Beale , Anna Julia Cooper , Maria Stewart , and hundreds of others [ 20 , 22 , 52 , 53 ] . They articulated that the interrelationship of White supremacy and male superiority created inhumane conditions for Black women as they experienced ( and continue to experience ) multiple forms of oppression including , but not limited to , racism , sexism , and classism . For the first time , intersectionality revealed how the intersection of race and gender subjugated Black women to a drastically different reality than White women in the U . S . [ 53 , 69 , 71 ] . For instance , influential White women suffragettes in the 19th century used racist arguments to gain the right to vote for White women but not Black women , even though there were many Black women suffragettes as well as support among some White women for Black emancipation [ 22 ] . The end result : White women were granted the right to vote while Black women were denied their civil rights [ 22 ] . The historical and political ramifications of the U . S . women’s suffrage movement exemplified gendered racism , a socially divisive phenomenon that Black women and other women of color experience because of White privilege and patriarchy . From a historical and political perspective , intersectional resistance work birthed Black Feminist Thought and the Black Feminist Movement . Born from the blood , sweat , and tears of Black women , both were developed in response to the relentless oppression of Black women and the persistent Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 4 Sheena Erete et al . denial of their humanity . " Concerned with any situation that impinges upon the lives of women , Third World and working people , " [ 19 , p . 10 ] Black Feminist Thought embraces inclusivity by forging alliances and coalitions with political and social movements that seek justice in an oppressive society . Given the historical and political ramifications of gendered racism and class stratification , Black women , Chicana and Latina women , Indigenous / Native women , and Asian - American women realized that a single - focused lens was acutely inadequate for addressing the complex social problems that they encountered in their lives [ 22 ] . Consequently , women of color formed coalitions to utilize intersectionality as a critical framework for making salient the social injustices that people who live at the intersections of race , gender , class , ethnicity , nationality , and sexuality experience on a daily basis [ 1 , 4 , 12 , 13 , 18 , 29 , 64 , 81 , 83 , 85 , 103 ] . For example , Telling To Live : Latina Feminist Testimonios [ 30 ] represents an anthology of Latinas from different backgrounds , such as ethnicity , religion , linguistic capability , gender identity , and sexuality , who celebrate their differences while fostering critical dialogue about liberation in Latina America . As such , Black feminist epistemologies serve as both tools and weapons in the fight for the liberation of oppressed people around the globe [ 21 ] . Telling To Live : Latina Feminist Testimonios [ 30 ] provides a poignant example of testimonial authority as a form of epistemic resistance . Epistemology is “the study of the standards used to assess knowledge or why we believe what we believe to be true” [ 21 , p . 122 ] . Epistemology is a form of power , because those who get to tell the story " wield epistemic power over [ . . ] history , [ . . ] core questions , and goals” ( ibid . ) . While epistemology is often viewed as being neutral and unbiased , “on some level , subordinated groups know that epistemology has never been neutral , and that epistemic power is part of how domination operates” [ 21 , p . 122 ] . Epistemologies like Black Feminist Thought were created as “conceptual tools for critical analysis” to allow subordinated groups , in this case , Black women , to engage in epistemic resistance [ 20 ] . Thus , Black women were imbued with testimonial authority and power to tell their own stories by elevating their outsider - within perspective as a unique expertise [ 20 ] rather than having others who lack a nuanced understanding of their experiences ( personal and cultural ) speak on their behalf [ 58 , 118 ] . Collins states : “A broader understanding of epistemology points to not only how social inequalities are reproduced in the application of seemingly objective rules , but also how the substance of the rules themselves foster social injustice” [ 21 , p . 127 ] . In addition , testimonial authority “rests on the ability of a person to both speak and to be heard” [ 21 , p . 132 ] . When there is the tendency to disbelieve the stories of subordinated individuals who have first - hand , intimate expertise and knowledge of their oppression , epistemic violence results [ 21 ] . Epistemic violence “operates through practices of silencing , ” particularly through testimonial quieting and testimonial smothering , both of which are strategies used to silence [ 38 ] and thereby “suppress the ideas of subordinated people” [ 21 , p . 133 ] . Testimonial quieting and testimonial smothering often work in conjunction with each other with the former silencing subordinated people by simply ignoring what they have to say ( thereby denying people space to be heard ) and the latter involving the internal self - censorship of “people who understand that what they have to say may not be welcome , ” thereby preventing people from speaking and expressing ideas in the first place , or “watering down ideas to make them more palatable” to or for the dominant interpretive community [ 21 , p . 134 ] . “Self censorship is often the cost of being heard at all , and [ . . ] silencing and self censorship go hand in hand - people who are repeatedly ignored [ or whose ideas or perspectives that run counter to the dominant narrative ] quickly learn from the protections of seeming acquiescence” [ 21 , p . 134 ] . What we now see happening within the HCI , CSCW , and larger computing communities is a refusal by Black women to endure epistemic violence any longer [ 14 , 58 , 89 , 96 , 98 , 99 , 110 , 118 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 5 2 . 2 Race in CSCW and HCI Before we can dismantle racism and other oppressive structures at work within the combined fields of CSCW and HCI , we must clearly define what is racism and why it is still prevalent today . Mistakenly perceived to be a biological marker , race is actually a socially constructed phenomenon used to delineate different groups of people based on physical attributes and features ( e . g . , skin color , shape of eyes , hair texture ) [ 10 ] . For example , Black people are typically identified visibly on the basis of larger amounts of darker melanin present in the skin even though some Black people have visibly lighter skin tones due to smaller amounts of darker melanin [ 71 ] . As defined by the Merriam - Webster dictionary , racism is the belief that race is the primary determinant of human traits and capacities and that racial differences produce an inherent superiority of a particular race [ 84 ] . Racism signifies racial prejudice that favors the dominant social group and contributes to racial inequalities that disadvantage less dominant social groups , a social dynamic that is evident in race relations between Black people and White people in the United States [ 32 , 76 ] . The aforementioned physical attributes not only define a specific social group but are falsely used as physical evidence of the same social group being subpar or less than human [ 10 , 76 ] . The social construct of race is founded in racist ideas about the superiority of Whiteness , referred to as White supremacy , which has been both subtly and blatantly interwoven into institutions , policies , and social norms [ 32 ] . However , scientific research has debunked these myths [ 10 ] . Because of the less obtrusive and hidden nuances of how racism works , complex social theories such as Black feminist epistemologies are needed for identifying and unpacking systemic oppression in its various forms . Recent literature has emerged that examines the role of race in technology design in the context of HCI and CSCW research [ 8 , 45 , 58 , 88 , 89 , 98 ] . Frameworks such as critical race theory have been used to examine how racism is pervasive in everyday socio - technical systems , urging the HCI community to reflect on the role of race in all aspects of the field [ 89 ] . Some researchers have focused on the role of race on design praxis , specifically participatory design workshops when working with Black and LatinX people [ 58 , 60 , 61 ] , while others have exposed inequities that emerging technologies inflict on racial minorities [ 8 , 45 , 88 ] . For example , racism has led to the creation of algorithmic search engines that provide misinformation to intentionally construct racist narratives and stereotypical representations of certain social groups ( e . g . , African Americans , Black women , Jews ) [ 45 , 88 ] . Artificial intelligence has contributed to facial recognition technology that invokes racial discrimination against people of color while facilitating racialized privilege of White people [ 15 , 16 , 62 , 115 ] . These examples of poorly designed technologies and their misuse demonstrate how racial ideologies are intricately embedded in technologies , which in turn reinforce racism . As a word of caution , it is naïve to think that technology alone can be a panacea for systemic oppression [ 41 ] , since technology can only amplify what already exists within society [ 120 ] . The racial impacts of technology have motivated some CSCW and HCI scholars to intentionally study the plight of people of color in relationship to the ramifications of technology design and usage . Numerous HCI scholars have focused on working with Black people and communities on topics such as health and wellness for Black people [ 49 , 50 , 61 , 105 , 106 , 116 ] , economic development [ 34 , 35 , 68 ] , violence and crime [ 40 , 43 , 44 , 70 ] , political power [ 41 ] , and education [ 95 , 97 , 99 , 119 ] . While these related works provide insight into effective strategies for addressing race , too few of them explicitly address racism . It is time for the combined fields of CSCW and HCI to engage in long overdue conversations about racism . In the field of computing , and specifically CSCW and HCI , racism remains an oppressive force used to empower White people at the expense of less dominant groups [ 11 , 59 , 88 , 98 , 100 , 107 ] . For example , Black women are rarely cited in CSCW or HCI publications despite having published relevant scholarship in similar venues as their White colleagues [ 98 ] . As a result , Black women , along Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 6 Sheena Erete et al . with their research accomplishments , have become invisible within CSCW and HCI . Moreover , Black women who conduct research within marginalized communities , the same context as their White colleagues who are recognized as legitimate scholars within the CSCW and HCI communities , are perceived as doing service rather than research [ 89 , 98 ] . Such racialized misconceptions perpetuate the negative stereotype that Black women are less competent scholars and incapable of being thought leaders in the fields of CSCW and HCI . As a starting point for dialogic interactions , we extend foundational literature by providing insight into our experiences and perspectives as scholars who conduct this type of research . Specifically , our contribution adds dialogue to the conversations regarding how we can better support Black women and Black people in CSCW and HCI , as well as how can we begin to reflect as a community to create equitable and just experiences for all . 3 POSITIONALITY STATEMENT Following the methodology of standpoint theory [ 57 ] , we include a statement of the authors’ standpoint . We are three Black American women with collectively over three decades of experience working in corporate research and academia . We also represent over 30 years of conducting research that aims to promote a more complex narrative of the ways Black girls’ and women’s bodies move through the world , particularly in computing , and the ways in which Black communities are impacted by computing technologies . Said another way , we have a posteriori knowledge about marginalization in computing and STEM spaces . We are upper - middle class Black women due to our socio - economic status and educational attainment . We recognize our privilege as cis - gendered and able - bodied . We also recognize our intersectional experiences as being both Black and women , who are minoritized in a field where there are few who share our identities . We do not use intersectionality as a garnish in our work that can be sprinkled around as needed , because as Black women , we have neither gender , nor Whiteness to fall back on ( as Amy Cooper so easily demonstrated in her falsified testimony to the police ) . Throughout this article , we use the inclusive term “Black” to refer to those from the African diaspora and is inclusive of people born of African descent across the diaspora , including Africa , the Caribbean , North and South America , Canada , Europe , and Asia . Racial discrimination , as evidenced in the U . S . , is applicable to and impacts everyone in the African diaspora , as the recent global protests demonstrate [ 22 ] . Those who are from the African diaspora experience racial discrimination based on the color of their skin in the U . S . , not their place of origin . At the same time , we acknowledge that we do not speak for all Black people since Black people are not monolithic and represent diverse perspectives and life experiences . 4 METHODS In this paper , we apply autoethnography [ 48 ] as a method for relating our personal experiences of racism in the academe and society , and the existing power structures that permeate the field of computing both as an illustration of testimonial authority and data . Aligned with standpoint epistemology , we claim the integrity of “one’s own experiences” as valid knowledge situated within a social context [ 21 ] . We define the social context to be the historical and ongoing racism , discrimination , and oppression of Black people in the United States at the hands of slave owners , organizations , institutions , and other entities that upheld White supremacy and Whiteness for more than four hundred years . Our personal testimonies serve as an example of epistemic resistance for two reasons . First , we refuse to remain silent about racism that insidiously surfaces within the culture of the academe , specifically the CSCW and HCI communities . Second , exposing ourselves and risking attack for raising our voices in protest , we , as Black women intellectuals , exercise epistemic agency in that Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 7 we advocate for more inclusionary politics of Black women and other marginalized populations within the CSCW and HCI communities [ 21 ] . In each reflective piece , we use first - person singular pronouns to represent each co - author’s individual Black woman standpoint [ 57 ] . Our personal testimonies reflect three common themes of racism : 1 ) Double trouble - Black trauma manifests in society and in academia ; 2 ) Black women are forgotten or overlooked in CSCW and HCI ; and 3 ) White silence is violence . We caution that readers may experience denial , anger , and defensiveness as these are typical reactions attributed to White fragility [ 32 ] . “White Fragility is a state in which even a minimum amount of racial stress becomes intolerable , triggering a range of defensive moves . These moves include the outward display of emotions such as anger , fear , and guilt , and behaviors such as argumentation , silence , and leaving the stress - inducing situation . These behaviors , in turn , function to reinstate white racial equilibrium " [ 31 , p . 57 ] . There may also be the urge to dismiss these reflections as individual experiences that were not a result of the reader’s direct action , concluding that the reader is therefore not accountable and / or complicit in the oppressions shared in this paper . We ask that readers respect the following intimate accounts as Black women’s lived intersectional experiences , which do not require validation by anyone , nor are these personal details shared for entertainment purposes . 5 REFLECTIONS 5 . 1 Reflection 1 : Double Trouble - Black Trauma in Society and in Academia As I sit thinking about what is currently happening in the world , I find it difficult to go on about my life the same way that my colleagues are seemingly able to . My inbox is full of emails , requesting things that do not seem of any importance right now . It is as if the city that I live in is not burning and that people , particularly Black and Brown people , are not grieving at this moment . It seems to ignore the police and the U . S . military patrolling our city streets in an effort to create a more militarized force of aggression to ‘combat’ the protests and uprisings . It seems odd to me . My colleagues are cordial and well meaning , but they don’t seem to understand that the protests and the pain felt by the Black community is not about one incident or one man ; it is the mourning and grief of hundreds of years of never feeling safe , even in our own homes . It is knowing that there is always perceived guilt upon us at all times and that we’ll never really be able to protect our children . This is all happening while also experiencing the death of loved ones due to a pandemic that is disproportionately impacting Black and Brown people as a result of historical health disparities . Technology has served as a connector during this pandemic and an outlet to physical isolation . But for me , it has caused me to relive the deaths and murders of Black people , mostly without consequence to their murderers . I think about the trauma that my foremothers bore , watching the lynching of their families and friends , and the trauma that Black people experience when watching police violence and the murder of people who look like them . When I first heard about the George Floyd murder , I had already decided that after watching numerous Black people being killed by the police that I would not watch another one . Watching the killing of Black people increases our anxiety and is not good for our mental health [ 9 ] . I have experienced this first hand , because after watching such videos , I feel extreme anxiety when a police officer is in my vicinity . After reading the story from several reputable sources , I find it difficult to think about anything other than my usual concern : I wonder how tall my 4 - year - old will be when he’s 14 - years old and how can I keep him safe when Tamir Rice , while playing with a toy gun in a park , was only 12 - years old when he was killed within seconds of a White police officer arriving on the scene . I wonder if my White colleagues think about the potential murder of their sons too . I wonder if they feel the same heartbreak that I felt when I realized that White people began to view my son as a potential menace at the age of 3 - years old . That first feeling hit me like a punch in Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 8 Sheena Erete et al . the gut at a wedding reception for a colleague when a White woman from Iowa whispers to my then 3 - year old as he frowned at the brussel sprouts on his plate , “You are an ornery little boy , aren’t you ? " Though he was sitting down quietly and being a child ( not speaking but grimacing at the thought of eating his veggies ) , it was clear that 1 ) this woman believed that my child contained “badness " in him despite other White children his age running around , screaming , and knocking plates off the tables , to which she said nothing other than how cute they were ; and 2 ) she felt it was her job to tell him that he was bad . It was in that moment that I knew the change happened - he was no longer a cute , harmless boy in the eyes of White people , but a potential menace that needed to be reminded that he was “innately bad " due to his brown skin . As his mother , my mind constantly thinks about how I can protect him , all the way from literally keeping him alive and away from racists who may see him as a threat and kill him due to his skin color ( e . g . , Trayvon Martin ) to keeping him mentally well enough to cope as a Black man in this society . Again , I wonder if my White colleagues think about the same things for their sons . In addition to the personal stress caused by viral videos of Black bodies being murdered , I think about the picnics and social gatherings that were organized by White people to watch the murder of Black people [ 21 , 66 , 78 , 94 ] . Those same White people would cut the Black victim into parts to take home souvenirs for their children ( ibid . ) . I reflect on the parts of George Floyd that are being taken as souvenirs : the constant replaying of his voice , begging and pleading for his life and calling for his dead mother as his last breaths were being squeezed out of him . Though social media makes these videos more readily available , I question whether it is increasing empathy or simply numbing the world to seeing the killing of Black people [ 114 ] . It feels like another sick method of gathering ( digital ) souvenirs from the murder of Black victims . When people post a hashtag and then move on to business as usual , with little to no reflection on concrete ways that they can personally fight structural inequality in their daily lives , then what is the true role of the videos ? The vast majority of the officers involved are either not charged and / or not convicted , even with video evidence of abuse . Only in blatant cases , such as Walter Scott , where a bystander filmed a White officer killing him and planting his taser gun next to Walter’s dead body to frame him as being the aggressor . Walter Scott’s case resulted in an eventual guilty plea ( after a mistrial when one juror said he could never convict and 5 were still undecided after a month long trial and over 30 hours of deliberation ) . I begin thinking about the impact of the videos as some shared their reenactment of George Floyd’s murder for laughs [ 109 ] . As a scholar that focuses on technology design to address structural inequity , it feels foolish to read papers that taut technology as the great equalizer , when outside of a few recent scholars [ 7 , 41 , 58 , 89 , 98 , 120 ] , systemic structural inequities are largely ignored in our field . This omission is even more obvious and evidenced in the fact that mentioning such inequities is not required , or even encouraged , in HCI articles ( formally or even informally as a practice ) . In fact , I’ve received feedback numerous times from CSCW and HCI reviewers saying that bringing up structural inequity is ‘political’ and outside of the realm of HCI and technology design . On top of the civil unrest , due to systemic police violence and disproportionate mortality rate due to COVID - 19 , I’m working at home during a pandemic with children . Though domestic responsibilities are divided equally in my home , studies still show that women are less productive during maternity leave than their male counterparts [ 3 ] . As academics , we’re still expected to persist during this time , write papers , be productive , conduct research , mentor students , engage in unequal amounts of service , etc . This is on top of the typical invisible work that being a Black woman in academia brings including supporting students of color who have few options to talk with faculty who have shared lived experiences . I’ve found during this time of isolation , Black students need support more than ever and are reaching out for help . Furthermore , unfair methods of faculty assessment , such as student teaching evaluations that have been shown to be biased [ 80 ] , are still continuing – during a pandemic and online teaching . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 9 Meanwhile , many of my colleagues are not experiencing this double trauma situated on top of everyday inequity that existed before the pandemic and civil unrest [ 86 , 117 ] . Eventually , the protests will end , online petitions will stop , and life will return as it once was . It troubles me even more to know that this rallying cry , while it may feel different for the moment given the number of non - Black allies in this fight , will undoubtedly result in no change . I have no evidence that anything systemically will change , nor that power structures will shift . It is those who are least impacted by both of these tragedies that have the power to transform society and the academy to be more equitable and just . Do I have hope that structural racism and injustice will be rooted out of society and our field ? Maybe but I won’t hold my breath . I can’t breathe as it is . 5 . 2 Reflection 2 : Black Women are Forgotten or Overlooked in CSCW / HCI “Turn it off ! Just turn it off ! I can’t even listen to the sound of it ! ” That’s what I told my husband as he watched the video of George Floyd being killed by a police officer . Even the sound of people in the crowd begging and pleading with the officer to get up so George Floyd could breath was too much for me to bear , and I burst into tears . A few days later , I saw a lone Facebook post about Breonna Taylor . Breonna Taylor would have been 27 on June 6 , 2020 , two days prior to the day I’m writing this reflection [ 91 ] . She lived in Louisville , Kentucky and worked as an emergency medical technician ( E . M . T . ) , one of our heroic and brave essential front - line workers , many of them Black and Brown who are still battling the global COVID - 19 pandemic in emergency rooms and hospitals around the world . She had hopes of becoming a nurse ( ibid . ) . However , shortly after midnight on March 13 , 2020 , Breonna Taylor was shot and killed by police officers in her bed as she lay sleeping . I saw the lone Facebook post almost two months after she’d been killed . The Facebook post implored readers to stop scrolling and to put some of the same energy and outrage that caused the world to take to the streets toward bringing light and awareness to her death as well so that some justice could begin to be meted out . I thought about a protest sign I saw once that read , “Black women , girls , and trans folks get locked up and shot down , too” [ 104 ] . I felt disappointment , anguish , and outrage beginning to bubble up in my chest . Days later , as I watched the Verzuz Kirk Franklin and Fred Hammond gospel battle , which was so cathartic and uplifting and felt like a ray of sunshine amidst the dark clouds of this time , the names of Black men who had been murdered by police were called out . After about two or three minutes , one of the artists received a tweet that told him that he’d forgotten about the Black women who had been killed by police as well . He called the name of Sandra Bland and apologized for the oversight . Black women have always and continue to show up and show out , taking action for and on behalf of our Black men , other Black women , and Black children [ 20 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 51 , 104 ] in the streets , at the ballot box , in the community , and for the world . Once again , I felt disappointment , anguish , and outrage beginning to bubble up in my chest . From Ida B . Wells - Barnett , who led a decades long anti - lynching campaign and crusade beginning in 1892 to Tarana Burke who birthed the # MeToo movement , the activism of Black women is often overlooked and forgotten and we as Black women bear the additional burden of having to remind people that we are here , too . In this moment , I will not allow the deaths of Breonna Taylor , Sandra Bland , Alexia Christian , Mya Hall , Kayla Moore , Michelle Cusseaux , Miriam Carey , Alberta Spruil , Tanisha Anderson , Shelley Frey , and so many other Black women at the hands of police to fade into the background . They deserve the same foreground as the killings of Black men by police have garnered . This isn’t an either / or moment ( either race or gender ) ; this is a both / and moment . Yet again , I feel disappointment , anguish , and outrage beginning to bubble up in my chest . “Anger is good . It moves one to action” [ 111 ] . This has been a both / and moment for me and many other Black women in the field for quite a while . I made a commitment back in 2016 that I would also no longer remain silent about the contribution of Black women to STEM and Computing or the epistemic violence that Black women endure in Computing Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 10 Sheena Erete et al . and HCI , another area where the contributions of Black women are often ignored or overlooked . I think about watching the movie " Hidden Figures " [ 112 ] and not being surprised that Black women were amazing mathematicians as I’d been taught , mentored , and poured into by many of those brilliant mathematicians such as Dr . Etta Falconer and Dr . Gladys Glass . The shocking moment for me was the revelation that Black women were also some of the first Computer Scientists . I remember simultaneous joy and disappointment and anger building up in my chest during that part of the movie . I remember walking out and asking my girlfriend , “How could the narrative of the contributions of Black women in this field have been revised in the span of less than one generation ? ” It is exciting and makes me hopeful to see many of our White colleagues realizing , recognizing , and now in these moments , finally stating that “we have to change CS so that it serves the needs of our students and society” [ 23 , 54 ] . Black women have been calling for that change for many , many years . We have always known that subfields in computing such as HCI , CSCW , AI , and other areas needed to change , and we have been and continue to advocate for that change . And yet , that change has to happen not only in computing education , but also in academia , industry , tech entrepreneurship . . . in every space in which Black women navigate . The call to # CiteBlackWomen has been and continues to be a clarion call [ 89 , 98 , 113 , 118 ] . It is no longer acceptable to write about doing intersectional work and not cite one Black woman scholar . It is no longer acceptable for colleges , universities , computing organizations , reviewers of conference papers , journal articles , and grant proposals , and the aforementioned communities to perform academic and intellectual anti - racism , yet continue to smother and quiet the intersectional work and testimonial authority of Black women within the field [ 14 , 21 , 102 ] . It is no longer acceptable to relegate our research and activism as service or leverage our actual bodies and work as a commodity used to serve the interests of those who already have power , enriching them and their careers on our backs [ 110 ] . It is no longer acceptable to claim to be a field that focuses on empathy and understanding yet be unwilling to empathize and understand Black women in the field . To be clear , we are glad to see our non - Black and Black male colleagues now here in the room with us and ready to fight with us to truly reimagine what Computing , HCI , and CSCW can and should be . At the same time we also wonder , “Where have you been ? ” Now that you are here , we will hold you accountable . 5 . 3 Reflection 3 : White Silence is Violence Today is May 29 , 2020 . “Where is it ? ” I keep asking myself as I search through my university inbox which is never empty . I have spent night after night glued to my television for the past five days as I watch the myriad of interactions between protesters , police , journalists , and looters on the streets of my city . I have not received official correspondence from my respective institution or my department regarding the murder of George Floyd by four police offers or any comments about the protests of systemic racism or police brutality that Black people encounter on a daily basis . Nothing . Keeping in mind that some of my White colleagues are also my Facebook “friends , ” I consider posting a positive message to encourage others through these trying times , a radical move for me since I adamantly refuse to live my life via social media . ( Yes , I have a Twitter account , but I use that account to catch the latest news . ) I ponder , “That’s strange . No official correspondence from the university concerning what’s happening across American right now ? ” I slowly start to process how I feel about the building silence . When the harsh realities of the COVID - 19 global pandemic hit the United States hard in March ( sheltering in place , rising numbers of cases and deaths ) , we received daily emails from the university with updates and resources for coping with the drastic changes in mode of instruction , counseling services and positive messages ( “We’re all in this together and we’ll get through it” ) . Out of curiosity , I attended weekly meetings with administration to talk about plans for dealing with the COVID - 19 coronavirus , students’ feelings concerning the fallout from the global pandemic and its impact on classes and graduation , and how to best navigate this “new normal . ” I was amazed by the outpouring of support and positive affirmations as “we” worked together to weather the storm . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 11 Fast forward to three months later , specifically five days after four policemen choked a handcuffed Black man to death as onlookers urged him to stop . “Why are there no emails from the university or the department about systemic racism , the oppression of Black people killed at the hands of police when people from all walks of life are coming together to protest social injustice ? Where are the statements of support from international computing organizations ? What has changed ? Are we not in this together ? ” I ask myself . I engage in conversations over the phone ( still practicing physical distancing ) with other Black women as we discuss why people are looting and rioting in the streets and how this behavior becomes an excuse for others to not join us in the fight for social justice . Nevermind that the United States has a history of White people rioting ( e . g . , Boston Tea Party ) or looting and destroying wealthy Black communities like the Greenwood District in Tulsa , Oklahoma [ 72 ] , literally killing Black children , women , and men in the streets . I am still waiting for White people to acknowledge the historical racism , White supremacy , and privilege inflicted on Black Americans since slavery and make amends for these criminal acts . Just more silence . On June 3 , 2020 , the university president issues a statement that denounces racism , police brutality , and the murder of George Floyd . The statement goes on to reaffirm the university’s commitment to diversity and inclusion . This is a step in the right direction , but I notice no other correspondence from my White colleagues concerning these egregious acts or the racial injustices Black faculty and students routinely experience as part of the academic experience at predominantly White institutions . As a Black women in computing , I patiently wait for the official correspondence from professional computing organizations like the Association of Computing Machinery ( ACM ) , the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) , or technological giants such as Google , Apple , and Facebook that condemns racism and other heinous acts carried out against Black people and other marginalized populations . Time passes . I visit respective websites and read succinct commitment statements about diversity , inclusion , and equity . Too few of them even admit that racism is a problem within the domain of technology . Eventually , a few bland emails from computing professional organizations and technology companies find their way into my inbox with the exception of one or two that explicitly condemn racism and stand in solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement . The message is obvious : “Let’s just throw money at the problem and quietly sweep racism under the rug . Eventually this will die down and we can return to business as usual . ” Only one White colleague at my institution dares to send me an email , acknowledging racial injustice exists and asking if I am okay . I begin to make excuses . Perhaps the others were unsure of what to say or maybe they were afraid of saying the wrong thing and offending me or other Black people . Over the course of the week , I notice how everyone is comfortable talking about work - related issues . The silence endures and I am left feeling invisible , ignored , and inconsequential . This is nothing new as the fields of CSCW and HCI have long been silent on the topic of racism . I recall attending a CHI Diversity Luncheon and hearing the speaker , a White woman , publicly say that racism does not exist in field of HCI as I stared in disbelief . How could she be so clueless ? Structural racism does exist in CSCW and HCI ! How many times have White women scholars , respected and celebrated in the field of CSCW or HCI , attempted to destroy me ( and other Black women ) by withholding support and mentorship ( e . g . , research advisor threatened to withdraw financial support if I did not withdraw an accepted paper from the same reputable venue in which she was the keynote speaker ) . This is a prime example of testimonial quieting . Many years have passed , but I am still traumatized by the epistemic violence that I have experienced in this field . My story is not unique , nor do I mean to imply that all White women scholars have caused such harm . However , the trauma that Black scholars have endured in CSCW and HCI continues to this day . I communicate with fellow Black people in computing as we discuss the awkward attempts to ignore the public protests against racism , the feeble endorsements of the Black Lives Matter movement , and the lack of empathy expressed towards Black people in computing . The sentiment is that our more privileged colleagues think that issues of racism , White supremacy , Whiteness [ 73 ] , and privilege are Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 12 Sheena Erete et al . irrelevant in the field of computing , a colorblind discipline based on meritocracy [ 17 , 54 ] . This attitude reflects the disciplinary domain of power - the differential treatment of Black people compared to White people in the field of computing such that White people have unfair advantages while Black people are disadvantaged [ 22 ] . Disciplinary power creates this “wall of whiteness” within the field of computing , insulating my non - Black colleagues from any unsolicited accounts of racism that I or fellow Black colleagues may have experienced while automatically positioning them as allies with no attempt to engage in direct conversations or interactions with me or other Black colleagues about our experiences [ 102 ] . The silence ensues . As a Black woman who has more than seven years of industry experience and chose to leave Silicon Valley to pursue an academic career first at a Historically Black College and later at a Predominantly White Institution , I have seen my share of statistical data ( “not enough Black people in the computing pipeline” ) and heard too many empty promises ( another diversity initiative ) that perpetuate the racism that renders Black people invisible within Silicon Valley [ 88 ] and the field of computing time and time again . Racism lies beneath the surface in hiring policies at top technology companies that discriminate against Black women who graduate from Historically Black Colleges & Universities ( HBCUs ) , applying the deficit model as an explanation for inadequately prepared graduates who are incapable of succeeding in such a competitive environment . Such subliminal messages reflect the racist and hostile culture of computing directed towards Black women and other women of color . My personal favorite is the perception of Black women as “double diversity” hires , checking two boxes for race and gender on the job application while negating any technical ability or experience . What about the time that my White male colleague called me “Honey” in a software development team meeting . I was furious and immediately corrected him to his chagrin . The situation escalated into a private meeting with my female manager who identified as Egyptian ( not African ) and thought that I should be more understanding of my White male colleague’s intentions ( “He didn’t mean any harm . . . You need to smile more . ” ) . Needless to say , I did not receive a stellar performance evaluation despite having met all of my project deadlines . ( Yes , that did happen to me ! ) This speaks to the integrated structural , cultural , and interpersonal domains of power that shape the field of computing . This feels familiar to me , this sense of being invisible , of being relegated to the outer fringes of academia . My colleagues do not want to hear about racist acts or implicit biases that I have experienced as a college professor . The wall of whiteness in academia remains intact . Twenty years later and nothing much has changed . The silence is deafening . 6 DISCUSSION Reflecting on our different experiences with gendered racism enables us to take a step back and offer a different perspective , one that examines the experiences of marginalized populations in the social context of current events . It calls into question the ways that race , gender , class , sexuality , etc . impact the experiences of Black and other minoritized scholars in CSCW and HCI , and the computing community more broadly . Using Black feminist epistemologies as critical lenses , we examine these intersecting identities in the social context of current civil unrest , a global pandemic , and the oppression of Black people in the field of computing broadly and in CSCW and HCI specifically . We also offer concrete steps for how colleagues can be effective allies in fighting against racism . 6 . 1 Black Feminists Stand in Solidarity As Black feminists [ 75 ] , we exercise our privilege and position within the academe to devise “strategies of everyday resistance” that allow us “to create spheres of influence , authority , and power within institutions that traditionally have given little formal authority or real power” [ 20 , p . 225 ] to Black people and Black women . We do so , not for selfish reasons ( e . g . , to attain a certain Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 13 stature ) , but to uplift the Black community , in particular the survival and livelihood of Black students , faculty , and industry professionals in computing . Because silence is violence , we engage epistemic agency to render Black scholars visible in the field of computing and HCI whose scholarship and contributions have long been ignored and to expose the wounds that we have endured and the price we have paid for the privilege to be recognized as intellectuals and fellow researchers [ 89 ] . Collins [ 20 ] refers to this as “working for race uplift” - using our power and status as cultural workers to reinforce Black women’s roles as educators and community leaders for the further development of the Black community . Our three reflective pieces provide insight into how some Black women in computing perceive their research as being a direct extension of their life’s work , a labor of love and a commitment to the Black community [ 33 – 35 , 41 , 42 , 44 , 58 , 61 , 68 , 79 , 95 – 97 , 99 , 116 , 118 , 119 ] To the growing number of Black scholars and allies whose research speaks to the challenges of designing non - biased technologies that benefit marginalized populations or create opportunities for these same populations to navigate technological spaces , as Black women who represent willing and able co - conspirators , we see you , hear you , feel you , and validate your humanity [ 11 , 14 , 88 ] . To be a Black person in computing is an act of resistance to the dominant culture that denies our existence and refutes that racism even exists within the “meritocracy” of computing [ 54 ] . To put this in perspective , slavery prohibited Black people in the United States from receiving a formal education or learning how to read and write , and yet Black people perceived literacy and education as essential to their freedom [ 20 , 93 ] . As such , acquiring technical skills and developing social skills to assimilate into the dominant culture was done for the purpose of uplifting Black people by creating a more level playing field in which Black people could advance their socioeco - nomic status while leveraging their social status to benefit those with less privilege within the Black community [ 20 ] . While this speaks to interpersonal relations among Black people , as well as those between Black and White people ( inclusive of power differentials ) , these social interactions also point to race relations and the need to identify racist behaviors that target people as the problem rather than calling out the power structures that exist within the field of computing . We return to this point later in the discussion . As more social injustices come to light in the public eye and are rightfully deemed as inhumane , scholarly activities ( i . e . , designing technology , conducting user studies , or writing and submitting manuscripts ) seem insignificant compared to non - violent protests in cities across the U . S . , writing an opinion - editorial piece that illuminates the plight of Black people [ 14 ] , donating money to fight social injustice , or simply standing in solidarity with the world to fight against racism , White supremacy , discrimination , colonialism , and heteropatriarchy . We recognize that the culture of CSCW and HCI will only begin to change for the better when we speak up as a community and speak out against racism and other social injustices that impact all people . We invite others to do the same . 6 . 2 Addressing Epistemic Violence in CSCW and HCI Using an intersectional lens [ 21 ] , we refer to the intersection of epistemic violence and epistemic resistance as sites of violence . Applying this concept of sites of violence , we identify opposing forces and existing structures of oppression within the field of CSCW and HCI . The three reflection pieces provide examples of what racism looks like in the CSCW and HCI communities . In this section , we summarize the larger points made in the reflections and highlight ways in which epistemic violence is present in CSCW and HCI . Though we incorporate recommendations to dismantle such epistemic violence , we , again , urge those who have and continue to benefit from the unjust power structures that exist within the field to work with those who are oppressed to address systemic issues that plague our field . Our recommendations are not intended to supersede the effort that needs to be done by those in power to dismantle systemic racism in CSCW and HCI . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 14 Sheena Erete et al . 6 . 2 . 1 Review and Evaluation Practices of “Appropriate " CSCW and HCI Scholarship . Reflection 1 highlights the experiences of a Black woman scholar who faces inequity due to systemic racism , specifically how her work is reviewed and frequently criticized by her fellow peers for being “political . ” Despite results from rigorous community - based research which reveals systemic racist policies that impact the design , creation , and usage of technology , she still receives reviewer comments’ that clearly take the liberty of exercising testimonial silencing , an example of epistemic violence . Her scholarly work is still deemed as being “outside of the realm of HCI . ” The dangers of calling out structural inequities that negatively impact Black people can be detrimental to a burgeoning scholar , who is many times evaluated by the number of publications , quality of publication venues , and the number of citations . Despite recent pushes in ACM SIGCHI for more diversity and inclusion , there is a lack of clarity regarding how the review process promotes diversity of research , inclusion of underrepresented populations , or addresses inequities inherent in the review process ( e . g . CSCW and HCI subcommittees that remain majority White in racial makeup ) . Unsurprisingly , a significantly low percentage of CSCW or HCI publications are authored by Black scholars [ 55 , 65 ] . In essence , the review process , with its “objective criteria , ” which is subject to the interpretations of reviewers , who tend to support research aims endorsed primarily by White scholars , becomes a site of violence . To address these issues , the paper review criteria should be reevaluated . Currently , the review criteria is broad and does not explicitly ask reviewers to consider the demographic populations of participants in studies . Furthermore , there is no indication of how a paper may and / or may not perpetuate stereotypes about the historically oppressed ( i . e . , evaluation of the harm that could be caused by publishing or not publishing a particular article ) . There should be statements denouncing and flags indicating gatekeeping of CSCW and HCI ( i . e . , where reviewers attempt to determine the type of work that is “appriopriate " ) as many times it is less about appropriateness and more about whether or not the work is palatable to the community ( i . e . , White Fragility [ 32 ] ) , especially work that calls out racist practices , infrastructures , and systems that perpetuate inequity . Even community - sanctioned processes that attempt to promote diversity ( e . g . , diversity awards ) are not defined and therefore left to the reviewers to interpret from their personal lens of what is acceptable . Furthermore , we must address the perpetuation of non - Whiteness as the “other " in CSCW and HCI scholarship . Reviewers asking authors to provide more background when study participants are non - White , non - middle / upper class , non - American , non - ablebody , etc . should be addressed . For example , Harrington’s thoughtful scholarly work designing health technologies with Black , older adults provides significant background information , including socioeconomic status , context , and living conditions [ 61 ] , while other scholarly work with older adults that are presumably White does not provide the historical context of their privilege , socioeconomic status , and what led to their current situation to engage in such a study ( e . g . , providing the history of racist policies that increased the gap in generational wealth such as the GI bill that provided many White families with low cost mortgages to purchases surburban homes during White flight , low interest loans to start businesses , and financial support to access higher education ) . Providing the historical context for White participants as well as Black participants would reduce " othering " while also providing context regarding why these populations may use technology differently ( e . g . , policies that promote inequity in generational wealth means differences in healthcare options for older adults and therefore less time to engage with and perhaps different attitudes towards technology solutions ) . 6 . 2 . 2 Visibility of Black Women Scholars . Reflection 2 illustrates the pain of being a Black woman scholar and not being cited or seeing few Black women scholars ( if any ) cited in research published in CSCW and HCI venues . One of the misconceptions that support this position is that there Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 15 are few Black women scholars who do research in this space , contributing to the subliminal message that Black women are not good enough to do research , a racist ideology that permeates the culture of CSCW and HCI . Black women have been written out of the history books of computing , demonstrating the racist act of exclusion that continues to plague Black scholars in the combined fields of CSCW and HCI . This action alone demonstrates White supremacy as a defining structure for CSCW and HCI , one that is indicative of the disciplinary domain of power [ 100 ] . As stated in Reflection 2 : It is no longer acceptable to relegate our research and activism as service or leverage our actual bodies and work . . . to serve the interests of those who already have power , enriching them and their careers on our backs . " As a community , we can begin to address the challenges concerning the lack of visibility by diversifying the pool of leadership , including those involved in the review process ( e . g . , associate chairs , sub - committee chairs , editors , and paper chairs ) and making it a practice to call out sub - missions that blatantly do not cite Black women / people . Recent criticism of the ACM leadership reveals Whiteness as a symptom of structural racism [ 59 , 89 ] . Why are there no Black women in the ACM SIGCHI leadership ? Diversifying leadership may require that opportunities are provided to people who do not have an extensive history of serving in leadership positions in the CSCW and HCI communities . Though ACM SIGCHI leadership has recently acknowledged the lack of inclusion of Black women / people in the field of CSCW and HCI [ 24 ] , consider how many of these positions are filled : 1 . People who were previously in leadership positions ( had power ) are selected to serve in another position of power ( maintain power ) ; and / or 2 . People are selected by someone that they know to serve in a leadership position ( given power ) . Therefore , if Black people are not on some colleague’s personal list , despite being a fellow alumni of the same reputable institutions as their colleagues , they never have the opportunity to serve . How many times have we heard the excuse , " There is an insufficient number of Black people in the pipeline " as the justification for the exclusion of Black people in leadership roles rather than calling out the unfair practice of “passing down the torch , ” which has become a way for those in power to remain in power ? Only recently have some conferences created an open call for participation on conference organizing committees , however , the selection process is opaque and left to White people who are in power and have been in power to select those they deem are worthy . If it is a question of experience , then those in power should take the opportunity to mentor Black people who have not had such opportunities before – opportunities that represent strong , impactful leadership positions and not just token roles to promote “diversity and inclusion” with no budget . ( Note that it is okay to have more than one Black person serve on a subcommittee or in a leadership position since a sole Black representative does not solve the problem of marginalization [ 20 ] . ) Lastly , when filling leadership positions , there may be times when Black people cannot accept due to their current overwhelming amount of service ( seen and unseen as discussed in Reflection 1 ) . To be true allies , those in power should ask for recommendations of others who may have the bandwidth to take on such positions . 6 . 2 . 3 Exploitation of Black People in CSCW and HCI Research . Reflection 2 also describes how White scholars irresponsibly conduct community - based research in Black communities without taking into account the historical and political ramifications that produced current circumstances ( e . g . , lack of access to educational resources ) in Black communities [ 58 ] . Black children , men , women , families nor our communities are research commodities to be studied , exploited and then thrown away once they have outgrown their use [ 110 ] . Furthermore , few , if any , White scholars are invested in the long - term development or success of Black communities . Meanwhile Black participants , exploited for their racialized identity in the name of research , are subjugated to differential treatment while struggling to survive in a world that perceives Blackness as a negative connotation [ 20 ] . This positions White scholars who do such irresponsible work as oppressors of Black lives and Black Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 16 Sheena Erete et al . communities as another site of violence . Reflection 2 states : It is no longer acceptable to claim to be a field that focuses on empathy and understanding yet be unwilling to empathize and understand Black women in the field . This sentiment refers to how some White scholars are quick to express empathy but fail to use their social status or power to take any corrective actions to include Black women or Black people in CSCW and HCI research in meaningful ways . The exploitation of people is a form of ( re ) colonization that must be addressed and corrected [ 21 ] . First , to stop the exploitation of Black bodies , it should be standard practice that researchers compensate Black research participants for their time , their data , and their knowledge . This aligns with the Black Feminist Thought principle which values Black people as agents of knowledge whose rich , historical legacy , sociocultural norms , and practices and lived experiences serve as resources and coping mechanisms for what it means to be Black in this world [ 20 , 118 ] . Second , the entire CSCW and HCI communities have an obligation to challenge research that does not explicitly state the impact on the Black community beyond “knowledge creation . ” Instead of gatekeeping , there could be an additional requirement for scholars who engage in community - based research to discuss their long - term commitment to Black communities ( similar to the obligation to discuss Institutional Review Board approval to help ensure that study was conducted in a “humane” way for the participants ) . Moreover , it should be the standard practice that Black community members co - author papers , that there is evidence that the research findings have been shared with the Black community , and that the Black community has pre - approved the publicly disseminated narrative . Third , we strongly caution non - Black scholars who do research in Black communities to work in coalition with Black scholars who leverage their privilege and power to uplift the Black community . Having an all White research team conduct research in Black communities without including a position statement that clearly communicates their research agenda and social status ( e . g . , White , privileged ) assumes Whiteness as the norm for scholarly publications . This is racist . Researchers have an ethical obligation to explain the historical context of the populations they are working with and how this impacts research outcomes ( despite the population they are working with so that White will stop being the norm while “othering " everyone else ) . As conscientious researchers and allies in the fight against racism , engage in reflexive thinking throughout the research process to identify assumptions , who actually benefits or who is disadvantaged . These combined actions will result in more socially just oriented research and scholarly publications that do not misrepresent marginalized populations [ 36 ] . 6 . 2 . 4 Social Media as a Tool of Oppression . Reflections 1 and 2 mention how social media , another site of violence , is used to re - enact racism and other forms of oppression . For example , both Black women compare the experience of repeatedly playing the video clips of the murder of George Floyd to Black people being subjugated all over again to the past murders and lynchings of Black people [ 78 , 94 ] . Reflection 2 implores readers to apply the same kind of energy exhibited in online activism to civic engagement ( e . g . , exercising the right to vote , supporting Black activist organizations ) that brings about real change and social justice for Black people . Though the field of CSCW examines various aspects of social computing , including the use of social media , very little social computing research examines how technology is continuously used to oppress and exploit Black people while reinforcing racist doctrine [ 11 , 15 , 88 , 92 ] . Instead , technology determinism is innately embedded in the field , suggesting that social media and other technologies have the ability to positively impact society without evaluating how their usage can continuously ( re ) traumatize Black people . The lack of acknowledgement of the mental and emotional trauma that Black people experience as a result of certain social media posts exemplifies a site of violence , one with a public - facing viewpoint that is rarely criticized or held accountable for invoking racism against Black people . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 17 As Black feminists , we question how our field , which touts its praxis of “empathy , ” does not acknowledge the violence that Black people experience as a result of social media and other tech - nologies . We , as a community , must bring to light the existence of these oppressions in our work , holding authors who push technology determinism to include statements about the potential negative impact of such technology on Black people . While we recognize that it is impossible for those who have power and privilege to completely understand the lived experience of marginal - ized or minoritized populations , there are strategic ways ( some mentioned above ) to include the perspectives of those populations in all of CSCW and HCI work . Even in our position of power and privilege as educated , upper - middle class , heterosexual Black women , we do not dare to think for one moment that we know what it means to be a member of another oppressed community , whose identity and humanity is constantly questioned . Rather , we advocate for using one’s power and privilege as a platform to empower those who are oppressed . This requires our allies to move past feelings of anger , guilt , or pity to intentional and specific “acts of resistance , ” or actions that induce equity within the field ( e . g . , invite Black scholars to give a research talk at your institution , require undergraduate and graduate students to read and cite Black scholars , include Black scholarship in your syllabi , learn the names of every Black student in your classes and periodically ask about their well being ) . 6 . 2 . 5 Silence in CSCW and HCI . Reflection 3 makes salient White silence as a form of racism when this particular Black woman describes the lack of acknowledgement of the racial inequities that Black scholars have endured within the walls of academia . She references the weakly worded diversity and inclusion statements and " the feeble endorsements of the Black Lives Matter movement " publicized by the ACM leadership ( and many tech company executive boards ) . Despite being a global organization with a Diversity & Inclusion committee , the ACM organization initially missed an opportunity to stand in solidarity with Black people in computing [ 59 ] , inflicting violence yet again on Black scholars that are ACM members . White silence along with testimonial silencing ( see Reflection 1 ) represent exemplars of epistemic violence aimed at Black scholars who attempt to navigate the fields of CSCW and HCI . As of this publication , the ACM leadership and SIGCHI community have begun to engage in conversations with Black scholars about structural racism inherent in the organizational structure of ACM , another site of violence . Consequently , ACM has composed a response to communicate its intent " to solicit more diverse participation . . . to continue working with and for our community . . . This work has begun " [ 24 ] . While we applaud these efforts , more work remains to be done and successful execution depends on building coalitions with Black - led organizations ( e . g . , National Society of Blacks in Computing , BlackcomputHer , National Society of Black Engineers ) committed to the uplift of Black people and their contributions to the world of technology . To abet progressive change , the field must be willing to engage in conversations with Black scholars and listen to and respect diverse perspectives of their experiences rather than dismissing them as irrelevant . Black Feminist Thought espouses dialogic interactions as a means for inves - tigating different aspects of the Black experience as the basis for understanding and respecting diverse perspectives [ 20 ] . As stated earlier , Black people do not represent a monolithic population . We differ in nationality , gender , sexuality , class , able - bodiedness , etc . Listening to and appreciating different perspectives of Black scholars’ experiences navigating CSCW and HCI communities means understanding that even the best intentions can still be harmful to Black people and other marginalized populations [ 58 ] . We acknowledge that non - Black scholars may experience discom - fort [ 32 , 76 ] . Our allies need to know it us okay to be uncomfortable and learn how to sit in their discomfort as opposed to running away or avoiding it [ 56 ] . Consider the feedback to be a criticism of oppressive behavior or what could have been done differently rather than an indictment of being Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 18 Sheena Erete et al . a racist . Remember that benefiting from racist policies and practices does not make you a racist [ 63 ] . However , continued complacency , apathy , and inaction does . In summary , all three reflections are examples of epistemic resistance , because they refute the status quo which includes ignoring racism and doing colorblind research [ 17 ] that is acceptable scholarship for the sole purpose of assimilating into the dominant ( White ) culture of CSCW and HCI for academic survival ( e . g . , achieving tenure and promotion ) . In this way , the machine that we call academia with its various departments , degree programs , tenure process , faculty , staff and students , serves as the most prevalent site of violence . As expressed in Reflection 3 , I have . . . heard too many empty promises ( another diversity initiative ) that perpetuate the racism that renders Black people invisible within . . . the field of computing time and time again . The articulation of empty promises testifies to the continued oppression and social injustices suffered by Black scholars in CSCW and HCI communities . Therefore , we urge all to use their available resources , platforms , and social statuses for the benefit of others . Those who are empowered and privileged can acknowledge their social status and its benefits without apology . To move from complacency to activism , we must leverage our positions and power to benefit the oppressed . The goal is not to reinforce the same systems of oppression . 7 CONCLUSIONS Given the history of oppression as it relates to the African diaspora , we must all educate ourselves about racism and power and acknowledge our role in each . What is happening here in our field is a mirror of what is happening in the world . However , because we as Black women have heard it all before , sustainable efforts are necessary to invoke social change . At this moment in time , people of diverse backgrounds are empowered , posting their experiences and perspectives on social media and physically marching in protest in the streets as an act of solidarity . What can our allies do to stop the vicious cycle of racism at work within the CSCW and HCI communities ? Plenty ! And in this paper , we emphasize a few concrete yet simple steps that anyone can do . Additional steps outlined by other Black people and White allies that are not mentioned in this paper should also be considered . In the words of one co - author , I can only think about and deal with what I’m feeling and experiencing right now . As Black women , this fight takes an emotional , physical , and spiritual toil . What happens when the camera stops rolling and this is no longer front pages news ? As Black feminists and scholars , this is not a matter of choice for us . We are fighting for our lives , rejecting disingenuous acts ( e . g . , performative anti - racism , photo opportunities ) that portray feeble attempts to address systemic racism . As a community of scholars , we must acknowledge the “wall of Whiteness” [ 102 ] that exists within CSCW and HCI communities and dismantle the oppressive power structures that obstruct social justice in the field of computing . 8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We express our sincere gratitude to our families , friends , the Black community , and allies who have fought incessantly along our side in the pursuit of social justice . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Norma Alarcón . 1993 . Chicana critical issues . Third Women Press . [ 2 ] Adriana Alvarado Garcia and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2018 . Quotidian Report : Grassroots Data Practices to Address Public Safety . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW , Article 17 ( Nov . 2018 ) , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274286 [ 3 ] Heather Antecol , Kelly Bedard , and Jenna Stearns . 2018 . Equal but inequitable : who benefits from gender - neutral tenure clock stopping policies ? American Economic Review 108 , 9 ( 2018 ) , 2420 – 41 . [ 4 ] Gloria Anzaldúa et al . 1987 . Borderlands / la frontera . Vol . 3 . aunt lute books San Francisco . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 19 [ 5 ] Rachel Aretakis and Grace Hauck . 2020 . Shooting death of Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia : What we know about the video , grand jury and arrests . https : / / www . usatoday . com / story / news / nation / 2020 / 05 / 06 / ahmaud - arbery - jogger - shooting - what - know - video - grand - jury - arrests / 5174327002 / [ 6 ] Teo Armus . 2020 . White woman ‘terminated’ from job after calling police on black birdwatcher who asked her to leash her dog , company says . https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / nation / 2020 / 05 / 26 / amy - cooper - central - park / [ 7 ] Mariam Asad . 2019 . Prefigurative Design as a Method for Research Justice . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article Article 200 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359302 [ 8 ] Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi Vora . 2019 . Surrogate Humanity : Race , Robots , and the Politics of Technological Futures . Duke University Press . [ 9 ] Joshua Barajas . 2018 . " New study gives broader look into how police killings affect black Americans’ mental health " . https : / / www . pbs . org / newshour / health / new - study - gives - broader - look - into - how - police - killings - affect - black - americans - mental - health [ 10 ] Derrick A . Bell . 1992 . Faces at the bottom of the well : The permanence of racism . New York : Basic Books . [ 11 ] Ruha Benjamin . 2019 . Race after Technology . Polity Press . [ 12 ] Irene Isabel Blea . 1992 . La Chicana and the intersection of race , class , and gender . Praeger Publishers . [ 13 ] Lisa Bowleg . 2008 . When Black + lesbian + woman ≠ Black lesbian woman : The methodological challenges of qualitative and quantitative intersectionality research . Sex roles 59 , 5 - 6 ( 2008 ) , 312 – 325 . [ 14 ] Quincy Brown . 2020 . " On Being Black In Computing During These Days " . https : / / medium . com / @ quincykbrown / on - being - black - in - computing - during - these - days - 54e049d56987 [ 15 ] Simone Browne . 2015 . Dark Matters : on the Surveillance of Blackness . Duke University Press . [ 16 ] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru . 2018 . Gender shades : Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classification . In In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ( PMLR’18 ) . 1 – 15 . [ 17 ] Devon W . Carbado . 2013 . Colorblind Intersectionality . Signs : Journal of Women in Culture and Society 38 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 13 – 19 . [ 18 ] Cathy J . Cohen and Tamara Jones . 1999 . Fighting homophobia versus challenging heterosexism : “The failure to transform” revisited . Dangerous liaisons : Blacks , gays , and the struggle for equality ( 1999 ) , 80 – 101 . [ 19 ] The Combahee River Collective . 1977 . The Combahee River Collective Statement : Black Feminist Organizing in the Seventies and Eighties . [ 20 ] Patricia Hill Collins . 2000 . Black feminist thought . Routledge . [ 21 ] Patricia Hill Collins . 2019 . Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory . Duke University Press . [ 22 ] Patricia Hill Collins and Sirma Bilge . 2016 . Intersectionality . Polity Press . [ 23 ] SIGCHI Executive Committee . [ n . d . ] . " A Time to Listen , Reflect , Act , and Represent " . https : / / medium . com / sigchi / a - time - to - listen - reflect - act - and - represent - 7595542e22cb [ 24 ] The SIGCHI Executive Committee . 2020 . SIGCHI4ALL . https : / / sigchi . org / 2020 / 06 / sigchi4all / [ 25 ] Brittany Cooper . 2020 . Why Are Black Women and Girls Still an Afterthought in Our Outrage Over Police Violence ? https : / / time . com / 5847970 / police - brutality - black - women - girls / [ 26 ] Eric Corbett and Yanni Loukissas . 2019 . Engaging Gentrification as a Social Justice Issue in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300510 [ 27 ] Aaronde Creighton . 2020 . Dear Black Men , ALL Black Lives Matter . Medium ( 2020 ) . https : / / medium . com / @ onlyoneaaronde / dear - black - men - all - black - lives - matter - 560c6b304a16 [ 28 ] Kimberle W . Crenshaw . 1995 . Mapping the Margins : Intersectionality , identity politics , and violence against women of color . In In Critical Race Theory , Kimberle W . Crenshaw , Neil Gotanda , Gary Peller , and Kendall Thomas ( Eds . ) . The New Press , New York , 357 – 383 . [ 29 ] Angela Davis . 1981 . Women , Race , & Class . New York : Vintage Books ( 1981 ) . [ 30 ] Luz del Alba Acevedo . 2001 . Telling to live : Latina feminist testimonios . Duke University Press . [ 31 ] Robin DiAngelo . 2011 . White Fragility . International Journal of Critical Pedagogy 3 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 54 – 70 . [ 32 ] Robin DiAngelo . 2018 . White Fragility : Why it’s so Hard for White People to Talk about Racism . Beacon Press . [ 33 ] Jessa Dickinson , Mark Díaz , Christopher A . Le Dantec , and Sheena Erete . 2019 . " The Cavalry Ain’t Coming in to Save Us " : Supporting Capacities and Relationships through Civic Tech . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 123 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359225 [ 34 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Vaishnav Kameswaran , Desiree McLain , Minnie Lester , Delores Orr , and Kentaro Toyama . 2018 . Entrepreneurship and the Socio - Technical Chasm in a Lean Economy . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173814 [ 35 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt and Tiffany C . Veinot . 2018 . Getting There : Barriers and Facilitators to Transportation Access in Underserved Communities . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 5 , Article 29 ( Oct . 2018 ) , 39 pages . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 20 Sheena Erete et al . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3233985 [ 36 ] Lynn Dombrowski . 2017 . Socially Just Design and Engendering Social Change . Interactions 24 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 63 – 65 . [ 37 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design : Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 656 – 671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 [ 38 ] Kristie Dotson . 2011 . Tracking Epistemic Violence , Tracking Practices of Silencing . Hypatia 26 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 236 – 257 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1527 - 2001 . 2011 . 01177 . x [ 39 ] Carolyn Ellis , Tony Adams , and Arthur Bochner . 2010 . Autoethnography : An Overview . Forum Qualitative Sozial - forschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 12 , 1 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17169 / fqs - 12 . 1 . 1589 [ 40 ] Sheena Erete . 2015 . Engaging Around Neighborhood Issues : How Online Communication Affects Offline Behavior . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 1590 – 1601 . [ 41 ] Sheena Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2307 – 2319 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025996 [ 42 ] Sheena Erete , Nichole Pinkard , Caitlin K . Martin , and Jim Sandherr . 2015 . Employing narratives to trigger interest in computational activities with inner - city girls . In 2015 Research in Equity and Sustained Participation in Engineering , Computing , and Technology ( RESPECT ) . 1 – 1 . [ 43 ] Sheena Lewis Erete . 2013 . Protecting the home : exploring the roles of technology and citizen activism from a burglar’s perspective . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , Paris , France , 2507 – 2516 . [ 44 ] Sheena L Erete , Ryan Miller , and Dan A Lewis . 2014 . Differences in Technology Use to Support Community Crime Prevention . In Proc . of CSCW . Baltimore , Maryland , USA , 153 – 156 . [ 45 ] Virginia Eubanks . 2018 . Automating inequality : How high - tech tools profile , police , and punish the poor . St . Martin’s Press . [ 46 ] Arline T . Geronimus , Margaret Hicken , Danya Keene , and John Bound . 2006 . “Weathering” and Age Patterns of Allostatic Load Scores Among Blacks and Whites in the United States . American Journal of Public Health 96 , 5 ( 2006 ) , 826 – 833 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2105 / AJPH . 2004 . 060749 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2105 / AJPH . 2004 . 060749 PMID : 16380565 . [ 47 ] Eric Gordon , Becky Michelson , and Jason Haas . 2016 . @ Stake : A Game to Facilitate the Process of Deliberative Democracy . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( CSCW ’16 Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 269 – 272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818052 . 2869125 [ 48 ] Rachel Alicia Griffin . 2012 . I AM an Angry Black Woman : Black Feminist Autoethnography , Voice , and Resis - tance . Women’s Studies in Communication 35 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 138 – 157 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07491409 . 2012 . 724524 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07491409 . 2012 . 724524 [ 49 ] Andrea Grimes , Martin Bednar , Jay David Bolter , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2008 . EatWell : Sharing Nutrition - Related Memories in a Low - Income Community . In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’08 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1460563 . 1460579 [ 50 ] Andrea Grimes and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2007 . Designing Persuasion : Health Technology for Low - Income African American Communities . In Persuasive Technology , Yvonne de Kort , Wijnand IJsselsteijn , Cees Midden , Berry Eggen , and B . J . Fogg ( Eds . ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 24 – 35 . [ 51 ] Alisha H . Gupta . 2020 . Why Aren’t We All Talking About Breonna Taylor ? The New York Times ( 2020 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2020 / 06 / 04 / us / breonna - taylor - black - lives - matter - women . html ? fbclid = IwAR1LtIepvJlH0QOEMGyXSdJzX3geSUgl5FFD4xSSzaXGsY _ C2AmyDEYgPQI [ 52 ] Beverly Guy - Sheftall . 1986 . Remembering sojourner truth : On black feminism . Catalyst 1 ( 1986 ) , 54 – 57 . [ 53 ] Beverly Guy - Sheftall . 1995 . Words of fire : An anthology of African - American feminist thought . The New Press . [ 54 ] Mark Guzdial . [ n . d . ] . " CS Teachers , It’s ( Past ) Time To Learn About Race " . https : / / cacm . acm . org / blogs / blog - cacm / 245408 - cs - teachers - its - past - time - to - learn - about - race / fulltext # comments [ 55 ] David Hankerson , Andrea R . Marshall , Jennifer Booker , Houda El Mimouni , Imani Walker , and Jennifer A . Rode . 2016 . Does Technology Have Race ? . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 473 – 486 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892578 [ 56 ] Karen Buenavista Hanna . 2019 . Pedagogies in the Flesh : Building an Anti - Racist Decolonized Classroom . Frontiers : A Journal of Women Studies 40 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 229 – 244 . [ 57 ] Sandra G . Harding . 2004 . The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader . ( 2004 ) . [ 58 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 21 Article Article 216 ( Nov . 2019 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 59 ] Christina Harrington , Yolanda Rankin , Jasmine Jones , Robin Brewer , Sheena Erete , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Quincy Brown . 2020 . A CALL TO ACTION FOR THE ACM . http : / / interactions . acm . org / blog / view / a - call - to - action - for - the - acm [ 60 ] Christina N . Harrington . 2020 . The Forgotten Margins : What is Community - Based Participatory Health Design Telling Us ? Interactions 27 , 3 ( April 2020 ) , 24 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3386381 [ 61 ] Christina N . Harrington , Lauren Wilcox , Kay Connelly , Wendy Rogers , and Jon Sanford . 2018 . Designing Health and Fitness Apps with Older Adults : Examining the Value of Experience - Based Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( PervasiveHealth ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 15 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240925 . 3240929 [ 62 ] Woodrow Hartzog . [ n . d . ] . Facial recognition is the perfect tool for oppression . https : / / medium . com / s / story / facial - recognition - is - the - perfect - tool - for - oppression - bc2a08f0fe66 [ 63 ] GillianR . Hayes . 2020 . InclusiveandEngagedHCI . Interactions 27 , 2 ( Feb . 2020 ) , 26 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3378561 [ 64 ] Chayla M . Haynes , Nicole M . Joseph , Lori Patton , Evette Allen , and Sarah Stewart . 2018 . I AM : Intersectionality as Methodology and Black Women as Possibility Models for Educational Research . A paper presented at American Education Research Association ( 2018 ) . [ 65 ] Julia Himmelsbach , Stephanie Schwarz , Cornelia Gerdenitsch , Beatrix Wais - Zechmann , Jan Bobeth , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2019 . Do We Care About Diversity in Human Computer Interaction : A Comprehensive Content Analysis on Diversity Dimensions in Research . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300720 [ 66 ] Darlene Clark Hine . 2010 . The African American Odyssey Combined Volume ( Volume 4 ) . Prentice Hall . [ 67 ] Alexis Hope , Catherine D’Ignazio , Josephine Hoy , Rebecca Michelson , Jennifer Roberts , Kate Krontiris , and Ethan Zuckerman . 2019 . Hackathons as Participatory Design : Iterating Feminist Utopias . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article Paper 61 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300291 [ 68 ] Julie Hui , Nefer Ra Barber , Wendy Casey , Suzanne Cleage , Danny C . Dolley , Frances Worthy , Kentaro Toyama , and TawannaR . Dillahunt . 2020 . CommunityCollectives : Low - TechSocialSupportforDigitally - EngagedEntrepreneurship . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376363 [ 69 ] Gloria T Hull , Patricia Bell - Scott , and Barbara Smith . 1982 . All the women are white , all the blacks are men , but some of us are brave : Black women’s studies . Feminist Press . [ 70 ] Aarti Israni , Sheena Erete , and Che L . Smith . 2017 . Snitches , Trolls , and Social Norms : Unpacking Perceptions of Social Media Use for Crime Prevention . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1193 – 1209 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998238 [ 71 ] Yanick St . Jean and Joe R . Feagin . 1998 . Double Burden : Black women and everyday racism . M . E . Sharpe , Inc . [ 72 ] Hannibal B . Johnson . 2014 . . Arcadia Publishing . [ 73 ] Kenneth Jones and Tema Okun . 2001 . White supremacy culture . Dismantling Racism : A Workbook for Social Change ( 2001 ) . [ 74 ] N . M . Joseph , C . M . Haynes , and L . D . Patton . in press . The Politics of Publishing : A National Conversation with Scholars who use their Research about Black Women to Address Intersectionality . Educational Researcher ( in press ) . [ 75 ] Mikki Kendall . 2020 . Hood Feminism : Notes from the Women a Movement Forgot . Penguin Random House , New York . [ 76 ] Ibram X Kendi . 2019 . How to be an Antiracist . One World , Random House . [ 77 ] Neha Kumar , Daniel A . Epstein , Catherine D’Ignazio , Amanda Lazar , Andrea Parker , Muge Haseki , and Anupriya Tuli . 2019 . Women’s Health , Wellbeing , Empowerment . In Conference Companion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 116 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3358606 [ 78 ] Jamiles Lartey and Sam Morris . 2018 . " How White Americans used Lynchings to Terrorize and Control Black People " . https : / / www . theguardian . com / us - news / 2018 / apr / 26 / lynchings - memorial - us - south - montgomery - alabama [ 79 ] Sheena Lewis and Dan A Lewis . 2012 . Examining Technology That Supports Community Policing . In Proc . of Human Factors in Computing Conference . To appear . [ 80 ] Eva Lilienfeld . [ n . d . ] . " How Student Evaluations Are Skewed against Women and Minority Professors " . https : / / tcf . org / content / commentary / student - evaluations - skewed - women - minority - professors / ? agreed = 1 & agreed = 1 [ 81 ] Shirley Lim , Mayumi Tsutakawa , and Margarita Donnelly . 1989 . The forbidden stitch : An Asian American women’s anthology . Calyx Books . [ 82 ] Audre Lorde . 1984 . Sister Outsider : Essays and Speeches . Crossing Press , Trumansburg , NY . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . 234 : 22 Sheena Erete et al . [ 83 ] Lisa Lowe . 1991 . Heterogeneity , hybridity , multiplicity : marking Asian American differences . A companion to Asian American studies ( 1991 ) , 254 – 75 . [ 84 ] Merriam - Webster . [ n . d . ] . Racism . https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / racism [ 85 ] Unsettling Minnesota . 2009 . Unsettling ourselves : Reflections and resources for deconstructing colonial mentality . Unsettling Minnesota ( 2009 ) . [ 86 ] Nina Martin Renee Montagne . [ n . d . ] . " Nothing Protects Black Women From Dying in Pregnancy and Childbirth " . https : / / www . propublica . org / article / nothing - protects - black - women - from - dying - in - pregnancy - and - childbirth [ 87 ] Esme Murphy . 2020 . ‘I Can’t Breathe ! ’ : Video Of Fatal Arrest Shows Minneapolis Officer Kneeling On George Floyd’s Neck For Several Minutes . https : / / minnesota . cbslocal . com / 2020 / 05 / 26 / george - floyd - man - dies - after - being - arrested - by - minneapolis - police - fbi - called - to - investigate / [ 88 ] Safiya Umoja Noble . 2018 . Algorithms of oppression : How Search Engines Reinforce Racism . NYU Press . [ 89 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela D . R . Smith , Alexandra To , and Kentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . ( 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376392 [ 90 ] Richard A . Oppel and Derrick Bryson Taylor . 09 . Here’s What You Need to Know About Breonna Taylor’s Death . [ 91 ] Richard A . Oppel and Derrick B . Taylor . 2020 . Here’s What You Need To Know About Breonna Taylor’s Death . The New York Times ( 2020 ) . https : / / www . nytimes . com / article / breonna - taylor - police . html [ 92 ] Jason Parham . [ n . d . ] . TikTok and the Evolution of Digital Blackface . Wired ( [ n . d . ] ) . https : / / www . wired . com / story / tiktok - evolution - digital - blackface / [ 93 ] Linda M . Perkins . 1982 . Heed Life’s Demands : The Educational Philosophy of Fanny Jackson Coppin . The Journal of Negro Education 51 , 3 ( 1982 ) , 181 – 190 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2294688 [ 94 ] Ed Pilkington . [ n . d . ] . " The sadism of white men Why America must atone for its lynchings " . https : / / www . theguardian . com / world / 2018 / apr / 26 / lynchings - sadism - white - men - why - america - must - atone [ 95 ] Nichole Pinkard , Sheena Erete , Caitlin K . Martin , and Maxine McKinney de Royston . 2017 . Digital Youth Divas : Exploring Narrative - Driven Curriculum to Spark Middle School Girls’ Interest in Computational Activities . Journal of the Learning Sciences 26 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 477 – 516 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10508406 . 2017 . 1307199 [ 96 ] Yolanda Rankin and India Irish . 2020 . A Seat at the Table : Black Feminist Thought as a Critical Framework for Inclusive Game Design . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction ( 2020 ) . [ 97 ] Yolanda A . Rankin and Na – eun Han . 2019 . Exploring the Plurality of Black Women’s Gameplay Experiences . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300369 [ 98 ] Yolanda A . Rankin and Jakita O . Thomas . 2019 . Straighten up and Fly Right : Rethinking Intersectionality in HCI Research . Interactions 26 , 6 ( Oct . 2019 ) , 64 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3363033 [ 99 ] Yolanda A . Rankin and Jakita O . Thomas . 2020 . The Intersectional Experiences of Black Women in Computing . In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education ( SIGCSE ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 199 – 205 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328778 . 3366873 [ 100 ] Yolanda A . Rankin , Jakita O . Thomas , and Nicole M . Joseph . 2020 . Intersectionality in HCI : Lost in Translation . Interactions 27 , 5 ( Sept . 2020 ) , 68 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3416498 [ 101 ] Rashawn Ray . 2020 . " Why are Blacks dying at higher rates from COVID - 19 " . Brookings Institution ( 2020 ) . https : / / www . brookings . edu / blog / fixgov / 2020 / 04 / 09 / why - are - blacks - dying - at - higher - rates - from - covid - 19 / [ 102 ] SanjayReddy . [ n . d . ] . " OnPerformativeAcademicAnti - Racism " . https : / / reddytoread . com / 2020 / 06 / 02 / on - performative - academic - anti - racism / [ 103 ] Mark Rifkin . 2011 . When Did Indians Become Straight ? : Kinship . The History of Sexuality , and Native Sovereignty ( 2011 ) . [ 104 ] Andrea J Ritchie . 2017 . Invisible no more : Police violence against Black women and women of color . Beacon press . [ 105 ] Herman Saksono , Carmen Castaneda - Sceppa , Jessica Hoffman , Magy Seif El - Nasr , Vivien Morris , and Andrea G . Parker . 2018 . Family Health Promotion in Low - SES Neighborhoods : A Two - Month Study of Wearable Activity Tracking . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173883 [ 106 ] Herman Saksono , Carmen Castaneda - Sceppa , Jessica Hoffman , Magy Seif El - Nasr , Vivien Morris , and Andrea G . Parker . 2019 . Social Reflections on Fitness Tracking Data : A Study with Families in Low - SES Neighborhoods . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300543 [ 107 ] Ari Schlesinger , Kenton P . O’Hara , and Alex S . Taylor . 2018 . Let’s Talk About Race : Identity , Chatbots , and AI . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173889 [ 108 ] Ari W . Schlesinger , Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : engaging identity through gender , race , and class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI 234 : 23 5412 – 5427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025766 [ 109 ] Jason Schreiber . 2020 . " Students won’t face charges for video mocking George Floyd death " . https : / / www . unionleader . com / news / social _ issues / students - wont - face - charges - for - video - mocking - george - floyd - death / article _ 9f11a7a4 - d7dd - 5d42 - 8124 - 50c2771c51e3 . html [ 110 ] Kimberly A . Scott and Steve Elliott . 2020 . STEM Diversity and Inclusion Efforts for Women of Color : A critique of the new labor system . International Journal of Gender , Science , and Technology 11 , 3 ( 2020 ) , 375 – 382 . [ 111 ] Shannon . 2020 . " Personal Notes " . [ 112 ] Margot Lee Shetterly . 2016 . Hidden Figures : The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathemati - cians Who Helped Win the Space Race . HarperCollins , New York , NY . [ 113 ] Christen A . Smith . 2020 . Cite Black Women . https : / / www . citeblackwomencollective . org / [ 114 ] Jamil Smith . 2015 . " Videos of Police Killings Are Numbing Us to the Spectacle of Black Death " . https : / / newrepublic . com / article / 121527 / what - does - seeing - black - men - die - do - you [ 115 ] Luke Stark . 2019 . Facial Recognition is the Plutonium of AI . XRDS 25 , 3 ( April 2019 ) , 50 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313129 [ 116 ] Elizabeth Stowell , Teresa K . O’Leary , Everlyne Kimani , Michael K . Paasche - Orlow , Timothy Bickmore , and Andrea G . Parker . 2020 . Investigating Opportunities for Crowdsourcing in Church - Based Health Interventions : A Participatory Design Study . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376833 [ 117 ] Shannon Sullivan . 2013 . Inheriting Racist Disparities in Health : Epigenetics and the Transgenerational Effects of White Racism . Critical Philosophy of Race 1 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 190 – 218 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 10 . 5325 / critphilrace . 1 . 2 . 0190 [ 118 ] Jakita O . Thomas , Nicole Joseph , Arian Williams , Chantrel Crum , and Jamika Burge . 2018 . Speaking Truth to Power : Exploring the Intersectional Experiences of Black Women in Computing . In Proceedings of the 2018 Research on Equity and Sustained Participation in Engineering , Computing , and Technology , RESPECT 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RESPECT . 2018 . 8491718 [ 119 ] Jakita O . Thomas , Yolanda Rankin , Rachelle Minor , and Li Sun . 2017 . Exploring the Difficulties African - American Middle School Girls Face Enacting Computational Algorithmic Thinking over three Years while Designing Games for Social Change . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW : An International Journal ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 017 - 9292 - y [ 120 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2015 . Geek Heresy : Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of Technology . PublicAffairs . [ 121 ] Jan Warren - Findlow . 2006 . Weathering : Stress and Heart Disease in African American Women Living in Chicago . Qualitative Health Research 16 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 221 – 237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1049732305278651 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1049732305278651 PMID : 16394211 . [ 122 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Arkadeep Kumar , Aditya Vishwanath , Naveena Karusala , Betsy DiSalvo , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Designing for Intersections . In proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ) Conference , 45 – 58 . Received June 2020 ; accepted July 2020 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW3 , Article 234 . Publication date : December 2020 .