MANAGEMENT SCIENCE Vol . 60 , No . 4 , April 2014 , pp . 1063 – 1081 ISSN 0025 - 1909 ( print ) ￿ ISSN 1526 - 5501 ( online ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2013 . 1805 ©2014 INFORMS Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets in New Product Ideation Nikolaus Franke Institute for Entrepreneurship and Innovation , WU Vienna University of Economics and Business , A - 1020 Vienna , Austria , nikolaus . franke @ wu . ac . at Marion K . Poetz Department of Innovation and Organizational Economics , Copenhagen Business School , 2000 Frederiksberg , Denmark , mp . ino @ cbs . dk Martin Schreier Institute for Marketing Management , WU Vienna University of Economics and Business , A - 1020 Vienna , Austria , martin . schreier @ wu . ac . at W ho provides better inputs to new product ideation tasks , problem solvers with expertise in the area for which new products are to be developed or problem solvers from “analogous” markets that are distant but share an analogous problem or need ? Conventional wisdom appears to suggest that target market expertise is indispensable , which is why most managers searching for new ideas tend to stay within their own market context even when they do search outside their ﬁrms’ boundaries . However , in a unique symmetric experiment that isolates the effect of market origin , we ﬁnd evidence for the opposite : Although solutions provided by problem solvers from analogous markets show lower potential for immediate use , they demonstrate substantially higher levels of novelty . Also , compared to established novelty drivers , this effect appears highly relevant from a managerial perspective : we ﬁnd that including problem solvers from analogous markets versus the target market accounts for almost two - thirds of the well - known effect of involving lead users instead of average problem solvers . This effect is further ampliﬁed when the analogous distance between the markets increases , i . e . , when searching in far versus near analogous markets . Finally , results indicate that the analogous market effect is particularly strong in the upper tail of the novelty distribution , which again underscores the effect’s practical importance . All of this suggests that it might pay to systematically search across ﬁrm - external sources of innovation that were formerly out of scope for most managers . Data , as supplemental material , are available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2013 . 1805 . Keywords : open innovation ; distant search ; exploration ; problem solving ; new product development ; analogical transfer ; analogy ; creativity History : Received August 6 , 2011 ; accepted February 18 , 2013 , by Lee Fleming , entrepreneurship and innovation . Published online in Articles in Advance November 26 , 2013 . 1 . Introduction When people seek a novel solution to a complicated problem and lack the skill to solve it themselves , they might consider consulting a person with more exper - tise . But whom ? Most scholarly research on prob - lem solving has focused on personal characteristics of the problem solver , and also managers seeking con - tributors to new product ideation projects will focus on personal characteristics such as experience , cre - ativity , or lead userness as dominant search criteria ( von Hippel 1986 , Amabile et al . 1996 , Terwiesch and Xu 2008 ) . The market origin of the potential problem solver is hardly seen as an issue . Almost automati - cally , managers will limit the search to their own mar - ket . In most cases , they will consider experts from the ﬁrm’s internal research and development , market - ing , or design department . Even managers following an “open innovation” approach usually look for spe - cialist experts among customers , suppliers , or even competitors within their markets ( Laursen and Salter 2006 ) . After all , such experts have the most knowl - edge about the market in question . On the other hand , it is a well - known problem that familiarity with a problem blocks creativity and the identiﬁcation of novel solutions . Individuals tend to focus on alter - natives within or in close proximity to their domi - nant ﬁeld of expertise ( Cyert and March 1963 ) . This problem , known as “functional ﬁxedness” or “local search , ” looms larger as problem solvers’ expertise in the focal area increases ( Katila and Ahuja 2002 ) , particularly in tasks that require novel solutions , i . e . , when the required knowledge is located on some dis - tant peak of the search landscape ( Gavetti et al . 2005 ) . 1063 I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1064 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS In this article we introduce a novel approach to overcome such local search biases in new product development . We argue that not only the personal characteristics of problem solvers but also their mar - ket origin matters . Being located in what we refer to as an analogous market , i . e . , a market that is analo - gously related with the focal target market in terms of sharing similar relational characteristics of the prob - lem , provides problem solvers with two systematic advantages . First , they might draw on knowledge about solutions that already exist in “their” markets but are unknown in the target market . Second , they might be more likely to provide creative solutions to a target market problem than individuals from the tar - get market because they are not mentally constrained by existing target market solutions . To test whether these systematic differences enable problem solvers from analogous markets to come up with ideas that are more novel than those from target market problem solvers , we conduct a unique symmetric experimental study . It allows us to isolate the effect of market origin from potentially confounding sample selection biases . The participants were 213 problem solvers from the three analogous markets of rooﬁng , carpentry and inline skating , which share the analogous problem of using safety gear to prevent serious injuries and to make improvements in the comfort of such gear . Any of the participants contributed ideas to the analogous problems in all three markets , allowing us to compare problem solvers’ capabilities for providing solution ideas to target market versus analogous market prob - lems while effectively controlling for person - related characteristics . Our ﬁndings demonstrate that there is indeed an “analogous market effect” : solutions provided by problem solvers from analogous markets show sub - stantially higher levels of novelty . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁnd that calling in problem solvers from an analogous market ( instead of the target market ) increases the novelty of solutions provided for a given target mar - ket problem by almost two - thirds of the gains from asking lead users ( LUs ) instead of average problem solvers . To illuminate the effect’s potential economic impact , we juxtapose it to a seminal 3M case study demonstrating that ideation projects involving lead users from analogous markets yielded projected sales that are $ 128 m higher on average than more tradi - tional 3M projects ( Lilien et al . 2002 ) with customers from the target market . The effect sizes found in our study allow for the speculation that the “analogous market” effect in this context might have accounted for additional projected sales of more than $ 40 mil - lion per project . Moreover , results indicate that the analogous market effect is particularly strong in the upper tail of the novelty distribution , which is of spe - ciﬁc managerial relevance since only the best ideas are considered for further development . Finally , it is found that the effect is particularly pronounced when the analogous distance between the markets increases , which bears additional theoretical and man - agerial implications . Novelty , which we deﬁne as the extent to which a new product idea or problem solution is original and thus new in light of current market offerings , is the key objective of most new product ideation tasks ( Dahl and Moreau 2002 ) . Yet , it is only one of the two constituent conceptual elements of innova - tion . The term innovation typically comprises “inven - tion” ( which results from the novelty of a solution ) and “usefulness , ” i . e . , the extent to which an idea can be directly converted to a product that generates immediate beneﬁts for a potentially large number of users . Research on new product ideation has empha - sized the importance of analyzing both two concep - tual dimensions separately for practical and theoret - ical reasons ( Moreau and Dahl 2005 ) . Regarding this second side of the innovation coin , we ﬁnd that origi - nating from an analogous market decreases the imme - diate use potential of the idea . As we argue in our general discussion , the net effect of involving prob - lem solvers from analogous markets in new product ideation will depend on the speciﬁc objectives of the ﬁrm as well as differences in organizational strategies and capabilities . 2 . Analogies and Their Value in Creative Thought If two entities ( A and B ) are seen as “analogous , ” it means that they share relational predicates but no or only few object attributes ( Gentner 1983 ) . For exam - ple , the hydrogen atom ( A ) can be seen as analo - gous to our solar system ( B ) because its relational structure is similar ( the electron revolves around the nucleus just as the planets revolve around the sun ) , although its characteristics as an object are not ( e . g . , the sun is large , hot , and yellow ; the nucleus is not ) . Analogical thinking , i . e . , transferring knowledge from an analogous source domain to solving a problem in the target domain , has been a topic of enduring interest in cognitive psychology literature . Scholars have studied the process steps underlying analogical thinking , the effects of using analogies on the nov - elty of problem solutions , and the factors that moder - ate this effect ( Gick and Holyoak 1980 , Gentner 1983 , Holyoak and Thagard 1995 ) . For example , Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 ) demonstrate that drawing on “far” versus “near” analogies increases the likelihood of generating particularly novel solutions . If only deep - structured relational attributes are similar between two entities , we speak of a far analogy ( the solar sys - tem and the hydrogen atom ) . If the similarity is based I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1065 on more obvious surface - level attributes , it is a near analogy ( “our” solar system and other planetary sys - tems ) . If one aims to design a new freeway system in a given city , for example , this means that it might be more promising to draw on a far analogy such as the human circulatory system compared to a near anal - ogy such as the trafﬁc system in a different city ( Dahl and Moreau 2002 ) . Since novelty is considered the distinguishing fea - ture in creative work , analogies of this kind are partic - ularly valuable for generating radically new products that might become a source of revenue growth and long - term competitiveness of a ﬁrm . It is interesting and noteworthy , however , that research in the ﬁeld of new product development has modeled analogical transfer almost exclusively as an activity carried out by a person ( or a team ) from the target market . This also appears to be the standard procedure in practice . Kalogerakis et al . ( 2010 ) provide an in - depth analysis of 16 cases of new product development projects in which analogical thinking was employed . They found that in each case the teams limited themselves to accessing and using analogous knowledge that had been stored within the team or the client , and as a result they concluded that “there is a strong ten - dency toward the usage of local knowledge” ( p . 433 ) . Also creativity techniques such as the “Synectics” brainstorming method are primarily geared toward uncovering local knowledge about analogous solu - tions that problem solvers are unaware of ( Gordon 1961 ) . Because local knowledge about analogous solu - tions worth transferring is necessarily limited , it is no surprise that Kalogerakis et al . ( 2010 ) ﬁnd that in the majority of cases , only “near” analogies were used ( solutions or principles developed in former projects ) . Dunbar ( 1997 ) reports that a bias toward near analo - gies is also the norm in science : He ﬁnds that only 2 of 99 analogies used by molecular biologists were completely out of the scientists’ domains . 3 . The “Analogous Market” Effect In this study , we test a different means of access - ing analogous knowledge : the integration of poten - tial problem solvers from analogous knowledge domains , that is , markets with similar relational characteristics ( such as similar problems or customer needs ) but no or only few similar product attributes . As an exam - ple of such an analogous relationship , consider the market for products designed to prevent infection in medical surgery and the market for computer chip manufacturing . Although these markets are entirely distinct in most surface - level attributes ( suppliers , customers , use context , products , etc . ) , the underlying need to remove impurities from the air is relevant to both markets . Both surgeons and computer chip man - ufacturers require clean air . A transfer of innovation - related knowledge from the analogous market of computer chip production to the target ﬁeld of med - ical surgery reportedly provided valuable input for new product development ( Herstatt et al . 2002 ) . What are the underlying mechanisms why integrat - ing problem solvers from analogous markets might generate value ? One obvious reason is that the anal - ogous market may be more advanced ( Lilien et al . 2002 ) . In this case , the ( less advanced ) target mar - ket can , of course , proﬁt from importing superior solutions , solution principles , and more experienced , qualiﬁed , or creative solution providers . However , it is unclear whether computer chip manufacturing is technologically more advanced than the medical surgery equipment industry . Importantly , we argue that the value of accessing analogous markets stems from two conceptual drivers that are independent of asymmetries in the technological maturity of the two markets . In other words , we propose an independent “mere analogous market effect” : Even if an analo - gous market is similarly or even less advanced , its potential problem solvers might still provide valuable solutions . 1 The ﬁrst factor is the arbitrage of existing solutions . Let A be a market in which a novel solution to a prob - lem is being sought , and let B be a market that is anal - ogously related to A . In both markets , there are sets of solutions to the shared problems ( sets a and b , respec - tively ) . If b is a complete subset of a , nothing can be gained from transferring b to A . Such a complete over - lap is theoretically possible , but it appears extremely unlikely from an empirical standpoint . Only if A is far more advanced than B would a situation be pos - sible in which all solutions in b already exist in A . It is more realistic to assume that beyond some over - lap ( a ∩ b ) , at least some elements in b ￿ are unknown in A ( b ￿ ￿ = a ) . Recall that the markets are only ana - logically related , not identical . Different surface - level market structures , regulatory and competitive forces , customer requirements , etc . will induce different pri - orities when actors in A and B apply their problem - solving capabilities , most likely resulting in elements from b that are disjunctive from a ( see Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 , Page 2007 ) . Accessing an actor from analogous market B to solve a problem in target mar - ket A will therefore bring about the possibility of get - ting access to b . From A ’s perspective , b ￿ is more novel 1 Our analysis focuses on comparing the quality of ideas stem - ming from analogous versus target market problem solvers ( the analogous market effect ) . Thus , one limitation is that we cannot test whether our approach ( drawing on analogous market problem solvers ) is any better than the one suggested by extant research on analogical thinking ( drawing on target market solvers who are actively stimulated to draw on analogies ) . We take up this issue in our general discussion . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1066 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS than from the perspective of B . In the example of computer chip manufacturing and medical surgery , it might be that the former focused their attention speciﬁcally on contamination resulting from produc - tion machinery and the latter more on pollution from human beings , thus opening up the possibility of learning from each other . In a similar vein , medical imaging problems ( e . g . , detecting very small features like early - stage tumors ) could be solved in an inno - vative fashion by the arbitrage of existing solutions from the military ( analogous market ) ; problem solvers in this market had long tried to improve any kind of pattern recognition ( e . g . , to detect enemies from large distances ) , and solutions from the military appeared highly innovative to the medical imaging problem ( von Hippel et al . 1999 ) . The second factor is the greater creativity of peo - ple due to their analogous market origin . Research on problem solving reveals that individuals gener - ally are heavily constrained by their past experience , which leads to functional ﬁxedness ( Duncker 1945 ) . This effect implies that people unconsciously stick to mental schemes and problem - solving strategies that have proven helpful in the past , which impedes them from coming up with truly novel solutions ( Chrysikou and Weisberg 2005 , Audia and Goncalo 2007 ) . Past problem - solving success induces a shift from exploring new knowledge to exploiting existing knowledge ( March 1991 ) . As argued above , only in very extreme constellations will the individuals’ expe - rience in target market A be identical to the experi - ence of individuals in analogously related market B . In most instances , their mental schemes and problem - solving strategies will differ somewhat . This means that with regard to a problem from A , actors from B are less likely to be blocked by functional ﬁxedness . The latter might have a fresh and unbiased perspec - tive and therefore come up with novel ideas and original solutions to which the target market experts are “blind . ” This might be the reason why IBM has not invented PC software , Microsoft has not invented search engines , Google has not invented social net - works , and Facebook will most likely also miss a future radical innovation out of their scope . Anecdotal evidence for the importance of the indi - viduals’ structural position in an analogous market can be seen in distributed innovation projects , for example , in the composition of lead user teams in practical applications of the lead user method . In ear - lier projects , ﬁrms searching for radical innovations focused on identifying lead users from their own industries , in particular from their own customer base . However , a remarkable trend toward system - atic searches for lead users in analogous markets has emerged . As an example , Lilien et al . ( 2002 ) present the case of a lead user project at 3M designed to identify better ways to prevent infections associated with surgery . Among others , a specialist in theatri - cal makeup , who is also confronted with preventing infections when adhering materials to the skin , sub - stantially contributed to what was considered a break - through product concept for 3M . More generally , the often - described effects of the heterogeneity of team members’ professional backgrounds on innovative - ness can be seen as indirect support for our argument ( Singh and Fleming 2010 ) . Based on the discussion of both mechanisms , we can predict the following : Hypothesis 1 ( H1 ) . Problem solvers from analogous markets will provide more novel solutions in new product ideation within a given target market than problem solvers from the target market , all other things being equal . Scholars studying innovation have emphasized that the novelty of a solution alone is no guarantee of a successful new product . Innovations thus are con - ceptualized as inventions that are used in a market context . This means that although novelty is consid - ered the main driver of successful innovation , it is not enough . Solutions must also be useful , that is , they have to contribute to solving the actual problem ( Moreau and Dahl 2005 ) ; ideally , they can be con - verted directly into a product that generates immedi - ate beneﬁts for a potentially large number of users . Individuals from analogous markets lack familiarity with the context of the actual target market problem as such . The fact that understanding the underlying nature of a problem is an important precondition for successful problem solving has been well known for a long time ( Gagne 1970 , Volkema 1983 ) . Especially when problems are novel , complex , and ill - structured ( as is often the case in new product ideation tasks ) , it is very difﬁcult to fully shift problem information from one locus to another . In other words , the infor - mation is “sticky” ( von Hippel 1994 ) . The articula - tion and deﬁnition of a problem may not compensate for an insufﬁcient understanding of its very nature , solution constraints , problematic side effects , impor - tant contextual factors , and so forth ( Nelson 1982 ) . In terms of direct ﬁt with target market structures , problem solvers from analogous markets will there - fore be at a disadvantage compared to their target market counterparts . If potential solvers do not have a precise understanding of the problem , their solutions are not likely to match it perfectly . The result might be a lower degree of ( immediate ) usefulness . Hypothesis 2 ( H2 ) . Problem solvers from analogous markets will provide solutions with a lower degree of use - fulness in new product ideation within a given target mar - ket than problem solvers from the target market , all other things being equal . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1067 4 . Method 4 . 1 . Overview of the Experiment We designed the following experimental study to test our predictions . We ﬁrst identiﬁed three different markets that have an analogous relationship , i . e . , they share a similar problem , but the producers , products , use contexts , and customers differ vastly . We then recruited independent random samples of potential problem solvers from each of the three markets and asked them to provide ( 1 ) a solution to a problem in “their own” ( target ) market and ( 2 ) solutions to analogous problems in the two analogous markets . The three problem - solving tasks were presented in random order to avoid order effects ( i . e . , problem solvers either started with idea generation for their target market or for one of the two analogous mar - kets ) . Thus , each participant in our experiment took on both structural positions , responding from the per - spective of a problem solver who originates from the target market and from an analogous market . The individual characteristics of participants in the target market and in the analogous markets are thus identical . Given that the sample size is also symmet - ric across the three markets , individual characteristics cannot confound our results in the aggregate . We also account for potential systematic differences in the markets chosen ( such as technological advancement ) , because each of the three markets serves both as a target market and as an analogous market . We there - fore eliminate sample selection bias and the resulting alternative explanations . The ideas were evaluated by independent market experts . Notably , in rating the novelty and usefulness of ideas , these experts were blind to the origin of problem solvers and blind to the speciﬁc research questions underlying this project . Speciﬁcally , this experimental design allows us to analyze the resulting data in two ways ( see Figure 1 ) . First , we can analyze the data at the individual level . We can test whether one and the same problem solver generates more novel and less useful ideas for the analogous markets versus his / her own target market . The main test is whether solutions for target market problems are more novel and less ( immediately ) use - ful overall if they come from analogous market prob - lem solvers as opposed to the canonical practice of employing target market problem solvers , all other things being equal ( market - level analysis ) . 4 . 2 . Identiﬁcation of Appropriate Analogous Markets We looked for three markets that met the following criteria : ( 1 ) the markets had to be related to each other by sharing an analogous problem ; ( 2 ) the mar - kets needed to be clearly delineated with regard to producers , products , and customers ( in particular , the problem solvers could not be active in more than one market ) ; ( 3 ) solving the problem should be compara - bly important in each of the markets ( to have similar incentives for developing a solution ) ; and ( 4 ) prob - lem solvers in each market needed to be accessible by means of a random sampling process . Follow - ing an exploratory pilot study based on secondary data research ( Internet and professional journals ) as well as interviews ( n = 20 ) , we identiﬁed the area of safety gear as an appropriate ﬁeld of study . Safety gear is important in a wide variety of professions and sports , with many of the markets sharing the com - mon problem of limited comfort and ﬁt . This problem , which manifests itself in the form of pain , impres - sions on the skin , and restricted movement , causes the users of safety gear to dislike or even refrain from using it despite its importance in protecting them from injury . The need to improve the comfort of safety gear is therefore an appropriate common denomina - tor among the markets studied ( i . e . , the analogous relationship ) . To identify speciﬁc markets in which safety gear plays a role , we conducted a second pilot study , which involved interviews with 30 experts in various markets . In those interviews , the need to improve the comfort of safety gear was conﬁrmed by in - depth input on market and product - speciﬁc problems and current statistics regarding injury rates . The ﬁnal selection of the three most appropriate anal - ogous markets for our study was based on how fully they met the four selection criteria mentioned above . In the end , we decided on the three analogous mar - kets of ( 1 ) carpenters using safety masks to protect themselves from dust and toxic vapors , ( 2 ) roofers using safety belts to prevent themselves from falling , and ( 3 ) inline skaters using knee and elbow protec - tion to prevent injuries in the case of a fall or crash . These markets are related by an analogous ( but not identical ) problem , they are sufﬁciently independent , the need for novel solutions is comparable , and prob - lem solvers appeared to be accessible by means of random sampling . Notably , carpenters and roofers constitute a nearer analogous relationship with some common surface - level attributes ( both are profession - als and craftsmen ) , whereas the two groups’ relation - ship to inline skaters represents a far analogy ( because the latter are hobbyists and use safety gear in recre - ational activities ) . We will account for this experimen - tal feature in our analysis below ; as indicated above , this will allow us to explore whether our results are affected by the speciﬁc problem solvers’ distance from the markets for which they generated ideas . 4 . 3 . Sampling and Sample Characteristics From the national population of roofers , carpen - ters , and inline skaters , we drew a random sample I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1068 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS Figure 1 Overview of Research Process P ha s e 3 : A na l ys i s P ha s e 2 : E x pe r t e v a l ua t i on P ha s e 1 : I dea c o ll e c t i on 71 carpenters Carpentryproblem ? Skatingproblem ? Roofingproblem ? 71 solutions by target market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from target market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from analogous market problem solvers 71 solutions from target market problem solvers Evaluation by carpentry market experts 71 roofers 213 carpentry problem solutions ( by target and analogous market problem solvers ) 213 skating problem solutions ( by target and analogous market problem solvers ) 213 roofing problem solutions ( by target and analogous market problem solvers ) Evaluation by skating market experts Evaluation by roofing market experts Analogousproblems Analogousproblems Analogousproblems Phase 1 c : Ideation by roofers Phase 1 b : Ideation by skaters Phase 1 a : Ideation by carpenters Carpentryproblem ? Skatingproblem ? Roofingproblem ? Carpentryproblem ? Skatingproblem ? Roofingproblem ? 71 skaters Solution by carpenter Solution by skater Solution by roofer Time Comparison 213 solutions from target market Phase 3 b : Market level analysis : Are solutions by analogous market problem solvers systematically different from solutions by target market problem solvers ? 426 solutions from analogous markets Comparison Phase 3 a : Individual level analysis : Are the individuals ’ solutions for analogous markets systematically different from their solutions for their own target market ? 213 solutions by carpenters 213 solutions by skaters 213 solutions by roofers Solutions for own market Solutions for analogous markets Skating problem Carpentry problem Roofing problem Same colors : Solution by target market problem solver ( here : carpenter solution for carpenter problem ) Different colors : Solution by analogous market problem solver ( here : carpenter solution for roofing problem ) of 1 , 030 potential problem solvers ( 330 carpenters , 400 roofers , and 300 inline skaters ) . The population of roofers and carpenters consisted of all those reg - istered with the national Federal Economic Chamber . The sample of inline skaters was randomly drawn from the members of inline skating clubs and partici - pants at inline skating competitions . To reach the club members , we contacted all nationally registered inline skating clubs ( n = 21 ) and asked members to submit their contact information using an online tool devel - oped speciﬁcally for that purpose . The participants in three inline skating competitions were contacted directly during the respective events and asked to pro - vide their contact information for a research project . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1069 Table 1 Sample Characteristics Age Gender Personal creativity a Lead userness a Technical expertise a Avg . time for ideation Mean ( SD ) Frequency Mean ( SD ) Mean ( SD ) Mean ( SD ) Mean ( SD ) Carpenters ( M1 ) 46 ￿ 35 Male : 70 3 ￿ 60 2 ￿ 34 3 ￿ 02 2 ￿ 00 ￿ 9 ￿ 44 ￿ Female : 1 ￿ 1 ￿ 00 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 59 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 98 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 76 ￿ Roofers ( M2 ) 44 ￿ 48 Male : 67 3 ￿ 37 2 ￿ 62 2 ￿ 49 2 ￿ 09 ￿ 12 ￿ 26 ￿ Female : 4 ￿ 1 ￿ 08 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 69 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 84 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 78 ￿ Inline skaters ( M3 ) 32 ￿ 61 Male : 44 3 ￿ 81 2 ￿ 75 3 ￿ 29 2 ￿ 33 ￿ 9 ￿ 58 ￿ Female : 27 ￿ 0 ￿ 84 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 76 ￿ ￿ 1 ￿ 11 ￿ ￿ 0 ￿ 70 ￿ ￿ ￿ M2 ￿ − ￿ M1 ￿ n . s . b n . s . b p < 0 ￿ 05 b p < 0 ￿ 01 b n . s . b ￿ ￿ M3 ￿ − ￿ M1 ￿p < 0 ￿ 01 b n . s . b p < 0 ￿ 01 b p < 0 ￿ 10 b p < 0 ￿ 01 b ￿ ￿ M3 ￿ − ￿ M2 ￿p < 0 ￿ 01 b p < 0 ￿ 01 b n . s . b p < 0 ￿ 01 b p < 0 ￿ 10 b Overall p < 0 ￿ 01 c p < 0 ￿ 01 d p < 0 ￿ 05 c p < 0 ￿ 01 c p < 0 ￿ 01 c p < 0 ￿ 05 c Note . N = 71 problem solvers per market . a Five - point scales ( 1 = very low ; 5 = very high ) . b Least signiﬁcant difference test . c ANOVA . d Chi - square test . In preparation for the telephone interview , we sent members of our sample a short letter in which we introduced the research project and asked them to participate once they were contacted . To avoid demand effects , we told participants that the purpose of the project was to ﬁnd solutions to typical user problems with safety gear . The ensuing interviews showed that this objective appeared highly plausi - ble to participants . As an incentive , we announced a number of noncash prizes ( total value , E 1 , 150 ) to be rafﬂed off among all participants . The data col - lection process resulted in a total of 306 interviews ( 99 interviews with carpenters , 85 with roofers , and 122 with skaters ) , making for a satisfactory response rate of 30 . 0 % among the carpenters , 21 . 3 % among the roofers , and 40 . 7 % among the inline skaters . A com - parison between early and late respondents does not show signiﬁcant differences in any of the variables measured . Additionally , we compared those partici - pants we needed to contact more than twice with the “easier” participants and again found no signiﬁcant differences . We can therefore expect that nonresponse bias is not a concern in our study . A check for potential overlaps between the three markets showed that 14 roofers reported to have experience with inline skating . We eliminated these overlaps from the sample because their market ori - gin is inherently confounded . The size of this sam - ple decreased from 85 to 71 roofers . We did the same check in the sample of carpenters ( 15 overlaps ) and inline skaters ( 3 overlaps ) . To avoid sample size arti - facts and to obtain a symmetric sample , we further reduced carpenters and inline skaters to a sample size of 71 by means of random elimination . Unequal cell sizes in the three markets would have posed a threat to internal validity , because more draws in one mar - ket could have increased the probability of observing a few truly exceptional ideas ( Gross 1972 , Terwiesch and Ulrich 2009 ; see also Blyth 1972 on the related risk of a Yule – Simpson effect ) . The 213 problem solvers ( 71 × 3 markets ) provided a total of 639 solutions ( 213 × 3 problems ) , with one - third originating from target market problem solvers and two - thirds from analogous market problem solvers . Table 1 summa - rizes key differences between the three subsamples . The results underscore the adequacy of our symmet - ric research design ( in which all participants belong to both a target market and two analogous markets and sample sizes across the three markets are symmetric ; for measurement items , see § 4 . 5 ) . 4 . 4 . Experimental Procedure and Stimuli We used standardized telephone interviews to collect the data . The interviewers were 17 master’s program students at two of the authors’ university ( a large European business university ) . To avoid interviewer effects , we held an extensive interviewer training ses - sion prior to data collection and developed standard schemes for assisting respondents with questions and problems . We randomly assigned interviewers to the interviewees from the three different markets . The interview began with a short introductory text . We then asked about the interviewees’ experience using safety equipment in their own domain and— potentially—any of the analogous domains ( to check for confounding overlaps ) . We then gave them an ini - tial problem statement ( Table 2 ) and asked them to come up with ideas for possible solutions . To stan - dardize the conditions , we limited the response time to ﬁve minutes . 2 The answers were documented in 2 We constrained the problem - solving activities to ﬁve minutes per market because a pretest had revealed that 15 minutes ( idea gener - ation for three markets ) was the maximum time participants were I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1070 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS Table 2 Problem Statements Used in Data Collection ( Identical for All Participants ) Market Problem statement ( experimental stimuli ) Rooﬁng Roofers often work at high elevations . To protect people from falling , safety belts are required . Unfortunately , these belts dent the skin , cause workers to sweat , and often lead to pain in the abdominal area . As a result , safety belts are often not used properly . How could we improve the safety belts to ensure that they are actually used ? Carpentry In carpentry , there is often a problem with breathing toxic vapors and dust . Currently this problem is solved by means of safety masks . Although these masks provide protection against toxic vapors and dust , they leave impressions on the skin and carpenters tend to sweat under the masks . As a result , they often don’t use them . How could we design the safety masks to solve this problem ? Inline skating Knee injuries are common in inline skating . Especially novice inline skaters often have painful experiences in this respect . Although kneepads provide a solution to this problem , they are often not used . As possible reasons , skaters mention restricted movement as well as sweating . How could we design the kneepads to overcome that problem ? detail by the interviewers . We informed participants when they were about to exceed the time limit and asked them to complete their thought at that moment . We proceeded in a similar manner with the second and third problem statements . As noted above and to avoid potential biases due to carryover or learn - ing effects , we randomly varied the order of the three problem statements . We had formulated the problem statements on the basis of insights from the pilot studies and in such a way that they were easy to understand and allowed creative solutions . Prior to the main data collection process , we had successfully tested them in a pilot study with n = 10 problem solvers from the cho - sen markets and reﬁned certain details in the state - ments . After the third ideation task was completed , we asked participants about a number of control vari - ables . We had successfully pretested the entire proce - dure with n = 20 respondents in the three markets . 4 . 5 . Measurement of Control Variables Research has documented several individual - level characteristics of the problem solver that might be willing to invest . Imposing this time constraint per market was important to avoid excessive idea generation for the ﬁrst market ( s ) and thus to preclude substantially lower time investments in the other market ( s ) . Although this procedure appeared mandatory for our study design , we note that future research , if possible , might look at the evolution of revised or multiple ideas over time ( by granting substantially more time for ideation ) . In this way , one might explore whether more time for ideation could eventually reduce the potential negative effect of target ( analogous ) market problem solvers on the idea’s novelty ( usefulness ) . related with the novelty of one’s ideas . In our study , we speciﬁcally control for personal creativity , lead userness , and technical expertise . First , we measured the participants’ personal creativity . Using the Buffalo Creative Process Inventory ( Puccio 1999 ) as a basis , we ﬁrst carried out a pilot study ( n = 48 ) to test the applicability of this scale to our setting and reduced the original nine - item scale to four items ( “I enjoy spending time looking beyond the initial view of the problem , ” “I enjoy working on ill - deﬁned , novel prob - lems , ” “I enjoy stretching my imagination to produce many ideas , ” “I like to work with unique ideas” ) , but still maintained a reliable scale for measuring personal creativity ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 ￿ 82 ) . Second , we measured participants’ “lead userness , ” which has often been documented as a robust predictor of an idea’s novelty ( Franke et al . 2006 ) , using a six - item measure ( “I usually ﬁnd out about new products and solutions earlier than others , ” “I have improved and developed safety gear myself , ” “I am dissatis - ﬁed with the existing safety gear , ” “In my opinion , there are still unresolved problems with safety gear , ” “I have needs as a carpenter / roofer / inline skater that are not covered by the safety gear products currently offered on the market , ” “I often get irritated by the lack of sophistication in safety gear” ; items adapted from Franke and Shah 2003 , Franke et al . 2006 ; Cron - bach’s alpha = 0 ￿ 57 ) . Third , we measured the respon - dents’ technical expertise using four items adapted from a scale developed by Franke et al . ( 2006 ) ( “I can repair my own safety gear , ” “I can help other car - penters / roofers / inline skaters solve problems with their safety gear , ” “I am handy and enjoy tinkering , ” “I can make technical changes to my safety gear on my own” ; Cronbach’s alpha = 0 ￿ 67 ) . Items for these variables were averaged for further analysis . Note that they might be particularly relevant to an idea’s novelty ( but less so with regard to its usefulness ) . All items were measured on ﬁve - point scales ( where 1 equaled not at all accurate , and 5 equaled very accurate ) . Finally , we also measured the actual time respondents needed to provide solutions to the three problem statements and captured the respondents’ age and gender . All these variables serve as controls for the market - level analysis to account for any dif - ferences in problem solvers between markets ( Table 1 ; for interconstruct correlations , see Appendix A ) . 4 . 6 . Evaluation of Ideas We had eight independent experts in the three mar - kets ( three carpentry experts , two rooﬁng experts , and three inline skating experts ) evaluate the quality of the solutions in terms of novelty and usefulness . Experts were selected on the basis of the follow - ing criteria : ( 1 ) high levels of personal use expe - rience , ( 2 ) a sound understanding of other users’ I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1071 problems with safety gear in their respective domains ( e . g . , based on a certain function in a community / professional association or on involvement in edu - cation or training activities ) , ( 3 ) outstanding market knowledge with respect to current standards and the latest products within their markets , and ( 4 ) a good understanding of technical aspects related to how safety gear and other relevant components within their domains function . For example , our inline skat - ing experts pool included an athlete who had won 20 national speed - skating championships . All rooﬁng and carpentry experts had passed the examination for the master craftsman’s certiﬁcate , had a minimum of 20 years’ professional experience and taught at voca - tional schools within their respective domains . The evaluations were carried out in half - day work - shops , thus ensuring a consistent framework and equivalent evaluation standards . In line with a pro - cedure for expert rating outlined by Krippendorff ( 2004 ) , the experts ﬁrst participated in introductory training sessions in which they were informed about the evaluation criteria and the respective rating scales . The aim of this step was to ensure that all experts had a comparable understanding of the task and of the rating standards to be applied . Second , each expert independently rated the novelty and usefulness of ideas generated for his or her speciﬁc target market . They were blind to the sources of the ideas , which were presented in random order . It is also worth not - ing that the experts were quite enthusiastic about the quality of some of the solutions . Some expressed will - ingness to support or even to commercialize the most promising ideas , which certainly supports the exter - nal validity of the data . We measured an idea’s novelty using two items , namely , the extent to which an idea reﬂects a truly creative thought and the extent to which the con - cept is different from products currently available on the target market ( Moreau and Dahl 2005 , Schulze and Hoegl 2008 ) , and we merged the ﬁve - point rating scales into a single index ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 ￿ 90 ) . An idea’s usefulness was also measured with two items , namely , the degree of usefulness to solve the problem and the number of users who would ﬁnd it useful ( Besemer and O’Quin 1987 , Moreau and Dahl 2005 ) ; these items were likewise merged into a single index ( Cronbach’s alpha = 0 ￿ 91 ) . We used a software tool that allowed us to track individual rating processes and calculate differences in ratings among the experts immediately after each individual evaluation step was completed . We in - formed the experts of the differences in their rat - ings and asked them to reveal the reasons why they had assigned a given value to each solution . Based on this discussion , the experts were allowed—but not required—to individually adapt and reﬁne their ratings if the arguments convinced them . Interrater reliability was assessed by calculating Krippendorff’s alpha for each item . Krippendorff’s alpha is a conser - vative index that measures agreement among multi - ple raters and is considered a highly rigorous measure for assessing interrater reliability for rating scales such as those employed in this study ( values of 0 . 67 and greater are generally considered to be satisfactory ; Krippendorff 2004 ) . The agreement coefﬁcients in our study are all well above the recommended thresh - old values , with the lowest alpha still exceeding 0 . 70 . To allow a valid comparison of ideas between markets ( and thus to avoid potential biases resulting from dif - ferent points of reference among experts from different markets ) , we standardized the averaged novelty and usefulness scores ( z - transformation ) . 5 . Findings We ﬁrst present the analyses in which we compare the individual problem solvers’ solutions for their own market with their solutions for the two analo - gous markets ( individual - level analysis ) . This analysis does not yet constitute a formal test of our hypothe - ses ; instead , it provides a microfoundation of the predicted analogous market effect . We then proceed with the market - level analysis , which formally tests our hypotheses in a multivariate setting . Here , we test whether solutions from analogous markets are systematically different from target market solutions for solving target market problems in the aggregate ( H1 and H2 ) . In both analyses , we ﬁrst present results regarding novelty as the dependent variable and then proceed to discuss usefulness . 5 . 1 . Individual - Level Analysis 5 . 1 . 1 . Novelty as Dependent Variable . Will prob - lem solvers generate more novel solutions in new product ideation for analogous markets compared to their solutions for their own target markets ? To provide an answer to this question , we performed a repeated measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with the standardized ideas’ novelty scores as the dependent variable . In the ﬁrst analysis , we com - pare the novelty score for the target market idea with the averaged novelty score of the two corresponding analogous market ideas . We control for the market origin of problem solvers ( carpenters , roofers , inline skaters ) by adding this group variable as a between - subject factor . We can therefore assess whether pool - ing across the market origins of problem solvers ( i . e . , being from one of the three markets ) affects our results . We ﬁnd that problem solvers’ ideas for their target market are , on average , indeed signiﬁcantly less novel ( M = − 0 ￿ 11 ) than their ideas for the analogous markets ( M = 0 ￿ 06 , F = 4 ￿ 83 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ) . Importantly , I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1072 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS Figure 2 Novelty of Ideas Generated by Problem Solvers for Target vs . Analogous Markets 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 – 0 . 25 – 0 . 20 – 0 . 15 – 0 . 10 – 0 . 05 0 . 00 – 0 . 11 Solution for own target market problem ( ∅ ) 0 . 06 Total – 0 . 19 … for carpentryproblem – 0 . 03 – 0 . 05 – 0 . 14 … for roofingproblem – 0 . 01 … for carpentryproblem – 0 . 01 … for skatingproblem 0 . 20 0 . 20 0 . 20 … for analogous problems ( ∅ ) … for roofingproblem … for skating problem – 0 . 01 … for analogousproblems ( ∅ ) – 0 . 00 … for skatingproblem0 . 01 … for analogousproblems ( ∅ ) Solution for analogous market problem ( ∅ ) Noveltyof ideas ( z - scores ) Carpenters as problem solvers Skaters as problem solvers Roofers as problem solvers we ﬁnd that the repeated measures factor does not interact with market origin ( F = 0 ￿ 08 , p = 0 ￿ 93 ) , which indicates that the positive analogous market effect on novelty is independent of the speciﬁc market origin of problem solvers ; the main effect of market origin was also insigniﬁcant ( F = 1 ￿ 94 , p = 0 ￿ 15 ) . The respective individual means are depicted in Figure 2 . To assess whether the observed analogous mar - ket effect might be driven by one particularly high value for one speciﬁc market , we repeated this anal - ysis by comparing the problem solvers’ scores for their target market ideas with their scores for the two analogous market ideas separately ( i . e . , the within - subject factor had three levels : one for the target market idea and two for analogous market ideas ) . The results are parallel to the ones reported above : we ﬁnd that the novelty of problem solvers’ ideas varies as a function of whether they were generated for their target market ( M = − 0 ￿ 11 ) versus the anal - ogous markets ( M = 0 ￿ 05 and M = 0 ￿ 07 , respectively ; F = 2 ￿ 47 , p = 0 ￿ 09 ) . 3 Importantly , we again ﬁnd that 3 The results of a Mauchly test conﬁrm that the assumption of sphericity is not violated ( p = 0 ￿ 58 ) . the repeated measures factor does not interact with market origin ( F = 0 ￿ 06 , p = 0 ￿ 99 ; main effect of mar - ket origin , F = 2 ￿ 17 , p = 0 ￿ 12 ) . Follow - up contrasts revealed that target market ideas are signiﬁcantly less novel than both analogous market ideas ( p = 0 ￿ 05 and p = 0 ￿ 07 , respectively ) . At the same time , the problem solvers’ two analogous market ideas did not differ in terms of novelty ( p = 0 ￿ 81 ) . In sum , these ﬁndings pro - vide a microfoundation for the ﬁrst analogous mar - ket hypothesis : Problem solvers generate more novel ideas for analogous markets than for their own tar - get market . The structural position of problem solvers matters . If we examine the novelty of the different anal - ogous “pairs , ” another interesting pattern emerges : The analogous market effect is smaller for the pairs of roofers and carpenters ( roofers → carpentry problem , carpenters → rooﬁng problem ) than if both roofers and carpenters are compared with skaters ( roofers → skating problem , carpenters → skating problem ) . It is also interesting that the analogous market effect is somewhat stronger among skaters than in the other two groups ( difference : 0 . 21 versus 0 . 16 and 0 . 14 ) . One interpretation might be that there are systematic I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1073 differences between individuals across markets , and skaters are simply more creative ( some evidence for this can be seen in personal creativity differences ; see Table 1 ) . However , another explanation might be that the problem solvers’ analogous distance might ( addi - tionally ) impact the idea’s novelty : As we argued in the method section , inline skaters are contextually far - ther away from carpenters and roofers than roofers are from carpenters . We explore this pattern in greater detail in § 5 . 2 . 1 . 5 . 1 . 2 . UsefulnessasDependentVariable . Thesame analytical logic was applied to provide an answer to the question of whether problem solvers will gen - erate solutions with lower ( immediate ) usefulness in analogous markets versus their own target mar - ket . We compared the usefulness score of the target Figure 3 Usefulness of Ideas Generated by Problem Solvers for Target vs . Analogous Markets Total … for carpentry problem0 . 01 … for roofingproblem … for roofingproblem0 . 06 … for carpentryproblem … for skaterproblem0 . 40 … for analogousproblems ( ∅ ) Solution for own target market problem ( ∅ ) Carpenters as problem solvers Skaters as problem solvers Roofers as problem solvers 0 . 16 – 0 . 08 Solution for analogous market problem ( ∅ ) – 0 . 20 … for analogousproblems ( ∅ ) – 0 . 23 … for skatingproblem – 0 . 11 … for analogousproblems ( ∅ ) – 0 . 16 … for skating problem 0 . 070 . 05 0 . 10 … for carpentryproblem … for roofingproblem 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 – 0 . 25 – 0 . 20 – 0 . 15 – 0 . 10 – 0 . 05 0 . 00 Usefulnessof ideas ( z - scores ) 0 . 30 0 . 35 – 0 . 15 – 0 . 06 market idea with the averaged usefulness score of the two corresponding analogous market ideas , and a repeated measures ANOVA reveals that the prob - lem solvers’ ideas for their target market are charac - terized by signiﬁcantly higher usefulness ( M = 0 ￿ 16 ) compared to the analogous market ideas ( M = − 0 ￿ 08 ￿ F = 9 ￿ 26 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ) . Once again , we ﬁnd that the repeated measures factor does not interact with mar - ket origin ( F = 0 ￿ 38 , p = 0 ￿ 68 ) , which indicates that the negative analogous market effect on usefulness is independent of the speciﬁc market origin of prob - lem solvers ( the main effect of market origin was signiﬁcant , which indicates that the general level of the ideas’ usefulness differed across market origins of problem solvers : F = 4 ￿ 96 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ) . The respective individual means are depicted in Figure 3 . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1074 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS As in the case of novelty , we repeated this analysis by comparing the problem solvers’ scores for their tar - get market ideas to their two analogous market ideas separately . The results are again parallel : we ﬁnd that the usefulness of ideas varies as a function of whether they were generated for the target market ( M = 0 ￿ 16 ) versus analogous markets ( M = − 0 ￿ 05 and M = − 0 ￿ 10 , respectively ; F = 4 ￿ 53 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ) . 4 We again ﬁnd that the repeated measures factor does not inter - act with market origin ( F = 0 ￿ 32 , p = 0 ￿ 87 ; main effect of market origin , F = 4 ￿ 76 , p = 0 ￿ 01 ) . Follow - up con - trasts revealed that target market ideas exhibit signif - icantly higher usefulness than both analogous market ideas ( p < 0 ￿ 05 and p < 0 ￿ 01 , respectively ) . At the same time , the problem solvers’ analogous market ideas did not differ in terms of usefulness ( p = 0 ￿ 62 ) . In sum , this provides a convergent microfoundation that also underpins our second hypothesis : Problem solvers generate ideas with lower ( immediate ) usefulness for analogous markets versus their own target mar - ket . Looking at the different individual markets , we again observe a pattern that suggests that analogous distance might additionally inﬂuence our ﬁndings : The analogous market effect is particularly strong for skaters as problem solvers ( difference : 0 . 33 versus 0 . 17 and 0 . 21 ) , and both carpenters’ and roofers’ solutions to the skating problem exhibit lower usefulness than their solutions for the “nearer” analogous market . 5 . 2 . Market - Level Analysis So far , we have found evidence that one and the same individual , on average , creates more novel ideas char - acterized by lower levels of ( immediate ) usefulness when asked to provide solutions for analogous mar - kets compared to his or her own target market . In this section , we proceed with the market - level analysis , which allows us to test our hypotheses formally in a multivariate setting . We test whether aggregate solu - tions from analogous markets are systematically dif - ferent from target market solutions for solving target market problems ( H1 and H2 ) . The analysis also allows us to compare the strength of the analogous market effect with an established predictor of nov - elty , namely , an individual’s lead userness . In addi - tion , we can more thoroughly explore the market dis - tance pattern described above . Will the effects found hold in a multivariate analysis where we can control for systematic differences between individuals across markets ( by controlling for different levels of e . g . , personal creativity , etc . ) ? Again , we will ﬁrst analyze the dependent variable of novelty and then turn to usefulness . 4 The results of a Mauchly test again conﬁrm that the assumption of sphericity is not violated ( p = 0 ￿ 57 ) . 5 . 2 . 1 . Novelty as Dependent Variable . We ﬁrst performed an ANOVA on the standardized novelty scores with the market origin of problem solvers ( tar - get versus analogous market ) as a between - subject factor that reproduces the mean results obtained from the within - subject analysis reported above : For tar - get market problems , analogous market problem solvers generate more novel ideas ( M = 0 ￿ 06 ) com - pared to target market problem solvers ( M = − 0 ￿ 11 , F = 4 ￿ 22 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ) . Next , we performed multiple ordi - nary least squares ( OLS ) regressions to assess the relative impact of the problem solvers’ market ori - gin vis - à - vis established individual - level predictors of an idea’s novelty . 5 In particular , we included the following additional variables in this and all the other regressions reported below : the respondents’ lead userness , technical expertise , personal creativ - ity , time for ideation , age , gender , dummies for the 17 student interviewers , dummies for the three pools of market experts , and dummies for the three mar - ket origins of problem solvers . Most importantly , the multivariate regression model produces a signif - icant analogous market effect , which supports H1 ( b = 0 ￿ 19 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ; see Model 1 in Table 3 ) . In addi - tion , and in line with extant research , we also ﬁnd that the problem solvers’ lead userness is posi - tively and signiﬁcantly related to the ideas’ nov - elty ( b = 0 ￿ 16 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ) . The effects of both the other conceptual individual - level variables—personal cre - ativity and technical expertise—are insigniﬁcant , a ﬁnding we will interpret in the discussion section . Finally , we note that time for ideation also positively affected novelty ( b = 0 ￿ 24 , p < 0 ￿ 001 ) , which can be seen as a proxy for the respondents’ efforts ( the more effort put into idea generation , the better the ideas ) . 6 To gain a better understanding of the importance of the analogous market effect , we compare it with the individuals’ lead userness ( the only signiﬁcant con - ceptual variable ) . To do so , we calculated the predicted novelty scores for representative groups . First , the pre - dicted means for target ( M = − 0 ￿ 13 ) versus analo - gous market problem solvers ( M = 0 ￿ 06 ) closely match the observed means reported above , which indicates that the inclusion of all the control variables hardly affected our results . Their difference ( effect size ) is 0 . 19 . Second , the predicted novelty means for an aver - age problem solver versus the individual with the highest lead user characteristics in the target market 5 The OLS regressions presented here are based on normal stan - dard errors ( SEs ) . As a robustness check , we reestimated the models presented in Table 3 using robust SE to account for the 213 respon - dent clusters ( i . e . , three ideas per respondent ) . As shown in the appendix , the results are hardly affected and the signiﬁcance pat - terns remain identical . 6 We also checked whether time for ideation interacts with the anal - ogous market effect , but found no signiﬁcant interaction . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1075 Table 3 Analogous Market Effect on Ideas’ Novelty and Usefulness ( Pooled Analysis for Markets ) DV : Novelty of ideas ( z - scores ) DV : Usefulness of ideas ( z - scores ) Model 1 a Model 2 b Model 3 a Model 4 b b ( SE ) B ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) Analogous market effect 0 ￿ 19 0 ￿ 08 ∗ 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 05 ∗ − 0 ￿ 22 0 ￿ 08 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 04 ∗∗ Individual - level variables c Personal creativity 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 Lead userness 0 ￿ 16 0 ￿ 06 ∗ 0 ￿ 16 0 ￿ 06 ∗ 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 06 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 06 Technical expertise − 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 − 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 04 Control variables d Time for ideation ( min . ) 0 ￿ 24 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 25 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 21 0 ￿ 06 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 20 0 ￿ 04 ∗∗∗ Age ( in years ) 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 Gender − 0 ￿ 08 0 ￿ 13 − 0 ￿ 07 0 ￿ 13 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 12 R 2 0 . 11 0 . 11 0 . 14 0 . 14 F - value 2 ￿ 82 ∗∗∗ 2 ￿ 86 ∗∗∗ 3 ￿ 78 ∗∗∗ 3 ￿ 80 ∗∗∗ Notes . The results do not change if we use robust ( instead of normal ) SEs ( i . e . , adjusting the SEs for the 213 respondent clusters ) ; see Appendix B for details . OLS regressions , N = 639 . DV , dependent variable . a Coding of analogous market effect : 0 = idea originates from a target market problem solver ; 1 = idea originates from an analogous market problem solver . b Coding of analogous market effect : 0 = idea originates from a target market problem solver ; 1 = carpenters for rooﬁng problem , roofers for carpentry problem ; 2 = carpenters for skating problem , roofers for skating problem , skaters for carpentry problem , skaters for rooﬁng problem . c Five - point rating scales ( 1 = very low ; 5 = very high ) . d All models included 16 dummies for the student interviewers , two dummies for the pools of market experts , and two dummies for the market origin of problem solvers as additional control variables . The regression coefﬁcients reported above account for these controls . ∗ p < 0 ￿ 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 001 ( two - sided ) . have an effect size of 0 . 30 ( M Novelty average problem solver = − 0 ￿ 13 , M Novelty lead user = 0 ￿ 17 ; Figure 4 ) . This means that including problem solvers from analogous mar - kets alone accounts for 63 % of the effect of involving lead users instead of average problem solvers . We now assess whether the market distance pat - tern described in § 5 . 1 . 1 . holds in a multivariate anal - ysis . To this end , we recoded the market origin of problem solvers from target versus analogous mar - kets accordingly ( idea for problem solvers’ own target market = 0 ; carpenters for rooﬁng problem , roofers for carpentry problem = 1 ; carpenters for skating prob - lem , roofers for skating problem , and skaters for car - pentry / rooﬁng problem = 2 ) . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that the newly created market distance metric is pos - itively and signiﬁcantly related to the ideas’ novelty ( b = 0 ￿ 12 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ; see Model 2 in Table 3 ) . This indi - cates that even if we control for individual difference variables , a higher distance from the market for which ideas were generated signiﬁcantly increases novelty . Again , the only additional theoretical variable that proved signiﬁcant in this model was an individual’s lead userness ( b = 0 ￿ 16 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ) . These results prompted us to differentiate the rela - tive importance of the analogous market effect from the effect of relying on lead users instead of aver - age problem solvers . We ﬁnd that moving from tar - get ( M = − 0 ￿ 13 ) to near analogous market problem solvers ( M = − 0 ￿ 01 ) corresponds to 40 % of the effect of turning from average ( M = − 0 ￿ 13 ) to lead users in the target market ( M = 0 ￿ 17 ) , whereas relying on problem solvers in far analogous markets ( M = 0 ￿ 10 ) increases this relative importance to 77 % . Finally we reran our model using quantile regres - sions with the same set of independent variables . So far , we have assumed that any differences in the dependent variable of novelty are equally impor - tant . In reality , however , only very few ideas are really helpful and can be developed further or imple - mented , whereas the bulk of ideas will not advance to those stages , regardless of whether they are aver - age or poor . Is the analogous market effect stronger or weaker in differentiating the lowest versus the high - est quantile of ideas from the rest ? Using quantile regressions , we can explore this managerially impor - tant question . We observe that the higher we set the threshold , the stronger the related coefﬁcients become ( see Model 1 in Table 4 ) . In particular , we ﬁnd that the analogous market effect is relatively weak and almost 10 times weaker for the 25th compared to the 75th percentile ( b 25 % = 0 ￿ 03 , not signiﬁcant ( n . s . ) ; b 75 % = 0 ￿ 28 , p < 0 ￿ 10 ) . Interestingly , the effect increases by more than 40 % when moving from the 75th to the 85th percentile ( b 85 % = 0 ￿ 41 ￿p < 0 ￿ 05 ) , and it remains strong and visible even at the 90th and 95th per - centiles ( b 90 % = 0 ￿ 34 , p < 0 ￿ 05 ; b 95 % = 0 ￿ 34 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ) . This underlines the managerial relevance of our effect . Managers are mostly interested in the upper tail of the novelty distribution , and that is where the analogous market effect is particularly strong . 5 . 2 . 2 . Usefulness as Dependent Variable . For use - fulness as the dependent variable , we applied a simi - lar procedure as we did for novelty . First , an ANOVA I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1076 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS Figure 4 Analogous Market Effect vs . Lead Userness ( Novelty ) 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 – 0 . 25 – 0 . 20 – 0 . 15 – 0 . 10 – 0 . 05 0 . 00 – 0 . 13 Estimated mean for own target market problem ( ∅ ) Analogousmarket effect Estimated mean for analogous market problem ( ∅ ) 0 . 06 Noveltyof ideas ( z - scores ) Lead user effect – 0 . 13 Estimated mean for average problem solver ( target market ) Estimated mean for problem solver with highest lead user score ( target market ) 0 . 17 0 . 19 0 . 30 on the standardized usefulness scores reveals that analogous market problem solvers generate ideas for a target market problem that are characterized by lower ( immediate ) usefulness ( M = − 0 ￿ 08 ) compared to problem solvers from the target market ( M = 0 ￿ 16 , F = 7 ￿ 87 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ) , which reproduces the mean results obtained from the within - subject analysis reported above . Next , we performed multiple OLS regressions to assess the relative impact of the problem solvers’ market origin vis - à - vis our other individual - level vari - ables ( technical expertise , lead userness , and personal creativity ) . In this and all the regressions below , we included the same control variables as in the regres - sions reported in § 5 . 2 . 1 . Most importantly , the mul - tivariate regression model shows a signiﬁcant anal - ogous market effect , which supports H2 ( b = − 0 ￿ 22 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ; see Model 3 in Table 3 ) . The individual - level variables do not signiﬁcantly impact the usefulness of ideas . Finally , we note that time for ideation pos - itively affects usefulness ( b = 0 ￿ 21 , p < 0 ￿ 001 ) , which can again be seen as a proxy for respondents’ efforts ( the more effort put into idea generation , the better the ideas ) . 7 We then analyzed whether the market distance pattern also holds for usefulness . For this purpose , we recoded the market origin of problem solvers ( target versus analogous market ) in a similar way as we had done for novelty ( see above ) . Impor - tantly , we ﬁnd that market distance is negatively and signiﬁcantly related to the ideas’ usefulness ( b = − 0 ￿ 12 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ; see Model 4 in Table 3 ) . This indicates that while controlling for individual - level difference variables , a higher distance from the mar - ket for which ideas were generated brings about a decrease in ( immediate ) usefulness . The individual - level variables do not signiﬁcantly impact the use - fulness of ideas . We ﬁnd that moving from target market problem solvers ( M Estimated = 0 ￿ 14 ) to prob - lem solvers in near analogous markets ( M Estimated = 0 ￿ 01 ) brings about a far weaker decrease in useful - ness than moving to problem solvers in far analogous 7 We again checked whether time for ideation interacts with the analogous market effect , but we found no signiﬁcant interaction . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1077 Table 4 Results of Quantile Regression DV : Novelty of ideas ( z - scores ) 25 % 50 % 75 % 85 % 90 % 95 % Model 1 a b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) Analogous market effect 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 21 0 ￿ 13 + 0 ￿ 28 0 ￿ 15 + 0 ￿ 41 0 ￿ 17 ∗ 0 ￿ 34 0 ￿ 17 ∗ 0 ￿ 34 0 ￿ 13 ∗∗ Lead userness 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 24 0 ￿ 10 ∗ 0 ￿ 29 0 ￿ 11 ∗ 0 ￿ 28 0 ￿ 13 ∗ 0 ￿ 32 0 ￿ 13 ∗ 0 ￿ 22 0 ￿ 10 ∗ Pseudo - R 2 0 . 08 0 . 09 0 . 12 0 . 10 0 . 11 0 . 16 DV : Usefulness of ideas ( z - scores ) 25 % 50 % 75 % 85 % 90 % 95 % Model 2 a b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) b ( SE ) Analogous market effect − 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 13 − 0 ￿ 41 0 ￿ 14 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 23 0 ￿ 09 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 09 0 ￿ 08 − 0 ￿ 06 0 ￿ 10 − 0 ￿ 07 0 ￿ 08 Lead userness 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 10 0 ￿ 10 0 ￿ 11 − 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 06 − 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 06 − 0 ￿ 01 0 ￿ 08 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 06 Pseudo - R 2 0 . 10 0 . 11 0 . 07 0 . 08 0 . 06 0 . 08 Notes . All models included the same additional control variables as in the OLS regressions ( see Table 3 ) . Quantile regressions , N = 639 . DV , dependent variable . a Coding of analogous market effect : 0 = idea originates from a target market problem solver ; 1 = idea originates from an analogous market problem solver . + p ≤ 0 ￿ 10 ; ∗ p < 0 ￿ 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 01 ( two - sided ) . markets ( M Estimated = − 0 ￿ 11 ) . ( The lead user construct ( n . s . ) is not a meaningful comparison for Usefulness ; therefore we refrained from calculating comparable means . ) Finally , we reran our model using quantile regres - sions ( see Model 2 in Table 4 ) . In contrast to our results for novelty , however , we do not detect a spe - ciﬁc pattern in the data—i . e . , the related coefﬁcients do not become systematically stronger or weaker as we move closer to the upper tail of the distribution . Instead , the strongest effect is obtained for the median ( b 50 % = − 0 ￿ 41 , p < 0 ￿ 01 ) . 6 . Discussion 6 . 1 . Contribution Who provides better inputs to new product ideation tasks ? Problem solvers with expertise in the area for which new products are to be developed ( target mar - ket ) or problem solvers with expertise in contextually distant domains which share an analogous problem or need ( analogous markets ) ? We argue that two mecha - nisms favor problem solvers from analogous markets . First , they may transfer existing solution information from the analogous market to the problem in the tar - get market . Second , they may have lower constraints because they lack prior target market knowledge . Our various analyses show convergent evidence for an “analogous market” effect : Relative to target market problem solvers , individuals from analogous markets are indeed more likely to provide novel solutions to target market problems . The magnitude of the analogous market effect is re - markable if we compare it with the effect of the well - established “lead user” construct ( von Hippel 1986 ) : including a random problem solver from an analo - gous market ( instead of the target market ) increases the expected novelty of the solution by almost two thirds of the gains from including lead users ver - sus average problem solvers . A study by Lilien et al . ( 2002 ) allows us to get an understanding of the eco - nomic consequences of the analogous market effect . In their study , they analyzed the outcome of 47 new product ideation projects carried out by 3M . They found that whereas traditional projects based on the information obtained by average target market cus - tomers had projected sales of $ 18 million on aver - age , projects involving LUs from analogous markets resulted in $ 146 million . As the authors argued , “This outcome differs from the outcomes of earlier studies of LU projects that reported generating ideas for valu - able next - generation products rather than for break - throughs . We speculate that this difference in out - comes is due to the 3M practice of identifying and learning from lead users outside ￿￿￿ of the target mar - ket , a speculation that requires further investigation” ( Lilien et al . 2002 , p . 1055 ) . Our data allow us to heed this call and decompose the contribution of the two different drivers of value . Assuming gener - alizability of our ﬁndings , the inclusion of problem solvers from analogous markets accounts for an addi - tional value of over $ 40 million per ideation project at 3M ( 0 ￿ 19 / ￿ 0 ￿ 19 + 0 ￿ 30 ￿ ∗ ￿ $ 146 m − $ 18 m ￿ ) . Cer - tainly , the different study contexts preclude taking these ﬁgures literally . On the other hand , it can be argued that the relative importance of including prob - lem solvers from analogous markets is even stronger in practical settings : Unlike in our study where we I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1078 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS took great care to neutralize the effect of potentially confounding sample selection biases , managers at 3M systematically targeted advanced analogous markets , which indisputably ampliﬁes the analogous market effect . Furthermore , ﬁndings from quantile regres - sions demonstrate that the analogous market effect becomes even stronger when focusing on more novel ideas . Again , this is in line with managers who seek for breakthrough ideas , not average ideas . Finally , we found evidence that solutions provided by prob - lem solvers from more distant analogous markets are more novel than solutions from nearer analogous markets , which is in line with extant research on indi - vidual problem solving ( Ward 1998 ) and managerial efforts as visible in the 3M study . However , the novelty of analogous market solu - tions comes at a price . We ﬁnd that , on average , they show lower immediate usefulness , presumably because the problem solvers lack familiarity with the context of the actual target market problem . Thus , including problem solvers from analogous markets has both positive ( higher novelty ) and negative effects ( lower usefulness ) . The net beneﬁt of the two dia - metrically opposed effects will depend on the ﬁrm’s objectives and capabilities . Is the goal radical inno - vation or rather incremental improvement ? In many new product ideation projects , novelty is seen as the most critical and scarce resource ( Dahl and Moreau 2002 ) . The immediate usefulness of ideas is less of an issue , because it is clear that more radical inno - vations usually target initially small markets ( Moreau and Dahl 2005 ) . This indicates that ﬁltering ideas by the criterion of immediate usefulness might con - stitute a problematically conservative ﬁlter ( Schulze and Hoegl 2008 ) . It is also easier to compensate for the lower immediate usefulness of ideas by comple - menting individuals from analogous markets with internal experts , which might be a good idea in any case . If a sequential process is more appropriate , one could also use the more novel ideas from analo - gous problem solvers as starting points for further development . Only when the ﬁrms’ objectives are to limit risks and the ﬁrm is content with incremental innovations will immediate usefulness dominate over novelty . In summary , this means that in many cases managers are well advised to look outside their own market domains and to identify relevant analogous markets with similar problems or customer needs , but with different products , ﬁrms , and customers . We are aware that this involves a complete overhaul of cur - rent perspectives and practices ; usually ﬁrms either rely on in - house experts or have a strong tendency to focus exclusively on customers , competitors , sup - pliers , etc . , in their own market when searching for input from outside their boundaries ( Laursen and Salter 2006 ) . Two criteria should guide the selection of analogous markets : First , we recommend that managers should not conﬁne the search to “near analogies” but also consider more far - analogous markets , where similar - ities are based on deep - structure relations . Here , the effects of avoiding functional ﬁxedness and import - ing existing solutions will be particularly strong . Sec - ond , managers should select analogous markets that can be considered more advanced relative to the tar - get market . Higher technological advancement can be assumed if the underlying problem is more extreme in the analogous market , if its consequences are more grave , or if ﬁrms and users have been look - ing for solutions with greater intensity for other rea - sons . Sheer volume ( i . e . , the number of ﬁrms and users ) or the maturity of the market might also con - tribute to such advancement . For example , a ﬁrm in the inline skating market looking for ideas for pro - tective gear might not choose the analogous mar - kets of rooﬁng or carpentry , but investigate Jackass - style extreme stunt shows ( because the protection problem is more extreme there ) , protection gear for people with brittle bone disease ( because the con - sequences are more grave for those suffering from this afﬂiction ) , or the market for safety belts and other protection systems in cars ( because the mar - ket is far larger ) . Within such advanced analogous markets , ﬁrms should look for individuals who dis - play high levels of personal creativity , lead user char - acteristics and technical expertise , or other factors conducive to singling out the most valuable prob - lem solvers . To overcome the weaknesses of prob - lem solvers from analogous markets , it may be a good idea to let them interact with problem solvers from the target market . If they manage to com - bine their strengths and compensate for their respec - tive weaknesses , the results should be even more beneﬁcial . In sum , our results contribute to extending the lit - erature on analogical reasoning and the use of analo - gies in managerial problem solving ( e . g . , Gavetti et al . 2005 ) . We also extend the existing literature on open innovation , boundary spanning , and local versus dis - tant search ( e . g . , Katila and Ahuja 2002 ) by provid - ing new insights as to where in the search landscape ﬁrms can obtain novel knowledge inputs as a basis for developing radical new products . Furthermore , we contribute to the discussion on marginality and con - textual distance in distributed problem - solving net - works ( Fleming et al . 2007 , Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) and shed light on which members of a diverse crowd of potential problem solvers are located in the “right search neighborhoods” ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 , p . 366 ) : those distant problem solvers for whom ﬁnd - ing a solution implies a local search because of the I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1079 analogous relationship but who are not constrained by mental schemes from the target market . 6 . 2 . Limitations and Avenues for Further Research The superior novelty of analogous market solutions is based on two arguments , namely , that problem solvers are less functionally ﬁxed and might already know of analogous solutions that can be transferred to solve the problem in the target market . We did not study which of these two conceptually different factors actually mediates the effect found and which of them plays a greater role . Theoretically , this could be attempted by a thorough content analysis of the 639 solutions obtained . However , we found that it is very difﬁcult to decide whether a solution is based on lower functional ﬁxedness , the transfer of existing solutions , or both . Directly asking participants brings about the risk of demand effects , and exploratory attempts revealed that the sources of their ideas are tacit knowledge , at least to a large degree . To shed more light on this issue , we thus recommend con - trolled experiments speciﬁcally designed for this pur - pose . It would be tempting to conduct such exper - iments with a view to analyzing which moderating factors ( such as the individuals’ cognitive capabilities ) impact the importance of the two sources . Our experimental design was not developed to mea - sure a market - distance hypothesis . The exploratory evidence we found appears quite plausible ; however , one must keep in mind that we are not able to for - mally disentangle the effect of greater distance from the potentially confounding effect of greater creativ - ity among skaters . The skater sample was also com - posed of individuals who are signiﬁcantly younger than the individuals sampled for the groups of car - penters and roofers . Thus , we acknowledge that our ﬁndings might be somewhat driven by the speciﬁcs of the skater sample . Again , controlled experiments are necessary to investigate how different degrees of distance inﬂuence the relevant dimensions of creative outcomes , ceteris paribus . Future research could also address other moderators of the beneﬁts of accessing analogous market knowledge to generate innovations , such as the problem type ( e . g . , well structured or ill structured ) , type of industry ( e . g . , tangible prod - ucts or services ) , or different groups of problem solvers ( e . g . , users versus employees of producers ) . We also note that we tested our predictions in only one empirical context ( safety equipment ) where we hand picked the three analogous markets ( carpenters , roofers , inline skaters ) ; despite the symmetric research design applied , we acknowledge that the empiri - cal results might be seen as somewhat idiosyncratic , which also limits our speculation about the monetary impact in the 3M context . To further corroborate our ﬁndings , future research might look for ways to more generally test our theory ( e . g . , by choosing systemat - ically different context ﬁelds and by more systemat - ically screening and selecting a variety of analogous markets ) . Another limitation of the experimental setting ( as noted in the method section ) is that we had to set a standardized time limit for the problem - solving exer - cises . Research on local search suggests that individ - uals will most likely start with what they are familiar with . This means that although we varied the start - ing task randomly , there might be some bias toward spontaneous , ﬁrst - idea creativity . Future research is thus invited to loosen the time constraints we had to impose ( preferably with stronger participation incen - tives ) and look at the systematic evolution of revised or multiple ideas over time . In this study , our only aim was to provide a clean test of our newly proposed analogous market effect . Thus we contrasted the quality of ideas generated by analogous market problem solvers for a certain tar - get market problem with that of ideas generated by problem solvers from the target market . As a con - sequence , we cannot draw inferences as to whether our approach ( drawing on analogous market prob - lem solvers ) is any better than the one suggested by extant research on analogical thinking ( drawing on target market problem solvers who are actively stimulated to think analogously ) . One advantage of drawing on analogous market problem solvers is that this approach allows the project manager to control the analogous distance ( which is not the case when analogical thinking is stimulated ) . Given that a ﬁrm is capable of applying appropriate open innovation search methods such as crowdsourcing to activate self - selection among problem solvers from analogous markets ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) or pyramid - ing to stimulate references into appropriate analogous domains ( Poetz and Prügl 2010 ) , it can freely decide which market is appropriate and also account for fac - tors such as technological advancement ( as outlined above ) . Future research that sheds more light on the relative performance of the two approaches might be a valuable next step in this area . Finally , to show the “clean” effect of accessing analogous market knowledge , we ensured that there was no overlap between problem solvers from tar - get markets and from analogous ﬁelds in our exper - iment . Thus , we are unable to analyze what hap - pens when the two groups interact . If they com - bine their speciﬁc strengths and compensate for their respective weaknesses , they might generate solu - tions that are both highly novel and highly useful to solve the problem . We propose that due to their analogous relationship , the likelihood that they will ﬁnd some common understanding is reasonably high . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets 1080 Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS But although this appears plausible and is in line with exploratory ﬁndings from lead user research ( Lilien et al . 2002 ) , theoretically they could also end up combining their speciﬁc weaknesses . Again , more research is warranted in this regard . Such analyses could also account for different interaction modes , such as “ad hoc” interaction or continuous exchange in communities or open idea generation platforms , to name just two examples . Supplemental Material Supplemental material to this paper is available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2013 . 1805 . Appendix A . Correlations ( Pooled Analysis for Markets ) ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 1 ) Novelty of ideas 1 0 ￿ 202 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 069 + 0 ￿ 173 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 034 0 ￿ 196 ∗∗∗ − 0 ￿ 023 0 ￿ 025 ( 2 ) Usefulness of ideas 1 0 ￿ 047 0 ￿ 061 0 ￿ 037 0 ￿ 107 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 044 0 ￿ 051 ( 3 ) Personal creativity 1 0 ￿ 189 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 249 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 141 ∗∗∗ − 0 ￿ 069 + 0 ￿ 077 + ( 4 ) Lead userness 1 0 ￿ 138 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 243 ∗∗∗ − 0 ￿ 060 0 ￿ 113 ∗∗ ( 5 ) Technical expertise 1 0 ￿ 113 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 010 0 ￿ 027 ( 6 ) Time for ideation 1 − 0 ￿ 040 0 ￿ 042 ( 7 ) Age ( in years ) 1 − 0 ￿ 335 ∗∗∗ ( 8 ) Gender 1 Note . N = 639 . + p < 0 ￿ 10 ; ∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 001 ( two - sided ) . Appendix B . Analogous Market Effect on Ideas’ Novelty and Usefulness ( Pooled Analysis for Markets ; Robust SEs ) DV : Novelty of ideas ( z - scores ) DV : Usefulness of ideas ( z - scores ) Model 1 a Model 2 b Model 3 a Model 4 b b rSE b rSE b rSE b rSE Analogous market effect 0 ￿ 19 0 ￿ 08 ∗ 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 05 ∗ − 0 ￿ 22 0 ￿ 08 ∗∗ − 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 04 ∗∗ Individual - level variables c Personal creativity 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 04 Lead userness 0 ￿ 16 0 ￿ 07 ∗ 0 ￿ 16 0 ￿ 07 ∗ 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 06 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 06 Technical expertise − 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 05 − 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 05 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 04 0 ￿ 03 0 ￿ 04 Control variables d Time for ideation ( min . ) 0 ￿ 24 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 25 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 21 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ 0 ￿ 20 0 ￿ 05 ∗∗∗ Age ( in years ) 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 0 ￿ 00 Gender − 0 ￿ 07 0 ￿ 13 − 0 ￿ 07 0 ￿ 13 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 12 0 ￿ 02 0 ￿ 12 R 2 0 . 11 0 . 11 0 . 14 0 . 14 F - value 3 ￿ 42 ∗∗∗ 3 ￿ 51 ∗∗∗ 3 ￿ 63 ∗∗∗ 3 ￿ 66 ∗∗∗ Notes . Here , we used robust ( instead of normal ) SEs ( rSE ; i . e . , we adjusted the SEs for the 213 respondent clusters ; three ideas per respondent ) . OLS regressions are shown ; N = 639 . DV , dependent variable . a Coding of analogous market effect : 0 = idea originates from a target market problem solver ; 1 = idea originates from an analogous market problem solver . b Coding of analogous market effect : 0 = idea originates from a target market problem solver ; 1 = carpenters for rooﬁng problem , roofers for carpentry problem ; 2 = carpenters for skating problem , roofers for skating problem , skaters for carpentry problem , skaters for rooﬁng problem . c Five - point rating scales ( 1 = very low ; 5 = very high ) . d All models included 16 dummies for the student interviewers , two dummies for the pools of market experts , and two dummies for the market origin of problem solvers as additional control variables . The regression coefﬁcients reported above account for these controls . ∗ p < 0 ￿ 05 ; ∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0 ￿ 001 ( two - sided ) . Acknowledgments The authors thank Oliver Alexy , Marco Giarratana , David Mazursky , Page Moreau , Francesco Rullani , the Manage - ment Science department editor Lee Fleming , the associate editor , and three reviewers , as well as the audiences at Bocconi University , LUISS Business School , Politecnico di Milano , Rotterdam School of Management , the Academy of Management Conference 2006 , and the Summer Market - ing Educators’ Conference 2006 for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper . The authors also thank Chris - tian Neumann , Barbara Piesch , Susanna Roiser , and the stu - dents of the E & I Research course for their valuable assis - tance . Financial support is acknowledged from the Danish Council for Independent Research , Social Sciences [ Research Grant 09 - 068739 ] . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / . Franke , Poetz , and Schreier : Integrating Problem Solvers from Analogous Markets Management Science 60 ( 4 ) , pp . 1063 – 1081 , ©2014 INFORMS 1081 References Afuah A , Tucci CL ( 2012 ) Crowdsourcing as a solution to distant search . Acad . Management Rev . 37 ( 3 ) : 355 – 375 . Amabile TM , Conti R , Coon H , Lazenby J , Herron M ( 1996 ) Assess - ing the work environment for creativity . Acad . Management J . 39 ( 5 ) : 1154 – 1184 . Audia PG , Goncalo JA ( 2007 ) Past success and creativity over time : A study of inventors in the hard disk drive industry . Manage - ment Sci . 53 ( 1 ) : 1 – 15 . Besemer SP , O’Quin K ( 1987 ) Creative product analysis : Testing a model by developing judging instruments . Isaksen SG , ed . Frontiers of Creativity Research ( Bearly Limited , Buffalo , NY ) , 341 – 357 . Blyth CR ( 1972 ) On Simpson’s paradox and the sure - thing princi - ple . J . Amer . Statist . Assoc . 67 ( 338 ) : 364 – 366 . Chrysikou EG , Weisberg RW ( 2005 ) Fixation effects of pictorial examples in a design problem - solving task . J . Experiment . Psych . Learn . 31 ( 5 ) : 1134 – 1148 . Cyert RM , March JG ( 1963 ) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm ( Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ ) . Dahl DW , Moreau P ( 2002 ) The inﬂuence and value of analog - ical thinking during new product ideation . J . Marketing Res . 39 ( 2 ) : 47 – 60 . Dunbar K ( 1997 ) How scientists think : On - line creativity and con - ceptual change in science . Ward TB , Smith SM , Vaid J , eds . Cre - ative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Pro - cesses ( American Psychological Association , Washington , DC ) , 461 – 493 . Duncker K ( 1945 ) On problem solving . Psych . Monographs 58 ( 5 ) : 1 – 110 . Fleming L , Mingo S , Chen D ( 2007 ) Collaborative brokerage , generative creativity , and creative success . Admin . Sci . Quart . 52 ( 3 ) : 443 – 475 . Franke N , Shah S ( 2003 ) How communities support innovative activities . An exploration of assistance and sharing among end - users . Res . Policy 32 ( 1 ) : 157 – 178 . Franke N , von Hippel E , Schreier M ( 2006 ) Finding commercially attractive user innovations . J . Product Innovation Management 23 ( 4 ) : 301 – 315 . Gagne RM ( 1970 ) The Conditions of Learning , 2nd ed . ( Holt , Rinehart & Winston , Oxford , UK ) . Gavetti G , Levinthal DA , Rivkin JW ( 2005 ) Strategy making in novel and complex worlds : The power of analogy . Strategic Management J . 26 ( 8 ) : 691 – 712 . Gentner D ( 1983 ) Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Sci . 7 : 155 – 170 . Gick ML , Holyoak KJ ( 1980 ) Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psych . 12 : 306 – 355 . Gordon W ( 1961 ) Synectics : The Development of Creative Capacity ( Harper and Row , New York ) . Gross I ( 1972 ) The creative aspects of advertising . Sloan Management Rev . 14 ( 1 ) : 83 – 109 . Herstatt C , Lüthje C , Lettl C ( 2002 ) Wie fortschrittliche Kunden zu Innovationen stimulieren . Harvard Bus . Manager 24 ( 1 ) : 60 – 68 . Holyoak KJ , Thagard P ( 1995 ) Mental Leaps : Analogy in Creative Thought ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Jeppesen LB , Lakhani KR ( 2010 ) Marginality and problem solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organ . Sci . 21 ( 5 ) : 1016 – 1033 . Kalogerakis K , Lüthje C , Herstatt C ( 2010 ) Developing innovations based on analogies : Experience from design and engineering consultants . J . Product Innovation Management 27 ( 3 ) : 418 – 436 . Katila R , Ahuja G ( 2002 ) Something old , something new : A longitu - dinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Acad . Management J . 45 ( 6 ) : 1183 – 1194 . Krippendorf K ( 2004 ) Content Analysis : An Introduction to Its Method - ology , 2nd ed . ( Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA ) . Laursen K , Salter A ( 2006 ) Open for innovation : The role of open - ness in explaining innovative performance among UK manu - facturing ﬁrms . Strategic Management J . 27 ( 2 ) : 131 – 150 . Lilien GL , Morrison PD , Searls K , Sonnack M , von Hippel E ( 2002 ) Performance assessment of the lead user idea - generation pro - cess for new product development . Management Sci . 48 ( 8 ) : 1042 – 1059 . March JG ( 1991 ) Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) : 71 – 87 . Moreau PC , Dahl DW ( 2005 ) Designing the solution : The impact of constraints on consumers’ creativity . J . Consumer Res . 32 ( 1 ) : 13 – 22 . Nelson R ( 1982 ) The role of knowledge in R & D efﬁciency . Quart . J . Econom . 97 ( 3 ) : 453 – 470 . Page S ( 2007 ) The Difference ( Princeton University Press , Prince - ton , NJ ) . Poetz MK , Prügl R ( 2010 ) Crossing domain - speciﬁc boundaries in search of innovation : Exploring the potential of “pyramiding . ” J . Product Innovation Management 27 ( 6 ) : 897 – 914 . Puccio GJ ( 1999 ) Creative problem solving preferences : Their iden - tiﬁcation and implications . Creativity Innovation Management 8 ( 3 ) : 171 – 178 . Schulze A , Hoegl M ( 2008 ) Organizational knowledge creation and the generation of new product ideas : A behavioral approach . Res . Policy 37 ( 10 ) : 1742 – 1750 . Singh J , Fleming L ( 2010 ) Lone inventors as sources of break - throughs : Myth or reality ? Management Sci . 56 ( 1 ) : 41 – 56 . Terwiesch C , Ulrich K ( 2009 ) Innovation Tournaments ( Harvard Busi - ness School Publishing , Boston ) . Terwiesch C , Xu Y ( 2008 ) Innovation contests , open innovation , and multiagent problem solving . Management Sci . 54 ( 9 ) : 1529 – 1543 . Volkema RJ ( 1983 ) Problem formulation in planning and design . Management Sci . 29 ( 6 ) : 639 – 652 . von Hippel E ( 1986 ) Lead users : A source of novel product con - cepts . Management Sci . 32 ( 7 ) : 791 – 805 . von Hippel E ( 1994 ) “Sticky Information” and the locus of prob - lem solving : Implications for innovation . Management Sci . 40 ( 4 ) : 429 – 439 . von Hippel E , Thomke S , Sonnack M ( 1999 ) Creating breakthroughs at 3M . Harvard Bus . Rev . 77 ( 5 ) : 47 – 57 . Ward TB ( 1998 ) Analogical distance and purpose in creative thought . Holyoak K , Gentner D , Kokinov B , eds . Advances in Analogy Research ( New Bulgarian University Press , Soﬁa , Bulgaria ) , 221 – 230 . I N F O R M S ho l d s c op y r i gh t t o t h i s a r t i c l e and d i s t r i bu t ed t h i s c op y a s a c ou r t e sy t o t he au t ho r ( s ) . A dd i t i ona l i n f o r m a t i o n , i n c l ud i ng r i gh t s and pe r m i ss i on po li c i e s , i s a v a il ab l e a t h tt p : / / j ou r na l s . i n f o r m s . o r g / .