4 Vol . 5 , Issue 1 , 2018 Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords : Design thinking Creativity Creative process Design pedagogy Innovation As the problem - solving methodology of design thinking has gained legitimacy in business and educational environments , this article suggests we also think about incorporating “art thinking” into approaches in design pedagogy . To study what skills and techniques can be useful in other disciplines , we can first review the stages of the creative process which are centered around preparation , incubation , ideation , illumi - nation , and evaluation . Within those stages , we can tease out specific elements unique to the artistic process that can be particularly useful , including mindsets of emotional engagement , intuition , and tolerance of ambiguity as well as cognitive strategies such as the use of metacognition , resource banks , generators and constraints , prolonged research , problem - creation , conversation with the work , closure delay , and reflection and thematic coherence . Emphasizing these elements and strategies in design peda - gogy can expand possibilities for creativity and innovation . Article history : Received 03 May 2018 Received in revised form 02 June 2018 Accepted 03 June 2018 ISSN : 2354 - 0036 DOI : 10 . 1515 / ctra - 2018 - 0001 Theories – Research – Applications Jessica Jacobs Columbia College Chicago , USA E - mail : jjacobs @ colum . edu INTRODUCTION Recent studies have indicated that employers are increasingly concerned about a per - ceived lack of creativity in the workplace . In an American Association of Colleges & Uni - versities survey of employers , 92 % felt that innovation is essential to their company’s continued success , and 71 % felt that more curricular emphasis should be placed on inno - vation and creativity ( Hart Research Associates , 2013 ) . In the field of design , educators may not be successfully preparing students to enter the workforce and subsequently sus - tain careers ( Davis , 2005 ) . Design educators and practitioners have also sounded the call for designers to be more creative and generative in an uncertain world ( Davis , 2015 ; AIGA , 2017 ) . Designers are being asked to expand their roles into those of inventors or research - ers , executing self - generated visions rather than the visions of others ( Burdick , 2007 ) . 5 In addition , speculative future practices need to be utilized to train designers to envision scenarios and design solutions for an unknown future ( Teixeira , 2017 ) . Despite these calls for designers to be more creative and generative , there are few studies of how the creative process occurs in design , and creative strategies do not ap - pear to be emphasized in design education ( Oxman , 1999 ; Dorst & Cross , 2001 ) . In addi - tion , there is a lack of research that examines the management of those creative process - es ( Jacobs , 2017 ) . Given these limitations , educators need to more fully understand , ex - pand , and perhaps reconfigure how we teach the creative process to design students in order to prepare them for a complex and uncertain future . Design and the fine arts have been historically connected in higher education both philosophically and operationally . While designers and artists share many creative methodologies , designers can be thought of as working to solve externally - defined prob - lems , while artists create internally - defined “problems” to solve ( Lawson , 1994 ) . In fact , many creative thinking methodologies share commonalities across domains , including art and design , yet there are differences in both processes , personality attributes , and skills ( Kaufman & Baer , 2005 ) . While there are similarities between the creative processes of artists and designers , there are domain - dominant aspects of the creative process of artists . “Design thinking” is a staged process model of creativity that has been developed and exported to management and higher education as a human - centred problem - solving methodology . In many respects , it simply packages problem - solving methodologies that are common across domains into a framework that is easy to understand and apply . The premise of this speculative paper is that these domain - dominant mindsets and cognitive skills of artists can be labelled “art thinking” , which can be successfully transferred and utilized by designers to develop and self - generate more creative and innovative solutions . “Art thinking” overlaps with design thinking in several areas , but has a domain - dominant emphasis in the following cognitive strategies and mindsets : Cognitive Strategies Metacognition Use of resource banks Prolonged research Problem - creation Use of constraints and generators Conversation with the work Delaying closure Reflection and evaluation of thematic coherence Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 6 Mindsets Emotional engagement Intuition Tolerance of ambiguity . Some designers deliberately cultivate some of these practices , but it is not a point of emphasis in the design process / methodology research . If educators embed these mind - sets and practices into design pedagogy , it may be possible to develop larger and more expansive frameworks for students to understand creative problem - solving . To provide context for this inquiry , current discourses in design thinking will be com - pared to the research on actual creative practices of designers . Then , there will be a brief review of studies of creativity that focus on the practices and process of creativity , specifi - cally on the creativity of artists . Following this review , a set of domain - dominant features of the creative processes of artists ( “art thinking” ) will be proposed that could be infused into the design process and pedagogy to stimulate creativity and self - generative innovation . DESIGN THINKING : CREATIVE PROCESSES AND MINDSETS OF DESIGNERS While design thinking has been popularized in recent decades across professional publi - cations , its definition lacks a consensus . In a comprehensive review of the literature to date on design thinking ( Johansson - Sköldberg et al . , 2013 ) , the researchers posited that design thinking means different things in different contexts , often divided by theory ( academia ) and practice ( management ) . Design thinking that is connected to a designer’s process has been discussed in academic circles for decades , while design thinking as applied to management has only become a discussion topic in the past fifteen years ( Hassi & Laakso , 2011 ) . From this research , design thinking embodies two categories of distinction : “designerly way of thinking” and “design thinking” ( Johansson - Sköldberg et al . , 2013 , p . 122 ) . “Designerly thinking” is the more academic discussion of the profes - sional designer’s practice and non - verbal processes , while “design thinking” takes place in mainstream management literature outside a purely design context . The use of the word “thinking” in design thinking is , of course , not fully representa - tive of all of the action and doing inherent in the process . Lindberg et al . ( 2010 ) highlight the difference between examining design thinking processes versus design processes . Design thinking is not a process , but shapes processes . For the purposes of this paper , focusing on the “designerly way of thinking” and examining the research about how de - signers actually practice design provides a fuller picture of how “art thinking” might en - hance creativity within those practices and processes . In the research on “designerly thinking” , scholars have focused on the working processes ( methodologies and activi - Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 7 ties ) , cognitive strategies ( thinking styles ) , and mindsets ( cognitive attributes or disposi - tions ) of designers . Design processes and practices include the following activities ( Hassi & Laakso , 2011 ; Cross , 1990 ; Kimbell , 2011 ; Lindberg et al . , 2010 ; Bauer & Eagan , 2008 ) : iterating that moves from generating insights about users , generating ideas , proto - typing , testing and implementing ideas forming multidisciplinary teams asking “what if ? ” to imagine future scenarios visualizing thinking by doing using a human - centred approach using convergent and divergent modes of thinking collaborating multidisciplinary teams resolving ill - defined problems exploring the problem space and the solution space understanding through immersion and subsequent redefinition . Design cognitive strategies ( or thinking styles ) include the following ( Hassi & Laakso , 2011 ; Bauer & Eagan , 2008 ; Lindberg et al . 2010 ; Tovey 2015 ) : adopting solution - focused cognitive strategies abductive reasoning / thinking oscillating between divergent and convergent thinking reframing problems in a reflective manner utilizing a holistic view of the problem practicing integrative thinking imagining possible solutions . Design mindsets include the following cognitive attributes or dispositions ( Hassi & Laakso , 2011 ) : experimental tolerant of ambiguity optimistic future - oriented . By examining the creative problem - solving methodologies across domains and spe - cifically for fine artists , we can begin to think about how “art thinking” - cognitive strategies and mindsets of artists - can weave in and out of some of these components to enhance creatively throughout the generative process . Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 8 CREATIVE PROBLEM - SOLVING : DOMAIN COMMONALITIES , SPECIFICITY AND DOMINANCE What do we mean when something is labelled as creative ? Definitions vary somewhat , but there is some consensus around Mayer’s ( 1999 ) definition that creative describes something that is both original and useful . Kozbelt et al . ( 2010 ) provide a thorough sum - mary of theories of creativity , all of which support the idea that creativity can be under - stood simply as a problem - solving process featuring different modes . Lubart ( 2000 ) takes a broad view of creativity in a thorough summary of staged and componential models of the creative process . The majority of this research focuses on elucidating working methodolo - gies of the creative process which have many similarities to the design process . The majority of these methodologies have been developed through research that takes a general view of creativity across domains . There are few studies that focus on the creative process of the artist , and the extent to which that process is domain - specific con - tinues to be debated ( Kaufman & Baer , 2005 ) . In an analysis of the overview of creativity across domains , Kaufman and Baer ( 2005 ) noted that all of the authors in their edited vol - ume found differences in creative processes , personality attributes and skills , including differences within individual domains themselves ( Kaufman & Baer , 2005 ) . Kaufman and Baer ( 2005 ) concluded that a skill or trait may not necessarily be unique to that domain , but it has a special emphasis within it . This is the presumption of this paper as well - that creativity can be conceptualized in a loose model in which some skills or traits are im - portant across domains , some are shared by a limited set of similar domains , and some are quite domain - dominant or domain - specific . ART THINKING : CREATIVE PROCESSES AND MINDSETS OF ARTISTS Artists are not necessarily more creative than non - artists nor do they generate more crea - tive solutions . However , the artistic process allows for a different kind of understanding of creativity , one that emphasizes self - generation , metacognition , and thematic coherence . These attributes could help designers in a contemporary environment in which creativity is seen as essential in developing novel solutions to complex and rapidly evolving envi - ronments , conditions and problems . There are limited , yet influential , studies on the creative process specifically in art - ists ( Getzels & Cszikszentmihaly , 1976 ; Kay , 1991 ; Dudek & Cote , 1994 ; Sapp , 1995 ; Mace , 1997 ; Mace & Ward , 2002 ; Botella et al . , 2013 ; Glăveanu et al . , 2013 ) . In these studies , it is interesting to note that the researchers’ methodology models differ from the previously mentioned models of creativity across domains . The artist models feature few - er discrete stages and allow for much more movement between stages . Prominent varia - Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 9 tions on the more general creative problem - solving models in general include Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi ( 1976 ) stages of experiencing conflict , formulating problem , expressing problem visually , resolving conflict through symbolic means , achieving cogni - tive and emotional balance ; Sapp’s ( 1995 ) stages of associative exploration , problem pa - rameter exploration , multiple focus exploration , primary focus exploration , and refine - ment ; Mace and Ward’s ( 2002 ) stages of artwork conception , idea development , making the artwork , and finishing the artwork and resolution ; Botella et al . ’s ( 2013 ) stages of idea / vision , documentation / reflection , first sketches , testing forms and ideas , provisional objects ( drafts ) , and series . Additional domain - dominant traits of artists that emerged in these studies will be highlighted in subsequent sections of this paper . FROM DESIGN THINKING TO ART THINKING : DESIGNERS OF THE FUTURE Designers are increasingly asked to research and understand their work more deeply and become more inventive , self - generating solutions to design challenges . “Designers are assuming leadership roles in which they are called upon to imagine systems , services , ecologies , experiences , and networks… As researchers and entrepreneurs , they must be prepared to generate self - defined areas of investigation and opportunity” ( Burdick , 2007 , p . 2 ) . In response to these changing conditions , several streams of design scholarship have called for more connection between design practice and pedagogy , including the study of the creative processes of working designers ( Dorst & Cross , 2001 ; Moultrie & Young , 2009 ) , the study of design management pedagogy ( Jacobs , 2017 ) , and the need for designers to be more creative and responsive to complex environments ( AIGA , 2017 ; Burdick , 2007 ) . Designers need to function in a cross - disciplinary fashion in teams with multiple and varied expertise ( Davis , 2015 ) . They also need to be collaborative and able to navigate within complex systems . In many college curricula , students are not be - ing taught to collaborate together in deep engagement with complex systems and user research ( Davis , 2015 ) . In addition , there is increasing pedagogical emphasis on creativi - ty and its elevation to a level equal to or beyond critical thinking and its importance in learning outcomes ( Krathwohl , 2002 ) . The convergence of all of these trends calls for more explicit understanding and training of the creative process for designers . Design’s close connection to art suggests a natural link and transferability of cognitive strategies and mindsets between artists and designers . There are clear overlaps in the creative processes of both designers and artists . Some artists’ practices , thinking styles , and dispositions may not be domain - specific ( in fact , many of these are shared with design ) , they could be considered domain - dominant . This paper proposes that “art thinking” does not necessarily diverge from de - Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 10 sign thinking , but the process has a strong emphasis within a few key cognitive strategies and mindsets . If we take the same approach as efforts to systematize design thinking processes , we can strategize about ways to bring the creative processes of artists , or “art thinking” , into design . DOMAIN - DOMINANT COGNITIVE STRATEGIES OF ARTISTS AND THEIR TRANS - FERABILITY TO DESIGN PROCESSES There are some domain - dominant cognitive strategies of artists that designers can study and employ to develop creative ideas and innovative solutions . These include emphases on the use of metacognition , resource banks , prolonged research , problem - creation , con - straints and generators , conversation with the work , closure delay , and reflection and the - matic coherence . Metacognition Embedded within an artist’s palette of cognitive strategies is the ability to view one’s own work in a metacognitive fashion . Metacognition refers to the monitoring of one’s own cog - nitive processes and influences while focusing on a specific task ( Kitchner , 1983 ) . Meta - cognition plays a key role in problem - solving and is especially important for solving open - ended , creative problems ( Jausovec , 1994 ) . Poor problem - solvers are less efficient at monitoring their own creative processes . While metacognition is a skill that designers need , it is especially acute for artists , as their problems are self - generated and successful solutions are primarily assessed against the artist’s conception of the problem . Through metacognitive thinking , the artist has knowledge and control over his or her cognitive pro - cesses . He or she must constantly be aware of what is known and unknown while devel - oping a strategy for further inquiry . Rather than continually focusing on a solution as a de - signer might , the artist may reflect on the problem for a more prolonged period of time . All studies of the creative process of artists highlighted the artist’s ability to con - sciously move between different modes of thinking within a given situation , which reflects a metacognitive mindset . The artist’s mind can quickly switch between modalities of thought such as visual , verbal and aural ( John - Steiner , 1985 ) . This transition between modalities sparks creativity ( Gruber & Wallace , 1999 ) . Artists use different types of men - tal abilities to be creative and generate ideas , and then to refine and execute those ideas ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 ) . Designers also shift often and rapidly between different modes of activity and think - ing during creative periods ( Cross , 2001 ) . “Six out of a total of eight times a novel design decision was made , we found the subject alternating between these three activity modes ( examining - drawing - thinking ) in rapid succession” ( p . 13 ) . However , metacognitive skills Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 11 may not be well developed in designers and design educators , and designers may not be taught to be aware of these shifts in problem - solving modes ( Hargrove , 2011 ) . As Oxman ( 1999 ) writes about design education in the studio , “the educational focus still remains on the representation of the design object , rather than on an explicit articulation of knowledge” ( p . 107 ) . As metacognition is a key component of the creative process across all domains , design educators need to explicitly teach this cognitive strategy . Hargrove ( 2011 ) mapped out some strategies to teach metacognition in his descrip - tion of a semester - long process in which students continually reflect on their selection and employment of cognitive strategies to solve design problems . This approach promoted more independent , self - regulated thinking . Hargrove ( 2011 ) also utilized assignments such as journal keeping and a final reflection that connects cognitive strategies to the final de - sign process and outcome . Design educators should structure projects to allow for multiple modes of thinking that are by various turns lateral , strategic , holistic , creative , reflective , re - active , and analytical . Design students should then be asked to explicitly reflect on these . Metacognitive awareness allows for switching between modes , a necessary cogni - tive strategy for designers to develop solutions to complex problems . While metacognition is only briefly mentioned here , it is a central component carried throughout the suggested list of cognitive strategies and mindsets in this paper . Resource banks Several of the creative problem - solving methodologies ( Osborn , 1953 ; Amabile , 1988 ; Puccio & Cabra , 2009 ) and artistic problem - solving methodologies ( Getzels & Csikszent - mihalyi , 1974 ; Sapp , 1995 ) include an initial stage of pre - preparation , something that is not included in design thinking models . Within this stage , we can find the domain - dominant trait of artists of growing and cultivating “resource banks” which provide a well for creativity . During this pre - preparation stage , the artist is simply consuming infor - mation , absorbing input , categorizing it , and filing it for use as possible source material . Artists describe themselves as “sponges” in a receptive stage , taking in the stimuli of the world to be stored in a personal vocabulary ( Glăveanu et al . , 2013 ) . Ideas emerge from a resource bank filled with previous work and research that the artist has built up over his or her career ( Mace & Ward , 2002 ) . During the idea stage , the artist experiences a crea - tive spark after a period of wandering and waiting , during which a stimulus ( such as an image , sight , sound ) triggers something that has been latent in the artist for a long time ( Botella et al . , 2013 ) . The artist has a deep understanding of their discipline so that when inspiration or idea strikes , it is recognized and acted upon . This state of awareness func - tions like a kind of priming device , allowing an artist to be ready to respond when seeking to find , generate , and / or solve a creative problem . Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 12 Artists are especially aware of assembling source material as an ongoing process , not just as a means to respond to a creative brief , as a designer might . Experienced design - ers also exhibit high sensitivity to their internal and external environments ( Cross , 2011 ) . Aspiring and beginning designers should be cognizant of this strategy to develop an awareness of their resource banks and consciously build them even when not working on a specific project or client need . This may help to ameliorate the issue of designers quickly scanning through award annuals for inspiration , or copying previous work ( Dorland , 2009 ) . Design educators should emphasize this activity with students as an in - tegral part of an ongoing practice , with or without a client commission . Independent of a specific assignment or creative brief , students could record and reflect on the infor - mation streaming in from their internal and external environments . This could be achieved through some sort of journaling or recording that identifies sensory information and con - tent from a range of sources including personal thoughts , sketches , news , music , film , independent research , and so on . The development of this intention and practice should be clearly elucidated for students . Prolonged research Connected to the practice of using a resource bank is the ongoing , deep immersion in the domain and artmaking practice that provides artists with a source of creativity . Creativity researchers have emphasized the importance of understanding the domain in which one is operating ( Ericsson et al . , 1993 ; Gardner , 1993 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 ) . The artist comes to know his / her own domain and becomes expert in it , both in its traditions and areas for possible problems or new explorations . Artists are then willing to cast out in new directions while less creative types are content to adhere to what is already known ( Gardner , 1993 ) . Diving deeply into a new domain is essential for meaningful creative growth and innovation . Artists are continually scaffolding onto previous art forms and par - adigms of artmaking ( Turner , 2006 ) . In addition , many artists undertake extensive re - search , either as part of an ongoing practice or dedicated to a specific project . Design thinking incorporates this domain immersion as well . From the design think - ing management perspective , Brown ( 2009 ) calls this the inspiration phase , while from the “designerly ways of thinking” academic perspective , Dorst ( 2004 ) labels it the formula - tion phase . Research is a standard of learning for thinking critically within a discipline and immersion and planning are key components of the design process . However , unlike de - signers , artists are more likely than designers to linger in this phase , thinking about the domain and the problem before jumping to the solution ( Cross , 2010 ; Dorst , 2004 ) . In his study of how designers think and practice , Lawson ( 1994 ) writes : Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 13 The problem for the designer is when the attempt should be made to recon - cile all the ideas , or lines of thought , which are developing . If this is attempted too early , ideas which are still poorly understood may get lost , while if this is left too late they may become fossilized and too rigid ( p . 140 ) . Designers often jump quickly into developing a solution without examining the prob - lem thoroughly . In fact , it may be that designers need to take the time to reframe the problem or proposal ( Cross , 2001 ) . Asking designers to consciously linger in the re - search phase can lead to increased openness to multiple solution paths . Applying this aspect of art thinking to the design process can call for less goal - oriented work and pro - vide more room to explore paths that might not lead to fruition . It can also allow for differ - ent methods of recording research , such as visual notetaking , scrapbooking or blogging . Design educators can build this extra time into their assignments in order to emphasize the importance of refraining from jumping to the solution too quickly without spending ad - equate time focusing on problem generation and clarification . Problem - creating A key difference in processes between designers , artists , and other domains ( such as scientists ) is in the problem - finding aspect of creativity ( Kozbelt et al . , 2010 ) . Many crea - tors and researchers have noted that finding the right problem ( or asking the right ques - tion ) is far more important than solving the problem ( Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi , 1976 ) . During the preparation phase of the creative problem - solving process , understanding the domain - dominant feature of problem - creating in art might help designers employ other methodologies to develop more creative solutions . Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi’s ( 1976 ) in - depth longitudinal study of college students that examines personality traits , process , creative production and career success is one of the most - cited accounts of the creative process of artists . As in other general creative process studies , the researchers’ key dis - covery is that finding a problem is more indicative of creative behaviour than solving a problem . Researchers found that time artists spent working on the drawings did not in - crease their quality . Rather , the time spent formulating the problem before beginning did increase the quality of the drawings . While designers may search for new problems , the search usually occurs within the context of the design brief . Artists , on the other hand , are unique in their driving force of self - generating their ‘problems’ ( Cross , 2001 ) . Lawson ( 1994 ) offers the following distinc - tion between art and design : “Design is directed towards solving a real - world problem while art is largely self - motivated and centers on the expression of inner thoughts” ( p . 138 ) . Therefore , design will always inevitably be guided by rational thought and evalu - ation that is relevant to the real - world . Lawson continues : Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 14 Designers must consciously direct their thought processes towards a particular specified end , although they may deliberately use undirected thought at times . Art - ists , however , are quite at liberty to follow the natural direction of their minds or to control and change the direction of their thinking as they see fit ( p . 141 ) . Studies also demonstrate that designers generate more varied solutions when the problem ( rather than the solution ) is precisely defined ( Cross , 2001 ) . So while a design - er’s tendencies are to immediately begin iterating and developing solutions , they may be better able to generate solutions by examining the problem further before moving into the solution phase of the process . “Art thinking” is distinctive in the artists’ self - generation of the problem . Artists do not wait for a problem to be handed to them or look for a problem in what already exists ; ra - ther , they create it from within , through their primed and prepared mind . Unlike designers , artists are more comfortable creating and reframing the original problem and less focused on a solution ( Cross , 2001 ) . This can be valuable when inventive thought is needed . Art - ists are adept at creating challenges for themselves , asking new questions of their work and applying new constraints to it . In lieu of having the problem defined externally ( as in design ) , the artist generates his / her own problem based on emotion and input , con - necting to larger themes throughout his / her work . Adopting a stance of being open to a new approach to viewing and constructing a problem is a transferrable skill to a variety of disciplines , including design , which can lead to increased creativity and innovation . Design students are often uncomfortable in the absence of being given a specific assignment or brief . Therefore , educators need to include more assignments that allow for self - generated creativity . Rather than provide the design problem for students in the brief or assignment , instructors could ask students to first define the problem , which could be based on a given set of circumstances , envi - ronmental conditions , business needs , social problems , and so on . Rather than immedi - ately focus on solving a problem as quickly as possible ( which can often lead to tradition - al , non - innovative solutions ) , “art thinking” can encourage people to take the time to think more deeply about the problem itself . Generators and constraints Following the pre - preparation and preparation stages of the creative process , artists begin to synthesize their research and domain knowledge in the incubation stage . As - which characterize the work of visually talented individuals as they link their impres - sions into a landscape” ( John - Steiner , 1985 , p . 24 ) . Moments of inspiration are often de - scribed in magical , mysterious terms ; however , they are actually the product of creating the space to allow the mind to make connections between various inputs . Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 15 In a valuable study of limited scope , McDonnell ( 2011 ) compared the creative process of two fine artists to the creative process in design . She focused on the differences in strate - gies used by designers and fine artists to impose constraints on a project . McDonnell uti - lized Darke’s ( 1979 ) term “primary generators” as frameworks that artists use for their practice in which they set their own challenges . The thematic , aesthetic and material con - straints that artists set for themselves are employed in order to maintain thematic coher - ence across a body of work ( McDonnell , 2011 ) . Gruber and Wallace ( 1999 ) noted that most creative thinkers work on themes or threads of thought constantly throughout a life - time , maintaining continuity across multiple projects at once . Inevitably , one project leads to another and the projects inform one another , leading to the development of new points of view . Kay ( 1991 ) described this use of generators or frameworks as a “personal aes - thetic bias” , a support structure or framework that forms an organizing principle for the creative thought process of the artist ( p . 248 ) . This guides the search for the problem , providing selection criteria through which the artist explores and forms the basis of lan - guage for the artist’s body of work . The art making process is overarching and includes an ongoing practice rather than single finite pieces of artwork . Constraints can be seen as the flip side of generators . Constraints impose further limitations on the work in order to proceed with a guiding framework . Much of the litera - ture on creativity addresses the idea of constraints - how the creator perceives them , when they are introduced into the process , and how they may or may not impact creativi - ty . A difference between art and design is that in design - related fields , problem parame - ters are often already decided on , and the progression through the creative stages will be defined by these parameters ( Sapp , 1995 ) . If the parameters are too restrictive in the ear - ly stages of the process , the potential for creativity may be limited ( Sapp ) . The way in which the artist proceeds through the problem - solving stages depends heavily on the re - strictiveness of the parameters . As in the self - generated problem definition of the prepa - ration stage , the constraint for an artist is most often internally ( rather than externally ) de - termined . This is in contrast to the designer for whom constraints are usually set by client demands , budget , project needs , and so on . Similar to the creative process in science , the creative process in design is more likely to have a consistent process because the constraints are stronger , whereas art will not ( Simonton , 2004 ) . Artists’ processes are therefore more likely to vary . By transferring this domain - dominant practice of artists to their own practice , design - ers could be more metacognitively aware of the frameworks and primary generators that they are using . Building on resource banks and problem - finding , if students deliberately reflect on the development of their ideas , they could also clearly identify a given set of Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 16 generators and constraints . Educators can also consciously introduce constraints to stim - ulate more generative creativity . In addition , students could identify and utilize their own generators and set their own constraints . Conversation with the work Moving from the incubation stage of the creative process into the ideation stage of the process ( it should be noted that these stages occur within a methodology in which stages are not always linear ) , conceptual development coalesces for the artist as he or she syn - thesizes diverse source material to make connections and develop concepts . In the stud - ies of the creative process of artists , the researchers’ examinations of this stage of idea development revealed the ways in which artists would have “conversations” with their pieces , developing a dialogue with the pieces , reacting to them , and making incremental changes along the way . ( This can be framed as another metacognitive approach . ) Prob - lem - finding is not limited only to the preparatory phase ; rather , it is ongoing for the artist , often in conversation with the artwork ( Dudek & Cote , 1994 ) . Mace ( 1997 ) described the decision - making process as a responsive interaction between artist and work in which the artist responds to the work and adjusts accordingly . As the artist makes decisions , he or she converses in a way with the work as they proceed , a unique experience that devel - ops situationally ( Mace , 1997 ) . If artists let the solution develop while responding to the work throughout , rather than just applying a known solution , more creativity results . This is a phenomenological appraisal of artistic creativity in which the artist “feels” their way towards the creation of the work . Botella et al . ( 2013 ) also described artists’ accounts that their work “posed ques - tions” to them ( p . 167 ) . Artists enjoyed engaging in this dialogue with the work , “confronting” the art object ( ibid . ) . Glăveanu et al . ( 2013 ) described this as a “dynamic be - tween doing and undergoing” in which artists refer to the back - and - forth nature of devel - oping a work and series ( p . 6 ) . It is a constant negotiation between the artist and the de - veloping concept of the work ( Mace & Ward , 2002 ) . The development and evolution of the work is altered via this conversation and response to the medium . It also demon - strates how artists are comfortable with openness , working on open - ended problems , al - lowing the problem they have created to evolve . While design students may already be asked to reflect on their final products , this simple rhetorical and phenomenological device of framing the iterative process as a con - versation with the work could be a valuable pedagogical tool . This encourages a metacog - nitive understanding of the interplay between the practices of doing and thinking by asking students to answer “What did you try ? How did it work ? ” This reconnects to Hargrove’s ( 2011 ) research on utilizing ongoing reflective practices in his design studio courses . Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 17 Delaying closure Creativity studies across domains show that some of the most creative ideas may come later in the process , after the ideation stage . In studies of artists , professional artists were found to have “delayed closure” , continuing to experiment with solutions longer than non - artists ( Walker , 2004 , p . 10 ) . By refusing to settle for an initial early solution , creativity can emerge in the form of new combinations and associations . Artists were shown to do this more than non - artists , and they found the experimentation phase of their projects to be quite enjoyable ( Mace , 1997 ) . In another study of art students , those who were willing to delay closure during the art making process moved beyond obvious possibilities and gen - erated more creative artworks ( Walker , 2004 ) . This strategy of delaying closure works in tandem with the rush to problem - solution mentioned earlier . If design students feel that they have satisfied the assignment or the pa - rameters of the brief , they may stop development too early in the process , possibly thwart - ing the development of a more creative solution . Design educators can emphasize the im - portance of deadlines , but at the same time allow for solutions to come later in the process . Educators should explicitly communicate this opportunity for students to rework an idea af - ter a stage has been passed if a more creative solution has been identified and developed . Reflection and thematic coherence During the final evaluation phase of the creative process , metacognition is enacted again via reflection . At this point , artists understand the need to step back from a project , re - group , and reassess from an objective point of view ( John - Steiner , 1985 ) . Artists can be thought two employ two types of metacognition , both internal and external : “The first type involves verifying or measuring the product against an internal standard - the original pur - pose of the creative enterprise and the mental image formed during illumination . The sec - ond type of metacognition involves verifying the product against an anticipated external standard - a would - be audience” ( Armbruster , 1989 , p . 180 ) . Artists become especially attuned to responding to both internal and external standards , and this awareness could be useful in other disciplines ( Armbruster , 1989 ) . Artists and designers are continually reflecting on what they are producing and us - ing those assessments to move forward with their work . This is often built into their daily working process and speaks to the dialogue between process and product ( John - Steiner , 1985 ) . Beyond the completion of a finite project , an artist must continually reflect on their body of work within the arc of a career . Artists are expert in self - reflection on what they have done , seeing it from a metacognitive perspective ( Turner , 2006 ) . The artist has an internal dialogue in which s / he is continually pushing his or her thinking , taking risks to move past the safe and reliable solutions to continually raise new questions ( Walker , Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 18 2004 ) . In Botella et al . ’s ( 2013 ) methodology of the artistic creative process , the final stage process is called “series” during which artists iterated more variations and engaged their work in the world . Just as an artist thinks about problem - solving with the work to ex - ecute the initial idea or concept , he or she also sees their work as part of a larger body of thematic coherence , as part of his or her “streams” of work overall . The iterative nature of design thinking highlights that designers are also continually framing and reframing their work . While experienced designers do this ( Cross , 2011 ) , are design educators teaching students to do this ? Is it built into the curriculum beyond a sim - ple portfolio class ? As an artist develops a body of work and assesses it , so too should a student be given the opportunity and tools to assess their own work on the path towards improving it . This metacognitive , reflective arc could be explicitly identified , scaffolded into lower - level courses , and embedded into upper - level capstone or portfolio courses in de - sign curricula . DOMAIN - DOMINANT MINDSETS OF ARTISTS AND THEIR TRANSFERABILITY TO DESIGN PROCESSES In addition to analysing these cognitive strategies of the creative process of artists for po - tential transferability to design processes , there are some domain - dominant , overarching mindsets or artists that designers can look to cultivate in order to generate more creative solutions . These points of emphasis include emotional engagement , intuition , and em - bracing ambiguity . Emotional engagement In one of the first research projects to study the creative process of artists , Patrick ( 1937 ) found artists to have more “emotional feeling” than non - artists during the process ( p . 54 ) . Dudek and Cote’s ( 1994 ) analysis also highlighted artists’ intense emotional involvement during the artmaking process . The authors relate this to the artists’ “emotional preoccupa - tion with self” , to create or communicate the experience of emotion . Artists are highly aware of these feelings and use them as source material for their work . They are also ex - cited and engaged about getting an idea , and this emotional connection , which is mostly positive , continues throughout the project ( Botella et al . , 2013 ) . Studies indicate that artists are more emotional than scientists , and designers fall somewhere in between ( Feist , 1999 ) . Wakefield ( 1994 ) uses the term “empathy with one - self” as a way to describe the artist’s exploration of emotional states and conflicts as source material or a means of problem - finding ( or concept / theme - finding ) and solving . This use of the word empathy is notable in relation to the empathy stage of the design thinking process in which the focus is on empathy for the user ( through the use of ethno - graphic studies , research , etc . ) . For the artist , the focus is towards the self . Glăveanu et Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 19 al . ( 2013 ) described the ongoing emotions of the process : “These range from pleasure and satisfaction to melancholia and even depression but , most of the time , the reported states are positive and have to do with the ‘jubilation of being alive’” ( p . 5 - 6 ) . This is clear - ly a key distinction for artists - to be in tune and connected with their emotions . Self - awareness and emotional connection , both to self and others , can be a key ful - crum from which designers and design students can think about operating . Research in social psychology indicates that self - empathy and self - awareness lead to more empa - thy for others ( Neff , 2003 ) . Through more conscious emotional engagement with oneself , one’s intuition , and one’s work , a designer might become truly empathic and in touch with themselves on a path to becoming more human - centred , self - aware , and generative of a broader range of creative solutions . Design educators can find a way to include more exercises to develop reflection and self - awareness . Possible strategies to increase empa - thy include teaching mindfulness , reflective writing during multiple stages of the design process , debriefing and class discussion , and role playing . Intuition Connected to the personal and emotional engagement of artists , intuition is a key point of emphasis in art thinking . Most successful artists are in touch with their intuition ( Wakefield , 1994 ) . For artists , ideas don’t always come from a brief or an assignment , but they spring internally from life experiences and knowledge of their medium . While one may think of a magical ‘aha ! ’ moment that occurs in the creative process , it is more often the case that artists are making connections and associations between embedded knowledge . For designers , Cross ( 2001 ) notes that the idea of a creative leap is better described as a key moment that bridges the problem and solution . This bridge can also be thought of as a two - stage process with an initial intuitive , emotive phase as well as a more analytical , iterative second phase ( John - Steiner , 1985 ) . Experienced designers have also been shown to deeply rely on their intuition , but they are unaware or at least unable to express how that intuitive sensibility developed for them . “They believe that this ‘intuitive’ way of thinking may be something they inherently possess , or it may be something that they developed through their education” ( Cross , 2011 , p . 9 ) . Cross speculates that what the designer describes as intuition is actually a pool of knowledge derived from extensive experience . As evidenced by the designers’ inability to identify the source of intuition , the cultiva - tion and translation of experience into intuition has not been transferred to design peda - gogy . Rather , designers are expected to accumulate this knowledge through experience , trial and error . Developing a metacognitive awareness of intuitive decision - making and Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 20 identifying key moments of intuitive bridging from problem to solution might allow design - ers to tap more consciously into emotion and intuition , generating more questions and alternative problems . In design education , we should demonstrably allow for these emo - tional and intuitive stages and respect that not everything that arises from these process - es will lead to fruition . Techniques and strategies can be employed to foster intuitive and associative thinking . Projects should be facilitated in a way that allows for increased room for exploration and reflection prior to evaluation . Again , design educators should build in space for metacognitive reflection to understand and cultivate these mindsets . Embracing ambiguity Descriptions of the creative processes of artists and designers often include a tolerance for ambiguity which has been described as the most mature stage of ego development ( Loevinger , 1987 ) . Both designers and artists are comfortable with ambiguity , which may be evident in the sketching process ( Cross , 2001 ) . However , the artist seems to go beyond mere tolerance to an embrace of ambiguity . This is something that can be useful for educa - tors as they scaffold students through critical thinking and developmental stages of learning . As an integral part of their process , artists are accustomed to trying an idea and fail - ing . From the outset , one doesn’t know how the problem created can be solved , so trial and error is vital . Successful artists produce a prolific amount of good work as well as bad work ( Gardner , 1993 ) . While designers are comfortable with iteration and failure within the context of the larger project or design brief , artists operate in an uncertain and limited marketplace , often attempting problems and solutions for which there is no audience or acceptance . Without a client to serve or a finite ‘problem’ to solve , artists may be more tolerant of ambiguous solutions and non - productive explorations . Experienced designers understand that ambiguity and uncertainty are essential to the exploratory nature of the design process ( Bucciarelli , 1994 ) . However , design stu - dents are often uncomfortable without specific guidance , permissions , rigid frameworks with which to proceed . They become reluctant to move forward and test an idea , restrict - ing their capacity for learning . In a business setting , less experienced designers may gen - erate fewer innovations and creative solutions because their tolerance for ambiguity is too low , making them risk - averse to an extent that it hinders their growth . On the contrary , artists are more tolerant of ambiguity which allows them step back and make connections between and assessments of ideas ( Lewis , 2014 ) . We should explicitly model this em - brace of ambiguity for our design students . This could be achieved by relaxing rubrics , allowing for multiple problem solutions , and rewarding novel solutions . Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 21 CONCLUSION There is a problem - solving process that is common to all domains and all human cogni - tion . However , a range of factors influence how those problems get solved , how they get solved creatively , and how innovation is generated . A comparison of the creative process of designers and artists illustrates key areas of overlap and distinction . Both use key cog - nitive strategies and mindsets that fall within loose methodological stages of pre - preparation , preparation , incubation , ideation , elaboration and evaluation . In the same way that design thinking has been applied in the classroom and work - place , we can expand our methodologies to include “art thinking” , specifically through the education of designers . There are some key domain - dominant points of emphasis in both cognitive strategies and mindsets specific to artists that may be especially transferrable to design students . Artists are expert at the mindsets of emotional engagement , intuition , and an embrace of ambiguity . They also employ such cognitive strategies as the use of metacognition , resource banks , generators and constraints , prolonged research , problem - creation , conversation with the work , closure delay and reflection and thematic coher - ence . Utilizing some of these approaches within design pedagogy may address the previ - ously mentioned calls for designers to have more creativity and self - generativity . Future research might then strategize how to expand upon and apply these pro - cesses beyond art and design to other disciplines . In an educational environment , all of these elements and strategies can help students mature developmentally and engage with subject matter from a more critical , creative , and engaged perspective . The creative process could be pulled out into individual components and highlighted in the classroom , or more effectively , used as an arc for a project or an entire class . Projects can be con - structed to allow for more freedom to discover connections and iterate new ideas . Just as in the classroom , the ability to critique and metacognitively reflect upon ideas in the work - place would be invaluable to developing innovative new solutions . As businesses look to hire more employees who are creative , educators have a responsibility to infuse some of these techniques into all of the disciplines in which we teach . Finally , by systematizing the problem - solving approach of “art thinking” , we can possibly shift the focus from the crea - tive person / personality to the process itself . Therefore , creativity and innovation can ( and should ) be taught to many people , not cultivated exclusively in the gifted minority . Crea - tivity is a skill that can be developed , practiced , and improved upon over time . Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 22 REFERENCES AIGA . ( 2017 ) . AIGA Designer 2025 : Why design education should pay attention to trends . Retrieved from https : / / educators . aiga . org / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 08 / DESIGNER - 2025 - SUMMARY . pdf Amabile , T . M . ( 1988 ) . A Model of Creativity and Innovation in Organizations . Research in Organizational Behavior , 10 , 123 - 167 . Amabile , T . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psychology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview . Armbruster , B . ( 1989 ) . Metacognition in creativity . In J . Glover , R . Ronning , & C . R . Reyn - olds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 177 - 182 ) . New York , NY : Plenum . Baer , J . ( 1998 ) . The case for domain specificity of creativity . Creativity research journal , 11 ( 2 ) , 173 - 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1102 _ 7 Bauer , R . , & Eagen , W . ( 2008 ) . Design thinking : Epistemic plurality in management and organization . Aesthesis : International Journal of Art and Aesthetics in Management and Organizational Life , 2 ( 3 ) , 568 - 96 . Botella , M . , Glăveanu , V . , Zenasni , F . , Storme , M . , Myszkowski , N . , Wolff , M . , & Lubart , T . ( 2013 ) . How artists create : Creative process and multivariate factors . Learning and Individual Differences , 26 , 161 - 170 . Brown , R . ( 2009 ) . The design of business . Boston , MA : Harvard Business Press . Bucciarelli , L . ( 1994 ) . Designing engineers . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Burdick , A . ( 2007 ) . Graduate education : Preparing designers for jobs that don’t exist yet . ’ . Inspire . Retrieved from https : / / www . scribd . com / document / 77955494 / Grad - Ed - article - by - Anne - Burdick . Cross , N . , ( 1990 ) . The nature and nurture of design ability . Design Studies , 11 ( 3 ) , 127 - 140 . Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Design cognition : Results from protocol and other empirical studies of design activity . In C . Eastman , W . Newstatter , & M . McCracken ( Eds . ) , Design know - ing and learning : Cognition in design education ( pp . 79 - 103 ) . Oxford , UK : Elsevier . Cross , N . ( 2010 ) . Design thinking as a form of intelligence . In Proceedings of the 8th De - sign Thinking Research Symposium ( DTRS8 ) Interpreting Design Thinking , Sydney , 19 - 20 October 2010 ( pp . 99 - 105 ) . Cross , N . ( 2011 ) . Design thinking : Understanding how designers think and work . New York , NY : Berg . Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity . New York , NY : HarperCollins Publishers . Darke , J . ( 1979 ) . The primary generator and the design process . Design Studies , 1 ( 1 ) , 36 - 44 . Davis , M . ( 2005 ) . Raising the bar for higher education . In S . Heller ( Ed . ) , The Education of a Graphic Designer ( pp . 13 - 18 ) . New York , NY : Allworth Press . Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 23 Davis , M . ( 2015 ) . Interdisciplinarity and the education of the design generalist . In Heller , S . ( Ed . ) , The Education of a Graphic Designer ( pp . 20 - 29 ) . New York , NY : Allworth Press . Dorland , A . ( 2009 ) . Routinized labour in the graphic design studio . In G . Julier & L . Moor ( Eds . ) , Design and creativity : Policy , management and practice ( pp . 105 - 121 ) . New York , NY : Berg . Dorst , K . ( 2004 ) . Investigating the nature of design thinking . In Future ground : DRS Con - ference . Melbourne . Dorst , K . , & Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Creativity in the design process : Co - evolution of problem - solution . Design Studies , 22 ( 5 ) , 425 - 437 . Dudek , S . Z . , & Cote , R . ( 1994 ) . Problem finding revisited . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Problem finding , problem solving and creativity ( pp . 130 - 150 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Ericsson , K . A . , Krampe , R . T . , & Tesch - Römer , C . ( 1993 ) . The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance . Psychological Review , 100 ( 3 ) , 363 - 406 . Feist , G . J . ( 1999 ) . Personality in scientific and artistic creativity . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( pp . 273 - 296 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Creating Minds . New York , NY : Basic Books . Getzels , J . W . , & Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1976 ) . The creative vision : A longitudinal study of problem finding in art . New York , NY : Wiley . Glăveanu , V . , Lubart , T . , Bonnardel , N . , Botella , M . , de Biaisi , P . M . , Desainte - Catherine , M . , Georgsdottir , A . , Guillou , K . , Kurtag , G . , Mouchiroud , C . , Storme , M . , Wojtczuk , A . , & Zenasni , F . ( 2013 ) . Creativity as action : findings from five creative domains . Frontiers in Psychology , 4 , 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2013 . 00176 Gruber , H . E . , & Wallace , D . B . 1999 . The case study method and evolving systems ap - proach for understanding unique creative people at work . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity , ( pp . 93 - 115 ) . New York : Cambridge University Pres Hargrove , R . ( 2011 ) . Fostering creativity in the design studio : A framework towards effec - tive pedagogical practices . Art , Design & Communication in Higher Education , 10 ( 1 ) , 7 - 31 . doi : 10 . 1386 / adch . 10 . 1 . 7 _ 1 Hassi , L . & Laakso , M . ( 2011 , October ) . Conceptions in design thinking in the design and management discourses . In Proceedings of the 4 th World Conference on Design Re - search , IASDR 2011 , Delft , Netherlands . Hart Research Associates . ( 2013 ) . It takes more than a major : Employer priorities for col - lege learning and student success . Liberal Education . , 99 . Retrieved from https : / / www . aacu . org / sites / default / files / files / LEAP / 2013 _ EmployerSurvey . pdf Jacobs , J . ( 2017 ) . Managing the creative process within graphic design firms : A literature review . Dialectic , 1 ( 2 ) , 155 - 178 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3998 / dialectic . 14932326 . 0001 . 208 Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation 24 Jausovec , N . ( 1994 ) . Metacognition in creative problem solving . In Runco , M . ( Ed . ) , Prob - lem finding , problem solving and creativity ( pp . 77 - 95 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Johansson - Sköldberg , U . , Woodilla , J . , & Çetinkaya , M . ( 2013 ) . Design thinking : Past , present and possible futures . Creativity and Innovation Management , 22 ( 2 ) , 121 - 146 . John - Steiner , V . ( 1985 ) . Notebooks of the mind . Albuquerque , NM : University of New Mexico Press . Kaufman , J . C . , & Baer , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . Creativity across domains : Faces of the muse . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Kay , S . ( 1991 ) . The figural problem solving and problem finding of professional and semi - professional artists and nonartists . Creativity Research Journal , 4 ( 3 ) , 233 - 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419109534396 Kimbell , L . ( 2011 ) . Rethinking design thinking : Part I . Design and Culture , 3 ( 3 ) , 285 - 306 . Kitchner , K . S . ( 1983 ) . Cognition , metacognition , and epistemic cognition . Human Devel - opment , 26 ( 4 ) , 222 - 232 . Kozbelt , A . , Beghetto , R . A . , & Runco , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Theories of creativity . In J . C . Kauf - man & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of creativity ( pp . 20 - 47 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Krathwohl , D . ( 2002 ) . A revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy : An overview . Theory into Prac - tice , 41 ( 4 ) , 212 - 264 . Lawson , B . ( 1994 ) . Design in mind . Oxford : Butterworth - Heinemann . Lewis , S . ( 2014 ) . The Rise . New York , NY : Simon & Shuster . Lindberg , T . , Noweski , C . , & Meinel , C . ( 2010 ) . Evolving discourses on design thinking : How design cognition inspires meta - disciplinary creative collaboration . Technoetic Arts : A Journal of Speculative Research , 8 ( 1 ) . Loevinger , J . ( 1987 ) . Paradigms of personality . New York , NY : Freeman . Lubart , T . I . ( 2001 ) . Models of the creative process : Past , present and future . Creativity Research Journal , 13 ( 3 - 4 ) , 295 - 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15326934CRJ1334 _ 07 Mace , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Toward an understanding of creativity through a qualitative appraisal of contemporary art making . Creativity Research Journal , 10 ( 2 - 3 ) , 265 - 278 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 1997 . 9651225 Mace , M . A . , & Ward , T . ( 2002 ) . Modeling the creative process : A grounded theory analy - sis of creativity in the domain of art making . Creativity Research Journal , 14 ( 2 ) , 179 - 192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15326934CRJ1402 _ 5 Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 449 - 460 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Creativity . Theories – Research – Applications 5 ( 1 ) 2018 25 McDonnell , J . ( 2011 ) . Impositions of order : a comparison between design and fine art prac - tices . Design Studies , 32 ( 6 ) , 557 - 572 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2011 . 07 . 003 Moultrie , J . & Young , A . ( 2009 ) . Exploratory study of organizational creativity in creative organizations . Creativity and Innovation Management , 18 ( 4 ) , 299 - 314 . Neff , K . ( 2003 ) . Self - compassion : An alternative conceptualization of a healthy attitude toward oneself . Self and Identity , 2 ( 2 ) , 85 - 101 . Osborn , A . ( 1963 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative problem solving . New York , NY : Charles Scribner ' s Sons . Oxman . R . ( 1999 ) . Educating the designerly thinker . Design Studies , 20 ( 2 ) , 105 - 122 . Patrick , C . ( 1937 ) . Creative thought in artists . The Journal of Psychology , 4 ( 1 ) , 35 - 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00223980 . 1937 . 9917525 Puccio , G . J . , & Cabra , J . F . ( 2009 ) . Creative problem solving : Past , present and future . In T . Rickards , M . A . Runco , & S . Moger ( Eds . ) , The Routledge companion to creativi - ty ( pp . 327 - 337 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Sapp , D . D . ( 1995 ) . Creative problem ‐ solving in art : A model for idea inception and image development . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 29 ( 3 ) , 173 - 185 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 1995 . tb00747 . x Simonton , D . K . ( 2004 ) . Creativity as a constrained stochastic process . In R . J . Stern - berg , E . L . Grigorenko , & J . L . Singer ( Eds . ) , Creativity : From potential to realization ( pp . 83 - 101 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Teixeira , C . ( 2017 ) . Transforming design matters . She Ji : The Journal of Design , Eco - nomics , and Innovation , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 - 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sheji . 2017 . 09 . 001 Tovey , M . , Ed . ( 2015 ) . Design pedagogy : Developments in art and design education . New York : Routledge . Turner , M . ( Ed . ) ( 2006 ) . The artful mind : Cognitive science and the riddle of human crea - tivity . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Walker , S . ( 2004 ) . Understanding the artmaking process : Reflective practice . Art Educa - tion , 57 ( 3 ) , 6 - 12 . Wakefield , J . ( 1994 ) . Problem finding and empathy in art . In Runco , M . ( Ed . ) , Problem finding , problem solving and creativity ( pp . 99 - 115 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing . Jacobs , J . Intersections in Design Thinking and Art Thinking : Towards Interdisciplinary Innovation Corresponding author at : Jessica Jacobs , Business and Entrepreneurship Depart - ment , Columbia College Chicago618 S . Michigan Ave . # 700 , Chicago , IL 60605 . E - mail : jjacobs @ colum . edu ©Copyright by Faculty of Pedagogy and Psychology , University of Bialystok , 20 Swierkowa St . , 15 - 328 Bialystok , Poland tel . + 48857457283 e - mail : creativity @ uwb . edu . pl http : / / www . creativity . uwb . edu . pl