Challenging Group Dynamics in Participatory Design with Children : Lessons from Social Interdependence Theory Maarten Van Mechelen Bieke Zaman CUO | Social Spaces iMinds , KU Leuven | MAD - faculty Parkstraat 45 , 3000 Leuven , Belgium firstname . lastname @ soc . kuleuven . be Ann Laenen LUCA Faculty of the Arts KU Leuven association Koningsstraat 328 1030 Brussel , Belgium ann . laenen @ kuleuven . be Vero Vanden Abeele e - Medialab KU Leuven Vesaliusstraat 13 3000 Leuven , Belgium vero . vandenabeele @ kuleuven . be ABSTRACT In this paper we explore whether Social Interdependence Theory ( SIT ) is a useful theoretical framework to anticipate on challenging intragroup dynamics in co - design with children . According to SIT , there are five principles that mediate the effectiveness of cooperation : positive interdependence , individual accountability , promotive interaction patterns , social skills and group processing . First , we theoretically ground six challenging group dynamics encountered in a previous study . Next , we introduce SIT and describe how we applied each of the five mediating principles in a new case study in which 49 children aged 9 to 10 were involved in a series of co - design sessions . Afterwards , we present our findings and reflect upon the SIT inspired co - design procedure . Finally we touch upon topics for further research and we make a call for more research on SIT in the Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) community . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 2 User Interfaces , Theory and methods , User - centered design General Terms Design ; Performance Keywords CCI ; Co - design ; Group dynamics ; Social Interdependence Theory ; Children ; Participatory design 1 . INTRODUCTION Within the area of Child Computer Interaction ( CCI ) children have participated in the design of technology for over two decades , relying on a variety of established methods . Whereas some researchers have involved children primarily as technology ‘testers’ ( e . g . , [ 45 ] [ 38 ] ) , others have included children to ‘inform’ the design process at certain stages ( e . g . , [ 36 ] [ 10 ] ) or as ‘full participants’ to give children an equal saying throughout the design process ( e . g . , [ 7 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] ) . These methods typically involve children in dyads or groups , rather than individually . For instance , Hoysniemi and colleagues [ 16 ] relied on peer tutoring ( children teaching other children software use ) to evaluate software products . Moser and colleagues [ 27 ] involved preteens in game design via ideation workshops . Druin [ 9 ] formed intergenerational design teams in which children and adults worked together for a prolonged period of time . Read and colleagues [ 32 ] involved teenagers in a series of participatory design activities in schools . Involving children in dyads or groups can be argued from a theoretical commitment to the notion that meanings are socially and collectively produced [ 2 ] . Positioning children as design partners of their technology and of the practices that may be reified in that technology , is in line with Participatory Design ( PD ) [ 1 ] . PD is commonly defined as a collection of theories , practices and methods that facilitate end - users’ or other stakeholders’ participation in the design process of technological artifacts or services [ 28 ] . PD originated in the Scandinavian labor movement in the 70s and 80s and was motivated by a commitment to empower workers and fostering democracy in the workplace [ 40 ] . Since then , PD has achieved a status as a useful approach to developing better products . Involving stakeholders , including potential end - users , is believed to give better insights , which could not have surfaced otherwise . However , in this discourse , PD is often framed as simply a design method to optimize the outcome , i . e . a user - friendly solution . Recently , attempts have been made to rekindle values in what is called a more authentic approach towards PD [ 17 ] [ 15 ] . Iversen and colleagues [ 18 ] , for instance , have proposed a PD approach to go beyond developing a final design outcome and to establish an ongoing dialogue with children . Their approach serves a dual purpose : providing children with meaningful alternatives for existing technology and helping children realize that they do have a choice when it comes to the design of future technologies . Their approach requires a highly dialogical process that goes beyond merely collecting user needs and requirements . During design activities , children’s values are implicitly or explicitly expressed as something children care about and find important in life [ 33 ] . Children’s values do not progress stepwise , but rather emerge , develop and ground recursively and dialogically over the course of the design process [ 17 ] . To engage with values in PD , a core task for design researchers is to orchestrate this dialogue with and among children in order to ensure value conflicts are transcended and translated into meaningful design concepts . Special attention should thereby be given to group dynamics that may impact this dialogical process . Within the CCI community , authors have only recently started to acknowledge the importance of group dynamics in PD with children ( e . g . , [ 42 ] [ 8 ] ) . Facilitating group dynamics is believed to have a positive impact on children’s motivation as well as on the development of creative solutions [ 3 ] . Nevertheless the concept ‘group dynamics’ has generally been poorly defined within the field of CCI . When defined , the majority of CCI - research has focused on remediating asymmetrical power relationships between adults and children ( e . g . , [ 9 ] [ 14 ] [ 26 ] ) . However , dynamics among children themselves are neglected . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . IDC ' 15 , June 21 - 25 , 2015 , Medford , MA , USA © 2015 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3590 - 4 / 15 / 06… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771862 Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 219 In previous work [ 43 ] we addressed this gap in research and presented an in - depth exploration and categorization of challenging group dynamics when co - designing technology with children . We thereby referred to ‘co - design dynamics’ as “a system of behaviors and psychological processes within a group of children sharing a common and often imposed design goal” [ 43 ] . However , we did not yet propose any solutions . Therefore , in this paper , we continue our work by looking for ways to anticipate on these challenging intragroup or co - design dynamics . More particularly , we will show that by applying the key principles of Social Interdependence Theory ( SIT ) to participatory design sessions with children , we can remediate challenging group dynamics into positive forces that give rise to improved collaboration , increased ownership and more focused results . In what follows , we will first briefly summarize and theoretically ground the challenging dynamics encountered . Afterwards , we will describe SIT’s history and key principles , and we will illustrate how we applied these principles in a series of co - design sessions with 49 children aged 9 to 10 to better structure cooperation . Finally , we will discuss and reflect upon our findings and topics for further research . 2 . CO - DESIGN DYNAMICS The term group dynamics was first coined by social psychologist Kurt Lewin [ 25 ] and refers to a system of behaviors and psychological processes occurring within a social group ( i . e . intragroup dynamics ) , or between social groups ( i . e . intergroup dynamics ) . In this paper , we refer to ‘co - design dynamics’ as a system of intragroup dynamics occurring within a group of children sharing a common and often imposed design goal . Although not a complete list , we revealed six challenging co - design dynamics [ 43 ] , referred to as unequal power ( i . e . , some children come to the co - design tasks with higher status than others ) , free riding ( i . e . , reduced effort by some individuals when working in a co - design team and taking advantage of other team members ) , laughing out loud ( i . e . , an unwillingness to take the task at hand serious as a group ) , dysfunctional conflict ( i . e . , escalating disagreements leading to a polarization within the team ) , apart together ( i . e . , working individually and only combining results superficially ) , and groupthink ( i . e . , poor decision - making by rushing too quickly towards consensus , neglecting choice alternatives ) [ 43 ] . Most of these challenging dynamics are well known in group dynamics research ( e . g . , [ 35 ] [ 41 ] [ 11 ] ) but have rarely been addressed in the field of CCI and in literature on co - design . In what follows , we will briefly describe each of these dynamics and provide more theoretical grounding . 2 . 1 Unequal power Some co - design teams quite openly follow the opinions and ideas of a dominant or charismatic team member . Such a leading member enjoys a higher status in the co - design team and can exert tremendous influence on the group process , either positively or negatively . This type of power is referred to in literature as personal power and in co - design usually results from liking , respect and admiration of other team members and / or the belief that one holds credibility or expertise [ 11 ] . High - power children have a higher likelihood of swaying any final decision by direct or indirect pressure as well as through the time they are allotted for discussion . By misusing their personal power , they can capitalize on the situation and force their design ideas on the team . This makes it difficult for less verbal and / or shy children to voice their opinions , and limits their influence on the group , thus undermining team effectiveness [ 43 ] . 2 . 2 Free riding Not all children devote equal effort when working in a team . Some children may take advantage of the work of others , because they feel not as responsible to contribute . This dynamic is well known in social psychology as social loafing , that is , “the tendency for individuals to expend less effort when working collectively than when working individually . ” [ 23 ] . Free riding is a particular kind of social loafing where team members decide to let others contribute and choose not to fully participate [ 41 ] . In co - design , loafing practices such as free riding cause reduced performance because not all children are working at their full potential . In addition , loafing may result in tensions and conflicts between children because it reduces feelings of satisfaction , and those group members who do not loaf feel that they have been taken advantage of [ 11 ] . 2 . 3 Laughing out loud Co - design teams sometimes gang up on the task . They are having a good time , but there is an unwillingness to take the task at hand seriously . In such teams , the atmosphere turns out to be disruptive rather then constructive . This may be due to a lack of intrinsic motivation and problem ownership , because children cannot identify a problem space they feel is worth tackling as a group [ 15 ] . This tendency towards an unserious atmosphere is often a gradually evolving process . At the beginning of a co - design session , only one or two group members may be giggling and come up with rather silly and irrelevant ideas . After a while , this behavior becomes viral and affects the other team members . The group ends up in a state of ‘full immersion’ in the unserious behavior , and their priorities have shifted from finding a design solution to having a good time [ 43 ] . 2 . 4 Dysfunctional conflict Different types of conflicts may occur during co - design . Whereas some conflicts are caused by personal incompatibilities , others are task - oriented ( disagreement about ‘what’ should be done ) or process - oriented ( disagreement about ‘how’ it should be done ) [ 20 ] . For instance , some children may have a difficult time letting go of their initially chosen ideas ( task conflict ) . This may complicate negotiating ideas with other team members and lead to disagreements about ‘how’ to select ideas after ideation ( process conflict ) . Children are not always capable of managing such conflict or differing voices productively , leading to a polarization within the team . Although moderate amounts of process and task conflict may be essential to move teams towards creative breakthroughs , it must be managed . If not , conflict easily becomes destructive , causing defensive behavior , inflexibility , contempt , a lack of trust and an unwillingness to work together [ 11 ] . 2 . 5 Apart together In some teams , children do not build on each other’s ideas and follow their idiosyncratic interests . Instead of working toward one integrated design , only in the end they combine their individual designs superficially . As a result , the groups’ designs are a disconnected mix of individual designs , lacking an overall design vision . In such groups , collaboration often falters due to a lack of cohesion , or “the glue that makes the members of a group stick together” [ 30 ] . Children may experience a lack of commitment to the group goal ( task cohesion ) or a lack of affect towards team members ( social cohesion ) and therefore decide to work individually rather than to collaborate and make design decisions Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 220 together [ 29 ] . Another cause of the apart together dynamic is a lack of interpersonal and small - group skills , necessary for high - quality cooperation in co - design with children . 2 . 6 Groupthink The dynamic of groupthink usually occurs in teams with high group cohesiveness . When everybody gets along , members often see the group as more effective than it really is [ 35 ] . Psychologist Irving Janis coined the term groupthink to describe a phenomenon in which the group ends up being dumber than its individual members [ 19 ] . In co - design , children may sometimes be reluctant to criticize the ideas of others in the team to safeguard the positive atmosphere . As a consequence , they keep on adding functionalities to please every team member and eventually end up with a design bloated with features . This emphasis on concurrence seeking instead of fully surveying choice alternatives leads to poor decision - making [ 11 ] . For creative breakthroughs to emerge , more energy should be created around sharing diverse information and viewpoints to move groups from groupthink to group genius [ 35 ] . 2 . 7 Managing intragroup dynamics The six dynamics described above are often linked . A team may fall into the groupthink trap when group cohesion is high and the team lacks diversity ( i . e . , differences in skills , abilities and backgrounds ) [ 11 ] . A dominant child may further strengthen groupthink by imposing ideas ( unequal power dynamic ) , upon which the team agrees too soon without critical examination of other choice alternatives . Such teams could actually benefit from a moderate form of conflict for creative breakthroughs to emerge . Although conflict is often perceived as a negative force , with cooperation at the other end of the continuum , the impact on group performance is more nuanced than that . Conflict can be a positive force when it creates more energy around sharing diverse information and viewpoints . The challenge is to move groups from dysfunctional to constructive conflicts . Whereas some teams could benefit from a moderate form of conflict , the opposite holds true for teams that are hesitant in making design decisions together and only combine individual efforts superficially ( apart together dynamic ) . Whereas this behavior may be a strategy to avoid further escalations within the team , it prevents the team from reaching its full potential . These teams usually lack both task and social cohesion and the main reason why the team is not disbanded is because the children are imposed to work together . Whereas the groupthink dynamic is often caused by a lack of diversity in the team , diversity can be a double - edged sword . Though diversity is positively correlated with creativity and performance , at the same time it has the potential to reduce group cohesion [ 37 ] . In teams with little cohesion , loafing practices such as free riding are much more common , because the team members feel not as motivated and accountable to contribute . Clearly , managing intragroup or co - design dynamics is a question of finding the right balance . In co - design , collaboration may lead to more creativity and unexpected concepts children could not have come up with alone . However , as Sawyer [ 35 ] puts it : “putting people into groups isn’t a magical dust that makes everyone more creative” . Teamwork entails resolving a paradox between providing enough focus , and leaving room for problem - finding to occur [ 35 ] . Whereas a well - defined design goal may increase ( task ) cohesion and provide focus , leaving room for problem - finding may increase feelings of ownership and personal responsibility [ 35 ] . When intragroup dynamics are not managed properly , one child’s freedom may easily become another child’s lack thereof , which undermines team effectiveness in co - design . Social Interdependence Theory offers interesting guidelines to anticipate on these challenges and structure cooperation more efficiently . Below , we will briefly discuss the theory and afterwards we will illustrate how we applied the theory’s principles in a series of co - design sessions with children . 3 . SOCIAL INTERDEPENDENCE THEORY In this section we will summarize Social Interdependence Theory ( SIT ) and place it in a historical perspective . SIT provides a conceptual framework to organize thinking about cooperation and competition [ 6 ] [ 22 ] . The theory states that the manner in which social interdependence between individuals is structured , determines how these individuals interact , which , in turn , determines outcomes . Social interdependence exists when the outcomes of individuals are affected by each other’s actions , either positively , when the actions of individuals promote the achievement of joint goals ( positive interdependence ) , or negatively , when there is a negative correlation among individuals’ goal attainments such as in a competitive situation ( negative interdependence ) . Social interdependence should be differentiated from social independence that exists when the goal achievement of one person is unaffected by another person’s actions and vice versa . SIT has its origins in Gestalt Psychology ( e . g . [ 24 ] ) and Lewin’s Field Theory [ 25 ] , was formally conceptualized by Deutsch [ 5 ] and extended by Johnson and Johnson [ 21 ] [ 22 ] . For Gestalt Psychologists , the whole or gestalt is the focus of attention when studying perception and behavior . Gestalt Psychologists argue that , in order to make meaning of their world , humans perceive events as integrated wholes rather than as the sum of its parts or properties [ 24 ] [ 22 ] . Similarly , groups are seen as dynamic wholes in which the interdependence among members could vary . Building on the principles of Gestalt Psychology , Lewin [ 25 ] defined the perceived interdependence among group members as the essence of a group . Groups , according to Lewin , are dynamic wholes in which group members become interdependent through common goals . When group members perceive their common goals , a state of tension arises that motivates them to accomplish these goals [ 25 ] . Deutsch [ 6 ] extended Lewin’s notions by studying the interrelation between tension systems of different people . The basic premise of Deutsch’ SIT is that the structure of the goals of the people in a situation , determines how people interact , which in turn determines the outcome of that situation . For instance , in a competitive situation individuals can only obtain their goals if the individuals with whom they are competitively linked fail to reach theirs . The opposite holds true in a cooperative situation . Johnson and Johnson modified and extended Deutsch’s SIT by identifying and validating five principles that mediate the effectiveness of cooperation and competition [ 21 ] [ 22 ] . The combination of these principles , argued by Johnson and Johnson , is essential to structure cooperation . These principles are : § Positive interdependence : the perception of team members that they have to work together to accomplish a common goal . Team membership in itself is not sufficient for higher achievement and productivity , positive interdependence is also required . This way , team members perceive that their work is important to the entire group . § Individual accountability : assessing individual performances and holding team members responsible for Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 221 doing their share in achieving the mutual goal . Individual accountability leads to feelings of responsibility among team members for completing their share of the work and facilitating the work of others in the team . § Promotive interactions : face - to - face meetings between team members to encourage and facilitate each other’s efforts to accomplish the group goals . Positive interdependence tends to result in promotive interactions between individuals , strengthening caring and committed relationships . Negative interdependence , on the other hand , leads to oppositional or contrient interactions . § Appropriate use of social skills : team members need appropriate interpersonal and small - group skills ( e . g . active listening and good questioning ) as well as the motivation to use them . Social skills are essential to cope with the stresses and strains of working in a team and are a precondition for promotive interactions to occur . § Group processing : team members reflecting upon the group process and making decisions about which actions to continue or change . To continuously improve their work over time , teams need time to discuss how well they are achieving their goals and maintaining effective working relationships among members . Since its original formulation by Deutsch [ 5 ] and its extension by Johnson and Johnson , SIT has been widely applied , especially in business and education . These applications have resulted in considerable new research on SIT’s effectiveness . A critical analysis of this extensive research showed a high external validity and generalizability [ 22 ] . However , applying SIT in co - design with children is unprecedented . In the next section we will show , via a case study , how we applied SIT’s five mediating principles in co - design with children to address challenging co - design dynamics . 4 . CASE STUDY We applied the key principles of SIT in a case study in which 49 children aged 9 to 10 were involved in a series of co - design sessions in two schools in Flanders , Belgium . The sessions were part of a project aimed at the design of tangible , digital tools to make class groups more self - regulatory in the prevention of both traditional bullying and cyberbullying . In what follows we will elaborate on the different steps of the co - design procedure and how we applied SIT’s mediating principles . In section 4 we will reflect upon the use of SIT in co - design with children to improve collaboration and remediate challenging intragroup dynamics . 4 . 1 SIT inspired co - design procedure We used a blend of two different approaches to co - design : Cooperative Inquiry [ 14 ] and Contextmapping [ 39 ] . The basic principle of both approaches is to let people make designerly artifacts and tell a story about what they have made [ 34 ] [ 39 ] . Over a period of one month , two co - design sessions were organized in two primary schools preceded by a general introduction , resulting in three visits per school ( see Figure 1 ) . Two researchers were involved in each co - design session and the introduction : one facilitator who interacted with the children and one fly on - the - wall observer making notes . In addition , the sessions were recorded on video and a report was written immediately afterwards . The general introduction took about 45 minutes per class group , whereas the co - design sessions lasted for about 150 minutes each . The co - design procedure to which we applied the key principles of SIT will be described in the next paragraphs . 4 . 1 . 1 Introduction and sensitizing When we met the children for the first time in their classroom , we explained the reason for our visit and told them that their help was much appreciated . The children had to find out through a question and answer game that we were researchers and what that means . Next , we introduced the design challenge : “What ( digital ) tools could primary school children use to improve the class atmosphere and thus prevent bullying ? ” To make the design challenge more tangible , we used a fictitious , detailed story of a class with a negative atmosphere as a starting point . For more information on the use of storytelling in PD with children , we refer to [ 44 ] . With this story , our aim was to create a sense of positive interdependence among children by providing the teams with a clear purpose . This specific type of positive interdependence is referred to as outcome interdependence in SIT and may result in increased achievement and productivity [ 22 ] . During our first encounter with the children we furthermore introduced a sensitizing package with four individual assignments . The goal of these assignments was to trigger children’s reflection in a playful and creative way , and to prepare them for the co - design sessions approximately two weeks later . Children had to work on these assignments at home in their free time . One assignment was to draw a class with a bad atmosphere and to specify reasons why they would not want to be in that class . In another assignment , children were asked to interview ( one of ) their grandparents about what school was like when they were the child’s age . For more information on sensitizing we refer to [ 39 ] . Figure 1 : The different steps of the SIT inspired co - design procedure 4 . 1 . 2 First Co - design Session The goal of the first co - design session was to create cohesive teams and , for each team , to define two problems based on the story and design challenge . In the second session , each team would then invent something to solve these problems . 4 . 1 . 2 . 1 Group formation and allocating roles Each class group was divided in a morning - and afternoon group . At the beginning of the co - design session , these morning - and afternoon groups were split into three gender - mixed subgroups of four to six boys and girls . With the help of the children’s teachers , INTRODUCTION & SENSITIZING Goal : reﬂection and understanding CO - DESIGN SESSION 1 Goal : team cohesion and problem ownership - Group formation and distributing roles - Teambuilding and empathy exercise - Problem deﬁnition - Presentation and discussion - Group processing CO - DESIGN SESSION 2 Goal : problem solving and evaluation - Ideation and selection - Elaboration through making - Peer jury - Group processing - Wrap up Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 222 these subgroups were formed heterogeneously , based on criteria such as intelligence , communication skills , gender and creative abilities . Forming groups heterogeneously may result in a broader subset of complementary skills per team , which , in turn , increases interdependence [ 22 ] . Teams were seated in different corners of the room and although they could walk around , they were asked to stick to their team . Proximity ( e . g . being seated together ) is an efficient way to structure boundaries between individuals and groups so as to define who is interdependent with whom . This type of positive interdependence is referred to as boundary interdependence [ 24 ] [ 22 ] . After discussing the purpose of the co - design session , the researcher reiterated the story of the class with a bad atmosphere , but now with additional details . For instance , a situation was described in which a girl made fun of someone’s appearance . Next , the researcher introduced different roles to be distributed between the team members . Each role came with a specific responsibility translated in a set of class rules to which we referred as ‘rules of the game’ . The material guard was responsible for the use of the materials and had to make sure each group member had something ( e . g . , scissors , glue , etc . ) to work with . The silence captain had to assure the children were quiet when the researcher would explain the next step . The responsibility of the inspiration general was to assure that each child had an equal chance to contribute and that nobody would impose his or her ideas . The fourth and last role was that of the time keeper , who had to prevent the co - design team from running out of time before completing the tasks . Our hope was that the responsibility associated with each of these roles would make group members accountable for doing their share of the work . According to SIT , increasing individual accountability will , in turn , increase perceived interdependence among team members , creating a snowball effect within the team . Badges visualized the roles ( see Figure 2 ) . Teams were asked to think carefully about which role was best suited for which team member and to assign the badges accordingly . This negotiating process allowed children to practice interpersonal and small - group skills needed for high - quality cooperation . These skills include communicating accurately and unambiguously and resolving conflicts constructively [ 21 ] [ 22 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 . 2 Teambuilding and empathy exercise The next phase included an introductory design activity . To strengthen the teams’ cohesiveness , we asked the children to think of a group name and design a logo ( see Figure 2 ) . For this activity , which was relatively easy compared to the project’s design challenge , the children had to pay special attention to their roles and ditto responsibilities . When all teams were ready , they presented their group name and logo to the other teams who could voice their opinions . This way , the co - design teams could get used to communicating ideas and being evaluated by their peers . Knowing this up front may foster feelings of responsibility necessary for high - quality cooperation [ 21 ] [ 22 ] . The following stage entailed an empathy exercise . Therefore the researcher handed out the results of one of the sensitizing assignments in which the children had to interview their grandparents about school life when they had their age . We asked them to discuss with their team members how school life had changed since then . Our hope was that children would approach the design challenge in new and unexpected ways due to this empathy exercise . At the same time , these discussions offered another opportunity to practice social skills before the teams would move on to the next step : problem definition . 4 . 1 . 2 . 3 Problem definition and discussion Each co - design team received a card with the story describing a class with a negative atmosphere , including detailed examples . The design challenge embedded in the story ( i . e . , improving the class atmosphere ) was deliberately kept broad , because we wanted each team to redefine the design challenge based on their interpretation of the story . We aspired that this would lead to increased problem ownership and involvement throughout the co - design sessions . Afterwards , the teams were asked to make a collage on a big sheet of paper that would illustrate the negative class atmosphere in the story ( Figure 4 ) . They could use different materials ( e . g . , markers , all sorts of pictograms , colored paper , etc . ) , but some of the materials were limited to one piece per team ( e . g . , scissors and glue ) . Limiting materials may be another way to increase interdependence because it forces teams to think carefully about who does what and in which order . This type of positive interdependence is referred to in SIT as means interdependence . While making the collage , the children were again prompted to focus on their role and responsibility so as to avoid free riding whereby some group members let others do all the work . Next , each team picked six situations they had just visualized and discussed ‘why’ each of these situations negatively influenced the class atmosphere . When a consensus was reached , they wrote their arguments on sticky notes and attached them to their collage . They then had to pick two problematic situations for which they would invent a solution during the next co - design session . Finally , each team briefly presented their collage to the other groups . Both the researcher and the children could ask questions . As noted earlier , when a team’s performance is being assessed , feelings of responsibility and group accountability may be increased [ 21 ] [ 22 ] . Figure 2 : Logo designs ( left ) - Figure 3 : Badges for the different roles : material guard , silence captain , inspiration general , time keeper ( right ) 4 . 1 . 2 . 4 Group processing At the end of the co - design session we asked the teams to evaluate the collaboration process . They had to list three actions that were helpful to accomplish the team’s goals , and one action that could be added or changed to make the group even more successful during the next co - design session . Group processing allows the co - design teams to improve their work together continuously over time and it focuses attention on team members’ contributions in order to increase individual accountability . As argued by Johnson and Johnson [ 22 ] , group processing is of uttermost importance to improve the collaboration process , because children will not learn as much from experiences they do not reflect on . When each team Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 223 had discussed the collaboration process , a class discussion followed . Finally , the researcher explained what would happen during the next session that was scheduled approximately one week from then . Figure 4 : Problem definition collages ( left ) - Figure 5 : Ideation sheets ( right ) 4 . 1 . 3 Second co - design session 4 . 1 . 3 . 1 Ideation and selection The goal of the second co - design session was to design a prototype that children could use to improve the class atmosphere . Whereas the teams had focused on problem definition during the first co - design session , they were now about to enter the solution space . As mentioned earlier , well - defined goals bind group members together ; a type of interdependence that is referred to in SIT as outcome interdependence [ 22 ] . To refresh the children’s memory , the researcher handed out the collages the children had made during the first session . Next , the teams were asked to reallocate the roles and to think carefully about which role was best suited for whom . As in the previous session , the goal of these roles was to increase positive interdependence and accountability . Afterwards the teams thought of different ideas to solve the problematic situations they had previously selected ( i . e . , divergence or creating choices ) . The researcher first introduced the children to the concept of brainstorming . After some classical free association exercises ( e . g . , through questions as “What pops up in your mind when you think of a birdhouse ? ” ) , the teams started brainstorming solutions . The team members had to write each idea on a separate sticky note and put it in the middle of the table to inspire or prime each other ( see Figure 5 ) . Priming is an effective strategy for divergent thinking , but may also be useful to engage all members of a group and avoid free riding [ 22 ] . Next , the teams had to group similar ideas together and select two ideas for further elaboration ( i . e . , convergence or selecting choices ) . 4 . 1 . 3 . 2 Elaboration through making Afterwards the teams elaborated on the selected ideas in a hands - on way . They used the ideas to prototype tools that would improve the class atmosphere . In analogy with mixing two colors into a new color , the researcher explained that the selected ideas could be blended into a new idea . In order to be able to design the tools , the material guard of each team received a bag with all kinds of materials to build the prototype ( e . g . , scissors , cardboard , glue , aluminum dishes , ropes , colored paper , etc . ) . To increase feelings of responsibility and individual accountability , the researcher reminded the children to perform their role within the team . To ensure that the teams would discuss their approach and cooperate efficiently , some of the materials they could use were again limited to increase means interdependence . Apart from that , the teams were free to choose how to approach the task at hand . 4 . 1 . 3 . 3 Peer jury , group processing and wrap - up For the following phase , the co - design teams had to prepare a presentation about their prototypes ( see Figure 6 ) . They could either explain how their solution would improve the class atmosphere or organize a small performance . When one team was presenting , the other teams functioned as a jury . After the presentation , the jury members could ask critical questions and voice their opinions about the prototypes , but in a constructive manner . Finally , each jury member filled in a form with questions such as : “What do you like about the team’s invention to improve the class atmosphere ? ” , “Why do you like it ? ” , “If there is one thing you could change , what would be it ? ” and “Why would you like to change it ? ” Peer jurying revealed how children valued each other’s ideas . Also , feelings of responsibility and group accountability increased because the children knew beforehand that they would have to present their designs at the end of the session . Presentations and questions were all recorded on video for further analysis . When each team had presented their design , the teams were asked to once more evaluate the group process . At this point , we were especially interested in how the children experienced the use of the roles and the responsibilities associated to these roles , and how the cooperation had changed since the first session . Finally , a short wrap - up followed in which we talked briefly about the next part of our research , and how we would use their designs as a source of inspiration and information . 4 . 2 Analysis The co - design sessions resulted in various tangible ( e . g . problem definition collages , co - design prototypes ) and textual outcomes ( e . g . transcriptions , written ideas on Post - Its , etc . ) . For the analyses we used a multimodal approach borrowed from social semiotics . For the multimodal analysis of the co - design outcomes , we refer to [ 4 ] . In this paper , our focus is not on the co - design outcomes but on the cooperation process . More particularly , we aim to explore whether SIT is a useful framework to anticipate on challenging intragroup dynamics in co - design with children . For our analyses , we used detailed observation reports , video fragments and transcripts of the group - processing phase at the end of each co - design session . These data were coded bottom - up , using an open and axial coding approach . In the next paragraph , we describe our findings and reflect upon the SIT inspired co - design procedure . 5 . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Positive interdependence Structuring positive interdependence ( SIT principle 1 ) was done in three different ways by ( 1 ) providing a clear end - goal and criteria for success through means of storytelling ( outcome interdependence ) , ( 2 ) distinguishing groups from each other by separating teams in space , ( boundary interdependence ) and ( 3 ) making team members interdependent through complementary roles and limited resources ( means interdependence ) . 5 . 1 . 1 Outcome interdependence Our results showed that our storytelling approach provided children with a clear end - goal , creating a sense of outcome interdependence . When we met the children for the second time , ( 1 st co - design session ) they recalled the story and remembered Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 224 that they would have to invent something to improve the atmosphere in the class , as described in the story . This suggests that storytelling made it easy for them to understand the design challenge and our expectations . Additionally , storytelling provided focus throughout the preparatory steps ( sensitizing , team building and introductory design activities ) as well as during the prototyping phase ( elaboration through making ) . This was confirmed by questions such as : Girl : “How many children are ‘exactly’ in Miss Anneleen’s class ? We , need to know that for our invention ! ” Children empathized with the story due to its many details . Our observations suggest that these feelings of engagement and commitment are essential to avoid children from getting caught up in an unserious and disruptive atmosphere ( laughing out loud dynamic ) . Figure 6 : Sprietje , a DJ robot made by team ‘Vivalalalas’ ( left ) and a hypnosis machine made by team ‘the Cooperators’ ( right ) 5 . 1 . 2 Boundary interdependence Not all children were happy when we divided them into groups , because they preferred being in the same team as their friends . However , the introductory design activities proved to be an efficient way to reverse feelings of disappointment and strengthen commitment towards the team . For instance , in a team of three girls and one boy , the boy did not seem to have much interest in his team . However , his attitude and commitment towards the team changed when he got involved in the teambuilding activities . He coined the name ‘Speedy Tigers’ for the team and together they designed an accompanying logo ( see Figure 2 ) . Our results further revealed that , notwithstanding the SIT inspired approach , we could not prevent challenging dynamics to occur . More particularly , in one team named ‘Elcogavi’ , the teambuilding activities were not sufficient to strengthen cohesion and the apart together dynamic was strongly present . In that particular team , children ended up working individually and during presentation it was clear they had not thought profoundly about how their designs could be integrated . In another team , and somewhat related to the apart together dynamic , we observed the tendency for boys and girls to work separately . This was the case in team ‘Uki’ where the boys were responsible for one part of the invention and the girls for another part . They reflected on these gender - based subgroups during group processing : Boy : “Uh , finishing in time , we did that well , and uh , that was less good…” Researcher : “What exactly do you mean ? ” Boy : “We have been working in two groups , actually , and we , we laughed a lot . ” Researcher : “What kind of groups exactly ? ” Boy : “The boys and the girls . ” However , in contrast to team ‘Elcogavi’ , Uki’s gender - based subgroups eventually integrated the objects into a coherent design . This indicates a division of labor rather than team members working separately without an overall design vision . On the other hand , it shows that teambuilding activities were not always sufficient to transcend gender - based favoritism in teams . Separating groups in space is another way to create boundary interdependence . In the implementation of this mediating principle , we stumbled upon practical constraints as the amount of physical space between teams varied greatly according to the room we had at our disposal . In small rooms where teams were seated close together , it was harder for children to stick with their group . In one school this led to an exchange of ideas across teams . As a consequence , all three teams ended up designing a robot , be it with different functionalities attached to it . 5 . 1 . 3 Means interdependence 5 . 1 . 3 . 1 Roles When evaluating the first session , we realized that we did not emphasize in our instructions that the distribution of roles ( i . e . , inspiration general , time keeper , material guard or silence captain ) would imply negotiation among team members to decide which role was best suited for whom . As a consequence , children chose roles randomly , which led to disagreements because some children were not happy with their role . We also grasped that we were not clear enough on the responsibility that came with these roles . During group processing , some children were critical about the function associated with their role : Boy : “Mmm , actually I did not know , uh , what a material guard had to do . ” Girl : “Me too with the time keeper , because there really was no ‘time’ , because you did not tell us when it had to be finished , only the first time . ” These problems were dealt with in the second co - design session : we stressed that they had to negotiate which role was best suited for whom and we summarized the roles on the badges as a visual reminder ( see Figure 3 ) . Moreover , we gave specific tasks throughout the session to make the roles more ‘active’ . For example , material guards had to distribute sticky notes for ideation and timekeepers had to set a timer when their team was ready for the next task . These simple measures together with the time allotted for practice ( i . e . , during introductory design activities ) proved to be useful . At the end of the second co - design session , the roles had become a second nature to most children . A striking example was an inspiration general proposing to vote ideas anonymously after brainstorming to prevent the team members from imposing ideas on others . 5 . 1 . 3 . 2 Resources Limiting materials per team both had positive and negative effects on cooperation . Based on SIT , we expected that limiting materials would enhance communication because team members would have to think carefully about who did what and why . However , we found that limiting materials sometimes encouraged loafing practices such as free riding , because children felt they could not contribute to the teamwork . It also led to disagreements about how to distribute the available tools . For instance , cutting out forms was a popular task , resulting in heated debates about who was allowed to use the pair of scissors . Children reflected on this problem during group processing : Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 225 Boy : “That , everyone , yes , could use the pair of scissors in turn and uh , yes , we think there were not enough scissors , because , everybody , yes everybody wants to use it to cut out their own idea and you always have to wait till the other one was finished . ” Although SIT suggests otherwise , this observation shows that limiting materials is not always an efficient way to improve cooperation . At the same time , the quote reveals an underlying problem : children being engaged with their own ideas instead of negotiating a solution with their team members . Initially , we dealt with such process conflicts ( i . e . , disagreements about how to approach a task ) by giving extra materials . However , in the long run , this was usually not the best solution , as exemplified in the following quote : Girl : “Uh , sometimes , someone took away the pair of scissors when someone else needed it as well , and then we had two pair of scissors and it even got worse . ” A more efficient approach was to facilitate children towards a solution without the need for extra materials . This proved to be a worthwhile strategy , because most of the teams showed significant progress in distributing materials and tasks during the second co - design session . This was confirmed during group processing : Researcher : “How was the collaboration in your team ? ” Girl : “I think the cooperation was good , because together we taught of different ideas together and then , then we divided the tasks , who what , you know , we divided who did what so everybody knew what to do , it was not like , what can I do ” 5 . 2 Individual accountability Creating a sense of positive interdependence ( SIT principle 1 ) by structuring outcomes , boundaries and means is posited to result in feelings of responsibility and accountability ( SIT principle 2 ) among team members . As suggested by SIT , the different roles children had to take on were used to increase feelings of responsibility towards the team . Although we did not assess individual contributions , we reminded children of their role within the team to , for instance , successfully counter a case of free riding . Our results showed that the roles were not only useful to anticipate on challenging group dynamics , but also to remediate such dynamics on the spot . Moreover , children referred to the roles during group processing to express how they believed the cooperation could be improved . We noticed that by referring to a ‘role’ rather then to a specific team member , the criticism became less personal . Girl : “My wish would be that , for example , the silence captain would make sure there is less noise next time . ” Another way in which we succeeded to increase feelings of responsibility towards the team was by letting teams evaluate each other’s efforts in the form of a peer jury . We found that peer jurying revealed interesting insights about how children valued each other’s ideas , but was also a useful strategy to increase group accountability . Some children became visibly nervous or exited when they had to present their prototype . Even the boldest children clearly wanted to make a good impression on their peers . Although SIT focuses on individual accountability , our results showed that increasing both individual and group accountability is a worthwhile strategy to improve cooperation in co - design . 5 . 3 Promotive interactions Positive interdependence ( SIT principle 1 ) not only increases feelings of responsibility and accountability ( SIT principle 2 ) , it is also posited to result in promotive interactions ( SIT principle 3 ) between team members . According to SIT , whether or not children engage in promotive interactions largely depends on children’s social skills and the perceived interdependence in the group . We influenced promotive interactions indirectly by structuring interdependence ( SIT principle 1 ) and training children’s social skills ( SIT principle 4 ) . We observed both promotive and contrient interactions . For instance , during the first co - design session , a boy in team ‘Apples’ was overly enthusiastic , but despites his commitment he did not give his team members an equal chance to contribute and tried to impose his ideas ( unequal power dynamic ) . In team ‘Uki’ we observed quite the opposite . A girl gradually became more devoted to the teamwork because of the positive feedback she received from her group members . She consequently used her higher status in the group to involve and motivate other team members . This observation shows that , when the conditions are right , promotive interactions can mitigate unequal power distribution . In general , we observed more promotive interactions during the second co - design session . There may be several reasons for this positive evolution . Children gained experience in teamwork through the co - design activities . Additionally , at the end of the first session , children reflected on the collaboration process and how it could be improved . Most teams succeeded in applying these suggestions for improvement throughout the second co - design session : Researcher : “ How was the collaboration compared with the first session ? ” Boy : “Better ! Uh if , for example , if someone made something and then we said ‘Should we do this or not ? ’ and then we decided it was okay . But if we , if one person said ‘no’ , then we didn’t do it . So if one person didn’t find it good we didn’t do it ; we only did what everybody wanted to do , and I think that’s good . ” 5 . 4 Interpersonal and small - group skills According to SIT , adequate interpersonal and small - group skills ( SIT principle 4 ) as well as the motivation to use these skills are a precondition for promotive interactions ( SIT principle 3 ) to occur . Examples of such skills are active listening , communicating accurately and unambiguously , and being able to resolve conflicts productively . We trained children’s social skills by gradually increasing the difficulty of the tasks and by specifying beforehand what kind of social skills children should be engaged in . For instance , children had to ‘negotiate’ which role was best suited for whom at the start of a session . For the empathy exercise they had to ‘listen actively’ to their fellow team members by repeating in their own words what they had been told . When children did not agree on how to proceed with the collage , they had to ‘provide arguments’ for their point of view . Despite this gradual learning process , the first co - design session was not without difficulties . Most children followed their own idiosyncratic interests : they chose roles randomly , they chatted with a friend from another team while they should be listening to a fellow team member and they started cutting out forms without informing fellow team members . However , we noticed a positive evolution towards the second session in , for example , how children dealt with conflicts . In one school , children even started to use the rock - paper - scissors game when they could not reach an agreement ( e . g . , deciding on the color of the robot’s cape ) . Although the outcome of the game was completely random , the game prevented teams from ending up in dysfunctional conflicts . Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 226 5 . 5 Group processing The fifth and final mediating principle , group processing ( SIT principle 5 ) , was implemented by adding a separate phase at the end of each co - design session . The most challenging part of group processing was to prevent children from blaming each other for things that went wrong , something we had not anticipated initially . In some cases , personal attacks led to further escalations during group processing because the conflicts had not yet been properly resolved . For instance , during the first co - design session , a team got stuck during the problem definition phase and was not sure how to proceed with the collage . Instead of helping his team , one of the boys acted rather silly , coming up with irrelevant ideas . The other team members critiqued his behavior during group processing : Girl : “In the beginning , Joe , the whole time , came up with stuff like ‘Joe is the best’ and… Boy : “Joe is the funniest” Joe : “No , that’s not true ! ” Girl : “It is true ! ” To prevent situations like these , we slightly altered the group processing procedure for the remaining sessions . Instead of asking in a straightforward manner what children thought of the cooperation , each team member had to list three actions that had been helpful and one action that could be improved for the ‘whole’ team . They were not supposed to blame each other , but had to express their concerns in a constructive manner , starting with the words “I wish we…” . This intervention led to more constructive dialogues about the group process and how it could be improved , as exemplified by the following quote at the end of the first co - design session : Girl : “Uh , I would wish that , for example , we would , if someone is doing a task that is more fatiguing , that we , we could change tasks once , or so . ” 6 . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK SIT has proven to be a useful theory to cope with challenging intragroup dynamics in co - design with children . The theory offers a validated framework of five principles that mediate the effectiveness of cooperation : ( 1 ) positive interdependence , ( 2 ) individual accountability , ( 3 ) promotive interaction , ( 4 ) appropriate use of social skills and ( 5 ) group processing . We applied these mediating principles to a case study which involved 49 children aged 9 to 10 , who designed tangible , digital tools to prevent ( cyber - ) bullying . SIT proved to be a flexible framework that can be applied in a wide range of contexts . To some extent , problematic intra - group or co - design dynamics remained in this case study , as described in this paper . SIT principles do not magically cure all challenging group dynamics . However , SIT provides a valuable framework to anticipate on these challenges , and to remediate these challenges into positive forces . For instance , a researcher can point towards children’s roles and responsibilities to counter a case of free riding . Moreover , since children are encouraged to develop their social skills in SIT inspired co - design , they become increasingly capable of managing differing voices , with little adult facilitation . Teamwork is a gradual learning process and , in most cases , children need time to adopt a design mindset . In this case study , group processing was essential to improve the collaboration process over time , because children were prompted to reflect on their experiences . Reflection resulted in a posteriori knowledge about teamwork and about how behaviors could be changed to improve collaboration and reach a common goal more efficiently . The case study described in this paper gave us first insights in the use of SIT in co - design with children . By applying the SIT inspired co - design procedure in other cases and design contexts , our aim is to further develop the procedure and improve its generalizability . Moreover , our hope is that more researchers within the CCI community will report on the use of SIT to cope with challenging intragroup or co - design dynamics . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study is part of ( 1 ) the EMSOC project ( Empowerment in a Social Media Culture ) , funded by IWT ( Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology ) and ( 2 ) a PhD research funded by the MAD - faculty ( UHasselt ) . 8 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bjerknes , G . Ehn , P . , and Kyng , M . ( 1987 ) . Computers and democracy : A Scandinavian challenge . Brookfield . [ 2 ] Buckingham , D . ( 2009 ) . Creative visual methods in media research : possibilities , problems and proposals . Media , Culture & Society , 31 ( 4 ) , 633 - 652 . [ 3 ] Cross , N . & Cross , A . C . ( 1995 ) . Observations of teamwork and social processes in design . Design Studies , 16 , 143 - 170 . [ 4 ] Derboven , J . , Van Mechelen , M . , Slegers , K . ( 2015 ) . Multimodal Analysis in Participatory Design with Children : a Primary School Case Study . In Proc . of the 2015 conference on Computer Human Interaction ( CHI ' 15 ) . ACM , New York . [ 5 ] Deutsch , M . ( 1949 ) . A theory of cooperation and competition . Human Relations , 2 , 129 - 152 . [ 6 ] Deutsch , M . ( 1962 ) . Cooperation and trust : Some theoretical notes . In M . R . Jones ( Ed . ) , Nebraska symposium on motivation ( 275 - 319 ) . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press . [ 7 ] Dindler , C . et al . ( 2005 ) . Mission from Mars : a method for exploring user requirements for children in a narrative space . Proceedings of the IDC 2005 conference . ACM , New York . [ 8 ] Dodero , G . , Gennari , R . , Melonio , A . , Torello S . ( 2014 ) . Towards tangible gamified co - design at school : two studies in primary schools . In Proceedings of the first ACM SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer - human interaction in play ( CHI PLAY ' 14 ) . ACM , New York . [ 9 ] Druin , A . ( 2002 ) . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour & Information Technology , 21 , 1 - 25 . [ 10 ] Duh , H . B . - L . , Chu Yew Yee , S . L . , Gu , Y . X . , Vivian Hsueh - Hua Chen , V . H . - H . ( 2010 ) . A narrative - driven design approach for casual games with children . In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games ( Sandbox ' 10 ) , Stephen N . Spencer ( Ed . ) . ACM , New York [ 11 ] Franz , T . M . ( 2012 ) . Group Dynamics and Team Interventions . Wiley - Blackwell , Chichester . [ 12 ] Garzotto . F . ( 2008 ) . Broadening Children ' s Involvement as Design Partners : From Technology to Experience . In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Interaction design and children ( IDC ' 08 ) . ACM , New York . [ 13 ] Göttel , T . ( 2013 ) . Avalanche ! Reanimating Multiple Roles in Child Computer Interaction Design . In Kotzé , P . , Marsden , G . , Wesson , J . , Winckler , M . ( Eds ) . Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 ( 666 - 673 ) . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg . Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 227 [ 14 ] Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . & Fails , J . A . ( 2013 ) . Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction . [ 15 ] Halloran , J . , Hornecker , E . , & Stringer , M . ( 2009 ) . The value of values : Resourcing co - design of ubiquitous computing . Co - Design , 4 ( 5 ) , 245 - 273 . [ 16 ] Höysniemi , J . , Hämäläinen , P . , Turkki , L . ( 2003 ) . Using peer tutoring in evaluating the usability of a physically interactive computer game with children . Interacting with Computers , 15 ( 2 ) : 203 - 225 . [ 17 ] Iversen , O . S . , Halskov , K . , Leong T . W . ( 2010 ) . Rekindling Values in Participatory Design . PDC ’10 Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . ACM , NY . [ 18 ] Iversen , O . S . , Smith , R . C . ( 2012 ) . Scandinavian participatory design : dialogic curation with teenagers . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 12 ) . ACM , New York . [ 19 ] Janis , I . L . ( 1982 ) . Groupthink : Psychological studies of policy decisions and fiascoes ( 2 nd ed . ) . Houghton Mifflin : New York . [ 20 ] Jehn , K . A . ( 1997 ) . A qualitative analysis of conflict types and dimensions in organizational groups . Administrative Scinece Quarterly , 42 : 530 - 557 . [ 21 ] Johnson , D . W . & Johnson , R . T . ( 2005 ) . New Developments in Social Interdependence Theory . Genetic , Social and General Psychology Monographs , 131 ( 4 ) , 285 - 358 . [ 22 ] Johnson , D . W . & Johnson , R . T . ( 2009 ) . An Educational Psychology Success Story : Social Interdependence Theory and Cooperative Learning . Educational Researcher 38 ( 5 ) : 365 - 379 . [ 23 ] Karau , S . J . & Williams , K . ( 1993 ) . Social Loafing : A Meta - Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 ( 4 ) : 681 - 706 . [ 24 ] Koffka , K . ( 1935 ) . Principles of gestalt psychology . New York : Harcourt , Brace . [ 25 ] Lewin , K . ( 1948 ) . Resolving social conflicts . New York : Harper . [ 26 ] Mazzone , E . et al . ( 2010 ) . Considering context , content , management , and engagement in design activities with children . Proc . of the 9th Int . Conf . on Interaction Design & Children . IDC ’10 . ACM , New York . [ 27 ] Moser , C . , Chisik , Y . , Tscheligi , M . ( 2014 ) . Around the world in 8 workshops : investigating anticipated player experiences of children . In Proceedings of the first ACM SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer - human interaction in play ( CHI PLAY ' 14 ) . ACM , New York . [ 28 ] Muller , M . J . ( 2002 ) . Participatory design : the third space in HCI . In The human - computer interaction handbook , Julie A . Jacko and Andrew Sears ( Eds . ) . L . Erlbaum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA 1051 - 1068 . [ 29 ] Myers , S . A . , Anderson , C . M . ( 2008 ) . The fundamentals of small group communication . Sage Publications : Thousand Oaks . [ 30 ] Nelson , D . L . , Quick , J . C . ( 2008 ) . Understanding Organizational Behavior ( 3 rd ed . ) . Cengage Learning , Florence , KY . [ 31 ] Read , J . , Horton , M . , Sim , G . , Gregory , P . , Fitton , D . , Cassidy , B . ( 2013 ) . CHECk : A Tool to Inform and Encourage Ethical Practice in Participatory Design with Children . CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York . [ 32 ] Read , J . C . , Fitton , D . , Horton , M . ( 2014 ) . Giving ideas an equal chance : inclusion and representation in participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children ( IDC ' 14 ) . ACM , NY . [ 33 ] Rokeach , M . ( 1973 ) . The Nature of Human Values . Free Press , New York . [ 34 ] Sanders , E . ( 2000 ) . Generative Tools for CoDesigning . In S . Scrivener , L . Ball , & A . Woodcock , eds . Proceedings of CoDesigning2000 . Springer , 3 - 12 . [ 35 ] Sawyer , K . ( 2008 ) . Group Genius : The Creative Power of Collaboration . Basic Books , NY . [ 36 ] Scaife , M . and Rogers , Y . ( 1999 ) . Kids as informants : Telling us what we didn’t know or confirming what we knew already , in A . Druin ( Ed . ) , The design of children ' s technology , pp . 29 - 50 . Morgan Kaufmann . [ 37 ] Shapcott , K . M . , Carron , A . V . , Burke , S . M . , Brashaw , M . H . , Estabrooks , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Member diversity and cohesion and performance in walking groups . Small Group Research , 37 ( 6 ) : 701 - 720 . [ 38 ] Sim , G . , Horton , M . ( 2012 ) . Investigating children ' s opinions of games : Fun Toolkit vs . This or That . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 12 ) . ACM , New York . [ 39 ] Sleeswijk Visser , F . , Stappers , P . J . , van der Lugt , R . , Sanders , E . B . N . ( 2005 ) . Contextmapping : Experiences from practice . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and Arts , 1 ( 2 ) , 119 - 149 . [ 40 ] Spinuzzi C . ( 2005 ) , The Methodology of Participatory Design . In : Technical Communication . 52 ( 2 ) , 163 - 175 . [ 41 ] Sutton , R . I . & Hargadon , A . ( 1996 ) . Brainstorming Groups in Context : Effectiveness in a Product Design Firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 ( 4 ) , 685 - 718 . [ 42 ] Vaajakallio , K . , Mattelmäki , T . & Lee , J . - J . ( 2010 ) . Co - design lessons with children . Interactions , 17 ( 4 ) , 26 – 29 . [ 43 ] Van Mechelen , M . , Gielen , M . , VandenAbeele , V . , Laenen , A . and Zaman , B . ( 2014a ) . Exploring challenging group dynamics in participatory design with children . In Proc . of the 2014 conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 14 ) . ACM , New York . [ 44 ] Van Mechelen , M . , Sim , G . , Zaman , B . , Gregory , P . , Slegers , K . and Horton , M . ( 2014b ) . Applying the CHECk tool to participatory design sessions with children . In Proc . of the 2014 conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 14 ) . ACM , New York . [ 45 ] Zaman , B . , Vanden Abeele , V . ( 2010 ) . Laddering with young children in User eXperience evaluations : theoretical groundings and a practical case . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ' 10 ) . ACM , New York . Full Papers IDC 2015 Medford , MA , USA 228