Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . 359 Transportation Amid Pandemics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 323 - 99770 - 6 . 00017 - X Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . COVID - 19 and big data technologies : Experience in China Jing Kang a and Junyi Zhang b a Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering , Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation , Hiroshima University , Higashihiroshima , Japan , b WCTRS COVID - 19 Task Force , Mobilities and Urban Policy Lab , Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering , Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation , Hiroshima University , Higashihiroshima , Hiroshima , Japan 28 . 1 Introduction The SARS - CoV - 2 virus is mainly transmitted through close contacts between people . Population mobility is therefore seen to be a major factor contributing to the spread of the virus ( Zhang et al . , 2020 ) . Big data technologies , especially those related to human mobility monitoring , have played a significant role in China’s anti - pandemic battle , particularly for nonpharmaceutical policies and precise prevention and control management ( Kraemer et al . , 2020 ) . The effective - ness of China’s practices and policies has been reported in various media , including official reports . a In January 2020 , COVID - 19 was discovered in Wuhan , Hubei Province . Due to the lack of effective medical treatment , blocking the source of the outbreak and traffic restrictions became the first major containment measures . Travel restrictions in China reduced approximately 70 % and 40 % of inter - city and intra - city mobility ( from 320 administrative cities and units in mainland China ) , respectively , which effectively slowed down the infection rate ( Mu , Yeh , & Zhang , 2020 ) . The number of confirmed infections in China reached a peak on February 12 , 2020 ( 15 , 152 cases ) . Response plans dictated immediate personnel deployment , aggressive case detection and close contact tracing , isolation of cases and asymptomatic persons , quarantine of close contacts , movement restrictions , and thorough testing . During the emergency response process , the epidemiologi - cal investigation data combined with big data on human mobility played significant roles in locating high - risk groups and areas . From February to April 2020 , China launched the “Health Code , ” based on mobile signaling big data , as a personal electronic pass that automatically detects a person’s risk level . This location - based application is officially used as the Green “Health Code” certificate to enter all public spaces , even to the present date . On March 11 , 2020 , the number of new infection cases per day was effectively brought down to single digits within only 2 months ( lower than 10 cases ) . On May 31 , 2020 , a total of 83 , 017 confirmed cases were reported , with a recovery rate of 94 . 3 % and a mortality rate of 5 . 6 % . At the time of writing , no serious repeated outbreaks had been observed . This chapter will provide a comprehensive overview a . “China’s Action against the New Corona Pneumonia Epidemic” White Paper , June 2020 , State Council Information Office of China , available on : https : / / www . chinacourt . org / article / detail / 2020 / 06 / id / 5285383 . shtml . Chapter outline 28 . 1 Introduction 359 28 . 2 Sources of big data 360 28 . 2 . 1 Big data on human mobility 360 28 . 2 . 2 Epidemiological survey data 360 28 . 3 Smartphone applications of big data 361 28 . 3 . 1 Measurement of close contacts 361 28 . 3 . 2 Health code 362 28 . 4 Evidence regarding control measures 363 28 . 4 . 1 Lockdown measures 363 28 . 4 . 2 Restriction of movement and social distancing 363 28 . 4 . 3 Identification of infection risk scenarios 364 28 . 4 . 4 Cross - border transportation of food in the cold chain 364 28 . 5 Roles of big data in policy implementation 365 28 . 5 . 1 Multilevel management of epidemic control 365 28 . 5 . 2 Support for decision making on the resumption of activities 365 28 . 6 Conclusion and outlook 368 28 . 6 . 1 Key messages of policy recommendations 368 28 . 6 . 2 Future research challenges 369 References 369 Chapter 28 360 PART | V Recovery of how big data on human mobility has been effectively used against the emerging epidemic in China , which can help guide researchers and decision - makers in conducting data - driven applications and policy interventions against the COVID - 19 pandemic . From China’s experiences , we expect to contribute to discussions on anti - epidemic measures using big data technology and inform policy recommendations for the world . The chapter is arranged into six sections . In Section 28 . 2 , the main sources of big data that were used to support COVID - 19 measures will be explained . Section 28 . 3 will further describe two important smartphone apps that played important roles in the timely identification of the source of the outbreak and tracing of close contacts , based on big data . Section 28 . 4 will examine the evidence from current big data research work to support policymaking , with a focus on sev - eral types of control measures , while Section 28 . 5 will focus on policy implications . Section 28 . 6 will give a summary and outlook for the current research . 28 . 2 Sources of big data 28 . 2 . 1 Big data on human mobility Big data on human mobility have been widely used to evaluate transmission , risk assessment , prevention , and control of the COVID - 19 pandemic . Currently , there are two major sources of such data : ( 1 ) mobile phone signaling data provided by mobile telecommunication operators , whereby locations can be derived from the Call Detailed Records ( CDRs ) acquired by connec - tions to cell tower stations and ( 2 ) the Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) , which collects individual - level mobility data from mobile phone users . For example , the widely used navigation apps ( e . g . , Baidu Map , Google Map ) can trace the real - time locations of users . Besides , social media apps ( e . g . , WeChat , Weibo , Facebook , Twitter ) , which provide geotagged data , have become an emerging spatiotemporal big data source for analyzing users’ mobility behavior ( Chen , Zhang , & Ren , 2020 ) . This kind of data can be obtained only when the users input their location or enable the GNSS positioning function . Mobility big data can achieve fine - grained location tracking , allowing the detection of location patterns and trajec - tories of human daily activities ( e . g . , activity destination , travel modes , and travel distance ) ( Changruenngam , Bicout , & Modchang , 2020 ; Yang , sha , et al . , 2020 ) . However , the original data are not available for public usage and cannot be directly applied due to data privacy issues . For public release , these data are generally processed and aggregated at a cer - tain geographic scale ( e . g . , province / city level or grids with a certain resolution , such as 200 m × 200 m ) . The aggregation provides a way to eliminate individual information and has become a commonly used data preprocessing method . Further , as a means to avoid privacy concerns , index - based mobility data was developed as an alternative way to capture human mobility as standardized and comparable indices , which enable multisource data comparisons at different geographic contexts . China’s big data application service providers have established human mobility platforms to support relevant re - search on epidemic prevention and control . For example , Tencent established a Migration Heat Index to represent the in - tensity of mobility flows between cities or provinces , which is based on a comprehensive calculation of the number of people migrating , the mode of transportation , and the distance of migration ( https : / / heat . qq . com / bigdata / qianxi . html ) . Baidu Migration Data was developed to measure real - time population inflows and outflows between cities and provinces ( https : / / qianxi . baidu . com / ) . The two datasets are measured by gathering travel data based on daily location requests ( e . g . , more than 120 billion location - based requests from the Baidu map and other apps who used Baidu’s map services ) ( Hu et al . , 2021 ) . 28 . 2 . 2 Epidemiological survey data Another type of data , Epidemiological Survey Data ( ESD ) , comes from anonymous interviews with patients . Once an in - fection is confirmed , an epidemiological survey is conducted , and the obtained data is released to the public by the Health Commission of the province or city as soon as possible . The main contents of the survey include the basic circumstances of a patient , his / her activity records ( including detailed time , location name , activity purpose , etc . ) , his / her social contacts , cur - rent status , and disease transmission path , etc . ESD has no information to identify the patient , except the infection - related information , as shown in the data sample description ( Table 28 . 1 ) . It is very essential for identifying high - risk places and close - contact people , as it can be used for locating the trajectory of patients , especially for identifying patient zero and the source of the outbreak . However , compared with mobility big data , the direct spatial traceability based on original ESD is relatively lower . As ESD contains many unstructured texts , Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) algorithms have been applied to extract key information for analysis . Specifically , in reality , the key information usually includes time - series data—the sequence of the activity locations over time and place information , created by matching and adding the geo - graphic coordinates , and semantically related information about the patient’s social contacts and potential transmission information . To prevent the further spread of the epidemic , both ESD and mobile phone data should be better integrated . COVID - 19 and big data technologies Chapter | 28 361 28 . 3 Smartphone applications of big data There are many uncertainties about the SARS - CoV - 2 virus , such as the existence of superspreaders ( Zhang , Li , Wang , Li , & Zhou , 2020 ) , the incubation period ( 14 days or longer ) ( Cheng et al . , 2021 ) , asymptomatic infection , and spatial transmission heterogeneity . The timely detection of potentially infected persons , especially presymptomatic and asymp - tomatic cases , and effective measures such as isolation of susceptible persons , can help control the further spread of the virus . In this regard , two smartphone applications were developed during the epidemic , based on mobility big data integrated with epidemiological surveys , have played important roles in the detection of close contacts and daily risk assessment . 28 . 3 . 1 Measurement of close contacts To effectively control the pandemic , it is necessary to capture spatial - temporal characteristics ( where and when ) of infected persons and their interactions with other people , as the interactions indicate potential social contacts . Transmission mostly occurs rapidly and before symptoms appear ( namely , presymptomatic transmission ) . Most of the evidence shows that the epidemic is highly unlikely to be controlled solely by isolating symptomatic individuals ; testing of passengers on six repatriation flights from Wuhan found that 40 % – 50 % of infections did not show symptoms ( Ferguson et al . , 2020 ; Verity et al . , 2020 ) . As of February 27 , 2020 , 135 confirmed cases were reported in Tianjin , of which 114 cases could be traced to one of 16 clusters . Through close contact investigations , 62 % of the cases were traced as presymptomatic transmission ( had close contacts with infectious people ) . The largest cluster with 45 cases was traced to a shopping mall in the Baodi district , Tianjin ( Ganyani et al . , 2020 ) . Traditional manual epidemiological surveys that rely on direct interviews with in - fected persons are inefficient for identifying people with potential contacts with infected persons , and not fast enough for containing SARS - CoV - 2 . Accurate identification of the above interactions has to rely on big data analysis at the individual level . However , personal big data cannot be disclosed due to data privacy regulations . To solve this problem , a smart - phone application “Instrument for Measuring Close Contacts” was developed by China Electronics Technology Group Corporation Limited , as shown in Figure 28 . 1 . By entering a person’s name and his / her ID number ( personal identifica - tion number registered by the country ) , he / she can check whether he / she had any close contact with an infected / suspected person in the recent past . Combined with people’s travel history ( derived from cellphone signaling data ) and mobility big data , the app has been used when a new case is reported to trace close contacts by tracking the high - risk flights , trains , or buses used by the patients and other risk areas like restaurants or places where the patients stayed . The backend system of this app is a set of integrated algorithms based on multisource and multiplatform big data , which are supported through cross - departmental collaboration , including the National Health Commission , Ministry of Transportation , China National Railway Group , and the Civil Aviation Administration of China . Inputs are automatically calculated in the backend system , i . e . , whether a person visited a high - risk location or had close contact with an infected / suspected person , while avoiding the TABLE 28 . 1 Examples of epidemiological survey data reported by local governments ( Chen et al . , 2020 ) . No . Basic situation Event description ( anonymous ) Case 1 Male , 65 years old , from Qingji Town , Taikang County Zhoukou City . He returned to Taikang County by private car from Wuhan on January 7 , went to Taikang County People’s Hospital on January 8 , and was transferred by the ambulance on January 10 . He went to Zhengzhou Yihe Hospital for treatment and was transferred to the Sixth People’s Hospital of Zhengzhou City by a negative pressure ambulance on January 20 . The diagnosis was confirmed on January 21 Case 2 Male , 55 years old , from Xinyang town He returned to Xinyang City from Wuhan City by bus on January 8 and transferred from Xinyang to Xinxiang by train T3040 on January 11 . He was in Yuanyang County People’s Hospital and Yuanyang County Maternal and Child Health Care . He went to the hospital and drove to the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University ( Zhengdong District ) on January 16 , and was diagnosed on January 22 Case 3 Female , 30 years old , living in Xinxiang town She accompanied her family ( case 2 ) on January 11 , went to the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University ( Zhengdong District ) on January 16 , and was diagnosed on January 23 362 PART | V Recovery leakage of privacy information . Using evidence from the 40 source - recipient transmission pairs ( 80 cases , before March 2020 ) in China , Ferretti et al . ( 2020 ) developed a mathematical model to test the effectiveness of controlling the epidemic using isolation coupled with the close contacts tracing mobile app ( i . e . , to bring transmission below the basic reproduction number R0 ) . The results show that the total contribution to R0 from presymptomatic people is 0 . 9 ( CI , 0 . 2 – 1 . 1 ) . Given the infectiousness of SARS - CoV - 2 and the high proportion of transmissions from presymptomatic individuals ( 46 % higher than other transmission routes ) , a wide promotion of the close - contact - tracing mobile app combined with physical distanc - ing measures was effective in containing the epidemic . 28 . 3 . 2 Health code In order to prevent the spread of the epidemic and support the resumption of economic activities , a universal “Health Code” ( or 健康码 in Chinese ) based on QR is established based on mobility big data . This Health Code has become a critical means for preventing and controlling the epidemic in China . As shown in Figure 28 . 2 , there are three types : i . e . , red , yellow , and green codes . The three colors are dynamically managed . The green code indicates that a person is currently having no infection . If a person with a green code visited a high - risk area or had contact with infected persons , the code will turn red . After the required conditions are met , the Health Code will be converted back to the green code . The Health Code is used as an electronic pass for approval of access into public places in daily life—without a green code , people are not allowed to enter a public space . An artificial intelligence algorithm ( Mozur , Zhong , & Krolik , 2020 ) for identifying the code types was designed based on the time and space intersections with infected cases , which is completed automatically in a background system based on trajectory big data ( not open to the public ) . The app has been generally adopted as a plug - in for the Alipay and WeChat apps . There are two principles to determine the color of the code . First , potentially infected persons are basi - cally those who stayed in specific places where infected people were identified or who had contact with infected people . Second , people who live in areas with outbreaks are targeted . Accordingly , a multilevel management and control system of high - risk areas has been proposed to narrow the scope of lockdowns , from cities to regions , to streets , and to communities . Specifically , each township is divided into three levels : high risk , medium risk , and low risk , depending on the number of confirmed cases . Overlaid with individual mobility data , the infection risk of people can be traced and noticed directly , which is helpful to take effective measures . FIGURE 28 . 1 Screenshots of the mobile phone app “Instrument for Measuring Close Contacts” . COVID - 19 and big data technologies Chapter | 28 363 28 . 4 Evidence regarding control measures Mobility big data and trajectories of infection cases are helpful in evaluating transmission routes . Analyzing the temporal and spatial characteristics and transmission chain of the virus through spatiotemporal big data can also determine the key factors affecting the virus spread , which can provide important information for policy interven - tions . Several data - driven studies have provided some evidence that supports nonpharmaceutical interventions , as discussed below . 28 . 4 . 1 Lockdown measures Based on real - time mobility data from Baidu , combined with detailed ESD data including travel history , it was found that population outflow in severely affected areas was the most important factor affecting the large - scale spread of the epidemic in the early stages ( Hu et al . , 2020 ; Kraemer et al . , 2020 ; Wu , Leung , & Leung , 2020 ) . Before 23 January , 81 % of reported cases were mostly restricted to Hubei Province , and 57 % of reported cases in provinces outside of Hubei had a travel history to Wuhan ( Kraemer et al . , 2020 ) . Therefore , it is necessary to pay close attention to people coming from epidemic areas , and to encourage self - isolation and monitoring . On the other hand , the lockdown of Wuhan ( from January 23 , to April 8 , 2020 , a period of 76 days ) played an effective role in the control of the epidemic and bought time for the arrangement of anti - epidemic measures in other cities . According to research conducted by Tian et al . ( 2020 ) , the lockdown measures in Wuhan delayed the spread of the epidemic to other cities by an average of 2 . 9 days , while the number of confirmed cases was 77 % lower than the situation without Wuhan’s lockdown . 28 . 4 . 2 Restriction of movement and social distancing As for within - city observations , it was found that an increase in population activity led to a significant increase in the number of confirmed cases per day based on location - based service ( LBS ) big data ( Ren et al . , 2020 ) , and the increase in population density resulted in an increase in morbidity and mortality , particularly in densely built - up areas ( Ma , Li , & Zhang , 2021 ; Zhang & Schwartz , 2020 ) . Mu et al . ( 2020 ) collected human mobility data ( intra - city travel intensity from Baidu ) for two weeks before the Chinese New Year , to investigate the association between the ratio of incidence and the travel restriction orders ; by comparing the first week ( January 11 – 17 , 2020 ) with the second week ( January 18 – 24 , 2020 ) , the results show that with a 10 % increase in travel volume and a 1 % ( one unit ) increase in the percentage of people living in the urban area , the number of infected cases in the city is expected to increase by about 7 % and 1 % , respectively ( Mu et al . , 2020 ) . These findings support measures which restrict people’s movements and maintain social distance to prevent the spread of the epidemic . Different policy restriction measures were taken for different places . Public places like restaurants , shopping malls , and public transportation were required to limit the density of people flow , suggesting people sit at least one place apart , while tourist attractions had to be booked online in advance , and people could use phone apps to check the number of appointments by time slot . Besides , evidence suggests that mask - wearing should be required in public spaces ; Xia et al . ( 2020 ) , for example , used population mo - bility big data to improve the existing SEIR model , and calculated that wearing a mask correctly can reduce the risk of transmission by 90 % in a variety of scenarios . FIGURE 28 . 2 Health Code ( an example of Hangzhou , China ) . ( The National Health Commission promotes “One Code Pass , ” and the future of Health Code is more than “Pass . ” https : / / www . cn - healthcare . com / article / 20201221 / content - 547951 . html . ) 364 PART | V Recovery 28 . 4 . 3 Identification of infection risk scenarios Deng et al . ( 2020 ) collected the trajectory of 27 clustered infection cases in Nanchang city of China from mobile communi - cation operators and investigated the relationship of the transmission chain of another 347 close contacts . It was found that the infection rate of close contacts with the first - generation cases was the highest ( from the first generation to the fourth generation , the infection rate is 52 . 6 % , 6 . 1 % , 2 . 3 % , and 0 % , respectively ) . Deng et al . ( 2020 ) also found that having a meal , living in a room , and working together with an infected person will induce infection rates of 10 . 6 % , 10 . 0 % , and 5 . 3 % , respectively . Derived from LBS big data of infected people , Yang , Xu , et al . ( 2020 ) analyzed spatial clustering patterns of the epidemic and confirmed high - risk places for virus transmission , namely , family gatherings , shopping malls , restaurants , and public transportation . The Chinese CDC , based on the analysis of ESD big data , defines close contacts under differ - ent scenarios . The definition provides an important basis for people to confirm their own close contacts . In general , close contacts refer to people who have not taken effective protection from close contact with the suspected and confirmed cases 2 days before the onset of symptoms , or 2 days before the asymptomatic infection samples are taken . Some specific condi - tions are described in Table 28 . 2 . 28 . 4 . 4 Cross - border transportation of food in the cold chain Although China was able to quickly control the epidemic without heavy rebounds , several sporadic outbreaks were re - ported . These unexpected cases were mostly imported cases . In addition to person - to - person transmission , the successive outbreaks in three cities , Beijing , Dalian , and Qingdao , were all directly linked to imported frozen meat . It was first dis - covered in a case in Beijing , which led to the second wave of epidemic in the city , on June 11 , 2020 . This case had come after 56 consecutive days of no local transmission events in the city , and there had been no experience with any infection locations , persons , or events during the prior 14 days . Based on epidemiological survey and trajectory analysis of the case , Xinfadi market ( in the southern Beijing district of Fengtai ) was identified as the source of this outbreak ( Wu , Leung , & Leung , 2020 ) . Further investigation showed that the imported frozen salmon tested positive for the SARS - CoV - 2 nucleic acid ; similarly , in the outbreak in July 2020 in Dalian , a coastal city in China , swab samples related to frozen seafood tested positive and were taken as the source of infection ( Ma et al . , 2020 ) . In another coastal city , Qingdao , the SARS - CoV - 2 from the surface of the outer packages of imported cod ( 50 out of 421 samples exactly ) tested positive Liu , Yang , et al . ( 2020 ) . TABLE 28 . 2 Specific risk scenarios taken as close contacts . No . Description 1 . Family members living together with the infected person in the same house 2 . Direct caregivers of the infected person or those who provide diagnosis , treatment , or nursing services 3 . Medical workers whose activities may generate aerosols in the same space as the infected person 4 . Having close contacts with infected people in the same space , including offices , workshops , teams , elevators , canteens , classrooms 5 . People who take the same transportation modes and have close contacts ( within 1 m ) , including staff and companions Airplane , passengers in the same row with the infected person’s seat and three rows of seats in front and back , and cabin staff who provide services in this area 6 . Train , for fully enclosed air - conditioned trains , all passengers in the same compartment ; for general trains , the same compartment , and neighbors in the same compartment ; also includes the staff in the above - mentioned area 7 . Bus , all persons in the same fully enclosed air - conditioned buses with the infected person ; three rows of passengers close to the cases and drivers in the nonenclosed ordinary buses 8 . Ship , all persons and staff in the same cabin with the infected person 9 . Other situations based on empirical investigation Source : Chinese CDC . COVID - 19 and big data technologies Chapter | 28 365 Given that these were not random examples , in December 2020 , the government required the investigation of cold - chain environments across the country . It was reported that positive test samples were found in other provinces ( like Hubei , Zhejiang , Shandong , Shanxi , Anhui , Liaoning , etc . ) , and involved many types of frozen meats ( e . g . , pork , beef , chicken ) . b In further studies , it was proven that SARS - CoV - 2 can survive on the packaging surface of food in cold chains for a long time , enabling a long - distance transmission ( Chi , Zheng , Liu , & Wang , 2021 ; Han & Liu , 2021 ) . Take Dalian , a port city in China , as an example , this city has experienced five waves of COVID - 19 outbreaks , and three of them due to the cold - chain logistics industry . c In July 2020 , the patient zero was infected in his work environment where the frozen seafood tested positive , as also convinced in the conclusion of Ma , Zhang , et al . ( 2020 ) . In December 2020 , the first cases were the dockers of cold - chain logistics , they were found through the routine nucleic acid test , and they were not contacts with any cases during the prior 14 days . The transmission chain diagram is shown in Figure 28 . 4 . On November 4 , 2021 , one new case was confirmed who is a cold storage employee , completed two doses of vaccination , and had no experience with any infection locations , persons , or events during the prior 14 days . As the country’s largest import port of cold - chain aquatic products , nearly 70 % of imported cold - chain goods enter China through Dalian , with more than 600 , 000 people engaged in imported cold - chain industries . c As the high - risk industry for infection , it has been required for regular nucleic acid tests as routine for the employees who engaged in cold - chain logistics . In addition , China has formed complete multilevel management of epidemic control response and emergency mechanism , which will be described in the Section 28 . 5 . 1 . Here , we focus on the transmission chain in Figure 28 . 4 , to illustrate the complexity and diversity of the spread of the virus and the importance , timeliness , and irreplaceability of ESD with big data tracking . Throughout the trans - mission chain , cold - chain logistics companies’ employees were infected ( they don’t realize they were infected ) , and then further spread through a series of activities with high infection rates , including family gathering , restaurant meals , work contacts , shopping , and hospital visits . 28 . 5 Roles of big data in policy implementation 28 . 5 . 1 Multilevel management of epidemic control The responses in China underscore the effectiveness of multilevel management of sensitive surveillance , immediate inves - tigation , and rapid responses in combination with public health interventions in containing the outbreak of SARS - CoV - 2 . Multilevel management and emergency response control procedures have been developed to be effective policy measures to prevent and control the epidemic ( Figure 28 . 3 ) . When a new case is confirmed , the local CDC will interview the patient as soon as possible , that is , epidemiological survey data is collected . Through the ESD analysis , important information from the patient’s activity trajectory will be quickly analyzed and corresponding measures will be taken : ( 1 ) spatial traceability , to confirm the patient’s route of infection and identify the transmission relationship , i . e . , the source of the virus ; ( 2 ) confirm the high - risk areas according to the patient’s stay time and recover details of any public transportation used , including flight number , seat number , etc . ; ( 3 ) update the close contacts database in a timely manner , according to the stay time , period , and space information of the patients ; close contacts will be determined based on whether the individual’s mobile phone data and mobility data overlap with the patient’s spatiotemporal trajectory ( this process is automatically calculated with the big data platform and server , and can be checked by individuals through the mobile app “Instrument for Measuring Close Contacts” ) ; ( 4 ) all close contacts are required to take measures , including nucleic acid testing and self - isolation ; the community where the patient lives will lockdown until the situation improves . As the survey is anonymized , and most people in China are living in dense residences , when the community is used as the unit for lockdown management , one community usually covers hundreds or thousands of people . Therefore , there is no individual information involved , and the Health Code of people who live in the town and district with the outbreak will turn red due to the distribution of infected cases . Residents living in this city will be encouraged to restrict their travel . 28 . 5 . 2 Support for decision making on the resumption of activities The reopening of society , with the resumption of work and productive activities , is of great significance for the restora - tion of normal social order and economic development . However , it also increases the risk of people gathering , causing repeated outbreaks of the epidemic . The timing of appropriate policy measures should be carefully taken to balance b . Worldwidenews : Import and cold chain ! Is “cold - chain hidden virus” really hard to guard against ? http : / / www . worldwidenews . cn / hq / list / 20115 . html . c . Guangming Net : CCTV : Three waves of cold chain - related epidemics occurred in Dalian , and there may be loopholes in the “iron barrel prevention and control” https : / / m . gmw . cn / baijia / 2021 - 11 / 13 / 1302677105 . html . 366 PART | V Recovery the postrecovery period of COVID - 19 and the protection of people . Some studies focused on the timing and order of resumption of work . Wang et al . ( 2020 ) used population migration data from Baidu to monitor outflow from Wuhan before the lockdowns and the outflow from Wuhan to other 15 severely affected close cities in Hubei Province ( from January 10 , to January 23 , 2020 ) , combined with real - time data of COVID - 19 at the city level , to develop a complex network and SDEIR warehouse model for simulating epidemic transmission trends . Compared with the normal migra - tion trend after the Chinese New Year in 2019 , they suggested that Hubei should not resume work earlier than March 2 , 2020 ; otherwise , it would cause another outbreak of the epidemic . Based on an age - stratified social contact matrix , Liu , Gu , et al . ( 2020 ) simulated the risk of epidemic transmission and economic losses under different scenarios of the timing and duration of work resumption , focusing on Wuhan , Beijing , Tianjin , Shenzhen , Hangzhou , and Suzhou . They used the confirmed cases ( from December 8 , 2019 , to February 29 , 2020 ) and the demographic data from the six representative cities . The population was divided into seven age groups , with four representative settings of social con - tacts that may cause infection , including households , schools , workplaces , and public spaces , to compute the contact intensity between different age groups at each of the four settings . The underlying transmission patterns of COVID - 19 among different populations were quantitatively characterized , highlighting the importance of social contacts and suggesting that they be incorporated into work resumption plans to provide situation - specific and better - informed pa - rameterization . To evaluate urban vitality recovery and its influencing factors , Ma , Kan , Gong , and Dang ( 2020 ) used intra - city trip intensities ( represented by the daily average of the number of trips ) , within 36 consecutive days from Lunar New Year’s Eve , to compare the travel flow changes in 2019 and 2020 . Combined with population migration datasets , inflows from Wuhan , COVID - 19 infection cases , and urban medical facilities indicators , 314 cities in China were clustered into six types of recovery models , evaluating the impacts of the epidemic on the city vitality . Through horizontal comparisons between the six types , it emphasized that policy recommendations of phased restoration should be proposed according to different city types . Due to the impact of the epidemic , the demand for commuting travel by public transportation has dropped significantly . Kan , Ma , and Dang ( 2020 ) analyzed the commuter flow and distribu - tion of commuters’ work and residence in Beijing from January 31 , to February 23 , 2020 , combined with the route planning method , to estimate the commuting mode and the daily average commuter flow intensity of the city’s bus and subway . It was found that during the epidemic , the main commuting demand was concentrated on the transfer stations connecting subway lines and buses , and the number of people taking public transport in the suburbs was greater than that in the urban area . FIGURE 28 . 3 Workflow of multilevel management of epidemic control . COVID - 19 and big data technologies Chapter | 28 367 FIGURE 28 . 4 Map of the transmission chain in Dalian ( December 2020 – January 2021 ) ; the COVID - 19 rebound due to the imported cold - chain logis - tics ( as the source of outbreak ) . On December 15 , 2020 , the routine nucleic acid test reported that four dockers were tested positive ( Zhang , Wang , Guo , and Zhao are workers of Haohan Labor Service Company ) . Through the ESD and big data trajectory tracking , all close contacts and all people who may be exposed to the high - risk environment are timely identified , especially for the residential and work environment . Thus , during the large - scale nucleic acid testing process for the people with potential infected risk , colleagues Yuan and Li were found to be infected . The four cases helped the company manager Zhang and his wife move and have dinner together . This process led to the infection of two couples , including the restaurant owner . In addition , in tracking Yuan’s trajectory , it was found that he had been to Jinzuo commercial building ; as such , all people who had been to the mall were suggested to test for nucleic acid , and then it was found that 10 merchants and 9 customers were infected . Among these people , Jin had a family gathering of 11 people ( presymptomatic ) and a family gathering infection occurred . Nine neighbors of Jin were infected . After that , the 11 infected people ( presymptomatic ) conducted a series of social activities , and this chain of transmission from Jin infected a total of 32 people . Most of these are presymptomatic , where big data tracking played an important role in cutting off the source of transmission in time . This map is made by the authors , and the content comes from the Health Commission of Dalian , http : / / hcod . dl . gov . cn / . 368 PART | V Recovery 28 . 6 Conclusion and outlook Human mobility determines the temporal and spatial transmission patterns of many infectious diseases , especially COVID - 19 . Thus , mobility big data have been widely used to support pandemic control measures around the world , such as stay - at - home orders , travel restrictions , physical distancing measures , quarantine requirements , mask - wearing , teleworking , vaccination , and resumption of economic activities . In China , such big data have been successfully ap - plied to identify , inform , quarantine , and monitor people who had contacts with infected persons in a timely and seam - less way , protecting privacy during the whole process . In particular , the sources of the outbreak have been detected in a timely and cost - efficient way for cutting off further transmission routes . Such success suggests that SARS - Cov - 2 detection technologies should be developed and deployed around the world . In areas with underdeveloped medical services , such technologies may be the only way to protect people from infection until a sufficient proportion of people are vaccinated . 28 . 6 . 1 Key messages of policy recommendations 28 . 6 . 1 . 1 Data - supported pandemic control policymaking Due to various unknowns about COVID - 19 , pandemic policymaking in many countries has been arbitrary in many ways . Because multiple policies are usually implemented , it is difficult to assess the pure effects of a single policy ( Zhang et al . , 2021 ) . To overcome this difficulty , reliable data with necessary information about infections and factors affecting virus transmission are crucial to support policymaking . Big data about human mobility , linked with epidemiological information , enable pin - pointed control of outbreaks . Because of the importance of balancing economic development and pandemic control ( Li , Ma , & Zhang , 2022 ) , it is necessary to determine the proper timing and duration of specific control measures by making better use of various big data . 28 . 6 . 1 . 2 Promoting data sharing between the health sector and other sectors The current practice from all over the world has shown that probability - based policymaking has seldom been success - ful in controlling the current COVID - 19 pandemic , as observed by repeated outbreaks in many countries . It seems that it is crucial to determine how to balance pandemic control , protection of privacy and freedom , and social responsibility of citizens , noting that freedom does not mean “free of responsibility . ” China has taken serious measures for individu - als who deliberately sabotage public safety . For example , a person who took a plane had symptoms but concealed his / her reports and took anti - fever medicines to use public transport systems . This person was eventually sentenced for the crime of obstructing the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases . From such a consideration , the health sector and other sectors should promote data sharing in a trustworthy and responsible way . Such shared data may include epi - demiological information and spatiotemporal social contacts , not only at activity sites but also during the use of vari - ous transport modes . Such data sharing should be supported by close collaboration between epidemiological experts and experts in other fields , and enabled by ensuring a fair , inclusive , and transparent public participation right that is legally guaranteed . To support such data sharing and wise use of big data , it is crucial to establish relevant laws and regulations , which not only protect privacy information but also enable policymakers to properly restrain the behavior from individuals to groups during the pandemic period . 28 . 6 . 1 . 3 Standardization of data sharing for controlling future pandemics The World Health Organization should take initiatives to standardize AI algorithms of smart sensing and data mining , private information processing , and sharing publicly acceptable big data - based practices to more countries , especially developing countries , under wide collaboration with other international organizations dealing with global technological developments . 28 . 6 . 1 . 4 Promoting booking - based resumption of social and economic activities With the resumption of social and economic activities , human mobility and social contacts are expected to increase . How , then , to prevent a resurgence of the COVID - 19 outbreak ? Online booking in advance by time slot should be advocated for achieving orderly control of population density in public spaces . Such booking measures based on smartphone apps ( e . g . , for use of public transportation , for visiting a destination ) have been widely taken in China , and its effectiveness has been confirmed with high public acceptance . COVID - 19 and big data technologies Chapter | 28 369 28 . 6 . 1 . 5 Logistics measures for controlling the spread of COVID - 19 SARS - CoV - 2 can survive on package surfaces for a long time in a cold environment . In China , the virus was found in the cold chain of foods transported from other countries . As a result , it has been widely suggested in China to increase the frequency of disinfection in high - risk environments , such as airports , logistics and transportation facilities , and other public places . Thus , it is also necessary to better control the cross - border spread of COVID - 19 caused by the food , meat , and other cold chains . 28 . 6 . 1 . 6 Process management of policy implementation The virus is invisible , and can exist anywhere , at any time and be transmitted to anybody . Therefore , it should be controlled in a seamless way from the spatial , temporal , and personal perspectives . The whole process of policy implementation should be better managed to avoid any mistakes . In this regard , the DIRECT approach ( Zhang , 2021 ) seems relevant , which consists of six steps : i . e . , detect ( D ) ( of a governance issue ) , inform - intervene ( I ) ( based on the D ) , ( 3 ) react ( to the I ) , ( 4 ) enlighten - enforce - evaluate ( the D - I - R ) , ( 5 ) collaborate ( C ) ( by involving various stakeholders to implement the D - I - R - E ) , and ( 6 ) transfer ( T ) ( the D - I - R - E - C experience ) . Successful process management could not be done without the strong sup - port of big data . 28 . 6 . 2 Future research challenges 28 . 6 . 2 . 1 More research on social contacts Control of dynamic population density is one of the core components of China’s anti - epidemic policy in public spaces . However , mobility data have not been directly used to measure social contacts . In reality , it is social contacts that directly cause person - to - person transmission , rather than population movements . In other words , if a person can keep a sufficient distance from other persons , the infection risk will be very low . Therefore , it is worth developing indicators representing the intensity of social contact at various locations over time . Such indicators can be used to better understand and control the virus transmission . 28 . 6 . 2 . 2 More research on the assessment of policy effects Many policies have been implemented jointly during the pandemic . Some policies are coordinated , while others are made without considering trade - offs across policies . Limited efforts have been made to evaluate the effects of a single policy . As social and economic activities resume , it is important to better package different policies that can most effectively bal - ance the resumption of activities and prevention of further outbreaks . Furthermore , it is still unclear how to modify social distancing interventions given that infections still occur after being vaccinated . A joint anti - epidemic policy study based on the analysis of spatial big data of vaccination and social distancing should be conducted . References Changruenngam , S . , Bicout , D . J . , & Modchang , C . ( 2020 ) . How the individual human mobility spatio - temporally shapes the disease transmission dynam - ics . Scientific Reports , 10 ( 1 ) , 1 – 13 . Chen , S . , Zhang , C . , & Ren , P . ( 2020 ) . Preliminary study on exploring the trajectory of patients with COVID - 19 by Data mining algorithms . Chinese Journal of Medical Science Research Management , 33 ( 00 ) , E005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3760 / cma . j . cn113565 - 20200212 - 00013 . Cheng , C . , Zhang , D . , Dang , D . , Geng , J . , Zhu , P . , Yuan , M . , et al . ( 2021 ) . The incubation period of COVID - 19 : A global meta - analysis of 53 studies and a Chinese observation study of 11 , 545 patients . Infectious Diseases of Poverty , 10 , 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s40249 - 021 - 00901 - 9 . Chi , Y . , Zheng , S . , Liu , C . , & Wang , Q . ( 2021 ) . Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 on cold - chain food overpacks : A new challenge . Journal of Global Health , 11 . Deng , Z . , Xia , W . , Fan , Y . , Wang , R . , Tu , Z . , Wang , W . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Analysis on transmission chain of a cluster epidemic of COVID - 19 , Nanchang . Chinese Journal of Epidemiology , 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3760 / cma . j . cn112338 - 20200313 - 00334 . Ferguson , N . , Laydon , D . , Nedjati - Gilani , G . , Imai , K . , Ainslie , N . , Baguelin , M . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Impact of non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) to reduce COVID - 19 mortality and healthcare demand . 16 March www . imperial . ac . uk / media / imperial - college / medicine / sph / ide / gida - fellowships / Imperial - College - COVID19 - NPI - modelling - 16 - 03 - 2020 . pdf . Ferretti , L . , Wymant , C . , Kendall , M . , Zhao , L . , Nurtay , A . , Abeler - Dörner , L . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Quantifying SARS - CoV - 2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing . Science , 368 ( 6491 ) . Ganyani , T . , Kremer , C . , Chen , D . , Torneri , A . , Faes , C . , Wallinga , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Estimating the generation interval for COVID - 19 based on symptom onset data . medRxiv . 2020 . 03 . 05 . 20031815 . 8 March . Han , S . , & Liu , X . ( 2021 ) . Can imported cold food cause COVID - 19 recurrent outbreaks ? A review . Environmental Chemistry Letters , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10311 - 021 - 01312 - w . 370 PART | V Recovery Hu , B . , Qiu , J . , Chen , H . , Tao , V . , Wang , J . , & Lin , H . ( 2020 ) . First , second and potential third generation spreads of the COVID - 19 epidemic in mainland China : An early exploratory study incorporating location - based service data of mobile devices . International Journal of Infectious Diseases , 96 , 489 – 495 . Hu , T . , Wang , S . , She , B . , Zhang , M . , Huang , X . , Cui , Y . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Human mobility data in the COVID - 19 pandemic : Characteristics , applications , and challenges . International Journal of Digital Earth . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 3851789 . Available at SSRN : https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 3851789 . Kan , C . , Ma , Q . , & Dang , A . ( 2020 ) . Predicting and optimizing commuting traffic by public transit under the COVID - 19 pandemic : A case study of Beijing . Urban Transport of China , 18 ( 3 ) , 33 – 41 . Kraemer , M . , Yang , C . , Gutierrez , B . , Wu , C . , Klein , B . , Pigott , D . , et al . ( 2020 ) . The effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID - 19 epidemic in China . Science , 368 ( 6490 ) , 493 – 497 . Li , S . , Ma , S . , & Zhang , J . ( 2022 ) . Building a system dynamics model to analyze scenarios of COVID - 19 policymaking in tourism - dependent developing countries : A case study of Cambodia . Tourism Economics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 13548166211059080 . First Published January 17 , 2022 . Liu , P . , Yang , M . , Zhao , X . , Guo , Y . , Wang , L . , Zhang , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Cold - chain transportation in the frozen food industry may have caused a recurrence of COVID - 19 cases in destination : successful isolation of SARS - CoV - 2 virus from the imported frozen cod package surface . Biosafety and Health , 2 ( 4 ) , 199 – 201 . Liu , Y . , Gu , Z . , Xia , S . , Shi , B . , Zhou , X . , Shi , Y . , & Liu , J . ( 2020 ) . What are the underlying transmission patterns of COVID - 19 outbreak ? An age - specific social contact characterization . EClinical Medicine , 22 , 100354 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eclinm . 2020 . 100354 . Ma , H . , Zhang , J . , Wang , J . , Qin , Y . , Chen , C . , Song , Y . , et al . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 outbreak caused by contaminated packaging of imported cold - chain products—Liaoning Province , China . China CDC Weekly , 3 ( 21 ) , 441 – 447 . Ma , Q . , Kan , C . , Gong , Z . , & Dang , A . ( 2020 ) . Recovery of urban vitality and its influencing factors : Exploration based on the scenario of the outbreak of public health emergencies . City Planning Review , 44 ( 9 ) , 22 – 27 ( in Chinese ) . Ma , S . , Li , S . , & Zhang , J . ( 2021 ) . Diverse and nonlinear influences of built environment factors on COVID - 19 spread across townships in China at its initial stage . Scientific Reports , 11 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 021 - 91849 - 1 . Mozur , P . , Zhong , R . , & Krolik , A . ( 2020 ) . In coronavirus fight , China gives citizens a color code , with red flags . New York Times . 1 March www . nytimes . com / 2020 / 03 / 01 / business / china - coronavirus - surveillance . html . Mu , X . , Yeh , A . G . , & Zhang , X . ( 2020 ) . The interplay of spatial spread of COVID - 19 and human mobility in the urban system of China during the Chinese new year . Environment and Planning B : Urban Analytics and City Science , 2399808320954211 . Ren , H . , Zhao , L . , Zhang , A . , Song , L . , Liao , Y . , Lu , W . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Early forecasting of the potential risk zones of COVID - 19 in China ' s megacities . Science of the Total Environment , 729 , 138995 . Tian , H . , Liu , Y . , Li , Y . , Wu , C . , Chen , B . , Kraemer , M . , et al . ( 2020 ) . An investigation of transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the COVID - 19 epidemic in China . Science , 368 ( 6491 ) , 638 – 642 . Verity , R . , Okell , L . C . , Dorigatti , I . , Winskill , P . , Whittaker , C . , Imai , N . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Estimates of the severity of COVID - 19 disease . medRxiv . 2020 . 03 . 09 . 20033357 . 13 March . Wang , X . , Tang , S . , Chen , Y . , Feng , X . , Xiao , Y . , & Xu , Z . ( 2020 ) . When will be the resumption of work in Wuhan and its surrounding areas during COVID - 19 epidemic ? A data - driven network modeling analysis . Science China Mathematica , 50 ( 7 ) , 969 – 978 . Wu , J . T . , Leung , K . , & Leung , G . M . ( 2020 ) . Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the COVID - 19 outbreak originating in Wuhan , China : A modelling study . Lancet , 395 ( 10225 ) , 689 – 697 . Xia , J . , Zhou , Y . , Li , Z . , Li , F . , Le , Y . , Cheng , T . , et al . ( 2020 ) . COVID - 19 risk assessment driven by urban spatiotemporal big data : A case study of Guangdong - Hong Kong - Macao Greater Bay Area . Acta Geodaetica et Cartographica Sinica , 49 ( 6 ) , 671 – 680 . Yang , C . , Sha , D . , Liu , Q . , Li , Y . , Lan , H . , Guand , W . W . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Taking the pulse of COVID - 19 : A spatiotemporal perspective . International Journal of Digital Earth , 13 ( 10 ) , 1186 – 1211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17538947 . 2020 . 1809723 . Yang , H . , Xu , J . , Li , Y . , Liang , X . , Jin , Y . , Chen , S . , et al . ( 2020 ) . The preliminary analysis on the characteristics of the cluster for the COVID - 19 . Chinese Journal of Epidemiology , 41 ( 5 ) , 623 – 628 ( in Chinese ) . Zhang , C . , & Schwartz , G . ( 2020 ) . Spatial disparities in coronavirus incidence and mortality in the United States : An ecological analysis as of May . Journal of Rural Health , 36 ( 3 ) , 433 – 445 . Zhang , J . ( 2021 ) . Governance for post - COVID - 19 carbon reduction : A case study of the transport sector . ( May 23 , 2021 ) . Available at SSRN : https : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract _ id = 3851398 . Zhang , J . , Litvinova , M . , Liang , Y . , Wang , Y . , Wang , Y . , Wang , W . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID - 19 outbreak in China . Science , 368 ( 6498 ) , 1481 – 1486 . Zhang , J . , Zhang , R . , Ding , H . , Li , S . , Liu , R . , Ma , S . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Effects of transport - related COVID - 19 policy measures : A case study of six developed countries . Transport Policy , 110 , 37 – 57 . Zhang , Y . , Li , Y . , Wang , L . , Li , M . , & Zhou , X . ( 2020 ) . Evaluating transmission heterogeneity and super - spreading event of COVID - 19 in a metropolis of China . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , 17 ( 10 ) , 3705 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph17103705 .