Co - design with Communities . A Reflection on the Literature Salomão David - salomao . david . cumbula @ usi . ch Amalia G . Sabiescu - sabiesca @ usi . ch Lorenzo Cantoni - lorenzo . cantoni @ usi . ch New Media in Education Laboratory Faculty of Communication Sciences Università della Svizzera italiana , Lugano , Switzerland Abstract This paper reviews the literature focused on co - design with communities , studying its ap - plicability in the field of Information and Communication Technologies for Development ( ICTD ) . Texts dated from 2002 to 2013 have been surveyed , covering both subjects : “co - design” and “development” . Based on their disciplinary orientation , three clusters were identified : ( 1 ) information and communication for development , with a focus on develop - mental goals ; ( 2 ) information systems , with a concern for technology design ; and ( 3 ) social design , in which social issues are prioritized . The analysis reverted on the identification and discussion of the themes emphasized in the literature as the most important aspects for linking co - design activities with development . Five themes emerged from the analysis : stakeholders , context , ownership , social learning , and sustainability . The paper defines each theme and shows how it has been approached differently in the three clusters of re - lated literature . This review is meant to inform future co - design studies in community set - tings , by providing a map of the most important research issues in this field coupled with considerations on how different disciplinary orientations – developmental , information sys - tems , and social sciences – are likely to inform different approaches in dealing with these issues . Keywords Co - design , community informatics , ICT for Development ( ICTD ) , participatory design . 1 . INTRODUCTION The goal of this study is to investigate and conceptualize a thematic framework for the analysis and applicability of co - design in the field of Information and Communication Technologies for Development ( ICTD ) , aiming at supporting researchers , practitioners , individuals , and institutions seeking to co - design ICTs with local communities in developing Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 152 contexts . As such , this study is concerned with understanding how technology design is marked by its applicability in the development field , and what are the underpinnings , explanations and implications for the tendencies to involve users in technology design . This investigation requires a comprehensive vision of what design is , in its cultural and historical dimensions , what role was played by the user in the historical evolution of design , and how does its application for developmental goals mark different approaches in the design process and its outcomes . Design has been around since the birth of humanity , with other denominations that evolved through time . The craftsmanship model of production characterizing the beginning times of design required that end - users and producers be fully involved in the conception , development , and evaluation of products ( Shah et al . , 2009 ) . With the industrial revolution , mass production emerged , positing a divide between end - users and the whole production cycle ( Castellacci , 2004 ) . End - users or clients became mainly targets of marketing and selling activities . From the industrial revolution , marked by the transition of manufacturing processes from hand production methods to machines , up until the present time , several inventions have become fundamental to improved life standards , e . g . electricity , domestic appliances , communication media , transportation means ( Brewer et al . 2005 ) . Design “as a plan or scheme devised by a person for something that is to be implemented” ( Bernhard and Bürdek , 2005 ) became highly specialized , and left little space for the involvement of end - users in the design process . More recently , higher standards and increasing competition on the quality levels determined an increased attention to the needs and views of the end - users . This motioned the inclusion of end - users within the design process as a means for ensuring better quality and higher relevance of products and services for users’ needs ( Wheelwright , 1992 ) . A similar path may be recognized in the evolution of approaches to technology design for socio - economic development . ICTs have long been acknowledged as a contributing factor for the improvement of socio - economic conditions in developing countries ( Mann , 2004 ; Sahay , 2005 ) . Yet what technologies , with what features and how these should be designed to maximize effective usage is a matter of debate . The approaches to technology design for developing contexts evolved in relation to considerations and beliefs on the nature of development and the effective means to pursue it . The poles of this evolution can be associated to two approaches : a transfer and diffusion approach characteristic of the first years of ICT for development ( ICT4D ) initiatives , and a social embeddedness approach that gained increased attention in the more mature years of ICT4D research and practice ( Avgerou , 2008 ) . The transfer and diffusion approach , associated with the tenets of conventional development , was based on the premise that developing countries can be propelled on the development path by knowledge and innovations emanating from developed nations ( Avgerou , 2008 ; Waisboard , 2001 ) . The design of technological innovation was therefore fully conceived by experts in developed countries and transferred in developing areas . Yet , the evaluation of projects fuelled by this vision revealed that the transfer of innovation with no attention to local factors incurred a high risk of failure ( Avgerou , 2008 ) . A notable example is that of the Lincos project , a well - financed initiative that aimed to drop recycled shipping containers with high - tech into areas with low or no access to technology ( Braund & Schwittay , 2006 ) . The project failed to reach up to the high objectives it had set , for Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 153 reasons that were related to inattention to design features and the impact of cultural factors ( Sterling & Rangaswamy , 2010 ) . On the contrary , the social embeddedness approach emphasizes the importance of local factors in the design and appropriation of innovation . This new understanding of development stresses the importance of design partnerships and participation by the civil society as the best method to achieve actual adoption and appropriation , and hence sustainable development ( Sonnenwald , 1997 ) . In this paradigm , user participation in the design process is considered a key factor for designing technology that has relevance and can be used sustainably in a socio - cultural context ( Waisboard , 2001 ) . The integration of co - design in developmental initiatives appears therefore to have been motioned and legitimated by two convergent waves : in design , the move towards user involvement as a means for ensuring higher product quality and relevance ; in development and especially ICT4D , the evolution towards participatory methods framed by discourses on the social embeddedness of ICT and the importance of local factors in technology appropriation . Different takes on co - design approaches and processes are further shaped by different research and disciplinary orientations . For example , information systems researchers are concerned with the intertwined processes of technology development and organizational change , while social sciences researchers place emphasis on the role of the socio - economic context on shaping technology usages , and on their impact in building towards sustainable community development ( Avgerou , 2010 ) . These considerations framed the perspective for conducting the present study , and drew attention to the bearing of different theoretical and disciplinary orientations in approaching co - design for community development . The study identifies three core disciplinary strands - ICTD , information systems , and social design - and shows how each puts forward a different understanding of co - design and prioritises different issues in relation to its employment and assessment . After outlining different definitions of co - design in each strand , the paper proceeds with an outline of the themes emphasized in the literature surveyed as the most important aspects linking co - design activities to community development goals . 2 . METHODOLOGY In order to find relevant documents , a combination of two keywords has been used : “co - design” and “development” . Queries have been done on the archives of the Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries ( EJISDC ) , and CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and Arts , then a snowball sampling method was employed , using the documents retrieved to identify other related documents . Beside EJISDC , the Journals of Information and Technologies & international Development ( ITID ) , Information Technologies for Development ( ITD ) , African Journal of Information and Communication ( AJIC ) , International Journal of Design ( IJD ) , and Journal of International Development ( JID ) have been searched following the snowball approach . The applied technique resulted in a first list of 189 documents . These were analysed , then reduced to a final sample of 36 fully relevant items , considering the following criteria : the studies surveyed had to ( i ) be related to co - design and communities , ( ii ) include case studies or reviews related to development programs , and ( iii ) provide clear evidence when Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 154 social aspects were investigated . Only research papers , conference proceedings , literature reviews , books , and doctoral theses have been included in the sample . Notes , master theses , and practitioner reports were not taken into consideration in this study . Selected documents were grouped depending on their approach and the field where co - design interventions were applied . The analysis indicated that co - design as a design technique is applied in the field of ICTD , having a relation with information system ( IS ) , as well as to social design ( SD ) . This prompted the identification of three research areas where co - design is studied and applied : ( 1 ) ICTD , ( 2 ) information systems ( IS ) and ( 3 ) social design , as shown in Figure 1 . The documents classified as ICTD are those in which co - design has been used to serve goals related to education , health , climate change , waste management , social communication through the use of ICTs , and to reduce digital divides and gaps between rural and urban communities . The documents categorized as IS are those where design is presented as creation of software or hardware that has inherent value to modern society . The documents in the social design strand emphasize social issues in design and the goals to be served by the resulting products and services . Furthermore , the documents included in this study were also classified according to the geographical location of presented cases studies . Figure 1 . Journals presenting co - design manuscripts clustered along three main research and disciplinary areas 3 . CO - DESIGN STUDIES AT A GLANCE From the 36 selected documents , 26 are conference proceedings , nine are journal papers , and one is a Ph . D . thesis . Studied documents were published between 2002 and 2013 . From the three research areas , IS has the highest number of documents , with 11 conference proceedings , five journal papers and one Ph . D . thesis . The field of ICTD comes second with 10 conference proceedings and three journal papers . The field of social design has five conference proceedings and one journal article . It is interesting to note that the field of IS has the highest number of manuscripts . The Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 155 result is supported by the fact that IS has been the pioneer field exploring the design paradigm through the need to provide e - governance and information and communication means to rural communities using web applications and mobile technologies ( Sanders , 2008 ) . Figure 2 . Manuscripts clustering according to research area and type of publication . Figure 3 shows that the highest numbers of countries with case studies applying co - design are located in Europe where eight countries have implemented co - design projects , followed by the Asian continent , Africa , and North America . When accessed by country , the highest numbers of co - design projects are located in United Kingdom with six projects . Figure 3 . Geographic provenance Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 156 4 . DEFINING CO - DESIGN The emergence of co - design can be linked to two design approaches : user - centred design and participatory design . In the 1970s , design firms initiated an approach that came to be known as user - centred design , characterised by the reproduction or translation of user knowledge into principles and prescriptions that designers could work with ( Santos , 2000 ) . The underlying principles were that designers should understand users and their needs and build trust to increase the efficiency of design outcomes through dialogue and participation . By giving a prominent place to the user , it was thought that more useful and relevant design ideas would emerge ( Nisbett and Wilson , 1977 ) . Research in engineering systems and software design prompted the emergence of a novel design approach , from user - centred design to participatory design ( Schuler & Namioka , 1993 ) . The user - centred design approach considered users as subjects who provide expertise to formulate and conceptualize an idea or service ( Ehn , 1993 ) . The participatory approach , pioneered by Kristen Nyaard , was described as a set of methodologies , a mind - set , and an attitude towards accepting that people have different perceptions of the design process . These perceptions and perspectives can be articulated only if users themselves are provided with appropriate tools to express them ( Sanders , 2003 ) . Consequently , participatory design covers theories and practices that emphasize the role of the end - users as full participants in the design process . Co - design is seen as the step forward from user - centred design , and closely associated with participatory design . Some studies describe user - centred design as a United States driven approach , and participatory design as a Northern European approach ( Sanders , 2007 ) . These two approaches have been influencing each other in their historical evolution , and marked the way co - design came to be defined and understood . Co - design can be considered “an updated term of participatory design” , as it shares its key principle of involving all stakeholders in the design process in order to ensure that the end - product meets user needs , and has a high rate of adoption ( Steinmueller , 2001 ) . The review shows also that there are strong similarities among the definitions of co - design in the fields of ICTD and IS , and a slight difference when it comes to the field of social design . The approach to co - design in ICTD is shaped by the concerns of practitioners , researchers and international development organisations with raising public awareness and spreading ICT knowledge and skills to promote sustainable community development ( Kang , 2010 ; Freeman , 1984 ) . Nevertheless , there is also contention on the role of ICT in promoting development , in particular because countries development priorities might be different ( Ramachandran and Kam , 2008 ; Kroczek et al . , 2013 ) . Co - design refers to the conception or creation of artefacts drawing on a shared vision , social learning and mutual understanding among all key stakeholders , taking into account that all those involved in the design process have somehow different perspectives and expectations , which should be adequately considered ( Fien et al . 2007 ) . Co - design is thought to result in higher quality of system requirements , higher system quality , a better fit between the system and users , and higher user or customer satisfaction ( Kaza , 1988 : 75 - 81 ) . Better value for users due to proactively reduced development time and costs on system testing is also mentioned as a key benefit ( Steen at al . , 2011 : 53 - 60 ) . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 157 The field of social design defines co - design as “a plan or method to do something” placing beneficiaries in positions of power and influence in the design and implementation process ( Murcott , 2007 ) . The underlying vision is that one can design an unlimited number of views on reality but to be considered effective design , every view implemented should relate to the specific social groups that will benefit from the outcomes , and reflect their views – something that can be done best by involving the beneficiaries in the design process ( Markus and Keil , 1994 ) . Therefore , to optimize the value of co - design , instead of designing technology that can be pushed towards communities , a bottom - up approach rooted in community participation should be employed . 5 . RESULTS The literature review has identified five key themes closely associated to the concept of co - design with communities : stakeholders , context , ownership , social learning , and sustainability . The quantitative findings indicate these themes as being the most representative ones across the three disciplines analysed , yet the importance assigned to each theme , as well as approaches in defining and tackling them , are different . In the following sections , the key themes will be presented . 5 . 1 . Stakeholders A stakeholder is defined as an organization , a social group , a community or an individual who can affect or is affected by the achievement of the objectives set by an organization or initiative ( Heeks and Kenny , 2002 ) . The relationship between stakeholders and ICT design and development is emphasized by the sample of surveyed studies that employed field research and mixed research methods ( qualitative and quantitative ) . In their position of project stakeholders , local communities are on the one hand contributing to the success of initiatives by investing their own resources , and on the other are affected by a project’s success or missed outcomes . Co - design creates opportunities for communities to contribute with their social and cultural knowledge in the design process , providing information to designers about their local context ( Thompson , 2008 ) , cultural habits , and taboos . Studies positioned in the ICTD literature , and in particular those implemented in developing contexts , note that communities tend not to use artefacts designed for their own benefit , in some cases due to local taboos and beliefs ( Parker and Gallagher , 2007 ) . This raises attention to the importance of properly identifying and involving the right stakeholders , who may be identified not necessarily by geographical location , ethnicity , or economic level , but by the common interest they have in a project ( Narayan , 1995 ) . Gaps in participation may therefore be formulated in terms of whose interests are represented . Several groups may be systematically excluded from participation even if their interests are at stake , for instance women ( Kanji and Greenwood , 2001 ) . Mismatch of benefits appears when during co - design sessions a community is represented by a single person of relevance in the developing context structure ( Parker , 2007 ) . These co - design processes tend to end in “design - reality gaps” , or missed outcomes ( Proenza , 2001 ) . Studies conducted in Africa and Asia point out the benefits that designers and academic practitioners gain from working with communities , ranging from increased efficiency , sustainability , and adoption , to the effectiveness of the delivered ICT solutions . There is a higher quality and effectiveness in decision - making , which leads to the deployment of relevant activities for program development . The participation of the right stakeholders Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 158 reduces the potential presence of conflicts and resistance to change . The involvement of influential people in the community ( traditional leaders , religious leaders , government structures , political figures ) creates space for social acceptance ( adoption ) and the effective employment of local expertise . These elements are determinant for ICT projects’ success ( Albinsson et al . , 2007 ; Kleine and Unwin , 2009 ) . 5 . 2 . Context The notion of context begins to appear in the co - design and participatory design literatures in the 1990s , when co - designers and participatory designers started to take this aspect into consideration and link it to others such as empowerment and effective design ( Ehn and Badham , 2013 ) . The local context emerged as important amidst discourses on the design - reality gap , brought to light by the evaluation of ICTD projects in developing areas . These evaluations highlighted the important place of cultural values , habits , and taboos , and their bearing on the development of artefacts that are deployable and practical ( Avgerou , 2008 ) . As Avgerou ( 2001 ) argues , technological innovation in developing countries has often been done through the transfer of solutions that proved successful in developed contexts . Yet , the value and fit of these solutions in new socio - cultural contexts can never be taken for granted . There is no universally agreed definition of context in the literature surveyed . Many studies tend to refer to it generally as the socio - cultural and physical environment in which a social group lives . The notion of context and that of culture appear to be very closely related . Those studies that give accrued importance to the local context tend to embrace social constructionist theoretical perspectives , which emphasize the interpenetration of the social and technical sphere ( Avgerou , 2008 ) . In this theoretical perspective , context has a quality of dynamism and evolution , and includes equally physical places , artefacts , and people . The focus falls on invisible patterns of relatedness that link people , artefacts , and activities ( Dourish , 2004 ) . This take on context contrasts with the positivist outlook in which the context is the outer environment surrounding people and the activities they perform ( Idem ) . While this latter perspective can be and has been employed in accounting for the local context in technology interventions , it has some important drawbacks . Especially , it tends to see it as a stable entity open to be studied and represented from an outer , objective stance , and it disregards the relation with people and their activities ( Dourish , 2004 : 4 - 5 ) . On the contrary , a constructionist view of context emphasizes the key role of the local people in defining meanings , understandings and usages of technology as they interact with it in their own social milieu . Thus , it provides a theoretical foundation and an explanation as to why it is important to involve the local people in the co - design of technological solutions . The way context is understood can be linked to differences in methodological approaches . Studies that point to the importance of the local context favour a bottom - up approach , where relevant design solutions are sought through the involvement of local people since the early stages of a development program ( Avgerou , 2010 ) . Studies that indicate more broadly the importance of the local culture tend to employ ethnographic approaches ( Crabtree , 1998 ) . The papers surveyed agree that communities are the ones that know best their own life context , and are therefore the most entitled to contribute to expanding knowledge for the implementing agencies . Local knowledge is thought to be fundamental for the success of an initiative especially for initiatives concerned with local knowledge production and Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 159 communication ( e . g . Rodil et al . , 2012 ; Winschiers - Teophilus et al . , 2010 ) . When the aim is to create culturally representative and locally useful artefacts , it becomes fundamental to conceive the design process starting from a local viewpoint , and allowing activities and design solutions to emerge from it ( Rodil et al . , 2012 ) , favouring community involvement in all design stages . Nevertheless , the literature outlines as well some of the reasons for failing to take into proper consideration the local context . Studies point to the challenges faced by researchers and practitioners during fieldwork , such as the lack of basic resources as well as communication barriers ( Zaharia , 2008 ) . 5 . 3 . Ownership The concept of “community ownership” is linked to the success of a project and its capacity to become sustainable . It has been argued that by participating in the design of technology artefacts , a community may be prone to develop a sense of owning the artefact , which quickens the process by which it is appropriated and integrated in its practices ( Ramirez , 2008 ) . Yet , caution should be paid in establishing a direct relation between a community’s participation in design and the development of a sense of ownership . Not all forms of community engagement are likely to foster this sense of ownership . The co - design process creates a framework in which a certain dynamic of interaction between stakeholders ( local and external ) is generated and nurtured . It is believed that a sense of ownership emerges when the community provides meaningful contributions from the beginning stages of the design process , starting with the definition of priorities , and leading to what Ramirez ( 2008 ) calls “ownership of the problem and its solution” . Fake or superficial forms of involvement would likely fail to achieve this result . Parker and Gallagher ( 2007 ) generated the notion of empty promise where “communities are quick to recognize an empty promise of a greater artifact” . The co - design literature indicates this is likely to occur when consultation with community members bears no reflection on final decisions , and where bottom - up decision - making continues to be undermined by top - down directives ( Walsh et al . , 2006 ) . The relation between ownership and sustainability is emphasized in the analysed documents . Especially in the ICTD disciplinary strand , it is indicated that apart from financial aspects , one of the chief reasons for failure lies in the fact that projects are not embraced by the communities ( Kujala , 2003 ) . On the other hand , studies point out that through community involvement comes understanding , and with understanding comes public support and commitment ( Harris et al . , 2003 ) . Studies indicate as well that communities in developing areas have not been participating enough in co - design processes , or the studies reporting community involvement fail to outline precisely how much a community contributed to the development of the artefact ( Merkel et al . , 2004 ) . 5 . 4 . Social learning Social learning refers to the sharing and development of adaptive group strategies for individual learning based on observation and problem solving in group settings ( Sanders , 2005 ; Huxham , 2000 ) . Sanders and Stappers ( 2008 ) place social learning at the heart of current changes in the design landscape , characterized by the emergence of new forms of collective creativity . Co - design with communities at the same time promotes and relies on social learning , which is seen as a process of knowledge advancement through exchanges between a local community and the design team ( Conruytl et al . , 2010 ) . The social in Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 160 social learning relates to the collaborative nature of the co - design process . Learning takes place through participation in group settings , through sharing and exchange ( Sanders and Stappers , 2008 ) . Learning is also a condition for local people’s effective participation in design decisions ( Hearn et al . , 2009 ) . ICTD studies tend to emphasize the importance of learning as participation in the co - design process especially for producing artefacts that represent or store representations of local identity , culture , and knowledge systems ( e . g . Rodil et al . , 2012 ; Verran et al . , 2006 ) . In these cases , knowledge of the local context , culture and history are used to better define the functionalities and uses of the technical artefact to serve community needs for knowledge production and communication . These practices are successfully introduced when a person from the community is previously trained by researchers on the topics dealt with ( Ramachandra et al . , 2007 ) , as it takes time to design relevant for the local context and culture when design is conducted by people outside the community ( Winschiers - Teophilus et al . , 2010 ) . 5 . 5 . Sustainability Sustainability can be defined as “the ability of a project or intervention to continue in existence after the implementing agency has departed” ( Harris et al . , 2003 : 2 ) . Economic or financial sustainability refers to the long - term ability of ICT projects to generate enough income to meet their operational and maintenance costs ( Johnson , 2000 ) . In the studies surveyed , two aspects of the relation between the co - design process and sustainability can be identified . Firstly , it has been argued that the co - design process itself can be instrumental to boosting a project’s potential for sustainability , if people’s involvement in design contributes to fostering a sense of project ownership ( Ramirez , 2008 ) . At this level , a community’s social capital , inclusive of communal values and aspirations , needs to be accounted for as a crucial factor for sustainability ( Simpson , 2005 ) . By becoming involved in the initial stages of the design process , people are prone to embrace and integrate its solution in their practices . Moreover , they may become sensitive to the identification of communal issues that can be adequately met by technology usage , and knowledgeable of socio - technical aspects that they can apply in activities promoted after a project’s completion . Second , studies point to the importance of including local members in decision - making and management of financial issues . Financial sustainability is one of the greatest challenges ICTD projects face ( Zaharia et al . , 2008 ) , and co - design projects are not an exception to it . This aspect is entangled with the duration of typical ICTD projects , as in many cases donors have a limited time and resources to set - up and develop a project ( Kumar and Best , 2006 ) . ICTD projects tend to be created with a business plan that oversees the generation of sufficient money ensuring continuous access for communities at a lower cost . This aspect has not been given sufficient attention in many community - based initiatives ( Roman and Colle , 2002 , 2003 ; Harris , 1999 ; Harris et al . , 2003 ) . Based on repeated evidence of past projects failure , the literature shows the importance of co - designing a business plan with the joint involvement of financial donors , implementers , and beneficiaries ( the local communities ) in the planning process ( Luk , 2008 ) . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 161 6 . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION This paper described the results of a literature survey on co - design with communities serving community development goals . The studied documents were grouped according to their research and disciplinary area in three strands : ICTD , information systems , and social design . The survey highlighted five themes that were found to be most closely connected to the process of co - design with communities : stakeholders , context , ownership , social learning , and sustainability . These themes connect and converge into a frame marking the conditions and impacts of successful co - design processes with and for communities . These themes demark key topics permeating the state of the art literature , and also delineate the areas that researchers and practitioners should focus on , or take into consideration in their critical analysis and set - up of future co - design initiatives . A few considerations can be advanced from the analysis of connections and relations among the themes . First ly , with respect to the theoretical orientation , it is noticed that taken in their togetherness the five themes are associated with the social embeddedness discourse in ICTD , by which in order to be accepted and appropriated , technological innovation needs to be embedded in the socio - cultural and organisational context ( Avgerou , 2008 ) . These tenets are evident in the concern with the local context and social aspects , and the importance assigned to these for a project’s success and sustainability . There is an underlying belief that the implementation of development projects should not be focused only on technical means to deliver services . The lack of contextualization and knowledge of local social structures makes it difficult to run a self - sustaining ICT venue . The importance of these social aspects emerged in practice in the aftermath of many ICTD implemented projects , after the funds invested by governments , non - governmental institutions and development agencies faded . Failure to take into account social aspects is reported to result in low adoption of ICT solutions , difficulties in maintaining the technical infrastructure , and low capacities and internal resources to sustain the venue beyond project completion . Secondly , different orientations were evident in the literatures surveyed with respect to the legitimation of co - design initiatives depending on whether the stress falls on community involvement as a means to an end or an end in itself . When the focus falls on communities as main stakeholders , community participation in design appears to have an intrinsic value , as it empowers people to take agency over activities of immediate relevance for their lives . In this optic , it is important to understand the way stakeholders participate , inform and communicate their involvement in design . Learning is valuable as it enables people to pursue the expansion of abilities and choices that can contribute to their overall well - being . On the contrary , in a means to an end optic , co - design emerges as a solution for improving the success rates of ICTD projects . This underlying belief is evident in the accent placed on sustainability and community ownership . Some studies ( e . g . Ramirez , 2008 ) hold it that by involvement in the early stages of design , local people are likely to develop ownership of a project and ensuing products , therefore boosting its potential for sustainability . In this perspective , social learning gains a different value , as a means by which a project can benefit by enabling reciprocal exchanges of knowledge and information between local communities and implementation teams . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 162 7 . REFERENCES Crabtree , A . , ( 1998 ) . Ethnography in Participatory Design . Computer Professionals Social Responsibility . Albinsson , L . , M . Lind , et al . ( 2007 ) . Co - Design : An approach to border crossing , Network Innovation . eChallenges , The Hague , The Netherlands , pages 1 - 6 . Avgerou , C . ( 2008 ) . Discourses on innovation and development in information systems in developing countries’ research . Journal of Information Technology , 23 ( 3 ) , 133 - 146 . Avgerou , C . ( 2001 ) . The significance of context in information systems and organizational change . Information systems journal , 11 ( 1 ) , 43 - 63 . Avgerou , C . , ( 2010 ) . Discourses on ICT and development , Information Technologies and International Development , vol 6 , no 3 , pages 1 - 18 . Bernhard E . ( 2005 ) . Theory and Practice of Product Design Springer , Apr 8 , 4 - 21 . Braund , P . , & Schwittay , A . ( 2006 , May ) . The missing piece : Human - driven design and re - search in ICT and development . In Information and Communication Technologies and De - velopment , 2006 . ICTD ' 06 . International Conference on ( pp . 2 - 10 ) . IEEE . Brewer , E . , Demmer , M . , Du , B . , Ho , M . , Kam , M . , Nedevschi , S . , Pal , J . , Patra , R . , Sur - ana , S . , ( 2005 ) . The Case for Technology in Developing Regions . IEEE Computer , 38 ( 6 ) , 25 - 38‬ . ‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬‬ Castellacci , F . ( 2008 ) . Technological paradigms , regimes and trajectories : Manufacturing and service industries in a new taxonomy of sectorial patterns of innovation . Research Policy , 37 ( 6 ) , 978 - 994 . Conruyt , N . ( 2006 ) . Enhancing Insular Tropical Environment contents with Information and Communication Technologies : the ETIC program at Reunion’s Island and in the South West of Indian Ocean . In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Informatics for Environmental Protection , EnviroInfo , Graz , Austria . Dourish , P . ( 2004 ) What we talk about when we talk about context . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , 8 ( 1 ) , 19 - 30 . Ehn , P . ( 1993 ) . Scandinavian Design : On Participation and Skill . Participatory Design : Principles and Practices . N . J . : Lawrence Erlbaum , pages 41 – 78 . Freeman , R . E . ( 1984 ) . Strategic Management : A stakeholder Approach . Harpercollins College Div , pages 1 - 6 . Goodman , L . A . 1961 . " Snowball sampling " . Annals of Mathematical Statistics , pages 148 – 170 . Harris , R . , Kumar , A . , and Balaji , V . ( 2003 ) . “Sustainable telecentres ? Two cases from India . In The Digital Challenge : Information Technology in the Development Context” , pages 124 – 136 , Ashgate , Aldershot , Hants . Harris , R . ( 1999 ) . “Evaluating telecentres within national policies for ICTs in Developing Countries” , in Telecentre Evaluation : A Global Perspective Report of an International Meeting on Telecentre Evaluation , GÓMEZ R . and HUNT P . ( Eds ) , IDRC . Far Hills Inn , Quebec , Canada , September 28 – 30 , 1999 . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 163 Hearn , G . , Tacchi , J . , Foth , M . , and Lennie , J . ( 2009 ) . Action Research and New Media . Concepts , Methods and Cases . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Heeks , R . B . & Kenny , C . ( 2002 ) . The Economics of ICTs and Global Inequality : Convergence or Divergence for Developing Countries ? , IDPM Development Informatics , pages 4 - 15 . Huxham , C . ( 2000 ) . The challenge of collaborative governance . Public Management , 2 , 337 – 357 . Fien , J . , Charlesworth , E . , Lee , G . , Morris , D . , Baker , D . , & Grice , T . ( 2007 ) . Flexible guidelines for the design of remote Indigenous community housing . AHURI Positioning Paper , 98 , 1 - 68 . Johnson , J . ( 2000 ) . The ‘Can You Trust It ? ’ . Problem of simulation science in the design of sociotechnical systems . Complexity , 6 ( 2 ) , 34 – 40 . Kam , M . , Ramachandran , D . , Raghavan , A . , Chiu , J . , Sahni , U . , and Canny , J . ( 2006 ) . Practical Considerations for Participatory Design with Rural School Children in Underdeveloped Regions : Early Reflections from the Field . In Proc . Interaction Design and Children , ACM Press , NY , USA . Kanji , N . and Greenwood , L . ( 2001 ) Participatory Approaches to Research and Development in IIED : Learning from Experience . London : IIED International conference on ICT for Africa , pages 3 - 6 . Kaza , S . ( 1988 ) . “Community Involvement in Marine Protected Areas . ” Oceanus . Volume 31 , Number 1 . Pages 75 - 81 . Kang , J . ( 2010 ) . ICTs for Development : From the Access - centric Approach to the Capability Approach . In International Communication Association , pages 1 - 3 . Kroczek A . , Stam G . , Mweetwa F . ( 2013 ) . Stakeholder Theory and ICT in Rural Macha . Zambia , Kleine , D . , & Unwin , T . ( 2009 ) . Technological Revolution , Evolution and New Dependencies : what’s new about ict4d ? Third World Quarterly , 30 ( 5 ) , pages 3 - 8 . Kumar , R . and Best , M . ( 2006 ) . “Impact and Sustainability of E - governance Services in Developing Countries : Lessons Learned from Tamil Nadu , India” The Information Society , 22 , pages . 1 - 12 . Kujala S . ( 2003 ) . " User involvement : a review of the benefits and challenges " . Behaviour and Information Technology , Vol . 22 ( 1 ) , pages . 1 - 16 . Mann , C . L . ( 2004 ) . " Information technologies and international development : conceptual clarity in the search for commonality and diversity , " Information Technologies and International Development ( 1 : 2 ) , pages 67 - 79 . Merkel , B . , Xiao , L . , Farooq , U . , Ganoe , C . H . , Lee R . , Carroll , J . M . , and Rosson , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Participatory Design in Community Computing Contexts : Tales from the field . Proceedings Participatory Design Conference , Toronto , Canada . Markus , M . L . , & Keil , M . ( 1994 ) . If we build it , they will come : Designing information systems that people want to use . Sloan Management Review , 35 , 11 - 11 . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 164 Murcott , S . ( 2007 ) . Co ‐ evolutionary design for development : influences shaping engineering design and implementation in Nepal and the global village . Journal of International Development , 19 ( 1 ) , 123 - 144 . Narayan , D . ( 1995 ) The Contribution of People ' s Participation : Evidence from 121 rural water supply projects . Environmentally Sustainable Development Occasional Paper Series No . I . The World Bank , Washington . DC . Nisbett , R . E . and J . D . Wilson . ( 1977 ) . " Telling More Than We Know : Verbal Reports on Mental Processes , " Psychological Review , 84 - 231 . Parker , S . & Gallagher , N ( 2007 ) . The collaborative state : How working together can transform public services . Collection 23 , pages 2 - 9 . Parker S . ( 2007 ) . ‘The co - production paradox’ in S Parker and N Gallagher ( eds ) , The Collaborative State ( London : Demos ) . Proenza , F . J . ( 2001 ) . “Telecentre sustainability – Myths and opportunities” , Journal of Development Communication , The Information Society , pages . 1 - 8 . Roman R . and Colle , R . ( 2002 ) . “Themes and issues in telecentres sustainability” , Development Informatics , Institute of Development Policy and Management , University of Manchester , UK . Roman , R . , and Colle , R . ( 2003 ) . “Content Creation for ICT Development Projects : Integrating Normative Approaches and Community Demand” , Information Technologyfor Development , 10 , pages . 85 - 94 . Sabine M . , ( 2012 ) . Product Service System : Co - Designing for Social Impact . Pages 4 - 5 . Sanders , E . B . - N . ( 2005 ) . " Information , Inspiration and Co - creation " . Paper presented at the 6th International Conference of the European Academy of Design , Bremen , Germany . Sanders , E . B . N . , and Stappers , P . J . ( 2008 ) Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . CoDesign , Taylor & Francis , March 2008 . Sey , A . ( 2008 ) . Public access to ICTs : A review of the literature . Center for Information & Society , University of Washington . Sonnenwald , D . H . , Liewrouw , L . A . ( 1997 ) . Collaboration during the design process : a case study of communication , information behavior , London : Taylor Graham , 179 - 204 . Sahay , S . ( 2001 ) . " Introduction to the special issue on " IT and Health Care in Developing Countries " , " Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries ( 5 : 0 ) , pages 1 - 6 . Simspon , L . ( 2005 ) Community Informatics and Sustainability : Why Social Capital Matters . The Journal of Community Informatics , ( 2005 ) Vol . 1 , Issue 2 , pp . 102 - 119 . Schuler D . , Namioka , A . ( 1993 ) . Participatory Design , Lawrence Erlbaum and chapter 11 in Helander’s Handbook of HCI , Elsevier 1997 , pages 3 - 12 . Shah , S . , Ghulam , S . , Ian , R . , Sarmad A . , ( 2009 ) " Developing medical device technologies from users ' perspectives : A theoretical framework for involving users in the development process . " International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care 25 . 4 : 514 . Steinmueller , E . W . ( 2001 ) . ICTs and the possibilities for leapfrogging by developing countries . International Labour Review , pages 1 - 14 . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 165 Steen , M . , Manschot , M . , & De Koning , N . ( 2011 ) . Benefits of co - design in service design projects . International Journal of Design , 5 ( 2 ) , pages 53 - 60 . Sterling , S . , & Rangaswamy , N . ( 2010 , December ) . Constructing informed consent in ICT4D research . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( p . 46 ) . ACM . Tilly , C . ( 1998 ) . Durable inequality . University of California Pr . Ramirez , R . ( 2008 ) . A ' Meditation ' on Meaningful Participation . The Journal of Community Informatics , Vol . 4 , No 3 ( 2008 ) . Ramachandran , M . Kam , et al . ( 2008 ) . Social Dynamics of Early Stage Co - Design in Developing Regions . CHI 2007 , April 28 – May 3 , 2007 , San Jose , California , USA . Pages 2 - 8 . Rodil , K . , Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , and Jensen , K . L . ( 2012 ) . Enhancing cross - cultural participation through creative visual exploration . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 . New York : ACM , 81 - 90 . Walsh , G . , Druin A . , Guha M , L . , Foss , E , . Evan G . , Hatley , L . , Bonsignore E . , Franckel S . ( 2010 ) . Layered Elaboration : A New Technique for Co - Design with Children . Atlanta , Georgia , USA , pages . 1 - 16 . Warschauer , M . ( 2004 ) . Technology and social inclusion : Rethinking the digital divide . the MIT Press . Wells , S . , and A . T . White . ( 1995 ) . “Involving the Community . ” In Marine Protected Areas : Principles . Winschiers - Theophilus , H . , Chivuno - Kuria , S . , Kapuire , G . K . , Bidwell , N . J . , and Blake , E . ( 2010 ) . Being participated : a community approach . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . New York , ACM , 1 - 10 . Wheelwright , S . C . ( 1992 ) . Revolutionizing product development : quantum leaps in speed , efficiency , and quality . SimonandSchuster . com . Verran , H . , Christie , M . , Anbins - King , B . , van Weeren , T . , and Yunupingu , W . ( 2006 ) Designing Digital Knowledge Management Tools with Aboriginal Australians . Performative Knowledge Making . Charles Darwin University , Australia . Accessed May 2011 . http : / / www . cdu . edu . au / centres / ik / pdf / DDKMT - AA . pdf . Zaharia , M . , Ho , Melissa . , Levine , B . , Aoki , P . , ( 2008 ) . ICTD for Healthcare in Ghana : Two Parallel Case Studies Rowena Luk . Steyn , J . , Van der Vyver , A . G . ( eds . ) . ( 2013 ) . Public and private access to ICTs in developing regions . Proceedings of the 7th International Development Informatics Association Conference , held in Bangkok , Thailand . ISBN : 978 - 0 - 620 - 58040 - 3 Pages 152 - 166 166