Journal Article Studies of Independence and Conformity : I . A Minority of One Against a Unanimous Majority Journal Psychological Monographs : General and Applied Publisher APA Journals ISSN 0096 - 9753 ( Print ) Collection PsycARTICLES® Issue Volume 70 , Number 9 / 1956 Category monograph Pages 1 - 70 DOI 10 . 1037 / h0093718 Authors Solomon E . Asch 1 1 Swarthmore College Abstract The investigations described in this series are concerned with the conditions of independence and lack of independence in the face of group pressure . The abstract temper of present - day theory and investigation in this region rests to a considerable degree on a neglect of the cognitive and emotional experiences that are part of the individual ' s psychological field . The understanding of social influences will require the study of a wide range of conditions and of the interrelated operations of different psychological functions . A group of seven to nine individuals was gathered in a classroom to take part in what appeared to be a simple experiment in visual discrimination . The subjects were all male , white college students , ranging in age from 17 to 25 ; the mean age was 20 . For certain purposes a large number of critical subjects was required for the present experiment . The present report is based on a total of 123 subjects . The task consisted of the comparison of a standard line with three other lines , one of which was equal in length to the standard . We investigated some of the conditions responsible for independence and lack of independence in the face of arbitrary group pressure . To this end we produced a disagreement between a group and one individual member about a clear and simple issue of fact . The interview , which followed the experimental session , provided qualitative evidence concerning the effects produced by the majority , The particular properties of the experimental situation and their relation to more usual social contradictions were described . Fulltext Preview ( Small , Large ) PDF ( 4 . 7 MB ) First Page Preview Studies of Independence and Conformity : I . A Minority of O . . . http : / / www . psycontent . com / content / h128830k244141t6 / ? print . . . 1 di 2 24 / 03 / 14 10 : 05