THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States e xe c ut ive sum mary COMMISSION MEMBERS Thomas H . Kean chair Richard Ben - Veniste Fred F . Fielding Jamie S . Gorelick Slade Gorton Lee H . Hamilton vice chair Bob Kerrey John F . Lehman Timothy J . Roemer James R . Thompson COMMISSION STAFF Philip Zelikow , Executive Director Christopher A . Kojm , Deputy Executive Director Daniel Marcus , General Counsel Joanne M . Accolla Staff Assistant Alexis Albion Professional Staff Member Scott H . Allan , Jr . Counsel John A . Azzarello Counsel Caroline Barnes Professional Staff Member Warren Bass Professional Staff Member Ann M . Bennett Information Control Officer Mark S . Bittinger Professional Staff Member Madeleine Blot Counsel Antwion M . Blount Systems Engineer Sam Brinkley Professional Staff Member Geoffrey Scott Brown Research Assistant Daniel Byman Professional Staff Member Dianna Campagna Manager of Operations Samuel M . W . Caspersen Counsel Melissa A . Coffey Staff Assistant Lance Cole Consultant Marquittia L . Coleman Staff Assistant Marco A . Cordero Professional Staff Member Rajesh De Counsel George W . Delgrosso Investigator Gerald L . Dillingham Professional Staff Member Thomas E . Dowling Professional Staff Member Steven M . Dunne Deputy General Counsel Thomas R . Eldridge Counsel Alice Falk Editor John J . Farmer , Jr . Senior Counsel & Team Leader Alvin S . Felzenberg Deputy for Communications COMMISSION STAFF Lorry M . Fenner Professional Staff Member Susan Ginsburg Senior Counsel & Team Leader T . Graham Giusti Security Officer Nicole Marie Grandrimo Professional Staff Member Douglas N . Greenburg Counsel Barbara A . Grewe Senior Counsel , Special Projects Elinore Flynn Hartz Family Liaison Leonard R . Hawley Professional Staff Member L . Christine Healey Senior Counsel & Team Leader Karen Heitkotter Executive Secretary Walter T . Hempel II Professional Staff Member C . Michael Hurley Senior Counsel & Team Leader Dana J . Hyde Counsel John W . Ivicic Security Officer Michael N . Jacobson Counsel Hunter W . Jamerson Intern Bonnie D . Jenkins Counsel Reginald F . Johnson Staff Assistant R . William Johnstone Professional Staff Member Stephanie L . Kaplan Special Assistant & Managing Editor Miles L . Kara , Sr . Professional Staff Member Janice L . Kephart Counsel Hyon Kim Counsel Katarzyna Kozaczuk Financial Assistant Gordon Nathaniel Lederman Counsel Daniel J . Leopold Staff Assistant Sarah Webb Linden Professional Staff Member Douglas J . MacEachin Professional Staff Member & Team Leader Ernest R . May Senior Adviser Joseph McBride Intern James Miller Professional Staff Member Kelly Moore Professional Staff Member Charles M . Pereira Professional Staff Member John Raidt Professional Staff Member John Roth Senior Counsel & Team Leader Peter Rundlet Counsel Lloyd D . Salvetti Professional Staff Member Kevin J . Scheid Professional Staff Member & Team Leader Kevin Shaeffer Professional Staff Member Tracy J . Shycoff Deputy for Administration & Finance Dietrich L . Snell Senior Counsel & Team Leader Jonathan DeWees Stull Communications Assistant Lisa Marie Sullivan Staff Assistant Quinn John Tamm , Jr . Professional Staff Member Catharine S . Taylor Staff Assistant Yoel Tobin Counsel Emily Landis Walker Professional Staff Member & Family Liaison Garth Wermter Senior IT Consultant Serena B . Wille Counsel Peter Yerkes Public Affairs Assistant THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT e xe c ut ive sum mary EXECUTIVE SUMMARY We present the narrative of this report and the recommendations that flow from it to the President of the United States , the United States Congress , and the American people for their consideration . Ten Commissioners—five Republicans and five Democrats chosen by elected leaders from our nation’s capital at a time of great partisan division—have come together to present this report without dissent . We have come together with a unity of purpose because our nation demands it . September 11 , 2001 , was a day of unprecedented shock and suffering in the history of the United States . The nation was unprepared . A NATION TRANSFORMED At 8 : 46 on the morning of September 11 , 2001 , the United States became a nation transformed . An airliner traveling at hundreds of miles per hour and carrying some 10 , 000 gallons of jet fuel plowed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan . At 9 : 03 , a second airliner hit the South Tower . Fire and smoke billowed upward . Steel , glass , ash , and bodies fell below . The Twin Towers , where up to 50 , 000 people worked each day , both collapsed less than 90 min­ utes later . At 9 : 37 that same morning , a third airliner slammed into the western face of the Pentagon . At 10 : 03 , a fourth airliner crashed in a field in southern Pennsylvania . It had been aimed at the United States Capitol or the White House , and was forced down by heroic passengers armed with the knowledge that America was under attack . More than 2 , 600 people died at the World Trade Center ; 125 died at the 2 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Pentagon ; 256 died on the four planes . The death toll surpassed that at Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . This immeasurable pain was inflicted by 19 young Arabs acting at the behest of Islamist extremists headquartered in distant Afghanistan . Some had been in the United States for more than a year , mixing with the rest of the population . Though four had training as pilots , most were not well - educated . Most spoke English poorly , some hardly at all . In groups of four or five , carrying with them only small knives , box cutters , and cans of Mace or pepper spray , they had hijacked the four planes and turned them into deadly guided missiles . Why did they do this ? How was the attack planned and conceived ? How did the U . S . government fail to anticipate and prevent it ? What can we do in the future to prevent similar acts of terrorism ? A Shock , Not a Surprise The 9 / 11 attacks were a shock , but they should not have come as a surprise . Islamist extremists had given plenty of warning that they meant to kill Americans indiscriminately and in large numbers . Although Usama Bin Ladin himself would not emerge as a signal threat until the late 1990s , the threat of Islamist terrorism grew over the decade . In February 1993 , a group led by Ramzi Yousef tried to bring down the World Trade Center with a truck bomb . They killed six and wounded a thou - sand . Plans by Omar Abdel Rahman and others to blow up the Holland and Lincoln tunnels and other New York City landmarks were frustrated when the plotters were arrested . In October 1993 , Somali tribesmen shot down U . S . hel­ icopters , killing 18 and wounding 73 in an incident that came to be known as “Black Hawk down . ”Years later it would be learned that those Somali tribes - men had received help from al Qaeda . In early 1995 , police in Manila uncovered a plot by Ramzi Yousef to blow up a dozen U . S . airliners while they were flying over the Pacific . In November 1995 , a car bomb exploded outside the office of the U . S . program manager for the Saudi National Guard in Riyadh , killing five Americans and two others . In June 1996 , a truck bomb demolished the Khobar Towers apartment complex in Dhahran , Saudi Arabia , killing 19 U . S . servicemen and wounding hundreds . The attack was carried out primarily by Saudi Hezbollah , an organization that had received help from the government of Iran . Until 1997 , the U . S . intelligence community viewed Bin Ladin as a fin­ ancier of terrorism , not as a terrorist leader . In February 1998 , Usama Bin Ladin and four others issued a self - styled fatwa , publicly declaring that it was God’s decree that every Muslim should try his utmost to kill any American , military or civilian , anywhere in the world , because of American “occupa - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 3 tion” of Islam’s holy places and aggression against Muslims . In August 1998 , Bin Ladin’s group , al Qaeda , carried out near - simultaneous truck bomb attacks on the U . S . embassies in Nairobi , Kenya , and Dar es Salaam , Tanzania . The attacks killed 224 people , including 12 Americans , and wounded thousands more . In December 1999 , Jordanian police foiled a plot to bomb hotels and other sites frequented by American tourists , and a U . S . Customs agent arrested Ahmed Ressam at the U . S . Canadian border as he was smuggling in explosives intend­ ed for an attack on Los Angeles International Airport . In October 2000 , an al Qaeda team in Aden , Yemen , used a motorboat filled with explosives to blow a hole in the side of a destroyer , the USS Cole , almost sinking the vessel and killing 17 American sailors . The 9 / 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were far more elaborate , precise , and destructive than any of these earlier assaults . But by September 2001 , the executive branch of the U . S . government , the Congress , the news media , and the American public had received clear warning that Islamist terrorists meant to kill Americans in high numbers . Who Is the Enemy ? Who is this enemy that created an organization capable of inflicting such hor­ rific damage on the United States ? We now know that these attacks were car­ ried out by various groups of Islamist extremists . The 9 / 11 attack was driven by Usama Bin Ladin . In the 1980s , young Muslims from around the world went to Afghanistan to join as volunteers in a jihad ( or holy struggle ) against the Soviet Union . A wealthy Saudi , Usama Bin Ladin , was one of them . Following the defeat of the Soviets in the late 1980s , Bin Ladin and others formed al Qaeda to mobilize jihads elsewhere . The history , culture , and body of beliefs from which Bin Ladin shapes and spreads his message are largely unknown to many Americans . Seizing on sym­ bols of Islam’s past greatness , he promises to restore pride to people who con­ sider themselves the victims of successive foreign masters . He uses cultural and religious allusions to the holy Qur’an and some of its interpreters . He appeals to people disoriented by cyclonic change as they confront modernity and glob­ alization . His rhetoric selectively draws from multiple sources—Islam , history , and the region’s political and economic malaise . Bin Ladin also stresses grievances against the United States widely shared in the Muslim world . He inveighed against the presence of U . S . troops in Saudi Arabia , which is the home of Islam’s holiest sites , and against other U . S . policies in the Middle East . 4 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Upon this political and ideological foundation , Bin Ladin built over the course of a decade a dynamic and lethal organization . He built an infrastructure and organization in Afghanistan that could attract , train , and use recruits against ever more ambitious targets . He rallied new zealots and new money with each demonstration of al Qaeda’s capability . He had forged a close alliance with the Taliban , a regime providing sanctuary for al Qaeda . By September 11 , 2001 , al Qaeda possessed • leaders able to evaluate , approve , and supervise the planning and direc­ tion of a major operation ; • a personnel system that could recruit candidates , indoctrinate them , vet them , and give them the necessary training ; • communications sufficient to enable planning and direction of opera­ tives and those who would be helping them ; • an intelligence effort to gather required information and form assess­ ments of enemy strengths and weaknesses ; • the ability to move people great distances ; and • the ability to raise and move the money necessary to finance an attack . 1998 to September 11 , 2001 The August 1998 bombings of U . S . embassies in Kenya and Tanzania established al Qaeda as a potent adversary of the United States . After launching cruise missile strikes against al Qaeda targets in Afghanistan and Sudan in retaliation for the embassy bombings , the Clinton administration applied diplomatic pressure to try to persuade the Taliban regime in Afghanistan to expel Bin Ladin . The administration also devised covert operations to use CIA - paid foreign agents to capture or kill Bin Ladin and his chief lieutenants . These actions did not stop Bin Ladin or dislodge al Qaeda from its sanctuary . By late 1998 or early 1999 , Bin Ladin and his advisers had agreed on an idea brought to them by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed ( KSM ) called the “planes oper­ ation . ” It would eventually culminate in the 9 / 11 attacks . Bin Ladin and his chief of operations , Mohammed Atef , occupied undisputed leadership positions atop al Qaeda . Within al Qaeda , they relied heavily on the ideas and enterprise of strong - willed field commanders , such as KSM , to carry out worldwide ter­ rorist operations . KSM claims that his original plot was even grander than those carried out on 9 / 11—ten planes would attack targets on both the East and West coasts of the United States . This plan was modified by Bin Ladin , KSM said , owing to its scale and complexity . Bin Ladin provided KSM with four initial operatives for suicide plane attacks within the United States , and in the fall of 1999 training EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 5 for the attacks began . New recruits included four from a cell of expatriate Muslim extremists who had clustered together in Hamburg , Germany . One became the tactical commander of the operation in the United States : Mohamed Atta . U . S . intelligence frequently picked up reports of attacks planned by al Qaeda . Working with foreign security services , the CIA broke up some al Qaeda cells . The core of Bin Ladin’s organization nevertheless remained intact . In December 1999 , news about the arrests of the terrorist cell in Jordan and the arrest of a terrorist at the U . S . - Canadian border became part of a “millennium alert . ”The government was galvanized , and the public was on alert for any possible attack . In January 2000 , the intense intelligence effort glimpsed and then lost sight of two operatives destined for the “planes operation . ” Spotted in Kuala Lumpur , the pair were lost passing through Bangkok . On January 15 , 2000 , they arrived in Los Angeles . Because these two al Qaeda operatives had spent little time in the West and spoke little , if any , English , it is plausible that they or KSM would have tried to identify , in advance , a friendly contact in the United States . We explored suspi­ cions about whether these two operatives had a support network of accomplices in the United States . The evidence is thin—simply not there for some cases , more worrisome in others . We do know that soon after arriving in California , the two al Qaeda oper­ atives sought out and found a group of ideologically like - minded Muslims with roots in Yemen and Saudi Arabia , individuals mainly associated with a young Yemeni and others who attended a mosque in San Diego . After a brief stay in Los Angeles about which we know little , the al Qaeda operatives lived openly in San Diego under their true names . They managed to avoid attracting much attention . By the summer of 2000 , three of the four Hamburg cell members had arrived on the East Coast of the United States and had begun pilot training . In early 2001 , a fourth future hijacker pilot , Hani Hanjour , journeyed to Arizona with another operative , Nawaf al Hazmi , and conducted his refresher pilot train­ ing there . A number of al Qaeda operatives had spent time in Arizona during the 1980s and early 1990s . During 2000 , President Bill Clinton and his advisers renewed diplomatic efforts to get Bin Ladin expelled from Afghanistan . They also renewed secret efforts with some of the Taliban’s opponents—the Northern Alliance—to get enough intelligence to attack Bin Ladin directly . Diplomatic efforts centered on the new military government in Pakistan , and they did not succeed . The efforts with the Northern Alliance revived an inconclusive and secret debate about whether the United States should take sides in Afghanistan’s civil war and sup - 6 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT port the Taliban’s enemies . The CIA also produced a plan to improve intelli­ gence collection on al Qaeda , including the use of a small , unmanned airplane with a video camera , known as the Predator . After the October 2000 attack on the USS Cole , evidence accumulated that it had been launched by al Qaeda operatives , but without confirmation that Bin Ladin had given the order . The Taliban had earlier been warned that it would be held responsible for another Bin Ladin attack on the United States . The CIA described its findings as a “preliminary judgment” ; President Clinton and his chief advisers told us they were waiting for a conclusion before deciding whether to take military action . The military alternatives remained unappealing to them . The transition to the new Bush administration in late 2000 and early 2001 took place with the Cole issue still pending . President George W . Bush and his chief advisers accepted that al Qaeda was responsible for the attack on the Cole , but did not like the options available for a response . Bin Ladin’s inference may well have been that attacks , at least at the level of the Cole , were risk free . The Bush administration began developing a new strategy with the stated goal of eliminating the al Qaeda threat within three to five years . During the spring and summer of 2001 , U . S . intelligence agencies received a stream of warnings that al Qaeda planned , as one report put it , “something very , very , very big . ” Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet told us , “The system was blinking red . ” Although Bin Ladin was determined to strike in the United States , as President Clinton had been told and President Bush was reminded in a Presidential Daily Brief article briefed to him in August 2001 , the specific threat information pointed overseas . Numerous precautions were taken overseas . Domestic agencies were not effectively mobilized . The threat did not receive national media attention comparable to the millennium alert . While the United States continued disruption efforts around the world , its emerging strategy to eliminate the al Qaeda threat was to include an enlarged covert action program in Afghanistan , as well as diplomatic strategies for Afghanistan and Pakistan . The process culminated during the summer of 2001 in a draft presidential directive and arguments about the Predator aircraft , which was soon to be deployed with a missile of its own , so that it might be used to attempt to kill Bin Ladin or his chief lieutenants . At a September 4 meeting , President Bush’s chief advisers approved the draft directive of the strategy and endorsed the concept of arming the Predator . This directive on the al Qaeda strategy was awaiting President Bush’s signature on September 11 , 2001 . Though the “planes operation” was progressing , the plotters had problems of EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7 their own in 2001 . Several possible participants dropped out ; others could not gain entry into the United States ( including one denial at a port of entry and visa denials not related to terrorism ) . One of the eventual pilots may have considered abandoning the planes operation . Zacarias Moussaoui , who showed up at a flight training school in Minnesota , may have been a candidate to replace him . Some of the vulnerabilities of the plotters become clear in retrospect . Moussaoui aroused suspicion for seeking fast - track training on how to pilot large jet airliners . He was arrested on August 16 , 2001 , for violations of immi­ gration regulations . In late August , officials in the intelligence community real­ ized that the terrorists spotted in Southeast Asia in January 2000 had arrived in the United States . These cases did not prompt urgent action . No one working on these late leads in the summer of 2001 connected them to the high level of threat report­ ing . In the words of one official , no analytic work foresaw the lightning that could connect the thundercloud to the ground . As final preparations were under way during the summer of 2001 , dissent emerged among al Qaeda leaders in Afghanistan over whether to proceed . The Taliban’s chief , Mullah Omar , opposed attacking the United States . Although facing opposition from many of his senior lieutenants , Bin Ladin effectively overruled their objections , and the attacks went forward . September 11 , 2001 The day began with the 19 hijackers getting through a security checkpoint sys­ tem that they had evidently analyzed and knew how to defeat . Their success rate in penetrating the system was 19 for 19 . They took over the four flights , taking advantage of air crews and cockpits that were not prepared for the contingency of a suicide hijacking . On 9 / 11 , the defense of U . S . air space depended on close interaction between two federal agencies : the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) and North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) . Existing protocols on 9 / 11 were unsuited in every respect for an attack in which hijacked planes were used as weapons . What ensued was a hurried attempt to improvise a defense by civilians who had never handled a hijacked aircraft that attempted to disappear , and by a mil­ itary unprepared for the transformation of commercial aircraft into weapons of mass destruction . A shootdown authorization was not communicated to the NORAD air defense sector until 28 minutes after United 93 had crashed in Pennsylvania . Planes were scrambled , but ineffectively , as they did not know where to go or what targets they were to intercept . And once the shootdown order was given , 8 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT it was not communicated to the pilots . In short , while leaders in Washington believed that the fighters circling above them had been instructed to “take out” hostile aircraft , the only orders actually conveyed to the pilots were to “ID type and tail . ” Like the national defense , the emergency response on 9 / 11 was necessarily improvised . In New York City , the Fire Department of New York , the New York Police Department , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , the building employees , and the occupants of the buildings did their best to cope with the effects of almost unimaginable events—unfolding furiously over 102 minutes . Casualties were nearly 100 percent at and above the impact zones and were very high among first responders who stayed in dan­ ger as they tried to save lives . Despite weaknesses in preparations for disas­ ter , failure to achieve unified incident command , and inadequate communi­ cations among responding agencies , all but approximately one hundred of the thousands of civilians who worked below the impact zone escaped , often with help from the emergency responders . At the Pentagon , while there were also problems of command and control , the emergency response was generally effective . The Incident Command System , a formalized management structure for emergency response in place in the National Capital Region , overcame the inherent complications of a response across local , state , and federal jurisdictions . Operational Opportunities We write with the benefit and handicap of hindsight . We are mindful of the danger of being unjust to men and women who made choices in conditions of uncertainty and in circumstances over which they often had little control . Nonetheless , there were specific points of vulnerability in the plot and opportunities to disrupt it . Operational failures—opportunities that were not or could not be exploited by the organizations and systems of that time—included • not watchlisting future hijackers Hazmi and Mihdhar , not trailing them after they traveled to Bangkok , and not informing the FBI about one future hijacker’s U . S . visa or his companion’s travel to the United States ; • not sharing information linking individuals in the Cole attack to Mihdhar ; • not taking adequate steps in time to find Mihdhar or Hazmi in the United States ; EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 9 • not linking the arrest of Zacarias Moussaoui , described as interested in flight training for the purpose of using an airplane in a terrorist act , to the heightened indications of attack ; • not discovering false statements on visa applications ; • not recognizing passports manipulated in a fraudulent manner ; • not expanding no - fly lists to include names from terrorist watchlists ; • not searching airline passengers identified by the computer - based CAPPS screening system ; and • not hardening aircraft cockpit doors or taking other measures to pre - pare for the possibility of suicide hijackings . GENERAL FINDINGS Since the plotters were flexible and resourceful , we cannot know whether any single step or series of steps would have defeated them . What we can say with confidence is that none of the measures adopted by the U . S . govern­ ment from 1998 to 2001 disturbed or even delayed the progress of the al Qaeda plot . Across the government , there were failures of imagination , pol - icy , capabilities , and management . Imagination The most important failure was one of imagination . We do not believe lead­ ers understood the gravity of the threat . The terrorist danger from Bin Ladin and al Qaeda was not a major topic for policy debate among the public , the media , or in the Congress . Indeed , it barely came up during the 2000 pres­ idential campaign . Al Qaeda’s new brand of terrorism presented challenges to U . S . governmen­ tal institutions that they were not well - designed to meet . Though top officials all told us that they understood the danger , we believe there was uncertainty among them as to whether this was just a new and especially venomous version of the ordinary terrorist threat the United States had lived with for decades , or it was indeed radically new , posing a threat beyond any yet experienced . As late as September 4 , 2001 , Richard Clarke , the White House staffer long responsible for counterterrorism policy coordination , asserted that the govern­ ment had not yet made up its mind how to answer the question : “Is al Qida a big deal ? ” A week later came the answer . 10 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Policy Terrorism was not the overriding national security concern for the U . S . gov­ ernment under either the Clinton or the pre - 9 / 11 Bush administration . The policy challenges were linked to this failure of imagination . Officials in both the Clinton and Bush administrations regarded a full U . S . invasion of Afghanistan as practically inconceivable before 9 / 11 . Capabilities Before 9 / 11 , the United States tried to solve the al Qaeda problem with the capabilities it had used in the last stages of the Cold War and its immediate aftermath . These capabilities were insufficient . Little was done to expand or reform them . The CIA had minimal capacity to conduct paramilitary operations with its own personnel , and it did not seek a large - scale expansion of these capabilities before 9 / 11 . The CIA also needed to improve its capability to collect intelli­ gence from human agents . At no point before 9 / 11 was the Department of Defense fully engaged in the mission of countering al Qaeda , even though this was perhaps the most dan­ gerous foreign enemy threatening the United States . America’s homeland defenders faced outward . NORAD itself was barely able to retain any alert bases at all . Its planning scenarios occasionally consid­ ered the danger of hijacked aircraft being guided to American targets , but only aircraft that were coming from overseas . The most serious weaknesses in agency capabilities were in the domestic arena . The FBI did not have the capability to link the collective knowledge of agents in the field to national priorities . Other domestic agencies deferred to the FBI . FAA capabilities were weak . Any serious examination of the possibility of a suicide hijacking could have suggested changes to fix glaring vulnera­ bilities—expanding no - fly lists , searching passengers identified by the CAPPS screening system , deploying federal air marshals domestically , hard­ ening cockpit doors , alerting air crews to a different kind of hijacking pos­ sibility than they had been trained to expect . Yet the FAA did not adjust either its own training or training with NORAD to take account of threats other than those experienced in the past . Management The missed opportunities to thwart the 9 / 11 plot were also symptoms of a broader inability to adapt the way government manages problems to the new challenges of the twenty - first century . Action officers should have been able to EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11 draw on all available knowledge about al Qaeda in the government . Management should have ensured that information was shared and duties were clearly assigned across agencies , and across the foreign - domestic divide . There were also broader management issues with respect to how top leaders set priorities and allocated resources . For instance , on December 4 , 1998 , DCI Tenet issued a directive to several CIA officials and the DDCI for Community Management , stating : “We are at war . I want no resources or people spared in this effort , either inside CIA or the Community . ”The memorandum had little overall effect on mobilizing the CIA or the intelligence community . This episode indicates the limitations of the DCI’s authority over the direction of the intelligence community , including agencies within the Department of Defense . The U . S . government did not find a way of pooling intelligence and using it to guide the planning and assignment of responsibilities for joint operations involving entities as disparate as the CIA , the FBI , the State Department , the military , and the agencies involved in homeland security . SPECIFIC FINDINGS Unsuccessful Diplomacy Beginning in February 1997 , and through September 11 , 2001 , the U . S . gov­ ernment tried to use diplomatic pressure to persuade the Taliban regime in Afghanistan to stop being a sanctuary for al Qaeda , and to expel Bin Ladin to a country where he could face justice . These efforts included warnings and sanctions , but they all failed . The U . S . government also pressed two successive Pakistani governments to demand that the Taliban cease providing a sanctuary for Bin Ladin and his organ­ ization and , failing that , to cut off their support for the Taliban . Before 9 / 11 , the United States could not find a mix of incentives and pressure that would per­ suade Pakistan to reconsider its fundamental relationship with the Taliban . From 1999 through early 2001 , the United States pressed the United Arab Emirates , one of the Taliban’s only travel and financial outlets to the outside world , to break off ties and enforce sanctions , especially those related to air trav­ el to Afghanistan . These efforts achieved little before 9 / 11 . Saudi Arabia has been a problematic ally in combating Islamic extremism . Before 9 / 11 , the Saudi and U . S . governments did not fully share intelligence information or develop an adequate joint effort to track and disrupt the finances of the al Qaeda organization . On the other hand , government officials of Saudi Arabia at the highest levels worked closely with top U . S . officials in major ini­ tiatives to solve the Bin Ladin problem with diplomacy . 12 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Lack of Military Options In response to the request of policymakers , the military prepared an array of limited strike options for attacking Bin Ladin and his organization from May 1998 onward . When they briefed policymakers , the military presented both the pros and cons of those strike options and the associated risks . Policymakers expressed frustration with the range of options presented . Following the August 20 , 1998 , missile strikes on al Qaeda targets in Afghanistan and Sudan , both senior military officials and policymakers placed great emphasis on actionable intelligence as the key factor in recom­ mending or deciding to launch military action against Bin Ladin and his organization . They did not want to risk significant collateral damage , and they did not want to miss Bin Ladin and thus make the United States look weak while making Bin Ladin look strong . On three specific occasions in 1998 – 1999 , intelligence was deemed credible enough to warrant planning for possible strikes to kill Bin Ladin . But in each case the strikes did not go forward , because senior policymakers did not regard the intelligence as suf­ ficiently actionable to offset their assessment of the risks . The Director of Central Intelligence , policymakers , and military officials expressed frustration with the lack of actionable intelligence . Some officials inside the Pentagon , including those in the special forces and the counterterror - ism policy office , also expressed frustration with the lack of military action . The Bush administration began to develop new policies toward al Qaeda in 2001 , but military plans did not change until after 9 / 11 . Problems within the Intelligence Community The intelligence community struggled throughout the 1990s and up to 9 / 11 to collect intelligence on and analyze the phenomenon of transnational terrorism . The combination of an overwhelming number of priorities , flat budgets , an outmoded structure , and bureaucratic rivalries resulted in an insufficient response to this new challenge . Many dedicated officers worked day and night for years to piece together the growing body of evidence on al Qaeda and to understand the threats . Yet , while there were many reports on Bin Laden and his growing al Qaeda organization , there was no comprehensive review of what the intelligence community knew and what it did not know , and what that meant . There was no National Intelligence Estimate on terrorism between 1995 and 9 / 11 . Before 9 / 11 , no agency did more to attack al Qaeda than the CIA . But there were limits to what the CIA was able to achieve by disrupting terrorist activi­ ties abroad and by using proxies to try to capture Bin Ladin and his lieutenants in Afghanistan . CIA officers were aware of those limitations . EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 13 To put it simply , covert action was not a silver bullet . It was important to engage proxies in Afghanistan and to build various capabilities so that if an opportunity presented itself , the CIA could act on it . But for more than three years , through both the late Clinton and early Bush administrations , the CIA relied on proxy forces , and there was growing frustration within the CIA’s Counterterrorist Center and in the National Security Council staff with the lack of results . The development of the Predator and the push to aid the Northern Alliance were products of this frustration . Problems in the FBI From the time of the first World Trade Center attack in 1993 , FBI and Department of Justice leadership in Washington and NewYork became increas­ ingly concerned about the terrorist threat from Islamist extremists to U . S . inter­ ests , both at home and abroad . Throughout the 1990s , the FBI’s counterterror - ism efforts against international terrorist organizations included both intelli­ gence and criminal investigations . The FBI’s approach to investigations was case - specific , decentralized , and geared toward prosecution . Significant FBI resources were devoted to after - the - fact investigations of major terrorist attacks , resulting in several prosecutions . The FBI attempted several reform efforts aimed at strengthening its ability to prevent such attacks , but these reform efforts failed to implement organiza­ tion - wide institutional change . On September 11 , 2001 , the FBI was limited in several areas critical to an effective preventive counterterrorism strategy . Those working counterterrorism matters did so despite limited intelligence collection and strategic analysis capabilities , a limited capacity to share information both internally and externally , insufficient training , perceived legal barriers to sharing information , and inadequate resources . Permeable Borders and Immigration Controls There were opportunities for intelligence and law enforcement to exploit al Qaeda’s travel vulnerabilities . Considered collectively , the 9 / 11 hijackers • included known al Qaeda operatives who could have been watchlisted ; • presented passports manipulated in a fraudulent manner ; • presented passports with suspicious indicators of extremism ; • made detectable false statements on visa applications ; • made false statements to border officials to gain entry into the United States ; and • violated immigration laws while in the United States . 14 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT Neither the State Department’s consular officers nor the Immigration and Naturalization Service’s inspectors and agents were ever considered full partners in a national counterterrorism effort . Protecting borders was not a national security issue before 9 / 11 . Permeable Aviation Security Hijackers studied publicly available materials on the aviation security system and used items that had less metal content than a handgun and were most like­ ly permissible . Though two of the hijackers were on the U . S . TIPOFF terrorist watchlist , the FAA did not use TIPOFF data . The hijackers had to beat only one layer of security—the security checkpoint process . Even though several hijack­ ers were selected for extra screening by the CAPPS system , this led only to greater scrutiny of their checked baggage . Once on board , the hijackers were faced with aircraft personnel who were trained to be nonconfrontational in the event of a hijacking . Financing The 9 / 11 attacks cost somewhere between $ 400 , 000 and $ 500 , 000 to execute . The operatives spent more than $ 270 , 000 in the United States . Additional expenses included travel to obtain passports and visas , travel to the United States , expenses incurred by the plot leader and facilitators outside the United States , and expenses incurred by the people selected to be hijackers who ulti­ mately did not participate . The conspiracy made extensive use of banks in the United States . The hijackers opened accounts in their own names , using passports and other iden­ tification documents . Their transactions were unremarkable and essentially invisible amid the billions of dollars flowing around the world every day . To date , we have not been able to determine the origin of the money used for the 9 / 11 attacks . Al Qaeda had many sources of funding and a pre - 9 / 11 annual budget estimated at $ 30 million . If a particular source of funds had dried up , al Qaeda could easily have found enough money elsewhere to fund the attack . An Improvised Homeland Defense The civilian and military defenders of the nation’s airspace—FAA and NORAD—were unprepared for the attacks launched against them . Given that lack of preparedness , they attempted and failed to improvise an effective home - land defense against an unprecedented challenge . The events of that morning do not reflect discredit on operational person­ nel . NORAD’s Northeast Air Defense Sector personnel reached out for infor - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 15 mation and made the best judgments they could based on the information they received . Individual FAA controllers , facility managers , and command center managers were creative and agile in recommending a nationwide alert , ground - stopping local traffic , ordering all aircraft nationwide to land , and executing that unprecedented order flawlessly . At more senior levels , communication was poor . Senior military and FAA leaders had no effective communication with each other . The chain of com­ mand did not function well . The President could not reach some senior offi­ cials . The Secretary of Defense did not enter the chain of command until the morning’s key events were over . Air National Guard units with different rules of engagement were scrambled without the knowledge of the President , NORAD , or the National Military Command Center . Emergency Response The civilians , firefighters , police officers , emergency medical technicians , and emergency management professionals exhibited steady determination and resolve under horrifying , overwhelming conditions on 9 / 11 . Their actions saved lives and inspired a nation . Effective decisionmaking in New York was hampered by problems in com­ mand and control and in internal communications . Within the Fire Department of New York , this was true for several reasons : the magnitude of the incident was unforeseen ; commanders had difficulty communicating with their units ; more units were actually dispatched than were ordered by the chiefs ; some units self - dispatched ; and once units arrived at the World Trade Center , they were neither comprehensively accounted for nor coordinated . The Port Authority’s response was hampered by the lack both of standard operating procedures and of radios capable of enabling multiple commands to respond to an incident in unified fashion . The New York Police Department , because of its history of mobilizing thousands of officers for major events requiring crowd control , had a technical radio capability and protocols more easily adapted to an incident of the magnitude of 9 / 11 . Congress The Congress , like the executive branch , responded slowly to the rise of transnational terrorism as a threat to national security . The legislative branch adjusted little and did not restructure itself to address changing threats . Its atten­ tion to terrorism was episodic and splintered across several committees . The Congress gave little guidance to executive branch agencies on terrorism , did not reform them in any significant way to meet the threat , and did not systemati­ cally perform robust oversight to identify , address , and attempt to resolve the 16 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT many problems in national security and domestic agencies that became appar­ ent in the aftermath of 9 / 11 . So long as oversight is undermined by current congressional rules and reso­ lutions , we believe the American people will not get the security they want and need . The United States needs a strong , stable , and capable congressional com­ mittee structure to give America’s national intelligence agencies oversight , sup - port , and leadership . Are We Safer ? Since 9 / 11 , the United States and its allies have killed or captured a majority of al Qaeda’s leadership ; toppled the Taliban , which gave al Qaeda sanctuary in Afghanistan ; and severely damaged the organization . Yet terrorist attacks contin­ ue . Even as we have thwarted attacks , nearly everyone expects they will come . How can this be ? The problem is that al Qaeda represents an ideological movement , not a finite group of people . It initiates and inspires , even if it no longer directs . In this way it has transformed itself into a decentralized force . Bin Ladin may be lim­ ited in his ability to organize major attacks from his hideouts . Yet killing or cap­ turing him , while extremely important , would not end terror . His message of inspiration to a new generation of terrorists would continue . Because of offensive actions against al Qaeda since 9 / 11 , and defensive actions to improve homeland security , we believe we are safer today . But we are not safe . We therefore make the following recommendations that we believe can make America safer and more secure . RECOMMENDATIONS Three years after 9 / 11 , the national debate continues about how to protect our nation in this new era . We divide our recommendations into two basic parts : What to do , and how to do it . WHAT TO DO ? A GLOBAL STRATEGY The enemy is not just “terrorism . ” It is the threat posed specifically by Islamist terrorism , by Bin Ladin and others who draw on a long tradition of extreme intolerance within a minority strain of Islam that does not distinguish politics from religion , and distorts both . The enemy is not Islam , the great world faith , but a perversion of Islam . The EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 17 enemy goes beyond al Qaeda to include the radical ideological movement , inspired in part by al Qaeda , that has spawned other terrorist groups and vio­ lence . Thus our strategy must match our means to two ends : dismantling the al Qaeda network and , in the long term , prevailing over the ideology that con - tributes to Islamist terrorism . The first phase of our post - 9 / 11 efforts rightly included military action to topple the Taliban and pursue al Qaeda . This work continues . But long - term success demands the use of all elements of national power : diplomacy , intelli­ gence , covert action , law enforcement , economic policy , foreign aid , public diplomacy , and homeland defense . If we favor one tool while neglecting others , we leave ourselves vulnerable and weaken our national effort . What should Americans expect from their government ? The goal seems unlimited : Defeat terrorism anywhere in the world . But Americans have also been told to expect the worst : An attack is probably coming ; it may be more devastating still . Vague goals match an amorphous picture of the enemy . Al Qaeda and other groups are popularly described as being all over the world , adaptable , resilient , needing little higher - level organization , and capable of anything . It is an image of an omnipotent hydra of destruction . That image lowers expectations of gov­ ernment effectiveness . It lowers them too far . Our report shows a determined and capable group of plotters . Yet the group was fragile and occasionally left vulnerable by the mar­ ginal , unstable people often attracted to such causes . The enemy made mistakes . The U . S . government was not able to capitalize on them . No president can promise that a catastrophic attack like that of 9 / 11 will not happen again . But the American people are entitled to expect that officials will have realistic objectives , clear guidance , and effective organization . They are entitled to see standards for performance so they can judge , with the help of their elected representatives , whether the objectives are being met . We propose a strategy with three dimensions : ( 1 ) attack terrorists and their organizations , ( 2 ) prevent the continued growth of Islamist terrorism , and ( 3 ) protect against and prepare for terrorist attacks . Attack Terrorists and Their Organizations • Root out sanctuaries . The U . S . government should identify and prior­ itize actual or potential terrorist sanctuaries and have realistic country or regional strategies for each , utilizing every element of national power and reaching out to countries that can help us . 18 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT • Strengthen long - term U . S . and international commitments to the future of Pakistan and Afghanistan . • Confront problems with Saudi Arabia in the open and build a relation - ship beyond oil , a relationship that both sides can defend to their citi­ zens and includes a shared commitment to reform . Prevent the Continued Growth of Islamist Terrorism In October 2003 , Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld asked if enough was being done “to fashion a broad integrated plan to stop the next generation of terrorists . ” As part of such a plan , the U . S . government should • Define the message and stand as an example of moral leadership in the world . To Muslim parents , terrorists like Bin Ladin have nothing to offer their children but visions of violence and death . America and its friends have the advantage—our vision can offer a better future . • Where Muslim governments , even those who are friends , do not offer opportunity , respect the rule of law , or tolerate differences , then the United States needs to stand for a better future . • Communicate and defend American ideals in the Islamic world , through much stronger public diplomacy to reach more people , including students and leaders outside of government . Our efforts here should be as strong as they were in combating closed societies during the Cold War . • Offer an agenda of opportunity that includes support for public edu­ cation and economic openness . • Develop a comprehensive coalition strategy against Islamist terrorism , using a flexible contact group of leading coalition governments and fashioning a common coalition approach on issues like the treatment of captured terrorists . • Devote a maximum effort to the parallel task of countering the pro­ liferation of weapons of mass destruction . • Expect less from trying to dry up terrorist money and more from fol­ lowing the money for intelligence , as a tool to hunt terrorists , under - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 19 stand their networks , and disrupt their operations . Protect against and Prepare for Terrorist Attacks • Target terrorist travel , an intelligence and security strategy that the 9 / 11 story showed could be at least as powerful as the effort devoted to terrorist finance . • Address problems of screening people with biometric identifiers across agencies and governments , including our border and transportation systems , by designing a comprehensive screening system that addresses common problems and sets common standards . As standards spread , this necessary and ambitious effort could dramatically strengthen the world’s ability to intercept individuals who could pose catastrophic threats . • Quickly complete a biometric entry - exit screening system , one that also speeds qualified travelers . • Set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and sources of iden­ tification , such as driver’s licenses . • Develop strategies for neglected parts of our transportation security system . Since 9 / 11 , about 90 percent of the nation’s $ 5 billion annual investment in transportation security has gone to aviation , to fight the last war . • In aviation , prevent arguments about a new computerized profiling system from delaying vital improvements in the “no - fly” and “auto­ matic selectee” lists . Also , give priority to the improvement of check - point screening . • Determine , with leadership from the President , guidelines for gather­ ing and sharing information in the new security systems that are need­ ed , guidelines that integrate safeguards for privacy and other essential liberties . • Underscore that as government power necessarily expands in certain ways , the burden of retaining such powers remains on the executive to demonstrate the value of such poweres and ensure adequate supervi - 20 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT sion of how they are used , including a new board to oversee the imple­ mentation of the guidelines needed for gathering and sharing infor­ mation in these new security systems . • Base federal funding for emergency preparedness solely on risks and vulnerabilities , putting New York City and Washington , D . C . , at the top of the current list . Such assistance should not remain a program for general revenue sharing or pork - barrel spending . • Make homeland security funding contingent on the adoption of an incident command system to strengthen teamwork in a crisis , includ­ ing a regional approach . Allocate more radio spectrum and improve connectivity for public safety communications , and encourage wide - spread adoption of newly developed standards for private - sector emer­ gency preparedness—since the private sector controls 85 percent of the nation’s critical infrastructure . HOW TO DO IT ? A DIFFERENT WAY OF ORGANIZING GOVERNMENT The strategy we have recommended is elaborate , even as presented here very briefly . To implement it will require a government better organized than the one that exists today , with its national security institutions designed half a century ago to win the Cold War . Americans should not settle for incremental , ad hoc adjustments to a system created a generation ago for a world that no longer exists . Our detailed recommendations are designed to fit together . Their purpose is clear : to build unity of effort across the U . S . government . As one official now serving on the front lines overseas put it to us : “One fight , one team . ” We call for unity of effort in five areas , beginning with unity of effort on the challenge of counterterrorism itself : • unifying strategic intelligence and operational planning against Islamist terrorists across the foreign - domestic divide with a National Counterterrorism Center ; • unifying the intelligence community with a new National Intelligence Director ; EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 21 • unifying the many participants in the counterterrorism effort and their knowledge in a network - based information sharing system that tran­ scends traditional governmental boundaries ; • unifying and strengthening congressional oversight to improve quality and accountability ; and • strengthening the FBI and homeland defenders . Unity of Effort : A National Counterterrorism Center The 9 / 11 story teaches the value of integrating strategic intelligence from all sources into joint operational planning—with both dimensions spanning the foreign - domestic divide . • In some ways , since 9 / 11 , joint work has gotten better . The effort of fighting terrorism has flooded over many of the usual agency bound­ aries because of its sheer quantity and energy . Attitudes have changed . But the problems of coordination have multiplied . The Defense Department alone has three unified commands ( SOCOM , CENT­ COM , and NORTHCOM ) that deal with terrorism as one of their principal concerns . • Much of the public commentary about the 9 / 11 attacks has focused on “lost opportunities . ”Though characterized as problems of “watch - listing , ” “information sharing , ” or “connecting the dots , ” each of these labels is too narrow . They describe the symptoms , not the disease . • Breaking the older mold of organization stovepiped purely in execu­ tive agencies , we propose a National Counterterrorism Center ( NCTC ) that would borrow the joint , unified command concept adopted in the 1980s by the American military in a civilian agency , combining the joint intelligence function alongside the operations work . • The NCTC would build on the existing Terrorist Threat Integration Center and would replace it and other terrorism “fusion centers” with - in the government . The NCTC would become the authoritative knowl­ edge bank , bringing information to bear on common plans . It should task collection requirements both inside and outside the United States . 22 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT • The NCTC should perform joint operational planning , assigning lead responsibilities to existing agencies and letting them direct the actual execution of the plans . • Placed in the Executive Office of the President , headed by a Senate - confirmed official ( with rank equal to the deputy head of a cabinet department ) who reports to the National Intelligence Director , the NCTC would track implementation of plans . It would be able to influence the leadership and the budgets of the counterterrorism operating arms of the CIA , the FBI , and the departments of Defense and Homeland Security . • The NCTC should not be a policymaking body . Its operations and planning should follow the policy direction of the president and the National Security Council . Unity of Effort : A National Intelligence Director Since long before 9 / 11—and continuing to this day—the intelligence commu­ nity is not organized well for joint intelligence work . It does not employ com­ mon standards and practices in reporting intelligence or in training experts overseas and at home . The expensive national capabilities for collecting intelli­ gence have divided management . The structures are too complex and too secret . • The community’s head—the Director of Central Intelligence—has at least three jobs : running the CIA , coordinating a 15 - agency confeder­ ation , and being the intelligence analyst - in - chief to the president . No one person can do all these things . • A new National Intelligence Director should be established with two main jobs : ( 1 ) to oversee national intelligence centers that combine experts from all the collection disciplines against common targets— like counterterrorism or nuclear proliferation ; and ( 2 ) to oversee the agencies that contribute to the national intelligence program , a task that includes setting common standards for personnel and information technology . • The national intelligence centers would be the unified commands of the intelligence world—a long - overdue reform for intelligence com­ parable to the 1986 Goldwater - Nichols law that reformed the organ­ ization of national defense . The home services—such as the CIA , DIA , EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 23 E x e c u t i v e O ff i c e o f t h e P r e s i d e n t P O T U S N a t i on a l I n t e ll i g e n c e D i r e c t o r S t a ff N a t i on a l C oun t e r t e rr o r i s m C e n t e r H i r e , T r a i n , A c q u i r e , E q u i p & F i e l d ( a g e n c i e s s u pp o r t / s t a ff t h e N a t ’ l I n t e l C e n t e r s ) D e p u t y N I D F o r e i g n I n t e ll i g e n c e ( C I A D i r . ) D e p u t y N I D D e f e n s e I n t e ll i g e n c e ( U S D I n t e ll i g e n c e ) D e p u t y N I D H o m e l a n d I n t e ll i g e n c e ( F B I / I n t e l D i r . ) N a t i on a l I n t e ll i g e n c e C e n t e r s ( c on d u c t “ j o i n t ” c o ll e c t i on a n d a n a l y s i s - i ll u s t r a t i v e ) W M D P r o l i f e r a t i on I n t ’ l C r i m e & N a r c o t i c s C h i n a / E a s t A s i a M i dd l e E a s t R u ss i a / E u r a s i a C I A C l a n d e s t i n e S e r v i c e s A ll - S ou r c e A n a l y s i s O p e n S ou r c e A g e n c y ( n e w ) D I A N S A N G A N R O O t h e r F B I I n t e l & C T / C I D H S / I A I P O t h e r D H S ( e . g . , C B P , T S A , N a t ’ l L a b s , C o a s t G u a r d , e t c . ) U n i t y o f E ff o r t i n M a n a g i n g I n t e ll i g e n c e 24 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT NSA , and FBI—would organize , train , and equip the best intelligence professionals in the world , and would handle the execution of intelli­ gence operations in the field . • This National Intelligence Director ( NID ) should be located in the Executive Office of the President and report directly to the president , yet be confirmed by the Senate . In addition to overseeing the National Counterterrorism Center described above ( which will include both the national intelligence center for terrorism and the joint operations planning effort ) , the NID should have three deputies : • For foreign intelligence ( a deputy who also would be the head of the CIA ) • For defense intelligence ( also the under secretary of defense for intelligence ) • For homeland intelligence ( also the executive assistant director for intelligence at the FBI or the under secretary of homeland securi­ ty for information analysis and infrastructure protection ) • The NID should receive a public appropriation for national intelli­ gence , should have authority to hire and fire his or her intelligence deputies , and should be able to set common personnel and informa­ tion technology policies across the intelligence community . • The CIA should concentrate on strengthening the collection capabil­ ities of its clandestine service and the talents of its analysts , building pride in its core expertise . • Secrecy stifles oversight , accountability , and information sharing . Unfortunately , all the current organizational incentives encourage overclassification . This balance should change ; and as a start , open information should be provided about the overall size of agency intel­ ligence budgets . Unity of Effort : Sharing Information The U . S . government has access to a vast amount of information . But it has a weak system for processing and using what it has . The system of “need to know” should be replaced by a system of “need to share . ” • The President should lead a government - wide effort to bring the EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 25 major national security institutions into the information revolution , turning a mainframe system into a decentralized network . The obsta­ cles are not technological . Official after official has urged us to call attention to problems with the unglamorous “back office” side of gov­ ernment operations . • But no agency can solve the problems on its own—to build the net - work requires an effort that transcends old divides , solving common legal and policy issues in ways that can help officials know what they can and cannot do . Again , in tackling information issues , America needs unity of effort . Unity of Effort : Congress Congress took too little action to adjust itself or to restructure the executive branch to address the emerging terrorist threat . Congressional oversight for intelligence—and counterterrorism—is dysfunctional . Both Congress and the executive need to do more to minimize national security risks during transi­ tions between administrations . • For intelligence oversight , we propose two options : either a joint com­ mittee on the old model of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy or a single committee in each house combining authorizing and appropriating committees . Our central message is the same : the intel­ ligence committees cannot carry out their oversight function unless they are made stronger , and thereby have both clear responsibility and accountability for that oversight . • Congress should create a single , principal point of oversight and review for homeland security . There should be one permanent stand­ ing committee for homeland security in each chamber . • We propose reforms to speed up the nomination , financial reporting , security clearance , and confirmation process for national security offi­ cials at the start of an administration , and suggest steps to make sure that incoming administrations have the information they need . Unity of Effort : Organizing America’s Defenses in the United States We have considered several proposals relating to the future of the domestic intelligence and counterterrorism mission . Adding a new domestic intelligence 26 THE 9 / 11 COMMISSION REPORT agency will not solve America’s problems in collecting and analyzing intelli­ gence within the United States . We do not recommend creating one . • We propose the establishment of a specialized and integrated national security workforce at the FBI , consisting of agents , analysts , linguists , and surveillance specialists who are recruited , trained , rewarded , and retained to ensure the development of an institutional culture imbued with a deep expertise in intelligence and national security . At several points we asked : Who has the responsibility for defending us at home ? Responsibility for America’s national defense is shared by the Department of Defense , with its new Northern Command , and by the Department of Homeland Security . They must have a clear delineation of roles , missions , and authority . • The Department of Defense and its oversight committees should reg­ ularly assess the adequacy of Northern Command’s strategies and planning to defend against military threats to the homeland . • The Department of Homeland Security and its oversight committees should regularly assess the types of threats the country faces , in order to determine the adequacy of the government’s plans and the readi­ ness of the government to respond to those threats . * * * We call on the American people to remember how we all felt on 9 / 11 , to remember not only the unspeakable horror but how we came together as a nation—one nation . Unity of purpose and unity of effort are the way we will defeat this enemy and make America safer for our children and grandchildren . We look forward to a national debate on the merits of what we have recom­ mended , and we will participate vigorously in that debate .