The Scientific Dimensions of Social Knowledge and their Distant Echoes in 20 th century American Philosophy of Science Philip Mirowski University of Notre Dame August 2003 second draft I would like to thank the participants at the Bielefeld - Notre Dame Conference on Science and Values , July 2003 , and especially James Robert Brown , Roger Strand and Tom Uebel for comments . This paper is dedicated to the memory of Paul Feyerabend . Please direct all correspondence to : Philip Mirowski , 400 Decio Hall , University of Notre Dame , Notre Dame , Indiana , 46556 . 1 1 . Introduction : What Do Philosophers of Science Know about the ‘Social Dimensions of Scientific Knowledge” ? In the Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy , the entry for the “Social Dimensions of Knowledge” makes the following observation : “Since 1980 , interest in developing philosophical accounts of scientific knowledge that incorporate the social dimensions of scientific practice has been on the increase” . Many philosophers of science regard themselves as participating in the “growing recognition of the social character of scientific inquiry . ” 1 While this impression is apparently quite widespread amongst the philosophy of science community , I shall argue in this paper that it is factually misleading , and furthermore , symptomatic of some of the ways in which the American philosophy of science community in the 20 th century has revealed itself either unwilling or incapable of regarding both the scientists they describe and themselves as integrated into a larger set of social structures of inquiry . ( One would find it more difficult , I suspect , to make a similar case for continental European philosophy of science . ) There are at least four problems with this self - congratulatory opinion : [ 1 ] It is historically inaccurate . A broader perspective will reveal that the philosophy of science is sometimes better regarded from the perspective of a subset of social science , especially in the 20 th century American context , in the sense that it has always participated in larger trends in social theory , making conscious or unconscious use of their doctrines . As such , it has always subscribed to some account or another of the ‘social dimensions of science’ . [ 2 ] It takes ‘society’ as an unproblematic entity . But the account of ‘society’ which has informed dominant schools of the philosophy of science have not remained constant or persisted as a fixed premise within their larger conceptual frameworks . Indeed , nagging suspicions about the legitimacy of the ontological entity ‘society’ constitutes a major subtext of our story , especially in American philosophy of science . Hence we can identify at least two ‘ruptures’ or profound revisions in the ways philosophers would see themselves as forging accommodations with the ‘social’ in the 20 th century . One occurs from the later 1930s to the immediate post - WWII period , and another in the 1980s . 1 The first quote may be found at : ( http : / / plato . stanford . edu / entries / scientific - knowledge - social ) The second quotation is from page 1 of ( Longino , 2002 ) , but could just as easily have come from Alvin Goldman , Joseph Rouse , Philip Kitcher , Miriam Solomon or indeed , any of a wide range of contemporary philosophers . 2 [ 3 ] It represses the fact that philosophy of science as an academic formation has always been pitted in competition with other academic disciplines whom also seek to make various pronouncements upon the social significance of science , the epistemological efficacy of scientific method , and the preferred modes of funding and organization of scientific communities . The ‘science policy’ community was perhaps the most significant rival throughout the 20 th century , but sociologists of science have also presented themselves as candidates , as one cannot help but notice from the surfeit of books and articles by philosophers seeking to reprimand them . 2 One might suspect that interpretative charity should ideally begin at home , with philosophers of science themselves coming to acknowledge that the conditions of their own academic professionalization as a discipline had more than a little to do with some major shifts in the structure and conduct of their own inquiries . [ 4 ] It is neglectful nearly to the point of oblivion about the conditions which prompt the existence of watersheds in the organization of science such as the more recent experience in the 1980s . A relevant congenital tic of the American philosophy profession ( although , it must be conceded , not theirs alone ) is a demonstrated unwillingness to regard science as an historically changing entity , not just in the realm of epistemic ‘values’ but also in terms of actual social structures . Science takes place in very specific settings , and is paid for in very specific ways ; and scientific findings are disseminated in highly structured and regimented formats . None of these has remained constant throughout the 20 th century , and almost none have been subjected to sustained scrutiny by philosophers of science . Of course , there have been notable exceptions to this generalization ; but in those instances , I believe it is most instructive to see how philosophers allowing for generational changes in scientific structures have been treated as pariahs by their peers . I am thinking here especially of Paul Feyerabend , who was vilified in his lifetime as a dangerous enemy of science ( Preston et al , 2000 ) . This paper is dedicated to the memory of Paul Feyerabend ; whereas one might reject his remedies for what he believed ailed science , he at least knew how to confront the issue of the relationship of science to society head - on as the rightful province of an engaged philosophy of science . Here again we find the self - congratulation of modern philosophers is unwarranted . He understood , as they apparently do not , that communal considerations were not a mere accessory , 2 The science policy literature may be sampled in their flagship journal Research Policy . For a sample of 3 a ‘social dimension to scientific knowledge’ , but instead the scientific dimension of social knowledge which deserved scrutiny and critique . Skeptical of the contributions of contemporary academic ‘social science’ to the discussion , he nevertheless situated his books squarely within the province of explicit politics , and then worked outwards to inquire how it was that various beliefs about the nature of science served certain interests and frustrated others . He not only was an advocate but practiced his own prescription that , “the history of ideas is an essential part of the scientific method” ( 1999 , p . 214 ) . He understood that one could not and should not rest satisfied with talk of ‘society’ as a whole , but rather had to look hard at which intellectual constituencies were aligned with particular groups , and then evaluate their transcendentalist claims . Writing in the midst of the Cold War , he suggested , “Church and State are now carefully separated . State and Science , however , are clearly tethered . ” ( 1978 , p . 74 ) Had he but lived into the 21 st century , he would have confirmed his initial hypothesis that no scientific alliances endure forever ( this being the real message of Against Method ) , and that now , if anything , Church and State are much less partitioned off than they once were in America , but that State and Science , if not exactly divorced from one another , are certainly exploring a trial separation . The omitted fourth party in the menage a quatre , throughout his own work as well as in the philosophy of science generally , was the private corporation . This shifting pattern of alliances over the century is the Rosetta Stone which will allow us to recover the longer - term interplay of social knowledge and the philosophy of science . 2 . The Bigger Picture : Regime Changes Lately there seems to be a belated attempt to provide the consideration of the “social dimensions of science” within the philosophy of science with a genealogy , but it has assumed a most curious configuration . 3 For some reason , everybody tends to start out with John Stuart Mill’s essay On Liberty . This , in itself , might constitute a harmless custom , in that all points of departure are to some extent arbitrary , except for the fact that most everyone ( with the possible exception of Nancy Cartwright ) tends to ignore his actual writings on what would now be called philosophers reprimands of sociologists of science , see ( Brown , 2001 ; Kitcher , 1993 ; 2000 ; 2001 ; Koertge , 1998 ) . 3 This is based upon comments in the aforementioned entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia , Longino ( 2002 , pp . 3 - 7 ) , Kitcher ( 2001 ) . An even more recent concern to reinstate the logical positivist claim to have a rich tradition of consideration of ‘social dimensions’ ( Richardson , 2001 ; 2002 ; Uebel , 200b ) is covered in later sections of this paper . 4 the philosophy of science , and show almost no interest in his political and economic doctrines , which Mill himself thought part and parcel of his philosophical position . One wonders whether these Anglo - American searchers after their roots are more attracted to the author of Utilitarianism and the advocate of a ‘negative conception of freedom’ , or alternatively drawn , as Isaiah Berlin put it , to the prophet of an “almost Hegelian distrust of simple models and cut - and - dried formulae to cover complex , contradictory , and changing situations . . . [ He courted ] Fallibility , the right to err , as a corollary of the capacity for self - improvement ; distrust [ ed ] symmetry and finality as enemies of freedom” ( Berlin , 1969 , pp . 193 , 192 ) . We may never fully grasp the exact character of the motives behind this particular point of departure , because the bulk of those who cite Mill pass over his ideas post haste , possibly because they may harbor a suspicion that his capacious sense of the openness of inquiry may not in fact have much correspondence to the practices of modern science . 4 Once past Mill , this genealogy tends to tip a hat to Charles Sanders Peirce , but never lingers there , since all and sundry confess themselves perplexed at the luxurious indiscipline of his massive oeuvre . Then , the narrative displays a rather yawning gap , usually absent any comment , leading up to contemporary figures that philosophers of science deem to be dealing with social epistemology in a serious and responsible manner . 5 The impression imparted by these genealogies is that once professional philosophers stumbled directly upon the social dimension of science , which they had previously unaccountably overlooked , they judiciously devoted some of their scarce attention to it and have made their peace with it . More recently , a few specialists in the history of philosophy of science have pointed out that this sketchy account is really untenable . 6 Rather , a more sensitive reading of the literature 4 For example , see ( Kitcher , 2001 , pp . 106 - 7 ) . By contrast , Feyerabend counted himself a true disciple of Mill , by starting from the premise that the contemporary organization of scientific research was not ideal . See his ( 1999 , chap . 11 ) . Nevertheless , even such an ardent philosopher of freedom of inquiry as Mill ultimately had to resort to social distinctions to help quarantine off those who might be considered illegitimate interlocutors , or as he put it , “Despotism is a legitimate mode of government when dealing with barbarians . ” This repressed politics of epistemology is discussed with great perspicuity by ( White , 1989 ) . 5 Sometimes various authors attempt to render the gap less daunting and embarrassing by inserting Karl Popper into the breach . An interesting argument by a Popperian that Popper did not in fact discuss actual social structures of science , even though that would have been the most logical implication of his position , can be found in ( Jarvie , 2001b ) . For purposes of limiting our exposition to the American context , we shall regretfully have to pass this issue by in the present paper . 6 Pride of place goes here to ( Don Howard , 2003a ; 2003b ) , and Thomas Uebel ( 2000a ) . ( Jacobs , 2002 ) raises the issue of the initial appearance of the discourse of “scientific communities” in philosophical discussion . 5 reveals that the “social dimension” was never altogether absent . Confining ourselves only to 20 th century Anglo - American texts ( itself introducing a substantial bias ) , it has been observed that the American Pragmatists had quite a bit to say about the relationship of science to society in the first third of the century ; John Dewey was regarded as a major public spokesman for the interplay of science and social values , and this is an area we shall explore in some detail below . In Britain , the “Social Planning of Science” movement associated with J . D . Bernal and Patrick Blackett during the Depression argued for a reorientation of science towards greater consideration of public welfare ; this provoked a major response on the part of such figures as Michael Polanyi and Friedrich Hayek ( McGuckin , 1984 ) . Philosophers of science ignore these writings at their peril , as we shall argue below ; the presence of a number of Nobel Prize winners should signal that something significant was going on here . Researchers such as Thomas Uebel , Alan Richardson and Don Howard have of late been recovering the ‘social’ content of the logical positivist movement ; and this will require rather more attention than has been devoted to the phenomenon so far . The displacement of the Pragmatists by the logical positivists in the American scene intersects with the question of the professionalization of the field of the philosophy of science after World War II , and coinciding with the Cold War reorganization of American science , an issue raised by John McCumber in his Time in the Ditch ( 2001 ) . Contemporaneously with these events , science policy managers such as Vannevar Bush , Warren Weaver and James Conant weighed in with their own narratives about the place of science in society , and far from being restricted to bureaucratic contexts , their prognostications also fed back into the philosophical discussion , as we shall observe below . Perhaps less familiar are a spate of writings on the social prerequisites of technical change and their relationship to science ( Hounshell in Hughes , 2000 ) . Jerry Ravetz ( 1971 ) proposed greater scrutiny of social control of social structures of science . Philosophers are aware that Kuhn , Lakatos and Feyerabend belong somewhere in here , in the period of the 1960s - 1980s , but nonetheless seem to flinch from acknowledging their social doctrines , perhaps feeling something subsequently went awry with the proposed alliance of the history and the philosophy of science . The congealing out of a separate sociology of science also occurs in this era , although it was regarded by philosophers more as a source of irritation than edification . Philosophers such as Joseph Rouse ( 1987 ) attempted to call attention to the political aspects of epistemology . Finally , we might point to the 6 impact of Steve Fuller in his quest to broaden the conception of a “social epistemology” within the philosophy profession , dating back to the 1980s ; he has also done yeoman work in trying to bridge the divide between philosophers , science policy advocates and the science studies community . So , as it turns out , there existed a surplus of meditations upon the ‘social dimensions of science’ throughout the 20 th century , most of it fairly high - profile , some of it done by bona fide philosophers , and quite a bit of it directly concerned with the interplay of science organization and human welfare . So whence came the impression that philosophers of science have only ‘recently’ turned their attention to serious consideration of the social dimensions of scientific inquiry ? How is it that , prior to this conversion , many of the elect seemed to be held in the thrall of what has been characterized as a “Legend” , as Philip Kitcher puts it , where said “Legend conceives of scientific method as determinate . There are no options for the good scientist” ( 1993 , p . 68 ) ? Since there was only one uniquely correct form of rationality , and if scientists were behaving properly , then for the purposes of the philosophy of science they are effectively all alike , and there was no need to consider the ‘society’ of such rational agents ? Furthermore , how did it come to pass that the question of the relationship of science to society was deemed moot , if only because , “science is the pinnacle of human achievement not because of its actual successes but in virtue of the fact that its practice , both in attaining truth and in lapsing into error , is thoroughly informed by reason” ( 1993 , p . 4 ) . How did science become portrayed as ‘value - free’ because it managed to transcend secular values ? The status of such an exemplary state of grace putatively did not need to be considered in relationship to the larger society ; indeed , many thought Society should feel honored and blessed that it found itself subsisting ( along side of ? embedded within ? enfolded around ? ) such a noble entity . Herein lies the origin of the strange polarity which contrasts a ‘rational’ Science with an ‘irrational’ Society . As I have argued elsewhere ( Mirowski & Sent , 2002 ) , the postwar credo that science enjoyed a dispensation from having an ‘economics’ had much to do with this philosophical construction . The coexistence of this bizarre conviction that science at its best was somehow a - social , both in its internal operation and in its external relations with the culture within which it was situated , juxtaposed with the demonstrable fact that very specific policies concerning the viability of particular social structures of science were being deployed in its day - to - day defense , 7 constitutes the primary topic of the present paper . Philosophers are perhaps fed up with sociologists chiming in with the mantra that ‘science is social’ ; here it will be conceded that there is no need for further repetition of that rallying cry at this late date . Rather , we are concerned to explore here how it was that science came to be portrayed by philosophers as a - social and autarkic and value - free in America in the middle of the 20 th century , and then , how it has subsequently become possible for the philosophy profession to come to the conclusion that this portrayal could be easily reversed without deranging their entire project . It so happens that this narrative is intimately intertwined with another strand of discourse , one which tracks attitudes towards “democracy” in America . Of necessity , this must be an historical inquiry , and thus we find that a few historians have cleared a path for exploration of this issue . 7 But we should like this to be regarded to a greater degree as an exercise in the social epistemology of the relationship of science to society . If we were to proceed to treat the ‘social dimensions of science’ solely as a set of propositions conforming to ( or not ) a unique logic of societal organization , then we should be recapitulating the error which has just been diagnosed with regard to the ‘Legend’ of an earlier vintage of the philosophy of science . Rather , it will be argued that certain configurations of science organization , in conjunction with certain widely accepted images of society , have given rise to very specific orthodoxies in the philosophy of science . There have been ( at least ) three distinct positions regarding the relationship of science to society dominant in the American philosophy profession in the 20 th century . For the purposes of exposition in this paper we shall identify each with a representative agent , viz . , John Dewey , Hans Reichenbach and Philip Kitcher . This personalization of categories undoubtedly constitutes to some extent a misrepresentation of communally shared beliefs in their respective eras , but that should be regarded merely as a provisional point of departure in what would eventually be a larger project . While we shall be concerned with providing a faithful thumbnail characterization of their respective accounts of the ‘social dimensions of science’ , our real innovation will be to supplement them with parallel accounts of the ‘scientific dimensions of the social’ , or the conditions which permitted these accounts to thrive in their respective eras . Consequently the dominant philosophical stance of the time should not be directly attributed to the actual charismatic protagonists named Dewey , Reichenbach and Kitcher ; rather , it should be a 7 Here we would mention ( Hollinger , 1996 ; Purcell , 1973 ) and ( Westbrook , 1991 ) as having provided 8 characterization of a set of working beliefs related to the actual social structures of science dominant within those epochs . In particular , in this paper we shall seek to relate their philosophical pronouncements to the types of environments in which scientific research was being prosecuted , the types of social theories widely prevalent in their eras , and last but not least , the conundrum of the role of the philosopher in those respective regimes . The variables which we shall touch upon are summarized below in Table I : Table I : Three Regimes 8 and their Philosophies Time period WWI to 1940 1940 - 80 1980 - present Science organization Foundations’ Cold War Global privatization managers : program officers military officers corporate officers Prime location : corporate lab research univs . industry hybrids Philos . orthodoxy : Pragmatism logical empiricism social epistemology exemplaryphilosopher John Dewey Hans Reichenbach Philip Kitcher social theory Institutionalism decision theory game theory / historicism operations research neoclassical econ . science exists for : communal welfare unimpeachable truth valuable information society is : a democratic nation rational individual a marketplace of multiplied ideas fundamentalchallenge national inferiority military dominance industrial control the enemy ignorance error inefficiency important clues . 8 The concept of regimes of science organization in America is discussed at some length in Philip Mirowski & Esther - Mirjam Sent , eds . , Science Bought and Sold , Univ . of Chicago Press , 2002 . 9 The purpose of correlating regimes of science organization with contrasting philosophical accounts of the relationship of science to society is to raise the troubling question : just how clearly have philosophers been able to train their analytical skills upon the complex of problems called ‘social dimensions of science’ ? Were there structural obstacles to their comprehension of the interplay of such vexing binaries as the connection of science to democracy , the mutual conditioning of science and the economy , the contrast of the natural to the social , the impact of formats of education upon the flourishing of science , and the impact of science on the constitution of communal values and aspirations of its client populations ? This will bring us to within hailing distance of a most unsettling question : To what extent does the modern orthodoxy in the philosophy of science even make contact with the contemporary state of science as found on the ground in the new millennium ? 3 . Dewey’s Philosophy for the Masses The notion of a complete separation of science from the social environment is a fallacy which encourages irresponsibility on the part of scientists regarding the social consequences of their work . ( Dewey , 198x , p . 483 ) For most people , “science is a mystery in the hands of initiates who have become adepts in virtue of following ritualistic ceremonies from which the profane are excluded . ” ( Dewey , 1927 , p . 164 ) John Dewey may not be generally accredited as a philosopher of science in good standing by our contemporaries , but nevertheless , that was perhaps the most important facet of his reputation in the first three decades of the 20 th century . Dewey was not only the best - known Pragmatist philosopher of his era , but he was also a public intellectual , seeking to make philosophy speak to the most insistent and pressing problems of the general public . Louis Mumford perceptively summed up his crusade as opposition to leisure - class notions of thinking , struggling to replace them with flexible , nondogmatic and democratic modes of thought . In this quest , his characterization of “science” played a pivotal role . In the early 20 th century , it was a trite commonplace to assert that science had liberated humanity from earlier metaphysical , primarily theological , fetters ; what made Dewey distinct from run - of - the - mill science idolaters was that he realized that contemporary practices of science had rendered any such emancipatory 10 promise not only feeble but deeply implausible , and that if left unchecked , the corruption of this particular ideal would spread to other , even more important cultural values . To understand Dewey’s reasoning , it is important to first appreciate that science as pursued in pre - Depression America was a very different phenomenon than what we now conceive of as the process and settings of scientific research . 9 Very little support for scientific research was provided by government funds , and most colleges were not set up to promote scientific research . American higher education was largely patterned upon the liberal education model , providing a generalist moral curriculum to a small proportion of the population not oriented towards vocational training . Indeed , most individuals who sought advanced academic training in the natural sciences had to go abroad , primarily to the German universities , then regarded as the best in the world . Outside of a handful of universities , most scientific research was funded by and prosecuted under the auspices of large corporations . Behemoths such as General Electric , duPont , American Telephone and Telegraph , and Eastman Kodak employed the vast majority of scientifically trained personnel in the US , and even supported a few Nobel Prize winners . The motives for this configuration of privatized science had more to do with the fin de siècle merger wave , antitrust policies and the need for routine in - house testing capabilities in the newer science - based industries , than it had to do with far - sighted innovation policies or benevolent intentions towards the general welfare . Even the funding of the miniscule sphere of academic research into science was conducted on terms dictated by the industrial behemoths . The vast wealth amassed by families such as the Carnegies and the Rockefellers were partially diverted into eponymous foundations in order to “give back” something to the nation that had made them wealthy . Although the entire raison d’être of the foundations was to fund research which was not dictated by the exigencies of the pursuit of profit , these nominally eleemosynary institutions were still run by men whose backgrounds were in corporate bureaucracies , and therefore the very criteria of research funding did not escape the stamp of corporate imperative . For instance , a few favored private ( not state - sponsored ) universities were encouraged to nurture the role of academic entrepreneur , mimicking the captains of industry whom had provided their seed capital . Grants became patterned upon the business instrument of contracts rather than the 9 Descriptions of early 20th century science are taken from ( Reingold , 1991 ; Shinn , 2003 ; McGrath , 2002 ) and sources cited in ( Mirowski & Sent , 2002 ) . The failure of early 20 th century attempts to garnish government support for science are recounted in ( Tobey , 1971 ) . 11 previous template of handouts for poor relief . Applications forms , progress reports , bureaucratic peer evaluation and the other trappings of the hierarchical M - form corporation were inserted into research protocols . 10 The corporate sway over science bore many other consequences for public attitudes towards science , and scientists’ attitudes towards the public . For instance , we now tend to forget that the first formal initiative aimed at shaping the “public understanding of science” dated from the 1920s , with the Scripps Newspaper Service instituting its Science Service in 1921 ( Tobey , 1971 , p . 67 ) . The fact that the bulk of scientifically trained personnel were employed by corporations also was a major conditioning factor behind the cultural fascination with the newly professionalized engineers as a putatively progressive political force in the 1920s . In the popular press , scientific theories were being persistently dragooned into service to justify various forms of elitism , from Social Darwinism to Technocracy to rehashes of the variational principles found in mechanics as grand theories of Natural efficiency . The ambitions of many scientists / engineers to assume credit for the progress of America provoked a reaction in the form of questioning the baleful influence of scientists on their social surroundings . 11 The supposed meritocratic character of science was often parlayed into anti - egalitarian precepts and corporate boosterism ; for instance , Robert Millikan told a Chicago audience in 1919 , “It is probable that the total possibilities of improvement of conditions through distribution are very limited , while possibilities of improvement through increases of production are incalculable” ( quoted in Tobey , 1971 , pp . 182 - 3 ) . This pervasive corporate character of early 20 th century American science was the looming backdrop to Dewey’s distress over the relationship of science to society . Science as then practiced constituted a problem because of the way it was imperfectly integrated into the social fabric . As he wrote , “the concept that natural science somehow sets a limit to freedom , subjecting men to fixed necessities , is not an intrinsic product of science . . . [ but ] a reflex of the 10 The corporate character of early foundations and their effect on scientific research in the early 20 th century is discussed in ( Kohler , 1991 ) . 11 See , for instance , ( Ayres , 1927 , p . 275 ) : “Scientists frequently argue that apart from making science one’s profession , the chief advantage to be obtained from the study of science is the scientific mind : freedom from dogma , hospitality to unexpected truth , the experimental attitude . . . Theoretically , all may gain these insights . But actually , only a few of us have ever done so . Theoretically , we might become a scientific people ; but we have not , and are not likely to , except in the sense in which we are now a Christian people . ” In a curious incident in 1936 , Franklin 12 social conditions under which science is applied so as to reach only a pecuniary function” ( 1984 , p . 105 ) . Dewey suspected that that the bureaucratic / industrial location of the scientist was a prime reason for the encapsulation of the scientific method within the cult of the expert , erecting an artificial barrier between science and society . He bemoaned the phenomenon that , “the idea of experts is substituted for that of philosophers , since philosophy has become something of a joke , while the . . . expert in operation is rendered familiar and congenial by the rise of the physical sciences and by the conduct of industry” ( 1927 , p . 205 ) . Philosophers bore some of the responsibility for this sorry state of affairs , because , “The philosopher’s idea of a complete separation of the mind and the body is realized in thousands of industrial workers” ( 1984 , p . 104 ) . How one thought about the process of thinking was shaped by the social structures which enabled the activity of thought . As he wrote in Experience and Nature : the ulterior problem of thought is to make thought prevail in experience , not just the results of thought by imposing them upon others , but the active process of thinking . The ultimate contradiction in the classic and genteel tradition is that while it made thought universal and necessary and the culminating good of nature , it was content to leave its distribution among men a thing of accident , dependent upon birth , economic and civil status . Consistent as well as humane thought will be aware of the hateful irony of a philosophy which is indifferent to the conditions that determine the occurrence of reason while it asserts the ultimacy and universality of reason . ( 1981 , p . 99 ) In retrospect , we can appreciate that Dewey was casting about for a role for the philosopher within the Jazz Age American system of science . Dewey’s alternative to the prevailing cult of the expert was to imagine a different sort of science , a science dedicated to the promotion of communal intelligence , a generic ‘experimental’ method which would be made available to all members of the community as a part of their birthright . Pragmatic knowledge of nature would shade imperceptibly into useful knowledge concerning regularities of communal behavior . In order to counter the corporatist and elitist connotations of science rife in his era , Dewey made a conceptual move which will reverberate down through the remainder of our narrative . Throughout his later career , Dewey concertedly and repeatedly blurred the definitions of “democracy” and “science” prevalent in his lifetime , so that he could conflate the two and provide an counterweight to the forces dragging science away from its liberal and liberationist potential . As he insisted , “democracy is not an alternative to other principles of associated life . It Delano Roosevelt wrote a letter to Science in which he suggested that scientists and engineers were not doing enough to help society “absorb the shocks of the impact of science” ( McGrath , 2002 , p . 50 ) . 13 is the idea of community life itself” ( 1927 , p . 148 . ) And from the obverse side , he saw himself , “raising the question of what science can do in making a different sort of world and society . Such a science would be the opposite pole to science conceived merely as a means to special industrial ends” ( 1984 , p . 107 ) . The yoking together of science and democracy was not such an obvious winning combination in the early 20 th century context ; it had yet to attain its subsequent unassailable American status of Mom and apple pie . Indeed , Dewey’s book The Public and its Problems was a response to an intellectual current which framed the duo as incompatible in structure and content . 12 As we have observed , a common form of ‘naturalism’ was regularly being used for nativist , racist , anti - egalitarian and conservative ends . But perhaps more disturbing , the spread of empiricist protocols to the newly established academic social sciences were producing observations that suggested conventional understandings of democracy were a sham . Political scientists were demonstrating that the United States government was not at all run by the people for the commonweal , but by a small handful of insiders for their own power and enrichment . Legal realists were documenting that judicial decisions were neither impartial nor logical , but rather the product of powerful interests . Psychologists were demonstrating that the voters were largely irrational and easily swayed by those who controlled the corporate media , particularly newspapers and the new - fangled radio . The sum total of this research portrayed a populace so easily manipulated and exploited that an expanded franchise and enhanced participation in the political process was widely regarded as dangerous ; the democratic election of fascist parties in Europe only reinforced that impression . Not only was science perceived as intrinsically undemocratic , but science when applied to society was revealing the dark side of democracy . Another Jazz Age trend that is often forgotten today is that there existed a fair degree of academic opposition to the idea that there was or could be a generic ‘science’ which would apply equally to Nature and Society . High - profile figures such as Frank Knight in economics and Pitrim Sorokin in sociology were arguing that the natural sciences ( and especially physics ) provided misleading paradigms for theory in the social sciences , and were citing German philosophical theses that nothing like the ‘laws’ of physics could be discovered when the subject was society . A general inclination towards evolutionary arguments were being deployed as 12 This case is made by Purcell ( 1973 ) and Westbrook ( 1991 ) . 14 explanations why there were no absolutes in human experience , and to argue in favor of the essential plasticity of human nature . But this opened the door to the cynical manipulation of the masses by experts . The major opponents to this ‘relativist’ threat in social science were theological , and in particular Catholic , academics who sought to reassert the centrality of values through reimposition of theological absolutes ( Purcell , 1973 , chap . 10 ) . These were not the sort of people Dewey could see himself making alliances with , and therefore he was driven to find a ‘third way’ to relegitimize science and democracy . Dewey’s path out of the impasse was to insist that science would cease to undermine liberal democracy and that the corporate sway over science would be progressively diminished if and only if we came to regard science and democracy as inseparable parts of the same communal activity ; that is , [ a ] the practice of democracy would come to resemble science at its best , which was procedurally non - dogmatic and experimental ; and [ b ] more science would be reorganized and conducted in the communal democratic interest . It will prove important for us to get the subtleties of Dewey’s equation of science and democracy correct , because it would very rapidly become corrupted into something very different in World War II , especially under the auspices of Robert Merton and Michael Polanyi and James Conant , something which Dewey personally would have regarded as pernicious , and something which is now mistakenly attributed to Dewey . In World War II , under the imperatives of wartime mobilization of science , the separate , autarkic and self - governing scientific community began to be held up as the icon of what a democratic community could aspire to be , in the guise of an ideal “republic of science” . In this construction , scientists did lay claim to an esoteric expertise in generic rationality inaccessible to ( or at least rare for ) the common layperson . Dewey could never have been a proponent of this position for a number of reasons , but primarily because the corporate science then dominant could never plausibly be portrayed as self - governing in that era ; nor , for that matter , could scientific rationality practically be pictured as politically ‘free’ from corporate imperatives . The separate constitution of the scientific community as a social formation was not yet a conceptual possibility . That could only become conceivable after the war . Dewey’s reconciliation of science and democracy was not a bolt from the blue , but was built up from resources available to him in the 1920s . Philosophy of science was just one component of theories of the social in that era , and not something set apart or distinct from them . 15 Economics and psychology were other key components . In Dewey’s case , he left numerous clues that he had made implicit pact with the Institutionalist school of economics and the “habit” school of social psychology , both very active traditions in the contemporary American context . 13 His position bore a number of striking resemblances in particular with the writings of the Institutionalist Thorstein Veblen , one of the very few authors whom he regularly cites ( 1984 , p . 102 ; Westerbrook , 1991 , p . 310 ) . The pediment of their shared themes was that metaphysics has operated in the past to reinforce existing class relationships in society ; hence Dewey united in opposition with Veblen to “leisure class thinking , ” first described in the Theory of the Leisure Class . Another was that the “individual” self is constantly under reconstruction in modern society , and therefore the older “individualist” orientation of both epistemology and social science stood as a major obstacle to the constitution of his ideal science . The text Individualism Old and New is one long argument against the classical economic elevation of the ‘natural’ individual as the basis for understanding society : [ T ] the chief obstacle to the creation of a type of individual . . . in whom sociability is one with cooperation in all regular human associations is the persistence of that feature of the earlier individualism which defines industry and commerce by ideas of private pecuniary profit . ( 1984 , p . 84 ) For Dewey , it was not that the average citizen was woefully ‘irrational’ ; rather , it was the received portrait of rationality which had led the social scientists astray . In Dewey’s system this implied the rejection of classical Utilitarianism , and consequently , of neoclassical economics : The idea that there is something inherently ‘natural’ and answerable to ‘natural law’ in the working of economic forces , in contrast with the man - made artificiality of political institutions . The idea of a natural individual in his isolation possessed of fully - fledged wants . . . and of a ready - made faculty of foresight and prudent calculation is as much a fiction in psychology as the picture of the individual in possession of antecedent political rights is in politics . ( p . 102 ) Veblen famously asked “Why is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science ? ” ; Dewey wanted to equate an evolutionary approach with what he considered to be the “experimental method . ” Yet this did not mean mimicking the actual quotidian procedures of the physical scientists , as he repeatedly insisted : 13 On the history of Institutionalist economics , see ( Mirowski , 1988 ; Rutherford , 1994 , Yonay , 1998 ) On habit psychology , see ( Camic , 1986 ; Dalton , 2002 ; Westerbrook , 1991 , pp . 286 - 93 ; Ayres , 1927 , chap . 22 ) . His periodic discussions at Columbia with another of the leading Institutionalist figures , Wesley Clair Mitchell , is documented in ( Mitchell , 1969 , vol . II , p . 450 ) 16 When we say that thinking and beliefs should be experimental , not absolutistic , we have then in mind a certain logic of method , not , primarily , the carrying on of experimentation like that of laboratories . ( 1927 , p . 202 ) What purports to be experiment in the social field is very different from experiment in natural science . ( 1939 , p . 65 ) Thus , by seeking to equate ‘good science’ with democracy , Dewey was definitely not appealing to any theories of natural science to underpin theories of democracy : he was no friend of any social physics . His version of pragmatism led him to deflect attention from the ends and content of science , and towards the means by which science was purportedly conducted . Thus he leaned heavily upon the Institutionalist rejection of “natural law” theories of the nature of humanity in order to prevent misunderstanding of what he intended by a scientific democracy . Dewey’s commitments to certain particular social theories were more fervent than has been noticed by later commentators . This is significant , because incipient revolutions in social theory would have direct implications for the plausibility of Dewey’s philosophical theses . Even writers deeply sympathetic to Dewey’s project have been forced to admit that his matchmaking activities between science and democracy subsequently proved practically barren , a most unhappy prognosis for a pragmatist philosopher . Long passages of clotted prose never led to any practical political programs . “He appeared to have given little thought to the problems and possibilities of participatory government . . . Dewey had surprisingly little to say about democratic citizenship” ( Westbrook , 1991 , p . 317 ) . Politics , one of his trademark concerns , ended up a lingering embarrassment , rather like a cynical guest at a patriotic gathering . More germane to our present concerns , he also made no suggestions as to how scientists could be unshackled from their lab benches in major corporations , much less the imperative of the profit motive ; there was no serious consideration of how science was to be paid for at all . One got the impression those questions would be in the nature of details to be worked out in the distant future when , believe it or not , the captains of industry would grow bored and would relinquish their ownership of ‘machine production’ to socialized entities “so that they may devote their energies to affairs which involve more novelty , variation and opportunities for gain” ( 1927 , p . 61 ) . And yet , Dewey also seemed to argue that America had the best chance of realizing his vague ideal of democracy as science , raising the bar for human excellence relative to the older , richer , but metaphysically lumbered cultures of Europe , producing a moral and intellectual advance in the career of mankind as a whole . This pie - in - the - sky aspect of Dewey’s thought illustrates the fact that his 17 popularity was frequently more directly attributable to his quest for a non - Marxian lowest common denominator of politics and economics which could attract the allegiance of the broadest array of American left - leaning intellectuals ( Purcell , 1973 , p . 202 ) . 14 Yet however toothless and nonspecific his reform program turned out to be in practice , it nonetheless proved to be untenable from World War II onwards , and furthermore , it unintentionally provided the major resource for certain more pointed and virulent doctrines on the social relations of science developed in America in the postwar period . In a further degradation of his program for the conflation of science and democracy , university - accredited scientists came to be said to conduct their activities within an ideal democracy—namely , Merton’s “norms” of universalism , communism , disinterestedness , and organized skepticism . No longer was democracy - in - the - making a legitimate aspiration for the scientific community at large ; instead , it became ossified as the esoteric virtue of the adept within the cloistered monastery of the newly re - engineered American research university . Rationality was increasingly deployed as an abstraction , the dogmatic preserve of the expert . These cloistered elect were explicitly absolved of all responsibility for the larger society and its political aspirations . And , in a twisted non sequitur , since America was putatively a democracy , it naturally acceded to the position of premier bastion of legitimate science , in comparison with a decadent and totalitarian Europe . Dewey’s pragmatic stress on means over ends became transmuted into the elevation of pure science over application ; Dewey’s critique of corporate science became twisted into a denial of any relevance of economic support to the conduct of science ; Dewey’s advocacy of a pragmatic logic of inquiry became the reification of a language of science of almost mystical powers , namely , formal logic and mathematical axiomatization ( Reichenbach , 1938 , p . 49 ) . We should not be understood as claiming that Robert Merton or anyone else intended this defalcation ; our argument is different . Rather , in World War II and after , the social organization of science had been re - engineered from the ground up , as had the universities and , to a lesser extent , the government . The science / industry partnership so inveighed against by Dewey was being replaced with a science / military partnership : Science had become betrothed to the State , 14 This may have some relevance for coming to comprehension of Richard Rorty’s quest to revive Dewey for the modern reader . Rorty distances himself from Dewey’s “habit of announcing a bold new positive program 18 but not in any way Dewey had imagined . Further , philosophers had learned in the interim a different way to make themselves useful . The world that had been the reference point of Dewey’s philosophy no longer existed , so it was a foregone conclusion that Dewey’s account of the social relations of science could no longer resonate with either the scientists themselves , a newer generation of philosophers , or with the broader public . 4 . Reichenbach’s Philosophy for the Operations Researcher No human being is completely rational , i . e . , makes decisions strictly according to the balance of probabilities and valuations . The decision may depend on emotional factors , which vary from moment to moment , such as an ‘itch to fight’ , or inversely , an indolence to the challenge of reason . If a decision is made not by one person but by a body of persons , such as a government , there are further random factors to be envisaged . . . . the tiredness or sickness of leaders ; the inertia of bureaucracy ; the pleading of voices of people frightened by the horrors of war , constitute factors which may deter from a decision for war . All these factors are random factors ; their effects are unpredictable and may extend in a positive or negative direction . ( Reichenbach , 1949 , p . 9 ) The philosopher James Robert Brown has written : “One of the travesties of current science studies debates is the branding of the positivists as political reactionaries . . . Dealing with political issues meant as much or more to Neurath , Carnap , Frank and Hahn as coming to grips with science for its own sake” ( 2001 , p . 54 ) . There is no doubt that politics mattered for the logical empiricist movement ; but the rather imprecise characterizations of the actual history which are exemplified by comments such as the above are yet another symptom of the weaknesses of contemporary philosophers in their quest to pronounce upon the ‘social dimensions of science’ . In this particular instance , the choice of relevant representatives of the positivist movement is more than a little misleading : with the exception of Carnap , none played much of a role in the professionalization of academic philosophy of science in the American context . 15 There is also the unfortunate tendency to think that , just because someone has identified himself as some species of ‘socialist’ , then that immediately absolves them from any when all he offers , and all he needs to offer , is criticism of the tradition” ( in Cahn , 1977 , p . 56 ) . A very interesting exercise which situates Rorty in his social context , as we have attempted to do here for Dewey , is ( Gross , 2003 ) . 15 On this point , see ( Howard , 2003 ) . Ron Giere has reminded us that , “The European origins of logical empiricism are not intellectually continuous with its later development in North America . . . It is with this fact that any future history of logical empiricism in North America must begin” ( Giere , 1996 , p . 336 ) . 19 accusations of reactionary political activity . 16 For the reasons we shall outline below , it will prove rather too hasty to hew to the conviction that , “Logical positivism was a casualty of the cold war , not one of its villains” ( Reisch , 2002 , p . 391 ) . The predominant fact about American science at mid - century was the assumption of its funding and organization by the military during World War II , establishing a novel regime of science management which lasted well into the 1980s . 17 As one can readily appreciate , this opened up a Pandora’s Box of problems for the relationship of science to society in general and democracy in particular , problems which the various constituencies identified in this narrative were anxious to address . Scientists recruited to the war effort were quick to realize that their newfound largesse came freighted with dangers and responsibilities . One response in Britain was the previously - mentioned “Social Planning of Science” movement of Blackett and Bernal , which provoked a hostile response by Michael Polanyi , Friedrich von Hayek and others ( McGuckin , 1984 ) . The latter conceived of their crusade as broadly ‘anti - positivist’ , in that Otto Neurath was a prime target of their disdain ( Uebel , 2000a ) . This dispute was closely related to another , which also tended to draw upon Viennese intellectual resources , namely , the ‘socialist calculation controversy’ , of which Otto Neurath was again a major protagonist . While some modern philosophers are quick to point to Neurath as someone attuned to our fin de siècle conundrums , it should be remembered that he bore little relevance for those weathering the seachange in science regimes in postwar America . Similar denunciations of ambitions for the planning of science for social ends were spearheaded by Vannevar Bush , James Conant and Warren Weaver ; but ironically , these were the primary protagonists in the wartime mobilization of science in America , the very people assigning the research tasks and cutting the checks . While public figures such as John Dewey had been talking about the social planning of science in a vague way before the war , the prospect of government direction of scientific research had abruptly become a much more tangible prospect in the US with the advent of the MIT Radiation Lab , the Manhattan Project , and a host of lesser mobilizations . The programs of science mobilization in Soviet 16 That appears to be the thrust of comments such as the following : “A socialist and an internationalist , Carnap nevertheless lived through situations which demanded defense , retreat , self - criticism , stubborn decency , maximal intelligence about minimal possibilities . . . In his passionate way , he was a man of the resistance” ( Cohen , 1971 , p . xlii ) . 17 This is a well - established fact in the history of American science , such that we should not need to document it here . See , for instance , ( Kevles , 1995 ; Kragh , 1999 , chap . 20 ; Michael Dennis in Krige & Pestre , 1997 ) . The following three paragraphs are a summary of an extensive case made in ( Mirowski , 2002 , chap . 4 ) . 20 Russia and Nazi Germany also had to be somehow distinguished from what was going on in America , if only to soothe anxieties about the global corruption of science and maintenance of the real source of American exceptionalism . It was the very palpability of a model for ‘socialist’ planning provided by military mobilization – an important theme in Neurath’s writings ( Cartwright et al , 1996 , pp . 14 - 18 ) - - which called forth a response to the perceived dangers of the reorganization of the social relations of science then in progress . And then , we must never forget , after 1945 there lurked the vexed issue of the relationship of a democracy to the production and use of the Bomb . Philosophers were a little slow off the mark to respond to these controversies ; but they soon took their cue from some natural and social scientists who had to come to rapid accommodation with the gales of change buffeting them from all sides . It was these wartime - induced anxieties which prompted the first real appearance of the conceptual innovation of a “scientific community” which purportedly subsisted autonomously from the larger culture in which it was situated . Some scholars have argued that such a notion was not seriously entertained prior to the writings of Michael Polanyi ( Jacobs , 2002 ) ; others credit Merton . This , as we have already hinted in the previous section , was the key innovation which utterly transformed the terms of debate concerning the relationship of science to society . Yet the watershed was not simply conceptual ; it was anchored in unprecedented innovations of social identities for scientists in wartime . When scientists were recruited into the military during World War II , they were very much concerned to differentiate themselves from the mass of conscripted manpower , but also exercise a fair amount of discretion in the deployment of their expertise . What began as scientists serving as glorified troubleshooters for the creation and deployment of new weapons systems such as radar and the atomic bomb was transformed by the scientists themselves into a never - before permitted institutional adjunct to the military , namely , as cadres of experts in a generic ‘scientific method’ whose remit was to assist in the generation of rational strategy and tactics for battle . These scientists were frequently contemptuous of tradition or ‘conventional’ military doctrine which they encountered , and sought to replace it with what they regarded as ‘empirical’ methods . In practice , much of this methodological innovation consisted in the imposition of physical models , especially those adapted from thermodynamics and mechanics , upon abstract agglomerations of men and machines . Because the quantum physics and nuclear cross - sections so bound up with the radar and atomic weapons 21 which occupied their attentions were so dependent upon stochastic formalisms , facility with probability theory tended to be a hallmark of their models . This “profession” , which did not even exist before WWII , grew rapidly during the war , and came to be known as “Operations Research” or OR . While it would be impossible to adequately summarize the scope and content of OR in the space of this paper , it will be indispensable to appreciate that OR was a practical response to the problems and paradoxes of the military planning and organization of science in mid - century . 18 Physicists such as Patrick Blackett , Philip Morse , George Gamow , and Ivan Getting , as well as mathematicians such as John von Neumann and Richard Bellman and their comrades wanted to enjoy the military largesse but maintain a fair amount of latitude in evading direct control by the military . Indeed , they believed that they were far smarter than your average lieutenant colonel , and should be allowed to run things as they saw fit ; in effect , they wanted to exist simultaneously within but apart from the military chain of command . They wanted to be paid by the military but not really be in the military ; as physicists , they wanted to do social research for the military but not become confused with social scientists ; they wanted to tell others what to do , but not be held responsible for the commands given . After the war , they wanted to return to their university posts without having to relinquish their lucrative military ties . To be granted these extraordinary dispensations , they had to innovate new roles which embodied this delicate amalgam of engagement and aloofness . The construct of the “operations researcher” was the professional device which fostered the reconciliation of these conflicting demands ; significantly for our present concerns , it also became the empirical template for the idea of a free - floating ‘scientific community , ’ distinguished by its possession of a special expertise rooted in a generic ‘scientific method’ , subsisting with a fair degree of autonomy within but apart from a larger social community . OR was the anvil upon which the postwar relationship between scientists and the American state was hammered out ; once successful , the blade was then turned to carve out a new model of society which could be amenable to the rapprochement of science and the military . OR provided much of the social launching pad and intellectual firepower for 18 There is no good history of Operations Research which can be recommended to the general reader . Existing histories of OR are summarized in ( Mirowski , 2002 , chap . 4 ) . ( Kirby , 2000 ) is a guide to the alternative trajectories of OR in the British and American contexts . 22 postwar social sciences like decision theory , organization theory , management theory and neoclassical economics ; but it also provided the framework for Cold War philosophy of science . I do not intend this thesis as to be regarded as trafficking in vague ‘influences’ and murky insinuations about science tainted by military dollars . That ilk of argumentation is rightly rejected by philosophers . I am instead pointing out that the professionalization of American philosophy of science in the immediate postwar era grew directly out of the soil of Operations Research ; that major figures of the logical empiricist movement in America served their country in dual capacities as operations researchers ; that the editors of the flagship journal Philosophy of Science in the critical transition period , C . West Churchman ( 1951 - 9 ) and Richard Rudner ( 1960 - 75 ) , were better known as operations researchers ; that philosophers of science were employed at major OR research centers such as RAND ( a fact discussed below ) . Much of the content of so - called ‘analytical philosophy’ in that period , ranging from its disdainful attitudes towards surrounding disciplines ( not to mention its own history ) to its preferred mathematical formalisms , is easily recognizable in its family resemblance to the contemporary subsets of OR known as decision theory and formal computational logic . The fascination with physics as the first science among equals reprised the historical fact that OR was first instituted by physicists for the protection and promotion of physics ; the presumption that one could proceed to formalize the behavior of rational empirical man innocent of any familiarity with or acknowledgment of the social sciences which supposedly were already concerned with them was also an echo of the credo of the operations researcher . 19 The conviction that prior practitioners simply did not sufficiently appreciate ‘the facts’ was the complaint most frequently launched by operations researchers against their military patrons . Rather than try and document these generalizations for an entire generation , we shall here be forced to settle for a brief account of a representative figure of this movement , Hans Reichenbach . Reichenbach’s career began with the Stuttgart and the Berlin Circle for empirical philosophy , where he had garnished a reputation as a socialist radical . The rise of the National Socialists and the Race Laws of 1933 forced him out of Berlin and into exile in Turkey for five years , after which he managed to get an appointment at UCLA in 1938 . Reichenbach’s 19 Has anyone ever noticed that the Library of Congress call numbers which categorize the philosophy of science in American libraries also designate books in OR of a postwar vintage ? Clues are quite abundant if one just permits oneself to perceive them . 23 tribulations did not end there , for he had to suffer the indignity of house arrest as an “enemy alien” during a portion of WWII . Nevertheless , Reichenbach did ultimately flourish in Southern California until his death in 1953 . Along with Rudolf Carnap’s appointment at the University of Chicago in 1936 , and Herbert Feigl’s move to Iowa in 1931 , his professorship was conceded to be one of the pivotal outposts for the promulgation of logical positivism throughout the American landscape ( Giere , 1996 ) . Reichenbach’s positivism , as is well known , began with detailed examinations of recent theoretical developments in physics for the purpose of drawing out epistemological lessons . While he sought to derive anti - Kantian morals from the theory of relativity and uncover anomalies for standard ideas of causality from contemporary interpretations of quantum mechanics , he also was an advocate of some larger themes which bore relevance for the “defense” of science against those he deemed its detractors . For instance , he thought that one task of the philosophy of science was to provide criteria for the distinction between propositions that might be deemed conventional and those which were incorrigibly empirical in the language of physics . In Experience and Prediction , he divided knowledge up into those propositions which were governed by the ideal of truth , which were the province of logic , and those which were motivated by “volitional resolutions” , which he called conventions . Conventions often masqueraded as logical statements , but in fact were nothing more than bald “decisions” in Reichenbach’s lexicon . “Decisions” were neither true nor false , but nevertheless the philosopher could offer advice concerning their efficacy by , among other things , pointing out whether they were consistent with one another ( 1938 , pp . 9 - 13 ) . Those familiar with “decision theory” in OR will recognize their discipline in embryo here in 1930s logical positivism . 20 Reichenbach never passed up an opportunity to vent his distaste for traditional wisdom , which he associated with the conventional character of certain epistemological precepts ; and was unapologetic about his contempt for history . Another task he undertook was the demonstration of the ‘fact’ that physics had managed to solve the problem of induction , largely by means of formal models of statistical inference . Perusal of his later popular works , such as the Rise of a Scientific Philosophy , shows that these projects melded imperceptibly into a defense of science as having stood stalwart and incorruptible , arrayed against Marxism ( eg . , 1953 , pp . 71 - 2 ) and 24 Fascism ; not such an unusual conviction for one who had endured the types of persecution which he had suffered . It is noteworthy that the way in which Reichenbach went about this project was to posit the existence of a formal logic not readily accessible to the general public , conceived as a ‘language’ that served to inoculate the scientific elect against the irrationality which plagued many nations in the 1930s and 1940s . Science , he maintained , was situated beyond dispute by the layman ; and the only people who could really appreciate this immunity were those who had taken the trouble to have immersed themselves in the technicalities of physics and mathematical logic : “technicalities , not dialectic , is the instrument of modern philosophy” ( 1978 , p . 253 ) . The retreat to technicalities did not altogether banish any consideration of older themes of the relationship of science to democracy , those troublesome holdovers from the earlier Pragmatist tradition . In Rise , Reichenbach portrays the scientist as governed by an algorithmic logic , but by contrast the general populace as governed by ‘volitions’ , which he then proceeded to equate with ‘preferences’ . Although he does not make much of it , this move signals his implicit endorsement of the type of social theory which starts with given individual preferences of convenient properties , such as that found in neoclassical economics . 21 Logic is subject to codification by the philosopher , but “it is therefore irrelevant where volitions come from , and we do not ask . . . whether we are conditioned to our volitions by the milieu in which we grew up” ( 1953 , p . 282 ) . We are then informed that “moral directives . . . express volitional decisions on the part of the speaker” ( p . 291 ) , and from this he concludes that “Science tells us what is , but not what should be” . Curiously , the first time that democracy is mentioned by Reichenbach is with respect to the precept that , “everybody is entitled to set up his own moral imperatives and demand that everyone else follow these imperatives” ( p . 295 ) , which constitutes his working definition of democracy . Conflict is to be expected amongst the laity , because all they do is blindly try and thrust their inexplicable and incompatible desires and volitions upon one another . Scientists qua scientists had managed to avoid all that ( and corruption by Fascists , etc . . . ) by conforming to the dictates of a logic of empirical evidence , and therefore were located in a space situated outside of the democratic sphere . Note well that science is not portrayed as an arena for the democratic 20 On pp . 27 - 31 of Experience and Prediction one will also discover the “physical symbol systems hypothesis” of early Artificial Intelligence avant la lettre , itself soon to also spring forth from its origins in OR . 25 hashing out of workable ethics and values , because science is not conceived as a part of society at all . As Reichenbach put it bluntly , “Science is its own master and recognizes no authority beyond its confines” ( 1953 , p . 214 ) . Dewey had effectively been banished . Reichenbach was not afraid to upbraid Dewey directly for not maintaining adequate separation of science in society in his famous essay in the Schlipp volume on Dewey’s philosophy . Although as to be expected Reichenbach berated Dewey for his lack of ‘technique’ ( “philosophic analysis of modern science cannot be achieved without a profound study of mathematical methods” ) , it is important to observe that he also backhandedly acknowledged a major source of their difference came in how they approached the social implications of their respective philosophies . In a most dubious rhetorical move , Reichenbach tried to make it appear that he , and not Dewey , was the bearer of a solid intellectual basis for the advocacy of socialism : There are ethical systems which for instance consider the idea that private property is sacrosanct as a demonstrable truth in the same sense it is demonstrable that private property is destructible by fire . It is the danger of pragmatism that its theory of reality is made to order for ethical theories of this type , although the pragmatists themselves may not intend these implications . ( 1989 , p . 180 ) The Popperians were among the first to flag this sort of argumentation as illegitimately stacking the deck against democracy and free inquiry . For them , “democracy requires a view of rationality that permits dissent , and inductive logic forbids it” ( Agassi , 1995 , p . 158 ) . The situation was even more indefensible once one finally realized that the positivists could never really settle upon the unique inductive formalism which supposedly governed the scientists’ activities : in that situation , the positivists had failed in providing anything approaching a logical criterion which would demarcate the scientist from any other political actor . Although [ the positivists ] have not found the right inductive rule , 22 they know that it should justify established scientific opinion , and so they demand that everyone follow this still - not - known rule of induction and endorse received scientific opinion under pain of being branded irrational . ( ibid . , p . 158 ) 21 He was undoubtedly familiar with this school , since he had attempted when younger to try and mathematize economics in conjunction with his friend Carl Landauer . On this , see ( Reichenbach , 1978 , p . 29 ) . 22 Many positivists were admitting this by the late 1960s . Witness Herbert Feigl : “the so - called problem of induction . . . cannot be solved either by the logical or the statistical concept of probability” ( 1969 , p . 11 ) . By the 1970s , it was clear that the positivists had completely misrepresented a monolithic character of probability theory ( Fine , 1973 ) . 26 The other place in which Reichenbach drove home his separation of science from society was in his infamous distinction between a context of discovery and a context of justification , which first appeared in his Experience and Nature ( 1938 , pp . 6 - 7 ) . He wrote there that “epistemology is only occupied in constructing the context of justification” , but curiously enough for a topic relegated to the category of the descriptive tasks of epistemology , the philosopher would not recover the actual social modes of argumentation and reason , but rather a “rational reconstruction” of what should have been said according to the canons of the philosopher . Not only was a wedge driven between philosophy and sociology , but another was driven between the actual prosecution of science and its supposed logical structure ( 1938 , p . 381 ) . As has frequently been noted , it was a convenient immunization stratagem for the logical positivists to prevent their theory of the scientific method from ever being falsified with data from the history of actual scientific inquiry : “all this is a logical reconstruction . It was never intended to be an account of the origin and development of scientific theories” ( Feigl , 1969 , p . 17 ) . But it was also much more than that . In Rise of Scientific Philosophy , Reichenbach tied adherence to the distinction to the very legitimacy of a logic of inductive inference . There he admits that induction could never help the scientist find a new theory ( a point made much more cogently by the pragmatist C . S . Peirce ) , but could only used to evaluate it after the fact . “The act of discovery escapes logical analysis . . . But it is not the logician’s task to account for scientific discoveries . . . logic is concerned only with the context of justification” ( 1953 , p . 231 ) . Developments categorized as falling within the context of discovery were placed upon the same epistemic plane as ‘volitions’ : one did not ask where they came from . This policy of “don’t ask , don’t tell” was extremely awkward for his philosophical system , since it threatened to situate a major component of what everyone else thought of as science , namely , its capacity to generate novel explanations of phenomena , stranded outside of the cloistered ideal community of scientists , and leave it mired in the irrational bog of “society” . It was almost as though the later Reichenbach was so driven to erect impermeable floodgates between science and society that he was willing to risk the interior of his citadel providing shelter the scientific status quo as containing a few ‘reputable’ physicists and no one else . The role of the philosopher had thus been rehabilitated as mounting the ‘defense’ of the upper reaches of the orthodoxy of the 27 physicists in the world according to the philosopher ; whether the physicists felt they needed this assistance was a moot point . Perhaps it commits the Whig fallacy , but it now seems a bit difficult to understand why anyone would find this version of ‘positivism’ compelling on its face . 23 The answer tendered in this paper is that the explanation must be sought in the pact which postwar American philosophy of science made with Operations Research . Put bluntly , it was no accident that so very much of Reichenbach’s later philosophy resembled the attitudes and content characteristic of postwar OR , because for a short while , they were actually one and the same . The idolization of physics , the contempt for tradition , the insistence upon a generic ‘scientific method’ based on logic and probability and indifferently portable to any subject or discipline , the role of the philosopher as a consultant therapist for decision theory , the postulation of a closed corporate priesthood who possessed sole control of these esoteric methods , the suggestion that the problem of induction had been dissolved by statistical algorithms , the conflation of mathematical prowess with intellectual virtue , and the assertion that the advice provided was pitched somewhere beyond ethics or morality , were all hallmarks of American OR . Operations Research had began as a negotiation to create a separate social identity for scientists operating in a semi - autonomous capacity within the military ; postwar logical positivism ended up as an ideology of science in general as a virtual community separate and autonomous from the social system as a whole . The symbiotic pact between OR and logical positivist philosophy of science would not have flourished if it did not take root in fertile ground . There were a number of circumstances specific to the postwar American context which were propitious for the graft . The first and most important was the shift in science funding and management from industry dominance to military dominance . The various protocols that were worked out during World War II – viz . , that scientists would conduct research under contracts that were issued by the military but managed through their universities , that they would be subject to indirect controls through security clearances and classification of secrets , that downstream development would be the province of the military science managers , that bureaucratic evaluation would be deployed through ‘peer review , ’ that grant overheads could buy off the principal investigator’s academic obligations to 23 As Giere asks , “How did a naturalistic pragmatism incorporating an empirical theory of inquiry get replaced by a philosophy that regarded induction as a formal relationship between evidence and hypothesis ? ” ( 1996 , p . 347 ) 28 his home institution – all militated in favor of treating the scientist as though she were a member of a community apart from the general run of intellectual life . This separation reflected a Cold War truth in a manner it never could have done under the previous industrial regime of science organization . The notion of the scientist as sequestered in an ivory tower was encouraged by the military , especially once a few of the elect physicists had suffered crises of conscience about ‘knowing sin’ after the dropping of the Bomb . The notion that scientists somehow were members of a commonwealth apart from society became smoothly integrated with the oft - intoned refrain that they could not be held responsible for how their discoveries in “pure science” were put to use by “others” . Of course , the very plausibility of a notion of a free - floating “pure science” detached from its prospective utility was the result of a fair amount of legal and economic construction initiated by the military . 24 The relationship of military - organized science to democracy was perhaps the issue most fraught with controversy in the immediate postwar period . The military and the Operations Researchers shared a jaundiced view of democracy when it came to prosecuting wars , and the suppression of democratic debate over the use of the Bomb was viewed by many in the political classes as a betrayal of fundamental principles which the Bomb was conceived nominally to protect . Dewey’s blind faith in democracy had to be revised in the Cold War era . OR theorists responded to the call , and went to work describing various ways in which democratic decision procedures were ‘irrational’ when it came to such momentous choices . 25 The most famous of these doctrines produced at RAND was the “Arrow Impossibility Theorem , ” based directly upon the assumptions of neoclassical economic theory : “If we exclude the possibility of interpersonal comparisons of utility , then the only methods of passing from individual tastes to social preferences which will be satisfactory . . . are either imposed or dictatorial . . . the doctrine of voters’ sovereignty is incompatible with that of collective rationality” ( Arrow , 1951 , pp . 59 - 60 ) . The upshot of this claim was that market expression of citizen preferences was a faithful representation of their desires , whereas standard majority voting procedures were not . This was an extremely felicitous Cold War doctrine from the military viewpoint , since it suggested that the 24 This case has been lately made by Asner ( 2002 ) , who describes many of the legal , accountancy and economic devices invented in order to give some solidity to the category “pure science” . 25 The complex interplay of attitudes towards democracy , OR , and decision theory in this period are covered at length in ( Amadae , 2003 ) . Pp . 128 - 132 especially explain how decision theory was a negation and repudiation of Dewey’s conception of science and democracy . 29 military was legitimately defending the welfare of the citizenry by allowing them free choice in their purchases while simultaneously conducting the national defense without the need for their explicit political acquiescence . This “double truth” doctrine had its exact parallel in Reichenbach’s separation between science and society : scientists were furthering the welfare of the citizenry by allowing them free choice in the ‘products’ of their endeavors in the marketplace while conducting their fundamental research without the need for prior accommodation or any explicit political acquiescence . 26 Democratic procedures were best kept well clear from such activities . The Cold War was also a watershed in the history of the American social sciences . The earlier orthodoxies of Institutionalist economics and habit psychology had suffered precipitous declines during the war and after ( Yonay , 1998 ; Mirowski , 2002 ) . Hence Dewey’s program to ‘naturalize’ philosophical inquiry , insofar as it bore its commitments to these social sciences on its sleeve , was increasingly seen as backing the wrong horse . Not only would European émigrés find these commitments unintelligible , but indigenous philosophers would be aware of more concertedly ‘scientific’ trends in economics and psychology ( often jump started by other European émigrés . ) Psychology grew more behaviorist and individualistic under wartime exigencies , and neoclassical economics rose to dominance in this time period . The gambling metaphor suffused throughout postwar psychology ( Goldstein & Hogarth , 1997 , p . 10 ) , and as Reichenbach put it ( 1953 , p . 248 ) , “the scientist resembles a gambler more than a prophet . ” It is again no accident that both these movements in economics and psychology were themselves linked to OR , especially beholden to it for their mathematical models and statistical protocols ; any philosophy willing to posit the motivations of the larger public as volitions / preferences and the rationality of the scientist as algorithmic optimization would find that their doctrines would resonate with a new postwar cross - disciplinary orthodoxy of the sciences of man . Thus OR reshaped both the social sciences and the philosophy of science in America . The exact character of the role of the market in OR and logical positivism was also rooted in the politics of the immediate postwar era . How could the logical positivists been such pliant Cold Warriors when they identified themselves as socialists ? Here is where left / right distinctions should not be taken for granted , but need to be translated into the specific spatio - temporal 26 Here Reichenbach’s autonomy of the scientist dovetails very nicely with the “linear model” of research 30 context . The fact of the matter was that in the 1950s , the OR profession was itself a veritable hotbed of self - identified socialists , both in Britain and in the US . The reason for this incongruous fact was that they were staffed by people who regarded themselves as applying scientific methods of command , planning and control to improve the efficiency of social action undertaken by groups such as armies and governments . It should be remembered that the military constituted the largest planned economy in any Western nation , and that the safest way to ward off perilous accusations of being ‘soft on communism’ and ‘un - American’ ( a heightened concern for those having recently emigrated ) was to sport a military clearance . A certain type of non - Marxian socialist found the broad church of Operations Research a most congenial shelter from the storms of the McCarthy era ; Reichenbach fit right in . 27 An American socialist in the Cold War embraced the idea that science existed in a world apart from the world they were forced to live in . Hans Reichenbach did not just resemble an Operations Researcher in the immediate postwar period ; he became an Operations Researcher . As his student Norman Dalkey ( himself a RAND employee ) informs us ( in Reichenbach , 1978 , p . 51 ) , Reichenbach signed on as a consultant at RAND in 1948 , that is , very soon after it broke away from Douglas Aircraft and reconstituted itself as a free - standing non - profit corporation . 28 So what would a logical positivist philosopher be doing in a military think tank dedicated to “thinking the unthinkable” about nuclear war ? The clarification begins with comments by another Operations Researcher who came to RAND in 1951 , Albert Wohlstetter : I had known some of the first people who were on the RAND staff because they were also mathematical logicians : J . C . C . McKinsey , and Olaf Helmer , and also M . A . Girschick . . . [ they told me about ] one of the most important contributions to metamathematics by Alfred Tarski , which had never been published , which showed that it was possible to get a decision method , an entschidungsverfahren , for a rather large and rich section of classical geometry , corresponding to high school geometry . . . Well , that was very interesting to mathematicians . I was surprised , however , to find that RAND , this organization that worked for the Air Force , was publishing a research memorandum by Tarski which presented this result , because it didn’t seem to me [ back then ] to have much directly to do with strategic bombing or anything and development popularized by Vannevar Bush in the same era . 27 Although we shall not explore the issue here , this fact helps clear up the fog that has surrounded Alan Sokal’s quest to ‘save’ the American Left from the postmodern Left and their tendency to see scientists as co - opted by the Right . The specifically American politics of the Science Wars has been misconstrued by Europeans generally , and is something that is left opaque by commentators such as ( Brown , 2001 ) . 28 The history of RAND has recently attracted the interest of a number of historians , even though access to their archives is still severely restricted to outside researchers . Some good sources are : ( Hounshell , 1997 ; Collins , 1998 ; Jardini , 1996 ; Hughes & Hughes , 2000 ; Amadae , 2003 ; and Mirowski , 2002 , chap . 4 ) . 31 of that sort . . . . we just ran into Abe Girschick , Olaf Helmer and Chen McKinsey on the street , and they were overjoyed to see us . Mathematical logic was a very , very small world . There were only a little over a dozen mathematical logicians before the war in the US , and two jobs in mathematical logic . For the rest , you had to teach calculus , as Chen McKinsey did , or philosophy of something of that sort . 29 Prior to the Cold War , career options in mathematical logic and formalist philosophy of science were miniscule to non - existent , as this comment acknowledges . When OR units at RAND , Stanford and elsewhere began to hire mathematical logicians at “unprecedentedly remunerative’ rates ( Quine , 1985 , p . 217 ) with military funding , this fostered the basis for the professionalization of these disciplines in postwar America . During the war many logicians had worked on cryptography , command and control , and the development of the electronic computer , so they were predisposed to become integrated into the burgeoning world of the defense intellectual after the war . For these reasons , RAND stood out as the locus of the densest concentration of mathematical logicians in the US in the 1950s . Furthermore , RAND was predisposed to hire a particular type of formalist philosopher : as another RAND consultant , Willard von Orman Quine put it , “young philosophers of the Carnap persuasion” ( 1985 , p . 217 ) . RAND did not employ this specialized class of philosophers because they were especially interested in the “elimination of metaphysics through the logical analysis of formal language” or anything else of that sort , but rather because the logical positivist program could readily be subordinated to the objectives of the Operations Researchers , as we have enumerated above . The fact that the logical empiricist program in the US owed its good fortune to OR has not been the subject of much commentary in part because the linkage has been suppressed by the participants themselves . We must remember that a precondition of joining the defense establishment was a willingness to submit to its stringent requirements concerning classification , secrecy and the “double truth” doctrine . In my experience , the vitas and bibliographies of the figures in question omit their military papers ; their archives have been ‘sanitized’ of most military records ; their collected works have blank pages . In their retrospective accounts , if they mention their ties at all , they tend to treat them as “boondoggles” ( Quine , 1985 , p . 217 ) , “diversions” ( Davidson in Hahn , 1999 , p . 32 ) and other trivial pursuits . Even figures who are a bit more open about their RAND experience , like Nicholas Rescher ( 1997a , chap . 8 ) , are still 29 Albert Wohlstetter interview with Martin Collins , 27 July 1987 , pp . 1 , 2 . RAND Oral History Project . Transcript from : National Air and Space Museum , Washington , D . C . Wohlstetter had studied with Tarski as an 32 noticeably reticent about discussing exactly what it was they did under those auspices . The RAND archives themselves , long after the Fall of the Wall , are still effectively closed to outside researchers . The dense web of interconnections which tied the fledgling OR community to the following important figures in postwar philosophy of science still awaits its historian : Olaf Helmer , Carl Hempel , Paul Oppenheim , Alfred Tarski , Willard Quine , John Kemeny , J . C . C . McKinsey , Patrick Suppes , Donald Davidson , Nicholas Rescher , Leonard Savage and Rudolf Carnap . However , we can give some idea of the shape that influence took in the work of Hans Reichenbach . Norman Dalkey ( in Reichenbach , 1978 , p . 52 ) informs us that Reichenbach wrote at least three papers for RAND while a consultant there . Two of them , both dated 1949 , were “General Form of the Probability for War” RAND D - 515 , and “Rational Reconstruction of the Decision for War” , RAND D - 539 . The objectives of these papers , consonant with the general orientation of OR at that time , was “Based on a rational reconstruction of Russia’s doctrines , [ to ] supply the mathematical form of the probability that Russia will go to war” ( 1949 , p . 23 ) . While one rather doubts that any American war planner ever even entertained Reichenbach’s master equations # 35 and # 36 , much less found them useful , their significance from our present perspective is the extent to which they resemble his formalization of the inductive problems of the scientist , and the way in which they draw a distinction between the ‘scientific’ approach to war and the less rational ‘political’ approach presumed to hold sway over other sorts of social formations . Reichenbach starts by distinguishing between an empiricist approach—ie . , actual intelligence gathering—and a “rational reconstruction” of the decision to go to war , an “imagining ourselves in the enemy’s place” , which is his own exercise . The free flight of imagination is disciplined by the postulation of a “valuation function” resembling the utility function of neoclassical economics and Reichenbach’s own ‘volitional’ preferences discussed above , as well as construction of a formal model of inductive inference . While the decision to go to war sounds a whole lot like the decision whether or not evidence confirms a scientific theory in his account , the problem with understanding the enemy ( as he conceives it ) is that he susceptible to all sorts of irrational motivations ( see the quote heading this section ) . Reichenbach’s solution is to treat these irrational elements as random , and adjust the model with a parameter _ to allow for the undergraduate at CCNY , and done graduate work in logic and philosophy of science at Columbia . 33 “degree of rationality” of the enemy ( 1949 , p . 13 ) . He then discusses the possibility of the empirical estimation of _ , but worries that it observationally indistinguishable from another variable he calls “the scale of decision ratings” ; to thwart the threatening underdetermination problem , he then posits a “coordinative definition” , a theme borrowed from his earlier work on the philosophy of space and time . This paper helps reveal the ways in which OR did not give rise to the philosophy of logical positivism , but it most certainly transformed it in the American context as a prelude to launching it as the characteristically professionalized philosophy of science that came to dominate the American landscape . Many of the representative themes are present there : the sharp separation between scientific rationality and social structures ( as if the Russians did not have their own Operations Researchers ! ) , the suspicion of democracy , the contempt for history and cultural considerations , the conflation of social groups with individual agency , the confusion of statistical inference with scientific method , the portrayal of science as algorithmic , the veiled endorsement of Western economics through recourse to a behaviorist ‘decision theory’ , the posturing concerning agnosticism about values , the underestimation of the difficulties of empiricism ( especially with regard to the underdetermination of theory by evidence ) , the conflation of mathematical logic with human rationality , the psychological metaphor of gambling , the claim to esoteric expertise . Some holdouts from the previous Pragmatist school may not have wanted to subscribe to much of this , but then they had less and less to say about it , as they were left out in the cold by the postwar reorganization of academic science by the military . 5 . Kitcher’s Philosophy for the Technology Transfer Bureaucrat When we confront an intricate causal explanation of how particular features of our lives are brought about through the interaction of molecules , will we be able to sustain our sense of the special value of our lives ? . . . Grand rhetoric about human freedom seduces us into thinking that we must , quite literally , make ourselves . . . the conception was always incoherent . If the self that allegedly makes itself is already fully formed , then it does not , after all , make itself ; if it is not fully formed , then it does not make itself . To find our freedom , we have to start acknowledging that we are the people we are because of events that are beyond our control , even beyond our understanding . ( Kitcher , 1996 , p . 272 , 282 ) 34 If one fears making broad generalizations about the Cold War science and its social millieu might be considered controversial , then just try and propose a few simple observations about what is happening to science right now . The writing of contemporary history has always been fraught with traps for the unwary , ranging from descent into journalism to ascent into the most rarified forms of wishful thinking . As we shall see , it is not just geriatric generals who are susceptible to the tendency to remount the last campaign in the name of a clear and present danger . Nevertheless , it will be necessary to give a brief characterization of the current situation of science , in order to make some arguments about the status of contemporary philosophy of science in parallel to those broached in the prior two sections . It has now become commonplace in the science policy and science studies literatures to concede that something rather dramatic has happened to the organization of science and the university in the quarter - century or so since 1980 . 30 The challenge is to characterize exactly what that something consists of , since we are all still cast adrift in the midst of it . The way most contemporary observers have talked about this interconnected set of phenomena is by asserting that the military dominance of science funding and organization in America has more or less waned , only to be replaced by the progressive extension of corporate commercial control of science . The first pitfall to be skirted in making such a generalization is that this transformation constitutes some sort of ‘return’ to the corporate situation which reigned supreme prior to 1940 : nothing could be further from the truth . Indeed , one of the phenomena which has confounded perceptions of the current situation is that the very largest corporations have spun off or otherwise divested themselves of their in - house corporate labs over this period , essentially gutting what had been some of the most hallowed research organizations in American history : AT & T spun off Bell Labs , IBM has downsized Yorktown Heights , Xerox has divested itself of PARC , and so forth . No , the subjection of science to the modern marketplace has been prosecuted through a whole range of unprecedented social innovations never remotely entertained in the Jazz Age . While we cannot even begin to address the question of why this has happened in the space of this paper ( but see Mirowski , forthcoming ) , we can however briefly make an inventory of those changes , as a necessary prelude to discussing the predicament of modern philosophy of science . 35 Most observers agree that the transformation began in the 1980s when a wave of concern over the loss of American “competitiveness” swept politicians and corporate leaders into a frenzy . This meant a diversity of things to many different constituencies , but was cashed out in science policy to mean that unquestioned American superiority in pure science was not being adequately transmuted into development and innovation in the commercial sphere , at least relative to commercial rivals . Politicians began to respond to this perception with a whole sequence of legislation , generally conceded to have begun with the Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 . This legislation changed the entire relationship of universities to government funding of scientific research , all subordinate to the aim of rendering “technology transfer” from the academic lab to the corporate setting more smooth and rapid . The proportion of federal funding of science in general fell , while that of industry rose sharply . What had commenced as a nationalistic initiative was rapidly co - opted by elements of the corporate sector , however , who were not themselves all that avidly concerned with American national superiority , but did seek to bend developments to their own ends . For instance , Ryan ( 1998 ) reveals how the Uruguay Round of GATT trade liberalization negotiations was captured by biotech , computer and entertainment interests in order to endow the movement to extend American innovations in intellectual property law to other countries with real political muscle . In a nutshell , the aims of activist segments of the corporate sector were to cut their R & D expenses by outsourcing their research activities in much the same way they had previously outsourced their labor - intensive manufacturing , and yet by the same token , to exercise greater control over the “intellectual property” which might be generated extramurally . In international venues , ideas and objects ( genomes , algorithms , bits ) which had never before been treated as commodities were now subject to an enclosure of the scientific commons , hedged round with thickets of legal restrictions . The vanguard of this movement were to be found in those industries which were not committed to classical heavy manufacturing , such as pharmaceuticals , biotechnology , computer software and entertainment . The fact that these industries were perceived as dynamically progressive and the high - tech wave of the future only lent their crusade to reconfigure science a patina of credibility . The consequences of these legal , financial , and social innovations have yet to be completely digested in the modern context . Universities have more recently suffered the brunt of 30 Consult the following for documentation ( Mirowski & Sent , 2002 ; Bok , 2003 ; Biagioli & Galison , 2003 ; 36 this revolution in science regimes . To put it bluntly , few claim with confidence anymore that the university serves the interests of state - building , which was , of course , the genesis of the German academic model . The purpose of university education today is no longer socialization , but instead the vocational stocking up on “human capital” . Universities don’t produce ‘citizens’ anymore ; indeed , the majority of those receiving advanced training in America in the natural sciences are foreigners , so the problem becomes how to justify what remains of public subsidy to train the manpower for tomorrow’s rivals . If “information” is a commodity , as it surely has become , then the question confronting universities is how to tame their faculty to produce the commodity efficiently and cheaply , and how can the university more completely capture the profits of information production ? Indeed , aren’t many of the perquisites of the faculty just bloated costs that need to be swept away by gales of creative destruction , with research perhaps sited in leaner and meaner structures like the firms located in nearby “research parks” , or better yet , the newly burgeoning “contract research organizations” ? 31 This profound change of mindset has recast the working image of the entirety of society as one big “marketplace of ideas” ; hence the question of the relationship of science to society has therefore become rephrased to one of efficient balancing of costs and benefits . The fallout for scientists has been profound . First and foremost , the Cold War obsession with the freedom of the individual scientist has melted into thin air ; after all , in this brave new world , it is only the entrepreneur who truly relishes freedom . The indiscriminate extension of patents to all sorts of entities threatens to render whole areas of scientific research legal minefields , with ( among other truly bizarre developments ) the owners of prior intellectual property claiming downstream ownership rights over the output of your research because you made use of their concept / device as research input . As footsoldiers of the New Order , academic technology transfer officers tie researchers in knots in the name of capturing the benefits of discoveries for the university . The honorific of ‘authorship’ itself becomes decoupled from those doing the actual research work , once it becomes like everything else , subject to being bought and sold ( Biagioli & Galison , 2003 ) . The structure of publication has also become intimately Nowotny et al . , 2001 ; Noll , 1998 ; Fuller , 2002a ; Dreyfus et al , 2001 ; Mirowski , forthcoming ) 31 The rise of contract research organizations in the 1980s , mostly though not exclusively in the area of pharmaceuticals , is one of the great blind spots of modern science studies . An attempt to gauge the extent to which they have the capacity to displace university research on a larger scale is the subject of Rob Van Horn & Mirowski ( forthcoming ) . 37 influenced by privatization of the journals ( Scheiding , forthcoming ) . Bureaucratic evaluation structures abound , with productivity ‘rated’ on a periodic basis . Graduate students and postdocs become the reserve army of casual labor in an atmosphere of cost - cutting , with “educational” preliminaries to the ever - receding mirage of an academic position causing the standard career path of the natural scientist to be stretched out interminably . In the never - ending search for cheaper labor , the site of research itself is increasingly shifted to poorer countries , especially if it involves human subjects . I would argue that , just as in the 1940s / 50s , emerging alterations in the organization of science are not uniformly apparent across the board nor initially well understood , and that philosophers of science have clocked in a little late and a few dollars short of the realization that their world has been irrevocably turned upside - down . In particular , taking the components of the regime change into account , the impression that philosophers have finally come to grips with the ‘social dimensions of science’ with which this paper began would seem little more than an inadequate reflex to a nagging feeling that something has drastically changed since the 1980s , and that philosophers must diversify their portfolio if they are to have anything at all to say about it . They have acknowledged that physics no longer stands as the pivot around which all other sciences are thought to revolve , and have even begun to pay serious attention to biology , but without asking why one science comes to displace another as the cultural icon of progressive research and fruitful knowledge . ( Hint : consult the above list of ‘progressive’ industries . ) Instead of dealing with the root cause of their discomfort , which is the fact that the globalized privatization regime of scientific research has left many of their traditional concerns ( unimpeachable truth , empirical adequacy , realism as permanence ) languishing in irrelevance , they have sought to argue that their version of ‘social epistemology’ reassures us that social considerations do not derange the portrayal of science handed down from their predecessors , the logical positivists . Science , they reassure us , transcends the sound and fury of hoi polloi in the marketplace . Some rambunctious groups , and maybe some feminists , might complain about this or that aspect of science—perhaps it has been used for nefarious purposes , or been twisted to ‘undemocratic’ ends in the past – but philosophers can feel confident they can enlighten the populace in ways to offset this , or counsel them how to live with it . Moreover , they can accomplish their task by building little game theoretic models of science ! It should not escape 38 the reader that game theory was the jewel in the crown of Operations Research in the 1950s , and indeed constitutes the core doctrine of modern neoclassical microeconomics today . 32 Philip Kitcher is our exemplary protagonist in this modern drama , although as we have mentioned before , many other contemporary philosophers also partake of a similar approach to “social epistemology” . His intellectual trajectory can serve to provoke us into rethinking how the scientific dimensions of social knowledge play themselves out in modern philosophy . In his case , what began as an attempt to banish the twin specters of Kuhnian relativism and the skeptical prognostications of sociologists of science in his Advancement of Science ( 1993 ) became transformed into a defense of the Human Genome Project in Lives to Come ( 1996 ) , then a futile call to reinstate a Mertonian sociology of science ( 2000 ) , and then , finally , an attempt to reconcile the demands of democratic principles with the structures of science in Science , Truth and Democracy ( 2001 ) . We should not , however , infer that because we have come round once more to a corporate dominance over the practice of science , that somehow this also betokens a return by philosophers to the concerns and prognostications of Dewey . In Kitcher’s case , the entire sequence of his writing in the last decade is dominated by an over - riding fear of attempts to encroach upon the self - sufficient scientific community by those whom he would regard as afflicted with misguided enthusiasms . 33 In the most recent book , he dismisses the following positions as “Marxist” ( 2001 , p . 172 ) : that one vice of the natural sciences is elevating the efficiency of means over ends , that natural scientific models applied to society distort and dehumanize our understanding of each other , and that “science turns out to be the scullion of capitalism . ” Dewey , of course , would be offended . The philosopher whom Kitcher more closely bears a family resemblance is Hans Reichenbach . Kitcher recycles many of Reichenbach’s prejudices without attribution , and even some of Reichenbach’s actual terminology : Instead of thinking about the virtues and vices of whole theories . . . we should separate those parts of past doctrine that are put to work in prediction and intervention , the ‘working posits’ . . . The practice of inferring truth from success should be understood as one in which we support belief in the working posits of our theories . ( 2001 , p . 18 ) If there is any concrete divergence from Reichenbach , it is that Kitcher has repeatedly restated his position as acknowledging that the larger social structure has something to do with 32 For a history of game theory , see ( Mirowski , 2002 , chap . 3 , 6 ) . 33 In ( Kitcher , 2002 ) he even makes a “George Bush joke that isn’t a joke” about “Methodism” . 39 the way scientific research is carried out , but that in the majority of cases , the criteria for the success of science are effectively independent and separable from the value criteria by which individuals and societies gauge the conformity of science to their values and aspirations ( p . 124 ) . This is nothing more than an ‘invisible hand’ argument , and as many have noted , and there is a strong undercurrent of the treatment of society as a ‘marketplace of ideas’ in Kitcher ; science purportedly serves transcendent ends which are not and need not be the ends of the individuals engaged in their idiosyncratic pursuits . Furthermore , these ends are said to be intrinsic goods in and of themselves , decoupled from the system of incentives and restrictions imposed by the paymasters of science . 34 It is significant that Kitcher has never been able to definitively settle on the exact identity of these transcendent goods over the course of his career : they started out looking like formal notions of Tarskiesque “truth” , and then were mutated to the identification of putative ‘natural kinds’ , later that became transmogrified into the ‘unification of explanation’ , and as of the present installment , he seems to have retreated back to the logical empiricist default position of providing accurate predictions . But no matter : professional academic philosophers will forever wrangle about the True Eternal Nature of science as prelude to their final knockdown argument which will silence all doubt and opposition concerning their own favorite utopia . Kitcher’s very real conundrum is that almost nobody today believes any longer that these abstract philosophical criteria of the success of science are sufficient to underwrite a separate , self - governing and independent cloister of scientists supported by unlimited public funds : in other words , Cold War philosophy of science is dead Here is where the themes broached in our previous sections come back into play . During the Cold War , when most science was primarily funded and organized by the military and the academic system was expanding , stories like those told by Polanyi and Reichenbach were eminently useful . They asserted that the public should simply acquiesce in the kinds of science it got in return for its investment , because scientists were the only legitimate judges of their own activity , and in any event , the public could never fully come to comprehend how science worked . Scientists should not set out to challenge research programs in their own areas of specialization , but rather forge their identities and chart their personal progress within parameters preset by 34 See Kitcher in Callebaut , 1993 , p . 216 : “there are special epistemic goals that in a certain sense we all tacitly know ; and that the philosopher’s task is to make those kind of things explicit . ” Kitcher’s misreading of the 40 their peers . Scientists were ushered into the mysteries of apprenticeship , not freely joining a debating society . The myriad ways in which this doctrine dovetailed with such outside structural impositions as security classifications , open vs . closed publication outlets , activist science managers , handpicked peer review panels , and so forth should be obvious . Now , in the modern regime of globalized privatization and flexible research specialization , all of that insistence upon the independent pristine constitution of the scientific sphere seems more than a little threadbare and outdated . Short employment spells and bowling alone are not just the prerogative of the blue collar worker any longer . The old Reichenbach catechism has lost much of its conviction . Indeed , Kitcher’s pressing problem situation has become to somehow argue that the modern corporate research structures and their academic offshoots which are increasingly results - oriented in the shorter term , stress bureaucratic accountability to outsiders , infested with lawyers and less infatuated with the disciplinary power of professionalization are nonetheless insignificant in their impact upon the true transcendental goals of science . Be it a CRO or the British Research Assessment Exercise , never fear , Science will find a way . What is required is a new apologetics for the technology transfer bureaucrat . The way Kitcher has sought to try and square this circle is to resort to the language and mathematical models of the neoclassical economists , or as he puts it , “inviting a collaboration between the philosophy of science and the social sciences to investigate how we might make up for the deficiencies” ( 2002 , p . 569 ) of modern scientific organization . Mimicking the language of neoclassical economists , he likewise avows science is driven by ‘interests’ ( and who would want to deny it in the present atmosphere of corporate science ? ) , but these interests are merely individual biases which must be modeled as ‘preferences’ . 35 Preferences are not systematic or structural ( Reichenbach counseled don’t ask ) ; and moreover , they merely serve to focus our attention . Hence interests just affect where we look for answers , not how we do research or what it is that we find there . Thus every question about possible pathologies of scientific research boils down in one way or another to questions about ‘preferences’ and what to do about them . Here Kitcher becomes all tangled up in the most awkward contradictions , exacerbated by the fact he science policy literature is particularly egregious in this regard : “Despite its elitism , Bush’s report . . . was plainly permeated by democratic values . ” ( 2001 , p . 141 ) 35 “We do better to deploy the notion of aims in its most natural home , referring to the aims of individual agents rather than to some abstraction” ( 2001 , p . 87 ) . It seems astounding that a philosopher can so blithely dictate that the ‘individual’ is not an abstraction , or that homes are innately ‘natural’ . 41 believes he can incorporate political , moral and economic theory into Cold War philosophy of science without actually consulting the former’s dauntingly voluminous literatures . ( History as something you actually had to document was abandoned long ago . 36 ) Those who detect echoes of Reichenbach’s original distinction between discovery / justification , his mistrust of history , as well as his crusade against metaphysics , would not be mistaken . 37 Initially , Kitcher tries to equate collective social welfare with the aggregation of individual preferences under a democratic regime : surely he is not completely ignorant of the infamous Arrow impossibility results ( 1951 ) cited above which suggest that the two are incompatible ? Then Kitcher likes to engage in talk about ‘freedom’ and ‘morality’ , but deep down ( like Polanyi , like Hayek , like Kuhn , like Reichenbach ) he harbors a paralyzing fear of what he calls “vulgar democracy’ , and perhaps religion as well . 38 His solution to this unbearable tension is to seek to alter the ‘preferences’ of those individuals whom he deems untrustworthy , converting ( brainwashing ? ) them into possession of what he calls ‘tutored preferences’ . So much for the shibboleth of freedom of thought—although this is not such a problem for Kitcher , since he takes a decidedly jaundiced view of freedom , as evidenced by the quote which heads this section . 39 In case the carefully tutored citizens still do not qualify as sufficiently pliable for science , Kitcher then proceeds to invent an elaborate Shangri - La , fortuitously fully equipped an agora of ideal forms of deliberation concerning prospective scientific research programs , voting on which to enjoy support ( with what nature of franchise ? ) and a Supreme Court of experts to sort things out when they get a little testy . Curiously in one normally extolled as a clear writer , Kitcher then appears to think that piling on the neoclassical jargon will aid and assist rendering this flight of fancy more plausible : [ W ] ith respect to each budgetary level , one identifies the set of possible distributions of resources among scientific projects compatible with the moral constraints on which the ideal deliberators agree , and picks from this set the option yielding maximum expected 36 One of Kitcher’s most irritating ploys is to present himself as advocate of a Golden Mean between historicists and analytical philosophers , all the while betraying lack of concern about the long history of arguments over the relationship of science to democracy ( Hollinger , 1996 ; Purcell , 1973 ) or indeed , the extended and vexed relationship between the history of utilitarian models of science and the philosophy of science . 37 “The modest realism I defend is supposed to strip away metaphysical excrescences . . . to allow issues about ethical , social and political values to enter , not under the rubric of some confused metaphysical or epistemological proposal” ( Kitcher , 2002 , p . 571 ) . 38 “Behind the often evangelical rhetoric about the value of knowledge stands a serious theology , an unexamined faith that pursuit of inquiry will be good for us” ( 2001 , p . 166 ) . 39 ( Longino , 2002b , p564 ) also comments upon this . 42 utility , where the utilities are generated from the collective wish list and the probabilities obtained from the experts . ( p . 121 ) If this sounds akin to the kind of verbiage that was broadcast from RAND in the 1960s concerning the optimal choice of weapons systems by the Pentagon , then one would not be led too far astray concerning its intellectual lineage . Indeed , decision theoretic terms applied to technoscientific options was one of the prime specialties of Operations Research in that era ( Hounshell in Hughes & Hughes , 2000 ) and designedly so : it draped a patina of political accountability over a process which was clearly spinning out of control and rife with conflicting interests , Machiavellian manipulation and backroom politics . As we have witnessed , philosophy of science itself has projected a pale reflection of the world according to the Operations Researcher since World War II ; Kitcher’s tragic flaw is that his ingrained disdain for history renders him incapable of realizing it is equally true of his own work . His decision theoretic exercises evade all the usual empirical criticisms of rational choice models : “the models Goldman and I develop aren’t intended as literal descriptions of people” ( 2002 , p . 559 ) . Kitcher , for all his vaunted ambition to be au courant , innovating new raison d’être and fresh topics for the philosophy of science , ends up being a commercialized and game - theoretic Reichenbach . 40 If there is any substantial difference , it is that we have traded the rhetoric of timeless truth for that of value - added information . As he writes , “I have attempted a systematic survey of all the possibilities for showing that ‘truth is better than profit’ and have come up empty” ( 2001 , p . 166 ) . The mortal sins of Kitcher’s version of social epistemology are that it ends up being both irrelevant and tautologous . It is irrelevant in that his ideal world of “well - ordered science’ has nothing whatsoever to do with the present predicaments of science – the runaway revisions of intellectual property , frequent resort to litigation to solve scientific problems , the crisis of scientific publication , the disenfranchisement of university faculty from academic governance , the bankruptcy of ritual mechanized induction , the over - emphasis on arcane mathematical expertise to validate relevance , the rationalization of teaching and lab work into temp McJobs , numerous popular crises of confidence in scientists as political actors – all this and more might as well be happening in another galaxy far , far away from Kitcher’s ideal republic . Helen 40 “the fundamentals of human reasoning are pretty much everywhere the same . . . So the ways in which arguments are justified ( and discovered ) in the human sciences should be no different than those employed in the natural sciences” ( 2001 , p . 175 ) . 43 Longino ( 2002b , p . 567 ) recently launched this criticism against Kitcher ; his response was most disconcerting : “If one is firmly committed to well - ordered science as an ideal . . . then the privatization of research looks like a trend that we should want to resist strenuously . . . I take it as a strength of the ideal of well - ordered science that it treats the pitching of scientific research into the marketplace as a disaster” ( 2002 , p . 570 ) . Not only is it unlikely that any such prognosis be drawn from Kitcher’s analysis , as I have argued above ; but it is disturbing that he is seemingly unaware that his own defense of the Human Genome project ( a public project in effect captured by Celera and the pharmaceutical companies ) and reification of science as a marketplace of ideas played directly into the hands of the globalized privateers . Indeed , spinning stirring fairytales about democratic plebiscites over government - controlled research programs while ignoring the dominant corporate control of the vast bulk of scientific research and intellectual property would qualify as a perfect example of what Karl Mannheim used to call “ideological discourse” . Doubly vexed , Kitcher’s social epistemology is also tautologous because of its circular notion of what it means to be a ‘tutored’ legitimate agent participating in deliberations about science . If ‘having a legitimate voice’ means getting a gold - plated Ph . D . in the relevant discipline , then we are back to Polanyi’s and Kuhn’s original prescription that only holders of valid union cards ( and then , only those who publicly submit to the authority of the master ) could get to cast their vote for whether we get the Human Genome Project or the Texas Supercollider or a fortified Social Security system . Of course , by then your ‘tutored’ vote is more or less a foregone conclusion . If , per contra , getting ‘tutored’ only means you need to know something about the sciences in question , then the prescription is unavailing , since there can be no settled prerequisite manifest of everything one needs to know in order to participate . If Kitcher could have been bothered to consult the philosophical literature on utilitarianism , he would have discovered that this idea of “cleansed” or suitably informed preferences is the Achilles Heel of left - liberal neoclassical economics ( Cowen , 1993 ) . The fundamental commitment of neoclassical models is to treat “preferences” as the independent unmoved movers of changes in market bundles . The mid - 20 th century revision of the economic agent towards greater resemblance to an information processor ( Mirowski , 2002 ) raised the disturbing spectre that if agents took action to change their own preferences through experience , learning and interpersonal interaction , then the vaunted determinacy of economic equilibrium would evaporate . A whole sequence of attempts to 44 stem the tide , from Nash equilibrium to schemes of mechanical induction to so - called “rational expectations” , have sought to endow the economic agent with some semblance of invariance , but Kitcher does not seem aware that his ideal Republic of Tutees doesn’t even begin to address the problem . Not only do we lack any guarantee that ex ante intentions need not map into ex post evaluations , but the very notion of ‘democracy’ as giving the people what they want loses all cogency . As Cowen writes , “Fully informed preferences do not offer an Archimedean point for value theory in a world of imperfect information” ( 1993 , p . 266 ) . 6 . Conclusion What do philosophers of science know about the “scientific dimensions of social knowledge” ? While one can only commend their ambition to “do something for society” , the answer must still be : nowhere near enough . There was a time when philosophers of science would light upon some specific recent theory in physics and inflate it up to represent some grand generalization about the nature of epistemology . The temptation seems to be currently to do something similar with recent economics , 41 proclaiming a new and fruitful alliance with the social sciences . The only antidote to this short - sighted practice is historical appreciation of the convoluted ways in which philosophy of science , social theory and the social structures of science have always and everywhere been intercalated and implicated in each other’s orthodoxies , and further , the way in which the dominant structures of the funding and organization of scientific research in a particular culture select those doctrines which give the appearance of rationalizing their practices . This phenomenon might itself be a fruitful topic for a philosophy of a unified social / natural science ; but there seems to be little enthusiasm for it in our globalized privatized regime . References Agassi , Joseph . 1995 . “Contemporary Philosophy of Science as Thinly Masked Antidemocratic Apologetics , ” in K . Gavroglu et al , eds . , Physics , Philosophy and the Scientific Community . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Amadae , Sonia . 2003 . Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy : the Cold War origins of rational choice liberalism . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Arrow , Kenneth . 1951 . Social Choice and Individual Values . New York : Wiley . 41 Or evolutionary psychology , or artificial intelligence , or cognitive science , or . . . anything that tends to travel under the rubric of “naturalism” . 45 Asner , Glen . 2002 . “Corporate Fad or Government Policy ? The Linear Model , the Department of Defense , and the Golden Age of Industrial Research , ” paper presented to the Nobel Symposium , November , Stockholm Sweden . Ayres , C . E . 1927 . Science - the False Messiah . Indianapolis : Bobs - Merrill . Berlin , Isaiah . 1969 . Four Essays on Liberty . New York : Oxford University Press . Biagioli , Mario & Galison , Peter . eds . 2003 . Scientific Authorship . New York : Routledge . Bok , Derek . 2003 . Universities in the Marketplace . Princeton : Princeton Univ . Press . Brown , James Robert . 2001 . Who Rules in Science ? Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Cahn , Steven , ed . 1977 . New Studies in the Philosophy of John Dewey . Hanover , NH : University Presses of New England . Camic , Charles . 1986 . “The Matter of Habit , ” American Journal of Sociology , ( 91 ) : 1039 - 1087 . Cartwright , Nancy ; Cat , Jordi ; Fleck , Lola ; & Uebel , Thomas . 1996 . Otto Neurath : Philosophy between Science and Politics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cohen , Robert . 1971 . “Homage to Rudolf Carnap , ” in PSA 1970 . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science . ed . Roger Buck & Robert Cohen . Dordrecht : Reidel . Collins , Martin . 1998 . Planning for Modern War : RAND and the Air Force , 1945 - 50 . History Ph . D . thesis , University of Maryland . Cowan , Tyler . 1993 . * * * Economics and Philosophy Dalton , Thomas . 2002 . Becoming John Dewey . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Dewey , John . 1927 . The Public and its Problems . New York : Holt . Dewey , John . 1939 . Freedom and Culture . New York : Putnam . Dewey , John . 1981 . Experience and Nature . Later Works , vol . 1 . Carbondale : Southern Illinois University Press . Dewey , John . 1984 . The Later Works , vol . 5 . Carbondale : Southern Illinois University Press . Dewey , John , 198x . The Later Works , vol . 12 . Carbondale : Southern Illinois University Press . Downes , Stephen . 2001 . “Agents and Norms in the New Economics of Science , ” Philosophy of the Social Sciences , ( 31 ) : 224 - 238 . Dreyfus , Rochelle ; Zimmerman , Diane ; & First , Harry . eds . 2001 . Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property . New York : Oxford University Press . Elliott , Carl . 2002 . “Diary , ” London Review of Books , 28 November : 36 - 7 . Ezrahi , Y . 1990 . The Descent of Icarus . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Feigl , Herbert . 1969 . “The Origin and Spirit of Logical Positivism , ” in Peter Achenstein & Stephen Baker , eds . , The Legacy of Logical Positivism . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Press . Feyerabend , Paul . 1978 . Science in a Free Society . London : New Left Books . Feyerabend , Paul . 1987 . Farewell to Reason . London : Verso . Feyerabend , Paul . 1999 . Knowledge , Science and Relativism . vol . 3 , Philosophical Papers . New York : Cambridge University Press . Fine , Terrence . 1973 . Theories of Probability . New York : Academic Press . Fuller , Steve , 1988 . Social Epistemology . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . 46 Fuller , Steve . 2000 . Thomas Kuhn : A philosophical history for our time . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Fuller , Steve . 2002a . Knowledge Management Foundations . Oxford : Butterworth - Heinemann . Fuller , Steve . 2002b . “Prolegomena to a Sociology of Philosophy in the 20 th Century English - speaking World , ” Philosophy of the Social Sciences , ( 32 ) : 151 - 177 . Giere , Ronald . 1996 . “From Wissenschaftliche Philosophie to Philosophy of Science , ” in Giere and Alan Richardson , eds . , Origins of Logical Positivism . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Goldman , Alvin . 1999 . Knowledge in a Social World . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Goldstein , W . & Hogarth , R . eds . 1997 . Research on Judgment and Decision Making . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gross , Neil . 2003 . “Richard Rorty’s Pragmatism : a case study in the sociology of ideas , ” Theory and Society , ( 32 ) : 93 - 148 . Hahn , Louis , ed . 1999 . The Philosophy of Donald Davidson . Chicago : Open Court . Helmer , Olaf & Oppenheim , Paul . 1945 . “A Syntactical Definition of Probability and Degree of Confirmation , ” Journal of Symbolic Logic , ( 10 ) : 25 - 60 . Hempel , Carl & Oppenheim , Paul . 1945 . “A Definition of Degree of Confirmation , ” Philosophy of Science , ( 12 ) : 98 Hempel , Carl . 1966 . Philosophy of Natural Science . Englewood Cliffs : Prentice - Hall . Hollinger , David . 1996 . Science , Jews and Culture . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Hounshell , David . 1997 . “The Cold War , RAND and the Generalization of Knowledge , ” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences , ( 27 ) : 237 - 67 . Howard , Don . 2003 . “Two Left Turns Make a Right : On the Curious Political Career of North American Philosophy of Science at Mid - Century , ” in Gary Hardcastle & Alan Richardson , eds . , Logical Empiricism in North America , Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Howard , Don . 2003b . “Marxist Themes in Early Logical Positivism , ” presentation to the Bielefeld - Notre Dame Conference on Science and Values . Hughes , Thomas & Hughes , Agatha , eds . 2000 . Systems , Experts and Computers . Cambridge : MIT Press . Jacobs , Struan . 2002 . “The Genesis of ‘Scientific Community’ , ” Social Epistemology , ( 16 ) : 157 - 68 Jardini , David . 1996 . Out of the Blue Yonder . History Ph . D . thesis , Carnegie - Mellon University . Jarvie , I . C . 2001a . “Science in a Democratic Republic , ” Philosophy of Science , ( 68 ) : 545 - 564 . Jarvie , I . C . 2001b . The Republic of Science . Amsterdam : Rodopi . Kadvany , John . 2001 . Imre Lakatos and the Guises of Reason . Durham : Duke University Press Kay , Lily . 1997 . “Rethinking Institutions : Philanthropy as a Problem of Knowledge and Power , ” Minerva , ( 35 ) : 283 - 293 . Kevles , Daniel . 1995 . The Physicists . Cambridge : Harvard Univ . Press . Kirby , Maurice . 2000 . “Operations Research Trajectories : Anglo - American Experience , 1940 - 1990 , ” Operations Research , ( 48 ) : 661 - 70 . 47 Kitcher , Philip . 1993 . The Advancement of Science . New York : Oxford University Press . Kitcher , Philip . 1996 . The Lives to Come . New York : Simon & Schuster . Kitcher , Philip . 2000 . “Reviving the Sociology of Science , ” PSA 98 Proceedings , Philosophy of Science , ( 67 ) : S33 - S44 . Kitcher , Philip . 2001 . Science , Truth and Democracy . New York : Oxford University Press . Kitcher , Philip . 2002 . “The Third Way : Reflections on Helen Longino , ” PSA Proceedings , Philosophy of Science , ( 69 ) : 549 - 59 ; 569 - 72 . Kitcher , Philip . 2003 . In Mendel’s Mirror . New York : Oxford University Press . Koertge , Noretta , ed . . 1998 . House built on Sand . New York : Oxford University Press . Kohler , Robert . 1991 . Partners in Science . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kragh , Helge . 1999 . Quantum Generations . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Krige , John & Pestre , Dominique , eds . 1997 . Science in the Twentieth Century . Amsterdam : Harwood . Longino , Helen . 2002a . The Fate of Knowledge . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Longino , Helen . 2002b . “Science and the Common Good : Thoughts on Philip Kitcher , ” Philosophy of Science , ( 69 ) : 560 - 568 . McCumber , John . 2001 . Time in the Ditch : American Philosophy and the McCarthy Era . Evanston : Northwestern University Press . McGrath , Patrick . 2002 . Scientists , Business and the State , 1890 - 1960 . Chapel Hill : Univ . of North Carolina Press . McGuckin , William . 1984 . Scientists , Society and the State . Columbus : Ohio State University Press . McKinsey , J . C . C . & Tarski , Alfred . 1948 . “Some Theorems about the Sentential Calculi of Lewis and Heyting , ” Journal of Symbolic Logic , ( 13 ) : 1 - 15 . Mirowski , Philip . 1988 . Against Mechanism . Totawa : Rowman & Littlefield . Mirowski , Philip . 1998 . " On Playing the Economics Trump Card in the Philosophy of Science : Why It Didn ' t Work for Michael Polanyi " Philosophy of Science , PSA 97 Supplement to vol . 64 : S127 - S138 Mirowski , Philip . 2002 . Machine Dreams : Economics becomes a cyborg science . New York : Cambridge University Press . Mirowski , Philip . forthcoming . “The Commercialization of Science and the Future of the University in the 21 st Century , ” multimedia presentation . Mirowski , Philip & Sent , Esther - Mirjam , eds . 2002 . Science Bought and Sold . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Mitchell , Wesley Clair . 1969 . Types of Economic Theory , vol . II . New York : Kelley . Motterlini , Matteo , ed . 1999 . For and Against Method . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Noll , Roger , ed . 1998 . Challenges to Research Universities . Washington : Brookings . Nowotny , Helga ; Scott , Peter & Gibbons , Michael . 2001 . Re - thinking Science . Cambridge : Polity . Preston , John ; Munevar , Gonzalo ; Lamb , David , eds . 2000 . The Worst Enemy of Science ? New York : Oxford University Press . 48 Purcell , Edward . 1973 . The Crisis of Democratic Theory : Scientific Naturalism and the Problem of Value . Lexington : University of Kentucky Press . Proctor , Robert . 1991 . Value Free Science ? Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Quine , W . V . O . 1985 . Time of My Life . Cambridge : MIT Press . Ravetz , Jerome . 1971 . Scientific Knowledge and its Social Problems . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Reichenbach , Hans . 1938 . Experience and Prediction . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Reichenbach , Hans . 1949 . “Rational Reconstruction of the Decision for War , ” RAND D - 539 . Reichenbach , Hans . 1953 . The Rise of Scientific Philosophy . Berkeley : University of California Press . Reichenbach , Hans . 1978 . Selected Writings . 2 vols . ed . M . Reichenbach & R . S . Cohen . Dordrecht : Reidel . Reichenbach , Hans . 1989 . “Dewey’s Theory of Science , ” in Paul Schlipp & Lewis Hahn , eds . , The Philosophy of John Dewey . Chicago : Open Court . Reingold , Nathan . 1991 . Science American Style . New Brunswick : Rutgers University Press . Reisch , George . 2002 . Review of McCumber , Time in the Ditch . Philosophy of Science . ( 68 ) : 389 - 92 . Rescher , Nicholas . 1997a . Instructive Journey . Lanham : University Presses of America . Rescher , Nicholas . 1997b . “H 2 O : Hempel - Helmer - Oppenheim” Philosophy of Science , ( 64 ) : 334 - 60 . Richardson , Alan . 2001 . “Science as Will and Representation , ” PSA 98 Proceedings , Philosophy of Science , ( 67 ) : S153 - S162 . Richardson , Alan . 2002 . “Engineering Philosophy of Science : American Pragmatism and Logical Empiricism in the 1930s , ” PSA 99 Proceedings , Philosophy of Science , ( 69 ) : S36 - S47 . Rouse , Joseph . 1987 . Knowledge and Power : toward a political philosophy of science . Ithaca : Cornell University Press . Ryan , Michael . 1998 . Knowledge Diplomacy . Washington : Brookings Institution . Rutherford , Malcolm . 1994 . Institutions in Economics . New York : Cambridge University Press . Scheiding , Tom . forthcoming . “Publish and Perish : Electronic Publication and the Serials Crisis , ” Ph . D . thesis , University of Notre Dame . Schmidt , Frederick , ed . 1994 . Socializing Epistemology . Lanham : Rowman & Littlefield . Shinn , Terry . 2003 . “The Industry , Research and Education Nexus , ” in Mary Jo Nye , ed . , Cambridge History of Science , vol . 5 . New York : Cambridge University Press . Tobey , Ronald . 1971 . The American Ideology of National Science , 1919 - 30 . Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press . Turner , Stephen . 1999 . “Does Funding Produce its Effects ? ” in T . Richardson & D . Fisher , eds . , The Development of the Social Sciences in the US and Canada : the role of philanthropy . Stamford : Ablex . Turner , Stephen . 2001 . “What is the Problem with Experts ? ” Social Studies of Science , ( 31 ) : 123 - 150 . 49 Uebel , Thomas . 2000a . “Some Scientism , Some Historicism , Some Critics : Hayek’s and Popper’s critiques revisited , ” pp . 151 - 173 in M . Stone & J . Wolff , eds . , The Proper Ambition of Science . London : Routledge . Uebel , Thomas . 2000b . “Logical Empiricism and the Sociology of Knowledge : the Case of Neurath and Frank , ” Philosophy of Science Proceedings ( 67 ) : S139 - S150 . Wang , Jessica . 1999 . “Merton’s Shadow : perspectives on science and democracy since 1940 , ” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences , ( 30 : 1 ) : 279 - 306 . Westbrook , Robert . 1991 . John Dewey and American Democracy . Ithaca : Cornell University Press . White , M . 1989 . “The Politics of Epistemology , ” Ethics , ( 100 ) : 77 - 92 . Wray , K . Brad . 2000 . “Science , Biases , and the Threat of Global Pessimism , ” Philosophy of Science , Proceedings ( 68 ) : S467 - 478 . Yonay , Yuval . 1998 . The Struggle over the Soul of Economics . Princeton : Princeton University Press .