Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina Institute of Cytology , Russian Academy of Sciences , Saint - Petersburg , Russia E - mails : skhspb @ yahoo . com ; skhspb @ gmail . com Contents 1 . Introduction 2 2 . Tropomyosin Properties and Actin Binding 4 2 . 1 Tropomyosin Structure 4 2 . 2 Actin Binding and Cooperativity 7 2 . 2 . 1 Actin e tropomyosin interface 7 2 . 2 . 2 Assembly of tropomyosin on actin ﬁ laments 8 2 . 2 . 3 Cooperative binding of tropomyosin to actin 10 3 . Actin Properties Regulated by Tropomyosin 11 3 . 1 Landmarks of Actin Polymerization 11 3 . 2 Dynamics and Cooperativity of F - Actin 12 4 . Effects of Tropomyosin on Actin Filament Assembly and Dynamics 14 4 . 1 Stabilizing Effects of Tropomyosin on Actin Filament 14 4 . 2 Tropomyosin and Actin Polymerization 15 4 . 3 Tropomyosin as Regulator of the Actin Filament Dynamics 17 4 . 3 . 1 Regulation of pointed end dynamics 17 4 . 3 . 2 Filament length and annealing 18 4 . 3 . 3 Modulation of intermonomer contacts within actin ﬁ lament 18 4 . 4 Interaction between Tropomyosin and Other Actin - Binding Proteins 20 4 . 4 . 1 Protection of actin ﬁ laments against binding of cytoskeleton proteins 21 4 . 4 . 2 Direct interaction of tropomyosin with actin - binding proteins 23 4 . 4 . 3 Partnership between tropomyosin and actin - binding proteins 25 5 . Concluding Remarks 27 Acknowledgment 28 References 28 Abstract Tropomyosin is a major regulatory protein of contractile systems and cytoskeleton , an actin - binding protein that positions laterally along actin ﬁ laments and modulates actin e myosin interaction . About 40 tropomyosin isoforms have been found in a variety of cytoskeleton systems , not necessarily connected with actin e myosin interaction and contraction . Involvement of speci ﬁ c tropomyosin isoforms in the regulation of key cell International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology , Volume 318 ISSN 1937 - 6448 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / bs . ircmb . 2015 . 06 . 002 © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 j ARTICLE IN PRESS processes was shown , and speci ﬁ c features of tropomyosin genes and protein structure have been investigated with molecular biology and genetics approaches . However , the mechanisms underlying the effects of tropomyosin on cytoskeleton dynamics are still unclear . As tropomyosin is primarily an F - actin - binding protein , it is important to under - stand how it interacts both with actin and actin - binding proteins functioning in mus - cles and cytoskeleton to regulate actin dynamics . This review focuses on biochemical data on the effects of tropomyosin on actin assembly and dynamics , as well as on the modulation of these effects by actin - binding proteins . The data indicate that tropomy - osin can ef ﬁ ciently regulate actin dynamics via allosteric conformational changes within actin ﬁ laments . 1 . INTRODUCTION Tropomyosin is a major regulatory protein of contractile systems and cytoskeleton known for a long time as an actin - binding protein which po - sitions laterally along actin ﬁ laments and mediates actin e myosin interaction ( Perry , 2001 ) . In skeletal muscles , in the absence of Ca 2 þ , tropomyosin lies over the outer domain of actin , in a position sterically blocking most of the sites for myosin binding . In the presence of Ca 2 þ , tropomyosin moves to the inner domain of actin , exposing most of the previously blocked myosin binding sites . Saturation of actin ﬁ laments with myosin heads produces a further shift in tropomyosin position , exposing the entire myosin - binding sites ( Lehman et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Vibert et al . , 1997 ; Xu et al . , 1999 ; Craig and Lehman , 2001 ) . However tropomyosin is not con ﬁ ned to one ﬁ xed location in either of the regulatory states . Though a particular con ﬁ guration is favored , in the absence of Ca 2 þ , parts of ﬁ laments are in the closed state and , conversely , parts of ﬁ laments treated with Ca 2 þ are in the blocked state ( Pirani et al . , 2005 ) . The regions of myosin - binding sites on F - actin that are blocked by tropomyosin as well as the striking ability of tropomyosin to translocate azimuthally across the actin ﬁ lament have been visualized in the cryo - EM structure of actin e tropomyosin ﬁ laments ( von der Ecken et al . , 2014 ) . These data are consistent with and provide structural basis for the func - tional role of tropomyosin in the three - state model of regulation in which activation of thin ﬁ lament is a stepwise process requiring sequential Ca 2 þ - and myosin - induced transitions to release inhibition ( McKillop and Geeves , 1993 ; Geeves and Lehrer , 1994 ; Chalovich , 2002 ) . In the solution experi - ments , in the absence of Ca 2 þ about 80 % of the myosin - binding sites of actin are blocked ( blocked state ) . Binding of Ca 2 þ to troponin leads to a 2 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS weak myosin binding ( closed state ) that promotes the strong myosin binding ( open state ) leading to force development . The three regulatory states are in rapid equilibrium with one another , where any one state may dominate depending on the in ﬂ uence of troponin and myosin ( Bremel and Weber , 1972 ; McKillop and Geeves , 1993 ; Maytum et al . , 1999 ; Lehrer and Geeves , 1998 ; Lehman and Craig , 2008 ) . This regulation involves cooperative and allosteric interactions among the protein components , with actin being the catalytic subunit , while tropomyosin is the regulatory component , and troponin in the absence and presence of Ca 2 þ is the allosteric inhibitor and activator , respectively . Thus , the primary function of tropomyosin in the striated muscle actin ﬁ lament is to set up the equilibrium between the off and on activity states altering the ability of actin ﬁ lament to accelerate myosin - associated ATP hydrolysis ( Lehrer and Geeves , 1998 ; Resetar et al . , 2002 ) . The role of tropomyosin in this regulation can be active , if tropomyosin movement and its position on actin ﬁ lament is determined by tropomyosin properties , or passive , if the tropomyosin movement is a consequence of conformational changes in the actin subunits with which tropomyosin is associated ( Perry , 2001 , 2003 ) . Movement of tropomyosin along the sides of actin ﬁ lament also occurs in smooth muscles that do not contain troponin , and contractile activity is determined primarily by the myosin light chain phosphorylation . Tropomy - osin location in the smooth muscle actin groove is different from that in stri - ated muscles . In smooth muscle thin ﬁ laments , in the absence of Ca 2 þ , tropomyosin was found in association with the inner domain of actin , away from the majority of strong myosin binding sites , inconsistent with a direct steric blocking of smooth muscle myosin binding by tropomyosin ( Vibert et al . , 1993 ; Hodgkinson et al . , 1997 ) . However , like skeletal muscle tropomyosin , smooth muscle tropomyosin is able to take up a variety of positions on actin , being involved in a cooperative allosteric mechanism of actomyosin regulation together with thin ﬁ lament - linked caldesmon . Actin e tropomyosin exists in two caldesmon - dependent activity states , on and off , that are linked by a concerted cooperative equilibrium ( Marston and El - Mezgueldi , 2008 ) . Numerous tropomyosin isoforms have been also revealed in a variety of cytoskeleton systems , not necessarily connected with actin e myosin interac - tion and contraction . Thereby , many functions of the actin cytoskeleton are related to spatial segregation and nonredundant functional diversity of tropomyosin isoforms , suggesting that tropomyosin plays a key role in the regulation of cytoskeleton organization and dynamics ( Gunning et al . , Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 3 ARTICLE IN PRESS 2008 ; Vindin and Gunning , 2013 ) . These aspects of tropomyosin biology have been extensively studied using cell biology and molecular genetics approaches ( Gunning et al . , 2008 ; Wang and Coluccio , 2010 ; Lees et al . , 2011 ; Vindin and Gunning , 2013 ) . In these studies , many speci ﬁ c features of tropomyosin genes ( Lees - Miller and Helfman , 1991 ; Dufour et al . , 1998 ; Cooley and Bergtrom , 2001 ) and of tropomyosin protein structure ( Green ﬁ eld et al . , 2006 ; Hitchckock - DeGregory and Singh , 2010 ; Barua et al . , 2011 , 2013 ; Cranz - Mileva et al . , 2013 ; Janco et al . , 2013 ) have been revealed . Moreover , involvement of speci ﬁ c tropomyosin isoforms in regulation of numerous cell processes such as cell migration ( Lees et al . , 2013 ) , cancer cell transformation ( Shah et al . , 1998 ; Helfman et al . , 2008 ; O ’ Neill et al . , 2008 ) , invasion ( O ’ Neill , 2011 ) , and apoptosis ( Desouza et al . , 2012 ) was shown . It was proposed therefore that the gen - eration of speci ﬁ c tropomyosin - containing actin ﬁ laments could be controlled via regulation by tropomyosin of actin assembly ( Schevzov et al . , 2012 ; Vindin and Gunning , 2013 ) . However , at the molecular level , the mechanisms underlying the effects of tropomyosin on cytoskeleton dy - namics are still ambiguous . To reveal these mechanisms it is important to understand how tropomyosin interacts both with actin and actin - binding proteins that are involved in the regulation of actin dynamics . The present review will be focused on the biochemical data on the effects of tropomy - osin on actin assembly and dynamics , as well as on the modulation of these effects by actin - binding proteins . 2 . TROPOMYOSIN PROPERTIES AND ACTIN BINDING 2 . 1 Tropomyosin Structure Tropomyosin has been found in all living organisms except bacteria and plants . In mammals , there are four genes that code for tropomyosin : a , b , g , and d , also referred to as TPM1 , TPM2 , TPM3 , and TPM4 , respec - tively . Alternative splicing of these four genes , the use of multiple pro - moters , and the choice of polyadenylation site lead to expression of more than 20 different tropomyosins in humans . Based on their molecular mass , tropomyosins are usually referred to as either high molecular weight iso - forms , which are 284 amino acids in length , and contain 7 actin - binding re - gions ; or low molecular weight ( LMW ) isoforms , which are w 248 amino acids in length , and contain 6 actin - binding motifs . Altogether , there are over 40 mammalian tropomyosin isoforms , 18 of which are expressed in 4 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS nonmuscle cells ( Perry , 2001 ; Gunning et al . , 2008 ; Lees et al . , 2011 ) . A rationalized nomenclature compatible with current practice for gene and protein names has recently been proposed to describe these isoforms ( Geeves et al . , 2015 ) . Tropomyosin is a two - chained a - helical coiled coil , i . e . , a dimer of two parallel polypeptide chains that can be assembled from identical ( homo - dimer ) or different ( heterodimer ) polypeptide chains of the same length . The polypeptide chain is comprised of a sequence of heptad amino acid re - peats that associate head - to - tail to form continuous strands along both sides of the actin ﬁ lament , such that one molecule spans the length of seven or six actin monomers ( Perry , 2001 ; Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2008 ; Wang and Coluccio , 2010 ; Nevzorov and Levitsky , 2011 ) . This structure is stabilized by hydrophobic core residues alternating with the clusters of destabilizing residues , including six clusters of core alanines called “ Ala clusters ” and other acidic and polar residues ( Kwok and Hodges , 2004 ; Brown et al . , 2005 ; Minakata et al . , 2008 ; Barua et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 1 ( A ) ) . The intrinsic helical contour of tropomyosin complements the actin ﬁ lament structure by having a shape that follows the actin ﬁ lament surface ( Gestalt - binding ) and allows it to interact with actin along its length as a cooperative unit , which assumes rather a high degree of tropomyosin rigidity ( Holmes and Lehman , 2008 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , by electron microscopy , molecular dynamics simulations , and corresponding persistence length analysis , the isolated tropomyosin ﬁ laments were determined as semirigid which binding with F - actin is due to the combined effect of the average structure ( in particular the overall curvature ) and considerable coiled - coil unfolding , splaying and twisting at N - and C - terminal ends providing conformational plasticity of tropomyosin end - to - end contacts ( Li et al . , 2010 ; Lehman et al . , 2013 ) . On the other hand , binding of semirigid tropomyosin to the actin ﬁ la - ment additionally requires a certain degree of local instability as well as re - gions of ﬂ exibility that allow the coiled coil to bend and conform to the actin ﬁ lament helix . The ﬂ exibility derives from bends and local unfolding at regions with a destabilized coiled - coil interface , as well as from the dynamic end - to - end complex ( Hitchcock - DeGregori , 2008 ; Hitchcock - DeGregori and Singh , 2010 ; Zheng et al . , 2013 ) . Structural irregularities such as noncanonical Ala clusters and charged residues in the hydrophobic core destabilize the coiled - coil structure and confer ﬂ exibility to some parts of the tropomyosin molecule ( Brown et al . , 2005 ; Minakata et al . , 2008 ) . The ﬂ exibility is unevenly distributed in the tropomyosin molecule and achieves the highest extent in its middle part containing noncanonical Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 5 ARTICLE IN PRESS Figure 1 Tropomyosin position on F - actin . ( A ) Locations of speci ﬁ c structural features in tropomyosin molecule ( Minakata et al . , 2008 ) : the alanine clusters destabilizing the tropomyosin structure ( pink ( gray in print versions ) circles ) and the break in hydropho - bic core ( green ( light gray in print versions ) circle ) . Other details are discussed by in the text . ( B ) Position of tropomyosin along the two long - pitch helices of the actin ﬁ lament . ( C ) Tropomyosin pseudorepeat 4 in the model of tropomyosin on the actin ﬁ lament as proposed by Li et al . ( 2011 ) . Positively charged amino acids of actin subdomain 3 ( Arg - 147 , Lys - 326 , and Lys - 328 ) and Arg 28 in subdomain 1 face negatively charged amino acids in each pseudorepeat of tropomyosin . Pro - 333 on actin locates near hydrophobic residues on the surface of tropomyosin . Additional contacts may be formed by nega - tively charged Glu - 334 and Asp - 25 in actin subdomain 1 and basic residues in tropomy - osin . Similar contacts are observed along all seven pseudorepeats of tropomyosin ( Table 1 ) . The ﬁ gure is from Minakata et al . ( 2008 ) and Dominguez ( 2011 ) . 6 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS residues Asp137 and Gly126 ( Pato et al . , 1981 ; Ueno , 1984 ; Brown et al . , 2005 ; Sumida et al . , 2008 ; Nevzorov et al . , 2011 ) . A separate and concerted action of these residues contributes to the tropomyosin ﬂ exibility and seems to modulate tropomyosin functions ( Sumida et al . , 2008 ; Nevzorov et al . , 2011 ; Matyushenko et al . , 2014 ) . The evidence on the colocalization of six Ala clusters with regions of tropomyosin ’ s high local ﬂ exibility as well as on the existence of numerous other sites of local ﬂ exibility was obtained by molecular dynamics simulation ( Zheng et al . , 2013 ) . The destabilizing Ala clusters can also in ﬂ uence cooperative actin binding in a positive fashion ( Singh and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2009 ) . The ends of tropomyosin molecules form a ﬂ exible four - helix intermolec - ular complex between the N - terminus and a set of the C - terminal residues that is required for cooperative actin binding ( Green ﬁ eld et al . , 2006 ; Tobacman , 2008 ) . In the end - to - end complex of muscle tropomyosin , the C - terminus splays apart to form a cleft where the N - terminus binds and overlaps 11 res - idues of the C - terminus ( Green ﬁ eld et al . , 2006 ) . The conformational ﬂ ex - ibility in the intermolecular junction , together with the interruptions in the canonical coiled - coil interface , local instability , and the variable tropomyosin supercoil pitch allow tropomyosin molecules to adopt a shape complemen - tary to the actin ﬁ lament and to move on the actin ﬁ lament in response to myosin and troponin ( Singh and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2009 ; Hitchcock - DeGregory and Singh , 2010 ; Zheng et al . , 2013 ) . In summary , tropomyosin is a coiled coil formed by two similar or different polypeptide chains of the same length . The polypeptide chains are comprised of a sequence of amino acid quasi - repeats that associate head - to - tail thus providing a high degree of semirigidity or ﬂ exibility . The conforma - tional ﬂ exibility of tropomyosin derives from conformational plasticity of the overlapping end - to - end contacts , as well as from bends and local unfolding at regions with a destabilized coiled - coil interface such as noncanonical alanine clusters and charged residues in the hydrophobic core . This structural design intrinsically determines binding of tropomyosin on the actin ﬁ lament and its ability to adopt different positions on the actin ﬁ lament . 2 . 2 Actin Binding and Cooperativity 2 . 2 . 1 Actin e tropomyosin interface Tropomyosin is known to be bound on F - actin predominantly by electro - static interactions ( Lorenz et al . , 1995 ; Barua et al . , 2011 ) that are weak and stereospeci ﬁ c . There is also a hydrophobic component of binding ( Kirwan and Hodges , 2010 ) , as illustrated by the cold sensitivity of tropomyosin Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 7 ARTICLE IN PRESS binding to actin ( Goll et al . , 1972 ) . Amino acid contacts between actin and tropomyosin at w 40 (cid:1) A were recently identi ﬁ ed in a molecular model of actin e tropomyosin based on computational chemistry and electron micro - scopy reconstruction ( Li et al . , 2011 ) . The model shows that tropomyosin lies over a set of basic amino acids Lys - 326 , Lys - 328 , and Arg - 147 on actin , near the base of the actin monomers where subdomains 1 and 3 intersect . These basic amino acids are centered on a corresponding patch of acidic res - idues on each of the tropomyosin quasi - repeating modules . In addition to these charge e charge interactions , negatively charged Asp - 25 on actin ﬂ anks basic residues on one edge of each of the tropomyosin quasi - repeats . Pro - 333 on actin locates near hydrophobic residues on the surface of tropomy - osin quasi - repeats 4 and 5 , likely contributing to binding strength that is the largest for these quasi - repeats ( Li et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 1 ( B ) , Table 1 ) . Similar actin e tropomyosin interface was revealed experimentally by systematic mutagenesis of tropomyosin basic and acidic residues ( Barua et al . , 2013 ) . Moreover , involvement of the actin - charged amino acid residues Asp25 , Glu334 , Lys326 , and Lys328 in the actin e tropomyosin interface was proved by the replacement of these residues for alanines : the actin mutant contain - ing these four mutations failed to bind tropomyosin ( Barua et al . , 2013 ) . Various mutations of tropomyosin amino acid residues involved in actin e tropomyosin interface are also shown to couple with muscle diseases ( Kee and Hardeman , 2008 ; Wieczorek et al . , 2008 ; Memo and Marston , 2013 ; Marston et al . , 2013 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 Assembly of tropomyosin on actin ﬁ laments The binding of individual tropomyosin molecules to actin is very weak ( K a w 3 (cid:2) 10 3 M (cid:3) 1 ) ( Wegner , 1980 ) . However , the individual molecules readily assemble on the actin ﬁ laments in a cooperative fashion as evident from the shapes of binding isotherms ( Wegner , 1979 , 1980 ) . The binding of tropomyosin molecules along the actin ﬁ lament strongly increases its af ﬁ nity for actin ( K a w 10 6 M (cid:3) 1 ) ( Wegner , 1980 ; Landis et al . , 1997 , 1999 ; Singh and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2009 ) , and a striking additional enhance - ment of tropomyosin e actin binding can be produced by myosin and troponin ( Eaton , 1976 ; Landis et al . , 1999 ; Tobacman and Butters , 2000 ; Perry , 2003 ) . To explain these observations , two different models for the as - sembly of tropomyosin on actin ﬁ lament have been developed . In the mechanism related to the Gestalt - binding model ( Lehman et al . , 2013 ) , the conformers of tropomyosin that most closely resemble the superhelical con - tours of F - actin bind to thin ﬁ laments , and once the molecule is bound on 8 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Table 1 List of actin and tropomyosin residues that closely contact each other Actin N a Tm b Residues pairs in close contacts Actin Tm c 1 7 Arg - 147 Asp - 258 Lys - 328 Asp - 258 Asp - 25 Arg - 244 2 6 Lys - 326 Glu - 223 Arg - 147 Asp - 219 Lys - 328 Glu - 223 Lys - 328 Asp - 219 Pro - 333 Ala - 209 Asp - 25 Lys - 205 3 5 Lys - 326 Glu - 181 Arg - 147 Glu - 181 Lys - 328 Glu - 181 Lys - 328 Glu - 184 Pro - 333 Val - 170 Asp - 25 Arg - 167 Arg - 28 Glu - 163 4 4 Lys - 326 Glu - 142 Arg - 147 Glu - 139 Lys - 328 Glu - 139 Pro - 333 Ser - 132 Glu - 334 Lys - 128 Asp - 25 Lys - 128 Asp - 25 Arg - 125 Arg - 28 Asp - 121 5 3 Lys - 326 Glu - 104 Lys - 328 Glu - 104 Lys - 328 Asp - 100 Arg - 147 Glu - 97 Asp - 25 Arg - 90 Arg - 28 Glu - 82 6 2 Arg - 147 Glu - 62 Arg - 147 Asp - 58 Lys - 328 Asp - 58 Lys - 328 Glu - 62 Asp - 25 Lys - 48 Arg - 28 Asp - 41 7 1 Lys - 326 Asp - 20 Arg - 147 Asp - 20 Arg - 147 Glu - 16 Lys - 328 Asp - 20 Asp - 25 Lys - 6 Asp - 25 Gln - 9 a actin subunit . b tropomyosin pseudorepeat . c tropomyosin . Data were taken from Li et al . ( 2011 ) . ARTICLE IN PRESS F - actin the tropomyosin conformation is characterized by a canonical coiled - coil pitch , so that all tropomyosin pseudorepeats align to successive actin subunits appropriately . The last residues at the free ends of the tropo - myosin molecules exhibit considerable bending , twisting , and splaying dynamics which promotes searching for binding partners to link into a head - to - tail nexus and to begin to form a continuous tropomyosin cable . This process is repeated until a tropomyosin cable extends over the full length of the actin ﬁ lament , and the local plasticity of the ends will then diminish ( Lehman et al . , 2014 ; Orzechowski et al . , 2014 ) . Thus a speci ﬁ c initial conformation of tropomyosin molecule coupled with the inherent tendency to polymerize by end - to - end association plays here a critical role . This mechanism cannot explain , however , how this assembly occurs without leaving gaps along the actin ﬁ lament ( Lehman et al . , 2014 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 Cooperative binding of tropomyosin to actin To explain continuous binding of tropomyosin along the actin ﬁ lament , it is suggested that tropomyosin molecules bind to actin conjointly , coopera - tively , greatly facilitating tropomyosin attachment to the actin ﬁ lament ( Tobacman and Butters , 2000 ; Tobacman , 2008 ) . A possible mechanism for the cooperative interaction of tropomyosin with F - actin is a cooperative conformational change occurring along the actin ﬁ lament ( Yang et al . , 1979 ; Tobacman , 2008 ) . This possibility manifests itself by inability of tropomy - osin to bind F - actin cross - linked with glutaraldehyde ( Yang et al . , 1979 ) as well as by a strong enhancement of the tropomyosin e actin binding by the myosin heads supposed to change actin ﬁ lament in a way stabilizing the appropriate binding sites for tropomyosin ( Eaton , 1976 ; Landis et al . , 1999 ; Tobacman and Butters , 2000 ) . In the opposite way , tropomyosin binding to the actin ﬁ lament strongly enhanced myosin af ﬁ nity ( Eaton et al . , 1975 ; Tobacman and Butters , 2000 ) . The cooperativity is associated with the internal periods of tropomyosin molecule rather than with the end - to - end tropomyosin interactions ( Landis et al . , 1999 ; Moraczewska and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2000 ) . Tropomyosin internal deletion mutants that span four or ﬁ ve rather than the usual seven actins exhibit exaggerated cooperativity in myosin S1 - actin ﬁ lament binding implying an allosteric effect of tropomyosin on actin ( Landis et al . , 1999 ; Tobacman and Buttres , 2000 ) . Increased cooperativity of binding was also observed upon destabilization of the coiled - coil interface in tropomy - osin period 3 sequence or replacement it with period 5 sequence ( Singh and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2009 ) . This work suggested that regions of 10 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS tropomyosin involved in binding actin have noninterface residues speci ﬁ c for interaction with actin and an unstable interface that is locally stabilized upon binding . The destabilized interface allows residues on the coiled - coil surface to obtain an optimal conformation for interaction with actin by increasing the number of local substates that the side chains can sample ( Singh and Hitchcock - DeGregory , 2009 ) . The ability of tropomyosin to endow cooperative properties on the actin ﬁ lament was also shown by its effect on the inhibitory properties of troponin I ( Patchell et al . , 2002 , 2005 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , tropomyosin did not block the binding to actin of either myosin or troponin I peptides but , in contrast , it strengthened their af ﬁ nity for actin and in this way increased its ability to impose a conformational change on the actin ( Patchell et al . , 2005 ) . It is suggested that in the presence of tropomyosin , the conformational changes imposed by troponin I on one actin monomer are transmitted to monomers on either side in the ﬁ lament . The role of tropomyosin is then to stabilize the ﬁ lament structure and thus facilitate the transmission of conformational changes along the ﬁ lament . Such a role of tropomyosin as a cooperative uniting of actin ﬁ laments makes good functional sense not only in all types of muscle but also for actin - binding proteins ( Perry , 2003 ) . This implies that the role of tropomyosin is not a special case unique to muscle but merely an example of the role played in all actin ﬁ lament systems ( Perry , 2003 ) . In summary , combination of biochemical data with recent electron microscopy reconstructions , systematic mutagenesis analysis , and molecular dynamic simulation of actin e tropomyosin interface revealed involvement of speci ﬁ c tropomyosin regions in the actin e tropomyosin interaction . Tropomyosin seems to bind actin cooperatively , and tropomyosin binding imposes some effect on the structure of actin ﬁ lament because in the pres - ence of tropomyosin the af ﬁ nities of troponin I inhibitory peptides , myosin peptides , troponin , and myosin are increased . These data suggest a speci ﬁ c role of tropomyosin in facilitating the transmission of conformational changes along the ﬁ lament and provide a framework to study how tropomy - osin modulates actin assembly and dynamics . 3 . ACTIN PROPERTIES REGULATED BY TROPOMYOSIN 3 . 1 Landmarks of Actin Polymerization The dynamics of actin structures of the cell are based on the ability of actin for reversible polymerization ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ; Pantaloni Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 11 ARTICLE IN PRESS et al . , 2001 ; Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . Both in vivo and in vitro actin can exist as a monomer ( G - actin ) and as a polymer ( F - actin ) , with the G - F trans - formation being a reversible process . Therefore , the ability of actin to form stable polymers that , in turn , can easily disassemble may be regarded as the main functional property of actin . The main steps and mechanisms of actin polymerization in vitro are well established ( Carlier , 1998 ; Dominguez and Holmes , 2011 ) . Globular actin spontaneously polymerizes into ﬁ laments at physiological concentrations of neutral salts , with the optimum being 50 e 150 mM KCl and / or 1 e 2 mM MgCl 2 . Since cellular concentrations of MgCl 2 are above millimolar , actin monomers under physiological condi - tions contain MgATP . Actin polymerization can also be induced at low salt concentrations by polycations ( Grant and Oriol - Audit , 1985 ; Muhlrad et al . , 2011 ) and by myosin and its proteolytic fragments ( Miller et al . , 1988 ; Chen and Reisler , 1991 ; Fievez et al . , 1997 ; Wawro et al . , 2005 ) . In the cell , spontaneous actin polymerization is inhibited by the monomer - sequestering proteins , pro ﬁ lin , and thymosin ( Sun et al . , 1995 ; Xue and Robinson , 2013 ) . Filament assembly can occur only above a threshold ( critical ) actin concen - tration , which varies with polymerizing conditions . The monomers associate rather slowly to form short oligomers ( nuclei ) consisting of at least three mono - mers ( Wegner and Engel , 1975 ; Galinska - Racoczy et al . , 2009 ) . Once the nuclei are formed , they are elongated rapidly until the monomer concentra - tion falls to the critical level and the system reaches a steady state ( Wegner and Engel , 1975 ) . Actin polymerization is accompanied by stoichiometric hydro - lysis of the tightly bound ATP , which occurs subsequent to incorporation of the monomer into the ﬁ lament to yield an ADP - containing ﬁ lament ( Korn et al . , 1987 ; Carlier , 1998 ) . In the cell , actin polymerization seems to be always nucleated by actin - binding proteins that regulate it spatially and temporally ( Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ; Pollard , 2007 ; Dominguez , 2009 ; Firat - Karalar and Welch , 2011 ; Suetsugu , 2013 ) . Thus , the ability of actin to polymerize can be characterized by two parameters : the critical concentra - tion for polymerization and the rate of reaction . 3 . 2 Dynamics and Cooperativity of F - Actin Actin ﬁ lament is a helical polymer whose structure can be described either as a one - start left - handed helix with a pitch of 5 . 9 nm or as a two - start right - handed helix with a pitch of 72 nm genetic helix ( Holmes et al . , 1990 ) . Actin ﬁ lament is maintained in a dynamic steady state : the association of ATP - G - actin predominantly at the barbed ( fast ) ﬁ lament end is balanced 12 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS by the dissociation of predominantly ADP - G - actin from the pointed ( slow ) ﬁ lament end ( Korn et al . , 1987 ; Carlier , 1998 ) , resulting in a ﬂ ux of actin subunits along the ﬁ lament , the so - called treadmilling ( Wegner , 1976 ) . Moreover , the ﬁ lament is ﬂ exible and can exist in a number of different structural states produced by changes in intermonomer contacts and / or intramonomer conformation ( Oosawa et al . , 1977 ; Oosawa , 1980 ; Yanagida et al . , 1984 ; Orlova and Egelman , 1992 , 1993 ; Orlova et al . , 1995 ; Galkin et al . , 2010 , 2015 ) . Image analysis of negatively stained actin ﬁ laments followed by their three - dimensional reconstruction revealed the difference between the F - actin - ADP state and the ADP - BeF 3 state , the latter being an analogue of the F - actin - ADP - Pi state or the F - actin - ATP state ( Orlova and Egelman , 1992 ) . In F - ADP - BeF 3 - actin , subdomain 2 is more strongly protected against proteolysis than in F - ADP - actin ( Muhlrad et al . , 1994 ) . These conformational changes correlate with destabilization of actin ﬁ la - ments accompanying the release of phosphate after ATP hydrolysis ( Korn et al . , 1987 ; Carlier , 1998 ; Isambert et al . , 1995 ) suggesting that a more open conformation of actin monomer can contribute to lower polymer sta - bility . These results imply that the newly formed ADP - Pi - actin ﬁ laments are more stable than the old F - ADP - actin ( Isambert et al . , 1995 ) . Since the conformation of actin monomer depends on a type of bound nucleotide and cation ( Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 2001 ) , these factors also affect the ﬁ la - ment structure although being not so large as those between the correspond - ing G - actins ( Orlova and Egelman , 1992 , 1993 ; Muhlrad et al . , 1994 ; Orlova et al . , 1995 ; Isambert et al . , 1995 ; Strzelecka - Golaszewska et al . , 1996 ) . No difference in ﬂ exibility and persistence ﬁ lament lengths of ﬂ uo - rescently labeled F - Ca - actin and F - Mg - actin was detected by means of ﬂ uo - rescence optical video microscopy ( Isambert et al . , 1995 ) . On the other hand , a striking Ca - induced decrease in the ﬂ exibility of Mg - actin ﬁ laments was observed in negatively stained electron microscopic samples ( Orlova and Egelman , 1993 ) , probably due to binding of Ca 2 þ at the sites of low and moderate af ﬁ nity . The other intrinsic property of actin ﬁ laments is their cooperativity , i . e . , the capability to propagate conformational changes that occur in actin mono - mer throughout the ﬁ lament . Therefore the structure of the ﬁ laments can be modulated by low amounts of ligands and actin - binding proteins . For example , modi ﬁ cation of the actin penultimate C - terminal cysteine residue 374 with glutathione resulted in ﬁ lament destabilization , with a half - maximal destabilization of 4 out of 5 actin subunits , and half - maximal reversion of this effect by phalloidin observed when only 1 out of 20 actin subunits was Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 13 ARTICLE IN PRESS complexed ( Drewes and Faulstich , 1993 ) . On the other hand , the half - maximal protection of actin proteolytically modi ﬁ ed within the DNase - I - binding loop required one phalloidin molecule per eight actin molecules ( Khaitlina and Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 2002 ) , pointing to a different role of the different monomer e monomer contacts in transmission of cooperative effects along the ﬁ lament . Propagation of the structural changes was also observed in the presence of substoichiometric concentrations of beryllium ﬂ uoride ( Muhlrad et al . , 1994 ) , heavy meromyosin , ( Orlova and Egelman , 1997 ) and in gelsolin - nucleated ﬁ laments ( Orlova et al . , 1995 ; Prochniewicz et al . , 1996 ; Khaitlina and Hinssen , 1997 ) , as well as in the binding of co ﬁ lin ( De La Cruz , 2005 ; Hayakawa et al . , 2014 ) . A near - maximal change in the ﬂ uorescence of a probe attached to F - actin was found at substoichiometric amounts of heavy meromyosin ( Miki et al . , 1982 ) , and a cooperative decrease in the anisotropy of tryptophan ﬂ uorescence of highly ordered actin ﬁ laments was induced by myosin subfragment - 1 ( Borovikov and Gusev , 1983 ) . It is also shown that chemically modi ﬁ ed actin protomers cooperatively affected the interaction of myosin with unmodi ﬁ ed protomers of the same actin ﬁ la - ment ( Prochniewicz et al . , 1993 ) . In summary , actin dynamics reveals itself in a steady - state exchange of the ﬁ lament subunits with the monomer pools . The exchange occurs even in relatively stable ﬁ lament structures , such as stress ﬁ bers and mature myo ﬁ brils ( Ono , 2010 ) . The ﬁ laments are ﬂ exible and can exist in a number of different structural states produced by changes in intermonomer contacts and / or intramonomer conformation . Actin ﬁ laments are highly cooperative , capable to propagate conformational changes that occur in actin monomer throughout the ﬁ lament . These properties are actively modulated by actin - binding proteins and can be affected by tropomyosin to regulate actin func - tions both during muscle contraction and cytoskeleton reorganizations . 4 . EFFECTS OF TROPOMYOSIN ON ACTIN FILAMENT ASSEMBLY AND DYNAMICS 4 . 1 Stabilizing Effects of Tropomyosin on Actin Filament It can be expected that the mechanical properties of the ﬂ exible actin ﬁ lament are altered by tropomyosin bound along the ﬁ lament axis . Indeed , the stabilizing and stiffening effect of tropomyosin on the actin ﬁ lament have been demonstrated by different experimental approaches ( Kawamura and Maruyama , 1970 ; Fujime and Ishiwata , 1971 ; Kojima et al . , 1994 ; Isambert 14 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS et al . , 1995 ; Goldmann , 2000 ; Wen et al . , 2000 ) . By electron microscopy observations , addition of tropomyosin did not change the average length of F - actin but F - actin ﬁ laments became rigid ( Kawamura and Maruyama , 1970 ) . The studies on the quasielastic light scattering of F - actin e tropomy - osin complexes also showed that at a weight tropomyosin to F - actin ratio less than 1 : 6 , an F - actin e tropomyosin complex gradually became stiff . This decrease of the ﬂ exibility of F - actin was explained by strengthening of both inter - and intrastrand contacts by the bonds between tropomyosin and monomers in F - actin ( Fujime and Ishiwata , 1971 ) . Consistent with this suggestion , cardiac and yeast tropomyosins stabilized a polymeriza - tion - defective mutant yeast actin in which the hydrophobic contacts be - tween the opposing strands of the actin ﬁ lament were impaired , with the effect being inversely proportional to tropomyosin length ( Wen et al . , 2000 ) . The direct measurement of the stiffness of single actin ﬁ laments with and without tropomyosin using microneedle technique showed that tropomyosin increased the stiffness of 1 - m M - long actin ﬁ laments by a factor of about 1 . 5 ( Kojima et al . , 1994 ) . The association of tropomyosin with actin ﬁ laments reduced the internal chain dynamic and increased the actin ﬁ la - ment stiffness by w 50 % also in the presence of troponin ( Goldman , 2000 ) . A comprehensive analysis of the effects of different ligands and condi - tions on the persistence length of the actin ﬁ lament revealed a twofold increase of the persistence length of rhodamine - labeled F - ADP - actin ﬁ la - ments induced by tropomyosin , which is similar to the stabilizing effect of phalloidin ( Isambert et al . , 1995 ) . Interestingly , a twofold increase in rigidity also accompanied the cleavage of the DNase - I - binding loop between resi - dues 47 e 48 , a modi ﬁ cation expected to destabilize rather than stabilize actin ﬁ lament ( Schwyter et al . , 1989 ) but may lead to a more compact folding of this region of subdomain 2 , to generate a stiffer ﬁ lament ( Isambert et al . , 1995 ) . Taken together , these data show that tropomyosin decreases ﬂ exi - bility of the actin ﬁ lament making the ﬁ lament approximately twice more rigid . This effect may be due to the tropomyosin - promoted strengthening of the intermonomer contacts within the actin ﬁ lament . 4 . 2 Tropomyosin and Actin Polymerization The polymerization of actin ﬁ laments proceeds in three sequential steps . Before approaching steady state , actin polymerization passes through the initial nucleation step followed by the elongation . Two additional steps of polymerization , a conformational change of G - actin transforming the monomer to a state that is conformationally similar to the F - actin subunit Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 15 ARTICLE IN PRESS ( monomer activation ) ( Rich and Estes , 1976 ; Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 2001 ) , and annealing of the fragments formed during elongation ( Murphy et al . , 1988 ; Andrianantoandro et al . , 2001 ) are also discussed . As tropomy - osin does not bind G - actin or short oligomers ( Eaton et al . , 1975 ; Perry , 2001 ) , the direct in ﬂ uence of tropomyosin on F - actin polymerization is rather limited , and the available data are often ambiguous . Tropomyosin was shown to accelerate ( Pragay and Gergely , 1968 ) or inhibit ( Drabikowski and Nowak , 1968 ; Lal and Korn , 1986 ; Hitchcock - DeGregory et al . , 1988 ) spontaneous polymerization of ATP - actin in the presence of salt . However , tropomyosin did not inhibit the rate of ATP hy - drolysis either during polymerization or at steady state ( Lal and Korn , 1986 ) . In the elongation e depolymerization assay with pyrenyl - labeled actin and tropomyosin - containing actin seeds , tropomyosin decreased the rates of actin monomer addition to and dissociation from the seeds by 40 % , indi - cating that both k þ and k (cid:3) are inhibited by tropomyosin at its saturating concentration ( Lal and Korn , 1986 ) . Nevertheless , the constants determined by a direct electron microscopic assay showed a very small or no effect of tropomyosin on the elongation at either end of the ﬁ lament ( Hitchcock - DeGregory et al . , 1988 ) , consistently with the evidence that tropomyosin does not affect the critical concentration of actin polymerization ( Walsh and Wegner , 1980 ; Lal and Korn , 1986 ; Hitchcock - DeGregory et al . , 1988 ) . Tropomyosin inhibited ( Lal and Korn , 1986 ; Hitchcock - DeGregory et al . , 1988 ; Wegner and Ruhnau , 1988 ; Broschat , 1990 ) or accelerated ( Wawro et al . , 2007 ) actin assembly in assays that measure elongation from the barbed ﬁ lament end . Depolymerization from the barbed end in the presence of tropomyosin was inhibited to the same extend as elongation ( Lal and Korn , 1986 ) . It was speculated also that actin - bound tropomyosin molecules bound to the ends of actin ﬁ laments retard association of actin monomers with ﬁ lament ends ( Wegner and Ruhnau , 1988 ) . However , in an another work ( Broshat , 1990 ) , tropomyosin was shown to inhibit the dissociation of actin monomers from the pointed end of the ﬁ lament but not to prevent monomer association at this end . These discrepancies can be rationalized in terms of differences in the rate of actin polymerization under various experimental conditions . Speci ﬁ cally , actin polymerization is not strongly affected by tropomyosin if it proceeds faster than the binding of tropomyosin to F - actin . However , the rate of ﬁ la - ment formation decreases if actin polymerization is slower than the binding of tropomyosin ( Wegner and Ruhnau , 1988 ) . It is also possible that different capping proteins used to distinguish association / dissociation at the ﬁ lament 16 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS ends may modulate the ﬁ lament properties . Tropomyosin may also reduce the probability of ﬁ lament fragmentation by thermal or mechanical forces , thus reducing the concentration of ﬁ lament ends available for elongation ( Wegner , 1982 ) . On the other hand , the actin ﬁ laments are quite stable , and hence , the effects of tropomyosin on actin polymerization are small . Indeed , a strong effect of tropomyosin on polymerization of a polymeriza - tion - defective yeast actin mutant was shown ( Wen et al . , 2000 ) . Taken together , these studies showed that the effects of tropomyosin on actin poly - merization are not dramatic and seem to be related to the tropomyosin - induced modulation of the actin ﬁ lament dynamics rather than to a direct regulation by tropomyosin of actin assembly . 4 . 3 Tropomyosin as Regulator of the Actin Filament Dynamics 4 . 3 . 1 Regulation of pointed end dynamics To reveal the role of tropomyosin in regulating steady - state ﬁ lament dy - namics , assembly and disassembly of actin monomers at the two ﬁ lament ends can be experimentally separated by capping either the barbed or the pointed end with CapZ / villin or tropomodulin , respectively ( Broschat et al . , 1989 ; Broschat , 1990 ; Little ﬁ eld et al . , 2001 ) . When the effects of tropomyosin were measured using electron microscopy and pyrenyl - actin ﬂ uorescence assays in which the barbed ﬁ lament ends were capped by villin ( Broschat , 1990 ) , tropomyosin stopped disassembly of actin monomers from the pointed end even at the actin concentration being far below the critical concentration for the pointed ﬁ lament end , i . e . , under conditions where control ﬁ laments disassembled within minutes . Although tropomyosin stopped ﬁ lament depolymerization , the ﬁ laments were not capped by tropo - myosin because the pointed end elongation was not affected . Therefore the inhibition by tropomyosin of the actin ﬁ lament disassembly is most likely due to its effect predominantly on the actin dissociation constant , with little effect upon the association constant , i . e . , to its in ﬂ uence on the dissociation of monomers from the pointed ﬁ lament end , similarly to the effect produced by phalloidin ( Broschat , 1990 ) . Moreover , tropomyosin drastically reduced the subunit ﬂ ow in F - actin indicating that tropomyosin exerts an anisotropic constraint on F - actin and regulates its dynamic polarity ( Suzuki and Mihashi , 1989 ) . On the other hand , tropomyosin e troponin complex reduced the rate of both dissociation and association of actin monomers at the pointed ends of actin ﬁ laments capped by gelsolin ( Weigt et al . , 1990 ) . The inhibitory Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 17 ARTICLE IN PRESS effect of tropomyosin on association of actin monomers at the pointed ends of these ﬁ laments may be due to the conformational changes induced by gelsolin and propagated along the ﬁ laments ( Orlova et al . , 1995 ; Khaitlina and Hinssen , 1997 ) or to the presence of troponin whose effects on the monomer conformation may be transmitted by tropomyosin ( Perry , 2003 ) . 4 . 3 . 2 Filament length and annealing Addition of tropomyosin did not change the average length of F - actin deter - mined by electron microscopy ( Kawamura and Maruyama , 1970 ) , as well as the concentration of the actin ﬁ laments whose barbed ends were blocked ( Broschat , 1990 ) , and only slightly decreased the number concentration of actin ﬁ laments in solutions of gelsolin precapped actin ﬁ laments ( Dabrowska et al . , 1996 ; Khaitlina et al . , 2013 ) . On the other hand , tropomyosin is believed to prevent ﬁ lament fragmentation ( Hitchcock - DeGregory et al . , 1988 ) and promote ﬁ lament annealing ( Nyakern - Meazza et al . , 2002 ) . Direct electron microscopic examination showed that short actin ﬁ laments rapidly annealed end - to - end , leading over time to an increase in ﬁ lament length at steady state ( Kawamura and Maruyama , 1970 ; Murphy et al . , 1988 ) . Recovery of long actin ﬁ laments fragmented by shearing was also visualized by ﬂ uorescent microscopy ( Andrianantoandro et al . , 2001 ) . How - ever , in contrast to the actin ﬁ laments , the actin e tropomyosin ﬁ laments anneal only if strict sterical conditions are satis ﬁ ed , i . e . , the angles between the annealing two rods and the distance between the ends of the two rods must be less than some small maximum values . As a consequence of the strict sterical requirements short actin e tropomyosin ﬁ laments anneal fast end - to - end and faster than actin ﬁ laments . As soon as a length of about 10 m m is reached , the length increases slowly and remains almost constant for hours ( Teubner and Wegner , 1996 ) . These data show that tropomyosin rather prevents the actin ﬁ lament fragmentation than promote the ﬁ lament annealing . 4 . 3 . 3 Modulation of intermonomer contacts within actin ﬁ lament While the stabilizing and regulatory effects of tropomyosin on the actin ﬁ la - ment suggest the tropomyosin - promoted modulation of the intermonomer contacts within the actin ﬁ lament , interactions of tropomyosin with modi - ﬁ ed actin species were investigated to prove this suggestion . In these studies , both steric and allosteric effects were revealed . It was shown that mutations of actin Asp56 , Glu57 , and Glu93 , forming a cluster of negative charge at 18 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS the bottom of subdomain 2 retain tropomyosin in the off - state ( Bing et al . , 1998 ; Korman et al . , 2000 ) . In a quantitative in vitro motility assay , tropo - myosin suppressed the motility of E93K actin ( Bing et al . , 1998 ) . Actin mu - tation D56A / E57A increased the af ﬁ nity of tropomyosin for actin threefold suggesting that acidic residues on subdomain 2 normally act to weaken tropomyosin binding thus being involved in the myosin - mediated confor - mational switching of the thin ﬁ lament ( Korman et al . , 2000 ) . As these actin negative residues are not involved in the primary amino acid contacts between actin and tropomyosin identi ﬁ ed in a molecular model of actin e tropomyosin ( Li et al . , 2011 ) , their involvement in the tropomyosin binding may be due to long - range effects of tropomyosin on the ﬁ lament structure . Although tropomyosin has no contacts with actin subdomain 2 , tropo - myosin abolished the cross - link between the central fragment of myosin S1 and Lys50 in the DNase - I - binding loop demonstrating its ability to allo - sterically affect the structure of this loop ( Bonafé et al . , 1994 ) . The cleavage between residues 42 and 43 within the DNase - I - binding loop diminished the af ﬁ nity to tropomyosin , reduced inhibition by tropomyosin of acto - S1 ATPase activity at low myosin S1 concentrations , and increased the tropomyosin - mediated cooperative enhancement of the ATPase activity by myosin S1 binding to actin ( Moraczewska et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , by our preliminary data , tropomyosin binding nearly completely suppressed the enhanced subunit exchange in the cleaved F - actin , indicating stabiliza - tion of the interprotomer contacts that are perturbed by this modi ﬁ cation , and this stabilizing effect of tropomyosin was cooperative ( Khaitlina and Strzelecka - Golaszewska , 2003 ) . Tropomyosin accelerated polymerization of actin glutathionylated at the C - terminal Cys - 374 , albeit not to the level of the native actin polymeriza - tion , and bound glutathionylated F - actin with signi ﬁ cantly reduced cooper - ativity ( Chen and Ogut , 2006 ) . Glutathionylated actin is characterized by the increased rate of ATP exchange as well as by the decreased susceptibility to proteolysis of the subtilisin cleavage site between Met47 and Gly48 , in the DNase - I - binding loop of the actin subdomain 2 ( Dalle - Donne et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore stabilization of the glutathionylated actin by tropomyosin may involve several intermonomer contacts within the actin ﬁ lament . Tropomyosin also restored polymerization of a polymerization - defective yeast actin in which two hydrophobic residues , Val266 and Leu267 , were simultaneously altered to glycines ( Wen et al . , 2000 ) . These residues are at the N - terminal end of a hydrophobic loop between actin subdomains 3 Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 19 ARTICLE IN PRESS and 4 making hydrophobic contacts with monomers of the opposing strand of the actin ﬁ lament which is supposed to stabilize the structure across the ﬁ lament ( Kabsch et al . , 1990 ) . Polymerizability of this mutant actin was restored by phalloidin , which forms a bridge between the two strands of the ﬁ lament , and with beryllium ﬂ uoride , which converts the ﬁ lament to a more stable ADP - Pi - like state by strengthening intermonomer contacts along the ﬁ lament axis ( Kuang and Rubenstein , 1997 ) . Polymerizability of the V266G / L267G mutant was restored by cardiac tropomyosin and yeast TPM1 and TPM2 with ef ﬁ ciency inversely proportional to tropomyosin length indicating the importance of the tropomyosin ends in polymerization rescue . In the presence of tropomyosin , the apparent critical concentration of actin was 10 - to 15 - fold higher than that of wild - type actin but below that of the V266G / L267G alone ( Wen et al . , 2000 ) . Further work demonstrated that under polymerization conditions , V266G / L267G - actin exhibits a continuous F - actin - like ATPase activity re - ﬂ ecting formation of unstable cycling F - actin oligomers ( Yao and Rubenstein , 2001 ) . When the oligomers became long enough to bind tropomyosin , subsequent ﬁ lament formation could result from their elongation and stabili - zation by tropomyosin or by annealing of these tropomyosin - stabilized olig - omers . Since the critical concentrations for oligomers and long ﬁ laments were similar , the tropomyosin - dependent rescue of V266G / L267 - actin polymer - ization seemed to depend on the capture of preformed actin oligomers by tropomyosin which strengthened actin monomer e monomer contacts along the ﬁ lament axis rather than on tropomyosin - dependent nucleation of ﬁ la - ment formation ( Yao and Rubenstein , 2001 ) . Taken together , these data indicate a speci ﬁ c role of tropomyosin in the modulation of actin ﬁ lament dynamics . When tropomyosin is not bound to the sites whose modi ﬁ cation destabilizes the actin ﬁ lament , it is plausible that the tropomyosin - produced stabilization is due to allosteric effects strengthening intermonomer contacts both across and along the ﬁ laments . 4 . 4 Interaction between Tropomyosin and Other Actin - Binding Proteins Lateral localization of tropomyosin along actin ﬁ laments obviously raises the question of interaction between tropomyosin and other actin - binding pro - teins . Tropomyosin can compete with actin - binding proteins for binding to the actin ﬁ lament , cooperate with them , or interact with them directly . In the cell , all these activities may be spatially , temporary , or isoforms speci ﬁ c ; they also may be additionally regulated by other actin - binding or signal 20 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS proteins . The detailed analysis of these multifaceted interactions can be found in recent reviews ( Bugyi and Carlier , 2010 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ) . 4 . 4 . 1 Protection of actin ﬁ laments against binding of cytoskeleton proteins Tropomyosin was shown to slow down depolymerization of actin with DNase I ( Hitchcock et al . , 1976 ) , to increase the resistance of actin ﬁ laments against cytochalasin D - and latrunculin - produced disassembly in an iso - forms - speci ﬁ c manner ( Suzuki and Mihashi , 1991 ; Creed et al . , 2008 ) . These effects do not have any special physiological importance but are widely used in studies on the mechanisms of actin dynamics . Physiologically important , tropomyosin protects actin ﬁ laments from disassembly with ADF / co ﬁ lin ( Ono and Ono , 2002 ; Mazur et al . , 2010 ) . A comprehensive study of biochemical and cell biological properties of tropomyosin and ADF / co ﬁ lin from Caenorhabditis elegans revealed that these proteins bound to F - actin in a mutually exclusive manner . Tropomyosin inhibited both the ADF / co ﬁ lin - induced actin depolymerization and enhancement of actin polymerization . In muscle cells , tropomyosin and ADF / co ﬁ lin were local - ized in different patterns . Within isolated native thin ﬁ laments , actin and tropomyosin were detected as major components , whereas ADF / co ﬁ lin was present at a trace amount . Puri ﬁ ed ADF / co ﬁ lin was unable to interact with the native thin ﬁ laments unless tropomyosin and other associated proteins were removed by high - salt extraction . Puri ﬁ ed tropomyosin was suf ﬁ cient to restore the resistance of the salt - extracted ﬁ laments to ADF / co ﬁ lin . These results suggest that tropomyosin is a physiological inhibitor of ADF / co ﬁ lin - dependent actin dynamics ( Ono and Ono , 2002 ) . However , both ADF / co ﬁ lin and tropomyosin are present in lamellipo - dia ( Hillberg et al . , 2006 ; Kiuchi et al . , 2007 ) and other cell compartments where their functions should be regulated . It is shown , for example , that increased expression of a single tropomyosin isoform , tropomyosin 1 , in U373MG astrocytoma cells led to multinucleated cells and a defective con - tractile ring . Overexpressed tropomyosin 1 was localized to the contractile ring and blocked accumulation of co ﬁ lin in the contractile ring , but the ef - fect of tropomyosin 1 on contractile ring function could be reversed by increasing the level of co ﬁ lin within the cells . These data indicate that cyto - skeleton function can dependent upon the antagonistic balance between co ﬁ lin and tropomyosin ( Thoms et al . , 2008 ) . On the other hand , some tropomyosin isoforms may cooperate with ADF / co ﬁ lin enhancing ﬁ lament dynamics ( Kuhn and Bamburg , 2008 ) . The balance can be maintained by Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 21 ARTICLE IN PRESS the capability of both tropomyosin and ADF / co ﬁ lin to modulate actin ﬁ la - ment conformation in an isoform - depending manner . Conceivable mecha - nisms for regulation of the tropomyosin e co ﬁ lin balance are discussed in detail elsewhere ( Kuhn and Bamburg , 2008 ) . It is also shown that in ﬁ ssion yeast , tropomyosin can be dissociated from actin ﬁ laments by cross - linking protein ﬁ mbrin , thus permitting co ﬁ lin - mediated severing . In the yeast cells , the balance between ﬁ mbrin and tropomyosin is important for both endocytic actin patch kinetics and con - tractile ring assembly during cytokinesis . High ﬁ mbrin concentrations pre - vent tropomyosin from associating with actin patches , allowing rapid patch turnover and motility . In the absence of ﬁ mbrin , ectopic localization of tropomyosin to actin patches increases patch lifetime while decreasing patch motility . Fimbrin and tropomyosin also play antagonistic roles during cytokinesis , where deletion of ﬁ mbrin rescues the contractile ring assembly defects caused by mutation of tropomyosin ( Skau and Kovar , 2010 ) . Apparently exclusive with tropomyosin seems to be Arp2 / 3 complex that binds to the side of an existing actin ﬁ lament nucleating a new ﬁ lament to form a branch . The presence of tropomyosin on an existing ﬁ lament inhibits the ac - tion of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Blanchoin et al . , 2001 ) . Then the absence of tropo - myosin would well correlate with the fast branched actin polymerization at the cell leading edge . However localization of tropomyosin at the cell leading edge is controversial . The presence of tropomyosin in lamellipodia and ﬁ lo - podia of spreading normal and transformed cells was determined by staining of cells with antibodies reacting with endogenous tropomyosins and through the expression of hemaglutinin - and green ﬂ uorescent protein - tagged tropo - myosin isoforms ( Hillberg et al . , 2006 ) . However , the other works showed that tropomyosin is generally absent from the lamellipodium and is present only in the lamellar array ( DesMarais et al . , 2002 ; Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ) . Nevertheless , tropomyosin was shown to inhibit lamellipodium for - mation and to facilitate the lamellar array while enhancing migration ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ) . To address the mechanism of these processes in vitro reconstituted motility assay using neuronal Wiskott e Aldrich Syndrome pro - tein ( N - WASP ) - coated beads was performed . These experiments showed that by competing with Arp2 / 3 complex in the branching reaction , tropo - myosin lowers the amount of Arp2 / 3 incorporated in the actin tail , but it does not cause debranching or dissociation of Arp2 / 3 from the actin mesh - work . Tropomyosin binding to the dendritic array was facilitated by ﬁ lament debranching , causing its enrichment at the rear of the actin tail , like in vivo ( Bugyi et al . , 2010 ) . Taken together , these data show that the interference of 22 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS tropomyosin with cytoskeletal proteins for binding to actin ﬁ lament may play an active role in the assembly of different actin ﬁ lament structures . 4 . 4 . 2 Direct interaction of tropomyosin with actin - binding proteins Early studies have also indicated that tropomyosin may inhibit fragmentation of F - actin by gelsolin . In these studies , both skeletal and smooth muscle tropomyosin partially protected F - actin from gelsolin - induced fragmenta - tion ( Ishikawa et al . , 1989 ; Dabrowska et al . , 1996 ) , whereas different non - muscle tropomyosins provided either full ( Kobayashi et al . , 1983 ; Pruliere et al . , 1986 ) or partial ( Fattoum et al . , 1983 ; Ishikawa et al . , 1989 ) protec - tion , or did not protect F - actin at all ( Ishikawa et al . , 1989 ) . At the same time , the presence of tropomyosin either along actin ﬁ laments or at their barbed ends did not prevent the binding of gelsolin to actin ( Gonsior and Hinssen , 1995 ; Dabrowska et al . , 1996 ; Michels et al . , 1998 ; Nyakern - Meazza et al . , 2002 ) . These observations suggested that tropomyosin can bind gelsolin , which , indeed , has been documented ( Koepf and Burtnick , 1992 ; Maciver et al . , 2000 ) . The interaction between gelsolin and tropomyosin was demonstrated by gelsolin e tropomyosin cross - linking , af ﬁ nity chromatography of gelsolin on immobilized tropomyosin , by the titration of ﬂ uorescein isothiocyanate - labeled gelsolin with tropomyosin ( Koepf and Burtnick , 1992 ) and by the effect of gelsolin on tropomyosin aggregation ( Maciver et al . , 2000 ) . In an attempt to reveal the sites involved in gelsolin e tropomyosin interaction , we have used limited proteolysis with enzymes whose cleavage sites on gel - solin have been known . Limited proteolysis indicated that the loop connecting the gelsolin do - mains G3 and G4 is involved in tropomyosin binding ( Figure 2 ) ( Khaitlina et al . , 2013 ) . Under nonpolymerizing conditions , binding of tropomyosin neither prevented the formation of a 2 : 1 actin e gelsolin complex , nor did it affect the nucleating activity of gelsolin in actin polymerization , likely as a result of competitive displacement of tropomyosin from the complex . To investigate the in ﬂ uence of tropomyosin on the actin ﬁ lament severing activity of gelsolin , we measured both the F - actin viscosity and the relative number concentrations of ﬁ laments after fragmentation by either gelsolin alone or by gelsolin e tropomyosin complexes . Our results show that even the saturation of actin ﬁ laments with tropomyosin does not signi ﬁ cantly reduce the severing activity of gelsolin , and hence does not protect the ﬁ l - aments from being fragmented ( Figure 2 ) . Tropomyosin will only confer a signi ﬁ cant resistance of actin ﬁ laments to gelsolin when in combination with Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 23 ARTICLE IN PRESS other actin - binding proteins , such as caldesmon ( Ishikawa et al . , 1989 ; Dabrowska et al . , 1996 ) or nebulin ( Gonsior and Hinssen , 1995 ) . In contrast , the major contribution of the observed reduction of gelsolin activity is a result of the complex formation of gelsolin and tropomyosin . These results suggest that tropomyosin is involved in the modulation of actin dynamics not via the protection of ﬁ laments against severing , but rather by binding gelsolin in solution to prevent it from severing and to promote the formation of new actin ﬁ laments ( Khaitlina et al . , 2013 ) . The direct interaction between tropomyosin and caldesmon was demonstrated by binding of tropomyosin to the caldesmon cross - linked Figure 2 Interaction of tropomyosin with gelsolin and F - actin severing . ( A ) Complex formation of gelsolin and tropomyosin as revealed by limited proteolysis with thermo - lysin . The presence of tropomyosin clearly inhibited gelsolin cleavage within the linker region between domains G3 and G4 . ( B , C ) Fragmentation of tropomyosin - saturated F - actin by gelsolin and gelsolin e tropomyosin complexes determined by viscometry ( B ) and ﬂ uorometry ( initial parts of F - actin depolymerization curves are shown ) ( C ) . Tak - ing into account the increased viscosity of actin / tropomyosin and a slower depolymer - ization of tropomyosin - saturated actin ﬁ laments than those of F - actin alone , the addition of gelsolin to F - actin / tropomyosin caused only a minor difference in the spe - ci ﬁ c viscosity or the ﬁ lament number compared to those generated with F - actin alone . In contrast , the same amount of tropomyosin preincubated with gelsolin reduced F - actin fragmentation by more than 50 % . The ﬁ gure is from Khaitlina et al . ( 2013 ) . 24 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Sepharose ( Smith et al . , 1987 ) and by interaction of caldesmon with tropo - myosin fragments suggested that the tropomyosin region between the resi - dues 142 and 227 is required for strong caldesmon binding ( Watson et al . , 1990 ) . Caldesmon induced conformational changes in tropomyosin bound to actin ( Horiuchi et al . , 1995 ) and increased af ﬁ nity of caldesmon to actin ( Smith et al . , 1987 ) . In turn , actin increased af ﬁ nity of tropomyosin to cal - desmon ( Horiuchi and Chacko , 1988 ) . In addition to their cooperation in smooth muscles as integral components of the contractile apparatus , tropo - myosin and caldesmon are involved in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton assembly and organization ( Wang , 2008 ) . Caldesmon and LMW tropomy - osin Tm5a were shown to synergistically modulate the conformation of actin during polymerization and maintain actin ﬁ laments in a more dynamic con ﬁ guration by binding to nascent actin ﬁ laments as they assemble . Both phosphorylated caldesmon and LMW tropomyosins , including LMW Tm5a , are found at the leading edge of cells ( and similar structures such as podosomes ) ( Wang and Colluccio , 2010 ) . One more actin - binding protein that interacts with tropomyosin to regulate actin dynamics is tropomodulin , the main pointed end actin - capping protein ( Weber et al . , 1994 ; Kostyukova et al . , 2006 ) . Tropomodu - lin can bind actin monomer and nucleate actin polymerization ( Yamashiro et al . , 2010 ) as well as bind the pointed end of actin ﬁ lament . However , af - ﬁ nity of tropomodulin for the pointed end is rather low , while in the pres - ence of tropomyosin , af ﬁ nity of tropomodulin for the pointed end increases 1000 - fold ( Weber et al . , 1994 ) . A molecular model for tropomyosin , tropo - modulin , and F - actin interactions proposed that one molecule of tropomo - dulin cooperatively binds two molecules of tropomyosin at the pointed end of F - actin ( Kostyukova et al . , 2006 ) . Thereby the ef ﬁ cient capping deter - mined by the af ﬁ nities of different tropomodulin isoforms to actin ﬁ laments may be regulated by their af ﬁ nity to tropomyosin associated with these ﬁ l - aments ( Uversky et al . , 2011 ) . 4 . 4 . 3 Partnership between tropomyosin and actin - binding proteins Tropomyosin can also function as an activator of formin , a processive capper of the fast - growing actin ﬁ lament end . Formins generate actin polymeriza - tion nuclei by stabilizing actin dimers through their homodimeric FH2 do - mains . The FH2 dimer stays processively attached to the barbed end of an actin ﬁ lament . Elongation is then stimulated by the proline - rich FH1 domain , which binds to and increases the local concentration of pro ﬁ lin - bound G - actin to enable its delivery to the barbed end ( Kovar , 2006 ; Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 25 ARTICLE IN PRESS Firat - Karalar and Welch , 2011 ) Binding between tropomyosin and formin FRL1 and mDia2 constructs containing the FH2 domain was shown by cir - cular dichroism measurements ( Wawro et al . , 2007 ) . The binding of the for - min mDia1 - FH2 dimer to the barbed end makes the actin ﬁ lament more ﬂ exible and the entire ﬁ lament more dynamic , whereas the structure of ﬂ ex - ible formin - bound actin ﬁ laments is stabilized by the binding of tropomy - osin ( Ujfalusi et al . , 2009 , 2012 ) . Binding of tropomyosin also activates actin ﬁ lament elongation at the barbed ﬁ lament end by reducing the capping function of formins , thereby making it a leakier but still processive capper ( Wawro et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 3 ) . Moreover , binding of tropomyosin to actin ﬁ laments inhibits the association of FRL1 - FH1FH2 with the ﬁ lament sides ( Wawro et al . , 2007 ) probably due to the conformational stabilization of actin ﬁ laments . In ﬁ ssion yeast , tropomyosin makes multiple contributions to contractile ring assembly during and after actin polymerization . Yeast formin Cdc12p Figure 3 Localization of tropomyosin and formin at the barbed end of the actin ﬁ la - ment . In contrast to the capping protein that blocks the barbed end dissociation and elongation ( left ) , formin is a leaky nucleator ( right ) . Tropomyosin binds along the actin ﬁ lament and interacts with formin - FH2 domain , thereby tropomyosin inhibits mono - mer dissociation but does not prevent the ﬁ lament elongation ( Wawro et al . , 2007 ; Skau et al . , 2009 ) . The ﬁ gure was reproduced from Wawro et al . ( 2007 ) . 26 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS can recruit yeast tropomyosin SpTm to actin ﬁ laments . Tropomyosin enhances processive elongation of the formin - nucleated ﬁ laments . Further - more , tropomyosin increases the length of formin - nucleated actin ﬁ laments by allowing them to anneal end - to - end and turned off formin - mediated elongation by “ trapping ” formin within annealed ﬁ laments or by dissociating formin from the barbed end ( Skau et al . , 2009 ) . In summary , tropomyosin is shown to compete with co ﬁ lin and Arp2 / 3 for binding to the actin ﬁ lament , to bind directly to gelsolin , calmesmon , and tropomodulin , or to bind to and be a partner for fragmin . This arrange - ment is , however , rather arbitrary . Involvement of other actin - binding pro - teins may smooth or even oppose the competition of tropomyosin with co ﬁ lin ; the direct interaction of tropomyosin with gelsolin restricts the gel - solin severing activity and even can promote the formation of new actin ﬁ l - aments ; binding of tropomyosin to caldesmon and tropomodulin increases af ﬁ nity of these proteins to actin . The mechanism of these interactions seems to involve tropomyosin - induced conformational changes along the actin ﬁ lament rather than steric hindrance . 5 . CONCLUDING REMARKS During the last decade , tropomyosin had passed a long way from being a structural muscle protein involved in the contractile activity of muscles and cellular micro ﬁ laments ( Perry , 2001 ) to a potentially universal regulator of actin cytoskeleton ( Vindin and Gunning , 2013 ) . Indeed , the expression of tropomyosin isoforms is under strong tissue speci ﬁ c and developmental con - trol . Tropomyosin isoforms are sorted speci ﬁ cally within the cell and cannot be substituted for each other without changes in cell morphology and func - tion . Changes in the tissue - speci ﬁ c synthesis of tropomyosin isoforms induced by the abolishment or alteration of control mechanisms usually coincide with alterations in cell morphology and function . These data sug - gest a functional speci ﬁ city for tropomyosin isoforms ( Gunning et al . , 2008 ; Vindin and Gunning , 2013 ) . May this functional speci ﬁ city be accounted for by tropomyosin properties ? Analysis of skeletal muscle actin e tropomyosin e troponin interactions suggested that the tropomyosin molecule located as a continuous ﬁ lament in each of the two grooves of the actin ﬁ lament is an ef ﬁ cient transmitter for the conformational effects induced by the binding proteins to be prop - agated along the ﬁ lament ( Perry , 2003 ) . The biochemical data on the effects Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 27 ARTICLE IN PRESS of tropomyosin on actin assembly and dynamics show that this regulation can be achieved both by the cooperative nature of tropomyosin itself and via the tropomyosin - induced allosteric conformational changes within the actin ﬁ lament , which also are transmitted cooperatively . Furthermore , tropomyosin regulates actin dynamics by binding with and modulating activity of other actin - binding proteins . These reactions may also involve tropomyosin - induced conformational changes within actin ﬁ laments . Com - parison of tropomyosin isoforms , though still not the systematic , indicates that they differ in af ﬁ nity to actin and cooperativity . On the other hand , actin isoforms differ from each other in polymerization kinetics , ﬁ lament dy - namics , and af ﬁ nity for tropomyosin , which , in addition , are modulated by actin - binding proteins ( Khaitlina , 2001 ; Rubenstein and Wen , 2014 ) . The combination of these properties provides at least some mechanisms underly - ing the regulatory role of tropomyosin in cytoskeleton dynamics . ACKNOWLEDGMENT Author ’ s work was supported in part by the Program “ Molecular and Cell Biology ” of the Russian Academy of Sciences . REFERENCES Andrianantoandro , E . , Blanchoin , L . , Sept , D . , McCammon , J . A . , Pollard , T . D . , 2001 . Kinetic mechanism of end - to - end annealing of actin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 312 , 721 e 730 . Barua , B . , Pamula , M . C . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2011 . Evolutionarily conserved sur - face residues constitute actin binding sites of tropomyosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 10150 e 10155 . Barua , B . , Fagnant , P . M . , Winkelmann , D . A . , Trybus , K . M . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2013 . A periodic pattern of evolutionarily conserved basic and acidic residues constitutes the binding interface of actin - tropomyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 9602 e 9609 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2001 . Inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated actin polymerization and branch formation by tropomyosin . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1300 e 1304 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . , Plastino , J . , 2014 . Actin dynamics , architec - ture and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 e 263 . Bing , W . , Razzaq , A . , Sparrow , J . , Marston , S . , 1998 . Tropomyosin and troponin regulation of wild type and E93K mutant actin ﬁ laments from Drosophila ﬂ ight muscle . Charge reversal on actin changes actin - tropomyosin from on to off state . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 15016 e 15021 . Bonafé , N . , Mathieu , M . , Kassab , R . , Chaussepied , P . , 1994 . Tropomyosin inhibits the glutaraldehyde - induced cross - link between the central 48 - kDa fragment of myosin head and segment 48 - 67 in actin subdomain 2 . Biochemistry 33 , 2594 e 2603 . Borovikov , Y . S . , Gusev , N . B . , 1983 . Effect of troponin - tropomyosin complex and Ca 2 þ on conformational changes in F - actin induced by myosin subfragment - 1 . Eur . J . Biochem . 136 , 363 e 369 . Bremel , R . D . , Weber , A . , 1972 . Cooperation within actin ﬁ lament in vertebrate skeletal muscle . Nat . New Biol . 238 , 97 e 101 . 28 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Broschat , K . O . , 1990 . Tropomyosin prevents depolymerization of actin ﬁ laments from the pointed end . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 21323 e 21329 . Broschat , K . O . , Weber , A . , Burgess , D . R . , 1989 . Tropomyosin stabilizes the pointed end of actin ﬁ laments by slowing depolymerization . Biochemistry 28 , 8501 e 8506 . Brown , J . H . , Zhou , Z . , Reshetnikova , L . , Robinson , H . , Yammani , R . D . , Tobacman , L . S . , Cohen , C . , 2005 . Structure of the mid - region of tropomyosin : bending and binding sites for actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 18878 e 18883 . Bugyi , B . , Carlier , M . F . , 2010 . Control of actin ﬁ lament treadmilling in cell motility . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 39 , 449 e 470 . Bugyi , B . , Didry , D . , Carlier , M . - F . , 2010 . How tropomyosin regulates lamellipodial actin - based motility : a combined biochemical and reconstituted motility approach . EMBO J . 29 , 14 e 26 . Carlier , M . - F . , 1998 . Control of actin dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 45 e 51 . Chalovich , J . M . , 2002 . Regulation of striated muscle contraction : a discussion . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 23 , 353 e 361 . Chen , F . C . , Ogut , O . , 2006 . Decline of contractility during ischemia - reperfusion injury : actin glutathionylation and its effect on allosteric interaction with tropomyosin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 290 , C719 e C727 . Chen , T . , Reisler , E . , 1991 . Interactions of myosin subfragment - 1 isozymes with G - actin . Biochemistry 30 , 4546 e 4552 . Chhabra , E . S . , Higgs , H . N . , 2007 . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1110 e 1121 . Cooley , B . C . , Bergtrom , G . , 2001 . Multiple combinations of alternatively spliced exons in rat tropomyosin - a gene MRNA : evidence for 20 new isoforms in adult tissues and cultured cells . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 390 , 71 e 77 . Creed , S . J . , Bryce , N . , Naumanen , P . , Weinberger , R . , Lappalainen , P . , Stehn , J . , Gunning , P . , 2008 . Tropomyosin isoforms de ﬁ ne distinct micro ﬁ lament populations with different drug susceptibility . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 709 e 720 . Craig , R . , Lehman , W . , 2001 . Crossbridge and tropomyosin positions observed in native , interacting thick and thin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 311 , 1027 e 1036 . Cranz - Mileva , S . , Pamula , M . C . , Barua , B . , Desai , B . , Hong , Y . H . , Russell , J . , Trent , R . , Wang , J . , Walworth , N . C . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2013 . A molecular evolution approach to study the roles of tropomyosin in ﬁ ssion yeast . PLoS One 8 , e76726 . Dalle - Donne , I . , Giustarini , D . , Rossi , R . , Colombo , R . , Milzani , A . , 2003 . Reversible S - glutathionylation of Cys 374 regulates actin ﬁ lament formation by inducing structural changes in the actin molecule . Free Radic . Biol . Med . 34 , 23 e 32 . Dabrowska , R . , Hinssen , H . , Golanckiewicz , B . , Nowak , E . , 1996 . Modulation of gelsolin - induced actin - ﬁ lament severing by caldesmon and tropomyosin and the effect of these pro - teins on the actin activation of myosin Mg 2 þ - ATPase activity . Biochem . J . 315 , 753 e 759 . De La Cruz , E . M . , 2005 . Co ﬁ lin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin ﬁ laments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 346 , 557 e 564 . DesMarais , V . , Ichetovkin , I . , Condeelis , J . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2002 . Spatial regu - lation of actin dynamics : a tropomyosin free , actin - rich compartment at the leading edge . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4649 e 4660 . Desouza , M . , Gunning , P . W . , Stehn , J . R . , 2012 . The actin cytoskeleton as a sensor and mediator of apoptosis . BioArchitecture 2 ( 3 ) , 75 e 87 . Dominguez , R . , 2009 . Actin ﬁ lament nucleation and elongation factors e structure e function relationships . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 44 , 351 e 366 . Dominguez , R . , 2011 . Tropomyosin : the gatekeeper ’ s view of the actin ﬁ lament revealed . Biophys . J . 100 , 797 e 798 . Dominguez , R . , Holmes , K . C . , 2011 . Actin structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 40 , 169 e 186 . Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 29 ARTICLE IN PRESS Drabikowski , W . , Nowak , E . , 1968 . Studies on the interaction of F - actin with tropomyosin . Eur . J . Biochem . 5 , 376 e 384 . Drewes , G . , Faulstich , H . , 1993 . Cooperative effects on ﬁ lament stability in actin modi ﬁ ed at the C - terminus by substitution or truncation . Eur . J . Biochem . 212 , 247 e 253 . Dufour , C . , Weinberger , R . P . , Schevzov , G . , Jeffrey , P . L . , Gunning , P . , 1998 . Splicing of two internal and four carboxyl - terminal alternative exons in nonmuscle tropomyosin 5 pre - mRNA is independently regulated during development . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 18547 e 18555 . Eaton , B . L . , 1976 . Tropomyosin binding to F - actin induced by myosin heads . Science 192 , 1337 e 1339 . Eaton , B . L . , Kominz , D . R . , Eisenberg , E . , 1975 . Correlation between the inhibition of the acto - heavy meromyosin ATPase and the binding of tropomyosin to F - actin : effects of Mg 2 þ , KCl , troponin I , and troponin C . Biochemistry 14 , 2718 e 2725 . Fattoum , A . , Hartwig , J . H . , Stossel , T . P . , 1983 . Isolation and some structural and functional properties of macrophage tropomyosin . Biochemistry 22 , 1187 e 1193 . Fievez , S . , Carlier , M . - F . , Pantaloni , D . , 1997 . Mechanism of myosin subfragment - 1 - induced assembly of CaG - actin and MgG - actin into F - actin - S1 - decorated ﬁ laments . Biochemistry 36 , 11843 e 11850 . Firat - Karalar , E . N . , Welch , M . D . , 2011 . New mechanisms and functions of actin nucleation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 4 e 13 . Fujime , S . , Ishiwata , S . , 1971 . Dynamic study of F - actin by quasielastic scattering of laser light . J . Mol . Biol . 62 , 251 e 265 . Gali (cid:3) nska - Rakoczy , A . , Wawro , B . , Strzelecka - Go 1 aszewska , H . , 2009 . New aspects of the spontaneous polymerization of actin in the presence of salts . J . Mol . Biol . 387 , 869 e 882 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schroder , G . F . , Egelman , E . H . , 2010 . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 e 1323 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Vos , M . R . , Schroder , G . F . , Egelman , E . H . , 2015 . Near - atomic resolution for one state of F - actin . Structure 23 , 173 e 182 . Geeves , M . A . , Lehrer , S . S . , 1994 . Dynamics of the muscle thin ﬁ lament regulatory switch : the size of the cooperative unit . Biophys . J . 67 , 273 e 282 . Geeves , M . A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Gunning , P . W . , 2015 . A systematic nomencla - ture for mammalian tropomyosin isoforms . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 36 , 147 e 153 . Goldmann , W . H . , 2000 . Binding of tropomyosin e troponin to actin increases ﬁ lament bending stiffness . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 276 , 1225 e 1228 . Grant , N . J . , Oriol - Audit , C . , 1985 . In ﬂ uence of the polyamine spermine on the organiza - tion of cortical ﬁ laments in isolated cortices of Xenopus laevis eggs . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 36 , 239 e 246 . Green ﬁ eld , N . J . , Huang , Y . J . , Swapna , G . V . , Bhattacharya , A . , Rapp , B . , Singh , A . , Montelione , G . T . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2006 . Solution NMR structure of the junction between tropomyosin molecules : implications for actin binding and regulation . J . Mol . Biol . 364 , 80 e 96 . Goll , D . E . , Suzuki , A . , Temple , J . , Holmes , G . R . , 1972 . Studies on puri ﬁ ed alpha - actinin . I . Effect of temperature and tropomyosin on the alpha - actinin - F - actin interaction . J . Mol . Biol . 67 , 469 e 488 . Gonsior , S . , Hinssen , H . , 1995 . Exogenous gelsolin binds to sarcomeric thin ﬁ laments without severing . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 31 , 196 e 206 . Gunning , P . , O ’ Neill , G . , Hardeman , E . , 2008 . Tropomyosin - based regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in time and space . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 1 e 35 . Hayakawa , K . , Sakakibara , S . , Sokabe , M . , Tatsumi , H . , 2014 . Single - molecule imaging and kinetic analysis of cooperative co ﬁ lin - actin ﬁ lament interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 9810 e 9815 . 30 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Helfman , D . M . , Flynn , P . , Khan , P . , Saed , A . , 2008 . Tropomyosin as a regulator of cancer cell transformation . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 124 e 131 . Hillberg , L . , Zhao Rathje , L . - S . , Nyakern - Meazza , M . , Helfand , B . , Goldman , R . D . , Schutt , C . E . , Lindberg , U . , 2006 . Tropomyosins are present in lamellipodia of motile cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 399 e 409 . Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2008 . Tropomyosin : function follows structure . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 60 e 72 . Hitchcock , S . E . , Carisson , L . , Lindberg , U . , 1976 . Depolymerization of F - actin by deoxyri - bonuclease I . Cell 7 , 531 e 542 . Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Sampath , P . , Pollard , T . D . , 1988 . Tropomyosin inhibits the rate of actin polymerization by stabilizing actin ﬁ laments . Biochemistry 27 , 9182 e 9185 . Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Singh , A . , 2010 . What makes tropomyosin an actin binding protein ? J . Struct . Biol . 170 , 319 e 324 . Hodgkinson , J . L . , el - Mezgueldi , M . , Craig , R . , Vibert , P . , Marston , S . B . , Lehman , W . , 1997 . 3 - D image reconstruction of reconstituted smooth muscle thin ﬁ laments contain - ing calponin : visualization of interactions between F - actin and calponin . J . Mol . Biol . 273 , 150 e 159 . Holmes , K . C . , Popp , D . , Gebhard , W . , Kabsch , W . , 1990 . Atomic model of the actin ﬁ lament . Nature 347 , 44 e 49 . Holmes , K . C . , Lehman , W . , 2008 . Gestalt - binding of tropomyosin to actin ﬁ laments . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 29 , 213 e 219 . Horiuchi , K . Y . , Chacko , S . , 1988 . Interaction between caldesmon and tropomyosin in the presence and absence of smooth muscle actin . Biochemistry 27 , 8388 e 8393 . Horiuchi , K . Y . , Wang , Z . , Chacko , S . , 1995 . Inhibition of smooth muscle actomyosin ATPase by caldesmon is associated with caldesmon - induced conformational changes in tropomyosin bound to actin . Biochemistry 34 , 16815 e 16820 . Isambert , H . , Venier , P . , Maggs , A . C . , Fattoum , A . , Kassab , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Carlier , M . - F . , 1995 . Flexibility of actin ﬁ laments derived from thermal ﬂ uctuations . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 11437 e 11444 . Ishikawa , R . , Yamashiro , S . , Matsumura , F . , 1989 . Differential modulation of actin - severing activity of gelsolin by multiple isoforms of cultured rat cell tropomyosin . Potentiation of protective ability of tropomyosins by 83 - kDa nonmuscle caldesmon . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 7490 e 7497 . Iwasa , J . H . , Mullins , R . D . , 2007 . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - ﬁ lament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 , 395 e 406 . Janco , M . , Suphamungmee , W . , Li , X . , Lehman , W . , Lehrer , S . S . , Geeves , M . A . , 2013 . Polymorphism in tropomyosin structure and function . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 34 , 177 e 187 . Kabsch , W . , Mannherz , H . G . , Suck , D . , Pai , E . F . , Holmes , K . C . , 1990 . Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 , 37 e 44 . Kawamura , M . , Maruyama , K . , 1970 . Electron microscopic particle length of F - actin poly - merized in vitro . J . Biochem . 67 , 437 e 457 . Kee , A . J . , Hardeman , E . C . , 2008 . Tropomyosins in skeletal muscle diseases . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 143 e 157 . Khaitlina , S . Y . , 2001 . Functional speci ﬁ city of actin isoforms . Intern . Rev . Cytol . 202 , 35 e 98 . Khaitlina , S . Y . , Hinssen , H . , 1997 . Conformational changes in actin induced by its interac - tion with gelsolin . Biophys . J . 73 , 920 e 937 . Khaitlina , S . Y . , Strzelecka - Goaszewska , H . , 2002 . Role of the DNase - I - binding loop in dy - namic properties of actin ﬁ lament . Biophys . J . 82 , 321 e 334 . Khaitlina , S . Y . , Strzelecka - Go 1 aszewska , H . , 2003 . Effects of tropomyosin on dynamics of actin ﬁ laments . Biophys . J . 84 , 480a . Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 31 ARTICLE IN PRESS Khaitlina , S . , Fitz , H . , Hinssen , H . , 2013 . The interaction of gelsolin with tropomyosin mod - ulates actin dynamics . FEBS J . 280 , 4600 e 4616 . Kirwan , J . P . , Hodges , R . S . , 2010 . Critical interactions in the stability control region of tropomyosin . J . Struct . Biol . 170 , 294 e 306 . Kiuchi , T . , Ohashi , K . , Kurita , S . , Mizuno , K . , 2007 . Co ﬁ lin promotes stimulus - induced lamellipodium formation by generating an abundant supply of actin monomers . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 465 e 476 . Kobayashi , R . , Nonomura , Y . , Okano , A . , Tashima , Y . , 1983 . Puri ﬁ cation and some prop - erties of porcine kidney tropomyosin . J . Biochem . 94 , 171 e 179 . Koepf , E . K . , Burtnick , L . D . , 1992 . Interaction of plasma gelsolin with tropomyosin . FEBS Lett . 309 , 56 e 58 . Kojima , H . , Ishijima , A . , Yanagida , T . , 1994 . Direct measurement of stiffness of single actin ﬁ laments with and without tropomyosin by in vitro nanomanipulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 12962 e 12966 . Korman , V . L . , Hatch , V . , Dixon , K . Y . , Craig , R . , Lehman , W . , Tobacman , L . S . , 2000 . An actin subdomain 2 mutation that impairs thin ﬁ lament regulation by troponin and tropomyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 22470 e 22478 . Korn , E . D . , Carlier , M . - F . , Pantaloni , D . , 1987 . Actin polymerization and ATP hydrolysis . Science 238 , 638 e 644 . Kostyukova , A . S . , Choy , A . , Rapp , B . A . , 2006 . Tropomodulin binds two tropomyosins : a novel model for actin ﬁ lament capping . Biochemistry 45 ( 39 ) , 12068 e 12075 . Kovar , D . R . , 2006 . Molecular details of formin - mediated actin assembly . Cur . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 11 e 17 . Kuang , B . , Rubenstein , P . A . , 1997 . Beryllium ﬂ uoride and phalloidin restore polymerizabil - ity of a mutant yeast actin ( V266G , L267G ) with severely decreased hydrophobicity in a subdomain 3 / 4 loop . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 1237 e 1247 . Kuhn , T . B . , Bamburg , J . R . , 2008 . Tropomyosin and ADF / co ﬁ lin as collaborators and competitors . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 232 e 249 . Kwok , S . C . , Hodges , R . S . , 2004 . Stabilizing and destabilizing clusters in the hydrophobic core of long two - stranded alpha - helical coiled - coils . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 21576 e 21588 . Lal , A . A . , Korn , E . D . , 1986 . Effect of muscle tropomyosin on the kinetics of polymerization of muscle actin . Biochemistry 25 , 1154 e 1158 . Landis , C . A . , Bobkova , A . , Homsher , E . , Tobacman , L . S . , 1997 . The active state of the thin ﬁ lament is destabilized by an internal deletion in tropomyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 14051 e 14056 . Landis , C . A . , Back , N . , Homsher , E . , Tobacman , L . S . , 1999 . Effects of tropomyosin internal deletions on thin ﬁ lament function . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 31279 e 31285 . Lees , J . G . , Bach , C . T . T . , O ’ Neill , G . M . , 2011 . Interior decoration . Tropomyosin in actin dynamics and cell migration . Cell Adh . Migr 5 , 181 e 186 . Lees , J . G . , Ching , Y . W . , Adams , D . H . , Bach , C . T . T . , Samuel , M . S . , Kee , A . J . , Hardeman , E . C . , Gunning , P . , Cowin , A . J . , O ’ Neill , G . M . , 2013 . Tropomyosin regulates cell migration dur - ing skin wound healing . J . Invest . Dermatol . 133 , 1330 e 1339 . Lees - Miller , J . P . , Helfman , D . M . , 1991 . The molecular basis for tropomyosin isoform diversity . Bioessays 13 , 429 e 437 . Lehman , W . , Craig , R . , Vibert , P . , 1994 . Ca 2 þ - induced tropomyosin movement in Limulus thin ﬁ laments revealed by three - dimensional reconstruction . Nature 368 , 65 e 67 . Lehman , W . , Vibert , P . , Uman , P . , Craig , R . , 1995 . Steric - blocking by tropomyosin visu - alized in relaxed vertebrate muscle thin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 251 , 191 e 196 . Lehman , W . , Craig , R . , 2008 . Tropomyosin and the steric mechanism of muscle regulation . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 95 e 109 . Lehman , W . , Orzechowski , M . , Li , X . E . , Fischer , S . , Raunser , S . , 2013 . Gestalt - binding of tropo - myosin on actin during thin ﬁ lament activation . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 34 , 155 e 163 . 32 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Lehman , W . , Li , X . E . , Orzechowski , M . , Fischer , S . , 2014 . The structural dynamics of a - tropomyosin on F - actin shape the overlap complex between adjacent tropomyosin molecules . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 552 - 553 , 68 e 73 . Lehrer , S . S . , Geeves , M . A . , 1998 . The muscle thin ﬁ lament as a classical cooperative / allosteric regulatory system . J . Mol . Biol . 277 , 1081 e 1089 . Li , X . E . , Holmes , K . C . , Lehman , W . , Jung , H . S . , Fischer , S . , 2010 . The shape and ﬂ exibility of tropomyosin coiled coils : implications for actin ﬁ lament assembly and regulation . J . Mol . Biol . 395 , 327 e 339 . Li , X . E . , Tobacman , L . S . , Mun , J . Y . , Craig , R . , Fischer , S . , Lehman , W . , 2011 . Tropomy - osin position on F - actin revealed by EM reconstruction and computational chemistry . Biophys . J . 100 , 1005 e 1013 . Little ﬁ eld , R . , Almenar - Queralt , A . , Fowler , V . M . , 2001 . Actin dynamics at pointed ends regulates thin ﬁ lament length in striated muscle . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 544 e 551 . Lorenz , M . , Poole , K . J . , Popp , D . , Rosenbaum , G . , Holmes , K . C . , 1995 . An atomic model of the unregulated thin ﬁ lament obtained by X - ray ﬁ ber diffraction on oriented actin - tropomyosin gels . J . Mol . Biol . 246 , 108 e 119 . Maciver , S . K . , Ternent , D . , McLaughlin , P . J . , 2000 . Domain 2 of gelsolin binds directly to tropomyosin . FEBS Lett . 473 , 71 e 75 . Marston , S . , El - Mezgueldi , M . , 2008 . Role of tropomyosin in the regulation of contraction in smooth muscle . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 110 e 123 . Marston , S . , Memo , M . , Messer , A . , Papadaki , M . , Nowak , K . , McNamara , E . , Ong , R . , El - Mezgueldi , M . , Li , X . , Lehman , W . , 2013 . Mutations in repeating structural motifs of tropomyosin cause gain of function in skeletal muscle myopathy patients . Hum . Mol . Genet . 22 , 4978 e 4987 . Matyushenko , A . M . , Artemova , N . V . , Shchepkin , D . V . , Kopylova , G . V . , Bershitsky , S . Y . , Tsaturyan , A . K . , Sluchanko , N . N . , Levitsky , D . I . , 2014 . Structural and functional effects of two stabilizing substitutions , D137L and G126R , in the middle part of a - tropomyosin molecule . FEBS J . 281 , 2004 e 2016 . Maytum , R . , Lehrer , S . S . , Geeves , M . A . , 1999 . Cooperativity and switching within the three - state model of muscle regulation . Biochemistry 38 , 1102 e 1110 . Mazur , A . J . , Gremm , D . , Dansranjavin , T . , Litwin , M . , Jockusch , B . M . , Wegner , A . , Weeds , A . G . , Mannherz , H . G . , 2010 . Modulation of actin ﬁ lament dynamics by actin binding proteins residing in lamellipodia . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 402 e 413 . McKillop , D . F . , Geeves , M . A . , 1993 . Regulation of the interaction between actin and myosin subfragment 1 : evidence for three states of the thin ﬁ lament . Biophys . J . 65 , 693 e 701 . Memo , M . , Marston , S . , 2013 . Skeletal muscle myopathy mutations at the actin tropomy - osin interface that cause gain - or loss - of - function . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 34 , 165 e 169 . Michels , A . , Remmert , K . , Khaitlina , S . , Hinssen , H . , 1998 . Competitive interaction of tropomyosin and gelsolin on actin ﬁ laments . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 19 , 290 . Miki , M . , Wahl , P . , Auchet , J . C . , 1982 . Fluorescence anisotropy of labeled F - actin : in ﬂ uence of divalent cations on the interaction between F - actin and myosin heads . Biochemistry 21 , 3661 e 3665 . Miller , L . , Phillips , M . , Reisler , E . , 1988 . Polymerization of G - actin by myosin subfragment 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 1996 e 2002 . Minakata , S . , Maeda , K . , Oda , N . , Wakabayashi , K . , Nitanai , Y . , Maeda , Y . , 2008 . Two - crystal structures of tropomyosin C - terminal fragment 176 e 273 : exposure of the hydrophobic core to the solvent destabilizes the tropomyosin molecule . Biophys . J . 95 , 710 e 719 . Moraczewska , J . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2000 . Independent functions for N - and C - termini in the overlap region of tropomyosin . Biochemistry 39 , 6891 e 6897 . Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 33 ARTICLE IN PRESS Moraczewska , J . , Gruszczynska - Biegala , J . , Redowicz , M . J . , Khaitlina , S . Y . , Strzelecka - Golaszewska , H . , 2004 . The DNase - I binding loop of actin may play a role in the regu - lation of actin - myosin interaction by tropomyosin / troponin . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 31197 e 31204 . Muhlrad , A . , Cheung , P . , Phan , B . C . , Miller , C . , Reisler , E . , 1994 . Dynamic properties of actin . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 11852 e 11858 . Muhlrad , A . , Grintsevich , E . , Reisler , E . , 2011 . Polycation induced actin bundles . Biophys . Chem . 155 , 45 e 51 . Murphy , D . B . , Gray , R . V . , Grasser , W . A . , Pollard , T . D . , 1988 . Direct demonstration of actin ﬁ lament annealing in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 1947 e 1954 . Nyakern - Meazza , M . , Narayan , K . , Schutt , C . E . , Lindberg , U . , 2002 . Tropomyosin and gelsolin cooperate in controlling the micro ﬁ lament system . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 28774 e 28779 . Nevzorov , I . A . , Levitsky , D . I . , 2011 . Tropomyosin : double helix from the protein world . Biochemistry ( Mosc ) 76 , 1507 e 1527 . Nevzorov , I . A . , Nikolaeva , O . P . , Kainov , Y . A . , Redwood , C . S . , Levitsky , D . I . , 2011 . Conserved noncanonical residue Gly - 126 confers instability to the middle part of the tropomyosin molecule . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 15766 e 15772 . O ’ Neill , G . M . , Stehn , J . , Gunning , P . W . , 2008 . Tropomyosins as interpreters of the signal - ling environment to regulate the local cytoskeleton . Semin . Cancer Biol . 18 , 35 e 44 . O ’ Neill , G . M . , 2011 . Scared stiff . Stabilizing the actin cytoskeleton to stop invading cancer cells in their tracks . BioArchitecture 1 ( 1 ) , 29 e 31 . Ono , S . , 2010 . Dynamic regulation of sarcomeric actin ﬁ laments in striated muscle . Cytoskel - eton ( Hoboken ) 67 , 677 e 692 . Ono , S . , Ono , K . , 2002 . Tropomyosin inhibits ADF / co ﬁ lin - dependent actin ﬁ lament dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 1065 e 1076 . Oosawa , F . , 1980 . The ﬂ exibility of F - actin . Biophys . Chem . 11 , 443 e 446 . Oosawa , F . , Maeda , J . , Fujime , S . , Ishiwata , S . , Yanagida , T . , Taniguchi , M . , 1977 . Dynamic characteristics of F - actin and thin ﬁ lament in vivo and in vitro . J . Mechanochem . Cell Motil . 4 , 63 e 78 . Orlova , A . , Egelman , E . H . , 1992 . Structural basis for the destabilization of F - actin by phos - phate release following ATP hydrolysis . J . Mol . Biol . 227 , 1043 e 1053 . Orlova , A . , Egelman , E . H . , 1993 . A conformational change in the actin subunit can change the ﬂ exibility of the actin ﬁ lament . J . Mol . Biol . 232 , 334 e 341 . Orlova , A . , Prochniewicz , E . , Egelman , E . H . , 1995 . Structural dynamics of F - actin : II . Cooperativity in structural transitions . J . Mol . Biol . 245 , 598 e 607 . Orlova , A . , Egelman , E . H . , 1997 . Cooperative rigor binding of myosin to actin is a function of F - actin structure . J . Mol . Biol . 265 , 469 e 474 . Orzechowski , M . , Li , X . E . , Fischer , S . , Lehman , W . , 2014 . An atomic model of the tropo - myosin cable on F - actin . Biophys . J . 107 , 694 e 699 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . , Carlier , M . - F . , 2001 . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 e 1506 . Patchell , V . B . , Gallon , C . E . , Hodgkin , M . A . , Fattoum , A . , Perry , S . V . , Levine , B . A . , 2002 . The inhibitory region of troponin - I alters the ability of F - actin to interact with different segments of myosin . Eur . J . Biochem . 269 , 5088 e 5100 . Patchell , V . B . , Gallon , C . E . , Evans , J . S . , Gao , Y . , Perry , S . V . , Levine , B . A . , 2005 . The reg - ulatory effects of tropomyosin and troponin - I on the interaction of myosin loop regions with F - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 14469 e 14475 . Pato , M . D . , Mak , A . S . , Smillie , L . B . , 1981 . Fragments of rabbit striated muscle a - tropomyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 256 , 593 e 601 . Perry , S . V . , 2001 . Vertebrate tropomyosin : distribution , properties and function . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 22 , 5 e 49 . 34 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Perry , S . V . , 2003 . What is the role of tropomyosin in the regulation of muscle contraction ? J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 24 , 593 e 596 . Pirani , A . , Xu , C . , Hatch , V . , Craig , R . , Tobacman , L . S . , Lehman , W . , 2005 . Single particle analysis of relaxed and activated muscle thin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 346 , 761 e 772 . Pollard , T . D . , 2007 . Regulation of actin ﬁ lament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 e 457 . Pollard , T . D . , Borisy , G . G . , 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁ laments . Cell 112 , 453 e 465 . Pollard , T . D . , Cooper , J . A . , 2009 . Actin a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 e 1212 . Pragay , D . A . , Gergely , J . , 1968 . Effect of tropomyosin on the polymerization of ATP - G - actin and ADP - G - actin . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 125 , 727 e 733 . Prochniewicz , E . , Katayama , E . , Yanagida , T . , Thomas , D . D . , 1993 . Cooperativity in F - actin : chemical modi ﬁ cations of actin monomers affect the functional interactions of myosin with unmodi ﬁ ed monomers in the same actin ﬁ lament . Biophys . J . 65 , 113 e 123 . Prochniewicz , E . , Zhang , Q . , Janmey , P . A . , Thomas , D . D . , 1996 . Cooperativity in F - actin : binding of gelsolin at the barbed end affects structure and dynamics of the whole ﬁ lament . J . Mol . Biol . 260 , 756 e 766 . Pruliere , G . , Fuller , S . D . , Weeds , A . G . , d ’ Albis , A . , der Terrossian , E . , 1986 . Pig platelet tropo - myosin : interactions with the other thin - ﬁ lament proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 192 , 815 e 830 . Resetar , A . M . , Stephens , J . M . , Chalovich , J . M . , 2002 . Troponin - tropomyosin : an allosteric switch or a steric blocker ? Biophys . J . 83 , 1039 e 1049 . Rich , S . A . , Estes , J . E . , 1976 . Detection of conformational changes in actin by proteolytic digestion : evidence for a new monomeric species . J . Mol . Biol . 104 , 777 e 792 . Rubenstein , P . A . , Wen , K . K . , 2014 . Insights into the effects of disease - causing mutations in human actins . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 71 , 211 e 229 . Schevzov , G . , Curthoys , N . M . , Gunning , P . W . , Fath , T . , 2012 . Functional diversity of actin cytoskeleton in neurons and its regulation by tropomyosin . Int . Rev . Cell . Mol . Biol . 298 , 33 e 94 . Schwyter , D . , Phillips , M . , Reisler , E . , 1989 . Subtilisin - cleaved actin : polymerization and interaction with myosin subfragment 1 . Biochemistry 28 , 5885 e 5895 . Shah , V . , Braverman , R . , Prasad , G . L . , 1998 . Suppression of neoplastic transformation and regulation of cytoskeleton by tropomyosins . Somat . Cell Mol . Genet . 24 , 273 e 280 . Singh , A . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2009 . A peek into tropomyosin binding and unfold - ing on the actin ﬁ lament . PLoS One 4 , e6336 . Skau , C . T . , Neidt , E . M . , Kovar , D . R . , 2009 . Role of tropomyosin in formin - mediated con - tractile ring assembly in ﬁ ssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2160 e 2173 . Skau , C . T . , Kovar , D . R . , 2010 . Competition between ﬁ mbrin and tropomyosin regulates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in ﬁ ssion yeast . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1415 e 1422 . Smith , C . W . , Pritchard , K . , Marston , S . B . , 1987 . The mechanism of Ca 2 þ regulation of vascular smooth muscle thin ﬁ laments by caldesmon and calmodulin . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 116 e 122 . Strzelecka - Golaszewska , H . , 2001 . Divalent cations , nucleotides , and actin structure . Results Probl . Cell Differ . 32 , 23 e 41 . Strzelecka - Golaszewska , H . , Wozniak , A . , Hult , T . , Lindberg , U . , 1996 . Effect of the type of divalent cation , Ca 2 þ or Mg 2 þ , bound at the high af ﬁ nity site and of the ionic compo - sition of the solution on the structure of F - actin . Biochem . J . 316 , 713 e 721 . Suetsugu , S . , 2013 . Activation of nucleation promoting factors for directional actin ﬁ lament elongation : allosteric regulation and multimerization on the membrane . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 24 , 267 e 271 . Sumida , J . P . , Wu , E . , Lehrer , S . S . , 2008 . Conserved Asp - 137 imparts ﬂ exibility to tropomy - osin and affects function . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 6728 e 6734 . Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 35 ARTICLE IN PRESS Sun , H . Q . , Kwiatkowska , K . , Yin , H . I . , 1995 . Actin monomer binding proteins . Curr . Biol . 7 , 102 e 110 . Suzuki , N . , Mihashi , K . , 1989 . Subunit ﬂ ow in F - actin under steady - state conditions appli - cation of a novel method to determination of the rate of subunit exchange of F - actin at the terminals . Biophys . Chem . 33 , 177 e 193 . Suzuki , N . , Mihashi , K . , 1991 . Binding mode of cytochalasin B to F - actin is altered by lateral binding of regulatory proteins . J . Biochem . 109 , 19 e 23 . Teubner , A . , Wegner , A . , 1996 . The rate of annealing of actin tropomyosin ﬁ laments de - pends strongly on the length of the ﬁ laments . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1297 , 214 e 218 . Thoms , J . A . I . , Loch , H . M . , Bamburg , J . R . , Gunning , P . W . , Weinberger , R . P . , 2008 . A tropomyosin 1 induced defect in cytokinesis can be rescued by elevated expression of co ﬁ lin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 979 e 990 . Tobacman , L . , 2008 . Cooperative binding of tropomyosin to actin . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 85 e 94 . Tobacman , L . , Butters , C . A . , 2000 . A new model of cooperative myosin - thin ﬁ lament binding . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 27587 e 27593 . Ueno , H . , 1984 . Local structural changes in tropomyosin detected by a trypsin - probe method . Biochemistry 23 , 4791 e 4798 . Ujfalusi , Z . , Vig , A . , Hild , G . , Nyitrai , M . , 2009 . Effect of tropomyosin on formin - bound actin ﬁ laments . Biophys . J . 96 , 162 e 168 . Ujfalusi , Z . , Kovacs , M . , Nagy , N . T . , Barko , S . , Hild , G . , Luka , A . , Nyitrai , M . , Bugyi , B . , 2012 . Myosin and tropomyosin stabilize the conformation of formin - nucleated actin Filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 31894 e 31904 . Uversky , V . N . , Shah , S . P . , Gritsyna , Y . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , Kostyukova , A . S . , 2011 . Systematic analysis of tropomodulin / tropomyosin interactions uncovers ﬁ ne - tuned bind - ing speci ﬁ city of intrinsically disordered proteins . J . Mol . Recognit . 24 , 647 e 655 . Vibert , P . , Craig , R . , Lehman , W . , 1993 . Three - dimensional reconstruction of caldesmon - containing smooth muscle thin ﬁ laments . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 313 e 321 . Vibert , P . , Craig , R . , Lehman , W . , 1997 . Steric - model for activation of muscle thin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 266 , 8 e 14 . Vindin , H . , Gunning , P . , 2013 . Cytoskeletal tropomyosins : choreographers of actin ﬁ lament functional diversity . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 34 , 261 e 274 . von der Ecken , J . , M € uller , M . , Lehman , W . , Manstein , D . J . , Penczek , P . A . , Raunser , S . , 2014 . Structure of the F - actin e tropomyosin complex . Nature . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature14033 ( Epub ahead of print ) . Walsh , T . P . , Wegner , A . , 1980 . Effect of the state of oxidation of cysteine 190 of tropomy - osin on the assembly of the actin - tropomyosin complex . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 626 , 79 e 87 . Wang , C . - L . A . , 2008 . Caldesmon and the regulation of cytoskeletal functions . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 250 e 272 . Wang , C . L . , Coluccio , L . M . , 2010 . New insights into the regulation of the actin cytoskel - eton by tropomyosin . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 281 , 91 e 128 . Watson , M . H . , Kuhn , A . E . , Novy , R . E . , Lin , J . J . , Mak , A . S . , 1990 . Caldesmon - binding sites on tropomyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 18860 e 18866 . Wawro , B . , Khaitlina , S . Yu , Galinska - Rakoczy , A . , Strzelecka - Golaszewska , H . , 2005 . Role of DNase - I - binding loop in myosin subfragment 1 - induced actin polymerization . Impli - cations to the polymerization mechanism . Biophys . J . 88 , 2883 e 2896 . Wawro , B . , Green ﬁ eld , N . J . , Wear , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . , Higgs , H . N . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2007 . Tropomyosin regulates elongation by formin at the fast - growing end of the actin ﬁ lament . Biochemistry 46 , 8146 e 8155 . Weber , A . , Pennise , C . R . , Babcock , G . G . , Fowler , V . M . , 1994 . Tropomodulin caps the pointed ends of actin ﬁ laments . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1627 e 1635 . 36 So ﬁ a Yu . Khaitlina ARTICLE IN PRESS Wegner , A . , 1976 . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J . Mol . Biol . 108 , 139 e 150 . Wegner , A . , 1979 . Equilibrium of the actin - tropomyosin interaction . J . Mol . Biol . 131 , 839 e 853 . Wegner , A . , 1980 . The interaction of alpha , alpha - and alpha , beta - tropomyosin with actin ﬁ laments . FEBS Lett . 119 , 245 e 248 . Wegner , A . , 1982 . Kinetic analysis of actin assembly suggests that tropomyosin inhibits spon - taneous fragmentation of actin ﬁ laments . J . Mol . Biol . 161 , 217 e 227 . Wegner , A . , Engel , J . , 1975 . Kinetics of the cooperative association of actin to actin ﬁ laments . Biophys . Chem . 3 , 215 e 225 . Wegner , A . , Ruhnau , K . , 1988 . Rate of binding of tropomyosin to actin ﬁ laments . Biochemistry 27 , 6994 e 7000 . Weigt , C . , Schoepper , B . , Wegner , A . , 1990 . Tropomyosin - troponin complex stabilizes the pointed ends of actin ﬁ laments against polymerization and depolymerization . FEBS Lett . 260 , 266 e 268 . Wen , K . K . , Kuang , B . , Rubenstein , P . A . , 2000 . Tropomyosin - dependent ﬁ lament forma - tion by a polymerization - defective mutant yeast actin ( V266G , L267G ) . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 40594 e 40600 . Wieczorek , D . F . , Jagatheesan , G . , Rajan , S . , 2008 . The role of tropomyosin in heart disease . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 132 e 142 . Xu , C . , Craig , R . , Tobacman , L . , Horowitz , R . , Lehman , W . , 1999 . Tropomyosin positions in regulated thin ﬁ laments revealed by cryoelectron microscopy . Biophys . J . 77 , 985 e 992 . Xue , B . , Robinson , R . C . , 2013 . Guardians of the actin monomer . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 316 e 332 . Yamashiro , S . , Speicher , K . D . , Speicher , D . W . , Fowler , V . M . , 2010 . Mammalian tropomo - dulins nucleate actin polymerization via their actin monomer binding and ﬁ lament pointed end - capping activities . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 33265 e 33280 . Yanagida , T . , Nekase , M . , Nishiyama , K . , Oosawa , F . , 1984 . Direct observation of motion of single F - actin ﬁ lament in the presence of myosin . Nature 307 , 58 e 60 . Yang , Y . - Z . , Korn , E . D . , Eisenberg , E . , 1979 . Cooperative binding of tropomyosin to mus - cle and Acanthamoeba actin . J . Biol . Chem . 254 , 7137 e 7140 . Yao , X . , Rubenstein , P . A . , 2001 . F - actin - like ATPase activity in a polymerization - defective mutant yeast actin ( V266G / L267G ) . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 25598 e 25604 . Zheng , W . , Barua , B . , Hitchcock - DeGregori , S . E . , 2013 . Probing the ﬂ exibility of tropo - myosin and its binding to ﬁ lamentous actin using molecular dynamics simulations . Biophys . J . 105 , 1882 e 1892 . Tropomyosin as a Regulator of Actin Dynamics 37 ARTICLE IN PRESS