Endocytosis : Curvature To The ENTH Degree Dispatch Ralph Nossal and Joshua Zimmerberg Recent work has shown that the protein epsin 1 induces highly curved lipidic structures when added with clathrin to appropriate lipid mixtures . This property may be a critical factor in the ‘curvature stress cycle’ of membrane trafficking . A great deal is known about the molecular elements of endocytosis [ 1 , 2 ] , but the mechanisms by which the plasma membrane is curved to effect vesicle formation are still poorly understood . Several factors undoubt - edly act cooperatively to induce the significant change in curvature that occurs when clathrin - coated vesicles , with radii from 25 – 50nm , are produced . Indeed , recent studies of receptor - mediated endocytosis have indi - cated a number of factors that might be involved in producing this dramatic curvature of the membrane . One is the cytoskeleton , in particular the actin cortex [ 3 ] . Another is the copolymerization of a complex , multi - component protein coat — of which clathrin is but one of the required mechanical elements — coupled with translocation of specific lipids from the outer to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane [ 4 ] . And the induction of lipid shape changes through mod - ification of acyl chain carbon bonds has been sug - gested to play a part in curving the membrane to make a vesicle [ 5 ] . There is evidence that clathrin triskelions , the build - ing blocks of the clathrin coat , have an intrinsic , non - zero curvature [ 1 ] . Yet , although clathrin alone can assemble into closed cages with the high curvature of native coated vesicles , it is uncertain whether unadorned clathrin is sufficiently rigid to overcome the mechanical bending resistance of the plasma mem - brane [ 6 ] . So , it is not known if the classical view that clathrin itself bends the membrane into a bud is correct ( Figure 1A ) . In monolayer studies , it was shown that certain coat proteins which contain phosphatidylinos - itol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) - binding ‘ANTH’ domains can cause clathrin to assemble on appropriately con - stituted phospholipid monolayers . However , in work with the ANTH domain protein AP180 , to observe incipient vesicle budding , the adaptor complex had to be present [ 7 ] . Although AP180 alone may not cause membrane blebbing , its conformation has been shown to affect the curvature of clathrin - coated vesicles in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans [ 8 ] . Ford et al . [ 9 ] have now shown that the protein epsin 1 — and by implication other members of the mammalian epsin family — can modify membrane curvature when added to lipids in conjunction with clathrin polymerisation . Epsin 1 has an amino - terminal ‘ENTH’ domain [ 10 ] which , like the ANTH domain , associates with PIP 2 ; it also binds to clathrin , AP2 and eps 15 , the latter being a coat component that is particularly prevalent in brain tissue . Ford et al . [ 9 ] observed by electron microscopy that full - length epsin , or the ENTH domain alone , will cause tubulation of liposomes derived from total brain lipids . Expressed in COS cells [ 9 ] , the epsin ENTH domain seems to induce rod - like structures — visible by con - focal immunocytometric light microscopy — that might be tubules or , possibly , folded regions of the plasma membrane . Full - length epsin accumulates in punctate sites at the plasma membrane , which can be co - labeled with antibodies against clathrin , AP2 , eps 15 or dynamin ( but not with markers for early endo - somes or the Golgi complex ) , suggesting that epsin 1 is at the right place to have a cellular role during coated pit formation and vesicle invagination . Mutant forms of epsin 1 expressed in COS cells were found to inhibit transferrin endocytosis , and a mutant epsin 1 that failed to localize on the plasma membrane caused formation of unusual aggregates of plasma - membrane - bound AP2 complex . Ford et al . [ 9 ] also reported the X - ray structure of the epsin 1 ENTH domain co - crystallized with inositol ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) . The data indicate that , in the presence of lipid , the amino terminus of epsin reorganizes to form a binding pocket for IP 3 . The ligand phosphate groups are oriented so that they strongly interact with basic amino acids elsewhere on the peptide backbone of the ENTH domain , which , even in the absence of ligand , form a group of rela - tively stable αα helices . The mutant epsin 1 mentioned above has substitutions of two charged residues that normally coordinate phosphates 4 and 5 of IP 3 , pre - sumably explaining why it fails to bind to the plasma membrane . These observations also agree with corre - sponding in vitro determinations of the protein’s lipid - binding affinity based on calorimetric titration [ 9 ] . When IP 3 binds to the ENTH domain , the newly induced protein structure is a relatively short helical region — the ‘0 - helix’ — which not only provides coordination sites on its inner surface for the inositol phosphates , but on its outer surface has hydrophobic residues which can bind generically to membrane lipids . The effects of substituting one of these residues indicated that , the more hydrophobic the amino acid in this position , the greater the tendency to transform liposomes to tubules . Corresponding mutations in full - length epsin 1 did not prevent localization to punctate regions of plasma membrane in COS cells , consistent with the notion that membrane targeting is caused by binding to inositol phosphates . Intriguingly , Ford et al . [ 9 ] found that epsin 1 added to brain lipids in vitro produced lipidic rods — assumed to represent bilayer tubules rather than cylindrical micelles — with diameters on the order of 20 nm , much Current Biology , Vol . 12 , R770 – R772 , November 19 , 2002 , ©2002 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII S0960 - 9822 ( 02 ) 01289 - 7 National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , USA . smaller than that of synaptic vesicles , which are created through a clathrin - mediated endocytosis . This diameter is similar to that of the most highly curved liposomes that can be prepared by application of ultra - sonic energy ( note that , for an equal bending stress per phospholipid molecule , neglecting ends , a cylinder has half the limiting diameter of a vesicle ( Figure 2 ) ) . Amphiphysin , dynamin and endophilin , in contrast , yield tubules of considerably greater diameter ( and thus lower curvature ) [ 9 , 11 , 12 ] . As the ENTH domain has the power to create such structures and is not an ATPase , motor or contractile protein , it probably bends membranes by the bilayer couple mechanism [ 13 – 15 ] — that is , by increasing the area of leaflet into which it inserts and thereby increas - ing the spontaneous curvature of the bilayer , Js [ 16 ] . Alternatively , it may change Js by altering the sponta - neous curvature of one monolayer without significantly changing area . Without other opposing forces , bilayer membranes minimize energy by adopting a curvature , J , that is the same as their spontaneous curvature Js . It has always been a puzzle how coat - encapsulated membrane shells of such high curvature can form , because thermal fluctuations alone cannot give rise to such highly bent structures for clathrin to jump onto . For example , a patch of bilayer lying under one clathrin triskelion contains ~ 6000 lipid molecules . The work of bending this flat patch into a spherical segment of radius 25 nm is ~ 120 k B T ( Figure 2 ) . It would take nearly infinite time for such a pit to form spontaneously . To flatten a triskelion , however , may take much less energy ( ~ 2 – 10 k B T ) . So clathrin , while it can contribute its spontaneous curvature , may not have enough energy by itself to bend the membrane into a pit ( of course , cooperative assembly of ~ 20 clathrin triskelions helps get closer to the 500 k B T needed for a sphere ) . Thus it would be helpful if another process could bend an appropriate patch of membrane to high enough curvature to aid with the assembly of clathrin and adaptors ( Figure 1B ) . Epsin 1 is now a candidate for this process , facilitating vesicle budding by binding to PIP 2 and perturbing the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane , presumably by mem - brane expansion if a local barrier to lipid flux exists , such as a ring raft [ 17 ] . Interactions of epsin 1 with its binding partner proteins may help keep the mem - brane - bound epsin confined to the small patch des - tined for endocytosis . Additionally , epsin - derived curvature may be involved in the poorly understood process of the pinching - off of the vesicle , where the neck assumes even greater degrees of curvature [ 9 ] . If so , then a long neck would help , as the positive cur - vature component of the neck would then dominate its overall curvature . Not only do the observations of Ford et al . [ 9 ] relate to the induction of membrane curvature , but they may also be relevant to the issue of how vesiculation occurs at specific locations on the cell surface . Trans - duction events that affect local phosphoinositide metabolism [ 17 , 18 ] may create sites where epsin can bind , initiating a ‘curvature stress cycle’ in membrane trafficking ( Figure 3 ) . To propose one ‘epsin - centric’ scenario , the assembly of cargo or receptors onto sphyngomyelin / cholesterol - rich ‘rafts’ on the luminal ( extracellular ) leaflet of a membrane compartment may recruit PIP 2 locally to the cytosolic leaflet , leading to headgroup binding by proteins such as epsin that subsequently insert into the cytosolic leaflet of the membrane . To minimize bending energy , the patch of Current Biology R771 Figure 1 . Does clathrin bend membranes by itself — or with adaptors — or does it jump onto previously bent buds ? ( A ) The formation of a coated vesicle may involve laying down of clathrin and asso - ciated proteins on a flat membrane ; then the intrinsic curvature of clathrin drives formation of a membrane bud , just as it can form a clathrin cage in the absence of membrane [ 1 , 2 ] . ( B ) Membrane curvature may be altered by proteins such as epsin which can insert into the phospholipid bilayer portion of the biological mem - brane and change its spontaneous curva - ture , forming a bud to relieve the newly imposed bending stress [ 9 ] . The binding of adaptors and clathrin to epsin then facilitates the recruitment of clathrin into a cage , perhaps thereby displacing epsin . Most likely , mechanisms A and B occur simultaneously , with both epsin and clathrin acting in concert on the flat membrane . In either model , epsin may function at the highly curved neck of the emerging bud to effect the pinch - ing off of the coated vesicle if the neck is long relative to its width . Epsin 1 Clathrin , adaptors , etc . Bilayer A B Current Biology Figure 2 . Bending energy of phospholipid bilayers . The plot shows the energy of bending a patch of membrane of area ( ~ 2000 sq nm ) equivalent to that underlying a single clathrin triskelion . Red , sphere ; black , cylinder , neglecting ends . Current Biology 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 B end i ng ene r g y o f b il a y e r unde r l y i ng s i ng l e t r i sk e li on ( k B T ) Curvature radius ( nm ) 1 10 100 DispatchR772 membrane buds cytosolically to assume a real curva - ture to match its spontaneous curvature . AP2 adaptor complexes , in indeterminate aggre - gates when the clathrin coat is absent [ 19 ] , seem to rearrange in the presence of epsin [ 9 ] , as other adap - tors and clathrin move into the budding vesicle . The polymerization of the clathrin coat provides stability to the emerging bud and perhaps progressively dis - places epsin as it solidifies ( leaving epsin at the neck ) . The coated pit then pinches off from the plasma mem - brane by a process involving dynamin . Once the clathrin coat has formed , epsin is released , perhaps by PIP 2 hydrolysis , leaving a coated vesicle whose lipids are now at a higher energy due to the mismatch of the spontaneous and actual curvatures [ 20 ] . When the clathrin lattice is dismantled , this leaves a metastable vesicle . This metastability , however , is exactly what the cell wants for the next stage in the cur - vature cycle , exocytosis or fusion to an endosome . The excess curvature could be the driving force for fusion of the vesicle . More generally , after coat disassembly , cel - lular regulation of bilayer spontaneous curvature may dictate whether a fusion pore either opens completely and full fusion ensues , or whether that fusion pore is stabilized at small diameter and closes again . References 1 . Kirchhausen , T . ( 2000 ) . Clathrin . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 69 , 699 – 727 . 2 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . - Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . and Wakeham , D . E . ( 2001 ) . Biological basket weaving : Formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 517 – 568 . 3 . Schafer , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 76 – 81 . 4 . Baba , T . , Rauch . C . , Xue , M . , Terada , N . , Fujii , Y . , Ueda , H . , Takayama , I . , Ohno , S . , Farge , E . and Sato , S . B . ( 2001 ) . Clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis are differentially sensitive to insertion of poly ( ethylene glycol ) - derivatized choles - terol in the plasma membrane . Traffic 2 , 501 – 512 . 5 . Schmidt , A . Wolde , M . , Thiele , C . , Fest , W . , Kratzin , H . , Podtele - jnikov , A . V . , Witke , W . , Huttner , W . B . and Soling , H . D . ( 1999 ) . Endophilin I mediates synaptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 401 , 133 – 141 . 6 . Nossal , R . ( 2001 ) . Energetics of clathrin basket assembly . Traffic 2 , 138 – 147 . 7 . Ford , M . G . J . , Pearse , B . M . F . , Higgins , M . K . , Vallis , Y . , Owen , D . J . , Gibson , A . , Hopkins , C . R . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2001 ) . Simultaneous binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation of clathrin lattices on membranes . Science 291 , 1051 – 1055 . 8 . Nonet , M . L . , Holgado , A . M . , Brewer , F . , Serpe , C . J . , Norbeck , B . A . , Holleran , J . , Wei , L . , Hartweig , E . , Jorgensen , E . M . and Alfonso , A . ( 1999 ) . UNC - 11 , a Caenorhabditis elegans AP180 homologue , reg - ulates the size and protein composition of synaptic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 2343 – 2360 . 9 . Ford , M . G . J . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . K . , Evans , P . R . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 , 361 - 366 . 10 . Wendland , B . , Steece , K . E . , Emr , S . D . ( 1999 ) . Yeast epsins contain an essential n - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . EMBO J . 18 , 4383 - 4393 . 11 . Sweitzer , S . M . and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 . 12 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . and De Camilli . P . ( 2001 ) . Generation of high curvature membranes medi - ated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 . 13 . Helfrich , W . ( 1974 ) . Blocked lipid exchanges in bilayers and its pos - sible influence on the shape of vesicles . Z . Naturforsch . 29 , 510 – 515 . 14 . Evans , E . ( 1974 ) . Bending resistance and chemically induced moments in membrane bilayers . Biophys . J . 14 , 923 – 931 . 15 . Sheetz , M . P . and Singer , S . J . ( 1974 ) . Biological membranes as bilayer couples . A molecular mechanism of drug - erythrocyte inter - actions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 71 , 4457 – 4461 . 16 . Hurley , J . H . and Wendland , B . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis : Driving mem - branes around the bend . Cell , in press . 17 . Huttner , W . B . and Zimmerberg , J . ( 2001 ) . Implications of lipid microdomains for membrane curvature , budding and fission . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 478 – 484 . 18 . Cremona , O . and De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) . Phosphoinositides in mem - brane traffic at the synapse . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1041 – 1052 . 19 . Brown , C . M . and Petersen , N . O . ( 1999 ) . Free clathrin triskelions are required for the stability of clathrin - associated adaptor protein ( AP - 2 ) coated pit nucleation sites . Biochem . Cell Biol . 77 , 439 – 448 . 20 . Kozlov , M . M . , and Chernomordik , L . ( 20021 ) . The protein coat in membrane fusions ; lessons from fission . Traffic 3 , 256 – 267 . Figure 3 . The curvature stress cycle of vesicle formation . With non - structural curving proteins such as epsin , which can change the spontaneous curvature ( Js ) of a membrane by insertion , it is possible to imagine a scenario by which cells regulate the activity of these curving proteins to effect local budding and flattening of membranes in endocytosis and exo - cytosis . For example , PIP 2 accumulation may lead to epsin binding , thus increasing Js and the free energy of the patch of membrane ( E ) . The lipids respond by budding into a vesicle with the same actual curvature ( J ) , relieving the bending stress . Clathrin , which binds to epsin , can then polymerize into a cage around the vesicle , perhaps displacing epsin ( which may remain at the neck to facilitate pinching off ) . When the vesicle is completely detached , it uncoats . Once epsin and clathrin are gone , the spontaneous curvature of the bilayer returns to 0 , but as the membrane is actually curved , stress returns and the vesicle becomes metastable ( E = 500 k B T ) This provides a stressed vesicle having a driving force for flattening out during exocytosis . For any vesicle about to fuse , by regulating the spontaneous curvature of the membrane , through proteins such as epsin , cells can regulate the degree to which fusion pores open and remain small , or repeatedly open and close — ‘kiss and run’ — rather than flattening out in complete fusion . Js > 0 J = Js E = 0 Js > 0 J = Js E = 0 Js = 0 J = 0 E = 0 Js > 0 J = 0 E ~ 500 kT Js = 0 J > 0 E = 0 Epsin 1 Clathrin , adaptors , etc . Bilayer Current Biology