Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof An investigation into the use of smart home devices , user preferences , and impact during COVID - 19 Moojan Ghafurian , Colin Ellard , Kerstin Dautenhahn PII : S2451 - 9588 ( 23 ) 00033 - 7 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chbr . 2023 . 100300 Reference : CHBR 100300 To appear in : Computers in Human Behavior Reports Received Date : 7 October 2022 Revised Date : 12 December 2022 Accepted Date : 21 May 2023 Please cite this article as : Ghafurian M . , Ellard C . & Dautenhahn K . , An investigation into the use of smart home devices , user preferences , and impact during COVID - 19 , Computers in Human Behavior Reports ( 2023 ) , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chbr . 2023 . 100300 . This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd . Title An Investigation into the Use of Smart Home Devices , User Preferences , and Impact During COVID - 19 Authors Moojan Ghafurian a , Colin Ellard b , Kerstin Dautenhahn a a Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada b Department of Psychology , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada Corresponding Author : Moojan Ghafurian . PhD Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Waterloo 200 University Avenue West Waterloo , Ontario Email : moojan @ uwaterloo . ca Financial Disclosure : This research was undertaken , in part , thanks to funding from the Canada 150 Research Chairs Program . Conflict of Interest : The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Declaration of interests ☐ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper . ☒ The authors declare the following financial interests / personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests : Kerstin Dautenhahn reports financial support was provided by Canada 150 Research Chairs Program . J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f