JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 208 No . 1 109 – 123 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201404050 JCB 109 Correspondence to Mariusz Karbowski : mkarbowski @ umaryland . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : AvDev , average deviation ; IMM , inner mi - tochondrial membrane ; MEF , mouse embryonic fibroblast ; Mff , mitochondrial fission factor ; mito - PAGFP , mitochondrial matrix – targeted photoactivatable GFP ; OMM , outer mitochondrial membrane . Introduction Balancing mitochondrial fusion and fission is necessary to main - tain cellular homeostasis and adjust mitochondrial function to cellular needs . Disturbing this process causes mitochondrial dysfunction , ultimately leading to cellular demise ( Youle and Karbowski , 2005 ; Chen et al . , 2007 ; Knott et al . , 2008 ; Benard and Karbowski , 2009 ; DuBoff et al . , 2012 ; Nunnari and Suomalainen , 2012 ) . Consistent with a critical role for mitochon - drial dynamics in cell homeostasis , the wide spectrum of mito - chondrial diseases , which typically concern deficiencies in the oxidative phosphorylation system ( OXPHOS ) , now includes genetic and biochemical alterations of mitochondrial fusion and fission . For example , mutations in Mfn2 ( mitochondrial fusion factor Mitofusin 2 ) result in CMT2A ( Charcot - Marie - Tooth Neuropathy type 2A ; Züchner et al . , 2004 ) , an inherited disorder of the peripheral nervous system . Mutations in the inner mito - chondrial membrane ( IMM ) protein Opa1 ( Optic Atrophy 1 ) cause autosomal dominant optic atrophy ( DOA ; Alexander et al . , 2000 ) . Mitochondrial division is a multistep process relying on the action of several proteins . Control of the essential mitochon - drial fission protein Drp1 ( Dynamin - related protein 1 ) appears to be the primary function of these proteins ( Bui and Shaw , 2013 ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) . The recruitment of Drp1 from the cytosol to the outer mitochondrial membrane ( OMM ) is medi - ated by integral OMM - associated Drp1 receptors , mitochon - drial fission factor ( Mff ; Gandre - Babbe and van der Bliek , 2008 ; Otera et al . , 2010 ) , mitochondrial division proteins 49 and 51 ( MiD49 / 51 ; Palmer et al . , 2011 ) , and Fis1 ( Yoon et al . , 2003 ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) . Specific roles of other Mffs , including SUMO proteases SENP3 and SENP5 ( Zunino et al . , 2009 ; Guo et al . , 2013 ) , and ubiquitin E3 ligase MARCH5 ( Karbowski et al . , 2007 ) in relation to Drp1 recruitment are not clear . However , upon recruitment to the mitochondria Drp1 forms homo and I n addition to established membrane remodeling roles in various cellular locations , actin has recently emerged as a participant in mitochondrial fission . However , the underlying mechanisms of its participation remain largely unknown . We report that transient de novo F - actin assem - bly on the mitochondria occurs upon induction of mitochon - drial fission and F - actin accumulates on the mitochondria without forming detectable submitochondrial foci . Impair - ing mitochondrial division through Drp1 knockout or inhibition prolonged the time of mitochondrial accumu - lation of F - actin and also led to abnormal mitochondrial accumulation of the actin regulatory factors cortactin , co - filin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes , suggesting that disassembly of mitochondrial F - actin depends on Drp1 activity . Fur - thermore , down - regulation of actin regulatory proteins led to elongation of mitochondria , associated with mito - chondrial accumulation of Drp1 . In addition , depletion of cortactin inhibited Mfn2 down - regulation – or FCCP - induced mitochondrial fragmentation . These data indicate that the dynamic assembly and disassembly of F - actin on the mitochondria participates in Drp1 - mediated mito - chondrial fission . Transient assembly of F - actin on the outer mitochondrial membrane contributes to mitochondrial fission Sunan Li , 1 , 2 Shan Xu , 1 , 2 Brian A . Roelofs , 1 , 2 Liron Boyman , 1 , 3 W . Jonathan Lederer , 1 , 3 Hiromi Sesaki , 4 and Mariusz Karbowski 1 , 2 1 Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology , 2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , and 3 Department of Physiology , University of Maryland School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21201 4 Department of Cell Biology , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 © 2015 Li et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 110 Results Accumulation of F - actin on the mitochondria in Drp1  /  mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) Accumulating evidence suggests a role for the actin cytoskele - ton in both Drp1 - dependent and Drp1 - independent mitochon - drial division ( De Vos et al . , 2005 ; DuBoff et al . , 2012 ; Korobova et al . , 2013 ; Stavru et al . , 2013 ) . However , the mechanism and the scope of cross talk between mitochondrial fission and actin are not well defined . We analyzed the spatial relation between F - actin and mitochondria in wild - type MEFs and in Drp1  /  MEFs ( Fig . 1 , A – E ) . To detect F - actin , cells were labeled with Alexa Fluor 546 phalloidin ( Alexa - phalloidin ) , a high - affinity F - actin probe . Mitochondria were immunolabeled with anti – cytochrome c antibody , followed by structured illumination im - aging . Although specific colocalization between F - actin and mitochondria was not detectable in untreated wild - type MEFs ( Fig . 1 , A and E ) , Alexa - phalloidin colocalized with mitochon - dria in  20 % of Drp1  /  MEFs ( 20 . 2 ± 4 . 1 % ; Fig . 1 , C and E ) . This colocalization was primarily restricted to the perinuclear mitochondria ( Fig . 1 C ) . Confirming the specificity of F - actin colocalization with mitochondria in Drp1  /  MEFs , mitochon - drial F - actin was not detected in Mfn2  /  MEFs ( Fig . 1 E ) , and only 5 . 7 ± 4 . 6 % HeLa cells displayed some F - actin colocaliza - tion with mitochondria ( Fig . 1 E ) . However , F - actin was also found to colocalize in  34 % of mitochondrial Drp1 receptor Mff knockout ( Mff  /  ) cells ( 34 . 4 ± 3 . 0 % ; Figs . 1 E and S1 ) . Thus , inhibition of mitochondrial fission either by loss of Drp1 or reduction of Drp1 interaction with mitochondria resulted in abnormal mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin . Transient de novo polymerization of F - actin on the mitochondria upon stress - induced mitochondrial fission Transient F - actin assembly has been implicated in various membrane remodeling events including dynamin - dependent endocytosis ( Mooren et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , knockout of dynamin , a large GTPase essential for endocytotic vesicle scis - sion led to abnormal accumulation of F - actin at the defective vesicle scission sites ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) . A similar scenario may also underlie mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin in mitochondrial fission deficient Drp1  /  and Mff  /  MEFs . To verify this possibility , we tested the degree to which F - actin assembles on mitochondria upon stress - induced mito - chondrial fission . Drp1 - mediated mitochondrial fission can be induced by mitochondrial toxins , including the uncoupling agents carbonyl cyanide 4 - ( trifluoromethoxy ) phenylhydrazone ( FCCP ) and 2 - [ 2 - ( 3 - Chlorophenyl ) hydrazinylyidene ] propanedinitrile ( CCCP ; Cereghetti et al . , 2008 ; Gandre - Babbe and van der Bliek , 2008 ; Palmer et al . , 2011 ; Stavru et al . , 2013 ) . Wild - type MEFs and Drp1  /  MEFs were treated with FCCP as indicated in Fig . 1 E , followed by immunofluorescence to detect F - actin using Alexa - phalloidin and mitochondria using anti – cytochrome c antibody ( Fig . 1 , B , D , and E ) . The data showed increase in sev - eral cells with F - actin – positive mitochondria in FCCP wild - type and Drp1  /  MEFs peaking at 2 – 5 min of treatment , followed by hetero oligomers . These form spirals around constricted sites on mitochondria in the final steps of mitochondrial fission that mediate membrane scission ( Ingerman et al . , 2005 ; Bui and Shaw , 2013 ) . This process appears to be facilitated by ER tu - bules that colocalize with mitochondrial fission sites ( Friedman et al . , 2011 ; Korobova et al . , 2013 ; Stavru et al . , 2013 ) . Subse - quently , disassembly and translocation of Drp1 from the mito - chondria to the cytosol completes the mitochondrial fission pathway . It is likely that mitochondrial fission steps downstream of mitochondrial recruitment of Drp1 are regulated by some of the above - mentioned accessory proteins . Consistent with this notion , SENP3 and SENP5 , as well as MARCH5 , were pro - posed to regulate Drp1 trafficking between the cytosol and mitochondria ( Karbowski et al . , 2007 ; Zunino et al . , 2007 ; Guo et al . , 2013 ) . Recent evidence supports a role for the actin cytoskeleton in mitochondrial division . For example , although pharmacolog - ical inhibition of F - actin polymerization did not affect mito - chondrial structure , it attenuated mitochondrial toxin - induced mitochondrial fragmentation ( De Vos et al . , 2005 ) . Other reports showed that treatment with actin polymerization inhibi - tor latrunculin B ( LatB ) led to mitochondrial elongation in oth - erwise untreated U2OS osteosarcoma cells ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) but decreased mitochondrial size in cultured neurons ( Beck et al . , 2012 ) . These findings suggest that F - actin may regulate mitochondrial size perhaps through recruitment to or retention of Drp1 on the mitochondria . Consistent with this notion , in a Drosophila model of tauopathy , excess tau - induced F - actin stabilization inhibited as - sociation of Drp1 with mitochondria , leading to mitochondrial elongation and subsequent neurotoxicity ( DuBoff et al . , 2012 ) . Conversely , in mammalian cells , inhibition of actin polymeriza - tion or down - regulation of the ER - localized actin binding pro - tein INF2 ( inverted formin 2 ) reduced mitochondrial association of Drp1 ( De Vos et al . , 2005 ; Korobova et al . , 2013 ) . Consider - ing these reports , it is possible that it is not the status of actin ( polymerized versus monomeric ) but rather dynamic remodel - ing of the actin cytoskeleton on the mitochondria that regulates mitochondrial association of Drp1 and potentially Drp1 - driven mitochondrial fission . Because overexpression of MiD49 / 51 , mitochondrial receptors of Drp1 , led to mitochondrial elonga - tion that was associated with abnormal mitochondrial accumu - lation of F - actin , it is also possible that mitochondrial fission proteins might be implicated in mitochondrial assembly of F - actin ( Palmer et al . , 2011 ) . Actin depolymerization by cyto - chalasin d reduced Drp1 - independent mitochondrial division induced by pore - forming toxin listeriolysin ( LLO ; Stavru et al . , 2013 ) , indicating that F - actin may also contribute to non – Drp1 - related mechanisms of mitochondrial fission . Despite the many lines of evidence pointing to a role for actin in regulating mito - chondrial morphology , the mechanism remains unclear . Here , we report that transient Drp1 - independent de novo polymerization of F - actin on the OMM contributes to mito - chondrial division in mammalian cells . We also found that mitochondrial division and mitochondrial assembly of F - actin were controlled by the actin regulatory proteins cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes . 111 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . Furthermore , parallel analyses of Mfn2  /  MEFs and HeLa cells revealed transient increases in the number of cells with F - actin – positive mitochondria occurring at comparable rates as FCCP - treated wild - type MEFs ( Figs . 1 E and S1 ) . Treatment with the cytochrome c reductase inhibitor Antimycin A ( AntA ) , another inducer of mitochondrial division ( De Vos et al . , 2005 ) , also led to mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin ( Figs . 1 E and S1 ) . As with FCCP treatment , mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin was more pronounced in AntA - treated Drp1  /  MEFs a gradual decline in the number of cells with F - actin – positive mitochondria ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) . However , there was a major dif - ference in the number of cells with F - actin – positive mitochondria between wild - type and Drp1  /  MEFs . At 2 min into FCCP treatment ,  100 % of Drp1  /  MEFs displayed a clear mito - chondrial accumulation of F - actin , in contrast to  33 % in the case of wild - type MEFs ( Figs . 1 E and S1 ) . Similar mitochon - drial accumulation of F - actin at 2 min of FCCP treatment was also detected in  100 % of Mff  /  MEFs ( Figs . 1 E and S1 ) . Figure 1 . Localization of F - actin on the mitochondria . ( A – D ) Wild type ( A and B ) and Drp1  /  ( C and D ) MEFs were treated with FCCP ( B and D ) or DMSO ( A and C ) for 2 min , and then labeled with Alexa - phalloidin to detect F - actin ( red ) and immunostained with anti – cytochrome c mAb ( green ) to detect mitochon - dria . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . The mitochondria - enriched z - sections corresponding to the vertical middle part of the cells are shown here and thereafter . These images largely lack the cortical F - actin signal , which is detectable in the bottom of the cells , corresponding to z - sections below those enriched in the mitochondria . The typical z - stacks are shown in Fig . S2 . These z - stack series also reveal the relative intensity of mitochondria - associated F - actin versus cortical F - actin . ( E ) Quantification of the number of cells showing mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin . Wild - type , Drp1  /  , Mff  /  , and Mfn2  /  MEFs , as well as HeLa cells , were treated with FCCP or AntA as indicated in the figure followed by immunofluorescence and cell counting . Means ± average deviation ( AvDev ) of triplicate counting of 150 cells / condition are shown . ( F ) Colocalization of Drp1 with mitochondria was analyzed in wild - type and Mff  /  MEFs . The values represent Mander’s correlation coefficient ( Rr ) that reveal the degree of association of pixels in different channels of the image . Data represent the mean ± SD of 15 images / condition . Each image used for the analysis contained at least two cells . * , P < 0 . 001 . ( G ) Quantification of the number of cells with different mitochondrial phenotypes in FCCP - AntA - , LatB - , LatB + FCCP - , and LatB + AntA - treated wild - type MEFs . Typical examples of cells and specific mitochondrial phenotypes are shown in Fig . S3 . Means ± AvDev from a representative experiment after triplicate counting of 150 cells / condition are shown . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 112 for 5 or 10 min . Because there was no detectable mitochondrial F - actin accumulation in LatB - pretreated FCCP - or AntA - treated wild - type and Drp1  /  MEFs ( unpublished data ) , we conclude that de novo actin polymerization is required for mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin . The effect of LatB on mitochondrial structure was also tested ( Figs . 1 G and S3 ) . Wild - type MEFs were treated with FCCP , AntA , or LatB , or were pretreated with LatB followed by FCCP or AntA , as indicated ( Fig . 1 G ) . Although there was no clear difference in mitochondrial structure between untreated and LatB - treated cells , LatB pretreatment decreased FCCP - and AntA - induced mitochondrial fragmentation ( Figs . 1 G and S3 ) . Confirming earlier reports ( De Vos et al . , 2005 ; Cereghetti et al . , than AntA - treated wild - type MEFs ( Fig . 1 E ) . We also tested mitochondrial colocalization of Drp1 in control and FCCP - treated wild - type MEFs and Mff  /  MEFs ( Fig . 1 F ) . As expected ( Otera et al . , 2010 ) , Mff ablation significantly reduced mitochondrial localization of Drp1 . Furthermore , there was only a minor increase in mitochondrial Drp1 in FCCP - treated cells . Thus , mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin appears to preferentially occur in cells in which Drp1 fission complex formation is inhib - ited , and may occur before Drp1 activation in control cells . We tested whether mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin requires de novo actin polymerization . Cells were pretreated with LatB , an actin polymerization inhibitor , for 2 min , fol - lowed by treatment with either FCCP for 2 or 10 min or AntA Figure 2 . Spatial relation of F - actin and mitochondria in mitotic cells . ( A and B ) HeLa cells were synchronized in G 1 / S phase of the cell cycle using a double thymidine block procedure and subsequently released into thymidine - free medium to restart the cell cycle progression . Cells were fixed at 8 . 5 h after release and stained with anti – cytochrome c mAbs ( A and B overlay images ; green ; to reveal mitochondria ) , Alexa - phalloidin ( A and B overlay images ; red , to reveal F - actin ) , and DAPI ( A and B overlay images , blue ; to reveal DNA ) , followed by structured illumination imaging . The examples of anaphase ( A ) and pro - phase ( B ) cells that were identified based on the chromosomal status and distribution are shown . Higher magnification of insets marked with yellow rectangles in A and B are shown in detail images . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . ( C ) Cells in different stages of mitosis were analyzed for mitochondrial assembly of F - actin and mitochondrial morphology . Data represent quantification of  70 cells per mitotic stage . 113 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . cell cycle using a double thymidine block procedure and subse - quently released into thymidine - free medium to restart cell cycle progression . Cells were fixed at different time points after release up to 10 h and stained with Alexa - phalloidin , anti – cytochrome c antibody , and DAPI to detect DNA , followed by structured illumination imaging . Because accumulation of mitotic cells was most pronounced at 8 – 9 h after release ( not depicted ) , cells fixed at 8 . 5 h after release were analyzed ( Fig . 2 ) . The data showed that in mitotic cells mitochondria were aligned along the F - actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . Although mitochon - drial fragmentation was apparent in  80 % of anaphase cells and  85 % of these cells showed mitochondrial association of 2008 ; Gandre - Babbe and van der Bliek , 2008 ) , FCCP and AntA did not significantly affect mitochondrial structure in Drp1  /  MEFs , except for some mitochondrial swelling ( unpublished data ) . Mitochondrial assembly of F - actin in mitotic cells Interconnected mitochondrial networks become fragmented in mitotic cells in a Drp1 - dependent manner ( Taguchi et al . , 2007 ; Zunino et al . , 2009 ; Kashatus et al . , 2011 ) , probably facilitating stochastic mitochondrial segregation into two daughter cells . To test whether mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin also occurs during mitosis , cells were synchronized in the G 1 / S phase of the Figure 3 . Submitochondrial distribution of F - actin in FCCP - treated cells . Wild - type ( A and I ) , Mfn2  /  ( C ) , and Drp1  /  ( E , G , and J ) MEFs were treated with FCCP for 2 min , followed by immunofluorescence . High magnification struc - tured illumination images of Alexa - phalloidin ( A , C , E , G , I , and J ) – labeled mitochondria - associated F - actin are shown . Mitochondrial inner membrane and intermembrane space were re - vealed by cytochrome c ( A , C , and E ) , the OMM was revealed by immunoblotting for Tom20 ( G ) and Mff ( J ) , and the OMM - associated Drp1 was detected with anti - Drp1 mAb ( I ) . Bars : 5 µm ; ( detail ) 1 µm . Fluorescence linescans along the lines shown in the respective detail panels are also shown ( B , D , F , and H ) . Similar linescan patterns were obtained in several ( n > 10 ) independent immunofluorescence experiments . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 114 and Mff , we did not detect any accumulation of F - actin on the punctate OMM - associated foci formed by Mff ( Fig . 3 J ) . Mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin in living cells To verify mitochondrial assembly of F - actin independently , we applied a red fluorescent protein mRuby - tagged Lifeact ( mRuby - Lifeact ) . Lifeact is a 17 – aa peptide derived from the N - terminal domain of actin binding protein 140 ( Abp140 ) ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) . It has been shown that fluorescent - tagged Lifeact interacts with F - actin with  30× greater affinity than with G - actin , enabling visualization of local F - actin polymer - ization associated with various cellular pathways ( Riedl et al . , 2008 , 2010 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Another benefit of mRuby - Lifeact is its applicability to live cell imaging . Cells were cotransfected with mRuby - Lifeact and mito - YFP followed by time - lapse microscopy . Although the use of wide field fluorescence imaging failed to detect mitochondria - associated mRuby - Lifeact in a clear manner ( not depicted ) , application of a structured illumination imaging method reduced background and cortical F - actin – derived fluorescence , enabling unambiguous visualization of FCCP - induced dynamic changes of F - actin on the mitochondria ( Figs . 4 and S4 ) . The data F - actin ( Fig . 2 , A – C ) , mitochondrial assembly of F - actin was also detectable in  95 % of prophase cells ,  45 % of which dis - played mitochondrial fragmentation ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . Thus , it appears that in a similar manner as in stress - induced mitochon - drial fission , mitochondrial assembly of F - actin also precedes mitochondrial division in mitotic cells . F - actin accumulates on the OMM without forming submitochondrial foci Analyses of FCCP - treated wild - type , Drp1  /  , and Mfn2  /  MEFs ( Fig . 3 ) and similarly treated HeLa cells ( Fig . S1 ) revealed that F - actin did not colocalize with the cytochrome c – positive IMM , intermembrane space , or mitochondrial cristae but rather formed cytochrome c circumscribing rings ( Fig . 3 , A – F ) , consistent with OMM localization . Indeed , in FCCP - treated cells Alexa - phalloidin colocalized with Tom20 , a marker of the OMM ( Fig . 3 , G and H ) . Furthermore , the Alexa - phalloidin signal was equally distributed with no apparent colocalization with Drp1 ( Fig . 3 I ) . Because Drp1 colocalizes with submito - chondrial foci formed by Mff , a mitochondrial receptor of Drp1 ( Otera et al . , 2010 ) , we also tested the degree to which Mff colocalized with mitochondrial F - actin in Drp1  /  MEFs . Although there was a clear overlap between Alexa - phalloidin Figure 4 . Mitochondrial assembly of F - actin in living cells . ( A and B ) HeLa cells expressing mRuby - Lifeact ( red in B ) and mito - YFP ( green in B ) were treated with FCCP as indicated , fol - lowed by a time - lapse structural illumination imaging . In A , fluorescence images of mRuby - Lifeact are shown . To enable easier interpretation of the data , fluorescent images were inverted . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . ( C ) Pseudocolored images showing the mitochondrial F - actin assembly at 0 min ( green ) , 10 min ( red ) , and 16 min ( blue ) after addition of FCCP within the red rectangle shown in A . Note a dominant red signal in C indicating a high level of mitochon - drial F - actin at 10 min of FCCP treatment , as compared with 0 min and 16 min . Arrows in A and C indicate F - actin – positive structures that are not altered by FCCP treatment , which shows a white pseudocolored signal in C . ( D ) Details from marked area in the image taken at 10 min ( shown in A ) of FCCP treatment . Bars , 5 µm . 115 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . The calponin homology domain of utrophin ( mCherry - UtrCH ) , another live cell actin probe ( Burkel et al . , 2007 ) , was also applied to further verify mitochondrial assembly of F - actin . Cells cotransfected with mCherry - UtrCH and mito - YFP were treated with FCCP followed by time - lapse imaging . Like mRuby - Lifeact , mCherry - UtrCH accumulated on the mito - chondria in FCCP - treated cells ( Fig . S5 ) . This accumulation was also transient and occurred in a similar time frame as accu - mulation of mRuby - Lifeact . Down - regulation of cortactin , cofilin , or Arp2 / 3 complexes results in abnormal interconnection and elongation of mitochondria Based on the data discussed above and the fact that activity of INF2 ( inverted formin 2 ) , which is already linked to Drp1 - mediated showed mitochondrial accumulation of mRuby - Lifeact starting at  4 min ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) , with a gradual decline in mitochon - drial levels of mRuby - Lifeact at  12 min after initial detection ( Fig . 4 , A – C ) . Importantly , the diffused OMM localization pat - tern of mRuby - Lifeact ( Fig . 4 , B and D ) was reminiscent of that observed in Alexa - phalloidin – labeled fixed cells ( Figs . 1 and 3 ) . This was also apparent in cells expressing Drp1 K38A , a dominant - negative mutant of Drp1 ( Fig . S4 ) . Further confirming the Alexa - phalloidin labeling results in Drp1  /  MEFs ( Fig . 1 ) , the data also showed accumulation of F - actin on the perinuclear mitochondria in untreated Drp1 K38A - expressing HeLa cells but not in wild - type Drp1 - overexpressing HeLa cells ( Fig . S4 ) . Furthermore , pretreatment with LatB for 2 min before FCCP application also inhibited mitochondrial accumulation of mRuby - Lifeact in control and Drp1 K38A - expressing cells ( un - published data ) . Figure 5 . Down - regulation of cortactin , co - filin , and components of the Arp2 / 3 complex result in abnormal mitochondrial elongation / interconnection . ( A – J ) Control RNAi ( A and F ) , cortactin RNAi cells ( obtained using three distinct cortactin RNAi constructs ; B ) , cofilin RNAi cells ( obtained using three distinct co - filin RNAi constructs ; C ) , Arp2 RNAi cells ( achieved with a mix of two independent Arp2 targeting RNAi constructs ; G ) , ARC / p34 RNAi cells ( achieved with a mix of two independent ARC / p34 targeting RNAi constructs ; H ) , and combined double Arp2 and ARC / p34 RNAi cells ( achieved with one RNAi construct per each target ; I ) were immunostained with anti – cytochrome c mAb to reveal mitochondria , followed by structured illumination imaging . Higher magnifications of areas marked with yellow rectangles are shown in detail images . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . Down - regulation levels of cortactin ( D ) , cofilin ( E ) , and Arp2 and ARC / p34 ( J ) were analyzed by Western blot - ting in total cell lysates obtained from respec - tive RNAi cells . Tom20 was used as a loading control . ( K ) Mitochondrial morphology in con - trol RNAi , cortactin RNAi ( constructs # 1 – 3 ) , cofilin RNAi ( constructs # 1 – 3 ) , and Arp2 / p34 RNAi cells were quantified as indicated in the figure . Data represent mean ± AvDev from a representative experiment after triplicate count - ing of 150 cells / condition . Values for the con - trol RNAi cells were obtained by averaging two triplicate counts of 150 cells / condition obtained independently in cortactin / cofilin and Arp2 / p34 RNAi experiments . Mitochon - drial morphology in gelsolin RNAi cells was also quantified in a similar manner . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 116 Figure 6 . Cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 complexes control mitochondrial division . ( A – F ) Control RNAi ( A , I , and J ) , Mfn2 RNAi ( B ) , Opa1 RNAi ( C ) , cortactin RNAi ( construct # 1 ; D , K , and L ) cells , as well as double Mfn2 / cortactin RNAi ( E ) and double Opa1 / cortactin RNAi cells ( F ) , were immunostained with anti – cytochrome c mAb to reveal mitochondria , followed by structured illumination imaging . Higher magnifications of areas marked with yellow rectangles are shown in detail images . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . ( G ) Mitochondrial morphologies in cells described above ( A – F ) were quantified as indicated in the figure . Data represent mean ± AvDev from a representative experiment after triplicate counting of 150 cells / condition . ( H ) Protein levels in cells described above ( A – F ) were analyzed by Western blotting in total cell lysates . Tom20 was used as a loading control . The asterisk indicates an x - reactive protein detectable with anti - Mfn2 antibody . Control RNAi ( I and J ) and cortactin RNAi ( construct # 1 ; K and L ) treated with either DMSO ( vehicle ; I and K ) or FCCP ( J and L ) for 30 min and immunostained with anti – cytochrome c mAb are shown . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . ( M ) Mitochondrial morphologies in vehicle - and FCCP - treated control RNAi , cortactin RNAi ( # 1 ) , and cofilin RNAi ( # 1 ) cells were quantified as indicated in the figure . Data represent mean ± AvDev from a representa - tive experiment after triplicate counting of 150 cells / condition . ( N – P ) Mitochondrial fusion rates in control ( N and P ) , cortactin ( O and P ) , cofilin ( P ) , and Arp2 ( P ) RNAi cells were analyzed using mito - PAGFP – based mitochondrial fusion assay ( Karbowski et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) . In N and O , typical images from a time - lapse series of control ( N ) and cortactin RNAi ( O ) cells are shown . Bars , 20 µm . In P , mito - PAGFP fluorescence changes in control , cortactin , cofilin , 117 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . mitochondrial fission ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) , did not appear to mediate mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin similar to what we demonstrated here ( Figs . 1 – 4 ) , we sought to determine whether proteins other than INF2 actin - modifying proteins could also regulate mitochondrial fission . We analyzed the degree to which overexpression or down - regulation of WASp , cortactin , Arp2 / 3 complex , formin1 , FBNP17 ( formin - binding protein 17 ) , gelsolin , cofilin , Abp1 , or coronin affect mitochon - drial network organization . This selection was based on the established role for each of these factors in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in membrane remodeling in non - mitochondrial compartments , including clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytosis ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ; Salbreux et al . , 2012 ; Stoeber et al . , 2012 ; Bravo - Cordero et al . , 2013 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ) . Although overexpression of any of the above - mentioned proteins did not affect mitochondrial network organization ( not depicted ) , down - regulation of cortactin ( Fig . 5 , B , D , and K ) and cofilin ( Fig . 5 , C , E , and K ) led to dramatic elongation and interconnection of mitochondria , as compared with control RNAi cells ( Fig . 5 , A and K ) . Because consistent mitochondrial alterations were apparent in cells transfected with three independent shRNAi vectors targeting cortactin ( Fig . 5 , B and D ) or cofilin ( Fig . 5 , C and E ) , these effects are likely spe - cific . Furthermore , separate or combined down - regulation of critical components of F - actin nucleation initiator Arp2 / 3 com - plex , Arp2 , or ARC / p34 also led to an increase in the number of cells with elongated mitochondria ( Fig . 5 , G – I and K ) . Interest - ingly , down - regulation of ARC / p34 occurred in Arp2 RNAi cells , and depletion of Arp2 was seen in ARC / p34 RNAi cells ( Fig . 5 J ) . These data suggest the possibility that depletion of a single component of Arp2 / 3 complex destabilizes the other components of this complex . Down - regulation of actin regulatory proteins inhibits Mfn2 down - regulation – or FCCP - induced mitochondrial fragmentation We also found that down - regulation of cortactin restored tubular mitochondria in mitochondrial fusion factor Mitofusin 2 – depleted cells ( Mfn2 RNAi ; Fig . 6 , E and G ) . Specifically , although down - regulation of Mfn2 alone led to formation of fragmented mito - chondrial networks in 76 . 7 ± 3 . 9 % of the cells ( Fig . 6 , B and G ) , cortactin / Mfn2 double RNAi displayed mitochondrial fragmen - tation in only 18 . 2 ± 3 . 8 % of cells ( Fig . 6 , E and G ) . Furthermore , there was no detectable effect of cortactin RNAi on mitochondria fragmentation induced by down - regulation of Opa1 ( Fig . 6 , C , F , and G ) . Considering that Mfn2 depletion results in partial inhibi - tion of mitochondrial fusion , although Opa1 down - regulation leads to complete fusion inhibition , it is likely that restoration of mitochondrial tubules observed in cortactin / Mfn2 double RNAi cells is due to Mfn1 - dependent mitochondrial fusion activity . We also tested the role of cortactin and cofilin in FCCP - induced mito - chondrial division . To this end , FCCP - treated ( Fig . 6 , J , L , and M ) or untreated Fig . 6 , I , K , and M ) control RNAi ( Fig . 6 , I , J , and M ) , cortactin RNAi ( Fig . 6 , K , L , and M ) , and cofilin RNAi ( Fig . 6 M ) cells were stained with anti – cytochrome c antibody followed by analysis of mitochondrial morphology . Supporting the role of cor - tactin and cofilin in mitochondrial division , down - regulation of either of these proteins inhibited FCCP - induced mitochondrial fragmentation ( Fig . 6 M ) . Down - regulation of actin regulatory proteins does not affect mitochondrial fusion rates Under certain situations , mitochondrial elongation and intercon - nection are induced not by inhibition of mitochondrial division but rather through the activation of mitochondrial fusion in a process called SIMH ( stress - induced mitochondrial hyperfusion ; Tondera et al . , 2009 ) . To test the effects of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complex down - regulation on mitochondrial fusion rates , we applied a mitochondrial matrix – targeted photoactivatable GFP ( mito - PAGFP ) – based mitochondrial fusion assay ( Karbowski et al . , 2004 , 2006 ; Tondera et al . , 2009 ) . Regions of interest ( red circles in preactivation ; “Pre” images in Fig . 6 , N and O ) in mito - PAGFP – expressing control , cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 + ARC / p34 RNAi cells were photoactivated by brief irra - diation with UV light , followed by time - lapse imaging with 488 - nm light every  2 min , over  30 min ( Fig . 6 , N – P ) . Quan - tification of mito - PAGFP fluorescence changes ( Karbowski et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) in several time - lapse experiments revealed similar fusion rates in all analyzed cell groups ( Fig . 6 P ) . The efficient protein down - regulation in each experiment was veri - fied by Western blotting ( unpublished data ) . These data further support the possibility that it is not induction of mitochondrial fusion but rather inhibition of mitochondrial fission that induces the mitochondrial elongation and interconnection observed in cortactin , cofilin , and the Arp2 / 3 complex RNAi cells . Down - regulation of cortactin or cofilin induces mitochondrial accumulation of Drp1 To gain insight into the mechanism by which cortactin and co - filin regulate mitochondrial division , we analyzed the mitochon - drial localization of Drp1 . Control RNAi ( Fig . 7 , A and D ) , cortactin RNAi ( Fig . 7 , B and D ) , and cofilin RNAi ( Fig . 7 , C and D ) cells were immunostained for Drp1 and Tom20 to reveal the OMM , followed by structured illumination imaging ( Fig . 7 , A – C ) . Surprisingly , we found that down - regulation of both cor - tactin and cofilin led to significant increases in the amount of mitochondria - associated Drp1 ( Fig . 7 , B – D ) . The degree of colocalization of Tom20 - labeled mitochondria and Drp1 was quantified and reported as a Mander’s correlation coefficient ( Rr ; Fig . 7 D ) . The data showed an Rr = 0 . 44 ± 0 . 041 in control RNAi cells , as compared with an Rr = 0 . 58 ± 0 . 06 in cortactin RNAi cells and Rr = 0 . 65 ± 0 . 034 in cofilin RNAi cells . Because Rr = 1 indicates complete colocalization , whereas Rr = 0 indi - cates random colocalization , and Mander’s score roughly corre - lates with percentage of overlap , the data indicated that  20 % and Arp2 RNAi cells were quantified and plotted as a function of time as shown in the figure . Initial postactivation values were normalized to 100 % . Data represent mean ± AvDev of 32 ( control RNAi ) , 21 ( cortactin RNAi ) , 24 ( cofilin RNAi ) , and 14 ( Arp2 ) single cell time - lapse experiments . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 118 Drp1  /  MEFs ( Fig . 8 ) . Consistent with published data , in wild - type MEFs cortactin ( Fig . 8 A ) , cofilin ( Fig . 8 B ) , and Arp3 ( Fig . 8 C ) were abundant within the cytosolic boundaries of the cell without showing strong mitochondria colocalization pat - terns . However subsets of these proteins colocalized with or were found in close association with mitochondria ( Fig . 8 , A – C , detail images ) . Similar localization of ARC / p34 , another com - ponent of the Arp2 / 3 complex , was also detected ( unpublished data ) . Although these data do not prove that cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes act at the OMM , we believe that the mitochondrial localization of these proteins , in combination with the data shown in earlier sections of this work , provides evidence suggesting direct mitochondrial roles for cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes . Further supporting this notion , additional mitochondrial accumulation of these proteins was apparent in Drp1  /  MEFs ( Fig . 8 , D – F ) . Notably , in many of Drp1  /  cells a mitochondrial pattern of cofilin ( Fig . 8 E ) , Arp3 ( Fig . 8 F ) , and to a lesser degree cortactin ( Fig . 8 D ) was detect - able . Quantitative colocalization analysis also revealed significant increases in the degree of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp3 colocal - ization with mitochondrial markers in Drp1  /  MEFs , as com - pared with wild - type MEFs ( Fig . 8 G ) . Although Mander’s coefficient ( Rr ) values in wild - type MEFs were relatively low , in Drp1  /  MEFs they approached values detected for Drp1 colocalization with the mitochondria in wild - type MEFs ( see Fig . 1 F ) . Thus , we conclude that Drp1 knockout leads to robust mitochondrial accumulation of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp3 . more of total Drp1 colocalized with mitochondria in cortactin or cofilin RNAi cells than in control RNAi cells . Furthermore , a careful examination of images revealed that submitochondrial Drp1 complexes in cortactin and cofilin RNAi cells were larger than those detected in control RNAi cells ( Fig . 7 , A – C , arrows ) . We also tested the degree to which cortactin and cofilin could regulate stress - induced mitochondrial accumulation of F - actin . Cells were treated with FCCP for 2 min , fixed , and then labeled with Alexa - phalloidin and anti – cytochrome c antibody . Quantification revealed that in both cortactin and cofilin RNAi cells ( Fig . 7 F ) , FCCP treatment resulted in reduced numbers of cells displaying mitochondria - associated F - actin compared with control RNAi cells ( 25 . 66 ± 4 . 22 in cortactin RNAi cells and 23 . 00 ± 2 . 66 in cofilin RNAi cells compared with 36 . 67 ± 3 . 77 in control RNAi cells ; Fig . 7 E ) . Mitochondrial association of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes Published reports indicate that cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 protein complexes are ubiquitous proteins distributed in the nucleus , cytosol , and membrane compartments of the cell , in - cluding the cell membrane , ER , and Golgi complex ( Nishida et al . , 1987 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1987 ; Wu and Montone , 1998 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ; Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . Using structured illumination imaging , we analyzed the spatial rela - tionship between endogenous cortactin , cofilin , or Arp3 and mitochondria in control and FCCP - treated wild - type and Figure 7 . Mitochondrial accumulation of Drp1 in cortactin and cofilin RNAi cells . ( A – C ) Control RNAi ( A ) , cortactin RNAi ( B ) , and cofilin RNAi ( C ) cells were immunostained for Drp1 ( green on overlay and detail images ) and Tom20 for mito - chondria ( red on overlay and detail images ) . Im - ages were acquired using structured illumination imaging . Maximum projections of seven z - sections acquired at 0 . 25 - µm intervals starting from the bottom of the cell are shown . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 5 µm . ( D ) Colocalization of Drp1 with mitochondria was analyzed in control RNAi , cor - tactin RNAi , and cofilin RNAi cells . The values represent Mander’s correlation coefficient ( Rr ) that reveals the degree of association of pixels in different channels of the image . Data represent the mean ± SD of 15 images / condition . Each image used for the analysis contained at least two cells . ( E ) Effects of cortactin or cofilin RNAi on accumu - lation of mitochondrial F - actin in untreated and FCCP - treated ( 2 min treatment ) control RNAi , cor - tactin RNAi , and cofilin RNAi cells . Data represent mean ± AvDev from a representative experiment after triplicate counting of 150 cells / condition . ( F ) Cortactin and cofilin protein levels in cells de - scribed above ( A – E ) were analyzed by Western blotting in total cell lysates . Tom20 was used as a loading control . 119 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ; Oser et al . , 2009 ; Mooren et al . , 2012 ; Chen and Pollard , 2013 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ) led to mito - chondrial elongation and interconnection , suggesting that cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes , branched F - actin modifying proteins , are also required for mitochondrial fission . However , INF2 - and cortactin / cofilin / Arp2 / 3 - dependent regula - tion of mitochondria is likely to occur through different mecha - nisms and affect different steps in Drp1 - dependent mitochondrial fission . We found that overexpression of ER - localizing INF2 ( Chhabra et al . , 2009 ) and dominant active INF2 mutant Discussion Here , we show that transient assembly of F - actin on the OMM is vital for the control of Drp1 - mediated mitochondrial division . Our data also indicate that F - actin participates in both stress - induced and physiological mitochondrial fission . It has been proposed that the linear F - actin mediator INF2 , and likely linear F - actin fibers , are important for Drp1 - dependent mitochondrial fission ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) . We found that down - regulation of branched F - actin chain modifying proteins Figure 8 . Mitochondrial association of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp2 / 3 complexes . ( A – F ) Wild - type MEFs ( A – C ) and Drp1  /  MEFs ( D – F ) were immuno - stained with cortactin mAb ( A and D ; green on overlay images ) , cofilin ( B and E ; green on overlay images ) , and Arp3 ( C and F ; green on overlay images ) polyclonal antibodies , and Tom20 ( A and D ; red on overlay images ) or cytochrome c ( B , C , E , and F ; red on overlay image ) to reveal mitochondria . Images were acquired using structured illumination imaging . Single z - sections acquired at 0 . 25 µm intervals starting from the bottom of the cell are shown . Bars : 20 µm ; ( detail ) 2 . 5 µm . ( G ) Colocalization of cortactin , cofilin , and Arp3 with mitochondria in untreated cells and cells treated with FCCP for 2 min were analyzed in wild - type MEFs and Drp1  /  MEFs . The values represent Mander’s correlation coefficient ( Rr ) that reveal the degree of association of pixels in different channels of the image . Data represent the mean ± AvDev of 15 images / condition . Each image used for the analyses contained at least two cells . Statistical significance was determined using a two - tailed t test . * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; N . S . , P > 0 . 01 . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 120 Greater understanding of the molecular mechanism that coordinates mitochondrial assembly of F - actin with Drp1 - dependent events of mitochondrial fission is critical . We are currently investigating the potential mitochondrial components that might be implicated in coordination of F - actin and Drp1 - dependent steps in mitochondrial fission . One possibility is that MiD49 / 51 or other mitochondrial receptors of Drp1 could serve this purpose . Supporting this notion , it has been shown that overexpression of MiD49 / 51 led to inhibition of mitochondrial division associated with both mitochondrial accumulation of inactive Drp1 and abnormal mitochondrial assembly of F - actin ( Palmer et al . , 2011 ) . Although the connection between cortactin , cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complexes , and F - actin assembly on the mitochondria with Drp1 - mediated mitochondrial division has not been previ - ously demonstrated , a potential role for cofilin in the regulation of mitochondria has been reported . It was shown that cofilin trans - locates to the mitochondria upon activation of stress - induced apoptosis ( Chua et al . , 2003 ; Li et al . , 2013 ) or necrosis ( Wabnitz et al . , 2010 ) . Because Drp1 - mediated mitochondrial fragmentation is one of the events universally linked to stress - induced apoptosis ( Youle and Karbowski , 2005 ) , it is possible that cofilin , and perhaps cofilin - dependent mitochondrial F - actin remodeling , also participates in apoptotic fragmentation of the mitochondria . The suggested role of mitochondrial assembly of F - actin in apoptosis - related mitochondrial fission is supported by data showing that in cells treated with various apoptosis inducers ,  - actin accumulated on the mitochondria ( Tang et al . , 2006 ) . Structured illumination imaging revealed that F - actin lo - calized to the OMM without forming specific submitochondrial foci colocalized with Drp1 and mitochondrial division sites . These findings are at odds with recently published data suggest - ing that F - actin might form submitochondrial foci specifically at sites where mitochondria interact with the ER ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) . Our results showed a diffuse localization of F - actin on the OMM . Although these data do not exclude the possibility that mitochondria - associated F - actin specifically participates in ER tubule – and INF2 - mediated mitochondrial fission , they sug - gest a more widespread role for mitochondrial assembly of F - actin in mitochondrial fission and perhaps other aspects of mitochon - drial homeostasis . Most of the proteins implicated in mitochon - drial fission in mammalian cells—including Drp1 and Drp1 receptors Mff and MiD49 / 51 , as well as a dominant - negative mutant of MARCH5 , a mitochondria - associated E3 ubiquitin ligase—localize to submitochondrial foci forming Drp1 fission complexes ( Karbowski et al . , 2007 ; Otera et al . , 2010 ; Friedman et al . , 2011 ; Palmer et al . , 2011 ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) . The diffuse mitochondrial appearance of F - actin is rather unique , with the exception of Fis1 , another mitochondrial receptor of Drp1 ( James et al . , 2003 ; Yoon et al . , 2003 ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) . Given the current understanding of how F - actin contributes to mem - brane scission in non - mitochondrial membrane compartments , it is possible that the OMM assembly and dynamics of F - actin provide mitochondrial division - facilitating alterations of the OMM . Indeed , it has been proposed that in dynamin - and clathrin - dependent endocytosis , local assembly of the F - actin ( INF2 A149D ) led to actin accumulation on the ER . Furthermore , INF2 A149D induced abnormal bundling of F - actin , associated with altered morphology of the ER , as previously shown for the INF2 DAD / WH2 domain mutant ( Chhabra et al . , 2009 ) . Also as reported previously ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) , mitochondrial fragmentation was apparent in INF2 A149D - expressing cells ( unpublished data ) . However , we were not able to detect tran - sient assembly of F - actin on the mitochondrial fission sites and effects of INF2 and INF2 A149D on mitochondrial assembly of Drp1 ( unpublished data ) . Thus , INF2 - induced mitochondrial assembly of F - actin might be very transient and not detectable by our imaging setup . Alternatively , based on the fact that over - expression of either INF2 or INF2 A149D induces robust F - actin assembly on the ER ( unpublished data ) and fragmented mito - chondria in INF2 A149D - expressing cells tend to accumulate along an INF2 - positive subset of the ER ( unpublished data ) , it is likely that specifically the ER components of the mitochondrial fission pathway are critical for INF2 - mediated mitochondrial fission . Under this scenario , INF2 could regulate linear F - actin assem - bly on the ER tubules that would subsequently redistribute to the mitochondrial fission sites to complete the mitochondrial fission process in a manner reported previously ( Friedman et al . , 2011 ) . Although we were not able to determine the effect of INF2 A149D on mitochondrial assembly of F - actin in an unbiased manner as a result of extensive bundling of F - actin filaments , INF2 overexpression in HeLa did not appear to affect FCCP - induced mitochondrial assembly of F - actin ( unpublished data ) . We show that down - regulation of the branched F - actin modifying proteins , cortactin and cofilin , led to abnormal accu - mulation of Drp1 on the mitochondria . Because mitochondrial accumulation of Drp1 is often associated with mitochondrial fragmentation ( Frank et al . , 2001 ; Benard and Karbowski , 2009 ; Braschi et al . , 2009 ; Stavru et al . , 2013 ) , Drp1 accumulation on highly interconnected / elongated mitochondria is some - what counterintuitive . However , it has been shown that overex - pression of MiD49 / 51 , mitochondrial receptors of Drp1 , or expression of a dominant - negative mutant of MARCH5 , a mitochondria - associated E3 ubiquitin ligase , led to mitochon - drial accumulation of Drp1 fission complexes associated with abnormal elongation of mitochondria ( Karbowski et al . , 2007 ; Palmer et al . , 2011 ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) . It is possible that mito - chondrial accumulation of Drp1 observed in cortactin or cofilin RNAi cells is a result of inhibition of plausible Drp1 assembly - independent steps of mitochondrial division . Under this sce - nario , both mitochondrial assembly of Drp1 fission complexes and F - actin – dependent OMM alterations would be required for completion of Drp1 - dependent mitochondrial fission . Inhibition of either of these pathways would prevent completion of the other pathway . Indeed , Drp1 accumulated on the mitochondria in cortactin - or cofilin - depleted cells ( Fig . 7 ) , whereas F - actin and actin regulatory proteins cortactin , cofilin , and Arp3 accumu - lated in Drp1 - depleted cells ( Fig . 8 ) . Similarly , in dynamin1 / 2  /  double knockout cells , abnormal accumulation of F - actin at en - docytic vesicle formation sites was observed ( Ferguson et al . , 2009 ) , suggesting that F - actin accumulation may point to a simi - lar mechanism in Drp1 - depleted cells . 121 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . Image acquisition and analysis Images were acquired using a fluorescent microscope ( AxioObserver Z1 ; Carl Zeiss ) , equipped with a 100 / 1 . 45 a - Plan - FLUAR objective lens ( Carl Zeiss ) , an ApoTome unit ( enabling high - resolution structured illumination image acquisition ) , a Definitive Focus module , and a CCD camera ( QuantEM 512SC ; Photometrics ) at RT . The ApoTome filters were set to maximum noise elimination . The software used for image acquisition was AxioVision 4 . 8 ( Carl Zeiss ) . Image cropping and global adjustments to brightness and contrast were performed using Photoshop CS6 software ( Adobe ) . Live cell imaging was performed using the above - described system . Cells were grown in 2 - well chamber slides ( model 1 German borosilicate ; Labtec ) and imaged in Phenol red – free DMEM , supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum , 2 mM Glutamax , 1 mM sodium pyru - vate , MEM nonessential amino acids , 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 mg / ml streptomycin , and 25 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , at RT . For colocalization analyses of Drp1 and mitochondria in cortactin and cofilin RNAi cells , seven z - section images ( 0 . 25 - µm interval between each image ) , starting from the bottom of the cell ( total depth 1 . 75 µm ) , were used to make maximum intensity projections using the z - project option of the image analysis software ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) . For MEF experiments , single z - sections selected based on the higher amount of mitochondria were used . Colocalization was analyzed using ImageJ plug - in “Mander’s Coefficients” . Mitochondrial fusion assay Mito - PAGFP – based mitochondrial fusion assay was performed using a confocal microscope ( LSM 510 META ; Carl Zeiss ) equipped with Plan - Apochromat 100× / 1 . 4D oil DIC M27 objective lens ( Carl Zeiss ) as described previously ( Karbowski et al . , 2004 ; Karbowski et al . , 2006 ) . In brief , after acquisition of a preactivation image , an  5 - µm - diameter circu - lar region of interest was photoactivated by brief irradiation with 351 / 364 - nm light ( using Coherent Enterprise Ion Laser 80 . 0mW ) , followed by time - lapse imaging using 488 - nm excitation light and 488 - nm Argon Ion Laser ( 25 . 0 mW set at 0 . 3 % ) . 15 postactivation images were collected with in - terval between images set to  2 min . To avoid z - section shift , focus was maintained using the “Multi - time Macro” and the autofocusing system ( uti - lizing linescans to detect the reflection off the coverglass ) . Images were acquired and analyzed using ZEN 2009 image acquisition software ( Carl Zeiss ) . Western blot Cells were harvested , and total cell protein lysates were prepared as previ - ously described ( Xu et al . , 2011 ) . In brief , cells were collected , washed with ice - cold PBS , resuspended in SDS PAGE sample buffer , and incubated at 100°C for 10 min . Protein concentrations were measured directly in the samples using NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer ( Thermo Fisher Scien - tific ) . Proteins were separated on 4 – 20 % gradient Tris - Glycine polyacrylamide gels ( Invitrogen ) , transferred onto PVDF membranes ( Immubilon - P ; Millipore ) , and incubated with primary antibodies , followed by HRP - conjugated anti – mouse ( Roche ) or anti – rabbit ( Roche ) secondary antibodies . Blots were de - tected with ECL PLUS reagent ( GE Healthcare ) using ImageQuant LAS4000 chemiluminescence imager ( GE Healthcare ) . Antibodies used for Western blot were : anti - cortactin mAb ( clone 4F11 ; Millipore ) , anti - cofilin polyclonal antibody ( clone FL - 166 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , anti - Arp2 poly - clonal antibody ( clone H - 84 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , anti - ARC / p34 polyclonal antibody ( Millipore ) , anti - Tom20 polyclonal antibody ( clone FL - 145 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , anti - Opa1 mAb ( clone 18 ; BD ) , and anti - Mfn2 mAb ( Abcam ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 presents the submitochondrial distribution of F - actin in FCCP - and Antimycin A – treated cells . Fig . S2 shows spatial relation of F - actin and mitochondria in FCCP - treated Drp1  /  MEFs . Fig . S3 demonstrates typical mitochondrial phenotypes and effect of LatB on the mitochondrial morphology . Fig . S4 shows mitochondrial assembly of F - actin of mRuby - Lifeact in FCCP - treated Drp1 K38A - expressing living HeLa cells . Fig . S5 shows mitochondrial assembly of mCherry - UtrCH in FCCP - treated living HeLa cells . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201404050 / DC1 . The authors would like to thank Pamela Wright and the members of the Karbowski laboratory for comments on the manuscript , Dr . David Chan for Mfn2  /  and Mff  /  MEFs , Dr . Thomas Blanpied for the mRUBY - Lifeact con - struct , and Ferenc Livak ( Flow Cytometry Core Facility , University of Maryland , Baltimore ) for the excellent service provided . cytoskeleton led to reorganization of membrane lipids , in partic - ular cholesterol - enriched lipid domains that in turn facilitated vesicle fission ( Yao et al . , 2013 ; Dason et al . , 2014 ) . It is also likely that F - actin has a critical role in providing a mitochondrial constriction / scission - facilitating force ( Skruzny et al . , 2012 ) . Materials and methods Cell culture , transfection , and treatments HeLa and wild - type , Drp1  /  ( Kageyama et al . , 2012 ) , Mff  /  ( based on the line AZ0438 , containing Mff gene trap disruption ; Losón et al . , 2013 ) , and Mfn2  /  MEFs ( Chen et al . , 2003 ) were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum , 2 mM Gluta - max , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , MEM nonessential amino acids ( Gibco ) , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 mg / ml streptomycin in 5 % CO 2 at 37°C . Mfn2  /  and Mff  /  MEFs were provided by D . Chan ( Caltech , Pasadena , CA ) . Cells were transfected with X - tremeGeneHP ( Roche ) or Lipofectamine2000 ( Invitrogen ) transfection reagents , according to the manufacturer’s instruc - tions . Cells were used for analyses at 16 – 20 h after transfection . Cell cycle arrest of HeLa cells was performed as previously described ( Whitfield et al . , 2000 ) . In brief , cells were treated with 2mM thymidine for 18 h , followed by PBS washes and then 9 h in thymidine - free media . Cells were then incu - bated with 2 mM thymidine for an additional 18 h , followed by washing with PBS . Normal growth medium was added , and then a subset of cells was fixed over time for up to 10 h after the release from the thymidine block . Cell cycle status of the released cells was monitored by flow cytometry after propidium iodide ( PI ) staining . Expression constructs and shRNAi mRuby - Lifeact construct ( Riedl et al . , 2008 ) was provided by T . Blanpied ( University of Maryland , Baltimore , MD ) . mCherry - UtrCH ( Burkel et al . , 2007 ) was purchased from Addgene ( plasmid 26740 ; deposited by W . Bement ) . The Mito - YFP construct was purchased from Takara Bio Inc . GFP - tagged INF2 and INF2 ( Korobova et al . , 2013 ) were provided by H . Higgs ( Dartmouth Medical School , Hanover , NH ) . MISSION shRNAi vectors were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Cortactin ( TRCN0000294181 , RNAi # 1 ; TRCN0000294182 , RNAi # 2 ; and TRCN0000298256 , RNAi # 3 ) , cofilin ( TRCN0000381606 , RNAi # 1 ; TRCN0000381418 , RNAi # 2 ; and TRCN0000381720 , RNAi # 3 ) , gelsolin ( TRCN0000343442 , RNAi # 1 ; TRCN0000343443 , RNAi # 2 ; and TRCN0000352869 , RNAi # 3 ) , Arp2 ( TRCN0000290833 ) , p34 ( TRCN0000379644 ) , Opa1 ( TRCN0000303506 ) , and Mfn2 ( TRCN0000082686 ) were down - regulated with above - mentioned MISSION shRNAi vectors . eGFP targeting shRNAi construct was used as a control ( SHC005 ) . Cells were transfected with respective shRNAi constructs , and then  24 h after transfection they were incubated with 3 µg / ml puromycin for an additional 4 – 5 d to select trans - fected cells . Immunofluorescence Immunofluorescence was performed as previously described ( Benard and Karbowski , 2009 ; Xu et al . , 2011 ) . For immunofluorescence , cells grown in 2 - well chamber slides ( model 1 German borosilicate ; Labtec ) were fixed with prewarmed to 37°C 4 % PFA in PBS solution for 20 min at RT , and then permeabilized with 0 . 15 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 20 min at RT . After blocking with 7 . 5 % BSA in PBS for 45 min , samples were incubated with primary antibodies in 7 . 5 % BSA in PBS for 90 min at RT , followed by 3 washes with 7 . 5 % BSA in PBS and incubation with secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for 45 min at RT . Samples were washed with PBS at RT , and imaged directly in PBS within 2 d after immunofluorescence pro - cessing . The primary antibodies were : anti - Tom20 polyclonal antibody ( dilution 1 : 2 , 000 ; clone FL - 145 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , anti – cytochrome c mAb ( 1 : 300 ; clone 6H2 . B4 ; BD ) , anti - cortactin mAb ( 1 : 500 ; clone 4F11 ; Millipore ) , anti - cofilin polyclonal antibody ( 1 : 500 ; clone FL166 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , anti - Arp3 polyclonal antibody ( 1 : 500 ; Millipore ) , anti - ARC / p34 polyclonal antibody ( 1 : 500 ; Millipore ) , anti - Dlp1 ( Drp1 ) mAb ( 1 : 250 ; clone 8 ; BD ) , and anti - Mff polyclonal anti - body ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; ProteinTech ) . Secondary antibodies were anti – mouse or anti – rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 ( 1 : 500 ; Molecular Probes ) , or anti – mouse or anti – rabbit Alexa Fluor 546 ( 1 : 500 ; Molecular Probes ) . F - actin in fixed cells was detected using Alexa 546 – phalloidin , according to the manufac - turer’s protocol ( Molecular Probes ) . In brief , after blocking with 7 . 5 % BSA in PBS , cells were incubated with 6 . 7 U / ml Alexa 546 – phalloidin in blocking buffer for 60 min at RT , washed and then processed for immunofluorescence with respective primary antibodies . JCB • volume 208 • numBer 1 • 2015 122 Friedman , J . R . , L . L . Lackner , M . West , J . R . DiBenedetto , J . Nunnari , and G . K . Voeltz . 2011 . ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division . Science . 334 : 358 – 362 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1207385 Gandre - Babbe , S . , and A . M . van der Bliek . 2008 . The novel tail - anchored mem - brane protein Mff controls mitochondrial and peroxisomal fission in mam - malian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 19 : 2402 – 2412 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 12 - 1287 Guo , C . , K . L . Hildick , J . Luo , L . Dearden , K . A . Wilkinson , and J . M . Henley . 2013 . SENP3 - mediated deSUMOylation of dynamin - related protein 1 pro - motes cell death following ischaemia . EMBO J . 32 : 1514 – 1528 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2013 . 65 Ingerman , E . , E . M . Perkins , M . Marino , J . A . Mears , J . M . McCaffery , J . E . Hinshaw , and J . Nunnari . 2005 . Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to fit mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 170 : 1021 – 1027 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200506078 James , D . I . , P . A . Parone , Y . Mattenberger , and J . C . Martinou . 2003 . hFis1 , a novel component of the mammalian mitochondrial fission machinery . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 36373 – 36379 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M303758200 Kageyama , Y . , Z . Zhang , R . Roda , M . Fukaya , J . Wakabayashi , N . Wakabayashi , T . W . Kensler , P . H . Reddy , M . Iijima , and H . Sesaki . 2012 . Mitochondrial division ensures the survival of postmitotic neurons by suppressing oxidative damage . J . Cell Biol . 197 : 535 – 551 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201110034 Kaksonen , M . , H . B . Peng , and H . Rauvala . 2000 . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 4421 – 4426 . Karbowski , M . , D . Arnoult , H . Chen , D . C . Chan , C . L . Smith , and R . J . Youle . 2004 . Quantitation of mitochondrial dynamics by photolabeling of indi - vidual organelles shows that mitochondrial fusion is blocked during the Bax activation phase of apoptosis . J . Cell Biol . 164 : 493 – 499 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200309082 Karbowski , M . , K . L . Norris , M . M . Cleland , S . Y . Jeong , and R . J . Youle . 2006 . Role of Bax and Bak in mitochondrial morphogenesis . Nature . 443 : 658 – 662 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature05111 Karbowski , M . , A . Neutzner , and R . J . Youle . 2007 . The mitochondrial E3 ubiq - uitin ligase MARCH5 is required for Drp1 dependent mitochondrial divi - sion . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 71 – 84 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200611064 Kashatus , D . F . , K . H . Lim , D . C . Brady , N . L . Pershing , A . D . Cox , and C . M . Counter . 2011 . RALA and RALBP1 regulate mitochondrial fission at mi - tosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 1108 – 1115 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2310 Knott , A . B . , G . Perkins , R . Schwarzenbacher , and E . Bossy - Wetzel . 2008 . Mitochondrial fragmentation in neurodegeneration . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 9 : 505 – 518 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrn2417 Korobova , F . , V . Ramabhadran , and H . N . Higgs . 2013 . An actin - dependent step in mitochondrial fission mediated by the ER - associated formin INF2 . Science . 339 : 464 – 467 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1228360 Li , G . B . , Q . Cheng , L . Liu , T . Zhou , C . Y . Shan , X . Y . Hu , J . Zhou , E . H . Liu , P . Li , and N . Gao . 2013 . Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is re - quired for allyl isothiocyanate - mediated cell death via ROCK1 / PTEN / PI3K signaling pathway . Cell Commun . Signal . 11 : 50 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1478 - 811X - 11 - 50 Losón , O . C . , Z . Song , H . Chen , and D . C . Chan . 2013 . Fis1 , Mff , MiD49 , and MiD51 mediate Drp1 recruitment in mitochondrial fission . Mol . Biol . Cell . 24 : 659 – 667 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 10 - 0721 Mooren , O . L . , B . J . Galletta , and J . A . Cooper . 2012 . Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 81 : 661 – 686 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - biochem - 060910 - 094416 Nishida , E . , K . Iida , N . Yonezawa , S . Koyasu , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1987 . Cofilin is a component of intranuclear and cytoplasmic actin rods induced in cultured cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 5262 – 5266 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 84 . 15 . 5262 Nunnari , J . , and A . Suomalainen . 2012 . Mitochondria : in sickness and in health . Cell . 148 : 1145 – 1159 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 02 . 035 Okreglak , V . , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . Cofilin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200703092 Oser , M . , H . Yamaguchi , C . C . Mader , J . J . Bravo - Cordero , M . Arias , X . Chen , V . Desmarais , J . van Rheenen , A . J . Koleske , and J . Condeelis . 2009 . Cortactin regulates cofilin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 : 571 – 587 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200812176 Otera , H . , C . Wang , M . M . Cleland , K . Setoguchi , S . Yokota , R . J . Youle , and K . Mihara . 2010 . Mff is an essential factor for mitochondrial recruitment of Drp1 during mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 191 : 1141 – 1158 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201007152 Palmer , C . S . , L . D . Osellame , D . Laine , O . S . Koutsopoulos , A . E . Frazier , and M . T . Ryan . 2011 . MiD49 and MiD51 , new components of the The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from NIH : R01GM089853 ( H . Sesaki ) , R01 HL105239 and U01 HL116321 ( W . J . Lederer ) , and R01 GM083131 and R01 GM102177 ( M . Karbowski ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Submitted : 10 April 2014 Accepted : 1 December 2014 References Alexander , C . , M . Votruba , U . E . Pesch , D . L . Thiselton , S . Mayer , A . Moore , M . Rodriguez , U . Kellner , B . Leo - Kottler , G . Auburger , et al . 2000 . OPA1 , encoding a dynamin - related GTPase , is mutated in autosomal dominant optic atrophy linked to chromosome 3q28 . Nat . Genet . 26 : 211 – 215 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 79944 Beck , H . , K . Flynn , K . S . Lindenberg , H . Schwarz , F . Bradke , S . Di Giovanni , and B . Knöll . 2012 . Serum Response Factor ( SRF ) - cofilin - actin signal - ing axis modulates mitochondrial dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E2523 – E2532 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1208141109 Benard , G . , and M . Karbowski . 2009 . Mitochondrial fusion and division : Regulation and role in cell viability . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 : 365 – 374 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2008 . 12 . 012 Blanchoin , L . , R . Boujemaa - Paterski , C . Sykes , and J . Plastino . 2014 . Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 : 235 – 263 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00018 . 2013 Braschi , E . , R . Zunino , and H . M . McBride . 2009 . MAPL is a new mitochon - drial SUMO E3 ligase that regulates mitochondrial fission . EMBO Rep . 10 : 748 – 754 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / embor . 2009 . 86 Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , M . A . Magalhaes , R . J . Eddy , L . Hodgson , and J . Condeelis . 2013 . Functions of cofilin in cell locomotion and invasion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 : 405 – 415 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3609 Bui , H . T . , and J . M . Shaw . 2013 . Dynamin assembly strategies and adaptor pro - teins in mitochondrial fission . Curr . Biol . 23 : R891 – R899 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 08 . 040 Burkel , B . M . , G . von Dassow , and W . M . Bement . 2007 . Versatile fluorescent probes for actin filaments based on the actin - binding domain of utrophin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 64 : 822 – 832 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 20226 Cereghetti , G . M . , A . Stangherlin , O . Martins de Brito , C . R . Chang , C . Blackstone , P . Bernardi , and L . Scorrano . 2008 . Dephosphorylation by calcineurin regulates translocation of Drp1 to mitochondria . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 15803 – 15808 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0808249105 Chen , Q . , and T . D . Pollard . 2013 . Actin filament severing by cofilin dismantles actin patches and produces mother filaments for new patches . Curr . Biol . 23 : 1154 – 1162 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 005 Chen , H . , S . A . Detmer , A . J . Ewald , E . E . Griffin , S . E . Fraser , and D . C . Chan . 2003 . Mitofusins Mfn1 and Mfn2 coordinately regulate mitochondrial fu - sion and are essential for embryonic development . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 189 – 200 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200211046 Chen , H . , J . M . McCaffery , and D . C . Chan . 2007 . Mitochondrial fusion protects against neurodegeneration in the cerebellum . Cell . 130 : 548 – 562 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 06 . 026 Chhabra , E . S . , V . Ramabhadran , S . A . Gerber , and H . N . Higgs . 2009 . INF2 is an endoplasmic reticulum - associated formin protein . J . Cell Sci . 122 : 1430 – 1440 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 040691 Chua , B . T . , C . Volbracht , K . O . Tan , R . Li , V . C . Yu , and P . Li . 2003 . Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is an early step in apoptosis induction . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 1083 – 1089 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1070 Dason , J . S . , A . J . Smith , L . Marin , and M . P . Charlton . 2014 . Cholesterol and F - actin are required for clustering of recycling synaptic vesicle proteins in the presynaptic plasma membrane . J . Physiol . 592 : 621 – 633 . De Vos , K . J . , V . J . Allan , A . J . Grierson , and M . P . Sheetz . 2005 . Mitochondrial function and actin regulate dynamin - related protein 1 - dependent mito - chondrial fission . Curr . Biol . 15 : 678 – 683 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 02 . 064 DuBoff , B . , J . Götz , and M . B . Feany . 2012 . Tau promotes neurodegeneration via DRP1 mislocalization in vivo . Neuron . 75 : 618 – 632 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 06 . 026 Ferguson , S . M . , A . Raimondi , S . Paradise , H . Shen , K . Mesaki , A . Ferguson , O . Destaing , G . Ko , J . Takasaki , O . Cremona , et al . 2009 . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell . 17 : 811 – 822 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 11 . 005 Frank , S . , B . Gaume , E . S . Bergmann - Leitner , W . W . Leitner , E . G . Robert , F . Catez , C . L . Smith , and R . J . Youle . 2001 . The role of dynamin - related protein 1 , a mediator of mitochondrial fission , in apoptosis . Dev . Cell . 1 : 515 – 525 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 01 ) 00055 - 7 123 F - actin and mitochondrial fission • li et al . Zunino , R . , E . Braschi , L . Xu , and H . M . McBride . 2009 . Translocation of SenP5 from the nucleoli to the mitochondria modulates DRP1 - dependent fis - sion during mitosis . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 17783 – 17795 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M901902200 mitochondrial fission machinery . EMBO Rep . 12 : 565 – 573 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / embor . 2011 . 54 Riedl , J . , A . H . Crevenna , K . Kessenbrock , J . H . Yu , D . Neukirchen , M . Bista , F . Bradke , D . Jenne , T . A . Holak , Z . Werb , et al . 2008 . Lifeact : a versa - tile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods . 5 : 605 – 607 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1220 Riedl , J . , K . C . Flynn , A . Raducanu , F . Gärtner , G . Beck , M . Bösl , F . Bradke , S . Massberg , A . Aszodi , M . Sixt , and R . Wedlich - Söldner . 2010 . Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat . Methods . 7 : 168 – 169 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth0310 - 168 Salbreux , G . , G . Charras , and E . Paluch . 2012 . Actin cortex mechanics and cellular morphogenesis . Trends Cell Biol . 22 : 536 – 545 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2012 . 07 . 001 Skruzny , M . , T . Brach , R . Ciuffa , S . Rybina , M . Wachsmuth , and M . Kaksonen . 2012 . Molecular basis for coupling the plasma membrane to the actin cytoskeleton during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E2533 – E2542 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207011109 Stavru , F . , A . E . Palmer , C . Wang , R . J . Youle , and P . Cossart . 2013 . Atypical mi - tochondrial fission upon bacterial infection . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 110 : 16003 – 16008 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1315784110 Stoeber , M . , I . K . Stoeck , C . Hänni , C . K . Bleck , G . Balistreri , and A . Helenius . 2012 . Oligomers of the ATPase EHD2 confine caveolae to the plasma membrane through association with actin . EMBO J . 31 : 2350 – 2364 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2012 . 98 Taguchi , N . , N . Ishihara , A . Jofuku , T . Oka , and K . Mihara . 2007 . Mitotic phosphorylation of dynamin - related GTPase Drp1 participates in mito - chondrial fission . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 11521 – 11529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M607279200 Tang , H . L . , A . H . Le , and H . L . Lung . 2006 . The increase in mitochondrial as - sociation with actin precedes Bax translocation in apoptosis . Biochem . J . 396 : 1 – 5 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BJ20060241 Taylor , M . J . , D . Perrais , and C . J . Merrifield . 2011 . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 9 : e1000604 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000604 Tondera , D . , S . Grandemange , A . Jourdain , M . Karbowski , Y . Mattenberger , S . Herzig , S . Da Cruz , P . Clerc , I . Raschke , C . Merkwirth , et al . 2009 . SLP - 2 is required for stress - induced mitochondrial hyperfusion . EMBO J . 28 : 1589 – 1600 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2009 . 89 Wabnitz , G . H . , C . Goursot , B . Jahraus , H . Kirchgessner , A . Hellwig , M . Klemke , M . H . Konstandin , and Y . Samstag . 2010 . Mitochondrial trans - location of oxidized cofilin induces caspase - independent necrotic - like programmed cell death of T cells . Cell Death Dis . 1 : e58 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2010 . 36 Whitfield , M . L . , L . X . Zheng , A . Baldwin , T . Ohta , M . M . Hurt , and W . F . Marzluff . 2000 . Stem - loop binding protein , the protein that binds the 3  end of histone mRNA , is cell cycle regulated by both translational and posttranslational mechanisms . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 4188 – 4198 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 20 . 12 . 4188 - 4198 . 2000 Wu , H . , and K . T . Montone . 1998 . Cortactin localization in actin - containing adult and fetal tissues . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 46 : 1189 – 1191 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 002215549804601011 Xu , S . , G . Peng , Y . Wang , S . Fang , and M . Karbowski . 2011 . The AAA - ATPase p97 is essential for outer mitochondrial membrane protein turnover . Mol . Biol . Cell . 22 : 291 – 300 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 09 - 0748 Yao , L . H . , Y . Rao , C . Bang , S . Kurilova , K . Varga , C . Y . Wang , B . D . Weller , W . Cho , J . Cheng , and L . W . Gong . 2013 . Actin polymerization does not provide direct mechanical forces for vesicle fission during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Neurosci . 33 : 15793 – 15798 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2171 - 13 . 2013 Yonezawa , N . , E . Nishida , S . Koyasu , S . Maekawa , Y . Ohta , I . Yahara , and H . Sakai . 1987 . Distribution among tissues and intracellular localization of cofilin , a 21kDa actin - binding protein . Cell Struct . Funct . 12 : 443 – 452 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1247 / csf . 12 . 443 Yoon , Y . , E . W . Krueger , B . J . Oswald , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . The mitochon - drial protein hFis1 regulates mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells through an interaction with the dynamin - like protein DLP1 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 5409 – 5420 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 23 . 15 . 5409 - 5420 . 2003 Youle , R . J . , and M . Karbowski . 2005 . Mitochondrial fission in apoptosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 657 – 663 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm1697 Züchner , S . , I . V . Mersiyanova , M . Muglia , N . Bissar - Tadmouri , J . Rochelle , E . L . Dadali , M . Zappia , E . Nelis , A . Patitucci , J . Senderek , et al . 2004 . Mutations in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot - Marie - Tooth neuropathy type 2A . Nat . Genet . 36 : 449 – 451 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng1341 Zunino , R . , A . Schauss , P . Rippstein , M . Andrade - Navarro , and H . M . McBride . 2007 . The SUMO protease SENP5 is required to maintain mitochondrial morphology and function . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 1178 – 1188 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03418