Cornell University School of Hotel Administration The Scholarly Commons Articles and Chapters School of Hotel Administration Collection 1 - 2014 Audience Heterogeneity and the Effectiveness of Market Signals : How to Overcome Liabilities of Foreignness in Film Exports ? Heeyon Kim Cornell University , heeyon @ cornell . edu Michael Jensen The University Of Michigan Follow this and additional works at : https : / / scholarship . sha . cornell . edu / articles Part of the Behavioral Economics Commons , Film and Media Studies Commons , and the Marketing Commons This Article or Chapter is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Hotel Administration Collection at The Scholarly Commons . It has been accepted for inclusion in Articles and Chapters by an authorized administrator of The Scholarly Commons . For more information , please contact hlmdigital @ cornell . edu . Recommended Citation Kim , H . & Jensen , M . ( 2014 ) . Audience heterogeneity and the effectiveness of market signals : How to overcome liabilities of foreignness in film exports ? Academy of Management Journal , 57 ( 5 ) , 1360 - 1384 . Audience Heterogeneity and the Effectiveness of Market Signals : How to Overcome Liabilities of Foreignness in Film Exports ? Abstract This study extends research on the importance of market signals in international markets for cultural products by examining not only when market signals are important but also what types of market signals are most important to which audiences . Specifically , we argue that audience heterogeneity influences the effectiveness of commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals in international film markets . Audience heterogeneity refers to the differences in the cultural knowledge and preferences of domestic and foreign consumers ( end audiences ) and product specialization of domestic and foreign distributors ( intermediary audiences ) . Our empirical setting is the European film industry . We use a large sample of films produced and distributed domestically and internationally in Europe between 2004 and 2009 . We find that domestic commercial performance and film festival participation increase international film success , but also that their effects depend on the cultural distance between countries and the use of major or independent distribution in the domestic and foreign markets . Keywords artistic acclaim , audience heterogeneity , commercial performance , cultural distance , film exports , liability of foreignness , market signals Disciplines Behavioral Economics | Film and Media Studies | Marketing Comments Required Publisher Statement : © Academy of Management . Reprinted with permission . All rights reserved . This article or chapter is available at The Scholarly Commons : https : / / scholarship . sha . cornell . edu / articles / 1171 AUDIENCE HETEROGENEITY AND THE EFFECTIVENESS OF MARKET SIGNALS : HOW TO OVERCOME LIABILITIES OF FOREIGNNESS IN FILM EXPORTS ? HEEYON KIM National University of Singapore MICHAEL JENSEN University of Michigan This study extends research on the importance of market signals in international markets for cultural products by examining not only when market signals are impor - tant but also what types of market signals are most important to which audiences . Specifically , we argue that audience heterogeneity influences the effectiveness of commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals in international film markets . Audience heterogeneity refers to the differences in the cultural knowledge and preferences of domestic and foreign consumers ( end audiences ) and product specialization of domestic and foreign distributors ( intermediary audiences ) . Our empirical setting is the European film industry . We use a large sample of films produced and distributed domestically and internationally in Europe between 2004 and 2009 . We find that domestic commercial performance and film festival participa - tion increase international film success , but also that their effects depend on the cultural distance between countries and the use of major or independent distribution in the domestic and foreign markets . The importance of market signals as a mecha - nism to reduce uncertainty about quality in eco - nomic and social exchange is well established . Fol - lowing Spence ( 1974 : 1 ) , who defined market signals as “activities or attributes of individuals [ producers ] in a market which , by design or acci - dent , alter the beliefs of , or convey information to , other individuals [ audiences ] in the market , ” schol - ars have explored how and when market signals reduce uncertainty about product quality ( see Con - nelly , Certo , Ireland , & Reutzel , 2011 , and Riley , 2001 , for comprehensive reviews ) . Whether market signals are defined in terms of product attributes , such as price ( Bagwell & Riordan , 1991 ; Milgrom & Roberts , 1986 ) and brand ( Dawar & Parker , 1994 ; Rao , Qu , & Ruekert , 1999 ) , or organizational attri - butes , such as status ( Jensen , Kim , & Kim , 2011 ; Podolny , 1993 ) and reputation ( Jensen , Kim , & Kim , 2012 ; Rindova , Williamson , Petkova , & Sever , 2005 ) , most research focuses on producers and the specific actions they take to communicate unob - servable quality to audiences ( Connelly et al . , 2011 ; Pollock & Gulati , 2007 ) . The focus on producers and their actions is not surprising , given Spence’s ( 1973 : 357 ) original emphasis on attributes that are subject to producer “manipulation . ” It does , how - ever , neglect the potentially important role of ex - ternal audiences and how they use market signals as screening devices in determining the effective - ness of market signals , defined here as the extent to which market signals influence exchange deci - sions . 1 The effectiveness of market signals depends on audiences in two different ways . First , market sig - nal effectiveness depends on the extent to which We thank Bo Kyung Kim , Jim Westphal , Minyuan Zhao , and seminar participants at Erasmus University , INSEAD , University of Michigan , and the Academy of Management Annual Meeting ( San Antonio , 2011 ) for helpful comments . Associate editor Tim Pollock and three anonymous reviewers provided excellent guidance throughout the review process . Please direct all corre - spondence to Michael Jensen ( michjen @ umich . edu ) . 1 The terms “signal” and “screen” refer to two different aspects of market signaling . Signaling is an act taken by a producer ( or other market participants , such as interme - diaries , certifiers , and critics ) to send information , whereas screening is an act taken by an audience to process the received information regardless of the origin of the information ( Riley , 2001 ; Spence , 1974 ) . 1360 (cid:2) Academy of Management Journal 2014 , Vol . 57 , No . 5 , 1360 – 1384 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amj . 2011 . 0903 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . audiences pay attention to a market signal . As noted by Pollock and Gulati ( 2007 : 340 ) , “to serve as uncertainty reducing signals , these characteris - tics [ market signals ] must first attract the attention of those who use them . ” To address this issue , Pollock and Gulati ( 2007 ) examined how different market signals ( IPO market reaction , investment bank and venture capitalist affiliations , and cover - age by security analysts ) differentially increase the visibility of entrepreneurial firms , and , therefore , their ability to form strategic alliances . Second , market signal effectiveness depends also on how audiences interpret market signals ( Heil & Robert - son , 1991 ) . Most research assumes that signal inter - pretation is unproblematic as audiences are as - sumed to be homogeneous and therefore agree on the relationship between observed signals and un - observable quality ( Connelly et al . , 2011 ) . We chal - lenge these assumptions and focus on the conse - quences of audience heterogeneity for signal effectiveness , defining a heterogeneous audience as one comprised of subgroups with different levels of knowledge , preferences , and specialization in a particular product . In other words , we seek to un - derstand not only when market signals are impor - tant , as has been the focus of other research ( Jensen & Roy , 2008 ; Podolny , 1994 ; Pollock , Rindova , & Maggitti , 2008 ) , but also what types of market sig - nals are most effective with which audiences . We study the importance of audience heteroge - neity for market signal effectiveness in interna - tional markets for cultural products . “Audience heterogeneity” refers , in this context , to differences in the cultural preferences of domestic and foreign consumers and product specialization of domestic and foreign distributors . Markets for cultural prod - ucts are typically characterized by a high degree of uncertainty about audience preferences . It is hard for producers to predict frequently changing audi - ence preferences , and hard for audiences to evalu - ate cultural products before purchase : cultural products are experience products and many audi - ences first discover their actual preferences for them during consumption ( De Vany , 2004 : 7 ; Hirsch , 1972 ) . The uncertainty of cultural products is exacerbated in foreign markets because most pro - ducers are less familiar with foreign audiences than with domestic audiences , and most audiences are less familiar with foreign products than with do - mestic products . Foreignness is therefore often a liability ( Caves , 1982 ; Hymer , 1960 ; Zaheer , 1995 ) in markets for cultural products . The liability of foreignness for cultural products is particularly challenging because the foreignness of cultural products typically is an integral part of the cultural products themselves . The embeddedness of cul - tural products in specific cultural contexts ( lan - guage , history , and customs ) makes it hard to re - move their foreignness outside their domestic market without questioning the authenticity ( Peter - son , 1997 ) of the cultural products . The uncertainty of cultural products is re - flected in the important role of market signals in their markets . Commercial performance and ar - tistic acclaim are two important , and , therefore , commonly used , indicators of quality in markets for cultural products , including film markets ( Holbrook & Addis , 2008 ; Baumann , 2002 ; Faulkner & Anderson , 1987 ) . Commercial success implies that a cultural product is popular with mainstream audiences and therefore in high de - mand , whereas artistic acclaim implies artistic approval by expert audiences such as critics and industry peers . Commercial performance and ar - tistic acclaim are mostly outside the control of producers of cultural products , but they are often used in product promotions , and are typically easily observable through broadly communicated sales rankings and cultural awards . The impor - tance of commercial performance and artistic ac - claim as market signals is particularly well estab - lished in the film industry in which early commercial performance and artistic acclaim tend to increase later commercial performance in domestic markets ( Sawhney & Eliashberg , 1996 ) . Commercial performance and artistic acclaim also help reduce the liability of foreignness and increase commercial performance when films are released in foreign markets ( Elberse & Eliashberg , 2003 ; Lee , 2009 ) , thus providing a strong founda - tion in existing research for examining the impor - tance of audience heterogeneity for the effective - ness of these market signals in the context of the film industry . We ask specifically how audience heterogene - ity moderates the effect of domestic commercial performance and artistic acclaim on the export likelihood and foreign commercial performance in the European film market . The cultural diver - sity of European countries and their distinct styles of film making provide an appropriate con - text in which to study how audience heterogene - ity , operationalized both by the cultural distance between film consumers and the product special - ization of major and independent film distribu - tors in domestic and foreign markets , influences 2014 1361 Kim and Jensen the effectiveness of commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals . 2 By focusing on the film industry , we can use existing film research on audience heterogeneity , which , to - gether with existing film research on market sig - nals , allows us to theorize how audience hetero - geneity shapes market signal effectiveness . In sum , our theoretical framework and empirical analyses provide a nuanced and rigorous account of how audience heterogeneity , a neglected as - pect of market signal theory , affects the ways in which market signals shape the perception of cultural products in international markets . MARKET SIGNALS AND AUDIENCE HETEROGENEITY IN FILM MARKETS The main function of market signals is to reduce information asymmetry between the producer sending the signal and the audiences receiving the signal . The standard market signal model focuses on heterogeneous producers who generate and send signals to homogeneous audiences who re - ceive and interpret the signals before making ex - change decisions ( Spence , 1974 ) . International markets for cultural products pose a particular challenge to the standard market signal model be - cause the production and consumption of cultural products take place in different cultural contexts , thus ensuring considerable heterogeneity between domestic and foreign audiences in their knowledge of and preferences for cultural products . Most audiences prefer cultural products from their own country not because of inherent national tastes but simply because they have had greater exposure to these cultural products ( Stigler & Becker , 1977 ) , and have come to know the basic artistic conventions behind domestic cultural prod - ucts ( Becker , 1982 : 46 ) . Knowing domestic artistic conventions allows audiences to appreciate domes - tic cultural products more easily without having to make the additional investments necessary to un - derstand and fully appreciate foreign cultural prod - ucts . Audience heterogeneity and perceived for - eignness are therefore inseparable in international markets for cultural products : embeddedness in a national cultural context tends to make cultural products from other cultural contexts appear for - eign and therefore less attractive . 3 International film markets are no exception : mar - ket signals are important for both film distributors , making decisions about what films to import , and for film audiences , making decisions about what films to watch . Domestic commercial performance and artistic acclaim help foreign distributors to es - timate the market potential of foreign films in their own markets , and to counter negative country - of - origin effects ( Magnusson , Westjohn , & Zdravkovic , 2011 ) among foreign audiences . Another approach to counter negative country - of - origin effects would be to localize foreign films by remaking them for foreign markets , a common approach to noncul - tural foreign products ( Zaheer , 1995 ) . Although for - eign films are occasionally remade for the U . S . market , this approach is costly and hardly ever used in other markets ( Horton & McDougal , 1998 ) . Domestic commercial performance functions , first and foremost , as a readily available quality screen that allows foreign distributors to select and market popular and , therefore , seemingly promising films for distribution in their own countries . Not surpris - ing , research supports using domestic commercial performance to predict foreign commercial perfor - mance by showing that domestic commercial per - formance is associated with higher foreign commer - cial performance . Elberse and Eliashberg ( 2003 ) , for example , found that domestic commercial perfor - mance increased foreign commercial performance in a sample of Hollywood films exported to foreign markets ( see also Craig , Greene , & Douglas , 2005 ; Fu & Lee , 2008 ) . 2 Film distributors and film consumers are the key audiences for films : distributors are intermediary audi - ences and film consumers are end audiences . By conven - tion , we use “film audiences” to refer to film consumers henceforth . 3 Foreignness is not always is a liability , especially when audiences are familiar with foreign products ( Knight , Holdsworth , & Mather , 2007 ) , and it can even be an asset ( Nachum , 2003 , 2010 ; Newburry , Gardberg , & Belkin , 2006 ) . When a product category has strong roots in a particular region or country , being from that region or country can be a valuable asset that increases per - ceived product quality ( Veale & Quester , 2009 ) . Specifi - cally , some products have , over time , become commonly identified with a particular region or country , such as sparkling wine from Champagne , France , or Parmesan cheese from Parma ( Emilia - Romagna ) , Italy , which makes it difficult for producers not located in these re - gions to be accepted as authentic producers , regardless of quality ( see Lampert & Jaffe ( 1996 ) and Roth & Diaman - topoulos ( 2009 ) for comprehensive reviews of country - of - origin research ) . 1362 October Academy of Management Journal Artistic acclaim achieved through film awards and festival participation is a different type of mar - ket signal that allows screening on artistic quality rather than popularity alone ( Holbrook , 1999 ; Hol - brook & Addis , 2008 ) . It is well established that film awards such as the Academy Awards have a positive impact on domestic and foreign commer - cial performance ( Dodds & Holbrook , 1988 ; Lee , 2009 ; Nelson , Donihue , Waldman , & Wheaton , 2001 ) . International film festivals have received less attention , but have also been an integral part of the film industry—in particular , in Europe—since the establishment of the first festival in Venice in 1932 . The most prestigious international festivals— notably , the festivals in Cannes , Berlin , and Ven - ice—have a “professed commitment to artistic ex - cellence and nothing else” ( Elsaesser , 2005 : 96 ) and provide “another way of transcending the national for European films” ( Elsaesser , 2005 : 83 ) . These film festivals are organized around competitions in which films that have not been publicly screened compete for different film awards . Both the few films entering the competition and the films even - tually winning awards are selected by committees and juries of film experts such as prominent direc - tors , actors , film scholars , and critics ( Gemser , Leenders , & Wijnberg , 2008 ; Wijnberg , 1995 ) . Opening in competition at Cannes , Berlin , and Venice is an important form of artistic acclaim that , unlike many film awards ( including the Academy Awards ) , is not affected by commercial perfor - mance because the selected films have yet to open to the wider public . We argue that domestic commercial performance and artistic acclaim are important market signals for intermediary film distributors and final film audiences . Film distributors provide a bridge be - tween film producers and their domestic ( domestic distributors ) and foreign ( foreign distributors ) au - diences ; “they select the films they believe will appeal to audiences , convince theater owners to exhibit them , copy and distribute reels to the the - aters , and promote films prior to and after their release” ( Sorenson & Waguespack , 2006 : 566 ) . Most ( European ) films enter international markets in a staged manner : they are first distributed domesti - cally by a domestic distributor , and then distrib - uted internationally by foreign distributors . Distri - bution is typically handled by different distributors in domestic and foreign markets because most dis - tributors , even the large international subsidiaries of Hollywood film studios , operate and have the rights to distribute films on a market - by - market basis only ( Finney , 2010 ) . Domestic distributors are mostly restricted to product - based market signals controlled by film producers , such as choice of cast and crew , because domestic distribution is decided during the film production stage . Foreign distribu - tors can , however , also use market - based signals not controlled by film producers , including domes - tic commercial performance and artistic acclaim , because foreign distribution is decided after do - mestic distribution . 4 Most film audiences view foreign films as art films , even if the foreign films were seen as main - stream films in their own domestic markets . As a result , foreign films are commonly defined as “art films , ” together with “independent films , ” “classic re - releases , ” and “documentaries” ( Austin , 1984 ; Chuu , Chang , & Zaichkowsky , 2009 ) . The art film audiences open to foreign films are different from the audiences interested in mainstream films only : they are better educated , plan ahead to see films , are interested in learning about films , actively seek information about films , and are more positive about foreign films , although they also favor do - mestic films ( Austin , 1984 ; Chuu et al . , 2009 ) . Re - flecting the tendency of art film audiences to be broadly informed about films and to share film preferences with film experts , film experts influ - ence the demand for narrowly released art films more than the demand for broadly released main - stream films ( Gemser , van Oostrum , & Leenders , 2007 ; Reinstein & Snyder , 2005 ) . Given their inter - est in films , art film audiences are typically aware of film festival participation , domestic commercial performance , and the type of distribution of the foreign films released in their own market . Festival participation and domestic commercial performance are often used to promote foreign films , and film writers tend to echo this information in different film commentaries . And the type of distribution ( i . e . , ma - jor or independent , as discussed below ) is visible by the width of distribution and multiplex or art - house theater exhibition ( Gemser et al . , 2007 ) , even if indi - vidual distributors are not known . 5 4 For simplicity and consistency , we use “domestic” and “foreign” with respect to the country of origin of a film . For example , when we talk about foreign audiences observing foreign distributors , we use “foreign” in refer - ence to a film’s country of origin , even if foreign audi - ences and distributors are domestic audiences and dis - tributors in their own countries . 5 Introducing the 2009 Swedish film Män Som Hatar Kvinnor ( The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo ) to the U . S . 2014 1363 Kim and Jensen In sum , building on prior research , we assume that domestic commercial performance and film festival participation are positive market signals in international film markets that are known to for - eign distributors and foreign audiences . However , our focus is not the direct effects of commercial performance and artistic acclaim on international success—defined both by a film being exported and its subsequent foreign commercial perfor - mance—but , instead , how audience heterogeneity in the form of cultural distance between domestic and foreign film audiences and product specializa - tion of domestic and foreign film distributors influ - ence the effectiveness of market signals . CULTURAL DISTANCE AND MARKET SIGNAL EFFECTIVENESS We begin our analyses of the effects of audience heterogeneity on market signal effectiveness by fo - cusing on the cultural distance between domestic and foreign film audiences—thus assuming , ini - tially , that foreign and domestic distributors have no independent influence on market signal effectiveness . The perceived foreignness of a film depends on the “cultural distance” between film audiences in domestic and foreign markets , defined broadly as the extent to which audiences in different countries are culturally similar or different ( Hofstede , 1980 ) . Culture refers to “the publicly available symbolic forms through which people experience and ex - press meaning , ” and consists of symbolic vehicles such as beliefs , rituals , art , and ceremonies as well as informal practices such as language , gossip , sto - ries , and daily routines ( Swidler , 1986 : 273 ) . Al - though culture obviously is complex , multifaceted , and varies within nations ( Shenkar , 2001 ) , national culture still accounts for important differences in cultural production and consumption ( Akdeniz & Talay , 2013 ) . International film markets are no exception . For - eign film and television products are subject to cultural discounts outside of their domestic mar - kets because most audiences lack familiarity with foreign languages , cast and crew , cultural contexts , and cinematic styles , which makes such audiences gravitate toward film and television products that reflect their own cultural background more closely ( Hoskins & Mirus , 1988 ; Jayakar & Waterman , 2000 ; Wildman & Siwek , 1988 ) . In other words , the greater the cultural distance between two coun - tries , the greater the liability of foreignness or cul - tural discount—a liability that , unlike liabilities of foreignness in noncultural markets ( Kostova & Za - heer , 1999 ; Zaheer , 1995 ) , is difficult to remove through product alterations . It is therefore not surprising that the main effect of cultural distance on international film success tends to be negative : the higher the cultural dis - tance between two countries , the more foreign the films from one country appear to audiences in the other country , and the less trade of films between these two countries . Craig et al . ( 2005 ) , for example , found that Hollywood films were more success - fully exported to foreign countries that are cultur - ally similar to the United States ( see also Fu & Govindaraju , 2010 ; Fu & Sim , 2010 ; Lee , 2006 ) . Alternatively , “variety seeking” ( Kahn , 1995 ; Ratner , Kahn , & Kahneman , 1999 ) could induce audiences to seek out different cinematic experi - ences from different countries . Variety seeking is surely a motivation for some audiences to experi - ment with unfamiliar foreign films , but the major - ity of audiences are typically more inclined to se - lect familiar films most of the time ( domestic films first and foreign films from culturally distant coun - tries last ) . Watching a film in a movie theater is a relatively high involvement activity , in terms of time commitment , and variety seeking is more prevalent in low - involvement decisions ( van Trijp , Hoyer , & Inman , 1996 ) , such as the choice of clas - sical rock songs , candy , and appetizers ( Ratner & Kahn , 2002 ; Ratner et al . , 1999 ) . Consequently , we assume that the main effect of cultural distance on international success is negative , and focus on the effectiveness of markets signals depending on the degree of cultural distance . Domestic commercial performance is likely to be a more ( less ) effective market signal when the cul - tural distance between home country and market country is relatively short ( long ) . The commercial performance of a film depends partly on the match between film attributes and audience preferences . The more closely film attributes match audience preferences , the more audiences tend to like a film , and the more likely it is to become a commercial success . When the cultural distance between a home country and a market country is relatively short , the preferences of domestic audiences and market in the New York Times , for example , Anderson ( 2010 ) and Dargis ( 2010 ) mentioned both its domestic commercial performance and the limited distribution the film received in the United States . 1364 October Academy of Management Journal foreign audiences are more closely aligned—for - eign films such as German films in Austria might not really be seen as foreign . In other words , the alignment of preferences between culturally similar audiences ensures that the match between audience preferences and film attributes that ac - counts for domestic commercial performance is preserved in culturally similar foreign markets . By preserving the match between audience prefer - ences and film attributes in foreign markets , the perceived correlation between domestic commer - cial performance and unobservable quality is also preserved . The effectiveness of domestic commer - cial performance as a market signal is therefore higher in culturally similar , as compared to cultur - ally dissimilar , foreign markets . Specifically , the commercial performance of a film in its domestic market makes international success more likely when foreign markets are culturally similar than when they are culturally dissimilar . In sum , we argue that cultural distance reduces ( moderates negatively ) the effect of domestic com - mercial performance on international success . Hypothesis 1 . The greater the cultural distance , the weaker the effect of domestic commercial performance on ( a ) the likelihood of export and ( b ) foreign commercial performance . When the cultural distance between home coun - try and market country is relatively long ( short ) , however , artistic acclaim is likely to be a more ( less ) effective market signal . While culturally dis - similar film - going audiences cannot be assumed to share cultural preferences , industry experts are more likely to share universal conventions and standards . Whether the film experts granting artis - tic acclaim are industry insiders , such as actors and directors , or outsiders , such as film scholars and critics , they typically have extensive industry ex - perience and , often , formal education in film pro - duction and theory . Exposure to a diverse set of films gives them a broader vantage point from which to evaluate films and a universally shared , professional language with which to communicate across cultural boundaries . Film scholars and film critics , for example , like members of other profes - sions , share universal institutional norms and typ - ifications ( Meyer & Rowan , 1977 ; Scott , 2008 : 100 ) that distinguish their “intellectualizing discourse” about films ( Baumann , 2001 ) . Indeed , juries at in - ternational film festival competitions are mostly composed of renowned experts from different countries in order to provide a broad variety of viewpoints and transcend national idiosyncratic cinematic preferences ( De Valck & Soeteman , 2010 ) . 6 Because audiences—even relatively in - formed art film audiences open to foreign films— generally are less familiar with films from cultur - ally distant countries , they are more likely to rely on experts to screen films from these countries , which implies that artistic acclaim is a more effec - tive market signal when countries are culturally distant , and , therefore , is more likely to increase international film success . In sum , we argue that cultural distance increases ( moderates positively ) the effect of artistic acclaim on international success . Hypothesis 2 . The greater the cultural dis - tance , the stronger the effect of artistic acclaim on ( a ) the likelihood of export and ( b ) foreign commercial performance . DISTRIBUTION TYPE AND MARKET SIGNAL EFFECTIVENESS We continue our analysis of audience heteroge - neity and market signal effectiveness by arguing that distributors add a different source of audience heterogeneity based on product specialization . The distinction between major and independent distribution captures an important source of heter - ogeneity for both domestic and foreign distributors based on product specialization rather than cul - tural distance . “Major distribution” referred origi - nally to widely distributed films with a broad ap - peal and originating inside the Hollywood studio system , whereas “independent distribution” re - ferred to narrowly distributed films with a narrow appeal originating outside the Hollywood studio system ( Levy , 1999 ; Zuckerman & Kim , 2003 ; Finney , 2010 ) . The major Hollywood studios ( and their distribution companies ) include Metro – Gold - wyn – Mayer , Sony / Columbia Pictures , Paramount Pictures , 20th Century Fox , Universal Studios , Dis - 6 The main juries at the Cannes , Berlin , and Venice film festivals between 2000 and 2010 , for example , were represented by jurors from between five and nine differ - ent countries ( the average number of jurors was eight ; the average number of countries was seven ) . The average Herfindahl index for the diversity of jurors is 0 . 17 , with Berlin in 2001 being the most diverse ( 0 . 11 ) , having nine members from nine countries , and Cannes in 2004 the least diverse ( 0 . 26 ) , having four American members out of nine . 2014 1365 Kim and Jensen ney / Buena Vista , and Warner Brothers . The dis - tinction between major and independent is also used to describe the content and style of films : “ [ M ] ajor and independent films are quite different products , the former appealing to a mass audience with high - concept marketing . . . the latter to a more specialized one with different tastes” ( Zuckerman & Kim , 2003 : 38 ) . Independent distributors do not focus on art films only , however , but distribute all types of films not targeting mass audiences or not being picked up by major distributors , regardless of the reasons ( too artsy , too low quality , and so on ) . Major distributors tend , in other words , to focus on large - budget films expected to attract a broad audi - ence , whereas independent distributors focus on small - budget films expected to attract a narrow au - dience only . Market signal effectiveness varies with distribution type because market signals provide information that either confirms or disconfirms expectations im - plicit in distribution type . When foreign distribu - tors make decisions about importing a foreign film , it is useful to know if a film uses major or indepen - dent domestic distribution as it reveals the ex - pected type of audience for the film . Specifically , if a film uses a major domestic distributor , at least one distributor believed that the film , regardless of artistic quality , is of sufficient commercial quality to appeal to enough audiences to warrant broader distribution . If a film uses independent domestic distribution , however , it could be because the film deliberately targets a narrower audience interested in more artistic films . It could also be because the major distributors found it to be of too low a qual - ity , commercially and artistically , to attract a wider audience . Independent distribution is , thus , asso - ciated with more ambiguity about film quality than major distribution . Specifically , independently dis - tributed films could be targeting a narrow specialist audience , or simply be too low quality for all but the least discerning film audiences . Domestic com - mercial performance and artistic acclaim of inde - pendently distributed films help subsequent audi - ences decide which films to import ( foreign distributors ) and watch ( foreign audiences ) by pro - viding independent film - specific information that allows them to choose between the “narrow audi - ence” and “low quality” interpretations of indepen - dent distribution . For foreign distributors making decisions to im - port foreign films , the domestic commercial per - formance of an independently distributed film reduces some of the uncertainty about the commer - cial appeal of the film , and shifts attention to the more specific uncertainty about the extent to which its commercial appeal is transferable to foreign au - diences . A commercially successful , indepen - dently distributed film is a “surprise” or “sleeper” hit that , despite initial , modest expectations , in fact appealed to a broad audience ( Finney , 2010 ) . Un - expected commercial success attracts the attention of foreign distributors , who will carefully analyze the film’s potential appeal in their own markets . Simi - larly , the artistic acclaim of an independently dis - tributed film reduces some uncertainty about the cinematic quality of the film , and suggests that the film at least may appeal to an art film audience seeking alternatives to mainstream films ( Elsaesser , 2005 ) . In contrast , the commercial performance and artistic acclaim of films with major domestic dis - tribution is less informative because films with ma - jor distribution are already expected , whether for commercial or artistic reasons , to appeal to a broader audience . That is , confirming category - based expectations about distribution type and au - dience appeal is less informative because it does not question that major domestic distribution implies greater exportability than independent do - mestic distribution or requires diagnostic attribute - based information about individual films before making import decisions ( Fiske , Neuberg , Beattie , & Milberg , 1987 ) . In sum , we argue that independent domestic dis - tribution increases ( moderates positively ) the ef - fects of commercial performance and artistic ac - claim on the likelihood of film export , as compared to major distribution . Hypothesis 3 . The effects on export likelihood of ( a ) domestic commercial performance and ( b ) artistic acclaim are stronger with indepen - dent than with major domestic distribution . Next , we shift focus from foreign distributors ob - serving if films use major or independent domestic distribution to foreign audiences observing if for - eign films use major or independent foreign distri - bution ( i . e . , use major or independent distribution in their own markets ) . For foreign audiences , see - ing that foreign films use independent distribution creates an expectation that their artistic quality dominates their commercial quality , which could further reduce the narrow audience for these for - eign films by appealing to the most dedicated for - eign film enthusiasts only . The expectations for foreign films with major foreign distribution are , in contrast , that the commercial qualities of these 1366 October Academy of Management Journal films dominate their artistic qualities , and that they , therefore , appeal to broader , perhaps even mainstream audiences in the foreign market . For a foreign film with major distribution to also be ar - tistically acclaimed , however , could create confu - sion about its target audience by providing a con - tradictory signal , which could cause some mainstream audiences to decide against seeing the film . Fearing a diminished popular appeal of films targeted at mainstream audiences is , indeed , one reason Hollywood is “wary” about film festivals as a mechanism to reach their target audiences ( El - saesser , 2005 : 103 ) : “As Hollywood aimed to reach a mass audience , film festival competitions were shunned because of fears that the film would be considered too artsy and turn off mainstream audi - ences” ( De Valck , 2007 : 99 ) . Foreign audiences may also interpret domestic commercial performance differently depending on the type of foreign distribution . Knowing that a film was a commercial success in its domestic market provides some assurance about its quality and ap - peal to a wider audience , but it does not necessarily imply that the appeal is transferable . When films with domestic commercial success receive major foreign distribution , however , foreign audiences can interpret this as an indication that foreign dis - tributors think that the domestic commercial suc - cess is transferable between film markets , which increases the perceived appeal of the film to foreign audiences . In contrast , when films with domestic commercial success receives independent distribu - tion only , foreign audiences are more likely to in - terpret this as an indication that foreign distribu - tors think that the domestic commercial success is not as transferable between film markets , which , in turn , reduces the perceived appeal of the film . The type of foreign distribution , in other words , makes information about domestic commercial per - formance interpretable for foreign film audiences . In sum , we argue that major foreign distribution increases ( moderate positively ) the effects of do - mestic commercial performance and reduces ( mod - erate negatively ) the effects of artistic acclaim on foreign commercial performance , compared to the effects of independent foreign distribution . Hypothesis 4 . The effect on foreign market per - formance of ( a ) domestic commercial perfor - mance is stronger with major than with indepen - dent foreign distribution , whereas the effect of ( b ) artistic acclaim is weaker with major than with independent foreign distribution . METHODS European Film Sample We tested our hypotheses using a sample of films produced and traded in Europe , thus focusing spe - cifically on the liabilities of foreignness that Euro - pean films face when entering another European country . We deliberately excluded films produced in the United States from the empirical analyses for several reasons . First , American films have gained popularity worldwide and become a de facto stan - dard for audiences as American culture in general has penetrated foreign markets . American films al - ready make up the majority of films screened in most European countries ( Lange & Newman - Bau - dais , 2007 ) , which means that they are unlikely to face the same liabilities of foreignness as would films produced in other countries . Second , due to the widespread popularity of American films and the increased fear of piracy immediately after their release , many American films are released simultaneously in multiple countries , which makes exporting American films different from the sequential export process typically used in other countries . Third , despite the geographic proximity between European countries , most have different languages , histories , cultures , and political economies , all of which has resulted in the development of different film industries and national cinemas : “ [ E ] ach country has its own national cinema , increasingly defended as a valu - able treasure and part of an inalienable national patrimony” ( Elsaesser , 2005 : 13 ) . The European film industry is , in other words , an appropriate setting in which to test our theoretical arguments about market signals and audience heterogeneity . Our sample comprises films produced from 2004 to 2006 in the following 19 European countries : Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Great Britain , Hungary , Iceland , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Portugal , Romania , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland , and Tur - key . See Table 1 for basic descriptive information about these countries and their film industries . We focus on these 19 countries because the European Audiovisual Observatory’s LUMIERE database pro - vides near - complete information about their film production . Approximately 2 , 600 films were pro - duced in these countries between 2004 and 2006 ; information was available at the Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) for 1 , 669 of these films ( most films with missing information are low - budget niche productions and experimental films ) . Each of these 2014 1367 Kim and Jensen T A B LE 1 F il m - P r o du c i n g C o un t r i e s a nd t h e i r F il m I ndu s t r i e s P o pu l a ti o n ( m illi o n ) F il m P r o du c ti o n ( 2004 – 2006 ) E x p o r t e d F il m s ( 2004 – 2009 ) P e r ce n t a ge o f F il m s E x p o r t e d A v e r a ge N u m b e r o f E x p o r t C o un t r i e s M e a n F o r e i g n A d m i ss i o n s M e d i a n F o r e i g n A d m i ss i o n s M a i n M a r k e t C o un t r y F il m A w a r d s C zec h R e pu b li c 10 . 5 68 44 0 . 65 2 . 84 13 , 938 7136 S l ov a k i a C zec h L i o n A w a r d s D e n m a r k 5 . 6 107 46 0 . 43 5 . 70 16 , 681 4854 N o r w a y B o d il A w a r d s E s t o n i a 1 . 3 31 4 0 . 13 3 . 50 9899 7407 F i n l a nd G r a nd P r i x , T a lli nn B l ac k N i g h t s F il m F e s ti v a l F i n l a nd 5 . 4 51 1 8 0 . 35 2 . 89 10 , 808 2646 S w e d e n J u ss i A w a r d s F r a n ce 65 . 8 570 33 9 0 . 59 5 . 82 33 , 442 6506 B e l g i u m C é s a r A w a r d s G e r m a n y 81 . 8 264 13 3 0 . 50 4 . 50 54 , 915 8713 A u s t r i a G e r m a n F il m A w a r d s G r ea t B r it a i n 62 . 0 216 9 6 0 . 44 9 . 64 180 , 839 21 , 713 Sp a i n B r iti s h A ca d e m y F il m A w a r d s H un ga r y 10 . 0 69 1 5 0 . 22 3 . 60 4758 1839 R o m a n i a G r a nd P r i ze , H un ga r i a n F il m W ee k I ce l a nd 0 . 3 13 5 0 . 38 3 . 60 3687 1367 N o r w a y Edd a A w a r d s It a l y 60 . 6 252 77 0 . 31 3 . 83 18 , 702 4223 S w it z e r l a nd D a v i d d i D o n a t e ll o A w a r d s N e t h e r l a nd s 16 . 7 95 28 0 . 29 3 . 00 17 , 179 4288 B e l g i u m G o l d e n C a l v e s A w a r d s N o r w a y 4 . 9 67 2 2 0 . 33 4 . 23 9419 3504 S w e d e n A m a nd a A w a r d s P o l a nd 38 . 1 58 8 0 . 14 1 . 50 1306 458 C zec h R e pu b li c E ag l e A w a r d s P o r t u ga l 10 . 6 48 1 1 0 . 23 1 . 18 4249 2720 F r a n c e G o l d e n G l ob e s , P o r t u ga l R o m a n i a 21 . 5 34 5 0 . 15 2 . 16 7166 2807 F r a n c e R o m a n i a n U n i o n o f F il mm a k e r s A w a r d s Sp a i n 46 . 1 332 6 8 0 . 20 5 . 38 51 , 484 9407 F r a n c e G oy a A w a r d s S w e d e n 9 . 4 133 49 0 . 37 2 . 98 34 , 043 6245 N o r w a y G u l d b agge A w a r d s S w it ze r l a nd 7 . 9 111 21 0 . 19 2 . 29 23 , 176 3833 F r a n c e S w i ss F il m P r i ze T u r k e y 73 . 7 76 32 0 . 42 3 . 59 30 , 015 6964 G e r m a n y G o l d e n O r a n ge A w a r d s 1 , 669 films could then be exported to the 18 other film - producing countries , plus Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Croatia , Cyprus , Greece , Ireland , Latvia , Liechtenstein , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Russia , Slo - vakia , and Slovenia for a total of 32 market countries ( we track all films until 2009 ) . For each film , LUMIERE provides the yearly number of domestic admissions as well as the num - ber of admissions in each foreign country to which the film was exported . When films were co - pro - duced by more than one country , we followed LUMIERE in assigning them to the main produc - tion country , based on the amount of financial in - vestment at the production stage . LUMIERE also provides a link to each film listed on IMDb . com , which allowed us to collect additional information , including award nominations and wins , genres , the birth country of the director and the actors , and the language ( s ) of the film . Dependent Variables Our dependent variables are the unobserved likelihood of export and the subsequent , ob - served commercial performance ( box office ) in foreign markets . We focus on both the likelihood that a film will be exported and its subsequent foreign commercial performance , measured in terms of the logged ( due to the skewed distribu - tion of commercial performance ) number of ad - missions in the foreign country , because these variables represent different aspects of export success . Export likelihood captures the expecta - tions of foreign distributors about the potential demand from film audiences in foreign markets , whereas foreign commercial performance mea - sures the actual demand for the film by foreign film audiences . Independent Variables We focus on two market signals—commercial performance and artistic acclaim—and two di - mensions of audience heterogeneity—cultural distance and distributor type—and how they af - fect the effectiveness of market signals on the likelihood of export and foreign box office suc - cess . Domestic commercial performance was measured by the logged ( due to the skewed dis - tribution of commercial performance ) number of admissions in the domestic country ( Domestic Commercial Performance ) . 7 We measured artistic acclaim by a binary vari - able that indicates whether or not a film was se - lected to open in ( main ) competition at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice ( Cannes , Berlin , or Venice ) . Cannes , Berlin , and Venice are the most prestigious and important film festivals worldwide , with Cannes arguably the pinnacle of the film festival circuit ( Elsaesser , 2005 ) . We focused on the most prestigious international film festivals because they are most likely to be highlighted on film posters and other marketing materials used to promote films , and , thus , most visible to regular audiences . Because we have data on all film awards listed on IMDb , we experimented with other measures of artistic acclaim as well , and found the results are similar regardless of measure . 8 We measured cultural distance between the film - producing country and the market country using Hofstede’s ( 1980 ) widely accepted measure of cul - tural distance ( Craig et al . , 2005 ) . We followed Kogut and Singh ( 1988 ) and used the variance - adjusted differences in individualism , power dis - tance , uncertainty avoidance , and masculinity— the key cultural dimensions identified by Hofstede ( 1980 ) in his research on national cultures ( Cultural Distance ) . 9 The Hofstede measure of cultural dis - tance could be problematic in our study as it as - sumes that the cultural distance from country A to country B is the same as from country B to country 7 We include film - producing country fixed effects to adjust for a producing country’s population . Unreported robustness checks confirmed that our results are robust to adjusting for population by either controlling for pop - ulation or dividing number of admission with population size . Because a film - producing country’s population is not significant ( and does not affect estimated coeffi - cients ) , we report the simpler fixed effects approach . 8 Most importantly , we also measured artistic acclaim by nominations in the major award categories ( best film , di - rector , actor , actress , and screenplay ) for the most presti - gious domestic film awards such as the César in France , the Donatello in Italy , and the Goya in Spain , and found our results to be robust ( see Table 1 for an overview of the national awards ) . 9 Kogut and Singh ( 1988 ) measured cultural distance by , first , taking the difference between the two countries’ scores on the four key cultural dimensions in Hofstede’s ( 1980 ) research , then correcting for the variance differ - ences of each dimension by dividing the squared differ - ence in the scores by the variance of each dimension , and , finally , arithmetically averaging the four numbers . 2014 1369 Kim and Jensen A ( see Shenkar , 2001 , for other limitations ) . The cultural distance symmetry assumption could be problematic , for example , if more cultural products flow from country A to country B than from coun - try B to country A . To ensure that our results are robust to the cultural distance symmetry assump - tion , we used the asymmetric voting patterns in the Eurovision Song Contest—a televised international competition in which singers representing different European countries compete and the viewing audi - ence votes to select a winner—as an alternative measure of cultural distance ( Fenn , Suleman , Efsta - thiou , & Johnson , 2006 ) . We only report the Hofst - ede results because the Eurovision Song Contest results are basically the same . We used a binary variable to distinguish between major and independent distributors . For each mar - ket country , we identified , first , all the major dis - tributors , using Lange and Newman - Baudais’ ( 2007 ) comprehensive description of film distribu - tion companies in Europe . We defined subsidiaries of U . S . distributors , such as United International Pictures , 20th Century Fox , and Warner Brothers , and large European distributors distributing films for the major U . S . studios as major distributors . For example , we coded the U . S . United International Pictures ( distributing 42 films in Denmark between 2000 and 2005 , of which 38 were from the United States ) and Danish Nordisk Film ( distributing 44 films , of which 23 were from the United States and 19 from Denmark ) as major distributors ( Lange & Newman - Baudais , 2007 : 67 ) . In a separate analysis , we distinguished between U . S . and European ma - jor distributors and found no difference in results . Having identified the major distributors in each market , we followed industry convention ( Finney , 2010 ) and simply define independent distributors as all the non - major distributors ( a comprehensive Internet search of the more than 1 , 100 distributors in our sample confirmed this approach ) . Control Variables We controlled for a number of different film at - tributes that represent alternative indicators of un - observable film quality to isolate the effects of our focal market signals , commercial performance and artistic acclaim ( see Hadida , 2009 ) . First , we focused on Cannes , Berlin , and Venice film festivals for our measure of artistic acclaim as films open in these festivals before opening to the general public , ensuring that commercial perfor - mance does not impact our artistic acclaim mea - sure . Other awards , however , may impact the ex - port success of films . We included a binary variable coded “1” for the films that were nominated in the major categories ( best film , director , actor , actress , and screenplay ) in top domestic film awards , such as the César in France , the Donatello in Italy , and the Goya in Spain ( see Table 1 for overview of the national awards ) , or nominated for the Academy Awards ( Oscar ) ( Top National Award or Oscar Nomination ) . We combined the awards because rel - atively few European films are nominated for Oscars . Second , the director of a film and its lead actors are uniquely positioned to affect the actual and the perceived quality of a film ( De Vany , 2004 ; Hsu , 2006 ; Sorenson & Waguespack , 2006 ) . Films by award - winning directors and actors are more likely to be higher - quality films , and more visible , than films with lesser acclaimed directors and actors ( Schwab & Miner , 2008 ) , and they are therefore more likely to be commercially successful , artisti - cally acclaimed , and successfully exported to for - eign markets . We measured the cumulative awards of the director and the sum of the cumulative awards for the top five leading actors for the focal film . We counted all the awards listed on IMDb for director and actor roles , respectively , but excluded ones received for the categories “Worst Director” or “Worst Actor” ( Director Awards ; Actor Awards ) . Third , although we distinguish between major and independent distributors , distributor market share may itself influence the accessibility and vis - ibility of films . The larger the distributor , the more screens available for the film , the higher the mar - keting budget for the film , and the more likely the film is to be viewed as a mainstream film—all of which may affect the perceived quality of a film and contribute to its commercial performance ( Gemser et al . , 2007 ; Hsu , 2006 ; Zuckerman & Kim , 2003 ) . We measured the size of distributors by the domestic market share of the distributor in analyses of export likelihood , and the market share in each foreign market in analyses of foreign box office success ( Distributor Market Share ) . Fourth , we controlled for the “cultural specific - ity” of a film . Cultural specificity refers to the ex - tent to which a film typifies a specific culture , and , therefore , a specific audience ; the higher the cul - tural specificity of films , the more foreign they ap - pear to foreign audiences , and the less likely they are to succeed in international markets ( Lee , 2006 ) . To measure cultural specificity , we created a do - mesticity index using the language of the film , the 1370 October Academy of Management Journal birth country of the director , the birth country of the top five actors credited in IMDb , and number of co - producing countries ( Cultural Specificity ) . A film is high on cultural specificity if it is in the domestic language , uses a domestic director , at least one of the top five actors is domestic ( results the same if weighted for number of domestic ac - tors ) , and incorporates no co - producing countries . Fifth , following prior research showing that film genres have significant impact on export success ( Lee , 2006 ) , we included four ( non - exclusive ) binary variables that indicate if a film has been catego - rized in the action , comedy , documentary , and / or drama genres by IMDb ( Genre : Action ; Comedy ; Doc - umentary ; Drama ) . Sixth , the foreignness of a film from a producing country may be reduced if the audiences of the mar - ket country are exposed to many films from that pro - ducing country . Therefore , we include a measure that indicates the logged number of films imported in the last two years from the same producing country as the film ( Number Films from Producing Country ) . Seventh , because audiences , in general , tend to avoid foreign films due to the language barrier , we control for whether the languages of the film matches one of the official languages of the market country ( Language Match ) . For other market coun - try characteristics , we controlled for yearly cinema attendance per capita ( Cinema Frequency of Market Country ) , and the logged population of the market country ( Market Country Population ) . An alterna - tive to cinema frequency and market country pop - ulation would be to use market country fixed ef - fects . We also estimated all models with market country fixed effects , and report that the models with market country characteristic variables as the main results are the same . Eighth , some films are the product of interna - tional co - productions , which means that being ex - ported to the home countries of co - producers likely has been part of the production and distribution plans from the initial film production stages . Inter - national co - productions may therefore be particu - larly likely to bridge the expectations and prefer - ences of audiences from the different co - producing countries , thus suggesting that we included a bi - nary variable to indicate if the market country is home to a co - producer ( Co - producing Country ) . Ninth , regarding our measure of the cultural spec - ificity of a film , the birth country of the director and the top five leading actors is unknown in some in - stances . In these cases , we assumed that the director and leading actors are from the film - producing coun - try . The country - specific names of most directors and actors suggest this is a reasonable assumption , but we still included a binary variable to control for missing information ( Missing Director Birth Country , Missing Actor Birth Country ) . Tenth , due to the cross - sectional nature of the models with foreign box office performance as the dependent variable , we also included binary vari - ables to capture the sequential aspect of film ex - ports and controlled for other types of awards that might have acted as alternative market signals prior to the export . More specifically , we controlled for films that were exported in the opening year ( Ex - ported in Opening Year ) , if a country was the first country to import the focal film ( First Export ) , and those that were exported before being nomi - nated in a top national film festival ( Exported Before Top National Award Nomination ) or in the Academy Awards ( Exported Before Academy Award Nomination ) . Finally , all models include film - producing coun - try fixed effects to account for any unobservable differences that might affect export success across different countries ( to keep our tables manageable , we do not report the country fixed effects herein ; France is the comparison country ) . Our fixed ef - fects approach allowed us to control for the histor - ical differences in the prominence of the film in - dustry in different film - producing countries , such as , for example , the greater visibility of French cinema compared to Romanian cinema . Table 2 contains bivariate correlations and descriptive statistics . 10 10 Multicollinearity is not a problem . In models with - out interaction effects , the average variance inflation fac - tor ( VIF ) is below 1 . 60 ( max VIF is 2 . 33 ) and conditioning indices are below 6 . 03 ( Jaccard & Turrisi , 2003 ; Belsley , Kuh , & Welsh , 1980 ) . In models with all the interaction effects , the average VIF is below 1 . 98 ( max VIFs are for the two market signal main variables used in three inter - actions , each at 4 . 35 and 5 . 51 ) and conditioning indices are below 6 . 33 . The relatively higher VIF for market signal variables used in interaction variables is “non - essential ill - conditioning” ( Aiken & West , 1991 : 36 ) that disappears when the interaction effects are re - moved or mean - centered ( drops to 1 . 03 and 1 . 08 ) . In addition , as robustness checks , we , first , removed all insignificant variables and then removed all control variables , and found the results robust to both alterna - tive specifications . 2014 1371 Kim and Jensen T A B LE 2 D e s c r i p ti v e S t a ti s ti c s a nd P e a rs o n C o rr e l a ti o n C o e ffi c i e n t s A : C ox M o d e l s M S D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1 . D o m e s ti c C o mm e r c i a l Su cce ss 3 . 59 4 . 74 2 . C a nn e s , B e r li n , V e n i ce 0 . 04 0 . 19 0 . 0 6 3 . C u lt u r a l D i s t a n ce 2 . 06 1 . 70 (cid:2) 0 . 0 1 (cid:2) 0 . 01 4 . I nd e p e nd e n t D i s t r i b u t o r 0 . 34 0 . 47 (cid:2) 0 . 0 9 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 08 5 . T o p N a ti o n a l A w a r d o r O s ca r N o m i n a ti o n 0 . 13 0 . 34 (cid:2) 0 . 0 2 0 . 16 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 11 6 . D i r ec t o r A w a r d s 0 . 71 0 . 92 0 . 07 0 . 32 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 09 0 . 33 7 . A c t o r A w a r d s 1 . 44 1 . 32 0 . 04 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 14 0 . 26 0 . 34 8 . D i s t r i b u t o r M a r k e t Sh a r e 0 . 07 0 . 10 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 68 0 . 13 0 . 06 0 . 06 9 . C u lt u r a l Sp ec if i c it y 2 . 21 0 . 85 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 20 0 . 16 0 . 25 0 . 32 0 . 18 10 . G e n r e : A c ti o n 0 . 09 0 . 29 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 03 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 03 11 . G e n r e : C o m e d y 0 . 38 0 . 49 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 17 0 . 03 0 . 02 0 . 15 0 . 13 0 . 24 0 . 04 12 . G e n r e : D o c u m e n t a r y 0 . 17 0 . 38 (cid:2) 0 . 0 7 (cid:2) 0 . 08 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 19 (cid:2) 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 22 (cid:2) 0 . 40 (cid:2) 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 48 (cid:2) 0 . 14 (cid:2) 0 . 33 13 . G e n r e : D r a m a 0 . 50 0 . 50 0 . 02 0 . 17 0 . 04 0 . 00 0 . 24 0 . 27 0 . 25 0 . 02 0 . 19 (cid:2) 0 . 08 (cid:2) 0 . 20 (cid:2) 0 . 43 14 . N u m b e r F il m f r o m P r o du c i n g C o un t r y 1 . 93 1 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 0 3 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 18 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 10 0 . 04 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 30 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 00 15 . L a n g u age M a t c h 0 . 07 0 . 25 0 . 02 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 15 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 03 0 . 00 0 . 14 16 . C i n e m a F r e q u e n c y o f M a r k e t C o un t r y 1 . 71 1 . 11 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 18 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 0 0 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 24 17 . M a r k e t C o un t r y P o pu l a ti o n 16 . 36 1 . 31 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 0 0 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 14 (cid:2) 0 . 18 18 . C o - p r o du c i n g C o un t r y 0 . 01 0 . 09 0 . 03 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 11 0 . 05 0 . 04 19 . M i ss i n g D i r ec t o r B i r t h C o un t r y 0 . 38 0 . 49 (cid:2) 0 . 0 5 (cid:2) 0 . 12 0 . 00 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 12 (cid:2) 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 19 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 58 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 19 (cid:2) 0 . 15 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 01 20 . M i ss i n g A c t o r B i r t h C o un t r y 0 . 71 0 . 45 (cid:2) 0 . 0 5 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 20 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 12 0 . 03 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 10 T A B LE 2 ( C o n ti nu e d ) B : O LS M o d e l s M S D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 1 . B ox O ffi ce i n E x p o r t e d C o un t r y 9 . 08 2 . 02 2 . D o m e s ti c C o mm e r c i a l Su cce ss 12 . 50 1 . 89 0 . 46 3 . C a nn e s , B e r li n , V e n i c e 0 . 20 0 . 40 0 . 00 0 . 01 4 . C u lt u r a l D i s t a n ce 1 . 76 1 . 51 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 00 5 . M a j o r D i s t r i b u t o r 0 . 26 0 . 44 0 . 27 0 . 27 (cid:2) 0 . 15 0 . 09 6 . T o p N a ti o n a l A w a r d o r O s ca r N o m i n a ti o n 0 . 42 0 . 49 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 33 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 01 7 . D i r ec t o r A w a r d s 1 . 45 1 . 27 0 . 14 0 . 13 0 . 37 0 . 08 0 . 03 0 . 32 8 . A c t o r A w a r d s 2 . 27 1 . 44 0 . 27 0 . 39 0 . 14 0 . 07 0 . 19 0 . 20 0 . 28 9 . D i s t r i b u t o r M a r k e t S h a r e 0 . 06 0 . 11 0 . 13 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 13 0 . 63 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 18 10 . C u lt u r a l Sp ec ifi c it y 2 . 27 0 . 84 0 . 06 0 . 26 0 . 03 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 21 0 . 17 0 . 17 0 . 01 11 . G e n r e : A c ti o n 0 . 19 0 . 39 0 . 21 0 . 26 (cid:2) 0 . 11 0 . 03 0 . 26 (cid:2) 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 07 0 . 15 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 . 06 12 . G e n r e : C o m e d y 0 . 46 0 . 50 0 . 09 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 01 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 13 0 . 05 0 . 14 0 . 01 13 . G e n r e : D o c u m e n t a r y 0 . 06 0 . 25 (cid:2) 0 . 12 (cid:2) 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 22 (cid:2) 0 . 31 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 27 (cid:2) 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 22 14 . G e n r e : D r a m a 0 . 65 0 . 48 (cid:2) 0 . 08 (cid:2) 0 . 10 0 . 33 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 10 0 . 38 0 . 36 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 26 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 32 15 . N u m b e r F il m f r o m P r o du c i n g C o un t r y 3 . 14 1 . 18 0 . 14 0 . 21 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 27 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 19 (cid:2) 0 . 13 0 . 12 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 07 0 . 05 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 12 16 . L a n g u age M a t c h 0 . 22 0 . 42 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 30 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 09 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 04 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 11 0 . 41 17 . C i n e m a F r e q u e n c y o f M a r k e t C o un t r y 1 . 89 0 . 89 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 09 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 22 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 05 0 . 00 0 . 18 0 . 27 18 . M a r k e t C o un t r y P o pu l a ti o n 16 . 41 1 . 16 0 . 37 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 01 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 24 (cid:2) 0 . 02 19 . C o - p r o du c i n g C o un t r y 0 . 06 0 . 25 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 11 0 . 11 0 . 13 20 . M i ss i n g D i r ec t o r B i r t h C o un t r y 0 . 25 0 . 43 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 21 (cid:2) 0 . 45 (cid:2) 0 . 15 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 39 0 . 09 0 . 05 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 26 0 . 13 0 . 05 0 . 03 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 02 21 . M i ss i n g A c t o r B i r t h C o un t r y 0 . 56 0 . 50 (cid:2) 0 . 18 (cid:2) 0 . 29 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 14 (cid:2) 0 . 49 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:2) 0 . 17 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 10 0 . 06 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 05 0 . 08 0 . 01 0 . 04 0 . 08 22 . E x p o r t e d i n O p e n i n g Y ea r 0 . 48 0 . 50 0 . 21 0 . 15 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 12 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 01 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 17 0 . 06 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 11 0 . 30 0 . 28 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 14 0 . 06 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 05 23 . F i r s t E x p o r t 0 . 15 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 14 (cid:2) 0 . 27 (cid:2) 0 . 11 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 07 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 16 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 01 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 40 24 . E x p o r t e d B e f o r e T o p N a ti o n a l A w a r d N o m i n a ti o n 0 . 06 0 . 23 0 . 23 0 . 23 0 . 11 0 . 02 0 . 11 0 . 22 0 . 09 0 . 10 0 . 09 0 . 01 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 03 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 11 0 . 25 (cid:2) 0 . 10 25 . E x p o r t e d B e f o r e O s c a r N o m i n a ti o n 0 . 13 0 . 34 0 . 19 0 . 23 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 06 0 . 10 0 . 23 0 . 01 0 . 09 0 . 12 0 . 08 0 . 06 0 . 01 0 . 00 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 16 0 . 13 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 08 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 05 0 . 36 (cid:2) 0 . 13 0 . 30 26 . I n v e r s e M ill s ’ R a ti o 0 . 00 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 04 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 06 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 08 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 01 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 15 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 03 0 . 01 (cid:2) 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 07 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 03 Statistical Analysis A common approach in empirical research is to treat film exports as a cross - sectional phenomenon , and assume that all events , including domestic opening , foreign opening , and award nominations , occur simultaneously . We adopted a different but more accurate approach for the European film in - dustry by treating film exports as a sequential pro - cess in which films first open in their domestic market and then may or may not be exported . Spe - cifically , once produced , a film can be exported to each of the 32 other market countries in our study , which creates 32 film - market country dyads per film . Most films are never exported to another country ( 64 % of all produced films were not ex - ported to another country during our observation period ) ; of the films that are exported , most ( about 97 % ) are exported within three years after opening domestically . It is nevertheless important to explic - itly model the sequential nature of film exports in order to also account for the differences in being exported in the first year , third year , and even later years . A film should therefore only leave the for - eign country - specific risk set once it is exported to a given foreign country , even if the likelihood of being exported to that country is low after three years . The Danish film Arven ( The Inheri - tance ) , for example , opened in Denmark in 2003 ; was exported to Norway and Sweden in 2003 ; Bel - gium , Great Britain , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Spain , and Switzerland in 2004 ; and France and Germany in 2005 , but had not been exported to the 21 other European countries in our sample by the end of our observation period in 2009 . We used a standard Cox proportional hazards model to estimate the likelihood that a film will be exported , which makes it possible to include differences in export timing ( e . g . , Arven was ex - ported to Sweden in 2003 , Spain in 2004 , and France in 2005 ) and right censoring when films that have not been exported still could be ex - ported after the end of the observation period ( e . g . , Greece ) in our estimations . Observations are at the film / market country / year level , and ob - served until exported to the focal market country or until 2009 if not exported within our time - frame . This approach results in a total of 177 , 498 time spells . To analyze foreign commercial performance , we used an ordinary least squares ( OLS ) regression approach in which we only take into account the events that occurred prior to the film being ex - ported to a specific market country , and include the inverse Mills’ ratio ( Inverse Mills’ Ratio ) for each film estimated by the Cox proportional hazards model to account for selection bias ( Heckman , 1979 ) . Only the exported film / market country dy - ads are included in these models , resulting in 3 , 900 observations . RESULTS Export Likelihood Table 3 presents the results of the Cox propor - tional hazards analyses of export likelihood . Model 1 is a baseline model with control variables only , and it shows , as expected , that film awards , artistically acclaimed directors and actors , distrib - utor market share , action , history of imported films from producing country , sharing a language , and being a co - producing country increase the likeli - hood of export—whereas , cultural specificity de - creases the likelihood of export . Model 2 includes the main effect variables , and it shows , as expected , that commercial performance ( 0 . 12 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) and artistic acclaim ( 0 . 24 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) increase the likelihood of export , thus con - firming prior research on the importance of domes - tic commercial performance and providing the first systematic evidence of film festivals as positive market signals . Model 2 shows also that indepen - dent distribution ( (cid:2) 0 . 16 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) decreases the likelihood of export , whereas , contrary to expecta - tions , there is no main effect of cultural distance ( 0 . 01 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 10 ) on the likelihood of export . Our main focus in this study is the interaction variables introduced in Models 3 – 6 . Models 3 and 4 support Hypotheses 1a and 2a by showing that cultural distance decreases the effect of domestic commercial performance ( (cid:2) 0 . 01 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) , but increases the effect of artistic acclaim ( 0 . 06 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) on the likelihood of export . Models 5 and 6 support Hypotheses 3a and 3b by showing that domestic commercial performance ( 0 . 02 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 01 ) and artistic acclaim ( 0 . 26 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 01 ) increase the likelihood of export more for independent distrib - utors than for major distributors . All the results are confirmed in Model 7 , which includes all the in - teraction variables . The hypothesized export likelihood results are not only statistically significant but substan - tively significant as well . Figure 1 uses the pre - dicted multipliers of the unobserved base rates of export from our Cox models ( see Hannan & Free - 1374 October Academy of Management Journal man , 1989 : 186 ) to illustrate their substantive sig - nificance ( for France ) . Figure 1 shows specifically how the interactions between market signals and audience heterogeneity change the overall market signal effect ( main effect plus interaction effect ) at different levels of audience heterogeneity . To make the changes in the market signal effects caused by the interaction effects directly comparable , we rescaled the market signal effects for each level of audience heterogeneity to have the same starting point . We rescaled by dividing the overall market signal effect with the main effect of audience heterogeneity for each level of audience heterogeneity , thus effectively removing the audience heterogeneity main effect from the comparisons and focusing attention on the interaction effects ( slope differences ) only . Figures 1A and 1B illustrate how the effect of domestic commercial performance ( ranging from for lowest observed domestic box office to two stan - dard deviations above the mean ) on export likeli - TABLE 3 Cox Proportional Hazards Models on Export Likelihood a Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Cannes , Berlin , Venice by Independent Distributor 0 . 26 * * 0 . 25 * * ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) Domestic Commercial Success by Independent Distributor 0 . 02 * * 0 . 01 * ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) Cannes , Berlin , Venice by Cultural Distance 0 . 06 * 0 . 09 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) Domestic Commercial Success by Cultural Distance (cid:2) 0 . 01 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 01 * * * ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 00 ) Domestic Commercial Success 0 . 12 * * * 0 . 14 * * * 0 . 12 * * * 0 . 11 * * * 0 . 12 * * * 0 . 13 * * * ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) Cannes , Berlin , Venice 0 . 24 * * * 0 . 23 * * * 0 . 14 * 0 . 24 * * * 0 . 10 (cid:2) 0 . 05 ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 08 ) Cultural Distance 0 . 01 0 . 10 * * * 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 09 * * * ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 02 ) Independent Distributor (cid:2) 0 . 16 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 15 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 16 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 32 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 21 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 32 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 07 ) Top National Award or Oscar Nomination 1 . 06 * * * 0 . 83 * * * 0 . 83 * * * 0 . 83 * * * 0 . 83 * * * 0 . 85 * * * 0 . 84 * * * ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) Director Awards 0 . 44 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) Actor Awards 0 . 21 * * * 0 . 15 * * * 0 . 15 * * * 0 . 15 * * * 0 . 15 * * * 0 . 15 * * * 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) Distributor Market Share 3 . 90 * * * 2 . 50 * * * 2 . 54 * * * 2 . 46 * * * 2 . 50 * * * 2 . 50 * * * 2 . 50 * * * ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) Cultural Specificity - 0 . 25 * * * - 0 . 25 * * * - 0 . 25 * * * - 0 . 25 * * * - 0 . 24 * * * - 0 . 24 * * * - 0 . 25 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) Genre : Action 0 . 69 * * * 0 . 59 * * * 0 . 59 * * * 0 . 59 * * * 0 . 59 * * * 0 . 60 * * * 0 . 61 * * * ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) Genre : Comedy 0 . 05 0 . 03 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 04 ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) Genre : Documentary (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 05 (cid:2) 0 . 04 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 02 ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) ( 0 . 08 ) Genre : Drama (cid:2) 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 03 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 02 (cid:2) 0 . 02 ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) Number Film from Producing Country 0 . 99 * * * 1 . 00 * * * 0 . 99 * * * 1 . 00 * * * 1 . 00 * * * 1 . 00 * * * 0 . 99 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) ( 0 . 03 ) Language Match 0 . 44 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 36 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 38 * * * 0 . 39 * * * 0 . 38 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) ( 0 . 05 ) Cinema Frequency of Market Country 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) ( 0 . 02 ) Market Country Population 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 01 ) Co - producing Country 0 . 67 * * * 0 . 61 * * * 0 . 59 * * * 0 . 61 * * * 0 . 61 * * * 0 . 60 * * * 0 . 60 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) ( 0 . 07 ) Missing Director Birth Country (cid:2) 0 . 17 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 09 * (cid:2) 0 . 09 * (cid:2) 0 . 08 (cid:2) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) Missing Actor Birth Country (cid:2) 0 . 15 * * * (cid:2) 0 . 11 * * (cid:2) 0 . 11 * * (cid:2) 0 . 12 * * (cid:2) 0 . 11 * * (cid:2) 0 . 10 * * (cid:2) 0 . 10 * * ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) ( 0 . 04 ) Producing Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes (cid:2) 2 8920 * * * 9693 * * * 9727 * * * 9697 * * * 9701 * * * 9703 * * * 9752 * * * (cid:2) 2 - test of joint significance 639 . 16 * * * 35 . 29 * * * 4 . 86 * 8 . 14 * * 10 . 23 * * 60 . 42 * * * Note : Standard errors in parentheses . a Time spells (cid:5) 177 , 498 . * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 . * * p (cid:3) 0 . 01 . * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ( two - tailed tests ) . 2014 1375 Kim and Jensen hood is affected by audience heterogeneity . Fig - ure 1A shows that increasing domestic box office from zero to two standard deviations above the mean increases the domestic box office multiplier more than 4 . 5 times when cultural distance is low , but less than 2 . 5 times when cultural distance is high—an 80 % difference . Figure 1B shows that in - creasing domestic box office from zero to two stan - dard deviations above mean increases the domestic box office multiplier almost 4 times for indepen - dent distributors , but just above 3 times for major distributors—a 33 % difference . Figure 1C and 1D illustrate , similarly , how the effect of artistic ac - claim ( opening at the Cannes , Berlin , or Venice film festivals ) on export likelihood is affected by audi - ence heterogeneity . Figure 1C shows that the artis - tic acclaim multiplier increases more than 1 . 5 times when opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice when cultural distance is high , but less than 1 . 2 times when cultural distance is low—a 25 % differ - ence . Finally , Figure 1D shows that the artistic ac - claim multiplier increases more than 1 . 4 times when opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice when a film uses an independent distributor , but increases only 1 . 1 times when it uses a major distributor—a 27 % difference . Foreign Commercial Performance Table 4 shows the results of OLS regression on foreign commercial performance for exported films . Model 8 is a baseline model with control variables only , and they behave generally as ex - pected . Model 9 includes the main effect variables , and it shows that domestic commercial perfor - mance ( 0 . 43 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) and major distribution ( 0 . 39 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) increases foreign commercial perfor - mance , whereas cultural distance ( (cid:2) 0 . 07 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) decreases foreign commercial performance . Artistic acclaim through opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice ( 0 . 02 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) , however , does not affect foreign commercial performance . FIGURE 1 Market Signal and Audience Heterogeneity Interaction Effects on Export Likelihood 1376 October Academy of Management Journal Our main focus is , again , the interaction vari - ables introduced in Models 10 – 13 . Models 10 and 11 support Hypotheses 1b and 2b by showing that cultural distance decreases the effect of do - mestic commercial performance ( (cid:2) 0 . 04 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 001 ) , but increases the effect of artistic acclaim TABLE 4 OLS Regression Models On Foreign Box Office Performance ( n (cid:2) 3 , 900 ) Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 Model 11 Model 12 Model 13 Model 14 Cannes , Berlin , Venice by Major Distributor (cid:2) 0 . 40 * ( 0 . 17 ) (cid:2) 0 . 40 * ( 0 . 17 ) Domestic Commercial Success by Major Distributor 0 . 08 * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 09 * * ( 0 . 03 ) Cannes , Berlin , Venice by Cultural Distance 0 . 09 * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 08 * ( 0 . 03 ) Domestic Commercial Success by Cultural Distance (cid:2) 0 . 04 * * * ( 0 . 01 ) (cid:2) 0 . 04 * * * ( 0 . 01 ) Domestic Commercial Success 0 . 43 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 50 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 43 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 41 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 42 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 48 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) Cannes , Berlin , Venice 0 . 02 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 02 ( 0 . 07 ) (cid:2) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 07 ( 0 . 07 ) (cid:2) 0 . 05 ( 0 . 09 ) Cultural Distance (cid:2) 0 . 07 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 41 * * * ( 0 . 09 ) (cid:2) 0 . 09 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) (cid:2) 0 . 07 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) (cid:2) 0 . 07 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 41 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) Major Distributor 0 . 39 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 39 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 38 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) (cid:2) 0 . 61 ( 0 . 40 ) 0 . 45 * * * ( 0 . 08 ) (cid:2) 0 . 69 ( 0 . 40 ) Top National Award or Oscar Nomination 0 . 60 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 29 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 28 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 28 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 29 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 29 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 29 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) Director Awards 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 15 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) Actor Awards 0 . 21 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 11 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) Distributor Market Share 1 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 26 ) (cid:2) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 29 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 29 ) (cid:2) 0 . 06 ( 0 . 29 ) (cid:2) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 29 ) (cid:2) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 29 ) (cid:2) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 29 ) Cultural Specificity (cid:2) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 04 ) (cid:2) 0 . 17 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) (cid:2) 0 . 17 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) (cid:2) 0 . 17 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) Genre : Action 0 . 69 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 35 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 36 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 35 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 34 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 34 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 33 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) Genre : Comedy 0 . 11 * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 05 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) Genre : Documentary (cid:2) 0 . 67 * * * ( 0 . 12 ) (cid:2) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 11 ) (cid:2) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 11 ) (cid:2) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 11 ) (cid:2) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 11 ) (cid:2) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 11 ) (cid:2) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 11 ) Genre : Drama (cid:2) 0 . 56 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) (cid:2) 0 . 19 * * ( 0 . 06 ) (cid:2) 0 . 20 * * ( 0 . 06 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * ( 0 . 06 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * ( 0 . 06 ) (cid:2) 0 . 19 * * ( 0 . 06 ) (cid:2) 0 . 18 * * ( 0 . 06 ) Number Film from Producing Country 0 . 27 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 27 * * * ( 0 . 05 ) Language Match 0 . 13 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 11 ( 0 . 07 ) Cinema Frequency of Market Country 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 16 * * * ( 0 . 03 ) Market Country Population 0 . 75 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 02 ) Co - producing Country 0 . 32 * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 37 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 39 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 37 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 37 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 37 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) 0 . 39 * * * ( 0 . 10 ) Missing Director Birth Country (cid:2) 0 . 09 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 00 ( 0 . 06 ) Missing Actor Birth Country (cid:2) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 10 ( 0 . 06 ) Exported in Opening Year 0 . 43 * * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 50 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 50 * * * ( 0 . 06 ) First Export (cid:2) 0 . 25 * * ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 16 * ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 08 ) Exported Before Top National Award Nomination 1 . 12 * * * ( 0 . 12 ) 0 . 63 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 63 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 62 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 61 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 64 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 63 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) Exported Before Oscar Nomination 0 . 31 * * * ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 09 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 06 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 07 ( 0 . 08 ) 0 . 06 ( 0 . 08 ) Inverse Mills’ Ratio 3 . 26 ( 3 . 44 ) 6 . 11 ( 3 . 16 ) 5 . 57 ( 3 . 15 ) 6 . 17 ( 3 . 16 ) 5 . 85 ( 3 . 16 ) 6 . 18 ( 3 . 16 ) 5 . 39 ( 3 . 15 ) Constant (cid:2) 5 . 79 * * * ( 0 . 43 ) (cid:2) 10 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 46 ) (cid:2) 11 . 33 * * * ( 0 . 48 ) (cid:2) 10 . 47 * * * ( 0 . 46 ) (cid:2) 10 . 27 * * * ( 0 . 47 ) (cid:2) 10 . 51 * * * ( 0 . 46 ) (cid:2) 11 . 05 * * * ( 0 . 49 ) Producing Country Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Adjusted R 2 0 . 4293 0 . 5192 0 . 5224 0 . 5199 0 . 5199 0 . 5198 0 . 5245 F - test of joint significance 181 . 55 * * * 26 . 79 * * * 6 . 49 * 6 . 38 * 5 . 88 * 11 . 72 * * * Note : Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 . * * p (cid:3) 0 . 01 . * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ( two - tailed tests ) . 2014 1377 Kim and Jensen on foreign commercial performance ( 0 . 09 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) . Models 12 and 13 support Hypotheses 4a and 4b . Domestic commercial performance in - creases foreign commercial performance more for major distributors than for independent distribu - tors ( 0 . 08 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) , but artistic acclaim in - creases foreign commercial performance less for major distributions than for independent distrib - utors ( (cid:2) 0 . 40 ; p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) . The results are confirmed in Model 14 , which includes all the interaction variables . Figure 2 uses the predicted number of foreign admissions to illustrate the substantive signifi - cance of our foreign commercial performance re - sults ( with the domestic , French , box office sam - ple plotted from minimum observed domestic box office to two standard deviations above mean domestic box office , all non - graphed continuous covariates set at their mean , and binary variables set at zero ) . To emphasize how the interactions between market signals and audience heterogene - ity change the overall market signal effects at different levels of audience heterogeneity , we used the same approach as with Figure 1 and rescaled the overall market signal effects ( main plus interaction effect ) to have the same starting point ( and took the natural logarithm of the res - caled market signal effects to make it possible to compare the effects for all values of domestic box office ) . Figures 2A and 2B show how the effectiveness of domestic commercial performance as a market signal on foreign commercial performance is af - fected by audience heterogeneity . Figure 2A shows that increasing domestic box office from the minimum observed domestic box office to two standard deviations above the mean in - creases the effect of domestic commercial perfor - mance more than 1 , 000 times ( exp ( 7 ) ) when cul - tural distance is low , but only 4 . 3 times ( exp ( 1 . 47 ) ) when cultural distance is high . Using predicted admissions instead , domestic commer - cial performance increases the number of pre - dicted admissions from less than 20 to more than FIGURE 2 Market Signal and Audience Heterogeneity Interaction Effects on Foreign Box Office 1378 October Academy of Management Journal 18 , 000 when cultural distance is low , and from almost 500 to less than 2 , 100 when cultural dis - tance is high ( by comparison , the observed me - dian foreign admissions for French films in Ta - ble 1 is 6 , 506 ) . Figure 2B shows that increasing domestic box office from the minimum observed domestic box office to two standard deviations above the mean increases the effect of domestic commercial performance almost 900 times ( exp ( 6 . 8 ) ) for major distributors , but only 300 times ( exp ( 5 . 7 ) ) for independent distributors . Us - ing predicted admissions instead , domestic com - mercial performance increases predicted admis - sions from less than 40 to more than 11 , 000 for independent distributors , and from less than 25 to more than 21 , 000 for major distributors . Figures 2C and 2D show , similarly , how the ef - fectiveness of artistic acclaim as a market signal on foreign commercial performance is affected by au - dience heterogeneity . Figure 2C shows that open - ing at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice increases predicted admissions more than 2 times when cultural dis - tance is high , but decreases predicted admission more than 0 . 9 times when cultural distance is low . Expressed in predicted admissions , opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice increases predicted ad - missions from less than 1 , 400 to more than 2 , 800 when cultural distance is high , but decreases pre - dicted admissions from more than 3 , 200 to around 2 , 800 when cultural distance is low . Finally , Fig - ure 2D shows that opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice increases predicted admissions a modest 1 . 1 times for independent distributors , but de - creases predicted admission almost 0 . 7 times for major distributors . Expressed in predicted admis - sions , opening at Cannes , Berlin , or Venice in - creases predicted admissions from more than 2 , 700 to more than 2 , 900 for independent distributors , but decreases predicted admissions from almost 4 , 300 to less than 3 , 100 for major distributors . The relatively small positive effect of artistic acclaim for independent distributors suggests that audi - ences already expect independently distributed films to be artistic films , whereas the relatively large negative effect for major distributors confirms the fear that artistic acclaim scares their core audi - ence away . In sum , the results provide overall support for the argument that audience heterogeneity affects , statistically and substantively , the effectiveness of market signals on the likelihood of export and for - eign commercial performance . 11 Comparing the rel - ative effectiveness of commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals shows also that commercial performance overall is a more effective market signal , as judged by the stronger effects on multipliers of base rates ( Figure 1 ) and predicted admissions ( Figure 2 ) . We are not surprised : this result probably reflects the broader audience for commercially successful foreign films , even among art film audiences , compared to the audience for artistically acclaimed foreign films . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION This study focused on the role of audience het - erogeneity in determining the effectiveness of mar - ket signals . Market signal effectiveness depends , in general , on the perceived correlation between the observable market signal and unobservable product quality , which , in turn , depends on how audiences interpret the signal and what they understand by quality . Focusing specifically on the effectiveness of commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals in international film markets , we argued that the perceived correlation between mar - ket signals and product quality depends on audi - ence heterogeneity , defined both in terms of differ - ences between domestic and foreign film audiences ( end audiences ) and film distributors ( intermediary audiences ) . We tested our arguments in the Euro - pean film industry ( 2004 – 2009 ) and found strong support for our hypothesized moderating effects of cultural distance and distributor type on market signal effectiveness . Based on these results , we con - clude that commercial performance and artistic ac - claim are important market signals that help over - come liabilities of foreignness , but also that these signals are interpreted in different ways depending on the audiences involved in film exporting , thus providing evidence that audience heterogeneity shapes market signal effectiveness . We contribute to research on market signals by shifting attention from producers and their use of 11 Documenting the substantive significance of our in - teractions is particularly important given the small sta - tistical effect sizes ( Prentice & Miller , 1992 ; Cortina & Landis , 2009 ) . Small effect sizes are not unusual in mod - erated multiple regressions with unequal sample sizes across moderator - based subgroups ( relatively few films open at Cannes , Berlin , and Venice ) and predictor vari - able range restriction ( in cultural distance ) ( Agui - nis , 1995 ) . 2014 1379 Kim and Jensen market signals to how audiences use market signals and how that affects their effectiveness , a neglected area of research ( Connelly et al . , 2011 ; Riley , 2001 ) . By focusing on audience heterogeneity , we move beyond the dominant focus on homogeneous audi - ences in classical signaling theory ( Spence , 1974 ) and extend market signal theory to situations in which producers engage heterogeneous audiences ( Jensen & Kim , 2014 ) . Shifting focus from produc - ers to audiences suggests , more broadly , that it is important to focus not only on when market signals are important but also on which market signals are most effective with which audiences . Regarding when market signals are important , prior research shows that market signals are most important when it is difficult to evaluate the qual - ity of a product before the product is exchanged ( Jensen , 2003 ; Stuart , Hoang , & Hybels , 1999 ) . Al - though cultural distance and distributor type could be interpreted simply as reflecting different levels of uncertainty about quality , this interpretation fails to account for why commercial performance and artistic acclaim work in opposite directions depending on cultural distance , thus suggesting that our results cannot be explained by uncertainty reduction only . We emphasize , instead , the contin - gent nature of market signals , and theorize how seemingly similar market signals work differently in different contexts with different audiences . Although our main theoretical contributions are to market signal research , our study also makes important contributions to research on interna - tional film markets . First , the importance of com - mercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals is well established , but our study is the first to show that film festivals increase the likelihood of export but decrease foreign commercial perfor - mance if the artistically acclaimed film is distrib - uted by a major distributor focused on commercial films . Second , our study is the first study to em - phasize the multistage nature of film exports and theorize the role of domestic and foreign distribu - tors as intermediary audiences in this process , thus complementing prior research emphasizing the im - portance of domestic distribution ( Sorenson & Waguespack , 2006 ; Zuckerman & Kim , 2003 ) . Third , while most research on film exports focus on Hollywood films exported to foreign markets ( El - berse & Eliashberg , 2003 ; Lee , 2009 ) , our study examines European films , which are relatively less researched but face higher levels of liabilities of foreignness , due to the general lack of exposure to European films in most international markets . Fourth , we use a comprehensive sample of films— successful and unsuccessful—produced in 19 Eu - ropean countries , and we differentiate between the likelihood of export and the subsequent commer - cial performance in foreign markets . This approach addresses some limitations , including sample se - lection bias , in prior empirical work that focuses only on the most popular Hollywood films ( Craig et al . , 2005 ; Lee , 2008 ) . Our focus on how audience heterogeneity influ - ences market signal effectiveness has important managerial implications as well . By showing how audience heterogeneity influences market signal ef - fectiveness , our study warns not only decision makers in the film industry about using artistic acclaim and commercial performance as market signals indiscriminately , but also decision makers in other cultural and non - cultural industries using commercial performance and artistic acclaim as market signals . Commercial performance is obvi - ously an important market signal in most industries and various industry experts , including security analysts and quality experts , provide independent product ratings and consumer reports that function analogously to artistic acclaim as market signals . When evaluating a foreign auto manufacturer , for example , consumers may use its market share in its home country as an indicator of quality , or rely on quality certifications provided by third - party auto experts ( Rao , 1994 ; Rhee & Haunschild , 2006 ) . By emphasizing that the effectiveness of these signals may vary depending on the specific countries and products involved , we suggest that it is important for managers to carefully match market signals to individual markets and audiences . Our study is not without limitations . We use yearly data to examine the export process , which could mask more fine - grained temporal differences in home market release , film festival awards , and foreign market release . Unfortunately , weekly or monthly data are not available for the European countries in our sample . Unlike research on the extent to which commercial performance and artis - tic acclaim are intertwined and influence one an - other ( Eliashberg & Shugan , 1997 ) , however , weekly or monthly data is less important in our study . First , we are more concerned with how the effectiveness of commercial performance and artis - tic acclaim as market signals vary depending on cultural distance and distributor type , and not the relationship between them . Second , we agree that domestic artistic acclaim could be a predictor of commercial performance in that market because 1380 October Academy of Management Journal film experts within a particular market may be at - tuned to the tastes of their audiences and therefore require fine - grained data to tease out the separate effects . We find it unlikely , however , that the film festivals we study can be meaningfully said to be aware of the tastes of audiences in 33 different countries and allocate awards based on such aware - ness . Despite these limitations , we have established that audience heterogeneity matters for market sig - nal effectiveness in contexts in which producers can simultaneously leverage multiple signals and audiences therefore have to interpret different signals . REFERENCES Aguinis , H . 1995 . Statistical power problems with mod - erated multiple regression in management research . Journal of Management , 21 : 1141 – 1158 . Aiken , L . S . , & West , S . G . 1991 . Multiple regression : Testing and interpreting interactions . Newbury Park , CA : SAGE Publications . Akdeniz , M . B . , & Talay , M . B . 2013 . Cultural variations in the use of marketing signals : A multilevel analysis of the motion picture industry . Journal of the Acad - emy of Marketing Science , 41 : 601 – 624 . Anderson , J . 2010 . From Denmark , hacker punk and hit in tow . New York Times , March 14 : AR16 . Austin , B . 1984 . Portrait of an art film audience . Journal of Communication , 34 ( 1 ) : 74 – 87 . Bagwell , K . , & Riordan , M . H . 1991 . High and declining prices signal product quality . American Economic Review , 81 : 239 . Baumann , S . 2001 . Intellectualization and art world de - velopment : Film in the United States . American So - ciological Review , 66 : 404 – 426 . Baumann , S . 2002 . Marketing , cultural hierarchy , and the relevance of critics : Film in the United States , 1935 – 1980 . Poetics , 30 : 243 – 262 . Becker , H . S . 1982 . Art worlds . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Belsley , D . A . , Kuh , E . , & Welsh , R . E . 1980 . Regression diagnostics : Identifying influential data and sources of collinearity . New York , NY : John Wiley . Caves , R . E . 1982 . Multinational enterprise and eco - nomic analysis . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Chuu , S . L . H . , Chang , J . C . , & Zaichkowsky , J . L . 2009 . Exploring art film audiences : A marketing analysis . Journal of Promotion Management , 15 : 212 – 228 . Connelly , B . L . , Certo , S . T . , Ireland , R . D . , & Reutzel , C . R . 2011 . Signaling theory : A review and assess - ment . Journal of Management , 37 : 39 – 67 . Cortina , J . M . , & Landis , R . S . 2009 . When small effect sizes tell a big story , and when large effect sizes don’t . In C . E . Lance & R . J . Vandenberg ( Eds . ) , Sta - tistical and methodological myths and urban leg - ends : 287 – 308 . New York , NY : Routledge . Craig , C . S . , Greene , W . H . , & Douglas , S . P . 2005 . Culture matters : Consumer acceptance of U . S . films in for - eign markets . Journal of International Marketing , 13 : 80 – 103 . Dawar , N . , & Parker , P . 1994 . Marketing universals : Con - sumers’ use of brand name , price , physical appear - ance , and retailer reputation as signals of product quality . Journal of Marketing , 58 : 81 – 95 . Dargis , M . 2010 . Hacker with ink on back and big chip on shoulder . New York Times , March 18 : C6 . De Valck , M . 2007 . Film festivals : From European geo - politics to global cinephilia . Amsterdam , The Neth - erlands : Amsterdam University Press . De Valck , M . , & Soeteman , M . 2010 . “And the winner is . . . ” : What happens behind the scenes of film festival competitions . International Journal of Cul - tural Studies , 13 : 290 – 307 . De Vany , A . 2004 . Hollywood economics : How extreme uncertainty shapes the film industry . London , UK , and New York , NY : Routledge . Dodds , J . C . , & Holbrook , M . B . 1988 . What’s an Oscar worth ? An empirical estimation of the effect of nom - inations and awards on movie distribution and rev - enues . In B . A . Austin ( Ed . ) , Current research in film : Audiences , economics and the law , vol . 4 : 72 – 88 . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing Co . Elberse , A . , & Eliashberg , J . 2003 . Demand and supply dynamics for sequentially released products in inter - national markets : The case of motion pictures . Mar - keting Science , 22 : 329 – 354 . Eliashberg , J . , & Shugan , S . M . 1997 . Film critics : Influ - encers or predictors ? Journal of Marketing , 61 : 68 – 78 . Elsaesser , T . 2005 . European cinema : Face to face with Hollywood . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Amster - dam University Press . Faulkner , R . R . , & Anderson , A . B . 1987 . Short - term proj - ects and emergent careers : Evidence from Holly - wood . American Journal of Sociology , 92 : 879 – 909 . Fenn , D . , Suleman , O . , Efstathiou , J . , & Johnson , N . F . 2006 . How does Europe make its mind up ? Connec - tions , cliques , and compatibility between countries in the Eurovision Song Contest . Physics and Soci - ety , 360 : 576 – 598 . Finney , A . 2010 . The international film business : A 2014 1381 Kim and Jensen market guide beyond Hollywood . New York , NY : Routledge . Fiske , S . T . , Neuberg , S . L . , Beattie , A . E . , & Milberg , S . J . 1987 . Category - based and attribute - based reactions to others : Some informational conditions of stereo - typing and individuating processes . Journal of Ex - perimental Social Psychology , 23 : 399 – 427 . Fu , W . W . , & Lee , T . K . 2008 . Economic and cultural influences on the theatrical consumption of foreign films in Singapore . Journal of Media Economics , 21 : 1 – 27 . Fu , W . W . , & Govindaraju , A . 2010 . Explaining global box - office tastes in Hollywood films : Homogeniza - tion of national audiences’ movie selections . Com - munication Research , 37 : 215 – 238 . Fu , W . W . , & Sim , C . 2010 . Examining international country - to - country flow of theatrical films . Journal of Communication , 60 : 120 – 143 . Gemser , G . , Leenders , M . A . A . M . , & Wijnberg , N . M . 2008 . Why some awards are more effective signals of quality than others : A study of movie awards . Jour - nal of Management , 34 : 25 – 54 . Gemser , G . , van Oostrum , M . , & Leenders , M . A . A . M . 2007 . The impact of film reviews on the box office performance of art house versus mainstream motion pictures . Journal of Cultural Economics , 31 : 43 – 63 . Hadida , A . L . 2009 . Motion picture performance : A re - view and research agenda . International Journal of Management Reviews , 11 : 297 – 335 . Hannan , M . T . , & Freeman , J . 1989 . Organizational ecol - ogy . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Heckman , J . J . 1979 . Sample selection bias as a specifi - cation error . Econometrica , 47 : 153 – 161 . Hirsch , P . M . 1972 . Processing fads and fashions : An organization - set analysis of cultural industry sys - tems . American Journal of Sociology , 77 : 639 – 659 . Heil , O . , & Robertson , T . S . 1991 . Toward a theory of competitive market signaling : A research agenda . Strategic Management Journal , 12 : 403 – 418 . Hofstede , G . H . 1980 . Culture consequences : Interna - tional differences in work - related values . London , UK : Sage Publications . Holbrook , M . B . 1999 . Popular appeal versus expert judg - ments of motion pictures . Journal of Consumer Re - search , 26 : 144 – 155 . Holbrook , M . B . , & Addis , M . 2008 . Art versus commerce in the movie industry : A two - path model of motion - picture success . Journal of Cultural Economics , 32 : 87 – 107 . Horton , A . , & McDougal , S . Y . 1998 . Introduction . In A . Horton & S . Y . McDougal ( Eds . ) , Play it again , Sam : Retakes on remakes : 1 – 11 . Berkeley , CA : Univer - sity of California Press . Hoskins , C . , & Mirus , R . 1988 . Reasons for the US dom - inance of the international trade in television pro - grammes . Media , Culture and Society , 10 : 499 – 515 . Hsu , G . 2006 . Jacks of all trades and masters of none : Audiences’ reactions to spanning genres in feature film production . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 51 : 420 – 450 . Hymer , S . H . 1960 . The international operations of na - tional firms : A study of direct foreign investment . Doctoral dissertation , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts . Jaccard , J . , & Turrisi , R . 2003 . Interaction effects in mul - tiple regressions . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publi - cations . Jayakar , K . P . , & Waterman , D . 2000 . The economics of American theatrical movie exports : An empirical analysis . Journal of Media Economics , 13 : 153 – 169 . Jensen , M . 2003 . The role of network resources in market entry : Commercial banks’ entry into investment banking , 1991 – 1997 . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 48 : 466 – 497 . Jensen , M . , & Roy , A . 2008 . Staging exchange partner choices : When do status and reputation matter ? Academy of Management Journal , 51 : 495 – 516 . Jensen , M . , & Kim , B . K . 2014 . Great , Madama Butterfly again ! How robust market identity shapes opera rep - ertoires . Organization Science , 25 : 109 – 126 . Jensen , M . , Kim , B . K . , & Kim , H . 2011 . The importance of status in markets : A market identity perspective . In J . L . Pearce ( Ed . ) , Status in management and organ - izations : 87 – 117 . Cambridge , UK : University Press . Jensen , M . , Kim , H . , & Kim , B . K . 2012 . Meeting expec - tations : A role - theoretic perspective on reputation . In M . L . Barnett & T . G . Pollock ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of corporate reputation : 140 – 159 . Ox - ford , UK : Oxford University Press . Kahn , B . E . 1995 . Consumer variety - seeking among goods and services : An integrative review . Journal of Re - tailing and Consumer Services , 2 : 139 – 148 . Knight , J . G . , Holdsworth , D . K . , & Mather , D . W . 2007 . Country - of - origin and choice of food imports : An in - depth study of European distribution channel gatekeepers . Journal of International Business Studies , 38 : 107 – 125 . Kogut , B . , & Singh , H . 1988 . The effect of national culture on the choice of entry mode . Journal of Interna - tional Business Studies , 19 : 411 – 432 . Kostova , T . , & Zaheer , S . 1999 . Organizational legitimacy under conditions of complexity : The case of the mul - 1382 October Academy of Management Journal tinational enterprise . Academy of Management Re - view , 24 : 64 – 81 . Lampert , S . I . , & Jaffe , E . D . 1996 . Country of origin effects of international market entry . Journal of Global Marketing , 10 : 27 – 52 . Lange , A . , & Newman - Baudais , S . 2007 . Film distribu - tion companies in Europe . Strasbourg , France : Eu - ropean Audiovisual Observatory . Lee , F . L . F . 2006 . Cultural discount and cross - culture predictability : Examining the box office performance of American movies in Hong Kong . Journal of Me - dia Economics , 19 : 259 – 278 . Lee , F . L . F . 2008 . Hollywood movies in East Asia : Ex - amining cultural discount and performance predict - ability at the box office . Asian Journal of Commu - nication , 18 : 117 – 136 . Lee , F . L . F . 2009 . Cultural discount of cinematic achievement : The Academy Awards and U . S . mov - ies’ East Asian box office . Journal of Cultural Eco - nomics , 33 : 239 – 263 . Levy , E . 1999 . Cinema of outsiders : The rise of Ameri - can independent films . New York , NY : New York University Press . Magnusson , P . , Westjohn , S . A . , & Zdravkovic , S . 2011 . “What ? I thought Samsung was Japanese” : Accurate or not , perceived of country of origin matters . Inter - national Marketing Review , 28 : 454 – 472 . Meyer , J . W . , & Rowan , B . 1977 . Institutionalized organ - izations : Formal structure as myth and ceremony . American Journal of Sociology , 83 : 340 – 363 . Milgrom , P . , & Roberts , J . 1986 . Price and advertising signals of product quality . Journal of Political Econ - omy , 94 : 796 – 821 . Nachum , L . 2003 . Liability of foreignness in global com - petition ? Financial service affiliates in the City of London . Strategic Management Journal , 24 : 1187 – 1208 . Nachum , L . 2010 . When is foreignness an asset or a liability ? Explaining the performance differential be - tween foreign and local firms . Journal of Manage - ment , 36 : 714 – 739 . Nelson , R . A . , Donihue , M . R . , Waldman , D . M . , & Whea - ton , C . 2001 . What’s an Oscar worth ? Economic In - quiry , 39 : 1 – 6 . Newburry , W . , Gardberg , N . A . , & Belkin , L . Y . 2006 . Organizational attractiveness is in the eye of the beholder : The interaction of demographic character - istics with foreignness . Journal of International Business Studies , 37 : 666 – 686 . Peterson , R . A . 1997 . Creating country music : Fabricat - ing authenticity . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Podolny , J . M . 1993 . A status - based model of market competition . American Journal of Sociology , 98 : 829 – 872 . Podolny , J . M . 1994 . Market uncertainty and the social character of economic exchange . Administrative Science Quarterly , 39 : 458 – 483 . Pollock , T . G . , & Gulati , R . 2007 . Standing out from the crowd : The visibility - enhancing effects of IPO - re - lated signals on alliance formation by entrepreneur - ial firms . Strategic Organization , 5 : 339 – 372 . Pollock , T . G . , Rindova , V . P . , & Maggitti , P . G . 2008 . Market watch : Information and availability cascades among the media and investors in the U . S . IPO mar - ket . Academy of Management Journal , 51 : 335 – 358 . Prentice , D . A . , & Miller , D . T . 1992 . When small effects are impressive . Psychological Bulletin , 112 : 160 – 164 . Rao , H . 1994 . The social construction of reputation : Cer - tification contests , legitimation , and the survival of organizations in the American automobile industry : 1895 – 1912 . Strategic Management Journal , 15 : 29 – 44 . Rao , A . R . , Qu , L . , & Ruekert , R . W . 1999 . Signaling unobservable product quality through a brand ally . Journal of Marketing Research , 36 : 258 – 268 . Ratner , R . K . , & Kahn , B . E . 2002 . The impact of private versus public consumption on variety - seeking be - havior . Journal of Consumer Research , 29 : 246 – 257 . Ratner , R . K . , Kahn , B . E . , & Kahneman , D . 1999 . Choos - ing less - preferred experiences for the sake of variety . Journal of Consumer Research , 26 : 1 – 15 . Reinstein , D . A . , & Snyder , C . M . 2005 . The influence of expert reviews on consumer demand for experience goods : A case study of movie critics . Journal of Industrial Economics , 53 : 27 – 51 . Rhee , M . , & Haunschild , P . R . 2006 . The liability of good reputation : A study of product recalls in the U . S . automobile industry . Organization Science , 17 : 101 – 117 . Riley , J . G . 2001 . Silver signals : Twenty - five years of screening and signaling . Journal of Economic Liter - ature , 39 : 432 – 478 . Rindova , V . P . , Williamson , I . O . , Petkova , A . P . , & Sever , J . M . 2005 . Being good or being known : An empirical examination of the dimensions , antecedents , and consequences of organizational reputation . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 48 : 1033 – 1049 . Roth , K . P . , & Diamantopoulos , A . 2009 . Advancing the country image construct . Journal of Business Re - search , 62 : 726 – 740 . 2014 1383 Kim and Jensen Sawhney , M . S . , & Eliashberg , J . 1996 . A parsimonious model for forecasting gross box - office revenues of motion pictures . Marketing Science , 15 : 113 – 131 . Schwab , A . , & Miner , A . S . 2008 . Learning in hybrid - project systems : The effects of project performance on repeated collaboration . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 51 : 1117 – 1149 . Scott , W . R . 2008 . Institutions and organizations : Ideas and interests . Los Angeles , CA : Sage Publications . Shenkar , O . 2001 . Cultural distance revisited : Towards a more rigorous conceptualization and measurement of cultural differences . Journal of International Business Studies , 32 : 519 – 535 . Sorenson , O . , & Waguespack , D . 2006 . Social structure and exchange : Self - confirming dynamics in Holly - wood . Administrative Science Quarterly , 51 : 560 – 589 . Spence , M . 1973 . Job market signaling . Quarterly Jour - nal of Economics , 87 : 355 – 374 . Spence , M . 1974 . Market signaling : Informational transfer in hiring and related screening processes . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Stigler , G . J . , & Becker , G . S . 1977 . De gustibus non est disputandum . American Economic Review , 67 : 76 – 90 . Stuart , T . E . , Hoang , H . , & Hybels , R . C . 1999 . Interorgan - izational endorsements and the performance of en - trepreneurial ventures . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 : 315 – 349 . Swidler , A . 1986 . Culture in action : Symbols and strate - gies . American Sociological Review , 51 : 273 – 286 . van Trijp , H . C . M . , Hoyer , W . D . , & Inman , J . J . 1996 . Why switch ? Product category - level explanations for true variety - seeking behavior . Journal of Marketing Re - search , 33 : 281 – 292 . Veale , R . , & Quester , P . 2009 . Do consumer expectations match experience ? Predicting the influence of price and country of origin on perceptions of product quality . International Business Review , 18 : 134 – 144 . Wijnberg , N . M . 1995 . Selection processes and appropri - ability in art , science and technology . Journal of Cultural Economics , 19 : 221 – 235 . Wildman , S . S . , & Siwek , S . E . 1988 . International trade in films and television programs . Cambridge , MA : Ballinger . Zaheer , S . 1995 . Overcoming the liabilities of foreign - ness . Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 341 – 363 . Zuckerman , E . W . , & Kim , T . Y . 2003 . The critical trade - off : Identity assignment and box - office success in the feature film industry . Industrial and Corporate Change , 12 : 27 – 67 . Heeyon Kim ( heeyon @ nus . edu . sg ) is an assistant profes - sor of strategy and policy at NUS Business School , Na - tional University of Singapore . She received her PhD in strategy from the University of Michigan . Her research interests include the mobility of status and identity , with particular emphasis on how status and identity influence actors in international contexts . Michael Jensen ( michjen @ umich . edu ) is an associate professor of strategy at the Stephen M . Ross School of Business , University of Michigan . He received his PhD in management and organizations from Northwestern Uni - versity , Illinois . His main research focuses on the role of social structures and dynamics in markets , with particu - lar emphasis on the role of status , reputation , and identity . 1384 October Academy of Management Journal