Should Jurors Be Allowed to Discuss Trial Evidence Before Deliberation ? : New Research Evidence Norbert L . Kerr Michigan State University and Claremont Graduate University Jiin Jung Claremont Graduate University BA BA Traditionally , jurors are not permitted to discuss trial evidence with one another prior to jury deliberation . Allowing such discussions , at least in civil trials , is a jury innovation that has become increasingly popular . Prior field research has generally supported the assumption that this innovation is benign and , in particular , introduces no systematic bias in jury verdicts . These issues are examined again here within an experimental jury simulation study . The opportunity for predeliberation juror discussion ( PJD ) between the plaintiff and defense cases - in - chief was manipulated . The results revealed that PJD biased jury verdicts . The nature of this bias was not , as commonly suspected , a commitment to evidence heard prior to PJD , but rather a greater weight placed on evidence heard following the PJD . One good explanation of this bias was that jurors acted as if evidence heard prior to PJD had “already been covered” during the PJD , and so primary attention was given to post - PJD evidence in jury deliberations . Little evidence was found to corroborate several other purported benefits or drawbacks of PJD . Public Significance Statement Several states have already begun to permit civil juries to discuss trial evidence prior to jury deliberation . Our study provides evidence that this practice can introduce a systematic bias in jury verdicts . We explore potential remedies for this bias and suggest directions for future research . Keywords : jury , predeliberation discussion , jury innovation , bias , recency effect Supplemental materials : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / lhb0000296 . supp Traditionally , the first real opportunity that jurors have to dis - cuss a trial’s evidence with one another occurs during jury delib - erations at the end of the trial . Indeed , jurors are routinely in - structed at the outset of the trial ( e . g . , Arizona Rules of Court , 1996 ) that they must not discuss the trial evidence with anyone— fellow jurors , friends , or even a spouse—before such deliberations begin . The primary reason for this prohibition is a concern that such discussions could lead jurors to make up their minds about the key issues in the case prematurely—that is , before they have heard all the evidence or been instructed on the law governing their verdicts . However , in the last few years a number of states ( e . g . , Arizona , Colorado , the District of Columbia , Indiana , Maryland , Michigan ) have relaxed this prohibition , permitting jurors to discuss the evidence prior to deliberation under certain conditions . For exam - ple , in Arizona civil trials jurors are now permitted to discuss the evidence during trial recesses , but only among themselves in the jury room and only when all jurors are present . Furthermore , jurors are cautioned that they must not form final opinions about any fact or about the outcome of the case until they have heard and considered all of the trial evidence . A number of other states ( e . g . , California , North Dakota ) have actively considered making similar changes to their procedures . Others ( e . g . , Anderson , 2002 ) have called for permitting such discussion to occur in criminal or This article was published Online First August 30 , 2018 . Norbert L . Kerr , Department of Psychology , Michigan State University , and Claremont Graduate University ; Jiin Jung , Department of Social Psy - chology , Claremont Graduate University . We thank Mathew Murray , Wesam Agha , Megan Almendinger , Whit - ney Anderson , Caitlin Cipri , Kelly O’Connell , Kelsey Smith , and Ronald Kozel for their assistance in data collection , Deborah Kashy for her assistance with the HLM analyses , and the Michigan State University School of Law for use of its moot courtroom . The raw data for this study have been archived in the APA repository at the Center for Open Science ; interested readers can access these data at https : / / osf . io / 3hm4g / . The data are available at https : / / osf . io / 3hm4g / The experiment materials are available at http : / / www . msu . edu / user / kerr / GravesV . Chartwell / JuryDiscussionStudy . Questionnaires . pdf Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Norbert L . Kerr , Department of Psychology , Michigan State University , East Lan - sing , MI 48840 . E - mail : norbkerr @ gmail . com T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Law and Human Behavior © 2018 American Psychological Association 2018 , Vol . 42 , No . 5 , 413 – 426 0147 - 7307 / 18 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / lhb0000296 413 military juries as well . And there are indications that even in states where predeliberation discussion is prohibited , judges are allowing it if counsel consent ( Mize , Hannaford - Agor , & Waters , 2007 ) . Jury Reform and Innovation Permitting such predeliberation juror discussion ( which , for convenience , we will henceforth refer to as PJD ) is but one of several innovations to traditional jury trials that have been gaining in popularity ( Munsterman , Hannaford - Agor , & Whitehead , 2006 ) , including permitting jurors to pose questions to witnesses , permitting jurors to take notes during the trial , automatically providing the jury with copies of the judge’s instructions and / or the trial transcript , and providing judicial instructions at the start of the trial . Fortunately , the debates surrounding such innovations have often been informed by concrete empirical evidence ( e . g . , Dann & Hans , 2004 ) . Such evidence has generally been encour - aging—that is , confirming purported advantages and feasibility of each innovation , and / or disconfirming purported disadvantages [ for example , note taking : ForsterLee & Horowitz , 1997 ; Rosen - han , Eisner , & Robinson , 1994 / juror questioning : Heuer & Penrod , 1988 , 1994 / preinstructing jurors : Fitzgerald , 2000 ; ForsterLee , Horowitz , & Bourgeois , 1993 ; Heuer & Penrod , 1989 ; Smith , 1991 / providing transcripts : Horowitz & ForsterLee , 2001 / provid - ing written summaries , Dann , Hans , & Kaye , 2006 ; ForsterLee , Kent , & Horowitz , 2005 / including PJD : Hannaford , Hans , & Mun - sterman , 2000 ; Diamond , Vidmar , Rose , Ellis , & Mirphy , 2003 ] . The present article presents some new and , frankly , not - so - encouraging empirical evidence on PJD . Advocates and critics have suggested both many potential ben - efits and many potential costs of PJD ( see Table 1 ; Diamond et al . , 2003 , pp . 10 – 12 ; Hans , Hannaford , & Munsterman , 1999 ; Mun - sterman et al . , 2006 ) . The purported benefits of PJD include greater juror attentiveness , better comprehension and memory of evidence , heightened jury cohesiveness and satisfaction , reduced conflict in deliberation , and providing opportunities for jurors to correct misunderstandings and admonish proscribed behavior ( e . g . , a juror making up his or her mind too early ) . Critics of PJD have expressed concerns about the effect of PJD on the comprehensive - ness of deliberation , the likelihood of proscribed discussions with nonjurors , and the fact that jurors’ discussions would take place before they had been fully instructed by the judge . However , the primary concerns of the critics , implicit in the longstanding tradi - tion of prohibiting PJD , are that such discussions may undermine the accuracy and impartiality of jury verdicts . Fairness in adver - sarial procedures requires that jurors hear both sides’ arguments before individually or collectively reaching a verdict . Discussions early in the trial could lead jurors to reach conclusions which are premature ( i . e . , not based on the totality of evidence to be pre - sented at trial ) and to become overly committed to those early and publicly expressed conclusions ( i . e . , not to be open to valid op - posing arguments ) . Ideally , any reform of jury trial procedures ( such as PJD ) , ought to be verdict neutral—that is , should not systematically advantage one of the contesting parties in the trial . If it could be shown that one or the other side in a trial stood to be materially advantaged by introducing PJD , it would be a powerful argument against its adoption . Prior Research on PJD What does the available evidence show ? Essentially , there have only been a pair of studies that have directly examined this question . These were two field experiments in Arizona that called for random assignment of a number of civil trials into two condi - tions—a No Discuss condition in which jurors were given the traditional instruction prohibiting predeliberation discussion , and a Table 1 Purported Pros and Cons of Permitting Pre - Deliberation Juror Discussion ( PJD ) Pros Cons 1 . Jurors will be more alert and pay more attention . 1 . An aggressive , overpowering juror might dominate discussions and have undue influence on the views of others before deliberations begin . 2 . Jurors will have better memory for the evidence . 2 . The quality of deliberations may decline as jurors become more familiar with each other’s views , restricting deliberations to a narrower and more confined set of issues . 3 . Jurors will correct one another’s misunderstandings of the evidence . 3 . Jurors would discuss evidence without benefit of final court instructions on the applicable law . 4 . Jurors can admonish one another for reaching final conclusions prematurely . 4 . Informing the jurors that they may discuss evidence may open the gate to discussion even if not all are present , or it may cause the jurors to drop inhibitions against talking with non - jurors about the case . 5 . Discussion will build jury cohesion and hence reduce conflict during deliberation ( and perhaps , shorten deliberations ) . 5 . Juror stress might increase because of the conflicts produced by prior discussions . 6 . Discussion will increase familiarity among jurors and lead to better foreperson selection . 6 . Jurors may adopt the same shared biases before hearing all the evidence , undermining some of the benefits of post - trial deliberation . 7 . If jurors are allowed to discuss in court , they will be less likely to discuss out of court . 7 . Once a juror openly expresses his or her views in the presence of the other jurors , he or she is likely to adhere to that position and will be less likely to change that opinion in the light of subsequent evidence . 8 . Jurors will talk anyway , so why forbid it . 8 . Alternate jurors are not part of the final jury that renders the verdict . However , under discussion instructions , alternate jurors discuss evidence that will play a part in deliberations and thus have an impact on the verdict that only the legally constituted jury should decide . 9 . Jurors will talk anyway , so at least put reasonable ground rules in place . 10 . Jurors will enjoy service more and more willingly serve . Note . Pros / Cons in boldface type could be examined empirically in the present study . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 414 KERR AND JUNG Discuss condition in which jurors received instructions ( based on Rule 39f of the Arizona Rule of Civil Procedure ) that permitted such discussions during trial recesses ( as long as all jurors were present in the jury room ) . The primary data for the first of these studies – Hannaford et al . ( 2000 ) – were jury verdicts along with posttrial questionnaires filled out by jurors , judges , and attorneys . The second study – Diamond et al . ( 2003 ) – also included videotap - ing of jury deliberations and all jurors’ discussions that occurred in the jury room during the trial . There was not a significant differ - ence between the distribution of verdicts of the experimental conditions in the Diamond et al . ( 2003 ) study : ( 18 for plaintiff , 10 for defense ) in the Discuss condition [ 64 % for plaintiff ] versus ( eight plaintiff , three defense , one hung ) in the No Discuss con - dition [ 67 % for plaintiff ] . The results of the Hannaford et al . study were a bit more complex . The rate of proplaintiff verdicts was higher in the Discuss condition ( 56 for plaintiff , 28 for defense ; 67 % for plaintiff ) than the No Discuss condition ( 41 for plaintiff , 34 for defense ; 55 % for plaintiff ) , but this difference was not statistically significant . However , when other predictor variables were entered into the analyses ( viz . , the judge’s rating of the strength of the defense case , the judge’s rating of the relative effectiveness of the attorneys , and the judge’s rating of trial com - plexity ) , this difference became statistically significant . Likewise , the percentage of jurors who reported clearly favoring the plaintiff at the start of deliberation was significantly higher in the Discuss than the No Discuss condition ( 30 % vs . 20 % , respectively ) . Although these analyses suggest a proplaintiff bias in the Dis - cuss jurors , Hannaford et al . demurred . First , the effect of discus - sion on proplaintiff jury verdicts was not uniform across counties , but largely restricted to a single county . Second , the authors note that about 31 % of the juries in the Discuss condition ( 26 out of 84 ) were never observed to have had a discussion in the jury room , which they plausibly attributed to these trials being so short that there were few or no recesses . They redid their analyses combining these 26 juries with the 75 No Discuss juries and found that the formerly significant differences ( in proplaintiff jury verdicts and predeliberation plaintiff tilt ) were no longer significant at conven - tional ( (cid:2) (cid:3) . 05 ) levels . Taken together , the findings from these two studies have generally and reasonably been interpreted as showing little evidence that PJD would favor one side over the other at trial . Perhaps , but there are also some reasons not to consider the matter settled . First , it is clear that the evidence for some prejudg - ment is stronger in the Hannaford et al . study than in the Diamond et al . study . One striking difference between the two studies might plausibly explain this difference—jurors knew their deliberations were being videotaped in the latter study . Such observation tends to increase evaluation apprehension ( e . g . , Cottrell , 1972 ) and heighten epistemic motivation ( e . g . , Kruglanski , 1989 ; De Dreu , Nijstad , & van Knippenberg , 2008 ) . Hence , it might be the case that juries strive harder to overcome any biases created through PJD ( e . g . , take greater pains to review and weigh all evidence during deliberations ) when they know that their deliberations are being recorded and can be evaluated ( as in Diamond et al . , 2003 ) than when they are not ( as in Hannaford et al . , 2000 ) . Hannaford et al . ’s internal analyses are also vulnerable to selection biases . Essentially , equivalence of cases can be achieved via random assignment ( and large samples ) . But when one creates subgroups within originally randomly assigned groups , this equivalence may be compromised . Functionally , Hannaford et al . assume that those who were assigned to the Discuss condition but never engaged in discussion were equivalent to those in the No Discuss condition . But this may not have been the case . The former appear to be shorter trials ( and may be less complex , etc . ) and could well differ in other ways ( e . g . , more proplaintiff , since weak / no defense may result in short trials ) . The authors of these articles were well aware of and acknowl - edged such ambiguities surrounding their findings . The latter did not result from errors of design or analyses by the investigators , but rather from limits on control inherent in most field studies ( e . g . , difficulty in insuring random assignment and manipulation application ; high between - case variability ) . At the conclusion of their article , Hannaford et al . ( 2000 ) call for additional experimen - tal evidence : “We hope that these findings will prompt others to investigate the questions raised in this study using more traditional laboratory methodologies” ( p . 380 ) . The present article reports the results of a jury simulation experiment on the effects of PJD . Such a highly controlled laboratory study , while having its own inherent weaknesses ( e . g . , lack of realism in cases and procedures ; less consequential decisions ; less representative jurors ; see Runkle & McGrath , 1972 ) , ideally offers high experimental control and can thereby overcome some of the problems with which Hannaford et al . and Diamond et al . had to wrestle . In any case , examining a research question using multiple methods with different weak - nesses provides an opportunity for triangulation and greater con - fidence in our conclusions ( Webb , Campbell , Schwartz , & Sechrest , 1966 ) . Competing Predictions for PJD’s Effect on Verdicts The general structure of trials require that one side present its case before the other—defendants cannot answer charges until the plaintiff / prosecution first present their case . If jurors have heard one side ( e . g . , the plaintiff’s ) first , and then discussed the case before hearing the other side ( e . g . , the defendant’s ) , prejudgment and early commitment would appear to advantage the plaintiff in civil trials ( and the prosecution in criminal trials ) . This reasoning has reasonably made a prediction of a type of “primacy effect” ( viz . , more verdicts for the side presenting first , the plaintiff or prosecution ) in prior PJD research the most popular alternative to the null hypothesis ( i . e . , same verdicts in juries permitted and forbidden to discuss ) . But an opposite , “recency effect” could also be predicted . For example , if jurors tended to discount , ignore , or underweigh in final deliberations evidence presented prior to their discussions ( which would tend to favor the side that presents first ) for any of several reasons ( e . g . , “we’ve already covered that” ; more confidence in one’s evaluation of evidence after an oppor - tunity to socially validate one’s understanding of evidence heard prior to discussion ) , then a recency / prodefense effect would result . Both of these predictions also make a simplifying but question - able assumption—that each side’s prospects for winning the trial hinge primarily on the evidence presented in each side’s case - in - chief ( i . e . , during the early plaintiff / prosecution case or the late - defense case ) . Although this may often be true , at the end of the trial it is not the relative strength evidence presented early versus late that is crucial , but rather the relative strength of the totality of each side’s supporting evidence that should determine the trial outcome . This means that a primacy effect—greater weight placed on information presented early—need not result in more proplain - T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 415 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION tiff / prosecution verdicts , and that a recency effect—greater weight placed on information presented late—need not result in more prodefense verdicts . For example , suppose in a civil trial the plaintiff’s case - in - chief is much weaker than the defense’s case - in - chief . A primacy effect might manifest itself as highlighting the weakness of the plaintiff’s case , and hence lead to more prodefense verdicts . Conversely , a recency effect might result in more pro - plaintiff / prosecution verdicts if the defense case - in - chief were extremely weak . A Proposed Design Testing such possibilities can be achieved with a design manip - ulating two factors : ( a ) the opportunity for PJD at midtrial , and ( b ) the matched strength of the two competing cases . The latter ma - nipulation involves comparing the distribution of verdicts in a civil trial with a strong plaintiff case - in - chief followed by an equally strong defense case - in - chief ( which we will refer to as an SS trial ) with those reached in trial with a weak plaintiff case - in - chief followed by an equally weak defense case - in - chief ( a WW case ) . In the absence of juror midtrial discussion , if the two cases are indeed equally balanced and jurors give equal attention and weight to the early / plaintiff case and the late / defense case ( i . e . , w plaintiff (cid:4) w defense ) , then there should not be a preponderance of evidence for either side in either trial , and verdicts should be split approxi - mately equally for the two sides in both trials ( i . e . , WW (cid:3) SS (cid:3) (cid:5) 50 % proplaintiff ) . We would expect exactly the same pattern of verdicts if PJD were , as prior research suggests , verdict neutral and again w plaintiff (cid:4) w defense . However , this would not be the case if midtrial discussion did affect the relative weight placed on evi - dence presented early versus late—that is , if PJD were not verdict neutral . Moreover , with this design , we should observe a very different pattern of verdicts if PJD results in w plaintiff (cid:6) w defense ( triggering a primacy effect ) versus w plaintiff (cid:7) w defense ( triggering a recency effect ) . This can easily be seen if we were to assume the most extreme case—if PJD led to zero weight being attached to the defense case ( maximal primacy effect ) or zero weight being at - tached to the plaintiff case ( maximal recency effect ) . In the former case , the contrast of SS with WW would functionally be a contrast between a very strong plaintiff case versus a very weak plaintiff case , and absent any further information , one would expect more proplaintiff sentiment in the former / SS trial than the latter / WW trial . Exactly the opposite would be expected under maximal recency—SS versus WW would functionally be a contest between a very strong defense case versus a very weak defense case , and absent any other information , we would expect weaker proplaintiff sentiment in the former / SS trial than the latter / WW trial . ( See Section SI . G of the online supplementary material for a parallel argument for less extreme recency / primacy effects . ) Hence , the present experimental design not only provided a novel test of whether PJD is verdict neutral , but also provided a critical test between the two most likely ways in which PJD might bias jury verdicts . The primary objective of the present study was to provide a new and theoretically focused test of the verdict neutrality of PJD . However , our design and measures also permitted us to explore empirically several of the other purported pros and cons of PJD that have been suggested—namely , all those in bold typeface in Table 1 . Several research questions were of particular interest : does PJD affect ( a ) juror attention to and ( b ) memory of the trial evidence , ( c ) attitude toward fellow jurors , or ( d ) when in the trial jurors made up their minds ? Method Pilot Studies for Developing Trial Stimuli A draft of an age discrimination lawsuit , based very loosely on Reeves v . Sanderson Plumbing Inc ( 2000 ) , was first written with the twin objectives of ( a ) producing a closely balanced case ( i . e . , one that would be close to 50 % of individual mock jurors finding for the plaintiff and 50 % for the defense ) and ( b ) presenting relatively weak and equivocal evidence for each side . This was to be the WW version of the trial . The trial summary consisted of pretrial judge’s instructions , opening statements from the plaintiff and defense attorneys , summaries of the testimony of four plaintiff witnesses and two defense witnesses , the attorneys’ final summa - ries , and the judge’s instructions to the jury . Still photos of each trial participant were also included . Pilot participants ( N (cid:3) 32 ) read the first draft of the WW version online and then provided dichotomous verdicts ( for the defense or the plaintiff ) . The overall base rate was 53 % for the plaintiff . Next , to create a SS version , another plaintiff witness and another defense witness were added , each bringing strong new evidence for each side . The initial pilot study on the first draft of the SS case ( N (cid:3) 23 ) showed that the case was not well enough balanced ( 86 % plaintiff verdicts ) . So certain aspects of the new witnesses’ testimony were changed and the revised draft repiloted . Four more iterations of this revision and repiloting procedure ( total N (cid:3) 108 ) finally resulted in a SS version that was fairly close in outcome to the WW version ( 55 % for plaintiff vs . 53 % for plaintiff , respectively ) . Final Trial Stimuli The suit was brought by Robert Graves , a 62 - year - old former employee of the Wardcliff Materials Company , against the Chartwell Corporation . Graves alleged that he was fired from his draftsman job in the firm’s design department because of his age and Chartwell’s desire to eliminate high - cost high - seniority jobs after the Wardcliff company was purchased by Chartwell Corpo - ration . WW ( weak plaintiff - weak defense ) cases - in - chief . Evidence for plaintiff in WW case included ( a ) the testimony of the plaintiff , describing his firing , ( b ) the testimony of another former employee fired at Wardcliff at the age of 64 , ( c ) the testimony of the plaintiff’s former job supervisor , and ( d ) the testimony of an expert on labor statistics who presented statistical evidence of age dis - crimination in Wardcliff’s employment practices ( for the complete trial materials , see Section SI . A in the online supplementary ma - terial ) . Evidence for defendant in the WW case - in - chief included ( a ) the testimony of a second expert on labor statistics who presented opposing statistical analyses ( i . e . , suggesting no age discrimination ) and ( b ) the testimony of Wardcliff plant manager who said that the plaintiff was fired due to suspicion that he was selling plans to a competitor ( viz . , the plaintiff had downloaded plans not essential for his work and was caught with these plans in his briefcase ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 416 KERR AND JUNG SS ( strong plaintiff - strong defense ) cases - in - chief . The strong / strong version included all the arguments and evidence from the WW version as well as an additional piece of evidence for each side ( plaintiff and defendant ; again , see Section SI . A in the online supplementary material ) . The additional strong Plaintiff evidence case was an e - mail sent by the CEO of Chartwell to the Vice President in charge of Wardcliff Material . In the e - mail the CEO wrote that “Part of the problem is that the workforce at Wardcliff is too old and expensive . . . . I want to see some action on cutting those labor costs at Wardcliff—eliminate any depart - ment that isn’t profitable , and get rid of all the deadwood . ” The additional strong Defense evidence was the testimony of a security expert who produced five pictures showing the plaintiff giving memory stick to the chief of security at Wardcliff’s primary competitor , receiving an envelope and removing some money from the envelope , and a final photograph showing the plaintiff and the chief of security shaking hands . The final WW and SS versions obtained from the pilot studies were transformed into PowerPoint presentations , with a photo - graph of each trial actor responsible for the text ( i . e . , witness , attorney , or judge ) at the top of the screen and the relevant text below . A reader audiotaped the full transcripts of both trial ver - sions . The experimenter advanced the PowerPoint slides in syn - chrony with the playback of the audio file ; mock jurors could both listen to the transcript and , if and when they chose to , read along as well . Participants and Design Three hundred twenty - four jury - eligible undergraduates at Michigan State University ( 209 female ; 18 – 30 years of age with a mean of 19 . 56 years ; 13 unspecified gender and age ) participated in exchange for course credit . The study was approved by the Michigan State University IRB . Participants were assigned to a 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) (cid:8) 2 ( Pre / Post Deliberation ) mixed design with one within - participant variable ( Pre / Post Deliberation ) and two between - participants variables ( trial , discussion ) . There were approximately 36 participants in each experimental session . Because all those attending a session saw one of the two trial versions , half the experimental sessions saw the WW trial , the remainder saw the SS trial . Care was taken to avoid any confound between the case seen and session time of day . The raw data for this study have been archived in the APA repository at the Center for Open Science ; interested readers can access these data at https : / / osf . io / 3hm4g / . Procedure The experiment took place in the moot courtroom in the Mich - igan State University College of Law . The deliberation rooms were two rooms attached to the courtroom , the courtroom itself , and three study rooms located in the Law Library in the same building . A minimum of 36 and a maximum of 40 participants were sched - uled for each 1 . 5 hr long experimental session ; the number actually participating varied somewhat due to no shows . Before each session began , participants were asked to sign a consent form . Within each session , participants were randomly divided into five - or six - person juries . To do this an experimenter shuffled the index cards on which numbers 1 – 36 were written . Participants with cards 1 – 6 were assigned to a jury , Participants 7 – 12 were assigned to another jury , and so forth . If fewer than 36 participants showed up , the experimenters composed as many 6 person groups as possible , and then as many five - person groups . Among the targeted six juries at each experimental session , three juries were randomly assigned to the discussion condition where they were allowed to engage in a discussion in the middle of the trial ( after the plaintiff’s case - in - chief but before the defense case - in - chief ) ; and the other three juries to the no - discussion condition where they were not allowed to engage in any discussion until jury deliberation , after the trial was complete . When the mock trial began , all participants saw the judge’s pretrial instructions and attorney opening statements . Then , an experimenter played the plaintiff’s case on the PowerPoint slides . Participants in the WW condition saw relatively weak evidence in favor of the plaintiff while participants in the SS condition saw relatively strong evidence in favor of the plaintiff . Discussion versus no - discussion manipulation . At this point a recess was called . All members of the three juries who were assigned to the no - discussion condition were removed from the courtroom by one proctor . They were told to take a 12 – 15 min break and were instructed not to discuss the trial with other jurors . The other three juries who were assigned to the discussion condi - tion were taken into separate rooms by an experimenter . In these rooms were six chairs with positions designated with the letters A – F . They were told that they would now have 12 min to discuss the evidence they had heard thus far in the trial . They were also given a summary of the Arizona instructions for jury discussion ( viz . , discussions were permitted only among jury members , only when all were present , and only within the jury room ) . After the recess all jurors were brought back into the courtroom . An exper - imenter played the defendant’s case on the PowerPoint slides . Participants in the WW trial condition saw weak evidence in favor of the defendant while participants in the SS trial condition saw strong evidence in favor of the defendant . Finally , all jurors then saw plaintiff’s and defendant’s summary and the judge’s instruc - tions . Predeliberation questionnaire . At this point , all jurors were given a predeliberation questionnaire that included nine items ( see Section SI . B in the online supplementary material ) . It was filled out privately and individually . Participants were first asked to indicate whether they found by a preponderance of the evidence that the plaintiff’s age was a substantial or motivating factor that prompted the defendant to discharge him ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 ) . Next they indicated how confident they were that their verdict was correct ( not at all (cid:3) 1 , very confident (cid:3) 7 ) and estimated the probability that the plaintiff’s age was a substantial or motivating factor that prompted the defendant to discharge him ( on an 11 - point scale ranging from 0 in 10 chances to 10 in 10 ) . They were asked to indicate how strongly all the evidence they have seen favored the plaintiff or the defendant ( evidence strongly favors the plaintiff (cid:3) 1 , evidence strongly favors the defendant (cid:3) 7 ) . Next , participants who found for the plaintiff in the first ques - tion were asked indicate whether the plaintiff should be awarded damages to compensate for a net loss of wages and benefits to the date of trial ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 ) ; and , if answered yes , suggested the amount of compensation in dollars . They were also asked to indicate whether they found that the defendant had “willfully” T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 417 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION violated the law ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 ) . Participants who found for the defendant in the first question skipped these three questions . Lastly , all participants were asked to guess the opinion of the other jurors on their jury ( all of them are likely to favor the plaintiff (cid:3) 1 , they are likely to be split evenly between the plaintiff and defendant (cid:3) 4 , all of them are likely to favor the defendant (cid:3) 7 ) and indicate how confident they were about this guess ( not at all confident (cid:3) 1 , very confident (cid:3) 7 ) . Jury deliberation . After all jurors had completed the prede - liberation questionnaire , proctors brought the six juries to their assigned deliberation rooms . Excess jurors ( beyond the 36 required to compose six six - person juries ) were given a filler task and then excused . Jurors were allowed to have 20 min to reach a verdict . If they had not finished by that time , they were told they had to make a decision within 3 min or declare themselves a hung jury . A jury - verdict form instructed the jury to first select a foreperson , who would then record the jury’s verdict . On this form ( see Section SI . C in the online supplementary material ) , juries were first asked to indicate whether they unanimously found that the plaintiff’s age was a substantial or motivating factor that prompted the defendant to discharge him ; the three available options were yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 , and hung jury (cid:3) 3 . If they chose ‘no , ’ they need not answer the remaining questions . Given the unanimity rule , if they chose ‘hung , ’ they were asked how many jurors favored the plaintiff and how many favored the defendant at the end of deliberation . If the jury had chosen ‘yes’ ( proplaintiff verdict ) , they were asked to indicate whether the plaintiff should be awarded damages to compensate for a net loss of wages and benefits to the date of trial ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 , hung jury (cid:3) 3 ) ; and to indicate the amount of compensation in dollars . Last , juries were asked to indicate whether they unanimously found that the defen - dant “willfully” violated the law ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 , hung jury (cid:3) 3 ) . All jurors signed the form , and a jury foreperson returned the jury verdict form to the experimenter . Following Diamond et al . ’s ( 2003 ) example , we intended to video record all jury deliberations and predeliberation discussions . However , due to a variety of technical problems and human errors , we were only able to obtain a handful of recordings . Postdeliberation questionnaire . The foreperson then opened an envelope and gave each juror an enclosed postdeliberation questionnaire . The foreperson made sure each juror filled out this questionnaire individually and privately and returned the question - naire to the experimenter upon completion . The questionnaire included most of the items from the predeliberation questionnaire , as well as a number of additional items ( See Section SI . D in the online supplementary material for the full questionnaire ) . Final individual verdict . First , jurors were asked the same initial questions as on the predeliberation questionnaire : ( a ) the dichotomous judgment of whether the defendant’s age was a substantial or motivating factor prompting his firing , ( b ) how confident they were about this judgment , ( c ) the probability that the plaintiff’s age was a substantial or motivating factor , and ( d ) how strongly all the evidence they have seen favored plaintiff or the defendant . Next , for exploratory purposes , participants were asked for the dichotomous judgment of whether the defendant’s age was a substantial or motivating factor prompting his firing if the actual jury were to find for the plaintiff , regardless of their own personal verdict ; and , if answered yes , to provide their recom - mended damage award in dollars . Then , they were asked to make the dichotomous judgment of whether by a preponderance of the evidence , the defendant “willfully” violated the law if the actual jury were to find for the plaintiff regardless of their own personal verdict . Understanding , attention , and memory . The next set of questions measured how well jurors understood , paid attention , and remembered the evidence . They were asked to indicate how complex they found the evidence , how well they understood the evidence , how well they understood the expert statistical testi - mony , how well they understood judge’s instructions to the jury , how much they would have liked to be able to pose additional questions to witnesses , how closely they had at - tended to the evidence presented during the first half of the trial and how closely they had attended to evidence presented during the second half of the trial ( all on 7 - point scales ; not at all (cid:3) 1 , extremely (cid:3) 7 ) . They were also asked to indicate at what point in the trial they started leaning toward one side versus the other and at what point they made up their mind about who should win this case . For these two questions , eight options were presented ( after the plaintiff’s opening statement , after the defense’s opening statement , after the plaintiff’s case was presented , after the defense’s case was pre - sented , after the plaintiff’s closing argument , after the defense’s closing argument , after the judge’s instructions to the jury , after the jury deliberations ) . Juror’s memory for the evidence presented during the first and second half of the trial was assessed by both self - perception and actual tests . Participants were asked to rate how good their mem - ory was for the evidence presented during the first half of the trial and how good their memory was for the evidence presented during the second half of the trial ( very bad (cid:3) 1 , very good (cid:3) 7 ) . Then they were asked to indicate how many witnesses testified for the plaintiff and the defense respectively . Next , 32 true / false items were presented to check participants’ memory for facts presented in the trial . A few examples are “Donald Stanley , Plaintiff expert witness , estimated that the odds were 1000 to one against the firings of older workers simply being due to chance , ” and “When the Plaintiff , Graves , asked his boss what the problem was with his work , he was told that he had made a drafting mistake that resulted in product defects . ” Importance of evidence . The extent to which different parts of the evidence was important to jurors’ verdict was measured with nine items . These questions also provided another check on juror memory and attention , since some of the alleged witnesses ( e . g . , the plaintiff’s wife ) did not testify in some trials . Participants were asked about ( a ) the testimony of the plaintiff , ( b ) the testimony of the plaintiff’s wife , ( c ) the testi - mony of the former employee fired at Wardcliff , ( d ) the testi - mony of the plaintiff’s former job supervisor , ( e ) the testimony of the plaintiff expert witness on labor statistics , ( f ) the testi - mony of the CEO of the Chartwell corporation , ( g ) the testi - mony of defense expert witness on labor statistics , ( h ) the testimony of Defense witness , Wardcliff plant manager , and ( i ) the testimony of Defense witness , the security specialist hired at Wardcliff . Participants indicated whether each witness had tes - tified or not , and if s / he did , how important that testimony had been to their verdict on a 7 - point scale ( not very important (cid:3) 1 , extremely important (cid:3) 7 ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 418 KERR AND JUNG Jury deliberation processes . Participants were then asked to describe the opinion of the other jurors on their jury ( all of them favored the plaintiff (cid:3) 1 , they were split evenly between the plaintiff and defense (cid:3) 4 , all of them favored the defense (cid:3) 7 ) and how fixed the other jurors had been in their initial preferences , how much conflict there had been between jurors during their jury deliberation , how stressful it was to participate in their jury delib - eration , how much they relied on other jurors during deliberation , and to what extent they would say that one or two jurors dominated their jury deliberation ( not at all (cid:3) 1 , extremely (cid:3) 7 ) . The extent to which jurors identified with their jury group was measured with eight items . They were asked to indicate how much they agreed or disagreed on six statements : ( a ) I feel a sense of belong to this jury , ( b ) I feel that I am a member of this jury , ( c ) I see myself as part of this jury , ( d ) I am enthusiastic about this jury , ( e ) I am happy to belong to this jury , and ( f ) this jury is one of the best groups in this study ( strongly agree (cid:3) 1 , strongly disagree (cid:3) 7 ) . Next , they were asked to indicate how friendly the members of their jury were toward one another , and how much they would like to work together with the members of their jury on some other task ( not at all (cid:3) 1 , very much (cid:3) 7 ) . For each juror , participants rated how much she / he influenced other jurors’ opin - ion , and how much each juror was influenced by other jurors’ opinions ( not at all (cid:3) 1 , very much (cid:3) 7 ) . Informal and formal discussion . Participants were asked to indicate , at any point before the end of the trial , whether they had any informal discussion with other jurors about the evidence of this case ; and whether they had any formal discussions with other jurors about the evidence in this case ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 ) . For jurors who answered yes to either of these two questions , the following nine questions were presented . They were asked to indicate ( a ) whether these discussions improved juror understand - ing of the trial evidence , ( b ) how thoroughly all jurors’ point of view were considered during these discussions , ( c ) how accurately the trial evidence was remembered during trial discussions , ( d ) how helpful these discussions were for resolving confusion about the testimony or evidence presented during the trial , ( e ) how comfortable they felt engaging in such discussions , ( f ) how con - cerned they were about inappropriately influencing or being influ - enced by the opinions of the other jurors by engaging in trial discussions , ( g ) to what extent they would say that one or two jurors dominated these discussions , and ( h ) whether these discus - sions had any direct impact on their jury’s final verdict ( not at all (cid:3) 1 , very much (cid:3) 7 ) . They were asked to indicate how much they agreed or disagreed with the statement , “such pre - deliberation jury discussions encourage jurors to make up their minds early on , before all the evidence and the law is presented” ( strongly agree (cid:3) 1 , strongly disagree (cid:3) 7 ) . For the other jurors who answered no to both questions above on informal and formal discussion , one question was presented for them to answer—whether they would have liked to have had discussions with other jurors about the evidence of this case before the end of the trial , if it were solely up to them ( yes (cid:3) 1 , no (cid:3) 2 ) . Demographics and debriefing . All jurors provided their de - mographic information—age , gender , how many times they have served on an actual jury , and political affiliation . Finally , they were thanked and debriefed . Results Demographics and Background Variables Participants across conditions did not significantly differ on age and gender . A two - way ANOVA ( 2 trial : WW vs . SS by 2 discussion : Yes vs . No ) was conducted on age . None of main and interaction effects was significant , 0 . 21 (cid:7) F s (cid:7) 2 . 17 , . 142 (cid:7) p s (cid:7) . 650 . There were no significant imbalances of gender across con - ditions , (cid:9) 2 ( 1 ) (cid:3) 2 . 23 , p (cid:3) . 135 . Verdict Data There were several reasonable ways to assess jury verdict sen - timent in our data . The most obvious is the simple dichotomous judgment of whether , by a preponderance of evidence , the juror felt that the plaintiff had been discharged because of his age ( VERD ) . Another alternative was the juror’s estimate of the prob - ability that the plaintiff had been discharged because of his age ( VERDPROB ) . Another measure , used in many prior studies ( e . g . , Kerr , Niedermeier , & Kaplan , 1999 ) , combines this dichotomous judgment with the juror’s 7 - point rating of their confidence in that judgment . This resulted in a measure ( VERDCONF ) that ranged from 1 ( very confident in the judgment that discharge had not been due to age ) to 7 ( not at all confident in the judgment that discharge had not been due to age ) to 8 ( not at all confident in the judgment that discharge had been due to age ) to 14 ( very confident in the judgment that discharge had been due to age ) . A final alternative was to use the collective jury verdict itself . To maximize sample size , we recoded these verdicts to include the Hung juries as an intermediate outcome ( viz . , JURYVERD , where 0 (cid:3) Defendant Not Guilty / Not Liable , . 5 (cid:3) Hung jury , and 1 (cid:3) Defendant Guilty / Liable ) . We might have begun with an examination of individual jurors’ predeliberation verdict judgments . However , since jurors in the Discussion condition had interacted at the trial midpoint , the independence of these predeliberation judgments is questionable . In any case , the most efficient and informative analysis of jury verdicts would examine whether the process of deliberation mod - erated any of the effects of our primary independent variables ( Trial and Discussion ) . If not , then any effects of Discussion could be attributed to its effects on individual juror sentiment prior to deliberation , effects that were simply mirrored in postdeliberation verdicts . If so , then the effects of Discussion would be at least partially due to processes occurring during jury deliberation . Clearly none of the postdeliberation juror judgments were statis - tically independent , and so the collective jury judgments were the proper units of analysis . Therefore , we averaged across jurors within each jury the VERD , VERDCONF , and VERDPROB mea - sures , both before and after jury deliberation . As one might expect , these alternative measures were highly intercorrelated , both before ( all r s (cid:6) . 84 ) and after ( all r s (cid:6) . 94 , including JURYVERD ) deliberation . It is thus not surprising that the analyses of these alternative verdict measures yielded an identical pattern of results , which can be confirmed by visual inspection of the relevant means ( see Table 2 ) . For economy , we will present here the detailed analyses for the VERD measure ( the interested reader can inspect the remaining analyses in Section SI . E in the online supplementary material ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 419 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION We conducted a 2 ( Timing : pre vs . post ) by 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) by 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) repeated measures ANOVA on averaged VERD measures ( where 1 . 0 (cid:3) most prodefendant [ equivalent to all jurors finding the defendant not guilty of age discrimination ] and 2 . 0 (cid:3) most proplaintiff [ equivalent to all jurors finding the defendant guilty ] ) with repeated measures on the first factor . There were two significant main effects , Pre / Post F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 9 . 38 , p (cid:3) . 003 , d (cid:3) . 58 , 95 % CI [ . 20 , . 96 ] , and Trial , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 4 . 65 , p (cid:3) . 036 , d (cid:3) . 571 , 95 % CI [ . 04 , 1 . 10 ] , but these were qualified by a significant two - way interaction of Trial and Discus - sion , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 5 . 98 , p (cid:3) . 018 , d (cid:3) . 66 , CI 95 % [ . 13 , 1 . 20 ] , and by the three - way interaction , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 6 . 14 , p (cid:3) . 016 , d (cid:3) . 47 , CI 95 % [ . 09 , . 85 ] . The general pattern , both pre - and postdelib - eration , was for a simple Trial main effect when there had been Discussion , but little or no such effect without discussion . This two - way interaction was not significant at predeliberation , F ( 1 , 54 ) (cid:3) 1 . 55 , p (cid:3) . 218 ( see Figure 1a ) . Only the Trial main effect was significant here , F ( 1 , 54 ) (cid:3) 7 . 72 , p (cid:3) . 007 , d (cid:3) . 749 , 95 % CI [ . 22 , 1 . 28 ] . After deliberation , however , the Trial (cid:8) Discussion interaction was significant , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 7 . 15 , p (cid:3) . 010 , d (cid:3) 1 . 05 , 95 % CI [ . 29 , 1 . 81 ] ( see Figure 1b ) . When there was never any predeliberation discussion among jurors , the balanced WW and SS trials did not differ significantly in the No - discussion juries’ post - deliberation VERD scores , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 0 . 73 , p (cid:3) . 398 ( nor , for that matter , did they in the predeliberation scores ) . However , when there had been a discussion among jurors at the midpoint of the trial , the Trial simple main effect was significant in the postdelib - eration VERD measure , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 8 . 70 , p (cid:3) . 005 , d (cid:3) 1 . 14 , 95 % CI [ . 40 , 1 . 89 ] . This pattern may be characterized as a recency effect ; when there had been a midtrial discussion , the evidence presented in the second half of the trial had disproportionate impact on the postdeliberation jury verdicts—that is , those who heard a very weak defense case ( W W case ) were much more likely to find for the plaintiff than those who heard a very strong defense case ( S S case ) . However , this moderation effect of Discussion did not emerge until after the jury’s deliberation . Note that the mag - nitude of the Discussion simple main effect was comparable for the WW trial ( (cid:10) . 27 ) and the SS trial ( . 31 ) ; a planned contrast comparing the absolute values of these two effects was not signif - icant , t ( 53 ) (cid:3) . 19 , p (cid:6) . 85 . Thus , it is not the case that the effect of PJD was restricted to only one of the two trials ; as we will see in the Discussion section of this article below , this finding will bear on the relative plausibility of alternative explanations of the effect of PJD . Our analytic approach ( to average responses across jurors within juries and use these jury averages as the replicates ) turns out to be equivalent to doing hierarchical linear modeling ( HLM ) with ju - rors nested within juries ( since there are no predictive “mixed - variables” which vary both within and between groups in our study ; Kenny & Kashy , 2014 ; D . A . Kashy , personal communica - tion , February 5 , 2018 ) . In Section SI . I of the online supplemen - tary material , the interested reader can find for all variables ana - lyzed in this study ( whether reported in the main text or the online supplementary material ) condition means and standard deviations and intercorrelations . However , there is one additional question of interest that could be answered with an HLM analysis of predeliberation verdict data . HLM analyses can yield intraclass correlation s ( ICC s ) which quantify the degree of interdependence within groups . It is obvious that there should be a very high degree of interdependence within juries after jury deliberation ( e . g . , most jurors will individually endorse the verdict that they have just reached unanimously in their jury ) . But it is possible that there could have been greater interdependence / similarity of predeliberation verdict within juries Table 2 Cell Means for All Jury Verdict Measures Pre / Post deliberation No discussion Discussion WW SS WW SS AverageVERD Pre 1 . 50 1 . 41 1 . 61 1 . 38 Post 1 . 29 1 . 43 1 . 56 1 . 12 Average VERDCONF Pre 7 . 40 6 . 73 8 . 44 6 . 34 Post 5 . 54 6 . 75 7 . 93 3 . 36 Average VERDPROB Pre 6 . 15 5 . 63 6 . 44 5 . 41 Post 5 . 05 5 . 68 6 . 45 3 . 97 JURYVERD Post . 30 . 42 . 54 . 13 Note . All measures scaled such that lower scores signify more pro - defendant sentiment , higher scores signify more anti - defendant sentiment . Figure 1 . Jury Average VERD ( 1 (cid:3) unanimous for defendant , 2 (cid:3) unanimous for plaintiff ) across experimental conditions . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 420 KERR AND JUNG that had engaged in PJD ( our Discussion condition ) than among those who had not ( our No - Discussion condition ) . We undertook the relevant HLM analyses and found that this was not the case . The degree of interdependence of predeliberation verdicts was very small ( ICC (cid:3) . 020 ) , not significantly greater than zero ( z (cid:3) 0 . 39 , p (cid:3) . 70 ) , and did not differ in magnitude between the Discussion and No - Discussion conditions ( (cid:9) 2 ( 2 ) (cid:3) 0 . 50 , p (cid:3) . 97 ) . Thus , our brief midtrial discussion did not produce a detectably greater convergence of predeliberation verdict opinion than oc - curred without such discussion . Social decision scheme analysis of verdict data . One useful means of analyzing the process of jury decision making is the application of the social decision scheme ( SDS ) model ( Davis , 1973 ) . The heart of such an analysis is estimating the social decision scheme matrix , D , that summarizes the decision - making process under various conditions ( e . g . , with vs . without PJD ) . The D matrix is a stochastic matrix whose columns represent the possible jury verdicts [ Plaintiff , Defense , Hung ] and whose rows represent the possible initial splits in juror predeliberation verdict preference [ for example , for 6 - person civil juries , there would be seven rows , ( 6 for Plaintiff , 0 for Defense ) , ( 5 P , 1 D ) , ( 4 P , 2 D ) . . . ( 0 P , 6 D ) ] , and whose entries are the row relative frequencies ( i . e . , the estimated probability that a group with a particular start - ing split reaches a particular final verdict ) . The overall estimated D matrix for our study ( see Table 3 ) , confirmed two familiar patterns ( e . g . , see MacCoun & Kerr , 1988 ; Stasser , Kerr , & Davis , 1989 ) : ( a ) initial majorities usually prevail ( in 73 . 5 % [ 25 / 34 ] of instances where there was an initial majority and a nonhung jury ) , and ( b ) the Defense was more likely to prevail than the Plaintiff when there was no strong majority ( e . g . , in our evenly split juries that were not hung , 83 . 3 % [ 10 out of 12 ] found for the Defense ; prodefense minorities were more likely to prevail than comparably sized proplaintiff minorities ) . The latter asymmetry has been well replicated in research on criminal juries ( Kerr & MacCoun , 2012 ) ; here we see a similar pattern for a civil jury case . Whether or not juries engaged in PJD did not significantly alter the estimated D matrix ( see Section SI . F of the online supplementary material for details ) . Damage Award The preceding analyses clearly showed that the predeliberation juror discussion affected the jury verdicts . The next question was whether it also affected the damages award to the plaintiff . A new variable was created ( NetDamages ) which , when a juror found the defendant had engaged in age discrimination , was the amount of damages recommended ; when a juror had acquitted the defendant of age discrimination , NetDamages (cid:3) 0 . A 2 ( Trial ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discus - sion ) analysis of the predeliberation averages for this variable yielded only a Trial main effect ( F ( 1 , 54 ) (cid:3) 5 . 81 , p (cid:3) . 019 , d (cid:3) . 65 , 95 % CI [ . 12 , 1 . 17 ] ; hence , Discussion had no effect . A parallel analysis of postdeliberation NetDamage awards was not under - taken because jurors were not asked postdeliberation to provide their personal damage award recommendations . After dropping juries that failed to reach unanimous agreement on a damage figure , a 2 ( Trial ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion ) of the jury - level equivalent of NetDamages yielded no significant results . Additional Outcomes Results Bearing on Other Purported Advantages and Disadvantages of PJD Table 1 lists a number of purported pros and cons of allowing jurors to discuss evidence predeliberation . For a few—those in nonbold typeface—we had no relevant data . But for the remainder ( those in bold typeface ) , we did . Below we report the analyses of variables reflecting objective juror performance ( e . g . , memory for evidence ) and those variables that showed interesting effects for the Discussion variable . The analyses of the remaining variables— that showed no interesting effects of Discussion—are summa - rized briefly . However , the detailed analyses of all variables , along with brief summaries of relevant results from prior PJD studies , can be found in Section SI . H of the online supplemen - tary material . Are jurors allowed to engage in PJD more alert and more attentive ? ( Pro # 1 ) . Participants were asked postdeliberation to rate how closely they attended to the evidence in the first and the second half of the trial . We conducted a 2 ( Focus of attention : first half of trial vs . second half of trial ) (cid:8) 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) repeated measures ANOVA on averaged attention measures . A Focus main effect was marginally signifi - cant , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 3 . 66 , p (cid:3) . 061 , d (cid:3) . 36 , 95 % CI [ (cid:10) . 02 , . 73 ] . This was qualified by a two - way interaction of Focus and Discussion , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 9 . 64 , p (cid:3) . 003 , d (cid:3) . 58 , 95 % CI [ . 20 , . 96 ] . No other effects were significant . Ratings for the first half of the trial ( presentation of the plaintiff’s case ) did not differ between the Discussion ( M (cid:3) 5 . 02 ) and No - discussion ( M (cid:3) 5 . 19 ) conditions , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 1 . 13 , p (cid:3) . 292 , not surprising given that Discussion had not yet occurred . However , participants in the Discussion condi - tion reported paying greater attention to the second half ( M (cid:3) 5 . 13 ) than those in the No - Discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 4 . 71 ) , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 6 . 19 , p (cid:3) . 016 , d (cid:3) . 66 , 95 % CI [ . 12 , 1 . 19 ] . Thus , there is evidence that juror discussion did increase self - perception of at - tention , but only to that portion of the trial that followed such discussion . Two other variables that reflected juror attention were analyzed : measures of how accurately they could recall a ) the number of witnesses testifying at trial and b ) whether or not Table 3 Estimated Social Decision Scheme Matrix for Full Sample Initial split % for plaintiff Final verdict For plaintiff For defendant Hung n 100 % 1 . 0 ( 1 ) . 0 ( 0 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 1 83 % — — — — 80 % . 67 ( 2 ) . 33 ( 1 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 3 67 % . 45 ( 5 ) . 27 ( 3 ) . 27 ( 3 ) 11 60 % . 67 ( 4 ) . 33 ( 2 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 6 50 % . 15 ( 2 ) . 77 ( 10 ) . 08 ( 1 ) 13 40 % . 17 ( 1 ) . 67 ( 4 ) . 17 ( 1 ) 6 33 % . 17 ( 1 ) . 83 ( 5 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 6 20 % . 0 ( 0 ) 1 . 0 ( 2 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 2 17 % . 25 ( 1 ) . 75 ( 3 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 4 0 % . 0 ( 0 ) 1 . 0 ( 4 ) . 0 ( 0 ) 4 Note . Since a few juries had fewer than six members , some entries in the first column are not multiples of 1 / 6 . Numbers in parentheses are the observed frequencies . Numbers in the final column are row frequency totals . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 421 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION specific witnesses had testified . In no instance was there a signif - icant difference in the accuracy of those who had versus had not engaged in Discussion . Do jurors allowed to engage in PJD have better memory for the evidence ? ( Pro # 2 ) . Postdeliberation , jurors were asked whether 32 statements were true or false ; of these , 14 were statements about the testimony of the first four Plaintiff witnesses presented in both WW and SS trials , 2 were statements about Chartwell CEO e - mail evidence presented as part of the plaintiff’s case in only the SS version , 14 were statements were about the testimony of the first two Defense witnesses presented in both WW and SS trials , and 2 were statements about the security expert’s testimony presented as part of the defense case in only the SS version . Objective memory scores ( proportion of questions answered correctly ) were computed for each juror for the 14 items all saw for the plaintiff witnesses and for the 14 items all saw for the defense witnesses . These scores were then averaged across jurors within jury . A higher score indicates better memory . We conducted a 2 ( Side : Plaintiff vs . Defense ) (cid:8) 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) repeated measures ANOVA on these scores . There were no significant effects , although there was a marginal trend for Side , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 3 . 18 , p (cid:3) . 08 , d (cid:3) . 33 , 95 % CI [ (cid:10) . 04 , . 71 ] , Overall , jurors were more accurate on plaintiff witnesses ( M (cid:3) 0 . 75 ) than on defense witnesses ( M (cid:3) 0 . 73 ) ; this could reflect better attention and recall for the plaintiff’s case , or , perhaps , greater difficulty for the questions for the defense wit - nesses . We also conducted a 2 ( Side : Plaintiff vs . Defense ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) repeated measures ANOVA on the averages for the evidence presented only for SS case . There were no significant effects . Finally , there were no effects of Discussion on the juries’ subjective assessment of how good their memory was for the evidence presented in the first or second half of the trial . Do jurors allowed to engage in PJD correct one another’s misunderstandings of the evidence ? ( Pro # 3 ) . We had only indirect and subjective measures to address this purported benefit of discussion . Participants rated the complexity of the overall evidence , as well as how well they understood that evidence and how well they understood the expert statistical evidence , in par - ticular . If there were confusions about the evidence that were clarified during the jurors’ discussion , we might expect a Discus - sion main effect on these measures . The averages across jurors within juries for these three variables were analyzed in 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) ANOVAs . There were no significant effects for the first two of these measures . On the third , focusing on statistical evidence , both main effects were significant , Trial F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 5 . 48 , p (cid:3) . 023 , d (cid:3) . 62 , 95 % CI [ . 08 , 1 . 15 ] , and Discussion F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 5 . 29 , p (cid:3) . 025 , d (cid:3) . 61 , 95 % CI [ . 07 , 1 . 14 ] . Jurors who read the SS trial ( M (cid:3) 4 . 77 ) reported they understood the expert statistical evidence better than jurors who read the WW trial ( M (cid:3) 4 . 31 ) . More interestingly , jurors in the No - discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 4 . 76 ) reported they understood the expert statistical evidence better than jurors in the Discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 4 . 31 ) . If anything , the midtrial discussion in - creased jurors’ confusion about the complex statistical evidence . Will discussions build jury cohesion and hence reduce con - flict during deliberation ? ( Pro # 5 ) . In the present study , par - ticipants completed an 8 - item cohesion scale . Factor analysis with principal axis factoring and varimax rotation identified two factors producing eigen values greater than 1 . An index termed Jury Identification was the average of the five items loading on the first factor ( e . g . , I feel a sense of belonging to this jury ) . The average of the two items loading on the second factor ( How friendly were the members of your jury toward one another ? How much would you like to work together with the members of your jury on some other task ? ) constituted the Congeniality index . The remaining item ( e . g . , This jury is one of the best groups in this study ) which loaded equality on the two factors was analyzed separately and called Pride . We conducted 2 ( Trial : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) ANOVAs on the jury averages of these three mea - sures—Identification , Pride and Congeniality . There were no sig - nificant Discussion effects on any of these measures , although the Discussion main effect was marginally significant , F ( 1 , 53 ) (cid:3) 3 . 43 , p (cid:3) . 069 , d (cid:3) . 49 , 95 % CI [ (cid:10) . 04 , 1 . 02 ] on the Congeniality measure . Jurors in Discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 5 . 80 ) tended to see their juries as more congenial than jurors in No - discussion condi - tion ( M (cid:3) 5 . 55 ) . Lack of conflict might also be manifest in shorter jury deliber - ations . So , we also conducted a 2 ( Case : WW vs . SS ) (cid:8) 2 ( Discussion : Yes vs . No ) ANOVA on jury deliberation time . A Discussion main effect was marginally significant , F ( 1 , 50 ) (cid:3) 3 . 12 , p (cid:3) . 083 , d (cid:3) . 48 , 95 % CI [ (cid:10) . 06 , 1 . 02 ] . Juries in Discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 13 . 59 min ) deliberated somewhat longer than Juries in No - discussion condition ( M (cid:3) 7 . 18 min ) . Other purported disadvantages of PJD . Compared to jurors in the No Discussion condition , jurors in Discussion juries did not a ) think that deliberations were dominated by one or two jurors ( Con # 1 ) , b ) perceive more unequal influence among jurors , report making their minds up earlier in the trial ( Con # 7 ) , or think their fellow jurors were more willing to change their minds . Discussion The primary objective of this article was to explore whether predeliberation juror discussion ( PJD ) is verdict neutral—that is , whether such discussion has no systematic impact on juror / jury verdicts , as the prior literature has suggested , or whether such discussion does have some impact . Our results clearly indicated that PJD is not verdict neutral , at least under the conditions examined here . The impact of PJD on verdicts was significant and strong ( e . g . , overall , the difference in jury pro - plaintiff - verdict rates between those denied and permitted PJD was 26 . 5 % ) . How - ever , the effect of PJD was not a simple proplaintiff / proprosecu - tion bias , as has been suspected in most prior commentary and research . Rather , the effect of PJD was a type of recency effect— the evidence presented later in the trial ( and after the jury’s PJD ) had relatively greater impact on the jury’s verdict than the evi - dence presented early in the trial ( and prior to the jury’s PJD ) . This kind of recency effect would not produce a simple proplaintiff or prodefense bias unless the timing of evidence ( early vs . late in the trial , and hence , usually before vs . after PJD ) was strongly corre - lated with which side the evidence favored ( plaintiff vs . defen - dant ) . It may well be true that the strongest plaintiff evidence often appears early ( during the plaintiff’s case - in - chief ) and the stron - gest defense evidence often appears late ( during the defense’s case - in - chief ) . But it is also quite possible for the opposite to occur—strong defense evidence appearing early or strong plaintiff evidence appearing late—or for there to be no clear correlation T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 422 KERR AND JUNG between timing and side favored . If across all trials , this correla - tion were weak or absent , we would not expect any net effect of PJD on verdict , which is just the general pattern observed in the prior field research . Our experimental design permitted us to tease apart the timing of strong evidence ( early vs . late ) and the side favored by that evidence ( plaintiff vs . defense ) . And our results suggest that the net effect of permitting PJD will be to bias verdicts in favor of whichever side would profit more from the jury paying greater attention and giving greater weight to the evidence pre - sented after PJD than before PJD . Alternative Explanations for the Observed PJD Bias The next question raised by these findings is why jurors placed greater weight on post - PJD evidence . There is more than one plausible reason why PJD would produce such a recency effect . One possibility is that jurors initially lack confidence in their ability to follow and interpret the trial evidence . However , PJD allows jurors to “compare notes” with one another . They are likely to find that their own reactions to the evidence are mirrored by many or most of their fellow jurors . Such agreement serves to validate one’s competence and increase one’s confidence ( e . g . , Festinger , 1954 ; Sniezek & Henry , 1989 ; Wittenbaum & Bowman , 2004 ) . If jurors’ confidence is bolstered by PJD , they might place greater weight on what they see after PJD , and hence , produce a recency effect . This explanation suggests that jurors who had engaged in PJD would be more confident about their predelibera - tion verdict ( whichever side was favored ) . However , when we analyzed jurors’ predeliberation verdict confidence ratings , we found no main or interaction effect of Discussion on either indi - vidual jurors’ ratings ( p s (cid:6) . 55 ) or confidence ratings averaged across jurors within juries ( p s (cid:6) . 41 ) . A second , “attention” explanation is that PJD made jurors more alert and attentive to the evidence they subsequently heard . Indeed , jurors in the Discussion condition thought they paid more attention to the second half of the trial than those in the No - discussion condition . However , the precise pattern of these data did not indicate that Discussion jurors reported greater attention to the second half than the first half of the trial ; rather they simply indicate that No - discussion jurors believed they paid more attention to the first than to the second half of the trial . Moreover , if PJD actually increased attention to the second half of the trial , we would have expected Discussion jurors to show relatively better recall of the facts , the number of witnesses , and the identity of the witnesses in the second half of the trial , and there was no hint of such a pattern . A third possibility is that when juries get to deliberations , they feel like the trial evidence presented before their PJD had essen - tially “already been covered” during PJD , and therefore they concentrate their attention during deliberation on the evidence presented after their ( last ) PJD . The most relevant data for this “we already covered that” ( WACT ) explanation is the content of de - liberation . As we noted above , we only obtained a handful of recordings of jury deliberations—only 22 out of 57 juries , and four of these were so close to unanimity that there was little delibera - tion . Still , these few recordings could be informative . Therefore , we familiarized an experimental assistant with all the evidence presented in the plaintiff’s case - in - chief ( for both the WW and SS trials ) and in the defense’s case - in - chief ( for both the WW and SS trials ) . We then had the assistant view the 18 deliberation tapes for which there was some actual deliberation of evidence . He was blind to each jury’s discussion condition and to the WACT hy - pothesis ( viz . , relatively more focus on defense evidence in dis - cussion juries than in no - discussion juries ) . He made a simple classification for each deliberation : ( a ) Deliberation content fo - cused mostly on defense evidence , ( b ) Deliberation content focused mostly plaintiff evidence , and ( c ) Deliberation content did not clearly focus on one side’s evidence . We found that the deliberations of most Discussion juries ( 70 % or 7 of 10 ) were dominated by defense evidence , whereas this was true for only a minority of No - discussion juries ( 25 % , or 2 of 8 ) . With this small sample , the difference between conditions was not statistically significant ( p (cid:3) . 077 / . 153 for a directional / nondirectional Fisher’s exact test ) . Nevertheless , these fragmentary results are quite inter - esting and offer clear if tentative support for the WACT explana - tion . Clearly , further research is needed on this question . Prior to jury deliberation , the impact of PJD on juror verdicts was weak and nonsignificant . However , following deliberation , PJD had a strong and significant effect on verdicts . This pat - tern—of jury deliberation strengthening trends observed in juror predeliberation sentiment—is a commonly observed one ( e . g . , Kerr , MacCoun , & Kramer , 1996 ; Kerr et al . , 1999 ; Kramer , Kerr , & Carroll , 1990 ) . The important point at present is that the psy - chological processes responsible for the impact of PJD on jury verdicts do not appear to be operating solely at the level of the individual juror—they must also involve collective processes of some kind . One such process is a collective decision - making process summarized by a strong majority - wins decision scheme , such as the D observed here ( see Table 3 ; Kerr et al . , 1996 ) . However , this process seems to have operated similarly within juries with and without PJD ( see Section SI . F in the online sup - plementary material ) . Thus , the net impact of PJD seems to require an alternative collective process . The evidence reviewed in the previous paragraph suggests that this process may have involved the selection of trial information to be discussed during delibera - tion , with information encountered after PJD being more likely to be discussed than information encountered prior to PJD . However , we must acknowledge that yet other explanations are possible . Two creative reviewers independently suggested that one might interpret our results as showing that PJD makes jurors more thoughtful , systematic processors of the evidence—a rather more positive conclusion than our “not verdict neutral” one . They noted that the testimony of James Saxon , the security specialist in the defense case - in - chief portion of the SS trial , was particularly crucial evidence . Not only did it bolster the defense argument that there had been a just cause for firing the defendant , it served to refute the plaintiff’s claim that his removal of plans from the workplace was an innocent mistake and hence , to wholly discredit the plaintiff and his credibility . Clearly , Saxon’s testimony was available in both the Discussion and No - Discussion conditions , but it was only in the Discussion condition that this evidence strongly affected verdicts . There were a couple of other findings consistent with this interpretation : a ) members of Discussion juries reported that they remained as attentive to the trial evidence in the second half of the trial as in the first , whereas the No Discussion juries reported that their attention flagged during the second half of the trial ; and b ) Discussion juries took marginally longer to deliberate the case than No Discussion juries . However , there were also a number of findings that were inconsistent with this interpretation . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 423 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION First , there was no evidence that Discussion actually improved jurors’ memory for the evidence , which we might have expected if they were processing information more systematically . Second , and most crucially , this explanation fails to explain the equally strong effect of Discussion in the WW trial . In the WW trial , there was no apparent proplaintiff “smoking gun” to be detected in the defense case - in - chief , yet Discussion juries were much more likely to find for the plaintiff than No Discussion juries . On balance , we believe that the WACT explanation is most consistent with the full pattern of results , but hasten to acknowledge that much more research is required to nail down whether , when , how and why PJD will affect jury verdicts . Particularly important will be exam - ining trials that differ in potentially informative ways from the trials used in this study . For example , in the present trial , the attorney’s opening statements only hinted at the full evidence later to be presented ( particularly in the SS trial ) . Perhaps giving the jurors a clearer “heads up” in opening statements of all evidence to be presented might attenuate any PJD - induced sensitivity to cru - cial and surprising evidence appearing late in the trial . Other Purported Benefits and Costs of PJD The bias in jury verdicts documented here clearly raises red flags about the PJD jury innovation . However , even if PJD does bias verdicts , at least under some circumstances , its adoption might still be justified if it also carried with it enough other benefits . In Table 1 we listed several such purported benefits . Several of these ( viz . , # 4 , # 6 - # 9 ) could not be tested within our study . But several ( viz . , # 1 - # 3 , # 5 , # 10 ) could . Analyses of the data relevant to the latter provided only a little evidence for the purported benefits of PJD . Specifically , PJD resulted in a ; marginally ) higher positive feelings about the jury and b ) no drop off in perceived attentive - ness ( unlike the No - discussion jurors , who reported that their attention flagged during the second half of the trial ) . However , contrary to the latter result , objective measures of juror memory for trial and witness facts showed no effects of PJD . Nor did PJD affect self - reports of memory acuity , understanding of the evi - dence , stress , conflict during deliberation , or identification with the jury . And there were a couple of isolated instances where pur - ported benefits turned out to be drawbacks of PJD : Discussion juries ( a ) reported greater confusion about the complex statistical evidence , and ( b ) took ( marginally ) longer to reach their verdicts . Except for the recency bias discussed above , our data confirmed none of the other purported drawbacks of PJD : there were no Discussion effects on perception of few jurors dominating delib - eration , of how willing jurors were to change their minds , or what point in the trial minds were made up . Generalizing and Remedying a PJD Bias Like most investigations , this study raises as many questions as it answers . Two generic questions clearly deserve further attention : a ) to what extent is the recency bias observed here generalizable to conditions different than those examined here ? and b ) how might the recency bias be remedied ? An ever - present issue for experi - mental jury simulation studies like this one is whether the key findings would be materially different under more realistic condi - tions ( e . g . , a more representative jurors ; with a live trial ; if the verdicts determined tangible consequences for the litigants ) . For - tunately , there is practically no evidence that results from mock jury simulation studies are materially altered by increasing realism along such dimensions ( e . g . , Bornstein , 1999 ; Kerr & Bray , 2005 ) . A separate issue is the particular form the PJD took in our study—a brief discussion of the evidence between the two cases in chief . Of course , there are many other forms that PJD might take in actual trials , and some of these seem likely to modify the recency effect we observed . For example , the closer the last juror discussion occurred to the start or the end of the trial , the less impact a greater focus on the postdiscussion evidence should have . At the limits , all / none of the trial evidence would remain to be heard if there were only a single discussion at the start / end of the trial . And the length of a trial or of a jury’s discussion might well affect any recency bias ; for example , the shorter the discussion , the harder it would be to maintain that the jury had “already covered” all the evidence presented prediscussion . Also , for good experi - mental reasons , our mock juries only considered trials in which the cases - in - chief for both sides were nicely balanced . But if there were a strong contrast between the strength of the plaintiff’s and the defense’s cases , the recency bias might be altered—it might be attenuated / bolstered if the defense case were patently weaker / stronger than the plaintiff case . Clearly , much more research is required to settle such external validity questions . For the sake of argument , let us momentarily assume that the recency bias found here will occur for a wide range of civil ( or criminal ) trials ; what might be done to minimize it ? If it could be shown that some ways of timing PJD were less likely to produce the bias ( e . g . , regular and frequent PJDs ) , perhaps juries might be encouraged or required to time their discussions accordingly . However , the evidence for such an ideal patterning of discussions would have to be compelling to justify such an intrusive remedy . Judges instructions might describe the bias and caution the jury not to consider evidence discussed during a PJD session as “already covered” and hence , worth less consideration during their final deliberations . Unfortunately , the research evidence on the effec - tiveness of such cautionary judicial instructions is not encouraging ( Nietzel , McCarthy , & Kern , 1999 ; Steblay , Hosch , Culhane , & McWethy , 2006 ) . Pending the research required to understand the full impact of permitting PJDs , and the effectiveness of alternative remedies , the safest option would appear to be to follow the long - standing tradition of prohibiting PJD . Such a conclusion is unlikely to be popular , either among those eager to reform and modernize the institution of the jury or among jurors themselves . It is patently unnatural for humans to be asked to make sense of voluminous and contradictory information and to make a highly consequential decision based on that information without being able to discuss that information and that decision with their fellow decision makers . It is hardly surprising that jurors chafe under such a prohibition . Nor is it surprising that jurors strongly prefer to be free of it . Hannaford et al . ( 2000 ) noted that . . . Approximately 8 of 10 jurors who had engaged in trial discussions agreed that trial discussions improve the jury’s understanding of the trial evidence . Jurors who engaged in discussions during the trial described them as thorough , accurate , and helpful in resolving con - fusion . Furthermore , the majority of jurors who were not permitted to discuss the evidence during the trial said that they would have liked to do so . ( Hans et al . , 1999 , pp . 372 , 373 ) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 424 KERR AND JUNG Arizona trial judges were also enthusiastic about the innovation ( 72 . 5 % supported it in one survey ; Hans et al . , 1999 ) . Making jury service more palatable to jurors is a worthwhile goal , to be sure , but surely not if it can produce a bias that favors one of the contesting sides . There are many trial practices which jurors dis - like , such as being denied information on a defendant’s past criminal history , being denied access to sidebar conversations , or reaching verdicts without knowing exactly what sentence might be imposed . But in these and many other practices , the goal of unbiased jury decision making trumps juror preferences . Our re - sults suggest that prohibiting predeliberation juror discussion might well be another such practice , and that the rush to implement this jury innovation should be reconsidered . References Anderson , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Let jurors talk : Authorizing predeliberation dis - cussion of the evidence during trial . Military Law Review , 174 , 92 – 124 . Arizona Rules of Court . ( 1996 ) . St . Paul , MN : West Publishing Co . Bornstein , B . H . ( 1999 ) . The ecological validity of jury simulations : Is the jury still out ? Law and Human Behavior , 23 , 75 – 91 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1022326807441 Cottrell , N . B . ( 1972 ) . Social facilitation . In C . G . McClintock ( Ed . ) , Experimental social psychology ( pp . 185 – 236 ) . New York , NY : Holt . Dann , B . M . , & Hans , V . P . ( 2004 ) . Recent Evaluative Research on Jury Trial Innovations . Cornell Law Faculty Publications . Paper 402 . http : / / scholarship . law . cornell . edu / facpub / 402 Dann , M . , Hans , V . P . , & Kaye , D . H . ( 2006 ) . Can jury trial innovations improve juror understanding of DNA evidence . Judicature , 90 , 152 – 156 . Davis , J . H . ( 1973 ) . Group decision and social interaction : A theory of social decision schemes . Psychological Review , 80 , 97 – 125 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0033951 De Dreu , C . K . W . , Nijstad , B . A . , & van Knippenberg , D . ( 2008 ) . Motivated information processing in group judgment and decision mak - ing . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 12 , 22 – 49 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1088868307304092 Diamond , S . S . , Vidmar , N . , Rose , M . , Ellis , L . , & Mirphy , B . ( 2003 ) . Jury discussion during civil trials : Studying an Arizona innovation . Arizona Law Review , 45 , 1 – 81 . Festinger , L . ( 1954 ) . A theory of social comparison processes . Human Relations , 7 , 117 – 140 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001872675400700202 Fitzgerald , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Younger and older jurors : The influence of environmental supports on memory performance and decision making in complex trials . The Journals of Gerontology . Series B , Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences , 55 , 323 – 331 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / geronb / 55 . 6 . P323 ForsterLee , L . , Horowitz , I . A . , & Bourgeois , M . J . ( 1993 ) . Juror compe - tence in civil trials : Effects of preinstruction and evidence technicality . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 , 14 – 21 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 78 . 1 . 14 ForsterLee , L . , & Horowitz , I . A . ( 1997 ) . Enhancing juror competence in a complex trial . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 11 , 305 – 319 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1099 - 0720 ( 199708 ) 11 : 4 (cid:7) 305 : : AID - ACP457 (cid:6) 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - J ForsterLee , L . , Kent , L . , & Horowitz , I . A . ( 2005 ) . The cognitive effects of jury aids on decision - making in complex civil litigation . Applied Cog - nitive Psychology , 19 , 867 – 884 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / acp . 1124 Hannaford , P . L . , Hans , V . P . , & Munsterman , G . T . ( 2000 ) . Permitting jury discussions during trial : Impact of the Arizona reform . Law and Human Behavior , 24 , 359 – 382 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1005540305832 Hans , V . P . , Hannaford , P . L . , & Munsterman , G . T . ( 1999 ) . The Arizona jury reform permitting civil jury trial discussions : The views of trial participants , judges , and jurors . University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform , 32 , 349 – 377 . Heuer , L . , & Penrod , S . ( 1988 ) . Increasing jurors’ participation in trials : A field experiment with jury notetaking and question asking . Law and Human Behavior , 12 , 231 – 261 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01044383 Heuer , L . B . , & Penrod , S . D . ( 1989 ) . Instructing jurors : A field experiment with written and preliminary instructions . Law and Human Behavior , 13 , 409 – 430 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01056412 Heuer , L . , & Penrod , S . ( 1994 ) . Juror notetaking and question asking during trials : A national field experiment . Law and Human Behavior , 18 , 121 – 150 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01499012 Horowitz , I . A . , & ForsterLee , L . ( 2001 ) . The effects of note - taking and trial transcript access on mock jury decisions in a complex civil trial . Law and Human Behavior , 25 , 373 – 391 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1010655602400 Kenny , D . A . , & Kashy , D . A . ( 2014 ) . The design and analysis of data from dyads and groups . In H . T . Reis , & C . M . Judd ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology ( 2nd Ed . , pp . 589 – 607 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Kerr , N . L . , & Bray , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Simulation , realism , and the study of the jury . In N . Brewer & K . D . Williams ( Eds . ) , Psychology and law : An empirical perspective ( pp . 322 – 364 ) . New York , NY : Guilford Press . Kerr , N . L . , & MacCoun , R . J . ( 2012 ) . Is the leniency bias really dead ? : Misinterpreting asymmetry effects in criminal jury deliberation . Group Processes and Intergroup Relations , 15 , 585 – 602 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1368430212441639 Kerr , N . L . , MacCoun , R . , & Kramer , G . P . ( 1996 ) . Bias in judgment : Comparing individuals and groups . Psychological Review , 103 , 687 – 719 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 103 . 4 . 687 Kerr , N . L . , Niedermeier , K . E . , & Kaplan , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Bias in jurors vs . juries : New evidence from the SDS perspective . Organizational Behav - ior and Human Decision Processes , 80 , 70 – 86 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / obhd . 1999 . 2855 Kramer , G . P . , Kerr , N . L . , & Carroll , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Pretrial publicity , judicial remedies , and jury bias . Law and Human Behavior , 14 , 409 – 438 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01044220 Kruglanski , A . W . ( 1989 ) . Lay epistemics and human knowledge : Cogni - tive and motivational bases . New York , NY : Plenum Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4899 - 0924 - 4 MacCoun , R . J . , & Kerr , N . L . ( 1988 ) . Asymmetric influence in mock jury deliberation : Jurors’ bias for leniency . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 , 21 – 33 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 54 . 1 . 21 Mize , G . E . , Hannaford - Agor , P . , & Waters , N . L . ( 2007 ) . The state - of - the - states survey of jury improvement efforts : A compendium report . Williamsburg , VA : National Center for State Courts . Retrieved from http : / / www . ncsconline . org / D _ Research / cjs / pdf / SOSCompendiumFinal . pdf Munsterman , G . T . , Hannaford - Agor , P . L . , & Whitehead , G . M . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Jury trial innovations . Williamsburg , VA : National Center for State Courts . Nietzel , M . T . , McCarthy , D . M . , & Kern , M . J . ( 1999 ) . Juries : The current state of the empirical literature . In R . Roesch , S . D . Hart , & J . R . P . Ogloff ( Eds . ) , Psychology and law : The state of the discipline ( pp . 23 – 52 ) . Dordrecht , Netherlands : Kluwer Academic Publishers . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4615 - 4891 - 1 _ 2 Reeves v . Sanderson Plumbing , Inc . , 530 U . S . 133 ( 2000 ) . Rosenhan , D . L . , Eisner , S . L . , & Robinson , R . J . ( 1994 ) . Notetaking can aid juror recall . Law and Human Behavior , 18 , 53 – 61 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF01499143 Runkle , P . J . , & McGrath , J . E . ( 1972 ) . Research on human behavior : A systematic guide to method . New York , NY : Holt , Rinehart and Win - ston . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 425 PRE - DELIBERATION JUROR DISCUSSION Smith , V . L . ( 1991 ) . Impact of pretrial instruction on jurors’ information processing and decision making . Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 , 220 – 228 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 76 . 2 . 220 Sniezek , J . A . , & Henry , R . A . ( 1989 ) . Accuracy and confidence in group judgment . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 43 , 1 – 28 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 5978 ( 89 ) 90055 - 1 Stasser , G . , Kerr , N . L . , & Davis , J . H . ( 1989 ) . Influence processes and consensus models in decision - making groups . In P . Paulus ( Ed . ) , Psy - chology of group influence ( 2nd Ed . , pp . 279 – 329 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Steblay , N . , Hosch , H . M . , Culhane , S . E . , & McWethy , A . ( 2006 ) . The impact on juror verdicts of judicial instruction to disregard inadmissible evidence : A meta - analysis . Law and Human Behavior , 30 , 469 – 492 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10979 - 006 - 9039 - 7 Webb , E . J . , Campbell , D . T . , Schwartz , R . D . , & Sechrest , L . ( 1966 ) . Unobtrusive measures : Nonreactive research in the social sciences . Oxford , England : Rand McNally . Wittenbaum , G . M . , & Bowman , J . M . ( 2004 ) . A social validation explanation for mutual enhancement . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 40 , 169 – 184 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 1031 ( 03 ) 00091 - X Received December 14 , 2017 Revision received June 1 , 2018 Accepted June 6 , 2018 (cid:2) E - Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online ! Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available online ? This service is now available to you . Sign up at https : / / my . apa . org / portal / alerts / and you will be notified by e - mail when issues of interest to you become available ! T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 426 KERR AND JUNG