Author ' s response to reviews Information resource preferences by general pediatricians in office settings : a qualitative study Title : Authors : George R Kim ( georkim @ pol . net ) Edward L Bartlett Jr ( ebartle @ jhmi . edu ) Harold P Lehmann ( lehmann @ jhmi . edu ) 5 12 October 2005 Version : Date : see over Author ' s response to reviews : Responses to requests for formatting changes Title & Abstract - Please ensure these are identical in the manuscript and in the submission system . Response : These appear to be identical . If there is a problem , please let me know . Do you prefer the British spelling of “pediatricians” ? Author list - The list of authors in the manuscript should be written exactly as they are in the submission system . The authors ( forename , initial ( if any ) , surname ) should be written identically and in the order in which they are listed in the submission system . R : These appear to be in order . Word count - Please remove this from the manuscript . R : Both the text and abstract word count have been removed from the title page . Qualifications - Please remove the authors ' qualifications ( e . g . PhD , M . D . ) from the title page . R : Removed . Section headings - Please use sentence case for all headings and sub - headings in the manuscript ( i . e . remove all unnecessary capitals ) . R : All capitals except for the first word of each heading have been changed to lower - case . Competing interests - If there are none to declare , please write only ‘The authors declare that they have no competing interests’ . R : Done . Tables - We have noted that the tables have been submitted as additional files with your manuscript . Please note that these files will not be displayed within the final version of the manuscript but linked to it in their current form . We ask that you include a separate section in the manuscript in place of the section now entitled ' Tables ' that lists the file format , title of data , and gives a short description of the data . Please remember to mention these files in the text , and refer to them in the following way : ‘Additional file 1’ , do not refer to them as tables in the text . This is also true of the appendix additional file , which is refered to in the text as ' Appendix 1 ' , this must be referred to in the text as an additional file in the following way : ' [ see Additional file 1 ] ’ . R : Tables and Appendix have been converted to Additional files and the references adjusted .