Y OLO , a Robot for Creativity : A Co - Design Study with Children Patrícia Alves - Oliveira INESC - ID ; Instituto Universitário de Lisboa ISCTE - IUL , CIS - IUL ; Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Cornell University pa284 @ cornell . edu Ana Paiva INESC - ID and Instituto Superior Técnico , Universidade de Lisboa Lisbon , Portugal ana . paiva @ inesc - id . pt Patrícia Arriaga Instituto Universitário de Lisboa ISCTE - IUL , CIS - IUL Lisbon , Portugal . patricia . arriaga @ iscte . pt Guy Hoffman Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Cornell University Ithaca , NY , USA hoffman @ cornell . edu Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4921 - 5 / 17 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084304 Abstract This paper describes the design and development of Y OLO , a social robot aimed at boosting creativity in children . Cre - ativity is one of the most sought - after competencies as we move from industrialized economies , in which standardized knowledge was imperative , to creative economies , where the ability to innovate is crucial for the workforce . Y OLO is a robot to be used by children as a tool to boost new ideas and stimulate their creativity . This paper describes how established educational strategies that enhance creativity were combined with co - designing with children as infor - mants to reach the the prototype design of the robot . Author Keywords Creativity ; Children ; Social robot ; Collective creation ; Human - robot interaction ; Design ; Prototype ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 1 . 2 [ User / Machine Systems ] : Human factors ; J . 4 [ So - cial and Behavioral Sciences ] : Psychology ; J . 6 [ Computer - Aided Engineering ] : Computer - aided design ( CAD ) Introduction Creativity is considered one of the highest human cog - nitive abilities [ 1 ] . It is also one of the most sought - after workforce skills as many societies are shifting from indus - trialized to creative economies [ 16 ] . Despite the lack of Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 423 a full consensus or a unique deﬁnition for the concept of creativity , a canonical literature sees creativity as the “in - teraction among aptitude , process , and environment by which an individual or group produces a perceptible prod - uct that is both novel and useful as deﬁned within a social context” , [ 15 ] related with “ﬂuency , ﬂexibility , and originality” of ideas [ 5 ] . Due to the variety of deﬁnitions , some authors attempted to convey key requirements that should underlie deﬁnitions of creativity . With this , they initiated a dialogue towards a standard deﬁnition of creativity , stating that orig - inality and usefulness are the most common occurrences when it comes to deﬁning this concept [ 18 ] , related with the number of ideas generated [ 7 ] . Despite schools being perceived as potentially rich and nur - turing environments for enhancing children’s creative abili - ties , research suggests a “creativity crisis” in education , in the form of a decline of creative abilities [ 9 ] , starting at ele - mentary school [ 2 ] . Scholars tend to agree that this ability can be nurtured and enhanced throughout life [ 12 ] , making it important to be stimulated from a very young age . Figure 1 : Model of cognitive processes involved in problem - solving tasks [ 21 ] . The design of Y OLO is dedicated to the enhancement of the cognitive process of idea generation . Vision for Y OLO We present the design and development of Y OLO , a social robot developed to boost creativity in children . Y OLO is a non - humanoid robot with interactive capabilities that makes use of established strategies for creativity enhancement to boost creativity in children . Y OLO was created to engage in playful activities with children and at the same time stimu - late them to be more creative . The application scenario for Y OLO is a storytelling activity with children , aiming to trigger idea generation and content for the story . According to literature , idea generation ( or ﬂuency ) is one fundamental creative ability that tends to lead to originality and novelty [ 5 ] . With Y OLO , we aim to stimulate ﬂuency dur - Table 1 : Design principles of Y OLO ’s creative triggers . Process Techniques Media Exercises Idea generation ( 1 ) Related Stimuli ( semantic intuition ) ( 2 ) Remote Stimuli ( Nonlogical stimuli ) Robot Group Imaginative Playful Creative encounters Collaborative emergence Robot Group Originality Motivate new ideas by discouraging repetitions Robot Group Imaginative Playful ing the creative process of storytelling . At the same time , we are interested in improving this ability in a group con - text [ 19 ] . Thus , Y OLO acts as a playful tool for supporting idea generation during the creative process of storytelling of groups of children . Design process of Y OLO The design of Y OLO included an integrative process of lit - erature review and user - studies of co - design with children . Therefore , Y OLO ’s design was informed by key concepts of validated creative programs and techniques that elicit cre - ativity , as well as from ﬁndings from the co - design studies with children . This enabled an integrative design approach that combined both aspects from theory revision as well as views and preferences of children as they will be the end - users of Y OLO . Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 424 Co - design studies with children As children are the end - users of Y OLO , they were included in the design process as informants [ 3 ] in two different co - design studies described below : Figure 2 : Co - design study 1 : Children animating the paper robot prototype using puppeteering technique . Figure 3 : Co - design study 2 : Children creating a story together with two robots ( blue and orange ) that were being animated by two children . Figure 4 : Paper - robot prototype with the basic shape of a cube in two sizes ( small and large ) that children animated during co - design studies . Co - design study 1 The goal of this study was to include children as co - designers of the social behaviors for the robot . To achieve this goal , children were asked to give expression to a prototype of the robot ac - cording to selected personality traits , e . g . , they were asked to provide movements and sounds for a grumpy / kind , sociable / shy robot . Thus , children gave expression to the robot by animating it according to puppeteering techniques as illustrated in Figure 2 . Co - design study 2 The goal of this study was to involve children in the design of creative behaviors for the robot , i . e . , different ways of the robot expressing new ideas during storytelling . For this , children were in - structed to create a story using a robot - prototype . One of the children was selected to animate the robot and instructed to express ideas through the robot by performing only movements and sounds ( thus , refraining from using speech to provide ideas ) . Thus , the group of children together with the robot ( that was being animated and controlled by another child ) , were able to generate ideas for a story . E . g . , the child - puppeteer would move the robot in a cer - tain way leading to the other children to interpret its behavior ( e . g . , children could say “the robot is afraid” because the child who is controlling the robot is mak - ing it shake ) and combine that interpretation in their story ( see Figure 3 ) . This way , they were integrating the robot’s ideas and building a story together . A total of 64 children aged between 6 - 10 years old were or - ganized in groups of 3 - 4 and the studies were conducted in the school’s classrooms . A psychologist researcher with experience in developmental studies with children was in the room where the sessions took place and performed ﬁeld observations . The most relevant results that informed the design of Y OLO are presented in Table 2 . During the two co - design studies , children used a low ﬁdelity robot - paper prototype with the basic shape of a cube ( see Figure 4 ) . This initial shape was inspired by LEGO™ bricks , nonethe - less , the ﬁnal morphology of the robot changed according to the results collected from the studies and accommodat - ing literature on creativity ( see e . g . , Figures 5 , 6 , 7 for the ﬁnal appearance of the robot ) . Literature review on creativity programs and techniques Systematic literature reviews and meta - analysis on the ﬁeld of creativity present a wide set of training programs for cre - ativity [ 11 , 17 , 20 , 21 ] . These programs were created and validated with the main goal of enhancing creativity . Usu - ally , these programs tackle speciﬁc cognitive processes of creativity ( such as idea generation ) . To achieve a success - ful enhancement of creativity levels , speciﬁc techniques are used ( such as ideation , metaphors , brainstorming , etc ) , delivered using different media ( i . e . , through a lecture , in - dividualized coaching , behavioral modiﬁcation , etc ) in the format of deﬁned exercises ( such as exercises in groups , written exercises , etc ) [ 21 ] . In this sense , Y OLO is a robot that will incorporate validated creativity techniques for idea generation [ 23 ] ( see Figure 1 ) , such as remote stimuli and related stimuli to enhance idea generation by children ( see Figure 7 ) ( for a full list , see Table 1 ) . Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 425 Table 2 : Field observations from the two co - design studies conducted with children , mapped with how these results informed the design of the robot Y OLO . Field observations from co - design studies How co - design studies informed the design of Y OLO S o c i a l ex p r ess i on Children were able to conceive different movements for the robot according to the personality traits . They expressed the different movement for different personality traits by animating the robot - paper prototype with different motion amplitude , angles and speed . E . g . , a grumpy robot would have a high movement amplitude , spiky motion with serious shapes and high speed ( see Figure 8 ) . Giving the rich set of movement expression , Y OLO was created to combine rich movement opportunities , expressed by different standing modes . Thus , the robot can stand in the vertical mode performing rotating movements ( resembling a vinyl record ) that can be programmed with different speeds . It also has a horizontal mode in which it has non automated wheels so that children can use the robot and express a variety of personalities and emotions ( see Figure 6 ) . G u ess i ng b e h av i o r When the robot gave ideas for the story , children almost always tried to guess which idea the robot was trying to express . As the robot could express ideas only by movement , this resulted in different interpretations from children about what the robot was trying to convey . This result validated the idea that children were able to attribute meaning to the robot’s movement when creating a story . Y OLO was designed to accommodate rich and diverse types of movements . Therefore , Y OLO has both a vertical and two horizontal standing modes , all of them providing different movements with the potential to elicit ideas . Besides the standing modes , Y OLO has the ability to move its strings in a hide - and - show movement ( see Figures 5 and 7 ) . Tu r n - t ak i ng At times , the interaction between children and the robot was chaotic due to the excitement of the task and because they wanted to share a large number of ideas with each other . In these moments , the researcher intervened to re - organize the ﬂow . Y OLO includes a button in its design that children can click on to ask for ideas to Y OLO , or to ask Y OLO what it thinks about their own ideas . We envision that because the button can be clicked whenever children decide to and does not obey to strict turn - taking rules , it will have the effect of organizing the interaction and decrease the interference of an adult , proving children more autonomy during their creations Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 426 Figure 5 : Movement study ( 1 ) : Rotation movement of Y OLO ’s strings ( optical ﬁbers ) . Figure 6 : Movement study ( 2 ) : Y OLO ’s non actuated wheels that are controllable by children . Figure 7 : Movement study ( 3 ) : Y OLO ’s hide - and - show autonomous behavior . Meet Y OLO For the design process of Y OLO a multidisciplinary team of psychologists , mechanical engineers and a computer sci - entists came together and have followed design techniques that emphasize movement in the robot [ 8 ] , improvisation , [ 4 ] , storyboarding [ 22 ] and user - studies [ 6 ] . Y OLO ’s mor - phology followed an iterative process involving sketches , 3D modeling and rapid prototyping that encouraged and evoked movement - centric design [ 8 ] . Freehand sketches were drawn in order to explore multiple shapes for the robot . Sketches were inspired in real - world objects that were per - ceived by the authors as candidates for organic shapes and agile movements ( see Figures 5 , 6 and 7 ) . Also , rapid prototyping enabled us to experiment several mechanical mechanisms . Storyboard techniques was used to explore different application scenarios for the deployment of the robot . In its ﬁnal morphology , Y OLO resembles a sea - like creature with a non - humanoid shape whose design was guided considering the following principles : • Expressive representations . Since Y OLO captures and recognized both the shape of the movement and the speed of the motion when children move it around , we will use this input to capture the context of the story . The shapes and speed’s input were deﬁned according to the results from the co - design study 1 . As children act out the story using the robot , the gen - erated movement will thus serve as our input ( in the form of shapes and speed ) , enabling Y OLO to react and contribute to the story . Y OLO ’s contributions have the goal to stimulate idea generation ( often called ﬂuency ) and will make use of the related stimuli tech - nique ( stimuli that is connected to the task ) and the remote stimuli technique ( stimuli that is unrelated to Figure 8 : Two examples of movements created by children for the kind ( on the left ) and the grumpy ( on the right ) personality traits . the task ) [ 23 ] to stimulate ideas from children . Differ - ent behavioral expressions of Y OLO ( sound , colors and movement ) will be used as related or remote stimuli . For this , we will develop expressive repre - sentations for the different movements that children produce , e . g . , if a child moves the robot with high speed in making a curly shape movement and the robot wants to provide a relate stimuli , it will display a given color , sound or movement that relates to this idea . The representations of movement - sound - color are based on the works of Mats B . Küssner [ 10 ] on visual representations of shapes and Konstantina Orlandatou on color - sound associations [ 13 ] . Y OLO will thus display these two idea - generation behavioral triggers along the storytelling process . • Creative encounters . Y OLO will be used with groups of 3 children in a storytelling task . Henceforth , it be - comes crucial to stimulate group processes of cre - ation ( denominated by Sawyer ( 2009 ) as collabo - rative emergence processes [ 19 ] ) . To stimulate the contribution of each child for the story creation Y OLO will turn to each child during the storytelling activity in order to motivate and empower them to contribute with ideas for the story . Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 427 • Originality . Creativity is not only about the number of relevant ideas generated ( ﬂuency ) , but also how orig - inal they are . To design for originality of ideas , Y OLO will demonstrate that it does not appreciate repeti - tions if they are performed too often in a row . There - fore , if children perform the same type of shapes us - ing the same speed more than three times in a row , Y OLO will perform a type of “shut - down” behavior in order to motivate children to perform different move - ments instead and not just repeat what they have performed . We envision Y OLO as a non - humanoid artifact that resem - ble a toy for children and that behave autonomously . Due to its autonomous behavior , it becomes non totally controllable ( such as toys are ) and thus fun for children to play with , having the potential to be a conductor of creative thinking . During playful interactions with Y OLO , children will likely try to guess what the robot is expressing , enhancing the ingre - dients in their stories and at the same time not letting them take full control . In this sense , Y OLO will not only be used and perceived as a toy that children project their unique ideas on , but additionally as an interactive toy that children can play with and that have a life on its own . Seymour Papert revolutionized the way we look at educa - tion and learning . His vision of education as the center of all growth lead to revolutionary ideas : from computers as tools to learn , from LOGO programming to Turtle creations [ 14 ] . Nowadays , technology is indeed part of our lives and robots are being developed at a fast pace to enter in our homes , work places , and schools . The work presented in this pa - per seeks to provide a new application for robot and to de - velop them in such a way that they nurture intrinsic human abilities , such as creativity . Our future work includes usabil - ity studies of Y OLO with children and long term studies in school to investigate if robotic technology can be used to boost creative thinkers . Acknowledgements This work was supported by national funds through Fun - dação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia ( FCT - UID / CEC / 500 21 / 2013 ) and through project AMIGOS ( PTDC / EEISII / 7174 / 2014 ) . P . Alves - Oliveira acknowledges a FCT grant ref . SFRH / BD / 110223 / 2015 . The authors show their gratitude to André Pires , Ian Coutlier and Ankita Chandak for their involvement in this project , as well as to all teachers , stu - dents and parents from Escola Infante Sagres and Colégio Campo de Flores . REFERENCES 1 . Lorin W Anderson , David R Krathwohl , and Benjamin Samuel Bloom . 2001 . A taxonomy for learning , teaching , and assessing : A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives . Allyn & Bacon . 2 . Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi . 1997 . Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . HarperPerennial , New York 39 ( 1997 ) . 3 . Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and information technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . 4 . Elizabeth Gerber . 2007 . Improvisation principles and techniques for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1069 – 1072 . 5 . Joy Paul Guilford . 1967 . The nature of human intelligence . ( 1967 ) . Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 428 6 . Rex Hartson and Pardha S Pyla . 2012 . The UX Book : Process and guidelines for ensuring a quality user experience . Elsevier . 7 . Dennis Hocevar . 1979 . Ideational ﬂuency as a confounding factor in the measurement of originality . Journal of Educational Psychology 71 , 2 ( 1979 ) , 191 . 8 . Guy Hoffman and Wendy Ju . 2014 . Designing robots with movement in mind . Journal of Human - Robot Interaction 3 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 89 – 122 . 9 . Kyung Hee Kim . 2011 . The creativity crisis : The decrease in creative thinking scores on the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking . Creativity Research Journal 23 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 285 – 295 . 10 . Mats Kussner . 2014 . Shape , drawing and gesture : Cross - modal mappings of sound and music . Ph . D . Dissertation . King’s College London ( University of London ) . 11 . Richard S Mansﬁeld , Thomas V Busse , and Ernest J Krepelka . 1978 . The effectiveness of creativity training . Review of Educational Research 48 , 4 ( 1978 ) , 517 – 536 . 12 . Raymond S Nickerson . 1999 . 20 Enhancing Creativity . Handbook of creativity ( 1999 ) , 392 . 13 . Konstantina Orlandatou . 2014 . Synaesthetic and intermodal audio - visual perception : an experimental research . ( 2014 ) . 14 . Seymour Papert . 1980 . Mindstorms : Children , computers , and powerful ideas . Basic Books , Inc . 15 . Jonathan A Plucker , Ronald A Beghetto , and Gayle T Dow . 2004 . Why isn’t creativity more important to educational psychologists ? Potentials , pitfalls , and future directions in creativity research . Educational psychologist 39 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 83 – 96 . 16 . Ken Robinson . 2011 . Out of our minds : Learning to be creative . John Wiley & Sons . 17 . Laura Hall Rose and HSIN - TAI LIN . 1984 . A meta - analysis of long - term creativity training programs . The Journal of Creative Behavior 18 , 1 ( 1984 ) , 11 – 22 . 18 . Mark A Runco and Garrett J Jaeger . 2012 . The standard deﬁnition of creativity . Creativity Research Journal 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 92 – 96 . 19 . R Keith Sawyer and Stacy DeZutter . 2009 . Distributed creativity : How collective creations emerge from collaboration . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts 3 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 81 . 20 . Ginamarie Scott , Lyle E Leritz , and Michael D Mumford . 2004a . The effectiveness of creativity training : A quantitative review . Creativity Research Journal 16 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 361 – 388 . 21 . Ginamarie Scott , Lyle E Leritz , and Michael D Mumford . 2004b . Types of creativity training : Approaches and their effectiveness . The Journal of Creative Behavior 38 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 149 – 179 . 22 . David Sirkin and Wendy Ju . 2014 . Using embodied design improvisation as a design research tool . In Proceedings of the international conference on Human Behavior in Design ( HBiD 2014 ) , Ascona , Switzerland . 23 . Gerald F Smith . 1998 . Idea - generation techniques : a formulary of active ingredients . The Journal of Creative Behavior 32 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 107 – 134 . Work in Progress / Late Breaking IDC 2017 , June 27 – 30 , 2017 , Stanford , CA , USA 429