Higher organisms have evolved sophisticated mecha - nisms for responding in an integrated and balanced manner to various developmental , environmental and nutritional cues by precisely modulating transcription output . In response to intra - and extracellular cues , organisms must execute complex programs that require exquisite regulation of the timing and level of gene expression . These different transcriptional - regulatory programmes are orchestrated by the concerted action of sequence - specific transcription factors that recruit the transcription machinery . The enzyme that transcribes mRNA from protein - encoding genes is RNA polymer - ase II ( Pol II ) . With the help of a constellation of acces - sory factors , Pol II executes a series of distinct steps : it binds to promoters , initiates RNA synthesis and then pauses in early transcriptional elongation . The paused Pol II remains stably associated with the nascent RNA and is fully capable of resuming elongation ; however , further signals are needed to elicit the transition to a productive elongation complex . After this maturation has occurred , the polymerase processively progresses through the gene , terminates and eventually reiniti - ates transcription . To understand how developmental and homeostatic transcriptional programmes operate requires that we know the transcription factors that are involved and their targets . But just as important is an understanding of the mechanisms by which the interplay between Pol II and regulatory factors leads to highly spe - cific yet readily modulated transcription profiles . Traditional models of eukaryotic gene regulation were largely based on studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae that primarily emphasized the recruitment step in the transcription cycle and assumed that little regulation occurred after the formation of a pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) . However , recent findings in metazoan systems have revealed that much of the transcription regula - tion occurs well after the recruitment of Pol II and the transcription machinery to a gene promoter , through controlling pausing and the efficiency of early elonga - tion . Thus , we are in the midst of a paradigm shift in our understanding of gene regulation as it applies to higher eukaryotic systems . Here , we focus on the promoter - proximal paus - ing of Pol II and its regulated escape into productive elongation 1 . In this Review , we use the shorthand of calling promoter - proximal pausing simply Pol II paus - ing , although ( as discussed below ) there is evidence that the polymerase can pause during productive elongation as well . We describe the basic biochemical properties of paused Pol II and recent evidence from genome - wide studies , indicating that this type of regu - lation is widespread in metazoans 2 – 9 . We then discuss how Pol II pausing can influence chromatin structure at promoters to facilitate gene activity and how paus - ing might lead to rapid or synchronous transcriptional responses when cells are exposed to an activation sig - nal . We also highlight how regulation of early elon - gation can interplay with factors that regulate Pol II recruitment and the RNA - processing machineries to finely modulate transcription in response to distinct signals that occur during development , homeostasis and disease . 1 Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis , National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences , Research Triangle Park , North Carolina 27709 , USA . 2 Cornell University , Molecular Biology and Genetics , Biotechnology Building , Ithaca , New York 14853 , USA . e - mails : adelmank @ niehs . nih . gov ; johnlis @ cornell . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg3293 Pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) . An entry form of Pol II in a complex with general transcription factors in which the polymerase is bound to the promoter DNA but has not yet initiated RNA synthesis . Promoter - proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II : emerging roles in metazoans Karen Adelman 1 and John T . Lis 2 Abstract | Recent years have witnessed a sea change in our understanding of transcription regulation : whereas traditional models focused solely on the events that brought RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) to a gene promoter to initiate RNA synthesis , emerging evidence points to the pausing of Pol II during early elongation as a widespread regulatory mechanism in higher eukaryotes . Current data indicate that pausing is particularly enriched at genes in signal - responsive pathways . Here the evidence for pausing of Pol II from recent high - throughput studies will be discussed , as well as the potential interconnected functions of promoter - proximally paused Pol II . MODES OF TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATION R E V I E W S 720 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Heat shock genes ( Hsp genes ) . These genes are a set of highly conserved genes that encode molecular chaperones . These genes are rapidly induced in cells or organisms in response to various cellular stresses , including a several - degree increase in temperature . Long terminal repeat ( LTR ) . In HIV , this promoter resides in a region of LTRs . Transcription from this promoter produces both viral proteins and new RNA genomes . Discovery of promoter - proximal Pol II pausing Although pausing has only recently been recognized to be a prevalent regulatory strategy , evidence that tran - scription elongation could be a rate - limiting step in gene expression surfaced more than 30 years ago . A number of studies in mammalian cell culture in the late 1970s and the early 1980s indicated that transcription initiation did not obligatorily lead to the production of a full - length transcript 10 , 11 . Insight into when this post - initiation block occurred came from in vivo analyses of the uninduced Drosophila melanogaster heat shock genes ( Hsp genes ) in the Lis laboratory 15 using ultravio - let protein – DNA crosslinking 12 , nuclear run - on assays 13 , permanganate footprinting 14 and analysis of the short , capped RNAs ( scRNAs ) ( BOX 1 ) . These studies revealed that transcriptionally engaged polymerase accumulates just downstream of the Hsp promoters and is associ - ated with 20 – 60 - nucleotide - long nascent RNA 13 , 15 . The properties of these promoter - associated Pol IIs were strikingly similar to those ascribed by Roberts and col - leagues 16 to Escherichia coli RNA polymerases that pause at the start of the lambda late gene transcription unit . Thus , the Lis group 17 referred to the promoter - proximal Pol II found at the Hsp genes as ‘paused’ . Importantly , additional work carried out in the late 1980s and early 1990s revealed that other promoters dis - played paused Pol II . In fact , a large fraction of D . mela - nogaster genes investigated in detail ( 6 out of 10 genes ) showed characteristics of Pol II pausing 17 , 18 . Moreover , a handful of mammalian genes , including key cell regula - tory genes , such as human MYC ( also known as c - MYC ) and FOS , showed an enrichment of engaged Pol II just downstream of the transcription start site ( TSS ) that was effectively indistinguishable from that seen at the D . melanogaster Hsp genes 19 – 21 . Pol II was also found to accumulate on promoters of the HIV long terminal repeat ( LTR ) , although this regulatory system displayed several features that distinguished it from pausing at endoge - nous genes . First , the nascent RNA transcribed at the HIV LTR forms a functionally important unique sec - ondary structure 4 , 22 and , second , the HIV LTR produces an abundant , 59 - nucleotide - long RNA that results from premature termination of the early elongation com - plex 22 . By contrast , there is no current evidence suggest - ing that high levels of promoter - proximal termination by Pol II at endogenous genes . Nonetheless , these studies of multiple - gene systems provided evidence of regula - tion after recruitment of Pol II to a gene promoter , beg - ging the question of how widespread these ‘alternative’ mechanisms of gene regulation might be . Pol II pausing is widespread in metazoans The findings described above , although appreciated by the field , were eclipsed by studies of transcription in the powerful yeast model system that demonstrated that recruitment of Pol II to promoters was a major mode of gene regulation and provided no compelling evidence for promoter - proximally paused Pol II 23 , 24 . The interest in promoter - associated polymerase was recently reig - nited by the ability to carry out Pol II chromatin immu - noprecipitation ( ChIP ) assays genome - wide using ChIP followed by microarray ( ChIP – chip ) or ChIP followed by high - throughput sequencing ( ChIP – seq ) techniques ( see BOX 1 on methods for detecting Pol II ) . These studies have provided evidence for widespread post - recruitment regulation of gene expression in metazoans . Identifying and defining promoter - associated Pol II . The global localization of Pol II occupancy in mul - tiple species has revealed that Pol II exhibits various distributions along genes that provide insights into the mechanics of their regulation . In yeast , Pol II usually displays an approximately uniform distribution across the transcription unit 25 , as expected from models in which Pol II , after it has been recruited , experiences few regulatory barriers . By striking contrast , Pol II in D . melanogaster 4 , 6 , 9 and mammalian cells 26 , 27 is frequently non - uniformly distributed on the bodies of genes . In these higher eukaryotes , a large fraction of genes displays Pol II signal that is concentrated near TSSs , indicating that polymerases recruited to these promoters are not efficiently released downstream into the gene . However , initial genome - wide studies used Pol II ChIP to localize the polymerase , which in itself is not sufficient to distinguish between species that are paused during early elongation and those that are blocked at another post - recruitment step in the transcription cycle ( FIG . 1 ; BOX 1 ; see ChIP ) . Therefore , elucidating the true status of poised , promoter - associated Pol II ( FIG . 1 ) required the development and use of additional assays . Defining the status of promoter - proximal Pol II is important for understanding the regulation of poly - merase release from the promoter region into productive synthesis . For example , a recruited polymerase that fails to initiate RNA synthesis and is trapped as a PIC ( FIG . 1a ) would involve substantially different mechanisms for release than would a Pol II that had synthesized a short transcript but that was blocked in early elongation . Moreover , early elongation complexes that accumulate downstream of promoters can be present in several con - formations that are not all competent to resume RNA synthesis . Paused Pol II can be readily induced to restart transcription ( FIG . 1b ) , whereas arrested and terminating elongation complexes cannot ( FIG . 1c , d ) and require either rescue or reinitiation to generate a productive transcript . The first genome - wide ChIP study of Pol II distri - bution in human primary lung fibroblasts 26 in 2005 referred to promoter - proximal accumulation of Pol II as PICs ( FIG . 1a ) , because the peak of Pol II mapped near the TSSs and because extensive studies in vitro had firmly established the concept of a PIC as an intermediate that occurs early in the transcription cycle . However , in 2007 , genomic analysis of Pol II in human embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) revealed that the Pol II accumulation was accompanied by chromatin signatures of gene activity , suggesting that these Pol IIs had undergone transcription initiation 27 . Concurrent ChIP – chip analyses in D . mela - nogaster S2 cells and early embryos also identified a widespread accumulation of promoter - associated Pol II , and follow - up with permanganate footprinting ( BOX 1 ) investigated whether the observed Pol II had paused during elongation through the promoter - proximal R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 721 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Ligation - meditated PCR ( LM - PCR ) . A technique that can be used to map the ends of DNA fragments precisely from a specific region of the genome . Small DNA linkers are added to ends of DNA samples and then primers that are complementary to this linker are combined with a sequence - specific primer to amplify the DNA of interest by PCR . region 6 , 9 . This permanganate footprinting demonstrated the presence of stably melted DNA located 20 – 60 bases downstream of the TSSs of dozens of genes 4 , 6 , 9 , and this is diagnostic of a transcriptionally engaged polymerase . In addition , depletion of negative elongation factor ( NELF ; discussed below ) , which induces pausing , released many Box 1 | Methods used to detect paused polymerase Chromatin immunoprecipitation This technique involves protein – DNA crosslinking coupled with immunoprecipitation . When an antibody that targets RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) is used , chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) can identify regions of DNA that are bound by Pol II . We note that several antibodies are available that recognize different phosphorylation states of the Pol II carboxy - terminal heptapeptide repeat domain ( CTD ) , including the early elongation form characterized by predominant Ser7 and Ser5 phosphorylation and the productive elongation form that is also phosphorylated at Ser2 ( REF . 91 ) . However , because our knowledge is incomplete concerning how the many reported modifications of the CTD affect the affinity of these antibodies for their target epitope and because we do not know the complete modification status of Pol II at every step of the transcription cycle , we caution against using phospho - CTD antibodies as the sole method for establishing the presence of a paused Pol II . Advantages . A snapshot of Pol II distribution can be achieved through rapid crosslinking of whole cells . Analysis of individual genes is straightforward using quantitative PCR . ChIP is readily adapted for high - throughput genome - wide studies , either by hybridizing immunoprecipitated DNA to an array ( ChIP – chip ) or through high - throughput sequencing of Pol - II - bound DNA ( ChIP – seq ) . Disadvantages . ChIP has a low spatial resolution and sensitivity , and signal and specificity are highly dependent on the antibody used . Permanganate footprinting This method detects locally melted regions of DNA , such as those that arise from paused polymerase by selectively modifying unpaired thymines in a stable , open transcription bubble . Modified thymines are then converted to strand breaks that are visualized by ligation - meditated PCR ( LM - PCR ) . Advantages . This method can be carried out directly on whole cells or tissues , it achieves nucleotide - level resolution for mapping paused polymerase , and it does not require antibodies . Disadvantages . Permanganate footprinting is low - throughput , as the readout involves LM - PCR on individual genes . As a result , the application is limited to genes in which good primers for primer extension and LM - PCR can be designed , making permanganate footprinting challenging in mammalian systems . Nuclear run‑on assays and global run‑on sequencing Run - on assays detect elongation - competent RNA polymerases through their ability to incorporate a label into nascent RNA in isolated nuclei . Global run - on sequencing ( GRO - seq ) is a genome - wide nuclear run - on method that allows high - resolution mapping of transcriptionally engaged Pol II . Transcriptionally engaged Pol II is allowed to elongate for ~ 100 nucleotides in the presence of 5 - bromouridine - 5 ʹ - triphosphate ( Br - UTP ) . The RNAs are then base - hydrolysed to ~ 100 nucleotides in length , and RNAs are affinity - purified using anti - BrUTP beads and specific linkers are added to the 5 ʹ and 3 ʹ ends before submitting samples to next - generation sequencing . The specific 5 ʹ primer allows the orientation of the RNAs to be determined , whereas three affinity purifications at various points in the sample preparation provide a low background . Advantages . These methods specifically reveal transcriptionally engaged and active polymerase and have a high sensitivity and a low background . They are adaptable for high - throughput genome - wide applications and can be used in various organisms . Disadvantages . These methods are technically challenging and require preparation of nuclei . Resolution for mapping of paused polymerase is reduced by the necessity to allow polymerase to run - on and to incorporate labelled nucleotides into RNA . Short , capped RNA analysis and sequencing Short , capped RNA ( scRNA ) analysis involves direct isolation and identification of short RNA species derived from promoter - proximal Pol II . Initial use of this technique isolated RNAs produced at individual genes using complementary sequence - specific probes 15 , 98 . Extending this technique genome - wide by scRNA sequencing ( scRNA - seq ) 7 involves isolation of nuclei , size selection of short ( < 100 - nucleotide ) RNA species and enzymatic degradation of RNAs that lack the 5 ʹ cap before directional linker addition and high - throughput sequencing . This strategy allows for highly sensitive detection of RNA produced by promoter - proximal Pol II , including RNA species that have been generated by Pol II that pauses only transiently or that prematurely terminates transcription . Advantages . scRNA - seq pinpoints the start site of transcription and the final nucleotide added by paused polymerase at single - nucleotide resolution . A low - background and high - sensitivity assay is well - suited for high - throughput genome - wide applications . It does not require antibodies , cell treatment or labelling , and it can be used in various organisms . Disadvantages . This technique is technically challenging and requires preparation of nuclei . It does not distinguish between RNA species that remain associated with paused Pol II and those that have been released through transcription termination . R E V I E W S 722 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved of these Pol II complexes from promoter regions , further supporting their designation as engaged but paused spe - cies 6 . However , it was unclear what fraction of these pro - moter - proximal elongation complexes was competent to resume RNA synthesis , because permanganate foot - printing cannot distinguish between paused , arrested and terminating complexes ( FIG . 1b – d ) . Thus , these Pol II species were initially referred to as ‘stalled’ 4 , 6 , 9 , which is a general term that includes all of these different forms of engaged Pol II ( FIG . 1f ) . Global nuclear run - on sequencing ( GRO - seq ; see BOX 1 ) in human primary lung fibroblasts in 2008 con - firmed that many of the promoter - associated Pol II molecules are indeed paused by demonstrating that they are largely capable of resuming transcription in vitro following treatment with the detergent sarko - syl 2 . Sarkosyl is thought to remove pause - inducing factors from the elongation complex , allowing RNA synthesis to continue . Importantly , arrested or ter - minating elongation complexes cannot be induced to ‘run - on’ in this assay , such that the peak of signal observed near promoters by GRO - seq clearly represents Pol II in a paused state 2 , 5 , 28 . Furthermore , although backtracking and arrest of early elongation complexes ( FIG . 1c ) were found to occur commonly in vitro using metazoan transcription sys - tems 29 , promoter - proximal backtracked complexes were found to be rapidly rescued from arrest in vivo . Indeed , genomic analyses of scRNAs generated by paused Pol II in D . melanogaster demonstrated that such backtrack - ing is efficiently followed by TFIIS ( also known as TCEA1 ) - mediated cleavage of the extruded RNA 7 . Thus , current evidence suggests that a large fraction of promoter - associated Pol II is in a stably paused state that is competent to resume RNA synthesis . However , more detailed analyses of Pol II status , and in particular the contribution of premature transcription termination to the promoter - proximal Pol II signal , will be required to address this issue conclusively . Patterns of paused Pol II . Many metazoan genes display higher levels of Pol II on their promoters than on their gene body , but this ratio of promoter to gene body Pol II density , which is termed the pausing index , can dra - matically vary among genes ( examples shown in FIG . 2 ) . Owing to this broad range of pausing indices and to the inherent difficulties in applying a discrete threshold to continuous data sets , calculations of the fraction of genes that display Pol II pausing in mouse ESCs have produced estimates ranging from ~ 30 % to ~ 90 % 5 , 8 . Therefore , rather than reflecting a biological difference , the reported differ - ences in prevalence of pausing are probably a consequence of using different methods and different statistical criteria to define Pol II pausing . Notably , when GRO - seq and a consistent data analysis method are used to measure Pol II occupancy in human primary lung fibroblasts , mouse ESCs or D . melanogaster cell culture , a similar fraction of genes is found to display paused Pol II in all cases : ~ 30 % of all genes 2 , 5 , 28 . Thus , despite the fact that the definition of what constitutes ‘pausing’ is highly variable among the different groups studying this phenomenon , the Figure 1 | Defining the terms used to describe promoter‑associated Pol II complexes . The promoter region is depicted with the transcription start site ( TSS ) labelled with an arrow . RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) is illustrated as a red rocket . The general transcription factors ( GTFs ; grey oval ) are shown centred at the TSS ( arrow ) . The pause - inducing factors negative elongation factor ( NELF ; orange oval ) , DRB - sensitivity - inducing factor ( DSIF ; purple pentagon ) and transcript cleavage factor TFIIS ( green circle ) are shown . The nascent RNA transcript is shown in blue , and a bracket indicates the pausing region , usually 20 – 60 nucleotides downstream from the TSS . a | Pre - initiation complex : an entry form of Pol II in a complex with general transcription factors in which the polymerase is bound to the promoter DNA but has not yet initiated RNA synthesis . b | Paused : an early elongation complex that has transiently halted RNA synthesis . Paused polymerase is fully competent to resume elongation , remaining stably engaged and associated with the nascent RNA . The 3 ʹ end of the RNA may have ‘frayed’ slightly from the Pol II active site in a manner that would slow further RNA synthesis , but the RNA is properly aligned with the active site . Two protein complexes , DSIF and NELF , reduce the rate of elongation and facilitate the establishment of the stably paused state . c | Arrested : a stably engaged elongation complex wherein the polymerase has backtracked along the DNA template , such that the RNA 3 ʹ end is displaced from the active site . Restart of an arrested complex usually requires TFIIS , which induces Pol II to cleave the nascent RNA at the active site , creating a new 3 ʹ end that is properly aligned with the Pol II active site and releasing a short ( 2 – 9 - nucleotide ) 3 ʹ RNA . d | Terminating : an unstable elongation complex that is in the process of dissociating from the DNA template and releasing the nascent RNA . The released Pol II could have the potential rapidly to reinitiate transcription and to ‘recycle’ at the promoter . e | Poised : a generic term that simply indicates that Pol II is located near the TSS but does not specify anything about its transcriptional status . It can include any of the above complexes ( a – d ) . f | Stalled : a term that indicates Pol II is engaged in transcription but that makes no assumptions about its ability to resume synthesis . This term includes paused , arrested and terminating complexes ( b – d , above ) . Nature Reviews | Genetics b Paused Pause region a Pre - initiation complex c Arrested 3 ′ e Poised f Stalled DSIF Pol II NELF TFIIS GTFs d Terminating DSIF Pol II NELF GTFs DSIF Pol II NELF GTFs Pol II GTFs R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 723 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Genetics P o l II s i g n a l Poly ( A ) TSS Paused , expressed ( ~ 30 % of all genes ) Paused , unexpressed ( < 1 % of all genes ) Non - paused , expressed ( ~ 45 % of all genes ) Non - paused , unexpressed ( ~ 25 % of all genes ) P o l II C h I P – s e q b e t a T u b 56 D P o l II C h I P – s e q C G 6847 P o l II C h I P – s e q C G 17508 0 0 100 0 56 P o l II C h I P – s e q C G 2926 0 30 P o l II C h I P – s e q e s n 0 30 30 2 kb 2 kb 20 kb 5 kb 5 kb e Summary a Paused , expressed genes c Non - paused , expressed b Paused but inactive gene d Non - paused , unexpressed Pausing index = 6 . 7 Pausing index = 21 . 7 Pausing index = 1 . 4 Pausing index = not applicable Pausing index = 4 . 7 R E V I E W S 724 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Figure 2 | Patterns of Pol II distribution across gene regions . RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high - throughput sequencing ( ChIP – seq ) signal is shown at genes that exemplify various Pol II distributions observed across metazoan genomes . Example genes are taken from Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells 7 , and the pausing index of each gene is indicated . a | Two paused but active genes with differing pausing indices . b | A paused but inactive gene . c | A non - paused gene that is expressed . d | A non - paused , unexpressed gene . We note that a pausing index cannot reliably be calculated for genes that lack significant Pol II promoter signal . e | Shown are profiles of Pol II signal that exemplify the four major groups of genes . We note that the ‘paused , unexpressed’ group is significantly underrepresented in vivo , suggesting that most paused genes display some basal RNA synthesis . Approximate percentages of genes that fall into each category are given 2 , 5 , 28 . proportion of genes that exhibit Pol II pausing appears to be approximately constant across species and devel - opmental stages reported to date . Interestingly , in all systems evaluated thus far , genes that exhibit pausing are enriched in signal - responsive pathways , including development , cell proliferation and stress or damage responses . This enrichment is of partic - ular interest in pluripotent cells , such as ESCs , in which pausing has been suggested to have a role in cell differ - entiation 27 . Underscoring that the presence and level of paused Pol II can be highly regulated , the specific genes that are paused in various cell types and under varying conditions , such as cell stress or cell cycle regulation , can differ dramatically 5 , 30 . Genomic analysis of Pol II distribution also indicates that pausing occurs at genes across the range of expres - sion levels 3 , 7 , 8 . In fact , recent global analyses of Pol II dis - tribution by GRO - seq indicate that few paused genes are transcriptionally inactive ( < 1 % ) 2 , 5 . This argues strongly against a common perception that Pol II pausing is pre - dominantly a mechanism to silence gene expression 31 , 32 . It is consistent with previous data on paused Pol II : for example , all of the traditionally defined paused genes ( such as D . melanogaster Hsp genes and β - tubulin , and mammalian MYC and FOS ) exhibit considerable basal expression , and the D . melanogaster Hsp genes continue to undergo pausing during activation 1 . On the basis of these data , we argue that pausing should be considered to be a mechanism for tuning expression from active genes and perhaps for poising them for future changes in expression , rather than as a means of gene inactivation . We note that Pol II can reduce its elongation velocity and / or can pause during productive synthesis as well , although the factors that are involved and the mecha - nisms that govern pausing within the gene appear to be distinct from those that regulate promoter - proximal Pol II 33 . Slowing of productive elongation is best charac - terized at the 3ʹ end of genes , where considerable accu - mulation of Pol II is observed just downstream of the poly ( A ) site 2 , 34 ( FIG . 2e ) . This slowing of Pol II at the end of the transcription unit is thought to facilitate the cou - pling of RNA cleavage with transcription termination 35 . Likewise , pausing within exons has been reported 36 , in which it is proposed to have a role in promoting splic - ing . Accordingly , evidence suggests that Pol II elonga - tion rates can have an impact on alternative splicing , and slower elongation favours inclusion of exons with inherently weak splice sites 37 . As such , we now appre - ciate that gene expression can be regulated at almost every step in the transcription cycle , from PIC formation through to productive elongation and RNA processing . Mechanisms of Pol II pausing and release The establishment of paused polymerase requires both bringing Pol II to promoters and stably retaining the early elongation complex within the pause region . These depend on the intrinsic strength of the core pro - moter 38 and on specific transcription factors that recruit chromatin - remodelling proteins and the transcription machinery ( FIG . 3a , b ; for example , transcription factor TF1 ) . After formation of the PIC , the promoter DNA is locally unwound , allowing the polymerase to initi - ate RNA synthesis and to undergo promoter escape , wherein it releases many of the contacts with promoter - bound general transcription factors ( GTFs ) 39 . During this process , the GTF TFIIH phosphorylates serine resi - dues within the carboxy - terminal heptapeptide repeat domain ( CTD ) of the largest Pol II subunit . The early elongation complex then extends the nascent RNA as it moves downstream into the gene . However , detailed analyses of early elongation have demonstrated that this process is fraught with difficulty 29 . Work done largely in the Handa and Price labora - tories 29 , 40 , 41 in the early 1990s demonstrated that Pol II elongates inefficiently through the promoter - proximal region , displaying a strong tendency to halt or to ter - minate within the first 100 nucleotides . These studies provided key mechanistic insights into Pol II pausing by revealing that the block in early transcription elongation results in part from the association of two pause - induc - ing factors with the early elongation complex ( FIG . 3c ) . These factors , which are called DRB - sensitivity - inducing factor ( DSIF ; also known as SPT5 – SPT4 ) 41 and NELF 42 , are together sufficient to inhibit early elongation in a purified system , indicating that they work directly on the polymerase to help to establish the paused elongation complex . Consistent with the lack of evidence for Pol II pausing in S . cerevisiae , homologues of the pause - induc - ing NELF proteins are absent in yeast but are conserved from D . melanogaster to humans 43 . Despite the clear importance of DSIF and / or NELF in establishing paused polymerase , growing evidence sug - gests that these factors are not alone in affecting the resi - dence time of promoter - associated Pol II . Recent in vitro work suggests that additional factors , such as GDOWN1 ( also known as GRINL1A ) and the general transcrip - tion factor TFIIF may also influence the stability or lifetime of the paused polymerase , perhaps by affect - ing the susceptibility of the early elongation complex to premature termination 44 . Although it remains unclear whether termination in the promoter - proximal region occurs in vivo , Pol II ChIP – seq studies have provided evidence for premature termination within transcribed units ( that is , downstream of + 500 ) 45 , suggesting that the processivity of elongating Pol II is continually subject to regulation . Thus , much yet remains to be learned about how the efficiency of early elongation is regulated at the mechanistic and biochemical level . ◀ R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 725 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved The maturation of paused Pol II to a productively elongating form requires the kinase activity posi - tive transcription elongation factor b ( P - TEFb ) 40 , 46 , 47 . P - TEFb phosphorylates the repressive DSIF – NELF complex , causing NELF to dissociate from Pol II and transforming DSIF to a state that promotes Pol II elongation 33 ( FIG . 3d ) . P - TEFb also carries out addi - tional phosphorylation of serine residues within the Pol II CTD , creating a platform for binding of RNA - processing factors and chromatin - modifying factors that facilitate productive RNA synthesis 33 , 48 . Given its key role in pause release , there is considerable interest in understanding how P - TEFb is targeted to particular gene promoters ( shown in FIG . 3d as TF2 ) . Befitting the diversity of genes that exhibit Pol II pausing , a large repertoire of factors has been reported to carry out this activity , including the acetylated histone - binding protein bromodomain - containing 4 ( BRD4 ) 49 , 50 , DNA - binding transcription activators such as MYC and nuclear factor - κ B ( NFκB ) 8 , 51 , 52 and the MED26 component of the Mediator complex 53 . Moreover , P - TEFb is found to be associated with a large number of other elongation factors and chromatin - modifying proteins in the ‘super elongation complex’ , suggesting that these factors work together to stimulate productive elongation 54 – 57 . Interestingly , although only a subset of genes appears to accumulate high levels of paused Pol II , most D . mel - anogaster or mammalian promoters display a detectable enrichment of polymerase near the promoter compared with the gene body 3 , 8 . In addition , analysis of the loca - tion of factors that regulate the establishment and release of pausing suggests that transient Pol II pausing is a general feature of the transcription cycle . For exam - ple , the vast majority of active promoters are bound by the pause - inducing factors DSIF and NELF 3 , 8 . The levels of DSIF and NELF at promoters correspond extremely well with total promoter Pol II , suggesting that these Figure 3 | Establishment and release of paused Pol II . The promoter region is shown with the transcription start site ( TSS ) labelled with an arrow . Nucleosomes are depicted in grey , and RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) is illustrated as a red rocket . The nascent RNA transcript is shown in blue . Factors that are involved in the establishment or release of paused Pol II , such as DRB sensitivity - inducing factor ( DSIF ; purple pentagon ) , negative elongation factor ( NELF ; orange oval ) and positive transcription elongation factor b ( P - TEFb ; green diamond ) are indicated . a | Promoter opening often involves binding a sequence - specific transcription factor ( shown here as TF1 , light blue circle ) that brings in chromatin remodellers ( blue oval ) to remove nucleosomes from around the TSS and to render the promoter accessible for recruitment of the transcription machinery . b | Pre - initiation complex formation involves the recruitment of a set of general transcription factors ( GTFs ; grey oval ) and Pol II , which is also facilitated by binding specific transcription factors ( also shown as TF1 for simplicity ) . This step precedes the initiation of RNA synthesis . c | Pol II pausing occurs shortly after transcription initiation and involves the association of pausing factors DSIF and NELF . The paused Pol II is phosphorylated on its carboxy - terminal heptapeptide repeat domain ( CTD ; shown in pink ) . The region in which pausing takes place is indicated on the figure . d | Pause release is triggered by the recruitment of the P - TEFb kinase ( green diamond ) , either directly or indirectly by a transcription factor ( shown here as TF2 ; beige diamond ) . P - TEFb kinase phosphorylates the DSIF – NELF complex to release paused Pol II and also targets the CTD ( shown in green ) . Phosphorylation of DSIF – NELF dissociates NELF from the elongation complex and transforms DSIF into a positive elongation factor that associates with Pol II throughout the gene . e | In the presence of both TF1 and TF2 , escape of the paused Pol II into productive elongation is rapidly followed by entry of another Pol II into the pause site , allowing for efficient RNA production . When the gene is activated , some nucleosome disruption is likely , as depicted by the lighter colouring of the downstream nucleosome . P DSIF Pol II NELF TSS Nature Reviews | Genetics Pause region + 20 to + 60 GTFs Pol II DSIF Pol II DSIF NELF DSIF Pol II TF2 TF1 P P P DSIF Pol II GTFs NELF TF2 TF1 P P P P P - TEFb c Pausing e Productive elongation and reﬁlling of pause region d Pause release P - TEFb TF2 GTFs TF1 Pol II GTFs b Pre - initiation complex formation a Promoter opening TF1 TF1 + Chromatin remodelling NELF R E V I E W S 726 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved CpG islands Regions of higher - than - normal CpG sequence content that are on average 1 , 000 base pairs in length . Such regions contain ~ 70 % of all mammalian promoters , including both genes that are highly regulated and broadly expressed . Polycomb Regulate chromatin structure to contribute to epigenetic inheritance of a repressed state . They form several complexes , which are broadly defined as Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 ( PRC1 and PRC2 ) , and these are thought to compact chromatin structure . Bivalent genes Exhibit histone modifications that are characteristic of both gene repression and activation . These genes display low levels of Pol II occupancy and activity and are hypothesized to be poised for activation during development . factors associate with most early elongation complexes . Further , treatment of cells with the P - TEFb inhibitor flavopiridol blocks the entry of most Pol II into produc - tive synthesis in both D . melanogaster and mammals 8 , 58 , indicating that polymerase release from the promoter region typically requires the activity of P - TEFb . Taken together , these data suggest that the early elongation complex comes under the control of DSIF and NELF at most genes and that the escape of Pol II into produc - tive elongation involves the release of this repressive complex by P - TEFb . Thus , we envision that the rate of P - TEFb recruitment would be crucial for determin - ing both gene expression levels and the appearance of paused Pol II . At many genes , P - TEFb recruitment to promoters may immediately follow transcription ini - tiation , leading to a rapid release of polymerase into the gene . However , at other genes , P - TEFb recruitment may be a much slower event , permitting accumulation of paused Pol II . Functions of paused Pol II Given the prevalence of paused Pol II at genes within important developmentally and environmentally responsive pathways , identifying the functional roles of paused Pol II has become an active topic of research . We discuss models for four functions below , some of which may be interconnected ( FIG . 4 ) . Establishing permissive chromatin . Wrapping pro - moter DNA around histone proteins to form nucle - osomes can present a barrier to transcription by rendering crucial recognition sequences inaccessible . As a result , remodelling promoter chromatin to remove or to displace nearby nucleosomes is often required to permit recruitment of the transcription machinery and gene expression 59 ( FIG . 3a ) . Whereas many genes , espe - cially those in yeast 60 , 61 , have been shown to couple this nucleosome remodelling temporally with gene activa - tion , genes with paused polymerase have been shown to undergo nucleosome removal to open promoters before and independently from gene activition 62 , 63 . Moreover , paused genes have been shown to persist in a nucleosome - deprived , regulatory - factor - accessible state that is dependent on the presence of the paused Pol II 3 , 64 – 66 ( FIG . 4a ) . A relationship between the paused polymerase and the lack of promoter nucleosomes is apparent at the D . melanogaster Hsp genes 62 , 63 , in which the pro - moter regions were shown to be nucleosome - deprived even in the uninduced state . Further studies of Hsp70 transgenes indicated that promoter - proximal muta - tions affecting the levels of paused Pol II also disrupted the binding of heat shock factor ( HSF ) to its target sites during heat shock and subsequent gene activation 64 , 67 . Notably , this work suggested that pausing could help to maintain an open and accessible promoter structure to facilitate binding by regulatory transcription factors as well as the transcription machinery . The link between paused Pol II and maintenance of a nucleosome - deprived promoter has recently been dem - onstrated at a genome - wide level in D . melanogater 3 . Genes with paused polymerase were globally shown to possess low levels of promoter nucleosome occupancy , which was dependent on the presence of promoter - associated Pol II : depletion of the pause - inducing fac - tor NELF , which considerably reduced promoter Pol II levels at highly paused genes , led to a concomitant increase in promoter nucleosome occupancy at these genes 3 , 65 . Thus , paused promoters display a dynamic competition for promoter binding between nucleo - somes and Pol II . Importantly , genes affected in this way often decreased their expression levels following NELF depletion and loss of paused Pol II . Interestingly , the underlying DNA sequence appears to contribute to the requirement for promoter - proxi - mal Pol II to prevent nucleosome assembly over many TSSs . Packaging DNA into nucleosomes requires that the underlying sequences are somewhat flexible and amenable to making regular bends as they wrap around the histone proteins , and it has been shown that certain sequences are particularly well - or ill - suited for this pur - pose 68 , 69 . Strikingly , genes with high levels of paused Pol II in D . melanogaster possess promoter sequences that are nucleosome - friendly and that are predicted to pro - mote chromatin assembly 3 . Genes at which less paused Pol II is present tend to disfavour nucleosome assem - bly 3 . Likewise , paused Pol II is enriched in mammals at CpG island promoters 2 , which tend to possess open chromatin 70 . Although currently a subject of debate , evi - dence suggests that mammalian promoters with a mod - erately high CG content intrinsically favour nucleosome formation 71 – 73 , suggesting that , like in D . melanogaster , the transcription machinery helps to maintain acces - sible chromatin architecture around these promoters . Thus , it is tempting to speculate that highly regu - lated promoters , many of which exhibit paused Pol II , have evolved DNA sequences that enable a dynamic competition to occur between paused Pol II and nucle - osomes 74 . For example , it has been proposed that the presence of paused Pol II poises genes in ESCs for expression during development , in part by altering pro - moter chromatin 27 . As such , the loss of paused Pol II later in development could permit nucleosome occlu - sion and permanent gene repression . The formation of repressive chromatin may be further enhanced by the recruitment of the Polycomb repressive complexes PRC1 and PRC2 . Notably , in ESCs , bivalent genes 75 that contain both PRCs have substantially less paused Pol II than genes that lack Polycomb 5 , 76 . Likewise , in D . mela - nogaster , mutations in a key component of the PRC2 complex that would presumably create a more acces - sible chromatin structure allows an increase in Pol II recruitment and pausing on thousands of promoters in the early embryo 77 . Importantly , the chromatin - opening function of paused Pol II would be connected to the other potential functions of pausing . For exam - ple , the presence of paused Pol II might allow genes that are transcribed at lower basal levels to be continu - ally accessible and primed for bursts of transcription activation in response to specific cues or for generat - ing synchronous transcriptional responses to signalling ( see below ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 727 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved A pausing framework for rapid and / or synchronous acti - vation . Although rapid gene activation at many genes involves mechanisms that are independent of paus - ing 78 , 79 , the presence of Pol II is an appealing way to gen - erate an accessible promoter region that can be quickly bound by activators and co - activators . Importantly , the presence of paused polymerase would allow a promoter to be readily switched from experiencing long - lived pausing to undergoing productive elongation simply through binding transcription activators that associate Figure 4 | Illustrations of the main hypotheses for the functions of Pol II pausing . The promoter region is depicted with the transcription start site ( TSS ) labelled with an arrow . Nucleosomes are shown in grey , and RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) is illustrated as a red rocket . The general transcription factors ( GTFs ; grey oval ) are shown centred at the TSS . The pause - inducing factors negative elongation factor ( NELF ; orange oval ) and DRB - sensitivity - inducing factor ( DSIF ; purple pentagon ) are shown . The nascent RNA transcript is shown in blue . a | Establishing permissive chromatin . After nucleosomes have been remodelled , paused Pol II helps to maintain the nucleosome - deprived structure by blocking nucleosome assembly over promoter sequences . Pausing would thus keep the promoter region accessible for activator and transcription factor binding . b | Rapid or synchronous gene activation . At a gene with paused Pol II , gene activation could proceed simply through recruitment of positive transcription elongation factor b ( P - TEFb ) , thereby triggering the rapid release of paused Pol II into productive elongation . If a number of genes that harbour paused Pol II were all activated by the same signal and associated transcription factor ( shown as TF2 ) , then these genes could be activated simultaneously . c | Integrating multiple regulatory signals . Pausing represents a separate step in the transcription cycle for factors to act and allows for combinatorial control between transcription factors that recruit the transcription machinery ( TF1 ) and those that trigger pause release ( TF2 ) , where both would be necessary for gene activation . In this example , signalling through TF2 such that it binds DNA and recruits P - TEFb would not lead to activation of a gene that was not paused ( that is , a gene that lacks TF1 ) but would stimulate synthesis from gene 2 that was loaded with paused polymerase . d | A checkpoint in early elongation . On the left , arrows depict interactions between the capping enzyme complex ( CEC ) and DSIF – NELF as well as the Ser5 phosphorylation of the carboxy - terminal heptapeptide repeat domain ( CTD ) of Pol II , which is thought to stimulate capping activity . The hat represents the 5 ʹ RNA cap . In the centre , P - TEFb - dependent phosphorylation events release paused Pol II and create a platform for binding of RNA - processing factors ( RPFs ) on the Ser2 - phosphorylated CTD of Pol II , as shown on the right . DSIF Pol II NELF GTFs TF1 DSIF Pol II GTFs NELF TF2 TF1 P P P - TEFb b Rapid or synchronous activation Pol II DSIF Pol II GTFs NELF TF2 TF1 P P P - TEFb DSIF Pol II GTFs NELF TF2 TF1 P P P - TEFb P DSIF NELF Signalling through TF2 Nature Reviews | Genetics GTFs DSIF Pol II P P P DSIF Pol II GTFs NELF TF2 TF2 TF1 P P P P - TEFb P - TEFb P - TEFb RPF Pol II DSIF Pol II P P P RPF P - TEFb TF2 P - TEFb TF2 CEC TF1 Gene 2 is activated Gene 1 remains oﬀ a Establishing permissive chromatin d Checkpoint in early elongation c Integration of signals P P P R E V I E W S 728 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved with P - TEFb ( FIG . 4b ) , bypassing a number of potentially slow or stochastic steps that are involved in PIC for - mation . The open promoter and scaffold of GTFs that remain after Pol II escape 80 may ensure continuous rapid entry of a succession of Pol II complexes on the activated gene ( FIG . 3b ) . Moreover , the nucleosome - deprived sta - tus of paused promoters is likely to facilitate transcrip - tion factor binding , resulting in more efficient , reliable activation 81 . In support of a role for paused Pol II in rapid acti - vation , pausing has been observed at D . melanogaster genes that are rapidly induced , such as the Hsp genes 1 and a number of genes that are involved in early embry - onic development 6 , 9 , 82 , leading to the idea that pausing facilitates synchronous changes in gene expression 83 . Consistent with this , many mammalian genes with paused Pol II ( MYC , FOS , JUNB and TNF - alpha ) have fast , transient expression kinetics 20 , 84 , 85 . However , not all rapidly induced genes display paused Pol II before activation 86 – 88 , nor are most paused genes highly inducible . In fact , recent work that sur - veyed the prevalence of paused genes across several signal transduction networks in D . melanogaster and murine ESCs revealed that pausing was more enriched at promoters that encode the constitutively expressed components of signal transduction pathways ( for exam - ple , receptors , kinases and transcription factors ) than at the inducible downstream targets of these pathways 89 . Moreover , pausing was shown to regulate network activity largely through affecting the basal expression of signal transduction machineries 89 . Thus , the role of pausing in stimulus - responsive networks is not limited to poising inducible genes for activation . Instead , Pol II pausing can regulate the expression of key molecules , such as transcription factors and signalling proteins , thereby tuning cellular responsiveness to external cues . Integrating multiple regulatory signals . Pausing repre - sents an additional regulatory step in the transcription cycle beyond Pol II recruitment . Accordingly , this could allow activators that influence pause release to work together with factors that stimulate recruitment to exert combinatorial control of transcription levels 30 , 90 ( FIG . 4c ) . Indeed , most promoters contain binding sites for multi - ple transcription activators . Importantly , some activators specifically function to recruit general transcription fac - tors ( GTFs ) or to establish a paused Pol II ( for example , transcription factors SP1 ( REF . 90 ) and GAGA factor 4 ; shown as TF1 in FIG . 4c ) , some factors bring P - TEFb to the promoter ( for example , MYC and HIV TAT 8 , 52 , 90 ; shown as TF2 ) , and others appear both to recruit and to release paused Pol II ( for example , NFκB and herpesvi - rus VP16 protein 51 , 90 ) . Thus , the particular combination of transcription activators that bind near any promoter would determine the rates of Pol II recruitment and pause release , thereby defining the rate - limiting step for transcription . In this way , cellular events that altered the levels or activity of individual transcription factors could be integrated on a gene - by - gene basis , depending on the sequence context and associated factors on the promoter and enhancer regions . Checkpoint for coupling elongation and RNA process - ing . Pol II coordinates the efficient processing of nascent RNA : adding a cap to the 5ʹ end , coupling splicing events to transcription and facilitating the 3ʹ end processing of RNAs . By coupling RNA processing to the status and activity of Pol II itself , the cell ensures that nascent RNA is properly protected from degradation and efficiently matures into a functional mRNA . Pol II is phosphoryl - ated on its CTD at various positions , providing a bind - ing platform to recruit an entourage of protein factors that can execute both early and later events of RNA processing 91 . Phosphorylation of Ser5 within the CTD creates a binding platform for interaction with the 5ʹ capping enzyme ( FIG . 4d ) and stimulates the activity of this enzyme 92 . In vivo , 5ʹ capping occurs as the nascent RNA is extended from 20 to 30 nucleotides in length , and the bulk of RNAs associated with paused Pol II is capped 7 , 15 . This was initially determined by detailed analysis of the Hsp genes 15 and extended by recent global analyses 7 in D . melanogaster . Interactions have also been reported between the RNA - capping machinery and the pause - regulatory factor DSIF 93 , 94 . Thus , pausing may provide both a kinetic ‘window of opportunity’ as well as an interaction surface to facilitate addition of the 5ʹ - methyl cap to the nascent RNA before the transition to productive elongation . As mentioned above , phosphorylation of paused Pol II by P - TEFb provides a binding platform for complexes that carry out 3ʹ end processing 95 . As such , the requirement for P - TEFb activity to phosphorylate the DSIF – NELF complex and to trigger pause release may also ensure that Pol II does not proceed into the gene before it is appropriately modified for binding by the RNA - processing factors ( FIG . 4d ) . Although rigorous tests of pausing as an obligatory checkpoint for Pol II CTD modification are lacking , the fact that the P - TEFb kinase phosphorylates both DSIF – NELF and Pol II might func - tionally couple pause release to this Pol II modification . Conclusions and perspectives In the past few years , a new picture of transcription regulation has emerged : genome - wide data in meta - zoans now point to the widespread importance of Pol II pausing in transcription regulation . Indeed , the escape of paused Pol II into productive elongation is regu - lated during environmental stress 6 , immunological signalling 85 and development 96 . Studies of pausing over the decades coupled with an explosion of interest in recent years have led to consider - able understanding of the characteristics and function of paused Pol II . Nonetheless , three major categories of questions remain . The first concerns the pervasiveness and patterns of pausing in eukaryotes . Studies under - way in many laboratories will sample a broad swath of additional cell types and organisms in addition to D . melanogaster , mice and humans studied thus far . These studies should identify common features of genes regulated by this mechanism , as well as revealing cell - type - specific or condition - specific patterns of paused Pol II . Quantitative genome - wide studies should also assess whether paused polymerases constitute nearly all R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 729 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved promoter - associated Pol II or whether there are promot - ers with substantial amounts of other forms : for example , PICs or arrested Pol II , which are indicative of alternative modes of regulation ( FIG . 1 ) . The second category deals with mechanistic ques - tions that address pausing in molecular terms . We know several factors 41 , 42 and DNA elements 7 , 82 that are involved in stabilizing the paused state , but the full rep - ertoire of factors and their interactions remains to be determined . Moreover , we know very little about how these factors interact to mediate efficient pausing . How stable are paused Pol II complexes , what are the relative levels of termination and escape to productive elongation and how might this balance be controlled ? It will also be important to elucidate further how P - TEFb is either directly or indirectly targeted to promoters and how its kinase activity is regulated . Several mechanisms for P - TEFb recruitment have been documented , but surely more are to be discovered 33 . Future work should also elucidate exactly how the Pol II paused complex is transformed into a productively elongating machine . These events need to be examined in living cells with optical and biochemical methods that provide detailed information on the position and dynamics of paused Pol II and the accompanying protein and DNA interac - tions . Improvements in inhibitor discovery and in the already powerful molecular ( BOX 1 ) and microscopic technologies 97 provoke optimism that these challenging mechanistic goals will be achieved . The third category contains questions addressing the function of this regulation . In this Review , we empha - size varying levels of evidence for four potential roles of pausing ( FIG . 4 ) . These proposed functions will be clari - fied by further rigorous tests that include global studies as well as targeted analysis of specific genes and pheno - typic analysis following systematic disruption of pausing . It will be interesting to define whether pausing serves different roles at different functional classes of genes and how these putative roles are interconnected . For example , the transient checkpoint established by pausing could be particularly useful at highly active genes to ensure that the nascent RNA is properly processed . However , the opening of chromatin structure by paused Pol II could both fine - tune the basal expression of signalling pro - teins 89 and facilitate a rapid transcriptional response 64 . In this Review , we highlight our current but incom - plete understanding of Pol II pausing at promoters and its role in gene regulation . After decades of research and numerous cycles of simplifying and confounding theories and observations , we now have a framework and many of the tools needed to understand mechanistically transcription and its regulation genome - wide . 1 . Lis , J . Promoter - associated pausing in promoter architecture and postinitiation transcriptional regulation . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 63 , 347 – 356 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Core , L . J . , Waterfall , J . J . & Lis , J . T . Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent initiation at human promoters . Science 322 , 1845 – 1848 ( 2008 ) . GRO - seq maps the position , amount and orientation of transcriptionally engaged RNA polymerases genome - wide and shows peaks of promoter - proximal polymerase residing on ~ 30 % of human genes . 3 . Gilchrist , D . A . et al . Pausing of RNA polymerase II disrupts DNA - specified nucleosome organization to enable precise gene regulation . Cell 143 , 540 – 551 ( 2010 ) . Global analyses of Pol II pausing and nucleosome occupancy reveal that Pol II and nucleosomes compete for promoter occupancy to regulate gene expression coordinately . 4 . Lee , C . et al . NELF and GAGA factor are linked to promoter - proximal pausing at many genes in Drosophila . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 3290 – 3300 ( 2008 ) . Comprehensive analysis of promoter - associated Pol II in D . melanogaster using ChIP – chip and permanganate footprinting demonstrates that NELF - mediated pausing of Pol II is common in D . melanogaster . 5 . Min , I . M . et al . Regulating RNA polymerase pausing and transcription elongation in embryonic stem cells . Genes Dev . 25 , 742 – 754 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Muse , G . W . et al . RNA polymerase is poised for activation across the genome . Nature Genet . 39 , 1507 – 1511 ( 2007 ) . Genome - wide Pol II ChIP – chip assays , coupled with permanganate footprinting and genetic manipulation of NELF , indicated that Pol II pausing is widespread in D . melanogaster . 7 . Nechaev , S . et al . Global analysis of short RNAs reveals widespread promoter - proximal stalling and arrest of Pol II in Drosophila . Science 327 , 335 – 338 ( 2010 ) . 8 . Rahl , P . B . et al . c - Myc tegulates transcriptional pause release . Cell 141 , 432 – 445 ( 2010 ) . Investigation of transcription factor MYC reveals its important role in releasing paused Pol II through recruitment of P - TEFb . 9 . Zeitlinger , J . et al . RNA polymerase stalling at developmental control genes in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo . Nature Genet . 39 , 1512 – 1516 ( 2007 ) . Genome - wide Pol II ChIP – chip assays indicated that Pol II pausing is widespread during early embryonic development in D . melanogaster . 10 . Fraser , N . W . , Sehgal , P . B . & Darnell , J . E . DRB - induced premature termination of late adenovirus transcription . Nature 272 , 590 – 593 ( 1978 ) . 11 . Gariglio , P . , Bellard , M . & Chambon , P . Clustering of RNA polymerase B molecules in the 5 ′ moiety of the adult beta - globin gene of hen erythrocytes . Nucleic Acids Res . 9 , 2589 – 2598 ( 1981 ) . 12 . Gilmour , D . S . & Lis , J . T . RNA polymerase II interacts with the promoter region of the noninduced hsp70 gene in Drosophila melanogaster cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 6 , 3984 – 3989 ( 1986 ) . 13 . Rougvie , A . E . & Lis , J . T . The RNA polymerase II molecule at the 5 ʹ end of the uninduced hsp70 gene of D . melanogaster is transcriptionally engaged . Cell 54 , 795 – 804 ( 1988 ) . Nuclear run - on assays demonstrate that the Pol II complex associated with the Hsp70 promoter is transcriptionally engaged but is unable to penetrate further into the gene without heat shock induction . 14 . Giardina , C . , Perez - Riba , M . & Lis , J . T . Promoter melting and TFIID complexes on Drosophila genes in vivo . Genes Dev . 6 , 2190 – 2200 ( 1992 ) . 15 . Rasmussen , E . B . & Lis , J . T . In vivo transcriptional pausing and cap formation on three Drosophila heat shock genes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 7923 – 7927 ( 1993 ) . 16 . Grayhack , E . J . , Yang , X . J . , Lau , L . F . & Roberts , J . W . Phage lambda gene Q antiterminator recognizes RNA polymerase near the promoter and accelerates it through a pause site . Cell 42 , 259 – 269 ( 1985 ) . 17 . Rougvie , A . E . & Lis , J . T . Postinitiation transcriptional control in Drosophila melanogaster . Mol . Cell . Biol . 10 , 6041 – 6045 ( 1990 ) . 18 . Law , A . , Hirayoshi , K . , O’Brien , T . & Lis , J . T . Direct cloning of DNA that interacts in vivo with a specific protein : application to RNA polymerase II and sites of pausing in Drosophila . Nucleic Acids Res . 26 , 919 – 924 ( 1998 ) . 19 . Strobl , L . J . & Eick , D . Hold back of RNA polymerase II at the transcription start site mediates down - regulation of c - Myc in vivo . EMBO J . 11 , 3307 – 3314 ( 1992 ) . 20 . Krumm , A . , Meulia , T . , Brunvand , M . & Groudine , M . The block to transcriptional elongation within the human c - myc gene is determined in the promoter - proximal region . Genes Dev . 6 , 2201 – 2213 ( 1992 ) . 21 . Plet , A . , Eick , D . & Blanchard , J . M . Elongation and premature termination of transcripts initiated from c - Fos and c - Myc promoters show dissimilar patterns . Oncogene 10 , 319 – 328 ( 1995 ) . 22 . Kao , S . Y . , Calman , A . F . , Luciw , P . A . & Peterlin , B . M . Anti - termination of transcription within the long terminal repeat of HIV - 1 by Tat gene product . Nature 330 , 489 – 493 ( 1987 ) . 23 . Stargell , L . A . & Struhl , K . Mechanisms of transcriptional activation in vivo : two steps forward . Trends Genet . 12 , 311 – 315 ( 1996 ) . 24 . Ptashne , M . & Gann , A . Transcriptional activation by recruitment . Nature 386 , 569 – 577 ( 1997 ) . 25 . Steinmetz , E . J . et al . Genome - wide distribution of yeast RNA polymerase II and its control by Sen1 helicase . Mol . Cell 24 , 735 – 746 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Kim , T . H . et al . A high - resolution map of active promoters in the human genome . Nature 436 , 876 – 880 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Guenther , M . G . , Levine , S . S . , Boyer , L . A . , Jaenisch , R . & Young , R . A . A chromatin landmark and transcription initiation at most promoters in human cells . Cell 130 , 77 – 88 ( 2007 ) . 28 . Larschan , E . et al . X chromosome dosage compensation via enhanced transcriptional elongation in Drosophila . Nature 471 , 115 – 118 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Kephart , D . D . , Marshall , N . F . & Price , D . H . Stability of Drosophila RNA polymerase II elongation complexes in vitro . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 2067 – 2077 ( 1992 ) . 30 . Nechaev , S . & Adelman , K . Promoter - proximal Pol II : when stalling speeds things up . Cell Cycle 7 , 1539 – 1544 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Hargreaves , D . C . , Horng , T . & Medzhitov , R . Control of inducible gene expression by signal - dependent transcriptional elongation . Cell 138 , 129 – 145 ( 2009 ) . 32 . Schones , D . E . et al . Dynamic regulation of nucleosome positioning in the human genome . Cell 132 , 887 – 898 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Peterlin , B . M . & Price , D . H . Controlling the elongation phase of transcription with P - TEFb . Mol . Cell 23 , 297 – 305 ( 2006 ) . R E V I E W S 730 | OCTOBER 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / genetics © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 34 . Gromak , N . , West , S . & Proudfoot , N . J . Pause sites promote transcriptional termination of mammalian RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 3986 – 3996 ( 2006 ) . 35 . Proudfoot , N . J . Ending the message : poly ( A ) signals then and now . Genes Dev . 25 , 1770 – 1782 ( 2011 ) . 36 . Carrillo Oesterreich , F . , Preibisch , S . & Neugebauer , K . M . Global analysis of nascent RNA reveals transcriptional pausing in terminal exons . Mol . Cell 40 , 571 – 581 ( 2010 ) . 37 . de la Mata , M . et al . A slow RNA polymerase II affects alternative splicing in vivo . Mol . Cell 12 , 525 – 532 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Juven - Gershon , T . & Kadonaga , J . T . Regulation of gene expression via the core promoter and the basal transcriptional machinery . Dev . Biol . 339 , 225 – 229 ( 2010 ) . 39 . Roeder , R . G . Transcriptional regulation and the role of diverse coactivators in animal cells . FEBS Lett . 579 , 909 – 915 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Marshall , N . F . & Price , D . H . Control of formation of two distinct classes of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 2078 – 2090 ( 1992 ) . 41 . Wada , T . et al . DSIF , a novel transcription elongation factor that regulates RNA polymerase II processivity , is composed of human Spt4 and Spt5 homologs . Genes Dev . 12 , 343 – 356 ( 1998 ) . 42 . Yamaguchi , Y . et al . NELF , a multisubunit complex containing RD , cooperates with DSIF to repress RNA polymerase II elongation . Cell 97 , 41 – 51 ( 1999 ) . Biochemical assays reveal the presence and identity of the NELF complex and elucidate its role in inhibiting early transcription elongation . 43 . Narita , T . et al . Human transcription elongation factor NELF : identification of novel subunits and reconstitution of the functionally active complex . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 1863 – 1873 ( 2003 ) . 44 . Cheng , B . et al . Functional association of Gdown1 with RNA polymerase II poised on human genes . Mol . Cell 45 , 38 – 50 ( 2012 ) . 45 . Brannan , K . et al . mRNA decapping factors and the exonuclease Xrn2 function in widespread premature termination of RNA polymerase II transcription . Mol . Cell 46 , 311 – 324 ( 2012 ) . 46 . Marshall , N . F . & Price , D . H . Purification of P - TEFb , a transcription factor required for the transition into productive elongation . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 12335 – 12338 ( 1995 ) . This pioneering paper describes the purification and characterization of the kinase P - TEFb . 47 . Wada , T . , Takagi , T . , Yamaguchi , Y . , Watanabe , D . & Handa , H . Evidence that P - TEFb alleviates the negative effect of DSIF on RNA polymerase II - dependent transcription in vitro . EMBO J . 17 , 7395 – 7403 ( 1998 ) . 48 . Czudnochowski , N . , Bosken , C . A . & Geyer , M . Serine - 7 but not serine - 5 phosphorylation primes RNA polymerase II CTD for P - TEFb recognition . Nature Commun . 3 , 842 ( 2012 ) . 49 . Jang , M . et al . The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P - TEFb and stimulates RNA polymerase II - dependent transcription . Mol . Cell 19 , 523 – 534 ( 2005 ) . 50 . Yang , Z . et al . Recruitment of P - TEFb for stimulation of transcriptional elongation by the bromodomain protein Brd4 . Mol . Cell 19 , 535 – 545 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Barboric , M . , Nissen , R . M . , Kanazawa , S . , Jabrane - Ferrat , N . & Peterlin , B . M . NF - κ B binds P - TEFb to stimulate transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 8 , 327 – 337 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Eberhardy , S . & Farnham , P . Myc recruits P - TEFb to mediate the final step in the transcriptional activation of the cad promoter . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 40156 – 40162 ( 2002 ) . 53 . Takahashi , H . et al . Human mediator subunit MED26 functions as a docking site for transcription elongation factors . Cell 146 , 92 – 104 ( 2011 ) . 54 . Mueller , D . et al . A role for the MLL fusion partner ENL in transcriptional elongation and chromatin modification . Blood 110 , 4445 – 4454 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Lin , C . et al . AFF4 , a component of the ELL / P - TEFb elongation complex and a shared subunit of MLL chimeras , can link transcription elongation to leukemia . Mol . Cell 37 , 429 – 437 ( 2010 ) . 56 . Sobhian , B . et al . HIV - 1 Tat assembles a multifunctional transcription elongation complex and stably associates with the 7SK snRNP . Mol . Cell 38 , 439 – 451 ( 2010 ) . 57 . He , N . et al . HIV - 1 Tat and host AFF4 recruit two transcription elongation factors into a bifunctional complex for coordinated activation of HIV - 1 transcription . Mol . Cell 38 , 428 – 438 ( 2010 ) . 58 . Ni , Z . et al . P - TEFb is critical for the maturation of RNA polymerase II into productive elongation in vivo . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 1161 – 1170 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Workman , J . L . Nucleosome displacement in transcription . Genes Dev . 20 , 2009 – 2017 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Boeger , H . , Griesenbeck , J . , Strattan , J . S . & Kornberg , R . D . Nucleosomes unfold completely at a transcriptionally active promoter . Mol . Cell 11 , 1587 – 1598 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Reinke , H . & Horz , W . Histones are first hyperacetylated and then lose contact with the activated PHO5 promoter . Mol . Cell 11 , 1599 – 1607 ( 2003 ) . 62 . Wu , C . The 5 ʹ ends of Drosophila heat shock genes in chromatin are hypersensitive to DNase I . Nature 286 , 854 – 860 ( 1980 ) . 63 . Costlow , N . & Lis , J . T . High - resolution mapping of DNase I - hypersensitive sites of Drosophila heat shock genes in Drosophila melanogaster and Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 , 1853 – 1863 ( 1984 ) . 64 . Shopland , L . S . , Hirayoshi , K . , Fernandes , M . & Lis , J . T . HSF access to heat shock elements in vivo depends critically on promoter architecture defined by GAGA factor , TFIID , and RNA polymerase II binding sites . Genes Dev . 9 , 2756 – 2769 ( 1995 ) . 65 . Gilchrist , D . A . et al . NELF - mediated stalling of Pol II can enhance gene expression by blocking promoter - proximal nucleosome assembly . Genes Dev . 22 , 1921 – 1933 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Leibovitch , B . A . et al . GAGA factor and the TFIID complex collaborate in generating an open chromatin structure at the Drosophila melanogaster hsp26 promoter . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 6148 – 6157 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Lee , H . , Kraus , K . W . , Wolfner , M . F . & Lis , J . T . DNA sequence requirements for generating paused polymerase at the start of hsp70 . Genes Dev . 6 , 284 – 295 ( 1992 ) . 68 . Iyer , V . & Struhl , K . Poly ( dA : dT ) , a ubiquitous promoter element that stimulates transcription via its intrinsic DNA structure . EMBO J . 14 , 2570 – 2579 ( 1995 ) . 69 . Kaplan , N . et al . The DNA - encoded nucleosome organization of a eukaryotic genome . Nature 458 , 362 – 366 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Jones , P . A . Functions of DNA methylation : islands , start sites , gene bodies and beyond . Nature Rev . Genet . 13 , 484 – 492 ( 2012 ) . 71 . Tillo , D . et al . High nucleosome occupancy is encoded at human regulatory sequences . PLoS ONE 5 , e9129 ( 2010 ) . 72 . Valouev , A . et al . Determinants of nucleosome organization in primary human cells . Nature 474 , 516 – 520 ( 2011 ) . 73 . Ramirez - Carrozzi , V . R . et al . A unifying model for the selective regulation of inducible transcription by CpG islands and nucleosome remodeling . Cell 138 , 114 – 128 ( 2009 ) . 74 . Gilchrist , D . A . & Adelman , K . Coupling polymerase pausing and chromatin landscapes for precise regulation of transcription . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1819 , 700 – 706 ( 2012 ) . 75 . Bernstein , B . E . et al . A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem cells . Cell 125 , 315 – 326 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Mikkelsen , T . S . et al . Genome - wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage - committed cells . Nature 448 , 553 – 560 ( 2007 ) . 77 . Chopra , V . S . et al . The polycomb group mutant esc leads to augmented levels of paused Pol II in the Drosophila embryo . Mol . Cell 42 , 837 – 844 ( 2011 ) . 78 . Weake , V . & Workman , J . Inducible gene expression : diverse regulatory mechanisms . Nature Rev . Genet . 11 , 426 – 437 ( 2010 ) . 79 . Bryant , G . O . & Ptashne , M . Independent recruitment in vivo by Gal4 of two complexes required for transcription . Mol . Cell 11 , 1301 – 1309 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Yudkovsky , N . , Ranish , J . A . & Hahn , S . A transcription reinitiation intermediate that is stabilized by activator . Nature 408 , 225 – 229 ( 2000 ) . 81 . Bai , L . , Charvin , G . , Siggia , E . D . & Cross , F . R . Nucleosome - depleted regions in cell - cycle - regulated promoters ensure reliable gene expression in every cell cycle . Dev . Cell 18 , 544 – 555 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Hendrix , D . A . , Hong , J . W . , Zeitlinger , J . , Rokhsar , D . S . & Levine , M . S . Promoter elements associated with RNA Pol II stalling in the Drosophila embryo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 7762 – 7767 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Boettiger , A . N . & Levine , M . Synchronous and stochastic patterns of gene activation in the Drosophila embryo . Science 325 , 471 – 473 ( 2009 ) . 84 . Aida , M . et al . Transcriptional pausing caused by NELF plays a dual role in regulating immediate - early expression of the junB gene . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 6094 – 6104 ( 2006 ) . 85 . Adelman , K . et al . Immediate mediators of the inflammatory response are poised for gene activation through RNA polymerase II stalling . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 18207 – 18212 ( 2009 ) . 86 . Nissen , R . M . & Yamamoto , K . R . The glucocorticoid receptor inhibits NF κ B by interfering with serine - 2 phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II carboxy - terminal domain . Genes Dev . 14 , 2314 – 2329 ( 2000 ) . 87 . Kininis , M . et al . Genomic analyses of transcription factor binding , histone acetylation , and gene expression reveal mechanistically distinct classes of estrogen - regulated promoters . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 5090 – 5104 ( 2007 ) . 88 . Lin , C . et al . Dynamic transcriptional events in embryonic stem cells mediated by the super elongation complex ( SEC ) . Genes Dev . 25 , 1486 – 1498 ( 2011 ) . 89 . Gilchrist , D . A . et al . Regulating the regulators : the pervasive effects of Pol II pausing on stimulus - responsive gene networks . Genes Dev . 26 , 933 – 944 ( 2012 ) . 90 . Blau , J . et al . Three functional classes of transcriptional activation domain . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 , 2044 – 2055 ( 1996 ) . 91 . Egloff , S . , Dienstbier , M . & Murphy , S . Updating the RNA polymerase CTD code : adding gene - specific layers . Trends Genet . 28 , 333 – 341 ( 2012 ) . 92 . Ghosh , A . , Shuman , S . & Lima , C . D . Structural insights to how mammalian capping enzyme reads the CTD code . Mol . Cell 43 , 299 – 310 ( 2011 ) . 93 . Mandal , S . S . et al . Functional interactions of RNA - capping enzyme with factors that positively and negatively regulate promoter escape by RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 7572 – 7577 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Moore , M . J . & Proudfoot , N . J . Pre - mRNA processing reaches back to transcription and ahead to translation . Cell 136 , 688 – 700 ( 2009 ) . 95 . Buratowski , S . Progression through the RNA polymerase II CTD cycle . Mol . Cell 36 , 541 – 546 ( 2009 ) . 96 . Levine , M . Paused , R . N . A . Polymerase II as a developmental checkpoint . Cell 145 , 502 – 511 ( 2011 ) . 97 . Gould , T . J . , Verkhusha , V . V . & Hess , S . T . Imaging biological structures with fluorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Nature Protoc . 4 , 291 – 308 ( 2009 ) . 98 . Rasmussen , E . B . & Lis , J . T . Short transcripts of the ternary complex provide insight into RNA polymerase II elongational pausing . J . Mol . Biol . 252 , 522 – 535 ( 1995 ) . Acknowledgements We thank the members of the Lis and Adelman laboratories for their helpful discussions on this Review . Funding for this work was provided by US National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant GM25232 to J . L . and the Intramural Research Program of the NIH National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences ( Z01 ES101987 ) to K . A . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . FURTHER INFORMATION Karen Adelman’s homepage : http : / / www . niehs . nih . gov / research / atniehs / labs / lmc / tre / index . cfm Nature Reviews Genetics Series on Modes of transcriptional regulation : http : / / www . nature . com / nrg / series / transcriptionalregulation / index . html ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 13 | OCTOBER 2012 | 731 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved