Gary Laevsky and David A . Knecht University of Connecticut , Storrs , CT , USA ABSTRACT Under - agarose chemotaxis has been used previously to assess the ability of neu - trophils to respond to gradients of chemoat - tractant . We have adapted this assay to the chemotactic movement of Dictyostelium amoebae in response to folic acid . Troughs are used instead of wells to increase the area along which the cells can be visualized and to create a uniform front of moving cells . Imaging the transition zone where the cells first encounter the agarose , we find that the cells move perpendicular to the gradient and periodically manage to squeeze under the agarose and move up the gradient . As cells exit the troughs , their cross - sectional area increases as the cells become flattened . Three - dimensional re - construction of confocal optical sections through GFP - labeled cells demonstrates that the increase in cross - sectional area is due to the flattening of the cells . Since the cells locally deform the agarose and be - come deformed by it , the concentration of the agarose , and therefore its stiffness , should affect the ability of the cells to mi - grate . Consistent with this hypothesis , cells in 0 . 5 % agarose move faster and are less flat than cells under 2 % agarose . Cells do not exit the troughs and move under 3 % agarose at all . Therefore , this assay can be used to compare and quantify the ability of different cell types or mutant cell lines to move in a restrictive environment . INTRODUCTION Dictyostelium discoideum is a eu - karyotic amoeba that normally inhabits the soil . During its life cycle , the hap - loid cells undergo two distinct types of chemotactic movement . In the vegeta - tive phase , the amoebae are attracted to folic acid , which is released by their bacterial food source , and detected by cell surface folate receptors ( 6 , 13 ) . As the bacterial food source is depleted , D . discoideum enters the developmental stage of its life cycle . The number of folate receptors decreases during the first 7 – 9 h of development ( 11 ) , and the cells become responsive to cAMP re - leased by other amoebae ( 8 , 13 ) . The number of cAMP receptors ( cARs ) be - gins to increase immediately after the initiation of starvation , and cAR1 is maximally expressed on the surface 3 – 4 h into development ( 7 ) . Cell motility is most often studied in a laboratory by observing cells crawl - ing on a glass cover slip in liquid medi - um . Under these conditions , there is lit - tle to resist the movement of the cells except their own adhesion to the sub - strate . However , cells in natural envi - ronments , such as amoebae moving in the soil or neutrophils extravasating through the endothelium of a capillary , are presumed to move under more re - strictive conditions . In addition , move - ment in 3 - D environments has the added complexity that cells do not have a clearly defined dorsal and ventral sur - face because they can interact with the substrate on all sides . The molecular mechanisms underlying motility in 3 - D environments are as yet poorly defined . We sought to develop an assay in which cells attempt to move in a restric - tive environment , but where high - reso - lution imaging is possible . Under - agarose assays have been used to show the chemotactic and invasive abilities of neutrophils and macrophages ( 2 , 12 ) . Dictyostelium cells had previously been shown to be able to move under agarose by Yumura and co - workers ( 18 ) as a way to image moving cells while limit - ing their three - dimensionality . Here , we have modified the under - agarose che - motaxis assay by altering the well con - figurations and varying the agarose con - centration to investigate the chemotactic motility of Dictyostelium cells in differ - ent types of restrictive environments . Using time - lapse imaging and confocal microscopy , we show that cells deform the agarose but at the same time become flattened as they move under the aga - rose . The assay is reproducible and movement is quantifiable , allowing de - tailed analysis of the motility of individ - ual cells or populations of cells . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture NC4A2 cells were transfected with vectors that express cytosolic GFP ( pB15 - GFP ) ( 15 ) , GFP - ABD120 ( 14 ) to visualize F - actin , and myosin II heavy chain - GFP ( mhcA = GFP ) ( 10 ) to visualize myosin II localization . All cells were cultured in HL - 5 medium [ 5 g Bacto (cid:210) Proteose Peptone no . 2 ( Dig - co , Detroit , MI , USA ) , 5 g BBL Thiotone E , 10 g glucose , 5 g yeast ex - Research Report 1140BioTechniques Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) Under - Agarose Folate Chemotaxis of Dictyostelium discoideum Amoebae in Permissive and Mechanically Inhibited Conditions BioTechniques 31 : 1140 - 1149 ( November 2001 ) tract , 0 . 35 g Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 35 g KH 2 P O 4 , and double - distilled water to 1 L , pH 6 . 7 ] . Under - Agarose Chemotaxis Assay To prepare plates for the under - agarose assay , SeaKem ® GTG agarose ( BMA , Rockland , ME , USA ) was melt - ed at concentrations as indicated in SM medium [ 10 g Bacto - Peptone ( Difco ) , 10 g glucose , 1 g yeast extract , 1 . 9 g KH 2 PO 4 , 0 . 6 g K 2 HPO 4 , and 0 . 43 g MgSO 4 to 1 L , pH 6 . 5 ] . Similar results were obtained with other types of agarose [ ultraPURE (cid:212) LMP ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) , NuSieve ® GTG ( BMA ) , and Ultra Low Gelling ( Fisher - Biotech ) . Motility was generally higher when SM was used to prepare the agarose instead of HL - 5 . The agarose mixture was prepared fresh each day by mixing sterile SM ( previously auto - claved ) with the agarose powder and au - toclaving for 5 min , slow exhausting , and then plating as soon as possible . Agarose solution ( 4 mL ) was added to each 60 - mm plastic petri dish and al - lowed to harden for 1 h . Three troughs were then cut in the agarose using a sin - gle - edge razor blade . The troughs were 2 mm wide , the length of the blade 39 mm long , and spaced 5 mm apart ( Figure 1 ) . The agarose was removed to form the troughs using light suction from a Pasteur pipet applied to the “end” of the agarose plug to be removed . Care was taken at each step not to disturb the agarose interface at the edge of the trough . A solution of 100 mM folic acid ( Research Organics , Cleveland , OH , USA ) was prepared by dissolving 0 . 44 g folic acid in approximately 200 m L 10 M NaOH . This was brought to a final volume of 10 mL , adjusted to pH 7 . 0 , and stored in the dark at 4°C . A 0 . 1 - mM folic acid solution was pre - pared from the stock solution , and then 40 m L were added to the center trough ( Figure 1 ) and the gradient was allowed to develop for 1 h before adding cells . While the gradient developed , cells were prepared for addition to the troughs . It was found that cells were re - duced in their chemotactic response if grown to stationary phase or if cen - trifuged to concentrate and wash the cells . To maximize responsiveness , cells were plated at 4 · 10 5 cells / mL in 10 mL HL - 5 in 100 - mm petri dishes and grown for 2 days to a titer of approxi - mately 1 · 10 6 / mL . The overlying me - dia was aspirated , and the cells were re - suspended in fresh HL5 . For individual cell analysis , the cells were resuspended in 10 mL HL5 , counted with a hemocy - tometer , and the density was adjusted to 1 · 10 6 / mL . For population analysis , the cells were harvested in 1 mL HL5 and adjusted to 1 · 10 7 cells / mL . Sev - enty microliters of cells were then added to the peripheral troughs . For fluorescence imaging experi - ments , 0 . 75 mL agarose was added to a Rose chamber ( 21 ) or a 60 - mm glass bottom petri dish ( Willco Wells , Ams - terdam , The Netherlands ) so that cells could be imaged through a 0 . 17 mm thick glass cover slip . The troughs in the Rose chamber were cut with a shortened razor blade to a length of 10 mm , and the amount of cells and folate was decreased proportionally . Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) BioTechniques 1141 Figure 2 . Under - agarose chemotaxis of Dictyostelium cells to folic acid . Images were taken of cells at three times during movement under 0 . 5 % agarose toward the folate source . Chemotaxis to 0 . 1 mM fo - late was imaged under 0 . 5 % agarose . The images were taken at a fixed location about 1500 m m from the edge of the cell trough , showing the movement of the front of cells across the plate . The 240 ¢ time point is equivalent to 4 h after the addition of cells to the trough . Arrows indicate the origin of gradient and the di - rection of cell movement . A QuickTime movie showing the chemotactic movement of cells can be ac - cessed at http : / / www . BioTechniques . com / Movies / Nov01 / KnechtFig2 . mov . Figure 1 . Experimental setup . ( A ) The under - agarose assay plate . A 60 - mm petri dish is filled with agarose , and three troughs are then cut with a razor blade . The center trough is filled with chemoattractant , and 1 h later cells are added to the outside troughs . ( B ) Side view of the plate . Cells can only move out of the troughs by squeezing between the deformable agarose and the non - deformable plastic or glass surface . Analysis of Chemotaxis Images were taken of the cell popu - lations using a Zeiss (cid:210) inverted micro - scope ( Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Ger - many ) , Paultek Imaging CCD camera ( Advanced Imaging Concepts , Prince - ton , NJ , USA ) , Scion LG3 frame grab - ber ( MVI , Avon , MA , USA ) , and NIH Image software ( NIH , Bethesda , MD , USA ) . Cell population speed was deter - mined by measuring the distance the leading cells had moved away from the trough edge at a particular time point . Data from 10 cells were used to calcu - late the average distance the front - most cells had migrated . The distance moved was determined by imaging a stage mi - crometer and superimposing it on the images . The time it took the cell front to travel to successive time points was used to determine cell front speed . Indi - vidual cell speed and direction change were determined using DIAS (cid:210) soft - ware ( Solltech , Oakdale , IA , USA ) . Speed was calculated from the dis - placement of the centroid from frame to frame . Direction change was measured as the absolute value of the difference in the direction of movement of the cen - troid from frame to frame , measured in degrees . Cross - sectional area measure - ments were made using NIH Image software . The cross - sectional area is measured as the area of the image of a cell seen using phase microscopy . Con - focal imaging of GFP - labeled cells was performed using an MRC 600 ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , USA ) equipped with a 25 - mW krypton - argon laser and COMOS software . Three - di - mensional reconstruction was done us - ing Viewpoint3 and Volrend software written by Dr . Eric Shelden ( University of Michigan ) . Links to QuickTime (cid:212) movies are shown in the legends to Figures 2 , 3 , and 6 . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Development of the Under - Agarose Assay The traditional under - agarose che - motaxis assay of macrophages and polymorphonuclear leukocytes ( PMNs ) utilizes small round wells cut in agarose into which cells or chemoattractant are loaded ( 2 , 12 ) . This format provides a small area where the cells are able to move in the direction of the gradient , making imaging of the transition zone difficult . We have modified this assay to make it more suitable to the visualiza - tion of a population of moving cells , al - lowing for quantification of both popu - lation and individual cell behavior . By cutting linear troughs instead of circular wells , movement along the entire front of the trough could be visualized and Research Report 1142BioTechniques Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) Figure 4 . The cross - sectional area of cells under agarose is increased . Images of cells under 0 . 5 % and 2 % agarose at the leading front , 1500 m m from trough edge . The arrow indicates the direction of move - ment . The inset shows the quantification of the cross - sectional area of the cells for the indicated agarose concentrations . Note the increased area of the cells under 2 % agarose . Figure 3 . Movement of cells at the transition zone . The large arrow points toward the source of folate and the direction of cell movement . The dashed line indicates the edge of the cell trough . Cells above the dashed line have moved underneath the 2 % agarose sheet . Note the increased cross - sectional surface area of the cells . The time points indicated are time elapsed after application of cells to trough . The black arrowhead in - dicates a cell that has moved under the agarose during this sequence . A QuickTime movie of cells exiting the trough can be accessed at http : / / www . BioTechniques . com / Movies / Nov01 / KnechtFig3 . mov . quantified . In preliminary experiments , it became clear that , if care was not tak - en in the cutting of the troughs , the inter - face could be disturbed such that gaps were created that allowed cells under the agarose . Even when care was taken , a few small areas where cells exited the trough much more rapidly were some - times observed . These areas were ig - nored in analysis , as they represented a small proportion of the behavior along the entire trough front . When the agarose was lifted and rotated within the petri dish to purposely disturb the inter - face , cell migration was less inhibited at all agarose concentrations . We believe this indicates an interaction between the agarose and the plastic substrate that must normally be broken or disturbed by the cells moving out of the trough . Using this assay , Dictyostelium cells were visualized over time after place - ment in the trough in the presence of a folate gradient . Cells exited the trough and moved up the folate gradient for at least 10 h ( Figure 2 ) . In the first hour af - ter application of cells to the trough , ap - proximately 10 times as many cells moved out of the trough toward the chemoattractant than away ( data not shown ) . After 4 h , the differential in movement approaches 1000 - fold . When cells were assayed using plates in which no folate was added , the results were similar to the results from the dis - tal side of the chemotaxis assay . Thus , randomly moving cells do not signifi - cantly exit the troughs , and it is the at - traction of the folate gradient that leads to cells moving under the agarose . Transition and Cortical Deformation Chemotaxis was initially character - ized using troughs cut in either 0 . 5 % agarose ( the minimum mechanically workable concentration ) or 2 % agarose . Before the arrival of cells , the agarose is in direct contact with the plastic surface of the petri dish . At the trough edge in - terface , the cells might move by climb - ing up and over the agarose , traveling through the agarose , moving under the agarose , or stopping at the edge of the trough . Microscopic analysis confirms that the cells do not climb over or through the agarose . Many but not all cells move out of the trough and under the agarose in the time frame of the as - say . Cells were not immediately able to make the transition to movement under the agarose when they reached the edge of the trough . Time - lapse movies of the trough edge show cells moving back and forth along the trough edge , and only occasionally does a cell actually extend a pseudopod under the agarose and move up the gradient . This behav - ior is particularly evident in the 2 % agarose plates . There is a continuous exit of cells from the trough throughout the assay . Some cells are left behind and do not exit the trough regardless of the concentration of the agarose . These cells are primarily in the middle or dis - tal portion of the trough . This cellular behavior suggests that a stable gradient does not extend very far into the trough . For cells to move out of the trough , they have to flatten themselves to a thickness that will fit between the agarose and the plastic , deform the agarose upwards while maintaining shape , or a combination of the two such that they deform the agarose upwards as they flatten themselves . As cells leave the trough and move under the agarose , there was a dramatic increase in their 2 - D cross - sectional area , indicating a flat - tening of the cells ( Figure 3 ) . The aver - age cross - sectional area of cells in the trough was 32 ± 4 m m 2 , while cells 1500 m m from the trough edge had an average area of 130 ± 4 m m 2 under 0 . 5 % agarose . If the stiffness of the agarose were causing the flattening of the cells , then , as the concentration of agarose is increased , the cells should become flatter . Consistent with this hy - pothesis , cells under 2 % agarose con - centration had a cross - sectional area of 301 ± 25 m m 2 ( Figure 4 and inset ) . Another approach used to assess changes in cell morphology was to use confocal imaging to determine the 3 - D shape of the cells under agarose . Cy - tosolic GFP was expressed in transfect - ed Dictyostelium cells . The chemotaxis assay was set up in a Rose chamber on a cover slip to allow high - resolution 3 - D optical sectioning with the confocal microscope . Reconstruction ( Figure 5 ) of the optical sections showed a clear flattening of the cells under agarose as compared to cells remaining in the trough . Cells in the trough that had not yet moved under the agarose were vari - able in height , ranging as high as 12 m m . Cells that had crawled under the 0 . 5 % agarose were 8 – 10 m m thick , and Research Report 1144BioTechniques Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) Figure 5 . Volume reconstruction of cells . Cells expressing cytosolic GFP were imaged in the trough , under 0 . 5 % or 2 % agarose . “Front” cells images were captured 1500 m m from trough edge . Confocal op - tical sections were collected through each cell and then reconstructed into a 3 - D volume . Each volume is shown in a top down and side view . cells under 2 % agarose were uniformly 4 m m thick . Another approach to understanding the interaction of the cells with the agarose is to determine the extent to which the agarose is deformed upward by the cells moving underneath . Since the cells have a thickness of 4 m m under the 2 % agarose , it is likely that the agarose is locally deformed or moved upward as the cell passes underneath . To visualize this deformation , 0 . 5 m m fluorescent beads were added to the agarose before hardening . Confocal im - ages with a Z - section approximately 1 m m thick were collected with the focal plane fixed 4 – 5 m m above the substrate , near the top of the cells . Beads could clearly be seen to move into and out of the plane of focus as the cells moved underneath ( Figure 6 ) . Some beads ( Figure 6 , lower left ) are visible before the cell arrives and then move out of the plane of focus as the cell passes . Beads at the bottom ( Figure 6 , upper right ) of the agarose were frequently pulled out of the agarose and phagocytosed by the cells . The beads that remained in the agarose after the cells passed were usu - ally in a slightly higher focal plane , in - dicating that the agarose is lifted slight - ly by the passing of cells . Thus , cells trailing the front will be exposed to a slightly different environment . If the imaging plane was set higher in the agarose , then no movement of the beads was observed . This indicates that the entire sheet of agarose is not raised but rather that the agarose is locally de - formed above the cell . In addition , the beads did not move until just before ( approximately 2 m m ) the advancing cell reached it and returned to their po - sitions just after the cell had passed , in - dicating that the deformation of the agarose is quite local . Effect of Agarose Concentration on Cell Movement After moving out of the trough , the cells form a distinct front that progress - es toward the chemoattractant well ( Fig - ure 4 ) . Time - lapse imaging and comput - er analysis were used to visualize and quantify the movement of cells up the folate gradient . The speed of the front was calculated by determining the posi - tion of the leading cells over time . Under 0 . 5 % agarose , the cell front moved at 6 . 4 m m / min ( Figure 7 and inset ) . The rate of movement of the cells was surprisingly consistent throughout the assay . Since the cells deform the agarose away from the surface to move , we hy - pothesized that , by increasing the con - centration of the agarose , the cells would have to work harder to move . Consistent with this idea , the speed of the front decreased as the agarose con - centration increased ( Figure 7 and in - set ) . At 2 % agarose , the cells moved at 3 . 1 m m / min ; however , at 3 % agarose , the cells can no longer move out of the trough , indicating that the cells are un - able to deform this stiff matrix suffi - ciently to squeeze underneath . These data may provide a clue as to why many previous attempts to use un - der - agarose chemotaxis with mam - malian cell lines have been unsuccess - ful . Cells clearly undergo a flattening as they begin to protrude under the agarose . Even Dictyostelium amoebae that move robustly once under the agarose have a difficult time making the transition to flatten out and squeeze under the agarose ( Figure 3 ) . The edge of the agarose trough seems to present a restrictive barrier that cells must over - come to move up the chemoattractant gradient . Cells must have sufficient ad - hesion to the surface to apply a forward force and deform the agarose as they move , and they must have sufficient cortical tension not to be crushed by the downward force of the overlying ma - trix . Many cell types may be unable to meet both of these criteria to move un - der agarose . By varying the substrate composition and reducing the stiffness of the overlay , it may be possible to im - prove the movement of mammalian cell lines . In fact , Mollison et al . ( 9 ) have shown that varying the concentration of agarose affects the under agarose mi - gration distance of PMNs . Research Report 1146BioTechniques Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) Figure 6 . Agarose deformation assay using flu - orescent beads . Fluorescent beads ( FITC , 0 . 5 m m diameter ) were added to 2 % agarose before pour - ing the plates . Images were collected using the confocal microscope as cells moved through the field of view . The plane of focus was just above the height of the cells so that some beads are ini - tially below the plane of focus and some are in the plane . As the cell moves by , beads below the plane are moved through the plane and so become temporarily visible . Beads initially in the plane move out of the plane , becoming invisible , and then reappear after the cell passes by . A Quick - Time movie showing the movement of the beads can be accessed at http : / / www . BioTechniques . com / Movies / Nov01 / KnechtFig6 . mov . Figure 7 . Movement of the leading edge of cells under various agarose concentrations . NC4A2 cells applied to troughs at the 0 time point . The movement of the front of cells over time is plot - ted . The cells at the front move at a constant speed throughout the assay . The inset shows the average speed of the front calculated from the slope of the 2 – 10 h time points . Characterization of Chemotactic and Chemokinetic Motility Cell motility was also analyzed by computerized motion analysis of indi - vidual cell paths over time . Cells at the leading front of 0 . 5 % agarose had a mean velocity of 6 . 9 ± 0 . 1 m m / min and a very low rate of directional change , indicating that they were moving per - sistently up the folate gradient ( Figure 8 and inset ) . This is also evident from the paths of individual cells , which are quite linear . The fact that the cell speed and the population speed are similar also indicates that cells are tracking Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) BioTechniques 1147 Figure 8 . DIAS analysis of leading - edge and lagging cells . The paths of representative cells were mea - sured using DIAS motion analysis software . The arrow points toward the chemoattractant trough and the direction of cell movement . Lagging cells are approximately 450 m m behind the leading cells . The inset table shows the quantification of speed and direction of leading and lagging cells as well as cells exposed to no folate or a uniform concentration of folate throughout the agarose . The speed and direction changes are expressed as the mean value of at least 50 cells monitored for at least 30 min in two independent ex - periments ( mean ± SEM ) . Figure 9 . GFP - labeled cells chemotaxing under agarose . ABD120 and myosin II heavy chain - GFP ( mhcA - GFP ) fusion proteins were expressed in cells to visualize F - actin and myosin II in cells . The top panel shows a mhcA - GFP - transformed cell , and the bottom panel shows a GFP - ABD120 - transformed cell . Cells are imaged under 2 % agarose using confocal microscopy as described . Cells are moving in the direction of the arrows . consistently up the gradient . The cells behind the leading front were slower ( 5 . 0 ± 0 . 7 m m / min ) but had twice the rate of directional change . The more frequent turns are evident in the paths of the trailing cells ( Figure 8 ) . This be - havior is most likely due to the distur - bance of the gradient by the leading cells . Dictyostelium cells have both cell surface and secreted folate deaminases that will alter the local gradient as the leading cell passes . Chemotactic agents can have both chemotactic ( directional ) and / or chemokinetic ( speed ) effects on cells . To determine the effects of folate on D . discoideum cells , we compared the movement of cells in the standard chemotactic chamber to movements in a chamber in which the folate was pre - sent uniformly throughout the agarose and the troughs , or a chamber that con - tained no folate . Cells in a uniform con - centration of folate moved as fast as cells exposed to a gradient ( Figure 8 and inset ) , but the cells made 50 % more direction changes . There was also a 50 % decrease ( data not shown ) in the number of cells migrating out of the troughs compared to the chemotactic conditions . Unlike the chemotactic as - say , in the chemokinetic assay an equal number of cells moved out in both di - rections . When no folate was present , very few cells moved out of the troughs ( data not shown ) . Thus , folate exerts both chemotactic and chemokinetic in - fluences on cells . This is to our knowl - edge the first demonstration of a chemokinetic effect of folate . The evi - dence for chemokinesis is not definitive because the ability of Dictyostelium to bind folate and the presence of extra - cellular and cell - surface folate deami - nases ( 3 , 4 ) may convert a uniform fo - late concentration into a local gradient ( 1 ) . It may be informative to perform this experiment using a non - hydrolyz - able folate analog such as methotrexate to confirm this observation . Localization of GFP - Labeled Proteins One of the benefits of this assay is the ability to image cells that are active - ly undergoing chemotaxis in a mechani - cally inhibited environment . Confocal microscopy of cells expressing GFP - fu - sion proteins was used to examine the localization of several cytoskeletal pro - teins during chemotaxis . It has been shown previously that myosin II moves to the rear of the cell when cells are overlaid with a thin agarose sheet ( 2 ) . The same phenomenon was observed when cells labeled with GFP - myosin II moved from the trough out under the agarose ( Figure 9 ) . The myosin II that Research Report was previously throughout the cortex , rapidly relocalized to the rear of the cell . The F - actin cytoskeleton was also visualized using an actin binding do - main - GFP fusion ( 18 ) . Surprisingly , the bulk of the F - actin co - localized with myosin II at the rear of the cell rather than in the leading lamella ( Figure 9 ) . The under - agarose chemotaxis assay has numerous potential applications that we will explore in the future . The assay has been combined with an electric cell impedance sensing ( ECIS ) system to al - low the arrival of the cells at a specified location to be recorded without visual - ization ( see following paper ) . This as - say opens the way for a high - throughput screen for agonists and antagonists of chemotaxis . Also , a variety of Dic - tyostelium mutants are available with alterations in cytoskeletal and motility - related genes . It is likely that mutations that affect cortical integrity will have adverse affects on motility in this re - strictive environment . Preliminary ex - amination of cells lacking myosin II heavy chain indicates significant defects in movement under agarose ( Laevsky unpublished observations and refer - ences . Furthermore , the visualization of GFP - labeled proteins in directionally moving cells will allow us to assess the localization of proteins in relation to the motility process and how the machinery changes between mechanically inhibit - ed and uninhibited conditions . Last , it should be possible to adapt this assay to isolate the cells left in the trough as a way to screen for mutants deficient in force production or chemotaxis . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Dr . Sally Zigmond , Dr . Andrew Masselli , Dr . Michael Lynes , Dr . Eunkyung Lee , and Catherine Green for encouragement , thoughtful discussions , and careful reading of the manuscript . This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health grant no . GM40599 to D . A . K . REFERENCES 1 . Condeelis , J . , A . Bresnick , M . Demma , S . Dharmawardhane , R . Eddy , A . L . Hall , R . Sauterer , and V . Warren . 1990 . Mechanisms of amoeboid chemotaxis : an evaluation of the cortical expansion model . Dev . Genet . 11 : 333 - 340 . 2 . Cutler , J . E . and J . J . Munoz . 1974 . A simple in vitro method for studies on chemotaxis . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 147 : 471 - 474 . 3 . Darmon , M . , J . Barra , and P . Brachet . 1978 . The role of phosphodiesterase in aggregation of Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Sci . 31 : 233 - 243 . 4 . Fukui , Y . and S . Inoue . 1991 . Cell division in Dictyostelium with special emphasis on acto - myosin organization in cytokinesis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 18 : 41 - 54 . 5 . Fukui , Y . and S . Inoue . 1997 . Amoeboid movement anchored by eupodia , new actin - rich knobby feet in Dictyostelium . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 36 : 339 - 354 . 6 . Fukui , Y . , T . J . Lynch , H . Brzeska , and E . D . Korn . 1989 . Myosin I is located at the leading edges of locomoting Dictyostelium amoebae . Nature 341 : 328 - 331 . 4 . Greiner , R . A . , D . Jacobs - Krahnen , R . Mutzel , D . Malchow , and B . Wurster . 1992 . A 138 - kDa glycoprotein from Dictyostelium membranes with folate deaminase and folate binding activity . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 5096 - 5101 . 5 . Hadjout , N . G . Laevsky , D . A . Knecht , and M . A . Lynes . 2001 . Automated real - time mea - surement of chemotactic cell motilitg . Bio - Techniques 31 : 1130 - 1138 . 6 . Jones , T . H . and G . M . Brown . 1967 . The biosynthesis of folic acid . VII . Enzymatic syn - thesis of pteridines from guanosine triphos - phate . J . Biol . Chem . 242 : 3989 - 3997 . 7 . Klein , P . S . , T . J . Sun , C . L . d . Saxe , A . R . Kim - mel , R . L . Johnson , and P . N . Devreotes . 1988 . A chemoattractant receptor controls develop - ment in Dictyostelium discoideum . Science 241 : 1467 - 1472 . 8 . Konijn , T . M . , J . G . Van De Meene , J . T . Bon - ner , and D . S . Barkley . 1967 . The acrasin ac - tivity of adenosine - 3 ¢ , 5 ¢ - cyclic phosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 58 : 1152 - 1154 . 9 . Mollison , K . W . , G . W . Carter , and R . A . Krause . 1981 . Chemotaxis of human polymor - phonuclear leukocytes under agarose : lack of requirement for media protein and differential effects of buffer and agarose type on locomo - tion . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 167 : 419 - 427 . 10 . Moores , S . L . , J . H . Sabry , and J . A . Spudich . 1996 . Myosin dynamics in live Dictyostelium cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 443 - 446 . 11 . Nandini - Kishore , S . G . and W . A . Frazier . 1981 . [ 3 H ] Methotrexate as a ligand for the fo - late receptor of Dictyostelium discoideum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 78 : 7299 - 7303 . 12 . Nelson , R . D . , P . G . Quie , and R . L . Simmons . 1975 . Chemotaxis under agarose : a new and simple method for measuring chemotaxis and spontaneous migration of human polymor - phonuclear leukocytes and monocytes . J . Im - munol . 115 : 1650 - 1656 . 13 . Pan , P . , E . M . Hall , and J . T . Bonner . 1972 . Folic acid as second chemotactic substance in the cellular slime moulds . Nat . New Biol . 237 : 181 - 182 . 14 . Pang , K . M . , E . Lee , and D . A . Knecht . 1998 . Use of a fusion protein between GFP and an actin - binding domain to visualize transient fila - mentous - actin structures . Curr . Biol . 8 : 405 - 408 . 15 . Rietdorf , J . , F . Siegert , and C . J . Weijer . 1996 . Analysis of optical density wave propa - gation and cell movement during mound for - mation in Dictyostelium discoideum . Dev . Biol . 177 : 427 - 438 . 16 . Rose , G . G . , C . M . Pomerat , T . O . Shindler , and J . B . Trunnell . 1958 . A cellophane - strip technique for culturing tissue in multipurpose culture chambers . Biophysic . Biochem . Cytol . 17 . Sussman , R . and M . Sussman . 1967 . Cultiva - tion of Dictyostelium discoideum in axenic medium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 29 : 53 - 55 . 18 . Yumura , S . , H . Mori , and Y . Fukui . 1984 . Localization of actin and myosin for the study of ameboid movement in Dictyostelium using improved immunofluorescence . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 894 - 899 . Received 31 January 2001 ; accepted 15 May 2001 . Address correspondence to : Dr . David Knecht University of Connecticut 75 N . Eagleville Rd . Dept . of MCB / U - 125 Storrs , CT 06269 , USA e - mail : knecht @ uconn . edu Vol . 31 , No . 5 ( 2001 ) BioTechniques 1149 For reprints of this or any other article , contact Reprints @ BioTechniques . com