1 Diversity and network coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity : Case studies in bionanoscience Ismael Rafols SPRU , University of Sussex , Brighton , UK i . rafols @ sussex . ac . uk Martin Meyer SPRU , University of Sussex , Brighton , UK Steunpunt O & O Statistieken , Katholieke Universiteit Leuven , Belgium Helsinki University of Technology , Finland June 30th , 2008 Abstract The multidimensional character and inherent conflict with categorisation of interdisciplinarity makes its mapping and evaluation a challenging task . We propose a conceptual framework that aims to capture interdisciplinarity in the wider sense of knowledge integration , by exploring the concepts of diversity and coherence . Disciplinary diversity indicators are developed to describe the heterogeneity of a bibliometric set viewed from predefined categories , i . e . using a top - down approach that locates the set on the global map of science . Network coherence indicators are constructed to measure the intensity of similarity relations within a bibliometric set , i . e . using a bottom - up approach , which reveals the structural consistency of the publications network . We carry out case studies on individual articles in bionanoscience to illustrate how these two perspectives identify different aspects of interdisciplinarity : disciplinary diversity indicates the large - scale breadth of the knowledge base of a publication ; network coherence reflects the novelty of its knowledge integration . We suggest that the combination of these two approaches may be useful for comparative studies of emergent scientific and technological fields , where new and controversial categorisations are accompanied by equally contested claims of novelty and interdisciplinarity . Keywords Interdisciplinary research ; nanotechnology ; nanoscience ; diversity ; indicators ; network analysis . 1 . Introduction In policy discourse interdisciplinarity is often perceived as a mark of ‘good’ research : interdisciplinary research is seen as more successful in achieving breakthroughs and relevant outcomes , be it in terms of innovation for economic growth or for social needs . This has led to policies aimed at fostering interdisciplinarity , particularly in fields , such as biotechnologies or nanotechnologies , regarded as emerging through technological convergence . 2 However , there is no systematic evidence , to our knowledge , showing that “more” interdisciplinarity leads to “better” research , although there is plenty of anecdotal evidence suggesting that interdisciplinarity has played a crucial role in many scientific breakthroughs ( e . g . Hollingsworth’s ( 2006 ) work on biomedical research ) . This lack of evidence stems from the difficulties of agreeing on criteria to define scientific performance ( a complex issue we will not discuss here ) and intensity of interdisciplinarity ( the aim of this paper ) . The concept of interdisciplinarity and its variants ( multi , trans , crossdisciplinarity ) 1 is problematic , if not controversial ( Weingart and Stehr , 2000 ) . First , given its polysemous and multidimensional nature ( Sanz - Menéndez et al . , 2001 ) , there is no agreement about pertinent indicators , or the appropriateness of categorisation methods ( Bordons et al . , 2004 ) . Second , although the etymology of inter - , multi - , trans - and cross - disciplinarity suggests that this is a property that is between , beyond or across various disciplines , interdisciplinarity is widely and ambiguously used to mean research spanning a variety of areas - academic disciplines , technological fields and / or even industrial sectors . Consequently , interdisciplinarity has been declared to be ‘no longer adequate’ ( Klein 2000 , p . 3 ) or a misnomer ( Glaser , 2006 ) . Thus , the process of integrating different bodies of knowledge rather than transgression of disciplinary boundaries per se , has been identified as the key aspect of so - called ‘interdisciplinary research’ ( National Academies , 2005 ) . How can this knowledge integration be assessed ? While some sort of taxonomy is necessary to ‘shrink’ and locate on a manageable map the integration occurring in the gigantic landscapes of scientific knowledge , any categorisation entails the adoption of ‘rigid’ boundaries , which hinders accurate description of the ‘fluid’ dynamics of science ( Zitt , 2005 ) . This tension between taxonomy and dynamics is particularly acute in emergent fields , and often produces conflicting views . For example , in nanotechnology , coarse - grained studies tend to emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of the field ( Meyer and Persson , 1998 ; Leydesdorff and Zhou , 2007 ) , whereas lower level studies suggest that , below the re - labelling , genuine knowledge integration is occurring at a slower pace ( Schummer , 2004 ; Rafols , 2007 ) . Policies fostering interdisciplinarity , therefore , sometimes appear to be based more on conventional wisdom and arbitrary classification than on empirical evidence . This investigation aims to inform policy - making on the dynamics of emerging fields by providing measures that capture the intensity of interdisciplinarity in the wider sense of knowledge integration . We do so by combining macro and micro level perspectives . We use as case studies individual publications in biomolecular motors , a research specialty of bionanoscience , and analyse interdisciplinarity as revealed from the set of references . The paper is organised as follows . Section 2 presents the concepts of diversity and coherence , relates them to the literature on interdisciplinarity and 1 In this study interdisciplinarity refers to all these types of cross - disciplinary research . 3 proposes an analytical framework to investigate knowledge integration . Section 3 describes the empirical data and the operationalisation of diversity and coherence as bibliometric indicators . Section 4 applies the diversity - coherence framework to case studies of individual articles in biomolecular motors . Section 5 summarises the results and discusses their implications . 2 . Conceptual framework 2 . 1 . Review of bibliometric studies on interdisciplinarity Several bibliometric studies have addressed the issue of interdisciplinarity , directly ( see review by Bordons et al . , 2004 ) or through discussion of related issues such as mapping knowledge flows among fields ( see review by Zitt , 2005 ) . Its study involves the choice of a disciplinary taxonomy , and / or relational properties ( similarities , co - occurrences , flows ) to characterise the interactions between elements or categories . Most investigations use a top - down approach and predefined categories ( typically ISI Subject Categories - SCs ) to study their proportions and / or relations . For example , van Raan and van Leeuwen ( 2002 ) describe interdisciplinarity in an institute in terms of the percentage of publications and citations received to and from each SCs . In the following three sections , we explore how these studies can be conceptualised as expressing disciplinary diversity . Some investigations adopt a bottom - up approach , in which the low - level elements investigated ( e . g . publications , papers ) are clustered or classified into factors on the basis of multivariate analyses of similarity measures ( Small , 1973 ; Braam et al . , 1991 ; van den Besselaar and Leydesdorff , 1994 ; Schmidt et al . , 2006 ) . These clusters are then projected in 2D or 3D maps to provide an insight into the structure of the field and estimate the degree of network - level similarity . Similarity measures have also been used to compute network properties , such as centralities , to identify interdisciplinarity ( Otte and Rousseau , 2002 ; Leydesdorff , 2007 ) . Following Nesta and Saviotti ( 2005 ) , in this study , we conceptualise network - level properties as network coherence . We build on top - down and bottom - up approaches , to develop a methodology combining ( i ) diversity measures using large - scale disciplinary categories , with ( ii ) network measures based on similarities among publications . 2 . 2 . Definition of interdisciplinarity In line with a number of works ( National Academies , 2004 , Porter et al . , 2006 , p . 3 ) , interdisciplinarity is defined here as a mode of research that integrates concepts or theories , tools or techniques , information or data from different bodies of knowledge . As highlighted by Porter et al . , the key concept is ‘knowledge integration’ . In order to capture the process of integration in research , we need to investigate two aspects : 4 Diversity : number , balance and degree of difference between the bodies of knowledge concerned ; Coherence : the extent that specific topics , concepts , tools , data , etc . used in a research process are related . In this framework , we view the knowledge integration process as being characterised by high cognitive heterogeneity ( diversity ) and increases in relational structure ( coherence ) ; in other words as a process in which previously different and disconnected bodies of research become related . 2 . 3 . Diversity : concept and measures The concept of diversity is used in many scientific fields , from ecology to economics and cultural studies , to refer to three different attributes of a system comprising different categories ( Stirling , 1998 , 2007 ; Purvis and Hector , 2000 ) : • variety : number of distinctive categories ; • balance : evenness of the distribution of categories ; • disparity or similarity 2 : degree to which the categories are different / similar . Figure 1 depicts how an increase in any of these attributes results in an increase in the diversity of the system examined . Variety : Number of disciplines Balance : Evenness of distribution Disparity or Similarity : Degree of difference Increasing Diversity Figure 1 . Schematic representation of the attributes of diversity , based on Stirling ( 1998 , p . 41 ) . 2 Hereafter we will use only the term similarity , which is the one commonly used in bibliometrics . 5 Stirling ( 2007 ) shows that classic indices of diversity , such as Shannon’s or Simpson’s ( also known as Herfindahl’s ) , measure a combination of variety and balance , but fail to account for the distances or similarities between categories . On the basis of a set of criteria , he proposes a general diversity heuristic in order to explore how diversity indices differ when more or less emphasis is given to variety , balance and similarity . Stirling’s heuristic can be formulated in a generalised diversity index which reduces to the traditional indices for specific set of parameters α , β ( Stirling , 2007 , p . 7 ) . For parsimony , here we define Stirling index ∆ as the variant for α = 1 , β = 1 , the simplest form incorporating variety , balance and similarity . Table 1 presents the notation and diversity indices used in our study . Table 1 . Selected measures of diversity . Notation : Proportion of elements in category i : p i Distance between categories i and j : d ij Similarity between categories i and j : s ij = 1 - d ij Indices : N = Variety N H = Shannon ∑ − i i i p p ln I = Simpson diversity 3 ∑ ∑ ≠ − = ) ( , 2 1 j i j i i i j i p p p ∆ = Stirling ( α = 1 , β = 1 ) ∑ ∑ − = j i j i ij j i j i ij p p s p p d , , 1 Generalised Stirling ( ) β α ∑ j i j i ij p p d , As the formulae show , Stirling index ∆ can be understood as a Simpson diversity in which the products of proportions of categories are weighted by distance / similarity . Our interest in using Stirling’s framework to track interdisciplinarity is twofold . First , since Stirling’s generalised formulation needs a metric ( d ij ) and has open values for the parameters α and β , it highlights that the mathematical form of any diversity index includes some prejudgement of the aspect of diversity that is considered important . High values for β give more weight to the contribution of large categories , and high values for α see the co - occurrence of distant categories as more important . The choice of the metric used to define distance is inevitably value laden . Second , and very importantly for emerging fields , the inclusion of distance among categories lessens the effect of inappropriate categorisation changes : if a new category i is very similar to an existing category j , their distance d ij will be close to zero , and its inclusion in categories list will result in only slightly increased diversity . 4 3 Simpson diversity is defined as ( 1 - Simpson Index ) , where the Simpson index is the commonly used measure of concentration . 4 One example could be ‘Nanoscience & Nanotechnology’ ( N & N ) from the ISI categorisation : according to Leydesdorff’s and Rafols’ metric ( submitted ) , N & N has a distance of only 0 . 0354 6 In the next section , we explore how these measures relate to already developed measures of interdisciplinarity . 2 . 4 . Use of diversity in studies of interdisciplinarity In this section , we present some illustrations of how bibliometric studies explicitly or implicitly address the properties of diversity , namely variety , balance and similarity , when investigating interdisciplinarity : Variety : Morillo et al . ( 2003 , p . 1241 ) for each SC , counted the number of other SCs with which it shared journals . Presentations of disciplinary profiles , e . g . in bar charts , provide visual cues for this variety ( e . g . van Raan and van Leeuwen , 2001 , p . 611 ) . Balance : Since Porter and Chubin’s ( 1985 ) seminal contribution , perhaps the most common indicator of interdisciplinarity has been the percentage of citations outside the discipline of the citing paper . Van Leeuwen and Tijssen ( 2000 ) showed that this could be as high as 69 % on average . Similarly , Schummer ( 2004 , p . 449 ) uses the percentage of co - occurrences of affiliations based on different disciplines as indicator . Similarity : Measures of similarity among predefined categories have been widely used to visualise the relative positions of different scientific disciplines ( Moya - Anegón et al . , 2004 , 2007 ) . Although in most cases associated dissimilarity values are not presented , the visualisation implicitly conveys the degree of diversity . 5 In some instances , these three properties are explicitly addressed in the same study . An interesting case is Morillo et al . ’s work on the multi - assignation of journals to SCs ( Morillo et al . , 2003 ; Bordons et al . , 2004 , pp . 447 - 453 ) . For each category , these studies looked at : • the balance , in terms of percentage of multi - assigned journals for one SC ; • the variety of links with other SCs , namely the number of different SCs with which a given SC shares journals ; • the strength of linkages ( or similarities ) given by number of co - assigned journals for two SCs . This multidimensional approach , covering different aspects of disciplinary diversity , allowed Morillo and co - workers to develop an elaborate taxonomy of interdisciplinarity types across science fields . with ‘Materials Science , multidisciplinary’ , whereas the distance between the latter and a relatively related field , such as ‘Physics , applied’ , is 0 . 1916 . 5 Matrices of knowledge flows among disciplines are another way to present interdisciplinarity . E . g . Bourke and Butler ( 1998 ) , calculated the number of publications from discipline - based departments associated to discipline - based journals . These matrices can then be used to compute similarity measures . 7 Finally , some studies use more complex indicators , such as the Pratt number ( similar to Simpson’s ; see Morillo , 2001 ) , or Shannon entropy ( Barjak , 2006 ) , which combine the properties of variety and balance . 6 While the bibliometric studies referred to above touch on particular aspects of diversity , to our knowledge , only the recent paper by Porter et al . ( 2007 ) actually integrates the attributes of variety , balance and similarity into one index . Interestingly , Porter’s indicator of Integration is a particular parameterisation of Stirling’s index ∆ ( see Table 1 ) , where the similarities s ij are Salton’s cosines for co - citation patterns among ISI SCs . Here , we operationalise Stirling’s diversity following Porter’s indicator , as described in the Data and Methods section . 2 . 5 . Coherence : concept and measures The concept of coherence aims to capture the extent to which of a system’s elements are consistently articulated and form a meaningful constellation ( Stirling , personal communication ) . Hence , coherence is a general property that addresses the functionality of a system . In our bibliometric context , coherence expresses the extent to which publication networks form a more or less compact structure . If we take degree of cognitive similarity as the linkage between publications ( e . g . by using co - citation , co - word or bibliographic coupling ) , a more clustered network is seen as having higher cognitive coherence . Coherence , or cognate concepts such as cohesion or compactness , have been extensively investigated in information sciences ( see Egghe and Rousseau , 2003 , for a bibliometric discussion ) . In the context of economic studies of innovation , coherence has been utilised to account for the aggregated relatedness ( or similarity ) of the firm’s technological base , with the idea that “coherent firms are more likely to be successful than incoherent ones” ( Nesta and Saviotti , 2005 , p . 124 ) . Here , we introduce coherence in order to express the degree of integration already in place in a body of research . However , since the key aspect of interdisciplinary research has been argued to be the process of knowledge integration ( Section 2 . 2 ) , interdisciplinarity should ideally be assessed in terms of a temporal derivative , i . e . a change in coherence . Depending on the unit of analysis used in the study of interdisciplinarity , coherence can take different meanings . High coherence within the reference set in a publication means that its referencing practices are highly specialised and hence , that it builds on an already established research specialty . High coherence in the publication set of an interdisciplinary centre would suggest that it is achieving its integrative mission . 6 Other publications use measures of diversity in bibliometrics , to examine not the diversity of disciplines , but diversity / concentration of research in institutions ( e . g . Rousseau , 2000 ) . 8 Since our definition of coherence is in terms of the network of relations among the basic elements ( publications ) , it has to be operationalised using bottom - up approaches . This avoids the use of previous categorisations but requires spiralling computing efforts for large data sets . In our view , bibliometric studies related to network coherence fall into the areas of mapping and associated methods of clustering , along with other multivariate analyses based on low level categories such as single articles , authors or journals . An example is Small’s ( 1977 ) study of a research specialty over five years . Using co - citation analysis , Small tracked the appearance and disappearance of clusters in the research specialty and proposed a ‘Stability Index’ , based on degree of overlap between the clusters , that described the coherence of the network . Other examples are combinations of co - citation and co - word analysis ( Braam et al . , 1991 ) , and large scale mapping using inter - citation flows among journals ( Boyack et al . , 2005 ) . Methodologies from network analysis continue to be experimented with , as shown by Hellsten et al . ’s ( 2007 ) adoption of an Optimal Percolation Method , and Schmidt et al . ’s ( 2006 ) clustering of research fronts . The connection between interdisciplinarity and network structure , as shown by factor analysis , was made explicit by van den Besselaar and Heimeriks ( 2001 ) . More recently Leydesdorff ( 2007 ) explored network centralities as indicators of interdisciplinarity . Building on these network approaches , we use simple network analysis measures for the operationalisation of coherence , as described in the Data and Methods section . 2 . 6 . Disciplinary diversity vs network coherence We introduced the concepts of diversity and coherence in relation to interdisciplinarity and have shown how they are related to previous bibliometric investigations . Table 2 presents a summary of this conceptual framework . In this subsection we argue for the need to combine disciplinary diversity and network coherence analyses to achieve a more nuanced view of knowledge integration . As discussed above , the problem with disciplinary diversity is that it relies on predefined and ‘rigid’ categories , which may miss emergent or dynamic phenomena in science . The inclusion of metrics between categories ( as in Stirling’s index ) lessens the effect of creating very similar categories , but does not solve the problem of hidden divides within existing categories . Coherence approaches might be seen as being more accurate , but unfortunately they present a very problematic trade - off between size and level of analysis . For micro - or meso - level investigations , bottom - up network approaches are more accurate for describing direct knowledge flows or other explicit relations . However , they cannot capture the position of local elements in the global map of science , and thus miss the large - scale perspective of the integration process . At the other extreme , in macro - level studies using complicated metrics , the direct relations between elements become opaque . In addition , the use of large bibliometric sets requires access to expensive 9 databases and computational resources that are beyond the reach of most researchers . Table 2 . Summary of conceptual framework . Diversity Coherence General concept : Heterogeneity in terms of variety , balance and similarity of categories Functional articulation and structural compactness of elements in system Main research tradition : Ecology Network Analysis Type of approach : Top - down Bottom - up Categorisation : Pre - defined Unnecessary Metric : Optional ( needed for Stirling ) Necessary Indices : N = Variety H = Shannon I = Simpson ∆ = Stirling S = Mean Linkage Strength L = Mean Path Length Given these constraints , we propose to combine disciplinary diversity ( top - down ) and network coherence ( bottom - up ) perspectives to track knowledge integration in small and medium sized studies . Figure 2 provides a schematic representation of this twofold perspective , after Porter et al . ’s ( 2007 , p . 139 ) proposal . Since in this study we take individual publications and study knowledge integration through their reference sets , each of the nodes in the networks represents a reference , and each link the degree of similarity between references ( we use bibliographic coupling ) . There are four possible combinations : ( i ) Low diversity - High coherence is a case of specialised disciplinary research – all the references are from the same discipline and are related . ( ii ) Low diversity - Low coherence is a case of a publication relating distant research specialties within one discipline . ( iii ) High diversity - Low coherence is a case of a publication citing references that were hitherto unrelated and belong to different disciplines : a potential instance of interdisciplinary knowledge integration . ( iv ) High diversity - High coherence is a case of a publication citing across several disciplines , to references that are similar . This similarity suggests that the references belong a single research specialty . Hence , although the publication is interdisciplinary , it does not involve new knowledge integration . 10 Specialised disciplinary Potential integration within discipline Low Specialised interdisciplinary Potential interdisciplinary integration High High Low Network Coherence D i s c i p li n a r y D i v e r s i t y Figure 2 . Disciplinary diversity vs network coherence . Figure 2 provides a simple heuristics to trace knowledge integration . However , as discussed above , although low coherence suggests potential integration , we would need to examine the process , i . e . the trajectory over the matrix , to confirm this . Knowledge integration trajectories should move from left to right , from less to more coherence . This scheme is partly based on Porter et al . ’s ( 2007 ) framework . They rely on the combination of two indicators based on ISI SCs : Integration and Specialisation . Integration captures the diversity of SCs in the references of the set of papers ; specialisation is the reverse of diversity ( i . e . 1 - ∆ , in its most recent formulation ) for the SCs of the journals in which the papers are published . The distinction between diversity in referencing and publishing is insightful and useful to differentiate between multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research . However , since both integration and specialisation are based on ISI SCs , they are correlated . The complement of network coherence is useful ; since its indicators are based on data and methods independent of SCs , they contribute an ‘orthogonal’ perspective on knowledge integration . 3 . Data and methods 3 . 1 . Data This study builds on previous investigations of interdisciplinary practices in laboratories of biomolecular motors , one of the specialties in bionanoscience 11 ( Rafols and Meyer , 2007 ) . From the keynote speakers at a 2005 international conference on biomolecular motors , we selected the Japanese researchers and interviewed them about a specific project , as perceived in the light of two or three major publications . We inquired into their affiliations , backgrounds , the techniques and instruments used and how they were acquired , their collaborations , and the story of the research process . These data were complemented by information from scientific publications , miscellaneous documentation and homepages . Detailed data for these case studies was presented in Rafols and Meyer ( 2007 ) and discussed in Rafols ( 2007 ) . From the ISI Web of Science we downloaded full bibliometric records for the publications on which we had based our interviews . These records were processed using the bibliometric programme Bibexcel ( Persson , 2008 ) , the statistical packet R ( 2007 ) , and the network analysis software Pajek ( Batagelj and Mvar , 2008 ) . For each publication , diversity and coherence measures were computed as summarised in Figure 3 and described in the following two subsections . Object of Study Bibliometric Set Analytical Unit Article Ref 1 Ref - of - Ref 1 Ref 2 Ref - of - Ref 2 Ref - of - Ref 3 Ref - of - Ref 4 Ref - of - Ref 5 Ref 3 References in Article Distribution of Subject Categories in Ref - of - Refs Network of References linked by Bibliographic Coupling ( i . e . linkages depend on shared Ref - of - Refs ) Disciplinary Diversity N = Variety H = Shannon I = Simpson ∆ = Stirling Network Coherence S = Mean Linkage Strength L = Mean Path Length Article Concept and Measures Figure 3 . Scheme of operationalisation of disciplinary diversity and network coherence for one article . 3 . 2 . Operationalisation of disciplinary diversity The disciplinary diversity of an article was constructed from the distribution of ISI SCs in the references of references ( ref - of - refs in Figure 3 , and hereafter ) 12 of an article . 7 To compute this distribution , we constructed a frequency list of the journals in which the ref - of - refs were published , and converted it into a frequency list of ISI SCs using the SC attribution of each journal as given in the Journal Citation Reports . The mean for each article was 30 references ( range 17 to 55 ) , and 1 , 290 ref - of - refs ( range 601 to 2 , 227 ) . We cleaned the list for misnamed journals until at least 90 % of the ref - of - refs in each list were attributable ( average attribution rate : 95 % ) . The distribution of SCs in the ref - of - refs list allowed us to compute variety N as the number of SCs that appeared at least once , and the Shannon H and Simpson I diversities ( see Table 1 ) . All indicators were normalised to a value between zero and 1 . 8 In order to compute the Stirling ∆ diversity , a similarity matrix s ij for the SCs must be constructed . To do so , we created a matrix of citation flows matrix between SCs , and then converted it into a Salton’s cosine similarity matrix in the citing dimension . The s ij describes the similarity in the citing patterns for each pair of SCs in 2006 , for the SCI set ( 175 SCs ) . A detailed description and analysis of this s ij SC - similarity matrix is provided elsewhere ( Leydesdorff and Rafols , submitted ) . By combining the ref - of - refs SC proportions p i and similarities s ij , we computed ∆ as shown in Table 1 . This particular operationalisation of the Stirling ∆ diversity yields an indicator that is almost identical to Porter et al . ’s ( 2007 ) Integration . Using the s ij similarity matrix we constructed science maps in terms of SCs ( Figure 4 ) , similar to those reported in Moya - Anegón et al . ( 2004 , 2007 ) . The labels in Figure 4 describe clusters of similar SCs derived from factor analysis ( Leydesdorff and Rafols , submitted ) . Following Klavans and Boyack ( 2008 ) , we used the science map as a ‘backbone’ on which to overlay the distribution of SCs from each article , to provide an intuitive perspective of the position of its knowledge base in the scientific landscape ( Scharnhorst , 1998 ) . 7 If the initial bibliometric set is large enough for statistical purposes , diversity can be computed directly from the SCs of the references . 8 Simpson I and Stirling ∆ , by definition , satisfy this condition . Variety N and Shannon H are normalised by dividing by their maximum values , N max and ln ( N max ) , respectively , with N max being the total number of ISI SCs . 13 Pajek Neurosciences Computer Sciences Geoscience Agriculture Ecology Biomedical Sciences Chemistry Physics Engineering Environ . Sci . Materials Sci . Infectious Diseases Clinical Medicine General Medicine Figure 4 . Map of science for 2006 based on similarities in citing patterns between ISI Subject Categories . Based on Leydesdorff and Rafols ( submitted ) . 3 . 3 . Operationalisation of network coherence In order to operationalise network coherence for our bibliometric set , we chose first , a similarity metric between network elements ( articles ) in order to measure the strength of their linkages ; second , an indicator of structural coherence of the network . Since the aim was to map the breadth of knowledge sources , similarity was measured in terms of bibliographic couplings 9 between articles ( co - occurrences of references ) , and normalised using Salton’s cosine ( Ahlgren et al . , 2003 ) . Then , basic network measures were used as indicators for network coherence : • Mean linkage strength , S : the mean of the bibliographic coupling matrix , excluding the diagonal - equivalent to network density in binary networks . In valued networks , it describes both realised links and intensity of similarities . By definition , S has a value between zero and 1 . 9 Although co - citation analysis is the most extended technique to measure similarities between publications , it is impractical for our purposes for two reasons : first , it cannot be for used for recently published papers , due to lack of citations ; second , it reflects similarities in the audience , rather than in the knowledge sources . 14 • Mean path length , L : the path length between two articles is defined as the minimum number of links crossed to go from one article to the other over the network . Mean path length describes how ‘spread’ the network is ; it is computed after binarising similarities . These measures can be interpreted in terms of network centralities , which were introduced in bibliometrics to study research communities ( Otte and Rousseau , 2002 ) and interdisciplinarity in journal sets ( Leydesdorff , 2007 ) . Mean linkage strength S is the mean degree centrality normalised by network size ; mean path length L is equal to the mean of closeness centrality . More sophisticated measures of network ‘compactness’ or cohesion ( Egghe and Rousseau , 2003 ) are not used in this study , but deserve further exploration within the conceptual framework proposed . Given that network measures are generally highly size dependent , it is necessary to check the scale invariance of S and L . Since the bibliometric networks in these case studies are small ( between 17 - 55 articles ) , we tested empirically the scale invariance of S in an independent sample of 1 , 275 articles related by research topic ( kinesin ) . It was found that S was size independent and that the distribution of bibliographic couplings could be approximated to a log - normal distribution . 10 This result is in accordance with Havemann et al . ( 2007 ) , who used a similar approach . Since S and L are highly correlated in our sample ( Pearson = 0 . 95 ) , L’ s size dependence appears to be negligible as well in this study . A possible drawback to bibliographic coupling is that it relates articles that share only one or two very general references , e . g . classical methodological handbooks , which do not necessarily inform about shared expertise . In order to minimise these spurious connections , we set a threshold of linkage strength to 0 . 05 = 1 / 20 when computing path length - as a result even in the smallest reference sets ( 20 ) , at least two common references are needed for two papers to be linked . 11 4 . Case studies in molecular motors The objective of this study is to assess the degree of interdisciplinarity of individual contributions in the specialty of molecular motors . As explained in the Data and Methods section , we build on previous investigations that carried 10 Details of the scale invariance test are presented below . Network size 10 51 255 637 1275 Mean linkage strength 0 . 022 0 . 023 0 . 024 0 . 025 0 . 024 Standard deviation per network 0 . 045 0 . 046 0 . 047 0 . 047 0 . 046 Network realisations 10 9 7 1 1 Standard deviation over realisations 0 . 007 0 . 004 0 . 002 - - - - From a network of 1 , 275 publications on kinesin research , random subnetworks of different sizes were extracted . Mean linkage strength and standard deviation were computed for each . For small networks , multiple realisations were carried out to minimise statistical fluctuations . 11 In one case , Noji 1997 , we had to set the threshold at 0 . 025 in order to keep the network connected . 15 out detailed case studies on interdisciplinary practices in five research projects ( Rafols and Meyer , 2007 ; Rafols , 2007 ) . It emerged from interviews that the techniques and concepts in all cases came from a variety of disciplines and that their combined use was crucial for the succes of the research . For example , in one case , newly developed fluorescence microscopy ( biophysics ) was combined with genetically engineered biomolecular motors ( molecular biology ) in order to trace the displacement of the motor at the nano - scale 12 . However , in spite of this shared interdisciplinarity , in some cases the projects were a continuation of a well - established research tradition and built on a narrow literature , while in others the projects brought together different research traditions and previously unrelated literatures . Can the indicators of disciplinary diversity and network coherence capture these differences ? We present the results of five case studies based on analysis of 12 articles . Table 3 shows the distribution of SCs in the ref - of - refs for each article . Given the well - documented innacuray of ISI SCs ( Boyack et al . , 2005 ) , these proportions should be taken as indicative . Biochemistry and Molecular Biology is the dominant discipline , but there are also important contributions from Cell Biology and Biophysics . Records in Multidisciplinary Sciences journals constitute almost 25 % of the total , possibly obscuring the actual distribution of references among the top SCs . 13 In particular , qualitative data from interviews suggested a larger presence of biophysics . After the four top SCs , the proportions are much smaller , and the distribution tails of some articles differ , e . g . Funatsu ( 1995 ) has a ‘fatter’ tail for the physical and chemical disciplines . Table 3 . Distribution of Subject Categories for each article . Subject Category ( % ref - of - refs ) Fun 95 Koj 97 Ish 98 Noj 97 Yas 98 Oka 99 Kik 01 Sak 99 Bur 03 Tom 00 Tom 02 Yil 04 Cum Ave . Biochem . & M . Biol . 31 . 1 23 . 9 45 . 5 49 . 2 51 . 9 32 . 2 36 . 7 30 . 5 30 . 8 32 . 4 30 . 8 27 . 4 36 . 2 Multidiscip . Sci . 29 . 0 32 . 6 20 . 7 17 . 2 13 . 0 32 . 4 25 . 5 22 . 3 15 . 6 26 . 9 24 . 0 26 . 7 59 . 4 Cell Biology 10 . 4 19 . 2 6 . 6 8 . 8 8 . 9 21 . 2 21 . 0 29 . 2 37 . 5 26 . 3 30 . 7 28 . 7 80 . 4 Biophysics 9 . 8 7 . 9 12 . 5 14 . 2 15 . 8 6 . 0 6 . 6 6 . 0 4 . 5 5 . 6 4 . 3 5 . 6 88 . 5 Physiology 4 . 3 2 . 5 6 . 8 1 . 7 2 . 5 1 . 2 0 . 8 1 . 2 0 . 5 0 . 9 0 . 6 0 . 9 90 . 5 Bio . Res . Meth . 1 . 5 2 . 6 1 . 7 1 . 7 1 . 9 1 . 8 1 . 4 3 . 5 1 . 6 1 . 2 1 . 1 0 . 9 92 . 1 Gen . & Heredity 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 0 0 . 6 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 8 0 . 8 1 . 7 0 . 9 1 . 2 2 . 1 92 . 9 Neurosciences 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 1 1 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 5 1 . 1 3 . 1 1 . 9 93 . 7 Biology 0 . 6 0 . 2 1 . 1 0 . 8 1 . 5 0 . 3 0 . 7 1 . 0 1 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 0 94 . 5 Crystallography 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 5 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 6 3 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 0 . 2 0 . 3 95 . 1 Develop . Biology 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 3 0 . 7 0 . 2 1 . 1 1 . 1 1 . 5 1 . 3 95 . 7 Chem . , Analytical 1 . 2 0 . 6 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 . 8 0 . 1 1 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 1 96 . 2 Optics 1 . 5 1 . 9 0 . 5 0 . 4 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 3 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 8 96 . 5 Chem . , Phys . 2 . 6 0 . 1 0 . 4 0 . 4 0 . 4 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 5 96 . 8 Chem . , Multidisc . 1 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 8 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 2 97 . 1 Phys , A . Mol . & Chem . 1 . 7 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 2 97 . 3 Physics , Multidisc . 1 . 1 1 . 1 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 3 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 5 97 . 6 12 More qualitative insights are described in Rafols and Meyer ( 2007 ) and Rafols ( 2007 ) . 13 This might explain , in part , the large difference between the SC distribution of ref - of - refs in Table 4 and the distribution of references among four selected disciplines reported in Rafols and Meyer ( 2007 ) . 16 Legend : Columns show the distribution of ref - of - refs for one article . Those in the same box belong to the same project . The last column is the cumulative percentage averaged over all cases . 4 . 1 . Comparison between indicators Table 4 presents the measures for disciplinary diversity and network coherence for each article ; Table 5 presents the correlations between the different diversity and coherence measures . Figure 5 plots diversity ∆ vs coherence S for each article . We compare , first , indicators , and , second , articles . Diversities H , I and ∆ were found to be correlated . Interestingly , the highest correlation was between Shannon H and Stirling ∆ , although Stirling ∆ and Simpson I ( rather than Shannon ) have similar mathematical formulations . Since Shannon H gives more weight to the small terms in its sum through its logarithmic factor , while Stirling ∆ gives more weight to the combinations of disparate SCs , we believe that the high correlation between H and ∆ is due to the fact that many SCs with small proportions happen also to be distant from the core SCs . Indicators of coherence , S and 1 / L , were also highly correlated with one another , but not with the diversity measures . Hence , we are capturing two different aspects of the same bibliometric set . Variety N was not correlated with any other measure , and it does not seem to be a good indicator of knowledge integration . Given this set of correlations , and in order to simplify the analysis , the discussion that follows is based on Stirling’s ∆ for diversity and mean linkage path S for coherence . Table 4 . Measures of disciplinary diversity and network coherence Disciplinary Diversity Network Coherence Articles N H I ∆ S 1 / L Funatsu 1995 0 . 16 0 . 39 0 . 79 0 . 27 0 . 054 0 . 54 Kojima 1997 0 . 20 0 . 38 0 . 79 0 . 24 0 . 074 0 . 70 Ishijima 1998 0 . 22 0 . 34 0 . 72 0 . 18 0 . 042 0 . 53 Noji 1997 0 . 18 0 . 32 0 . 70 0 . 15 0 . 024 0 . 43 Yasuda 1998 0 . 19 0 . 31 0 . 68 0 . 14 0 . 039 0 . 54 Okada 1999 0 . 14 0 . 32 0 . 74 0 . 15 0 . 107 0 . 73 Kikkawa 2001 0 . 20 0 . 33 0 . 75 0 . 16 0 . 072 0 . 63 Sakakibara 1999 0 . 15 0 . 34 0 . 77 0 . 16 0 . 029 0 . 47 Burgess 2003 0 . 20 0 . 34 0 . 74 0 . 14 0 . 050 0 . 59 Tomishige 2000 0 . 19 0 . 33 0 . 75 0 . 14 0 . 104 0 . 69 Tomishige 2002 0 . 16 0 . 33 0 . 75 0 . 15 0 . 113 0 . 79 Yildiz 2004 0 . 18 0 . 35 0 . 77 0 . 17 0 . 065 0 . 58 Mean 0 . 18 0 . 34 0 . 75 0 . 17 0 . 064 0 . 60 Stand . Deviation 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 030 0 . 11 Legend : N = v ariety of disciplines , H = Shannon , I = Simpson , ∆ = Stirling , S = mean sinkage strength , L = mean path length . Indicators are normalised to a value between zero and 1 . Highest diversity and lowest coherence values are highlighted . 17 Table 5 . Pearson correlations between diversity and coherence measures Disciplinary Diversity Network Coherence Pearson’s Correlations N H I ∆ S 1 / L N 1 . 00 0 . 04 - 0 . 20 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 23 - 0 . 10 H 1 . 00 0 . 81 0 . 95 - 0 . 12 - 0 . 06 I 1 . 00 0 . 71 0 . 32 0 . 31 ∆ 1 . 00 - 0 . 10 - 0 . 06 S 1 . 00 0 . 95 1 / L 1 . 00 Legend : N = variety of disciplines , H = Shannon , I = Simpson , ∆ = Stirling , S = mean linkage strength , L = mean path length . Highest correlations are highlighted . Noji97 Yasuda98 Funatsu95 Kojima97 Ishijima98 Okada99 Kikkawa01 Sakakibara99 Burgess03 Yildiz04 Tomishige02 Tomishige00 0 . 00 0 . 20 0 . 40 0 . 60 0 . 80 1 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 20 0 . 40 0 . 60 0 . 80 1 . 00 1 . 20 Network Coherence ( Mean Linkage Strength , a . u . ) D i sc i p li n a r y D i ve r s i t y ( S t i r li ng , a . u . ) Figure 5 . Disciplinary diversity vs network coherence . Same shape and colour indicate same project . Data is presented in arbitrary units ( a . u . ) obtained by dividing a series by the largest value . 4 . 2 . Comparison among articles Since we do not have benchmarks for diversity or coherence from other areas of science , we cannot investigate whether this field is ( or is not ) particularly diverse or coherent . However , this does not preclude comparison within our set . To do so , we combine the data presented in Table 4 and Figure 5 , with visualisations of the SC distributions and network structures respectively in Figures 6 and 7 . 18 Figure 6 visualises the relative contribution of SCs to an article over the backbone map of science , on the basis of the ref - of - refs distribution . Here the size of each SC node is arbitrarily set to a logarithmic factor of its SC proportion ( i . e . ( ) i p Area ⋅ + = 1000 1 ln ) in order to facilitate visualisation of small SCs . The map shows that the most highly cited SCs are in the area of biomedical sciences and closely related to one another . There are a few contributions from nearby areas such as neuroscience , and a tail of contributions spanning from chemistry to some areas of physics . In line with information gleaned from the interviews , the disciplinary distributions in the science map are very similar for all the articles . The exceptions are Funatsu 1995 and Kojima 1997 , which have thicker tails – see Figure 6 and compare maps for Funatsu 1995 ( top ) with that of Noji 1997 ( bottom ) . This is congruent with the indicators in Figure 5 . Funatsu 1995 and Kojima 1997 are publications from a research group composed mainly of biophysicists , which made major contributions to the development of single molecule microscopy and manipulation . The distribution in Table 3 shows that the share of biophysics is not particularly high , but there are sizeable proportions of physics and chemistry related disciplines . Ex - post , it could be argued that the physics tail is consistent with the type of physics - based insights and techniques needed to develop single molecule microscopy and manipulation . Since physics and biological sciences have a large cognitive distance ( see Figure 4 ) , their interaction would have a larger weight in Stirling ∆ . However , ex - ante , based on the qualitative investigation , we did not assess Funatsu and Kojima’s group to be any more interdisciplinary than the others on this axis , and we remain cautious in claiming higher disciplinary diversity for this group . For example , Yildiz 2004 is a publication that also developed single molecule microscopy based on biophysics , yet it does not present a physics related tail in its SC distribution . Hence , the two exception cases showing higher ∆ , cast doubt on the reliability of the disciplinary diversity indicator . Our unit of analysis , individual publication , may be too small for the ISI SC categorisation , which is known to be coarse - grained ; e . g . Boyack et al . , 2005 , report a more than 50 % disagreement between journal - based clustering and SCs . We expect improved reliability from use of finer - grained and / or more accurate taxonomies , e . g . based on bottom - up large - scale mapping efforts ( Boyack et al . , 2005 ) . 19 Biomedical Sciences Chemistry Physics Infectious Diseases Funatsu 1995 Materials Sci . Noji 1997 Infectious Diseases Biomedical Sciences Chemistry Engineering Physics Figure 6 . Distribution on the map of science of Subject Categories ( SCs ) of ref - of - refs in an article . The area of nodes is a logarithmic factor of a SC proportion in the ref - of - refs distribution , i . e . ln ( 1 + 1000p i ) . 20 Network coherence values , on the other hand , vary widely among case studies , as shown in Figure 5 . Figure 7 illustrates the differences in network structure associated with increasing values for coherence , for four articles . The first , Noji 1997 , is an interesting case of convergence of two strands of research by two laboratories in one collaborative project spawned by a PhD student ( Noji ) . Noji’s lab was mainly based in biochemistry and worked on F 1 - ATPase , a protein complex in the mitochondria studied by a research community focused on bioenergetics . The publication Noji 1997 was the result of a close collaboration with a biophysics laboratory specialised in linear molecular motors ( myosin and kinesin ) . The network of Noji’s references depicted in Figure 7 , neatly illustrates the divide in the literature between the two research communities : on the right hand side , are publications on linear molecular motors ; on the left , are publications on bioenergetics ( F 1 - ATPase ) . The only ( weak ) link between the two is due to a review with more than 311 references . 14 The low value for network coherence captures the fact that this article brought together distant bodies of knowledge , i . e . it would fall in the upper left quadrant in Figure 2 . Pajek Pajek Pajek Pajek Noji 1997 ( S = 0 . 024 ) Funatsu 1995 ( S = 0 . 054 ) Tomishige 2002 ( S = 0 . 113 ) Yildiz 2004 ( S = 0 . 065 ) Figure 7 . Bibliographic coupling networks for the reference set of various articles . The figures are ordered from lower to higher network coherence S ( from top left to bottom right ) ; thicker lines indicate greater similarity . 14 The historical anecdote is that Paul D . Boyer , the author of this long review , was awarded the Nobel Prize precisely in 1997 , thanks , in part , to the evidence provided by Noji and co - authors on his model of ATPase as a rotary motor . 21 Figure 8 illustrates the disciplinary mix of the Noji 1997 reference set by locating the SC where references were published . Given that Noji’s project was a collaboration between a biophysics and a biochemistry laboratory , it could be expected that the bioenergetics cluster would publish mainly on biochemistry , and the molecular motors cluster on biophysics . However , both clusters have publications in biochemistry , biophysics and cell biology , 15 which suggests that bioenergetics research on its own , and molecular motors on its own scored high for disciplinary diversity prior to Noji’s paper . In other words , this is a case of convergence of two bodies of knowledge that were already interdisciplinary . Pajek Pajek Pajek Biochemistry Pajek Pajek Pajek Biophysics Cell Biology Noji 1997 Yildiz 2004 Figure 8 . Distribution of SCs for publications in bibliographic coupling networks . Black nodes indicate the papers published in a given ISI subject category . The second case of network coherence we examine is Yildiz 2004 ( Figure 7 - bottom left ) . This article was also the result of a collaborative project , between a biophysics laboratory with expertise in fluorescent microscopy and Vale’s 15 Two caveats apply to Figure 8 : ( i ) on average 30 % of the references were published in Multidisciplinary Sciences journals ; ( ii ) about 25 % of the references are published in journals that are attributed to at least two SCs ( which is why the publication SCs cannot be presented in one unique network ) . 22 laboratory , one of the leading molecular motors groups , which has an eclectic knowledge mix of cell biology and biophysics ( including fluorescent microscopy expertise ) . Vale’s lab contributed a genetically modified protein that they had engineered in a previous study , and Yildiz’s lab contributed a new type of single molecule microscopy . Since both teams were working in the same specialty ( molecular motors ) and had some overlapping expertise in single molecule microscopy , they already shared a cognitive base . Hence , the references in their joint publication form a coherent cluster . Nevertheless , the cluster contains publications in biochemistry , cell biology and biophysics – the three main areas of molecular motors research , as shown in Figure 8 ( right ) . Therefore , Yildiz 2004 appears to be a case of research within an already integrated ( or specialised ) interdisciplinary body of knowledge ( upper right quadrant in Figure 2 ) . Tomishige 2002 ( a previous publication from Vale’s lab , see Figure 7 , bottom right ) is an even more ‘compact’ example of an already specialised interdisciplinary publication – although , as explained , Vale’s approach is integrative in the disciplinary sense : he draws on knowledge and recruits researchers from biophysics , cell biology and related fields . Finally , we have Funatsu 1995 ( top right in Figure 8 ) , which is an intermediate case between Noji 1997 and Yildiz 2004 . This article reports a technical breakthrough in single molecule visualisation by a team mainly based in biophysics and well established within the research specialty of molecular motors . Hence , not surprisingly , molecular motors constitutes the main body of the literature in the dense cluster , in the lower left of Figure 8 . However , the group also drew on its unique microscopy expertise , which extended beyond molecular motors . This ‘external’ expertise is exemplified by the three detached papers in the network which dealt exclusively with microscopy from a physical science perspective . Thus , Funatsu 1995 would be a case of acquisition of external supplementary knowledge from one literature ( technical studies of microscopy ) into the main cluster of molecular motors research . This limited integration effort would locate this publication in the upper middle part of Figure 2 . These examples suggest that bibliographic coupling networks and the network coherence indicators derived from them , provide a suitable tool for examination of the processes of knowledge integration at local level . The limitation , as discussed in Section 2 . 6 , is that these micro perspectives cannot assess how different are the bodies of knowledge integrated in the larger context of science . From the dual perspective of diversity and coherence , the case studies investigated provide empirical evidence that publications with similar levels of disciplinary diversity could be at very different stages of knowledge integration : Noji 1997 would be an example of an incipient interdisciplinary knowledge integration process ( upper left in Figure 2 ) , Tomishige 2002 , an example of interdisciplinary specialised research ( upper right ) and Funatsu 1995 , an intermediate case . Hence , molecular motors research appears to be 23 spread over the upper part of Figure 2 ( relatively high disciplinary diversity ) , 16 covering the left and right quadrants . 5 . Conclusions 5 . 1 . Summary of analytical framework and results In this article , we proposed a novel conceptual framework to investigate interdisciplinary processes in the wider sense of knowledge integration . The framework is based on the concepts of diversity and coherence , borrowed respectively from ecology and network analysis ( Table 2 and Figure 2 ) , and already used implicitly in previous bibliometric studies on interdisciplinarity ( e . g . Morillo et al . , 2003 ) . Diversity was used to capture the disciplinary heterogeneity of our bibliometric set as seen through the filter of predefined categories , i . e . taking a top - down perspective in order to locate the set on the global map of science ( Figure 6 ) . Coherence was used to apprehend the intensity of similarity relations within the bibliometric set , i . e . using a bottom - up approach to reveal the structural consistency and cognitive articulation of the publications network ( Figure 7 ) . Disciplinary diversity indicators were constructed from diversity indices ( Shannon H and Simpson I ) and a recently developed indicator ( Stirling ∆ , parameterised as Porter’s Integration ) , which takes account of the similarities between SCs ( Stirling 1998 , 2007 ; Porter et al . , 2007 ) . ISI SCs were used as disciplinary categories . Network coherence was operationalised in terms of the network measures Mean linkage strength and mean path length , in bibliographic coupling networks ( see Havemann et al . , 2007 for a similar approach ) . These indicators were applied to the reference set of publications in a bionanoscience research specialty , biomolecular motors , for which we had detailed information from interviews ( Rafols and Meyer , 2007 ; Rafols , 2007 ) . First , we found that the indicators for disciplinary diversity and network coherence were not correlated ( Table 4 ) , thus providing ‘orthogonal’ perspectives of the knowledge integration process . Among diversity indicators , Shannon H and Stirling ∆ made more salient the contributions of small or disparate categories . Second , disciplinary diversity took similar values for most of the publications examined , in line with our previous qualitative investigations ( Table 4 and Figure 5 ) . However , there are grounds to cast some doubt on the reliability of this indicator , given its unexpected high values for two publications ( out of 12 ) and low proportion of biophysics in the SC distributions . Since there is a trade - off between accuracy and simplicity of a taxonomy , it is possible that the unit of analysis ( the article ) in this study is too small for the coarse - grained description of science provided by ISI SCs . Comparative studies using 16 This is an inference from the qualitative interviews . Without quantitative benchmarks from other areas of science , the position of the case studies on the disciplinary diversity axis cannot be determined . 24 different disciplinary taxonomies ( e . g . provided by other bibliometric databases or categories derived from large - scale clustering ) would be needed to ascertain the scope of reliable application . Third , we found that measures for network coherence could discriminate among articles according to their different degrees of knowledge integration at micro level . For example , the case of lowest network coherence ( Noji 1997 ) , was the result of a collaboration between two laboratories based on two different bodies of knowledge ( bioenergetics vs linear molecular motors ) . On the contrary , those cases with high network coherence ( such as Tomishige 2002 ) were based on only one research tradition ( molecular motors ) , although they still relied on several disciplines . We believe that the discrimination between these two different phases of knowledge integration ( seminal integration vs specialisation in already integrated areas , depicted in Figures 2 and 7 ) , is important in emergent fields such as nanotechnology and systems biology , in order to distinguish pioneering integrative efforts from less risky rides on ‘interdisciplinary bandwagons’ . The operationalisation of network coherence in terms of mean linkage strength of bibliographic coupling appeared to work well , both for our small sets and in larger studies reported by Havemann et al . ( 2007 ) . Moreover , it has the advantage of simplicity . However , there is scope for exploring more sophisticated measures of network coherence ( e . g . Egghe and Rousseau , 2003 ) , and more nuanced cognitive similarities between publications ( e . g . including co - word analysis , as in Braam et al . , 1991 ) . Fourth , the visualisations of diversity ( through the overlay of disciplinary proportions on the map of science , Figure 6 ) , and of coherence ( by means of the bibliographic coupling network , Figure 7 ) , proved more valuable than expected . Although initially developed to support the indicators , the maps and networks provide a richer and subtler representation of the different aspects of diversity ( variety , balance and similarity ) and coherence ( linkage strength , density , clustering ) , which characterise the knowledge integration process . Fifth , the differences in network coherence observed for publications with similar disciplinary diversity , support the view that interdisciplinarity is an inadequate term or a misnomer ( Klein , 2000 , p . 3 ; Gläser , 2006 ) . In focusing on knowledge integration , adopting a bottom - up approach and looking at emergent structures , we encounter fuzzy and overlapping bodies of knowledge , as illustrated in Figure 7 , that do not conform to established categories . In our view , the crucial dynamics of knowledge integration lies in the interactions between these local bodies of knowledge . The use of macro ( disciplinary ) categories only provides information on the position of these local bodies on the science map . 5 . 2 . Future research and possible applications This study has developed a conceptual framework and methodology for capturing knowledge integration in research , which we applied to small case studies . How robust and generalizable is this approach ? We think that this 25 pilot study should be extended in the following directions for the method to be fully validated . First , benchmarks with other areas of science need to be established in order to gauge the range of high / low values on the diversity and coherence axes ; second , investigations employing larger bibliometric sets are needed to check scalability ; and third , studies using different taxonomies should test the sensitivity of disciplinary diversity to differences in categorisations . The approach proposed could easily be adopted and adapted , at least for small and medium sized bibliometric sets ( e . g . 10 4 records ) , given that it is based on simple indicators and standard similarity measures . Most of these can be computed using very simple bibliometric tools ( freeware ) and publicly available data . 17 Regarding the degree of general applicability , we believe the approach could be directly utilised , with little modification , for a number of science policy issues , including : 1 ) Evaluation of interdisciplinary programmes : Porter et al . ( 2007 ) report the use of the Integration indicator ( equivalent to our development of Stirling ∆ ) for evaluation of interdisciplinary performance of researchers involved in the National Academies Keck Future Initiative , on the basis of their publication records . The inclusion of an indicator for network coherence may add an orthogonal perspective ; 2 ) Emergence and diffusion of research topics : We have conducted preliminary studies on quantum dots ( with A . L . Porter ) and kinesin research , investigating diffusion and knowledge integration patterns from their appearance in a narrow field of science to their spread into broader research areas . Here the aim is to identify the key integrative research communities in the diffusion / translation process . We think that this use of diversity and coherence indicators can be valuable in comparative studies of emergent and ‘hyped’ fields such as nanotechnology , where claims of novelty and interdisciplinarity are rife , but not always substantiated . 3 ) Evaluation of diversity in science : Concerns have been expressed that diversity in the science system might be declining as a result of the increasing dependence of funding on performance evaluation ( Schmidt et al . , 2006 ) . Diversity and coherence indicators offer the possibility to address this issue through longitudinal or national comparative studies , as in Havemann et al . ( 2007 ) . Finally , we would point to the benefits of basing our approach on a general conceptual framework . First , in using a general framework , the concepts underlying the current indicators of interdisciplinarity are rendered more transparent . This , in turn , facilitates discussion of their inevitable biases , and adaptation to social and policy needs . Second , the generality of the formulation allows its application and cross - fertilisation among distinct 17 The only processed input needed is the SC similarity matrix used to create the science map and compute Stirling ∆ . This is available as a Pajek input file ( Leydesdorff and Rafols , submitted ) . : http : / / users . fmg . uva . nl / lleydesdorff / map06 / data . xls 26 research areas . Thus , we expect insights and enriching perspectives of the diversity - coherence framework from ongoing investigations on technological diversification in firms , biodiversity , energy portfolio and similar system approaches ( Nesta and Saviotti , 2005 ; Stirling , 2007 ) . Acknowledgements This research was supported by an EU postdoctoral Marie - Curie Fellowship to IR , and the Daiwa Anglo - Japanese Foundation . We benefited from discussions with J . Gläser , L . Leydesdorff , F . Morillo , A . L . Porter , and SPRU colleagues S . Katz , R . Kempener , W . E . Steinmueller and A . Stirling . References Ahlgren , P . , Jarneving , B . , & Rousseau , R . ( 2003 ) . Requirement for a Cocitation Similarity Measure , with Special Reference to Pearson ' s Correlation Coefficient . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54 ( 6 ) , 550 - 560 . Batagelj , V . and Mrvar , A . ( 2008 ) Pajek . Program for Large Network Analysis . http : / / vlado . fmf . uni - lj . si / pub / networks / pajek / Accessed 15 - 01 - 2008 . Barjak , F . ( 2006 ) . Team diversity and research collaboration in life sciences teams : Does a combination of research cultures pay off ? Olten , Switzerland : University of Applied Sciences Northwestern . Bordons , M . , Morillo , F . & Gómez , I . ( 2004 ) Analysis of cross - disciplinary research through bibliometric tools . In H . F . Moed , W . Glänzel and U . Schmoch ( Eds . ) Handbook of quantitative science and technology research ( pp . 437 - 456 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Boyack , K . W . , Klavans , R . and Börner , K . ( 2005 ) Mapping the backbone of science . Scientometrics , 64 ( 3 ) , 351 - 374 . Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . & van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1991 ) . Mapping of science by combined co - citation and word analysis . I . Structural aspects . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 42 ( 4 ) , 233 - 51 . Egghe , L . and Rousseau , R . ( 2003 ) A measure for the cohesion of weighted networks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54 ( 3 ) , 193 – 202 . Gläser , J . ( 2006 ) personal communication . Havemann , F . , Heinz , M . , Schmidt , M . & Glaser , J . ( 2007 ) . Measuring diversity of research in bibliographic - coupling networks . In Torres - Salinas & Moed , H . ( Eds . ) , 11th International Conference of the International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics ( pp . 860 - 1 ) . Madrid . Hellsten , I . , Lambiotte , R . , Scharnhorst , A . & Ausloos , M . ( 2007 ) . Self - citation , co - authorships and keywords : A new approach to scientists ' field mobility ? Scientometrics 72 ( 3 ) , 469 - 86 . Hollingsworth , J . R . ( 2006 ) A path - dependent perspective on institutional and organizational factors shaping major scientific discoveries . In Hage , J . and Meeus , M . Innovation , science , and institutional change . Oxford University Press , Oxford , pp . 423 - 442 . Klavans , R . and Boyack , K . ( 2008 ) A map of science . Retrieved on January 30th 2008 , from http : / / mapofscience . com / . Klein , J . T . ( 2000 ) ‘A conceptual vocabulary of interdisciplinary science’ . In Weingart , P . and Stehr , N . Eds . Practising interdisciplinarity . University of Toronto Press , Toronto , pp . 3 - 24 . Leydesdorff , L . ( 2007 ) . Betweenness centrality as an indicator of the interdisciplinarity of scientific journals . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 ( 9 ) , 1303 - 19 . Leydesdorff L . & Zhou , P . , Nanotechnology as a Field of Science : Its Delineation in Terms of Journals and Patents . Scientometrics , 70 ( 3 ) , 693 - 713 , 2007 Leydesdorff , L . and Rafols , I . ( submitted ) A Global Map of Science Based on the ISI Subject Categories . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 27 Technology . Available at : http : / / users . fmg . uva . nl / lleydesdorff / map06 / texts / map06 . pdf Meyer , M and Persson , O . ( 1998 ) Nanotechnology – Interdisciplinarity , patterns of collaboration and differences in application . Scientometrics 42 , 195 - 205 . Morillo , F . , Bordons , M . , Gomez , I . ( 2001 ) . An approach to interdisciplinarity through bibliometric indicators . Scientometrics , 51 ( 1 ) , 203 – 222 . Morillo , F . , Bordons , M . & Gómez , I . ( 2003 ) . Interdisciplinarity in science : A tentative typology of disciplines and research areas . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54 ( 13 ) , 1237 - 49 . Moya - Anegón , F . , Vargas - Quesada , B . , Victor Herrero - Solana , Chinchilla - Rodríguez , Z . , Elena Corera - Álvarez & Munoz - Fernández , F . J . ( 2004 ) . A new technique for building maps of large scientific domains based on the cocitation of classes and categories . Scientometrics 61 ( 1 ) , 129 - 45 . Moya - Anegón , F . de , Vargas - Quesada , B . , Chinchilla - Rodríguez , Z . , Corera - Álvarez , E . , Munoz - Fernández , F . J . , & Herrero - Solana , V . ( 2007 ) . Visualizing the marrow of science . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 58 ( 14 ) , 2167 - 2179 . National Academies ( 2005 ) Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research , Washington , D . C . : National Academies Press . Nesta , L . & Saviotti , P . P . ( 2005 ) . Coherence of the knowledge base and the firm ' s innovative performance : evidence from the U . S . pharmaceutical industry . Journal of Industrial Economics 8 ( 1 ) , 123 - 42 . Noyons , C . M . ( 2004 ) Science maps within a science policy context . In H . F . Moed , W . Glänzel and U . Schmoch ( Eds . ) Handbook of quantitative science and technology research ( pp . 237 - 255 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Otte , E . and Rousseau , R . ( 2002 ) . Social network analysis : a powerful strategy , also for the information sciences . Journal of Information Science 28 ( 6 ) , 441 - 53 . Porter , A . L . and Chubin , D . E . ( 1985 ) An indicator of cross - disciplinary research . Scientometrics 8 , 161 - 176 . Persson , O . ( 2008 ) Bibexcel . A tool - box programme for bibliometric analysis . http : / / www . umu . se / inforsk / Bibexcel / Accessed 01 - 02 - 2008 . R Development Core Team ( 2007 ) . R : A language and environment for statistical computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing , Vienna , Austria . ISBN 3 - 900051 - 07 - 0 , URL http : / / www . R - project . org . Rafols , I . ( 2007 ) Strategies for knowledge acquisition in bionanotechnology : why are interdisciplinary practices less widespread than expected ? Innovation ; The European Journal of Social Sciences , 20 ( 4 ) , 395 - 412 . Rafols , I . and Meyer , M . ( 2007 ) How cross - disciplinary is bionanotechnology ? Explorations in the specialty of molecular motors . Scientometrics , 70 ( 3 ) , 633 - 650 . Porter , A . L . and Chubin , D . E . ( 1985 ) An indicator of cross - disciplinary research . Scientometrics 8 , 161 - 176 . Porter , A . L . , Roessner , J . D . , Cohen , A . S . & Perreault , M . ( 2006 ) . Interdiscipinary research : meaning , metrics and nurture . Research Evaluation 15 , 187 - 96 . Porter , A . L . , Cohen , A . S . , Roessner , J . D . & Perreault , M . ( 2007 ) . Measuring researcher interdisciplinarity . Scientometrics 72 ( 1 ) , 117 - 147 . Purvis , A . and Hector , A . ( 2000 ) Getting the measure of biodiversity . Nature , 405 , 212 - 219 . Rousseau , R . ( 2001 ) Concentration and evenness measures as macro - level scientometric indicators . ( In Chinese ) In Jiang Gua - hua ( ed . ) , Research and University Evaluation . Red Flag Publishing House , Beijing , p . 72 - 89 . Sanz - Menéndez , L . , Bordons and M . Zulueta , M . A . ( 2001 ) Interdisciplinarity as a multidimensional concept : its measure in three different research areas . Research Evaluation , 10 ( 1 ) , 47 - 58 . Scharnhorst , A . ( 1998 ) . Citation - networks , science landscapes and evolutionary strategies . Scientometrics 43 ( 1 ) , 95 - 106 . Schmidt , M . , Glaser , J . , Havemann , F . and Michael , H . ( 2006 ) A Methodological Study for Measuring the Diversity of Science . In Proceedings International Workshop on Webometrics , Informetrics and Scientometrics & Seventh COLLNET Meeting , Nancy ( France ) . Schummer , J . ( 2004 ) Multidisciplinarity , Interdisciplinarity , and patterns of research collaboration in nanoscience and nanotechnology . Scientometrics 59 , 425 - 465 . 28 Small , H . G . ( 1973 ) . Co - citation in the scientific literature : a new measure of the relationship between two documents . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 24 ( 4 ) , 265 - 9 . Small , H . G . ( 1977 ) A co - citation model of a scientific specialty : a longitudinal study of collagen research . Social studies of science , 7 ( 2 ) , 139 - 166 . Stirling , A . ( 1998 ) On the economics and analysis of diversity . SPRU Electronic Working Paper . http : / / www . sussex . ac . uk / Units / spru / publications / imprint / sewps / sewp28 / sewp2 8 . pdf Accessed 01 - 04 - 2006 . Stirling , A . ( 2007 ) . A general framework for analysing diversity in science , technology and society . Journal of The Royal Society Interface 4 ( 15 ) , 707 - 719 . Tijssen , R . J . W . ( 1992 ) A quantitative assessment of interdisciplinary structures in science and technology : co - classification analysis of energy research . Research Policy 21 , 27 - 44 . van den Besselaar , P . and Leydesdorff , L . ( 1994 ) Mapping change in scientific specialties : a scientometric reconstruction of the development of Artificial intelligence . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 47 ( 6 ) , 415 - 436 . van den Besselaar , P . , and Heimeriks , G . ( 2001 ) . Disciplinary , Multidisciplinary , Interdisciplinary : Concepts and Indicators . In M . Davis & C . S . Wilson ( Eds . ) Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics - ISSI 2001 ( pp . 705 - 716 ) . Sydney : University of New South - Wales . van Leeuwen , T . and Tijssen , R . ( 2000 ) Interdisciplinary dynamics of modern science : Analysis of cross - disciplinary citation flows . Research Evaluation 9 ( 3 ) , 183 - 187 . van Raan , A . F . J . and van Leeuwen , T . ( 2002 ) Assessment of the scientific basis of interdisciplinarity , applied research . Application of bibliometric methods in Nutrition and Food Research . Research Policy 31 , 611 - 632 . Weingart , P . and Stehr , N . ( Eds ) . ( 2000 ) Practising interdisciplinarity . Toronto : University of Toronto Press . Zitt , M . ( 2005 ) . Facing diversity of science : a challenge for bibliometric indicators . Measurement 3 ( 1 ) , 38 - 49 .