Crowd - Designed Motivation : Motivational Messages for Exercise Adherence Based on Behavior Change Theory Roelof A . J . de Vries 1 , Khiet P . Truong 1 , Sigrid Kwint 2 , Constance H . C . Drossaert 2 , Vanessa Evers 1 1 Human Media Interaction , University of Twente { r . a . j . devries , k . p . truong , v . evers } @ utwente . nl 2 Psychology , Health and Technology , University of Twente s . j . m . kwint @ student . utwente . nl , c . h . c . drossaert @ utwente . nl ABSTRACT Developing motivational technology to support long - term be - havior change is a challenge . A solution is to incorporate insights from behavior change theory and design technology to tailor to individual users . We carried out two studies to investigate whether the processes of change , from the Trans - theoretical Model , can be effectively represented by motiva - tional text messages . We crowdsourced peer - designed text messages and coded them into categories based on the pro - cesses of change . We evaluated whether people perceived messages tailored to their stage of change as motivating . We found that crowdsourcing is an effective method to design motivational messages . Our results indicate that different mes - sages are perceived as motivating depending on the stage of behavior change a person is in . However , while motivational messages related to later stages of change were perceived as motivational for those stages , the motivational messages re - lated to earlier stages of change were not . This indicates that a person’s stage of change may not be the ( only ) key factor that determines behavior change . More individual factors need to be considered to design effective motivational technology . Author Keywords Crowdsourcing ; motivational messages ; exercise adherence ; behavior change theory ; Transtheoretical Model ; processes of change ; stages of change ; ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 Information Interfaces and Presentation : User Interfaces - Theory and methods ; J . 4 Social and Behavioral Sciences : Psychology INTRODUCTION In recent years , HCI research has increasingly focused on motivational technology to help people change , for instance , Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI’16 , May 07 – 12 , 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3362 - 7 / 16 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858229 their exercising behavior [ 10 ] . The potential beneﬁts of moti - vational applications in healthcare and well - being are tremen - dous because of the large number of people who can be reached through mobile technology . This has motivated many researchers to design and develop motivational technology for health . Design challenges Challenges arise for HCI researchers aiming to design tech - nology that motivates people to adopt more healthy behaviors long - term . One of these challenges is the evaluation of moti - vational technology . Although many HCI researchers aim to promote long - term behavior change through their technology , evaluations conﬁrming long - term behavior change are rarely carried out [ 17 ] . Practical limitations ( e . g . , how to track a large number of subjects for more than a few months ) and conceptual deﬁnitions ( e . g . , how to measure behavior change , how many months can be considered ‘long - term’ ) are some of the aspects researchers struggle with . Another challenge is that there is no method available to translate behavior change theories and models into concrete interaction designs to be used in practice . Also a challenge is to increase effectiveness of the motivational technology [ 33 ] . One way to increase effectiveness is to go beyond a one - size - ﬁts - all motivational strategy . This can be achieved , for example , by personalizing or tailoring the strategies used in motivational technology to the stage of behavior change a person is in ( e . g . , still in the stage of thinking about doing regular exercise ) . Behavioral change According to the Transtheoretical Model ( TTM ) [ 36 ] , behav - ioral change consists of ﬁve stages ( i . e . , the stages of change , see Table 1 ) . These stages describe people’s willingness to change their behavior , ranging from long - term inactive ( i . e . , in the Precontemplation stage ) to long - term active ( i . e . , in the Maintenance stage ) . Efforts to change behavior should closely match the stage that the person is in [ 39 ] . Developers of moti - vational technology who want people to change their behavior could use theories and models such as the TTM to tailor the information they provide to the stage the user is in . The TTM provides ten strategies to move through these stages of behav - ior change : the processes of change . Different processes are associated with different stages [ 27 ] . For example , Conscious - ness Raising ( i . e . , making someone aware of risks ) will be more effective for a long - term inactive person ( i . e . , someone in the Precontemplation stage ) , than for a long - term active per - son ( i . e . , someone in the Maintenance stage ) . We expect that when motivational technology uses messages that reﬂect or represent the processes of change that inﬂuence progression to the next stage , the messages will be more effective . This kind of personalization ( e . g . , tailoring to the user’s stage of change ) can have a positive inﬂuence on exercise adherence [ 26 ] . Aims Our goal is to design technology for long - term behavior change that is tailored to the user , based on well - established principles from behavior change theory . This is set in the context of the development of a smartphone - based application that motivates users to change their exercise behavior ( such as running ) and become regular exercisers . In this study , we investigate how we can tailor motivational messages to the TTM’s stages and processes of change , and how people experience these messages . Can we represent the processes of change with motivational text messages ? Will these messages relate to the stages of change like the processes of change do ? Will users indeed perceive messages that are tailored to the stage of change they are in as motivating ? In the following sections , we report on relevant theory and previous work , methods , results and discussion for the ﬁrst study , methods , results and discussion for the second study , and we end with an overall conclusion . BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK In HCI and healthcare - oriented research , there is an increas - ing focus on technology that assists or encourages people to change their eating , exercising , or sleeping behavior [ 10 ] , but also on technology to monitor , assist or change patients’ health - related behaviors . This is shown by recent review papers on mobile healthcare systems [ 19 ] , obesity management through mobile phone applications [ 11 ] , assistive technology to sup - port healthy behaviors [ 15 ] , information and communication technology - based interventions for promoting physical activ - ity [ 23 ] and general health interventions using mobile phones [ 18 ] . These papers show that the use of text messages has been a common approach , but there is room for improvement in both grounding the technological approach with a theoreti - cal foundation ( i . e . , behavior change theories or models ) and tailoring to the end - user . Using text messages to motivate Using tailored text messages to inﬂuence someone’s behavior has proven effective in various contexts , for example physical activity [ 31 ] . Unfortunately , studies describing the develop - ment of such technology do not yet explain in detail how the researchers designed the motivational messages used [ 22 ] . Re - cently , studies have started to describe the process of acquiring motivational text messages . For example , Kaptein et al . [ 14 ] , explained that two researchers thought of 42 text messages for six strategies to be tailored to the user’s susceptibility to persuasion ; Patrick et al . [ 35 ] explained that they developed 3000 SMS and MMS messages to be tailored to the user’s pref - erences on timing and frequency of the messages ; and Redfern et al . [ 35 ] explained that they designed 137 text messages ( based on behavior change techniques ) tailored to the user’s name . For all these and other studies , it is usually the authors or other experts who designed the messages . However , as is shown by Coley et al . [ 4 ] , peer - to - peer designed text messages are more engaging and more relevant to the user compared to expert - written text messages . Therefore , we decided to use crowdsourcing to collect motivational messages . Crowdsourcing motivational messages Crowdsourcing involves employing a large number of peo - ple to contribute to a speciﬁc task . Over the last few years , researchers have been using online crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) for a growing va - riety of tasks ; for example , for user - studies [ 16 ] , graphical perception tasks [ 9 ] , parallel prototyping tasks [ 5 ] , evaluating user interfaces [ 42 ] , but also for natural language processing tasks [ 2 ] . Crowdsourcing written transcriptions , translations or anno - tations ( e . g . , [ 28 , 43 , 12 ] ) is a relatively common natural language processing task , but we were aware of only two re - lated studies on collecting motivational messages . Coley et al . [ 4 ] crowdsourced peer - to - peer text messages to encourage users to quit smoking and compared these text messages to expert - written text messages . They found the peer - to - peer text messages to be more engaging and relevant to the user . They also found that the peer - to - peer designed messages reﬂected the same key theoretical concepts also addressed in the expert - written messages . To reduce alcohol consumption , Kristan and Suffoletto [ 20 ] also looked at peer - written text messages and evaluated expert - written text messages . Overall , they found that there were no universal positive attitudes towards any of their messages , which suggested the need for tailoring . By using crowdsourcing , we can study the message content and effectiveness for a large number of messages designed to motivate people to change their behavior . Transtheoretical Model of behavior change There are many theories and models on changing and inﬂuenc - ing behavior , ranging from more practical , such as Persuasive Design [ 7 ] to more theoretical ones , such as the Social Eco - logical Model [ 41 ] . A theory - based model that can easily be used in practice , is the Transtheoretical Model ( TTM ) from Prochaska et al . [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] . The model has been thoroughly reviewed ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) and also received criticism , speciﬁcally the construct of the stages of change [ 24 ] . Despite this , we chose the TTM because as articulated in [ 32 ] , it : “provides a frame - work for both the conceptualization and the measurement of behavior change , as well as facilitating promotion strategies that are individualized and easily adapted” [ 32 , p . 7 ] . The TTM is a dynamic , integrative model focused on the individual and can be applied practically , especially the con - struct of the stages of change [ 32 ] , which classiﬁes people into ( not necessarily linearly ) progressing stages of chang - ing behaviors : Precontemplation ( PC ) , Contemplation ( C ) , Preparation ( P ) , Action ( A ) and Maintenance ( M ) . While the stages of change ( see Table 1 ) are useful in explaining when changes in cognition , emotion , and behavior take place , the Stage of change Description Precontemplation ( PC ) The individual is not willing to change in the foreseeable future ( measured as the next 6 months ) . Individuals in this stage are mostly uninformed or demoralized . Contemplation ( C ) The individual is willing to change in the next 6 months . Individuals in this stage are aware of some pros of behavior change , but are still more inclined to value the cons . Preparation ( P ) The individual is willing to change in the foreseeable future ( measured as the next month ) and has already taken some small steps towards change ( in the past year ) . Individuals in this stage usually have some plan on how to tackle this inactiveness . Action ( A ) The individual has changed , but not longer than 6 months . Individuals in this stage have ‘changed’ , but have not reached the duration which exempliﬁes real behavior change . Maintenance ( M ) The individual has changed , longer than 6 months . Individuals in this stage have changed and are working not to relapse . Table 1 . The stages of change with a short description . processes of change from the TTM help to explain how and why the progression through these stages occur . Ten covert and overt processes will usually be experienced when success - fully progressing through the stages of change and achieving the desired behavioral change . The ten processes ( see Table 2 ) can be divided into two groups : Experiential processes and Behavioral processes . Experiential processes are focused on changing people’s ideas while Behavioral processes are fo - cused on changing people’s actions . The processes are strongly associated with certain stage transitions , but they are not com - pletely ﬁxed . The ten processes are Consciousness raising ( CR ) , Dramatic relief ( DR ) , Environmental reevaluation ( ER ) , Social liberation ( SOL ) , Self - reevaluation ( SR ) — Experien - tial , Self - liberation ( SEL ) , Helping relationships ( HR ) , Coun - terconditioning ( CC ) , Reinforcement management ( RM ) and Stimulus control ( SC ) — Behavioral . We grounded our design in the TTM : the processes of change informed our catego - rization of motivational messages , while the stages of change served as the basis for tailoring to the user . Tailoring to stage of change Stage - based interventions can be more effective than neutral interventions according to Marcus et al . [ 26 ] . In their study , they mailed ( at baseline , 1 , 3 and 6 months ) intervention ma - terials . A tailored intervention ( tailored to the participant’s stage of change , associated processes and more ) versus a neu - tral intervention was tested and they found that both increased physical activity levels , but the tailored version increased phys - ical activity levels most . This is a good example of the success of tailoring , but also the success of applying the TTM . This use of theories or models , such as the TTM , in designing in - terventions to change behavior has been advocated ( see [ 3 , 30 ] ) because it will help evaluate the model . However , it is also noted that there is little guidance on how to use theo - ries or models in designing concrete interventions [ 30 ] . This could explain why interventions designed with the TTM in mind usually fail to be properly based on the TTM , because not all elements of the model are incorporated [ 13 ] . In fact , when tailoring to the stages of change , it is more important than anything else to combine the stages with the processes of change [ 40 ] , because they are codependent . The importance of combining both is clear from several studies and as Spencer et al . remark in their review of TTM literature “Ensuring that participants use the appropriate processes of change as they move through the stages is essential for their success . ” [ 40 , p . 438 ] . RESEARCH GOALS AND EXPECTATIONS Our long - term goal is to develop technology that motivates and engages people to exercise and adhere to exercising so that long - term behavior change can be achieved . We believe that crowdsourcing peer - to - peer designed motivational text messages capturing the processes of change and then tailoring to the stages of change is an effective method to use theories or models in practice , and can eventually contribute to longer - term exercise adherence . In the current work , we collected peer - to - peer designed moti - vational messages and evaluated whether these messages could reﬂect the processes of change from the TTM . Because previ - ous research [ 4 ] showed that peer - to - peer designed messages reﬂected the same key theoretical concepts as expert - written messages , we expected that : 1 ) For study 1 , when asked to motivate a person in a particular stage of change , participants will design motivational mes - sages that reﬂect the processes of change related to that stage . To be speciﬁc : messages reﬂecting Experiential processes will be more prevalent in the earlier stages , while messages reﬂect - ing Behavioral processes will be more prevalent in the later stages . And because previous research [ 27 ] showed that people eval - uated the processes of change differently in the context of exercise than in other contexts , we expect that : 2 ) For study 2 , participants in a certain stage of change will evaluate the motivational messages that reﬂect the processes of change related to that stage as more motivating , in the context of exercise . To be speciﬁc : both the rating of the Experiential and Behavioral processes will peak in the Action stage , but the Experiential processes will be rated as more motivating than the Behavioral processes in the earlier stages and decline in the Maintenance stage , while the rating of the Behavioral processes will not decline in the Maintenance stage . STUDY 1 : DESIGNING AND CODING MOTIVATIONAL MESSAGES In the ﬁrst study we conducted an online crowdsourced survey where participants designed motivational text messages . Then the collected motivational text messages were coded according to categories based on the TTM’s processes of change . Crowdsourcing the design of motivational messages The online crowdsourcing survey , to collect motivational mes - sages , was set up on SurveyMonkey through Amazon Me - Experiential processes Description Consciousness raising ( CR ) The individual seeks increased knowledge about the causes , consequences and cures for their problem behavior . Dramatic relief ( DR ) The individual’s emotions about the problem behavior and possible solutions are evoked . Environmental reeval . ( ER ) The impact that the individual’s problem behavior has on their environment is reevaluated . Social liberation ( SOL ) Attempts are made to increase alternatives for the individual’s former problem behavior . Self - reevaluation ( SR ) Cognitions and emotions regarding the individual with respect to their problem behavior are reevaluated . Behavioral processes Description Self - liberation ( SEL ) The individual has the belief that he can change and commits to it by choosing a course of action . Helping relationships ( HR ) The individual seeks trust and open discussion about the problem behavior as well as support for the healthy behavior change . Counterconditioning ( CC ) The individual substitutes positive behaviors for the individual’s problem behavior . Reinforcement manag . ( RM ) Steps or changes made by the individual are rewarded when in a positive direction or punished when in a negative direction . Stimulus control ( SC ) Stimuli that may cue a lapse back to the problem behavior are avoided and prompts for more healthier alternatives are inserted . Table 2 . The processes of change divided in Experiential and Behavioral processes with a short description . chanical Turk ( AMT ) . In the task , participants were asked to create a number of messages to motivate a ﬁctional character in a speciﬁc stage of change to exercise more . As a result , we obtained a database of motivational text messages that are tailored to various stages of change . Sample The sample consisted of 500 people . Data from 19 respondents was excluded because their questionnaires were incomplete . The ﬁnal sample we worked with included 481 respondents ( 250 male and 231 female ) . The study was conducted in English . All but 5 respondents were native English speakers , their data was not anomalous and was kept . The minimum age was 18 and the maximum was 68 . The average age was 31 . 09 ( SD = 9 . 22 ) and the median 29 . With respect to education , 201 respondents received some college education , 183 had a college degree , 46 completed a master degree , 42 completed high school , 5 obtained a PhD and 4 had other types of qualiﬁcations . The AMT requirements for the respondents were that they should have already com - pleted > 1000 tasks on AMT , that > 98 % of these tasks were approved successfully and that the respondents were located in the United States . These requirements ensured that respon - dents were already familiar with surveys ( our survey was quite extensive ) , that they were serious about ﬁlling in the survey ( only 19 were not , which is low for online anonymous surveys ) and that they had some proﬁciency in English . In fact , 473 reported ‘very good’ as self - assessed proﬁciency , 7 ‘good’ and 1 ‘average’ , but none ‘bad’ or ‘very bad’ . Although our sample consisted only of AMT workers , which could misrepresent the general population , AMT can be con - sidered to deliver an acceptable representation of general soci - ety , especially by online survey standards [ 29 ] . However , we are aware of the limitations of AMT . Task manipulation To obtain motivational messages from the participants , we de - veloped ﬁve scenarios , each about a different stage of change , for which participants designed messages . The participant was given one short paragraph ( the scenario ) in which a person in a speciﬁc stage of change ( for instance , Precontemplation ) was described . The scenario that the participant received was ran - domized . We asked the participants to imagine that they had to motivate this person to exercise . In total , participants were asked to come up with six messages . Examples of scenarios and actual participant responses are shown in Table 3 . Procedure Participants were recruited through AMT . They were informed of their compensation , the goal of the survey and the estimated time to complete the survey . Participants could then decide to accept or decline the survey and proceed to the SurveyMon - key website where the survey was hosted . There , the goal of the survey was summarized and participants were asked to complete a consent form . The participants were then pre - sented with one of the ﬁve scenarios , and were asked to come up with motivational messages for the scenario . Afterwards , participants were debriefed about the goals of the survey and given a completion code to ﬁll in on AMT to receive payment . On average , the survey took about 45 minutes to complete . Participants were compensated with 3 US dollars for their participation . Coding motivational messages To see how the content of the 2886 ( 481 x 6 ) crowdsourced peer - to - peer messages reﬂected the processes of change , we translated the processes of change from the TTM to coding categories . We used a similar process to [ 25 ] . To use these cat - egories , we operationalized the fairly ﬂuid processes of change descriptions into more ﬁxed deﬁnitions that considered the perspective of ‘text messages sent by a peer’ . The procedure started with two coders ( coder 1 was the main investigator ) separately coming up with operationalized deﬁnitions of the processes of change for a ﬁrst version of the codebook . The codebook was developed following the guidelines of Guest and MacQueen [ 8 , 25 ] who advise structuring the code - book with ( at least ) six parameters : the code , brief deﬁnition , full deﬁnition , when to use , when not to use , and examples . We added a seventh parameter , namely the ‘perspective’ , which gives an alternative deﬁnition of what the process could look like in terms of a text message . Each category ( a process of change ) for coding was described in the same manner . Be - cause the majority of the messages were only a few words Stage of change scenario User designed text message Precontemplation : “Consider a middle - aged person , with a steady personal life and solid friend foundation . This person lacks regular exercise in his / her daily life and is unwilling to consider starting with this , at least not within the next 6 months . ” “You would really feel better if you started exercising regu - larly” Self - reevaluation “Do you really like being a muf - ﬁn top ? ” Dramatic relief “Maybe you can get one of your friends to work out with you” Helping relationships Maintenance : “Consider a middle - aged person , with a steady personal life and solid friend foundation . This person participates in regular exercise in his / her daily life , and has been doing so for an extended period of time . This person has been active for more than 6 months . ” “Keep it up ! ” Self - liberation “You have really lost a lot of weight ! Keep up the good work on your exercise ! ” Re - inforcement management “You can spend your time on more exercises that will re - move all your stress” Counter - conditioning Table 3 . Examples of two participants’ responses coded as processes of change for a scenario - described person who is in a certain stage of change . Behind the messages example codes are given in bold . long , it was decided that only one code per message would be used . The context for the deﬁnitions of the processes of change was the TTM in general , but also the TTM speciﬁcally in the context of exercising . A uniﬁed codebook was deﬁned before coding started . The messages were coded iteratively , independently and with - out scenario information by the two coders and afterwards the coders resolved any mismatches . The codebook would then be updated to reﬂect these resolved mismatches and the next round of coding started . The ﬁrst round of coding started with 60 messages and increased to a maximum of 300 for the ﬁnal round of coding ( approximately 10 % of the data ) . The ﬁnal round of coding was determined when the coders felt they had reached a saturation point at which achieving a higher agreement would not be feasible . The ﬁnal agreement was a Cohen’s kappa of 0 . 72 , which is substantial [ 21 ] . For our consecutive study ( Study 2 ) , we needed only the most representative messages for each of the process categories . To this end , we did another selection of only the best represen - tations of the processes . A follow - up coding was designed to complement the last round of coding , in which we used a ‘certainty’ measure along with the existing coding . This meant that both coders would add a certainty code to their ‘normal’ coding of the messages if they were 99 % sure about the message belonging to the particular coding category ( i . e . , one of the ten processes ) and that the other coder would agree on this . The messages that were coded by coder 1 scored a Cohen’s kappa of 0 . 86 for the certainty measure . The remaining messages ( 2586 messages ) were coded by one coder ( coder 1 ) , yielding a dataset containing 2886 coded messages in total and a subset of 1433 ( 49 . 7 % ) messages coded with the certainty measure ( examples of coded messages are given in Table 3 and a snippet of the codebook in Table 4 ) . Results : designed and coded motivational messages re - ﬂecting the processes In this section , we present the results of the online survey and how the crowdsourced messages ﬁtted into categories based on the processes of change . We looked at what kinds of messages ( process categories ) and how many of each people would come up with for each of the stage of change scenarios , and whether the distribution of messages more or less aligned to our expectation : the messages reﬂecting Experiential pro - cesses were expected to be more prevalent ( have more counts ) in the earlier stages compared to the later stages , while the messages reﬂecting Behavioral processes were expected to be more prevalent ( have more counts ) in the later stages com - pared to the earlier stages . We also looked whether the same distribution of counts for the messages was shown for each of the separate process categories . The motivational messages from 481 participants were used in the coding process . It is important to note that the manipu - lated stages of change scenarios were not completely equally distributed : 91 participants designed motivational messages for the Precontemplation scenario ( PC - S ) , 93 for the Contem - plation scenario ( C - S ) , 87 for the Preparation scenario ( P - S ) , 102 for the Action scenario ( A - S ) , and 108 participants for the Maintenance scenario ( M - S ) . To see whether the distribution of coded messages follows our expectation , we ﬁrst looked into the higher - order Experiential and Behavioral processes ( see Table 2 for an explanation ) . The results are shown in Table 5 . Of the total of 2886 mes - sages , 800 ( 27 . 7 % ) are coded as Experiential processes , and 2086 as Behavioral ( 72 . 3 % ) processes . From Table 5 it can be seen that the distribution of the higher - order processes over the stages resembles our expectation : Experiential processes are more prevalent in the earlier stages and Behavioral pro - cesses are prevalent in the later stages ( see the “count” row of Table 5 ) . A Chi - square test was carried out to see if the condition ( i . e . , the stages ) had an effect on the counts within the higher - order processes . The results show that there is a signiﬁcant association between the stages and higher - order processes ( χ 2 ( 4 ) = 223 . 179 , p < . 001 ) . The values of the stan - dardized residuals are used to further interpret the results of the Chi - square test . The standardized residuals represent the error between the observed frequency ( i . e . , what the data actually shows ) and expected frequency ( i . e . , what the model predicts ) . A positive value indicates an overrepresentation and a negative value points to an underrepresentation . A z - value higher than 1 . 96 or lower than - 1 . 96 for either the over or underrepresenta - tion is considered to be signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 [ 6 ] . The residuals show that for the Experiential processes in the Precontemplation stage , there is a signiﬁcant overrepresenta - tion of the processes ( z = 8 . 9 ) , and in the Action and Main - tenance stage there is a signiﬁcant underrepresentation of the processes ( z = − 6 . 0 and z = − 6 . 5 ) . For the Behavioral pro - cesses this is reversed , in the Precontemplation stage , there is a signiﬁcant underrepresentation of the processes ( z = − 5 . 5 ) , and in the Action and Maintenance stage there is a signiﬁ - cant overrepresentation of the processes ( z = 3 . 7 and z = 4 . 0 ) . Overall , this means that there are more Experiential messages Process Consciousness Raising / Increasing Knowledge Coding CR Brief deﬁnition Increased awareness of causes , consequences and cures for not being physical active . Full deﬁnition CR is a process that involves increased awareness of causes , consequences and cures for not being physical active . The intention is increasing the knowledge of unaware individuals with objective information Practical Deﬁnition Encourage subject to read and think about physical activity ( cognitive process ) Perspectives To start / trigger or advance the process : messages that give ( objective ) information about the beneﬁts or disadvantages of not exercising . Inclusion Arguments with information ( mostly ) facts about beneﬁts or disadvantages for health ; ( objective ) confrontations with diseases ; prevention for diseases Exclusion Subjective arguments why people should exercising ; beneﬁts for appearance ; a proposal Example inclusion “It can prevent all types of diseases like Diabetes and cancer” “Exercise can help you live longer” “Exercise will help you to be healthy and ﬁtt . ” Example exclusion “You worked hard for everything , why not also for your health ? ” - This would ﬁt better with SR “You will look much better ; You will feel better when you exercise . ” - This would ﬁt better with SR Table 4 . An example of one of the processes of change , Consciousness Raising , translated to a coding category . in the earlier stages and fewer in the later stages than the Chi - square model predicts . Also , this means there are fewer Behavioral messages in the earlier stages and more in the later stages than the Chi - square model predicts . At a lower level , we also looked at the distribution for the ten separate processes . In Table 6 it can be seen that the distri - bution of the processes over the stages somewhat resembles our expectation for some , but not all , of the processes . A Chi - square test was again performed to see if the condition ( i . e . , the stages ) had an effect on the counts of the processes . The results show that there is a signiﬁcant association between the stages and processes ( χ 2 ( 36 ) = 437 . 851 , p < . 001 ) . The val - ues of the standardized residuals are used to further interpret the results of the Chi - square test . For the Experiential processes , Conscientiousness Rais - ing , Dramatic Relief , Environmental Reevaluation and Self - reevaluation show a signiﬁcant trend of more counts in the earlier stages and fewer in the later stages . The Experiential process of Social Liberation has too few counts to interpret any results . For the Behavioral processes , only Reinforcement Manage - ment shows a signiﬁcant trend of fewer counts in the earlier stages and more in the later . Self - liberation and Countercondi - tioning both show some inclination toward this trend near the Action stage , but decline for the Maintenance stage . Helping Relationships is more or less equal throughout the stages and Stimulus Control displays the opposite ( Experiential ) trend signiﬁcantly . Overall , the distribution over the stages for both higher - order processes is in line with our ﬁrst expectation , but when looking at the distribution of the separate processes , the same trend is not present for all ten processes . Discussion We found that the messages that people design for different stage of change scenarios can be reliably coded into categories of processes of change . We used scenarios based on the stages to collect a broad range of unbiased messages . The scenarios also included general context ( middle - aged , steady personal life , solid friend foundation ) to make it realistic , which could Categories / Stage scenarios PC - S C - S P - S A - S M - S Total Experiential Count 299 177 160 92 72 800 Expected 179 . 6 154 . 7 144 . 7 169 . 6 151 . 4 800 Std . residual 8 . 9 3 1 . 8 1 . 3 - 6 . 0 3 - 6 . 5 3 Behavioral Count 349 381 362 520 474 2086 Expected 468 . 4 403 . 3 377 . 3 442 . 4 394 . 6 2086 Std . residual - 5 . 5 3 - 1 . 1 - 0 . 8 3 . 7 3 4 . 0 3 Total Count 648 558 522 612 546 2886 Table 5 . The distribution of all the codes over the 2 higher - order process categories and 5 stages of change scenarios . 1 p < . 05 , 2 p < . 01 , 3 p < . 001 have potentially biased the participants , but this text was kept the same for all scenarios and concerned less text than the actual stage description ( see Table 3 ) . Also , the coding was carried out without the stage information of the messages . Although a Chi - square test is not optimal to test the expected distribution of messages , together with the message counts , this test does show that the scenarios have an inﬂuence on the message content . There is no ratio for distribution over the different stages yet , so we could not do a rate comparison . We hope this research proved to be a ﬁrst step in dealing with a ratio for distribution of messages . The kinds of messages ( process categories ) are different be - tween the stages in the same way as expected : Experiential processes are more prevalent in the earlier stages while Behav - ioral processes are more prevalent in the later stages . Although the distribution within the higher order processes aligned quite well with our expected distribution , we did not have an expec - tation for the distribution of the number of messages between the higher order processes . It is important to note that the dis - tribution between the higher - order processes themselves was skewed ( 2086 of 2886 were coded as Behavioral processes ) . We found that people came up with mostly Behavioral - themed - processes ( 72 , 3 % ) . This could mean that , in our study setup , people found it much easier to think of more ‘action - oriented’ Behavioral messages than more ‘thinking - oriented’ Experien - tial messages , or that in general people ﬁnd it easier to think of more ‘action - oriented’ messages . Categories / Scenarios PC - S C - S P - S A - S M - S Total CR Count 67 18 36 10 7 138 Expected 31 . 0 26 . 7 25 . 0 29 . 3 26 . 1 138 Std . residual 6 . 5 3 - 1 . 7 2 . 2 1 - 3 , 6 3 - 3 , 7 3 DR Count 33 8 13 4 1 59 Expected 13 . 2 11 . 4 10 . 7 12 . 5 11 . 2 59 Std . residual 5 . 4 3 - 1 . 0 0 . 7 - 2 . 4 1 - 3 . 0 2 ER Count 33 13 9 14 10 79 Expected 17 . 7 15 . 3 14 . 3 16 . 8 14 . 9 79 Std . residual 3 . 6 3 - 0 . 6 - 1 . 4 - 0 . 7 - 1 . 3 SOL Count 2 6 1 0 2 11 Expected 2 . 5 2 . 1 2 . 0 2 . 3 2 . 1 11 Std . residual - 0 . 3 2 . 7 2 - 0 . 7 - 1 . 5 - 0 . 1 SR Count 164 132 101 64 52 513 Expected 115 . 2 99 . 2 92 . 8 108 . 8 97 . 1 513 Std . residual 4 . 5 3 3 . 3 3 0 . 9 - 4 . 3 3 - 4 . 6 3 SEL Count 178 168 190 221 182 939 Expected 210 . 8 181 . 6 169 . 8 199 . 1 177 . 6 939 Std . residual - 2 . 3 1 - 1 . 0 1 . 5 1 . 6 0 . 3 HR Count 44 53 31 59 51 238 Expected 53 . 4 46 . 0 43 . 0 50 . 5 45 . 0 238 Std . residual - 1 . 3 1 . 0 - 1 . 8 1 . 2 0 . 9 CC Count 49 65 49 83 43 289 Expected 64 . 9 55 . 9 52 . 3 61 . 3 54 . 7 289 Std . residual - 2 . 0 1 1 . 2 - 0 . 5 2 . 8 2 - 1 . 6 RM Count 40 67 72 146 187 512 Expected 115 . 0 99 . 0 92 . 6 108 . 6 96 . 9 512 Std . residual - 7 . 0 3 - 3 . 2 2 - 2 . 1 1 3 . 6 3 9 . 2 3 SC Count 38 28 20 11 11 108 Expected 24 . 2 20 . 9 19 . 5 22 . 9 20 . 4 108 Std . residual 2 . 8 2 1 . 6 0 . 1 - 2 . 5 1 - 2 . 1 1 Total Count 648 558 522 612 546 2886 Table 6 . The distribution of all the codes over the ten process categories and ﬁve stages of change scenarios with their respective counts for the processes and stages . 1 p < . 05 , 2 p < . 01 , 3 p < . 001 For the separate processes of change distributions over the stages , quite a few processes aligned to our expectation , al - though also several processes did not . Interestingly , most of the Experiential processes followed the expected distribution , but not many of the Behavioral processes . The counts for the Behavioral processes ( except Reinforcement Management ) are reasonably stable across all stages . One interpretation could be that when someone is motivated to learn a behavior it is more natural to start earlier with Behavioral as well as Experiential messages . Also interesting is that the signiﬁcant results are mostly for the Precontemplation and Maintenance stages : an interpretation could be that this is where the behav - iors are stable , and the differences in the processes that are used largest . Overall , crowd - designed TTM - informed motivational mes - sages seems to be a promising method . The messages re - ﬂected the processes of change . However , we did not yet know whether people in a speciﬁc stage of change would indeed ﬁnd the TTM - tailored messages motivating as we expected . This was addressed in Study 2 . STUDY 2 : EVALUATING MOTIVATIONAL MESSAGES The second study was designed to validate the ﬁrst study and to see whether the coded motivational messages would be rated according to our expectations . This study was also carried out on SurveyMonkey through AMT . In the survey , people evaluated a selection of the best representations of the previously coded messages . We asked people to rate how motivating they found the messages to be . We also measured the participants’ self - assessed stage of change in relation to exercising . Sample The sample consisted of 350 people . No data from any respon - dent was excluded . The study was conducted in English . All but 5 respondents were native English speakers , their results were not anomalous and were left in the sample . The minimum age was 20 and the maximum was 71 . The average age was 36 . 53 ( SD = 11 . 83 ) and the median 34 . With respect to education , 106 respondents received some college education , 142 had a college degree , 35 completed a masters , 59 completed high school , 5 obtained a PhD and 3 had other types of qualiﬁcations . To ensure consistency and a high qual - ity of responses , the AMT requirements for the respondents were the same as those in the ﬁrst survey . Questionnaire measures To measure participants’ stage of change , we used the vali - dated 1 - item stage of change measure for exercise 1 [ 34 ] where participants were given a description of regular exercise and of the ﬁve stages and rated their stage based on that description . Task manipulation We presented participants with a selection of ﬁfty messages and asked them to rate each according to how motivating they thought the message was ( “Please rate how motivating or de - motivating you speciﬁcally ﬁnd these messages for yourself . ” ) . From the subset of messages that were coded with the certainty measure , we selected ﬁve representative messages for each process category . The order of these messages was randomized for all participants . The evaluation of all the ﬁfty messages gave us the possibility to see how the ratings change over the different stages of change of the participants . The messages were rated on a scale from 1 ( “Very demotivating” ) to 5 ( “Very motivating” ) with a 3 as neutral ( “Neither demotivating nor motivating” ) . Procedure Participants were recruited through AMT . They were informed of their compensation , the goal of the survey and the estimated time to complete the survey . Participants could then decide to 1 web . uri . edu / cprc / exercise - stages - of - change - short - form accept or decline the survey and proceed to the SurveyMonkey website were the survey was hosted . The goal of this survey was summarized and participants were asked to complete a consent form . First , the participants were given ﬁfty moti - vational messages to rate and then participants were asked to ﬁll out the 1 - item stage of change measure . Afterwards , participants were debriefed about the detailed goals of the sur - vey and given a completion code to ﬁll in on AMT to receive payment . On average , the survey took about 40 minutes to complete . Participants were compensated with 3 US dollars for their participation . Results : coded motivational messages evaluated In this section , we present the results of our evaluation survey and how the evaluated messages ﬁtted into the categories of processes of change . The evaluations of 350 participants were analyzed . We looked at whether the selection of our coded messages were evaluated as representative of our developed process categories . We also looked at whether the motivational messages were evaluated in the same way that the processes relate to the stages of change ( in the context of exercise ) : the Experiential processes were expected to be rated as more motivating in the earlier stages of change , peak in the Action stage and decline in the Maintenance stage , while the ratings of the Behavioral processes were expected to also peak in the Action stage , but not decline in the Maintenance stage . It is important to note that for this study , we measured the self - assessed stages of change , which were not equally distributed : 120 participants rated themselves to be in the Maintenance stage ( M ) , 94 in the Preparation stage ( P ) , 73 in the Contempla - tion stage ( C ) , 46 in the Action stage ( A ) , and 17 participants rated themselves in the Precontemplation stage ( PC ) . The coded messages we selected for each process ( ﬁve for each process ) were representative of our developed categories , as is shown in Table 7 through the reliability of the coded message categories . The reliability of the measures was overall very good . The only disputable measure was that of Countercondi - tioning , with a Cronbach’s alpha of . 68 which we still found acceptable ( and also comparable to other relevant work [ 27 ] where they had this score for Social Liberation ) . Otherwise , the reliability scores were between . 72 and . 88 . The coded messages somewhat followed the expectation of the processes aligning to the stages in a similar way to Marcus et al . [ 27 ] , as is shown by the ratings given to the process cate - gories for each stage of change ( see Figure 1 ) . We found that there are peaks for all Experiential and Behavioral processes in the Action stage and that the Behavioral processes are rated as more motivating in the later stages . But , the Experien - tial processes are not rated as more motivating in the earlier stages ( Dramatic Relief and Environmental Reevaluation are even rated as demotivating in the earlier stages ) and although there is a decline for Experiential processes in the Mainte - nance stage , the same decline is also found for the Behavioral processes . Because these results were unexpected , we investigated fur - ther and analyzed whether there was a signiﬁcant difference in the rating of the process categories between the different Coded category M SD α Consciousness Raising 3 . 75 0 . 66 . 76 Dramatic Relief 3 . 02 0 . 94 . 82 Environmental Reevaluation 3 . 13 0 . 97 . 88 Social Liberation 3 . 15 0 . 69 . 73 Self - reevaluation 3 . 67 0 . 69 . 73 Self - liberation 3 . 74 0 . 59 . 72 Helping Relationships 3 . 69 0 . 67 . 74 Counterconditioning 3 . 51 0 . 61 . 68 Reinforcement Management 3 . 86 0 . 70 . 85 Stimulus Control 3 . 21 0 . 65 . 73 Table 7 . Averages ( M ) , standard deviations ( SD ) , and Cronbach’s al - pha’s ( α ) for all the evaluated motivational text message categories . Mes - sages were rated on as scale from 1 ( “Very demotivating” ) to 5 ( “Very motivating” ) with a 3 as neutral ( “Neither demotivating nor motivat - ing” ) . ( N = 350 ) stages of change . We carried out separate univariate analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) with the stages as predictor variable and the process categories as separate outcome variables ( i . e . , CR , DR , ER , SOL , SR , SEL , HR , CC , RM and SC ) . As can be seen in Figure 1 , all process categories differ signiﬁcantly along the stages of change ( all nine p < . 05 ) except for the Helping Relationships category . This indicates that for these process categories , the scores differ signiﬁcantly when compared be - tween the stages of change . In Figure 1 we can observe the direction of the relations in the reported means for all the stages . To see between which stages these processes of change differ signiﬁcantly , we performed post hoc tests . The post hoc test results for the signiﬁcant process categories ( all but the Helping Relationships category ) are shown in Table 8 . As can be seen , it is mostly the Precontemplation stage that differs from the Action and Maintenance stage and the Contemplation stage that differs from the Action stage . Overall , when looking at the average ratings over the stages it is clear that : the peak for all processes is in the Action stage , which is what we expected . There are no higher ratings for the Experiential processes than for the Behavioral processes in the earlier stages ; in fact , two Experiential processes ( Dramatic Relief and Environmental Reevaluation ) have negative ratings in the Precontemplation stage , and the decline in the Mainte - nance stage is there for Experiential but also for Behavioral processes , which is not what we had expected . Discussion The selection of coded messages to represent the process cate - gories showed very good reliability . Therefore , the ﬁve mes - sages we selected for each category were a good ﬁt for the process of change they represented . This shows that using crowdsourcing to design motivational messages for behavior change is feasible . 1 2 3 4 5 CR : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 5 . 406 ; p = . 000 Stage of Change M o t i va t i on a l r a t i ng PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 SEL : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 4 . 175 ; p = . 003 Stage of Change PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 DR : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 3 . 804 ; p = . 005 Stage of Change M o t i va t i on a l r a t i ng PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 HR : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 1 . 784 ; p = . 132 Stage of Change PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 ER : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 2 . 802 ; p = . 026 Stage of Change M o t i va t i on a l r a t i ng PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 CC : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 5 . 123 ; p = . 001 Stage of Change PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 SOL : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 3 . 248 ; p = . 012 Stage of Change M o t i va t i on a l r a t i ng PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 RM : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 2 . 887 ; p = . 023 Stage of Change PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 SR : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 4 . 598 ; p = . 001 Stage of Change M o t i va t i on a l r a t i ng PC C P M A 1 2 3 4 5 SC : F ( 4 , 435 ) = 7 . 056 ; p = . 000 Stage of Change PC C P M A Figure 1 . Bar charts describing the averages ( M ) , standard deviations ( SD ) , F - statistics and p - values for all coded message categories . On the left , all Experiential process categories on the right , all Behavioral pro - cess categories . Messages were rated on a scale from 1 ( “Very demotivat - ing” ) to 5 ( “Very motivating” ) with a 3 as neutral ( “Neither demotivating nor motivating” ) . N = 350 , PC = Precontemplation ( N = 17 ) , C = Con - templation ( N = 73 ) , P = Preparation ( N = 94 ) , A = Action ( N = 46 ) and M = Maintenance ( N = 120 ) Compared stages Coded category PC − P PC − A PC − M C − P C − A C − M CR → → ⇒ ⇒ ⇒ DR ⇒ ⇒ ER ⇒ SOL ⇒ SR → ⇒ ⇒ SEL → → CC ⇒ ⇒ ⇒ ⇒ RM ⇒ → ⇒ SC → → → → Table 8 . Post hoc analyses for the coded messages categories and the stages . Only signiﬁcant stage - to - stage post hoc test results are dis - played . Arrows represent signiﬁcant mean differences between stage X − Y , meaning there is a signiﬁcant increase in average rating from stage X to Y . → represents p < 0 . 05 , ⇒ represents p < 0 . 01 We also found that the motivational rating of coded messages of the participants did not entirely match our expectation of processes over stages . Speciﬁcally , that the messages rep - resenting the Experiential processes were not rated as more motivating in the earlier stages of change , although they did peak in the Action stage . And although the messages represent - ing the Behavioral processes were rated as more motivating in the later stages of change and peaked in the Action stage , they did decline in the Maintenance stage . To investigate further we looked at where the signiﬁcant differences between the stages were for all the processes . Even though the Experiential processes were not rated more motivating than the Behavioral processes in the earlier stages of change and the Behavioral processes did decline in the Maintenance stage , the broader trend for Experiential and Be - havioral processes was found ( both peak in the Action stage ) . This general trend is also shown in the post hoc test results ( see Table 8 ) , where four of the ﬁve Experiential processes ( not Environmental Reevaluation ) show signiﬁcant differences between the Action stage and the Precontemplation stage , and between the Action stage and the Contemplation stage . Moreover , the post hoc test results on Experiential processes showed twelve signiﬁcant mean differences and eight of those were in relation to the Action stage . The Behavioral peak was also found in the Action stage . The post hoc test results for the four signiﬁcant Behavioral processes ( not Helping Rela - tionships ) , showed differences between the Action stage and the Precontemplation and Contemplation stage , but also be - tween the Maintenance stage and the Precontemplation and Contemplation stage . The latter could be an indication that , even though there is a decline in the Maintenance stage for the Behavioral processes , overall , the Behavioral processes are still relevant in the Maintenance stage . It is important to note that for Study 2 , it was possible for peo - ple to rate messages on the demotivating end of the spectrum . We did this on purpose , to see if there might be messages we deﬁnitely should avoid for certain stages . The results for Dramatic Relief , Environmental Reevaluation and Stimulus Control actually show that they were rated as demotivating in the Precontemplation stage , and Dramatic Relief also in the Contemplation stage ( as can be seen in Figure 1 ) . In fact , none of the processes are rated as highly motivating for the early stages . One reason may be that unmotivated people do not ﬁnd the processes they should go through to change motivating , even though it is still required for behavior change . Another reason may be that they are unmotivated because they do not easily ﬁnd something motivating . The setup of this study has some limitations , for example : instead of implementing the messages in an application and testing them in - the - wild , we chose to carry out a pre - study to assess the usefulness of crowdsourcing and to elicit real - istic and highly motivating messages . This way we checked for consistency of our representative messages , which gives validity to our coding process and our interpretation of the theoretical deﬁnitions into practical text messages . In addi - tion , our future in - the - wild study will allow comparison of the real effectiveness of the messages to their previously rated motivationalness . Overall , the results show a great potential for motivational tech - nology to use crowd - designed motivational text messages as a method to represent the processes of change . However , using these messages to motivate people who are unmotivated ( i . e . , in the Precontemplation stage ) remains challenging . From the results it can be concluded that it is worthwhile to also try Be - havioral processes which are rated as slightly motivating such as Self - liberation , Helping Relationships and Reinforcement Management as motivational strategies in the earlier stages . CONCLUSION As a ﬁrst attempt to design motivational messages grounded in behavior change theory ( the TTM’s stages and processes of change ) , we carried out two studies that assessed the pos - sibility of using crowdsourcing as a method to design the motivational messages . In the ﬁrst study , we collected peer - designed motivational text messages and manually coded these messages into categories based on the processes of change . In the second study , we evaluated these messages to see whether they represent the intended process categories and whether people in different stages of change perceived messages tai - lored to their stage of change as more motivating . We conclude that 1 ) people design motivational messages that reﬂect the processes of change ; 2 ) these messages relate to the stages of change like the processes of change do ( Experiential processes prevalent in earlier stages , Behavioral processes prevalent in later stages ) ; and 3 ) the way people rate the messages ( process categories ) on how motivating they are does not always match the expectation of what processes should be most relevant for the stage of change they are in . Although there is a general consensus on the value of most be - havior change theories and more speciﬁcally the TTM , there is still plenty of room to increase the effectiveness and the appli - cation of such theories by designing practical implementations of whole theories and testing these in various contexts , such as the exercise domain . As part of a larger study , we sought to leverage HCI practices , to come to useful and practical insights about how to translate theoretical constructs ( i . e . , the processes of change ) to text messages . We showed a method by which theoretical con - structs of a behavior change theory or model ( the TTM ) can be represented by crowd - designed motivational text messages . Although this result is context - dependent , it could prove to be a valuable method for other theories , models or contexts . The motivational text messages will be used in motivational technology . For example , in a smartphone application , where users can receive these messages to get motivated to exercise or to be reminded to exercise regularly . The ratings of the mo - tivational text messages ( representing the processes of change ) can inform the application which messages would be most ef - fective , so that they can be tailored to the speciﬁc user’s stage of change . Overall , the ﬁndings in this paper can help inform researchers designing motivational technology for long - term behavior change who : 1 ) look for a method to translate the - oretical insights to practical text messages ; and who 2 ) want to go beyond a one - size - ﬁts - all strategy and design effective motivational technology that tailors to the stage of change a user is in , but also to more individual factors . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was funded by COMMIT / and is part of the P3 project SenseI : Sensor - Based Engagement for Improved Health . We would like to thank Cristina Zaga and Maartje de Graaf for their input . REFERENCES 1 . Johannes Brug , Mark Conner , Niki Harre , Stef Kremers , Susan McKellar , and Sandy Whitelaw . 2005 . The Transtheoretical Model and stages of change : a critique Observations by ﬁve Commentators on the paper by Adams , J . and White , M . ( 2004 ) Why don’t stage - based activity promotion interventions work ? Health education research 20 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 244 – 258 . 2 . C . Callison - Burch and M . Dredze . 2010 . Creating speech and language data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk . 1 – 12 . 3 . Heather Cole - Lewis and Trace Kershaw . 2010 . Text messaging as a tool for behavior change in disease prevention and management . Epidemiologic reviews 32 , 1 ( April 2010 ) , 56 – 69 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / epirev / mxq004 4 . Heather L Coley , Rajani S Sadasivam , Jessica H Williams , Julie E Volkman , Yu - Mei Schoenberger , Connie L Kohler , Heather Sobko , Midge N Ray , Jeroan J Allison , Daniel E Ford , Gregg H Gilbert , and Thomas K Houston . 2013 . Crowdsourced peer - versus expert - written smoking - cessation messages . American journal of preventive medicine 45 , 5 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 543 – 50 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . amepre . 2013 . 07 . 004 5 . Steven P Dow , Alana Glassco , Jonathan Kass , Melissa Schwarz , Daniel L Schwartz , and Scott R Klemmer . 2010 . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efﬁcacy . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 17 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 18 . 6 . Andy Field . 2013 . Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics . Sage . 7 . B J Fogg . 2003 . Persuasive technology : using computers to change what we think and do . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . 8 . Greg Guest and Kathleen M MacQueen . 2007 . Handbook for team - based qualitative research . Rowman Altamira . 9 . Jeffrey Heer and Michael Bostock . 2010 . Crowdsourcing graphical perception : using mechanical turk to assess visualization design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 203 – 212 . 10 . Eric B Hekler , Predrag Klasnja , Jon E Froehlich , and Matthew P Buman . 2013 . Mind the theoretical gap : interpreting , using , and developing behavioral theory in HCI research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3307 – 3316 . 11 . Setia Hermawati and Glyn Lawson . 2014 . Managing obesity through mobile phone applications : a state - of - the - art review from a user - centred design perspective . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing ( 2014 ) , 1 – 21 . 12 . Pei - Yun Hsueh , Prem Melville , and Vikas Sindhwani . 2009 . Data Quality from Crowdsourcing : A Study of Annotation Selection Criteria . In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active Learning for Natural Language Processing ( HLT ’09 ) . 27 – 35 . 13 . Andrew J Hutchison , Jeff D Breckon , and Lynne H Johnston . 2008 . Physical activity behavior change interventions based on the transtheoretical model : a systematic review . Health Education & Behavior ( 2008 ) . 14 . Maurits Kaptein , Boris De Ruyter , Panos Markopoulos , and Emile Aarts . 2012 . Adaptive persuasive systems : a study of tailored persuasive text messages to reduce snacking . ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems ( TiiS ) 2 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 10 . 15 . Catriona M Kennedy , John Powell , Thomas H Payne , John Ainsworth , Alan Boyd , and Iain Buchan . 2012 . Active assistance technology for health - related behavior change : an interdisciplinary review . Journal of medical Internet research 14 , 3 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Aniket Kittur , Ed H Chi , and Bongwon Suh . 2008 . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 453 – 456 . 17 . Predrag Klasnja , Sunny Consolvo , and Wanda Pratt . 2011 . How to evaluate technologies for health behavior change in HCI research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 3063 – 3072 . 18 . Predrag Klasnja and Wanda Pratt . 2012 . Healthcare in the pocket : Mapping the space of mobile - phone health interventions . Journal of biomedical informatics 45 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 184 – 198 . 19 . Santosh Krishna , Suzanne Austin Boren , and E Andrew Balas . 2009 . Healthcare via cell phones : a systematic review . Telemedicine and e - Health 15 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 231 – 240 . 20 . Jeffrey Kristan and Brian Suffoletto . 2015 . Using online crowdsourcing to understand young adult attitudes toward expert - authored messages aimed at reducing hazardous alcohol consumption and to collect peer - authored messages . Translational behavioral medicine 5 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 45 – 52 . 21 . J Richard Landis and Gary G Koch . 1977 . The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data . biometrics ( 1977 ) , 159 – 174 . 22 . Amy E Latimer , Lawrence R Brawley , and Rebecca L Bassett . 2010 . A systematic review of three approaches for constructing physical activity messages : What messages work and what improvements are needed ? The international journal of behavioral nutrition and physical activity 7 ( Jan . 2010 ) , 36 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1479 - 5868 - 7 - 36 23 . Patrick WC Lau , Erica Y Lau , Del P Wong , and Lynda Ransdell . 2011 . A systematic review of information and communication technology – based interventions for promoting physical activity behavior change in children and adolescents . Journal of medical Internet research 13 , 3 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Julia H Littell and Heather Girvin . 2002 . Stages of Change A Critique . Behavior Modiﬁcation 26 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 223 – 273 . 25 . Kathleen M MacQueen , Eleanor McLellan , Kelly Kay , and Bobby Milstein . 1998 . Codebook development for team - based qualitative analysis . Cultural anthropology methods 10 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 31 – 36 . 26 . Bess H Marcus , Beth C Bock , Bernardine M Pinto , Leigh Ann H Forsyth , Mary B Roberts , and Regina M Traﬁcante . 1998 . Efﬁcacy of an individualized , motivationally - tailored physical activity intervention . Annals of Behavioral Medicine 20 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 174 – 180 . 27 . Bess H Marcus , Joseph S Rossi , Vanessa C Selby , Raymond S Niaura , and David B Abrams . 1992 . The stages and processes of exercise adoption and maintenance in a worksite sample . Health Psychology 11 , 6 ( 1992 ) , 386 . 28 . M . Marge , S . Banerjee , and A . I . Rudnicky . 2010 . Using the Amazon Mechanical Turk for transcription of spoken language . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics , Speech and Signal Processing ( ICASSP ) . 5270 – 5273 . 29 . Winter Mason and Siddharth Suri . 2012 . Conducting behavioral research on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk . Behavior research methods 44 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 23 . 30 . Susan Michie , Marie Johnston , Jill Francis , Wendy Hardeman , and Martin Eccles . 2008 . From Theory to Intervention : Mapping Theoretically Derived Behavioural Determinants to Behaviour Change Techniques . Applied Psychology 57 , 4 ( Oct . 2008 ) , 660 – 680 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1464 - 0597 . 2008 . 00341 . x 31 . Adity U Mutsuddi and Kay Connelly . 2012 . Text messages for encouraging physical activity Are they effective after the novelty effect wears off ? . In Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( PervasiveHealth ) , 2012 6th International Conference on . IEEE , 33 – 40 . 32 . Claudio R Nigg , Karly S Geller , Rob W Motl , Caroline C Horwath , Kristin K Wertin , and Rodney K Dishman . 2011 . A Research Agenda to Examine the Efﬁcacy and Relevance of the Transtheoretical Model for Physical Activity Behavior . Psychology of sport and exercise 12 , 1 ( Jan . 2011 ) , 7 – 12 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . psychsport . 2010 . 04 . 004 33 . Seth M Noar , Christina N Benac , and Melissa S Harris . 2007 . Does tailoring matter ? Meta - analytic review of tailored print health behavior change interventions . Psychological bulletin 133 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 673 . 34 . GJ Norman , SV Benisovich , CR Nigg , and JS Rossi . 1998 . Examining three exercise staging algorithms in two samples . In 19th annual meeting of the Society of Behavioral Medicine . 35 . Kevin Patrick , Fred Raab , Marc A Adams , Lindsay Dillon , Marian Zabinski , Cheryl L Rock , William G Griswold , and Gregory J Norman . 2009 . A text message – based intervention for weight loss : randomized controlled trial . Journal of medical Internet research 11 , 1 ( 2009 ) . 36 . James O Prochaska and Carlo C DiClemente . 1983 . Stages and processes of self - change of smoking : toward an integrative model of change . Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 51 , 3 ( 1983 ) , 390 . 37 . James O Prochaska , Carlo C DiClemente , and John C Norcross . 1993 . In search of how people change : Applications to addictive behaviors . Journal of Addictions Nursing 5 , 1 ( 1993 ) , 2 – 16 . 38 . James O Prochaska and Wayne F Velicer . 1997 . The transtheoretical model of health behavior change . American journal of health promotion 12 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 38 – 48 . 39 . Craig S Rosen . 2000 . Is the sequencing of change processes by stage consistent across health problems ? A meta - analysis . Health Psychology 19 , 6 ( 2000 ) , 593 . 40 . Leslie Spencer , Troy B Adams , Sarah Malone , Lindsey Roy , and Elizabeth Yost . 2006 . Applying the transtheoretical model to exercise : a systematic and comprehensive review of the literature . Health promotion practice 7 , 4 ( Oct . 2006 ) , 428 – 43 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1524839905278900 41 . Daniel Stokols . 1996 . Translating social ecological theory into guidelines for community health promotion . American journal of health promotion 10 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 282 – 298 . 42 . Michael Toomim , Travis Kriplean , Claus Pörtner , and James Landay . 2011 . Utility of human - computer interactions : Toward a science of preference measurement . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2275 – 2284 . 43 . O . F . Zaidan and C . Callison - Burch . 2011 . Crowdsourcing Translation : Professional Quality from Non - professionals . In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies - Volume 1 ( HLT ’11 ) . 1220 – 1229 .