DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1158877 , 1530 ( 2009 ) ; 324 Science Graphene : Status and Prospects This copy is for your personal , non - commercial use only . clicking here . colleagues , clients , or customers by , you can order high - quality copies for your If you wish to distribute this article to others here . following the guidelines can be obtained by Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles ) : May 21 , 2011 www . sciencemag . org ( this infomation is current as of The following resources related to this article are available online at http : / / www . sciencemag . org / content / 324 / 5934 / 1530 . full . html version of this article at : including high - resolution figures , can be found in the online Updated information and services , http : / / www . sciencemag . org / content / 324 / 5934 / 1530 . full . html # ref - list - 1 , 5 of which can be accessed free : cites 37 articles This article 201 article ( s ) on the ISI Web of Science cited by This article has been http : / / www . sciencemag . org / content / 324 / 5934 / 1530 . full . html # related - urls 9 articles hosted by HighWire Press ; see : cited by This article has been http : / / www . sciencemag . org / cgi / collection / mat _ sci Materials Science subject collections : This article appears in the following registered trademark of AAAS . is a Science 2009 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science ; all rights reserved . The title Copyright American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1200 New York Avenue NW , Washington , DC 20005 . ( print ISSN 0036 - 8075 ; online ISSN 1095 - 9203 ) is published weekly , except the last week in December , by the Science on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Graphene : Status and Prospects A . K . Geim Graphene is a wonder material with many superlatives to its name . It is the thinnest known material in the universe and the strongest ever measured . Its charge carriers exhibit giant intrinsic mobility , have zero effective mass , and can travel for micrometers without scattering at room temperature . Graphene can sustain current densities six orders of magnitude higher than that of copper , shows record thermal conductivity and stiffness , is impermeable to gases , and reconciles such conflicting qualities as brittleness and ductility . Electron transport in graphene is described by a Dirac - like equation , which allows the investigation of relativistic quantum phenomena in a benchtop experiment . This review analyzes recent trends in graphene research and applications , and attempts to identify future directions in which the field is likely to develop . G raphene research has developed at a truly relentless pace . Several papers appear every day , and , if the bibliometrics pre - dictions ( 1 ) are to be trusted , the amount of litera - ture on graphene will keep rapidly increasing over the next few years . This makes it a real struggle to keep up with the developments . Newcomers are left without a broad perspective and are largely unaware of previous arguments and solved prob - lems , whereas the community ’ s doyens already show signs of forgetting their earlier papers . To combat this curse of success , many reviews have appeared in the last 2 years [ e . g . , ( 2 ) ] , and books on graphene are in the making . The electronic properties of graphene were recently discussed in an extensive theory review ( 3 ) , and this basic in - formation is unlikely to require any revision soon . More specialized papers discussing such topics as the quantum Hall effect in graphene , its Raman properties , and epitaxial growth on SiC are col - lected in ( 4 ) . Despite , or perhaps because of , the vast amount of available literature , graphene re - search has now reached the stage where a stra - tegic update is needed to cover the latest progress , emerging trends , and opening opportunities . This paper is intended to serve this purpose without repeating , whenever possible , the information available in the earlier reviews . Growing Opportunities Graphene is a single atomic plane of graphite , which — and this is essential — is sufficiently iso - lated from its environment to be considered free - standing . Atomic planes are , of course , familiar to everyone as constituents of bulk crystals , but one - atom - thick materials such as graphene re - mained unknown . The basic reason for this is that nature strictly forbids the growth of low - dimensional ( low - D ) crystals ( 2 ) . Crystal growth implies high temperatures ( T ) and , therefore , thermal fluctuations that are detrimental for the stability of macroscopic 1D and 2D objects . One can grow flat molecules and nanometer - sized crys - tallites , butastheirlateralsizeincreases , thephonon density integrated over the 3D space available for thermal vibrations rapidly grows , diverging on a macroscopic scale . This forces 2D crystallites to morph into a variety of stable 3D structures . The impossibility of growing 2D crystals does not actually mean that they cannot be made artifi - cially . With hindsight , this seems trivial . Indeed , one can grow a monolayer inside or on top of another crystal ( as an inherent part of a 3D sys - tem ) and then remove the bulk at sufficiently low T such that thermal fluctuations are unable to break atomic bonds even in macroscopic 2D crystals and mold them into 3D shapes . This consideration allows two principal routes for making 2D crystals ( Fig . 1 ) . One is to me - chanically split strongly layered materials such as graphite into individual atomic planes ( Fig . 1A ) . This is how graphene was first isolated and studied . Although delicate and time - consuming , the handcraft ( often referred to as a scotch - tape technique ) provides crystals of high structural and electronic quality , which can currently reach millimeter size . It is likely to remain the tech - nique of choice for basic research and for making proof - of - concept devices in the foreseeable fu - ture . Instead of cleaving graphite manually , it is also possible to automate the process by using , for example , ultrasonic cleavage ( 5 ) . This leads to stable suspensions of submicrometer graphene crystallites ( Fig . 1B ) , which can then be used to make polycrystalline films and composite mate - rials ( 5 , 6 ) . Conceptually similar is the ultrasonic cleavage of chemically “ loosened ” graphite , in which atomic planes are partially detached first by intercalation , making the sonification more efficient ( 6 ) . The sonification allows graphene production on an industrial scale . The alternative route is to start with graphitic layers grown epitaxially on top of other crystals ( 7 ) ( Fig . 1C ) . This is the 3D growth during which epitaxial layers remain bound to the underlying substrate and the bond - breaking fluctuations are suppressed . After the epitaxial structure is cooled down , one can remove the substrate by chemical etching . Technically , this is similar to making , for example , SiN membranes ; however , the survival of one - atom - thick crystals was deemed impossible , and no one tried this route until recently ( 8 – 10 ) . The isolation of epitaxial monolayers and their transfer onto weakly binding substrates ( 2 ) may REVIEW Manchester Centre for Mesoscience and Nanotechnology , University of Manchester , Oxford Road , Manchester M13 9PL , UK . A B C D 1 mm Fig . 1 . Making graphene . ( A ) Large graphene crystal prepared on an oxidized Si wafer by the scotch - tape technique . [ Courtesy of Graphene Industries Ltd . ] ( B ) Left panel : Suspension of microcrystals obtained by ultrasound cleavage of graphite in chloroform . Right panel : Such suspensions can be printed on various substrates . The resulting films are robust and remain highly conductive even if folded . [ Courtesy of R . Nair , University of Manchester ] ( C ) The first graphene wafers are now available as polycrystalline one - to five - layer films grown on Ni and transferred onto a Si wafer . [ Courtesy of A . Reina and J . Kong , MIT ] ( D ) State - of - the - art SiC wafer with atomic terraces covered by a graphitic monolayer ( indicated by “ 1 ” ) . Double and triple layers ( “ 2 ” and “ 3 ” ) grow at the steps ( 12 ) . 19 JUNE 2009 VOL 324 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1530 on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m now seem obvious , but it was realized only last year ( 9 , 10 ) . With progress continuing apace , the produc - tion of graphene wafers looks like a done deal . Imagine the following technology : Let us start with a tungsten ( 011 ) wafer of many inches in diameter and epitaxially grow a thin Ni ( 111 ) film on top ( 11 ) . This is to be followed by chemical vapor deposition of a carbon monolayer ( the growth of graphene on Ni can be self - terminating with little lattice mismatch ) ( 7 , 11 ) . In this manner , wafer - scale single crystals of graphene ( chemically bound to Ni ) have been grown ( 11 ) . A polymer or another film can then be deposited on top , and Ni is etched away as a sacrificial layer , leaving a graphene monolayer on an insulating substrate and the expensive W wafer ready for another round . The full cycle has not yet been demon - strated and will probably differ from the gedanken one outlined above ( e . g . , Cu can be used instead of Ni ) . Nonetheless , wafers of continuous few - layer graphene have already been grown on poly - crystalline Ni films and transferred onto plastic and Si wafers ( 9 , 10 ) ( Fig . 1C ) . These films ex - hibit carrier mobility m of up to 4000 cm 2 V − 1 s − 1 ( 10 ) — close to that of cleaved graphene — even before the substrate material , growth , and transfer procedures have been optimized . Where does this leave graphitic layers grown on SiC ( 4 , 12 ) ( Fig . 1D ) ? These have been con - sidered as a champion route to graphene wafers for electronics applications , mostly because SiC automatically provides an insulating substrate . First of all , one must distinguish between two principally different types of “ graphene on SiC . ” One consists of single and double layers grown on the Si - terminated face , and the other is “ mul - tilayer epitaxial graphene ” that rapidly grows on the carbon face ( 4 , 12 ) . In the former case , car - bon layers are bound to the substrate sufficiently weakly to retain graphene ’ s linear spectrum away ( > 0 . 2 eV ) from the charge neutrality point ( NP ) ( 13 ) . However , interaction with the substrate in - duces strong doping ( ~ 10 13 cm − 2 ) and spectral disorder at low energies [ ( 13 ) ; see ( 14 ) for a pos - sible model for the complex graphene - SiC inter - face ] . The crystal quality and coverage homogeneity for the Si - face films have recently improved ( 12 ) , and m values start approaching those for graphene transferred from Ni . As for the carbon face , its epitaxial multilayers should probably be referred to as turbostratic graphene because they are rota - tionally disordered ( no Bernal stacking ) and sep - arated by a distance slightly larger than that in graphite ( 4 , 15 ) . Turbostratic graphene exhibits the Dirac - like spectrum of free - standing graphene , lit - tledoping , andexceptionallyhighelectronicquality ( m ≈ 250 , 000 cm 2 V – 1 s – 1 at room temperature ) ( 15 ) . These features can be attributed to weak elec - tronic coupling between inner layers ; their protec - tion from the environment by a few outer layers ; and the absence of microscopic corrugations ( 2 , 8 ) . Because an external electric field is screened within just a couple of near - surface layers , turbostratic graphene probably offers limited potential for elec - tronics but is interesting from other perspectives , especially for fundamental studies close to NP . Whichever way one now looks at the pros - pects for graphene production in bulk and wafer - scale quantities , those challenges that looked so daunting just 2 years ago have suddenly shrunk , if not evaporated , thanks to the recent advances in growth , transfer , and cleavage techniques . Quantum Update The most explored aspect of graphene physics is its electronic properties . Despite being recently reviewed ( 2 – 4 ) , this subarea is so important that it necessitates a short update . From the most gen - eral perspective , several features make graphene ’ s electronic properties unique and different from those of any other known condensed matter sys - tem . The first and most discussed is , of course , graphene ’ s electronic spectrum . Electrons propa - gating through the honeycomb lattice completely lose their effective mass , which results in quasi - particles that are described by a Dirac - like equa - tion rather than the Schrödinger equation ( 2 – 4 ) . The latter — so successful for the understanding of quantum properties of other materials — does not work for graphene ’ s charge carriers with zero rest mass . Figure 2 provides a visual summary of how much our quantum playgrounds have expanded since the experimental discovery of graphene . Second , electron waves in graphene propagate within a layer that is only one atom thick , which makes them accessible and amenable to various scanningprobes , as well as sensitive to the proxim - ity of other materials such as high - k dielectrics , superconductors , ferromagnetics , etc . This feature offersmanyenticingpossibilitiesincomparisonwiththeconventional2Delectronicsystems ( 2DES ) . Third , graphene exhibits an astonishing electronic quality . Its electrons can cover submicrometer dis - tances without scattering , even in samples placed on an atomically rough substrate , covered with ad - sorbates and at room temperature . Fourth , as a result of the massless carriers and little scattering , quantum effects in graphene are robust and can survive even at room temperature . The initial studies of graphene ’ s electronic properties were focused on the analysis of what new physics could be gained by using the Dirac equation within the standard condensed matter formalism ( 2 – 4 ) . This “ recycling ” of quantum elec - trodynamics for the case of graphene has quickly led to the understanding of the half - integer quantum Hall effect and the predictions of such phenomena as Klein tunneling , zitterbewegung , the Schwinger production ( 16 ) , supercritical atomic collapse ( 3 , 17 ) , and Casimir - like interactions between adsorbates on graphene ( 18 ) . As for experiment , only the Klein tunneling has been verified in sufficient detail ( 19 , 20 ) . Furthermore , transport properties of real graphene devices have turned out to be much more complicated than theoretical quantum electrody - namics , and some basic questions about graphene ’ s electronic properties still remain to be answered . For example , there is no consensus about the scattering mechanism that currently limits m , little understanding of transport properties near NP [ especially on zero Landau level ( 21 ) ] , and no evidence for many predicted interaction effects . H = p 2 / 2 m * ˆ ˆ H = c σ • p ˆ ˆ H = v F σ • p ˆ ˆ H = σ • p ˆ 2 / 2 m * ˆ “Schrödingerfermions” ultra - relativistic Dirac particles massive chiral fermions massless Dirac fermions E k y k x A B C D Fig . 2 . Quasi - particle zoo . ( A ) Charge carriers in condensed matter physics are normally described by the Schrödinger equation with an effective mass m * different from the free electron mass ( ^ p is the momentum operator ) . ( B ) Relativistic particles in the limit of zero rest mass follow the Dirac equa - tion , where c is the speed of light and → s is the Pauli matrix . ( C ) Charge carriers in graphene are called massless Dirac fermions and are described by a 2D analog of the Dirac equation , with the Fermi velocity v F ≈ 1 × 10 6 m / s playing the role of the speed of light and a 2D pseudospin matrix → s describing two sublattices of the honeycomb lattice ( 3 ) . Similar to the real spin that can change its direction between , say , left and right , the pseudospin is an index that indicates on which of the two sublattices a quasi - particle is located . The pseudospin can be indicated by color ( e . g . , red and green ) . ( D ) Bilayer graphene provides us with yet another type of quasi - particles that have no analogies . They are massive Dirac fermions described by a rather bizarre Hamiltonian that combines features of both Dirac and Schrödinger equations . The pseudospin changes its color index four times as it moves among four carbon sublattices ( 2 – 4 ) . www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 324 19 JUNE 2009 1531 REVIEW on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m In the near term , much of this research will continue being driven by our knowledge about other low - D systems and by the “ recycling ” of the known issues and phenomena . Graphene - based quantum dots ( 22 , 23 ) , p - n junctions ( 19 , 20 ) , nanoribbons ( 23 – 25 ) , quantum point contacts ( 22 ) , and , especially , magnetotransport near NP have not received even a fraction of the attention they deserve . Also , it is easy to foresee the re - visiting of lateral superlattices , magnetic focus - ing , electron optics , and many interference and ballistic effects studied previously in the con - ventional 2DES ( 26 ) , which hopefully can either be more spectacular in graphene or clarify its physics . Among other usual suspects are electro - and magneto - optics , where graphene offers many unexplored opportunities . Graphene is structurally malleable , and its electronic , optical , and phonon properties can be strongly modified by strain and deformation ( 27 ) . For example , strain allows one to create local gauge fields ( 3 ) and even alter graphene ’ s band structure . Research on bended , folded , and scrolled graphene is also gearing up . Furthermore , graphene and turbostratic graphene offer a dream playground for scanning probe microscopy , and many experiments can be constructed for observing su - percritical screening , detecting local magnetic moments , mapping wave functions in quantizing fields , etc . Further down the line are interaction effects in split bilayers ; observing such effects would be experimentally challenging but may bring up phys - ics even more spectacular than that in the other 2DES ( 28 ) . On the fron - tier of exploration is the fractional quantum Hall effect , whose possi - bility has already been tormenting graphene researchers who occasionally observe plateau - like features at fractional fillings , only to find them irreproducible for different devices . The above sketchy agenda may take many years to complete , and the speed of developments will crucially depend on progress in growing wafers and improvements in sample quality . Inch - size wafers with m values in the range of 1 million can no longer be dismissed as “ graphene dreams , ” and when this happens , many - body phenomena and new physics that cannot even be envisaged at this stage are likely to emerge . Chemistry Matters Graphene is an ultimate incarnation of the sur - face : It has two faces with no bulk in between . Although this surface ’ s physics is currently at the center of attention , its chemistry has remained largely unexplored . What we have so far learned about graphene chemistry is that , similar to the surface of graphite , graphene can adsorb and desorb various atoms and molecules ( for exam - ple , NO 2 , NH 3 , K , and OH ) . Weakly attached adsorbates often act as donors or acceptors and lead to changes mostly in the carrier concentra - tion , so that graphene remains highly conductive ( 29 ) . Other adsorbates such as H + or OH – give rise to localized ( “ mid - gap ” ) states close to NP , whichresultsinpoorlyconductivederivativessuchasgrapheneoxide ( 6 ) and “ single - sided graphane ” ( 30 ) . Despite the new names , these are not new chemical compounds but are the same graphene randomly decorated with adsorbates . Thermal an - nealing or chemical treatment allows the reduction of graphene to its original state with relatively few defects left behind ( 30 ) . This reversible dressing up and down is possible because of the robust atomic scaffold that remains intact during chem - ical reactions . Within this surface science perspective , graphene chemistry looks similar to that of graphite , and the latter can be used for guidance . There are principal differences too . First , chemically induced changes in graphene ’ s properties are much more pronounced because of the absence of an obscuring contribution from the bulk ( 29 ) . Second , unlike graphite ’ s sur - face , graphene is not flat but typically exhibits nanometer - scale corrugations ( 8 ) . The associated strain and curvature can markedly influence local reactivity . Third , reagentscanattachtobothgraphene faces , and this alters the energetics , allowing chem - ical bonds that would be unstable if only one sur - face were exposed ( 31 ) . An alternative to the surface chemistry per - spective is to consider graphene as a giant flat molecule ( as first suggested by Linus Pauling ) . Like any other molecule , graphene can partake in chemical reactions . The important difference be - tween the two viewpoints is that in the latter case , adsorbates are implicitly assumed to attach to the carbon scaffold in a stoichiometric manner — that is , periodically rather than randomly . This should result in new 2D crystals with distinct electronic structures and different electrical , optical , and chemical properties . The first known example is graphane , a 2D hydrocarbon with one hydrogen atom attached to every site of the honeycomb lattice ( 30 , 31 ) . Many other graphene - based crys - tals should be possible because adsorbates are likely to self - organize into periodic structures , similar to the case of graphite , which is well known for its surface superstructures . Instead of doping with atomic hydrogen ( as in graphane ) , F – , OH – , and many functional groups appear to be viable candidates in the search for novel graphene - based 2D crystals . Graphene chemistry is likely to play an in - creasingly important role in future developments . For example , stoichiometric derivatives offer a way to control the electronic structure , which is of interest for many applications including elec - tronics . Chemical changes can probably be in - duced even locally . Imagine , then , an all - graphene circuitry in which interconnects are made from pristine graphene , whereas other areas are modi - fied to become semiconducting and allow transis - tors . Disordered graphene - based derivatives should not be overlooked either . They can probably be referred to as functionalized graphene , suitable for specific applications . “ Graphene paper ” is a spectacular example of how important such func - tionalization could be ( Fig . 3 ) . If it is made start - ing with a suspension of nonfunctionalized flakes ( 5 ) , the resulting material is porous and extremely fragile . However , the same paper made of graphene oxide is dense , stiff , and strong ( 6 , 32 ) . In the latter case , the functional groups bind individual sheets together , which results in a microscopic structure not dissimilar to that of nacre , known for its strength . Instead of aragonite bound in nacre by biopolymer glue , graphene oxide laminate , in particular its reduced version ( 32 ) , makes use of atomic - scale stitching of the strongest known nanomaterial . Despite a cornucopia of possible findings and applications , graphene chemistry has so far at - tracted little interest from professional chemists . One reason is that graphene is neither a standard surface nor a standard molecule . However , the main obstacle has probably been the lack of sam - ples suitable for traditional chemistry . The recent progress in making graphene suspensions ( 5 , 6 ) has opened up a way to liquid - phase chemistry , and hopefully , the professional help that graphene researchers have long been waiting for is now coming . Sleeping Beauty It is customary these days to start reports on graphene by referring to it as a “ unique elec - tronic system . ” This statement belittles what graphene is actually about . 2DES and even Dirac - like quasi - particles were known before , but one - atom - thick materials were not . In this respect , graphene has founded a league of its own , but little is known about its non - electronic properties . The situation is now rapidly changing , and this brings beautiful new dimensions into graphene research . Last year , the first measurements of graphene ’ s mechanical and thermal properties were reported . It exhibits a breaking strength of ~ 40 N / m , reaching the theoretical limit ( 33 ) . Record values for room - temperature thermal conductivity ( ~ 5000 W m – 1 K – 1 ) ( 34 ) and Young ’ s modulus ( ~ 1 . 0 TPa ) ( 33 ) were also reported . Graphene can be stretched elastically A B Fig . 3 . Graphene derivatives . ( A ) Graphene oxide laminate is tough , flexible , transparent , and insulating ( 6 ) . ( B ) Paper made in the same way as ( A ) but starting from graphene suspension ( 5 ) is porous , fragile , opaque , and metallic . [ Courtesy of R . Nair , University of Manchester ] 19 JUNE 2009 VOL 324 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1532 REVIEW on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m by as much as 20 % , more than any other crystal ( 27 , 33 ) . These observations were partially ex - pected on the basis of previous studies of carbon nanotubes and graphite , which are structurally made of graphene sheets . Somewhat higher val - ues observed in graphene can be attributed to the virtual absence of crystal defects in samples ob - tained by micromechanical cleavage . Even more intriguing are those findings that have no ana - logs . For example , unlike any other material , graphene shrinks with increasing T at all values of T because membrane phonons dominate in 2D ( 35 ) . Also , graphene exhibits simultaneously high pliability ( folds and pleats are commonly observed ) and brittleness [ it fractures like glass at high strains ( 36 ) ] . The notions constitute an oxymoron , but graphene combines both prop - erties . Equally unprecedented is the observation that the one - atom - thick film is impermeable to gases , including helium ( 37 ) . When wafers be - come available , there should be an explosion of interest in ( bio ) molecular and ion transport through graphene and its membranes with de - signer pores . Speaking of non - electronic properties , we do not even know such basic things about graphene as how it melts . Neither the melting temperature nor the order of the phase transition is known . Ultrathin films are known to exhibit melting tem - peratures that rapidly decrease with decreasing thickness . The thermodynamics of 2D crystals in a 3D space could be very different from that of thin films and may more closely resemble the physics of soft membranes . For example , melting can occur through generation of defect pairs and be dependent on the lateral size , similar to the Kosterlitz - Thouless transition . Experimental prog - ress in studying graphene ’ s thermodynamic prop - erties has been hindered by the small sizes of available crystals , but the situation may change soon . On the other hand , theoretical progress is likely to remain slow because small sizes have also proven to be a problem in molecular dy - namics and other numerical approaches , which struggle to grasp the underlying physics when studying crystals of only a few nanometers in size . Grandeur and Plainness Potential applications of graphene were discussed in ( 2 ) and , during the past 2 years , substantial progress has been made along many lines . The major difference between now and then is the ad - ventofmassproductiontechnologiesforgraphene . This has changed the whole landscape by making the subject of applications less speculative and allowing the development of new concepts un - imaginable earlier . Most of the current buzz surrounds graphene ’ s long - term prospects in computer electronics . Im - mediate , but often mundane , applications are least discussed and remain unnoticed even within parts of the graphene community . An extreme example of popular speculations is an idea about graphene becoming the base electronic material “ beyond the Si age . ” Although this possibility cannot be ruled out , it is so far beyond the horizon that it cannot be assessed accurately . At the very least , graphene - based integrated circuits require the con - ducting channel to be completely closed in the off state . Several schemes have been proposed to deal with graphene ’ s gapless spectrum and , recently , nanoribbon transistors with large on - off current ratios at room temperature were demon - strated ( 22 , 25 ) ( Fig . 4A ) . Nonetheless , the pros - pect of “ graphenium inside ” remains as distantas ever . This is not because of graphene shortfalls , but rather because experimental tools to define structures with atomic precision are lacking . More effortsinthisdirectionareneeded , buttheprogress is expected to be painstakingly slow and to de - pend on technological developments outside the research area . An example to the contrary is the use of graphene in transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . It is a tiny niche application , but it is real . Single - crystal membranes , one atom thick and with low atomic mass , provide the best imag - inable support for atomic - resolution TEM . With micrometer - sized crystallites now available in so - lution ( 5 ) for their cheap and easy deposition on standard grids and with films transferable from metals ( 9 , 10 ) onto such grids , graphene mem - branes are destined to become a routine TEM accessory ( Fig . 4D ) . The space between graphene dreams and im - mediate reality is packed with applications . One such application is neither grand nor mundane : individual ultrahigh - frequency analog transistors ( Fig . 4B ) . This area is currently dominated by GaAs - based devices known as high - electron - mobility transistors ( HEMTs ) , which are widely used in communication technologies . Graphene offers a possibility to extend HEMTs ’ operational range into terahertz frequencies . The fundamen - tals allowing this are well known : Graphene ex - hibits room - temperature ballistic transport such that the charge transit between source and drain contacts takes only 0 . 1 ps for a typical channel length of 100 nm . Gate electrodes can be placed as close as several nanometers above graphene , which allows shorter channels and even quicker transit . Although graphene ’ s gapless spectrum leads to low on - off ratios of 10 to 100 , they are 10 nm A B C D 3 µm 1 nm Fig . 4 . From dreams to reality . ( A ) Graphene nanoribbons of sub - 10 - nm scale exhibit the transistor action with large on - off ratios ( 22 , 25 ) . Scanning electron micrograph shows such a ribbon made by electron - beam lithography ( 22 ) . Control of such a ribbon ’ s width and its edge structure with atomic precision remains a daunting challenge on the way toward graphene - based electronics . ( B ) All the fundamentals are in place to make graphene - based HEMTs . This false - color micrograph shows the source and drain contacts in yellow , two top gates in light gray , and graphene underneath in green ( 38 ) . [ Courtesy of Y . Lin , IBM ] ( C ) Graphene - based NEMS . Shown is a drum resonator made from a 10 - nm - thick film of reduced graphene oxide , which covers a recess in a Si wafer ( 32 ) . ( D ) Ready to use : Graphene membranes provide an ideal support for TEM . The central part is a monolayer of amorphous carbon . Graphene itself shows on this image only as a gray background ( see the top part ) . Carbon atoms in the amorphous layer appear dark and make a random array of pentagons , hexagons , and heptagons , as indicated by color lines . Individual oxygen atoms clearly visible on graphene were also reported ( 36 ) . [ Courtesy of J . C . Meyer , A . Chuvilin , and U . Kaiser , University of Ulm ] www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 324 19 JUNE 2009 1533 REVIEW on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m considered sufficient for the analog electronics . The progress toward graphene HEMTs is hin - dered by experimental difficulties in accessing the microwave range . The first frequency tests of graphene transistors were reported only re - cently ( 38 ) . Long channels and low mobility in these experiments limited the cutoff frequen - cies to less than 30 GHz ( 38 ) , well below the operational range of GaAs - based HEMTs . How - ever , the observed scaling of the operational frequency as a function of the channel length and m indicates that the terahertz range is ac - cessible ( 38 ) . With graphene wafers in sight , these efforts are going to intensify , and HEMTs and other ultrahigh - frequency devices such as switches and rectifiers have a realistic chance to reach the market . Sitting on a Graphene Mine There has been an explosion of ideas that sug - gest graphene for virtually every feasible use . This is often led by analogies with carbon nano - tubes that continue to serve as a guide in search - ing for new applications . For example , graphene powder is considered to be excellent filler for composite materials ( 6 ) . Reports have also been made on graphene - based supercapacitors , bat - teries , interconnects , and field emitters , but it is too early to say whether graphene is able to compete with the other materials , including nano - tubes . Less expectedly , graphene has emerged as a viable candidate for use in optoelectronics ( 10 , 39 ) . Suspensions offer an inexpensive way to make graphene - based coatings by spinning or printing ( Fig . 1B ) . An alternative is the trans - fer of films grown on Ni ( 9 , 10 ) . These coatings are often suggested as a competitor for indium tin oxide ( ITO ) , the industry standard in such products as solar cells , liquid crystal displays , etc . However , graphene films exhibit resistivity of several hundred ohms for the standard trans - parency of ~ 80 % ( 9 , 10 , 39 ) . Such resistivity is two orders of magnitude higher than for ITO and is unacceptable in many applications ( e . g . , solar cells ) . It remains to be seen whether the conductivity can be improved to the required extent . Having said that , graphene coatings also offer certain advantages over ITO . They are chemically stable , robust , and flexible and can even be folded , which gives them a good chance of beating the competition in touch screens and bendable applications . There is also fast - growing interest in graphene as a base material for nanoelectromechanical systems ( NEMS ) ( 32 , 40 ) , given that lightness and stiffness are the essential characteristics sought in NEMS for sensing applications . Graphene - based resonators offer low inertial masses , ul - trahigh frequencies , and , in comparison with nanotubes , low - resistance contacts that are es - sential for matching the impedance of external circuits . Graphene membranes have so far shown quality factors of ~ 100 at 100 - MHz frequencies ( 40 ) . Even more encouraging are data for drum resonators made from reduced graphene oxide films ( 32 ) . These nanometer - thick polycrys - talline NEMS ( Fig . 4C ) exhibit high Young ’ s moduli ( comparable to those of graphene ) and quality factors of ~ 4000 at room temperature . The films can be produced as wafers and then processed by standard microfabrication tech - niques . Further developments ( increasing the frequency and improving quality factors ) should allow graphene NEMS to assail such tanta - lizing challenges as inertial sensing of indi - vidual atoms and the detection of zero - point oscillations . Among other applications that require men - tioning are labs - on - chips ( electronic noses ) and various resistive memories . The high sensitivity of graphene to its chemical environment is well acknowledged , now that sensors capable of de - tecting individual gas molecules have been dem - onstrated ( 29 ) . Imagine an array of graphene devices , each functionalized differently to be able to react to different chemicals or biomolecules . Such functionalization has been intensively re - searched for the case of carbon nanotubes , and graphene adds the possibility of mass - produced arrays of identical devices . Furthermore , there are several enticing reports on nonvolatile mem - ories in which graphene - based wires undergo reversible resistance switching by , for example , applying a sequence of current pulses ( 41 , 42 ) . The underlying mechanism remains largely unknown , but such nanometer - scale switches present an attractive alternative to phase - change memories and deserve further attention . Reports on graphene - ferroelectric memories ( 43 ) are also encouraging , given the basic simplicity of their operation . More Room in the Flatland Graphene has rapidly changed its status from being an unexpected and sometimes unwelcome newcomer to a rising star and to a reigning cham - pion . The professional skepticism that initially dominated the attitude of many researchers with respect to graphene applications is gradually evaporating under the pressure of recent devel - opments . Still , it is the wealth of new physics — observed , expected , and hoped for — that is driving the area for the moment . Research on graphene ’ s electronic properties is now matured but is unlikely to start fading any time soon , especially because of the virtually unexplored opportunity to control quantum transport by strain engineering and various structural modifications . Even after that , graphene will continue to stand out in the arsenal of condensed matter physics . Research on graphene ’ s non - electronic properties is just gearing up , and this should bring up new phenomena that may well sustain , if not expand , the graphene boom . References and Notes 1 . A . Barth , W . Marx , http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0808 . 3320 ( 2008 ) . 2 . A . K . Geim , K . S . Novoselov , Nat . Mater . 6 , 183 ( 2007 ) . 3 . A . H . Castro Neto , F . Guinea , N . M . R . Peres , K . S . Novoselov , A . K . Geim , Rev . Mod . Phys . 81 , 109 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Special edition : Exploring Graphene — Recent Research Advances , S . Das Sarma , A . K . Geim , P . Kim , A . H . MacDonald , Eds . , Solid State Commun . 143 , issues 1 – 2 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Y . Hernandez et al . , Nat . Nanotechnol . 3 , 563 ( 2008 ) . 6 . D . A . Dikin et al . , Nature 448 , 457 ( 2007 ) . 7 . C . Oshima , A . Nagashima , J . Phys . Condens . Matter 9 , 1 ( 1997 ) . 8 . J . C . Meyer et al . , Nature 446 , 60 ( 2007 ) . 9 . A . Reina et al . , Nano Lett . 9 , 30 ( 2009 ) . 10 . K . S . Kim et al . , Nature 457 , 706 ( 2009 ) . 11 . A . Grüneis , D . V . Vyalikh , Phys . Rev . B 77 , 193401 ( 2008 ) . 12 . K . V . Emtsev et al . , Nat . Mater . 8 , 203 ( 2009 ) . 13 . S . Y . Zhou et al . , Nat . Mater . 6 , 770 ( 2007 ) . 14 . S . Kim , J . Ihm , H . J . Choi , Y . W . Son , Phys . Rev . Lett . 100 , 176802 ( 2008 ) . 15 . M . Orlita et al . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 101 , 267601 ( 2008 ) . 16 . D . Allor , T . D . Chen , D . A . McGady , Phys . Rev . D 78 , 096009 ( 2008 ) . 17 . A . V . Shytov , M . I . Katsnelson , L . S . Levitov , Phys . Rev . Lett . 99 , 246802 ( 2007 ) . 18 . A . Shytov , D . Abanin , L . Levitov , http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0812 . 4970 ( 2008 ) . 19 . A . F . Young , P . Kim , Nat . Phys . 5 , 222 ( 2009 ) . 20 . N . Stander , B . Huard , D . Goldhaber - Gordon , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 026807 ( 2009 ) . 21 . J . G . Checkelsky , L . Li , N . P . Ong , Phys . Rev . B 79 , 115434 ( 2009 ) . 22 . L . A . Ponomarenko et al . , Science 320 , 356 ( 2008 ) . 23 . F . Molitor et al . , Phys . Rev . B 79 , 075426 ( 2009 ) . 24 . M . Y . Han , B . Ozyilmaz , Y . Zhang , P . Kim , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 , 206805 ( 2007 ) . 25 . X . Li , X . Wang , L . Zhang , S . Lee , H . Dai , Science 319 , 1229 ( 2008 ) ; published online 23 January 2008 ( 10 . 1126 / science . 1150878 ) . 26 . C . W . J . Beenakker , H . van Houten , in Semiconductor Heterostructures and Nanostructures , H . Ehrenreich , D . Turnbull , Eds . ( Academic , New York , 1991 ) , pp . 1 – 228 . 27 . V . M . Pereira , A . H . Castro Neto , N . M . R . Peres , http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0811 . 4396 ( 2008 ) . 28 . H . Min , R . Bistritzer , J . J . Su , A . H . MacDonald , Phys . Rev . B 78 , 121401 ( 2008 ) . 29 . F . Schedin et al . , Nat . Mater . 6 , 652 ( 2007 ) . 30 . D . C . Elias et al . , Science 323 , 610 ( 2009 ) . 31 . J . O . Sofo , A . S . Chaudhari , G . D . Barber , Phys . Rev . B 75 , 153401 ( 2007 ) . 32 . J . T . Robinson et al . , Nano Lett . 8 , 3441 ( 2008 ) . 33 . C . Lee , X . Wei , J . W . Kysar , J . Hone , Science 321 , 385 ( 2008 ) . 34 . A . A . Balandin et al . , Nano Lett . 8 , 902 ( 2008 ) . 35 . W . Bao et al . , http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0903 . 0414 ( 2009 ) . 36 . T . J . Booth et al . , Nano Lett . 8 , 2442 ( 2008 ) . 37 . J . S . Bunch et al . , Nano Lett . 8 , 2458 ( 2008 ) . 38 . Y . M . Lin et al . , Nano Lett . 9 , 422 ( 2009 ) . 39 . X . Wang , L . Zhi , K . Müllen , Nano Lett . 8 , 323 ( 2008 ) . 40 . J . S . Bunch et al . , Science 315 , 490 ( 2007 ) . 41 . Y . Li , A . Sinitskii , J . M . Tour , Nat . Mater . 7 , 966 ( 2008 ) . 42 . B . Standley et al . , Nano Lett . 8 , 3345 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Y . Zheng et al . , Appl . Phys . Lett . 94 , 163505 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Supported by the Engineering and Physical Science Research Council ( UK ) , U . S . Office of Naval Research , and U . S . Air Force Office of Scientific Research . I thank I . Grigorieva , A . Castro Neto , A . MacDonald , P . Kim , and K . Novoselov for many helpful comments , and the staff of the Max Planck Institute for Solid - State Research for their hospitality during my sabbatical when this review was partially written . 10 . 1126 / science . 1158877 19 JUNE 2009 VOL 324 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1534 REVIEW on M a y 21 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m