Request - Prediction and Hyperlink - Proposals Methodologies and Mathematics behind Web - Applications Dissertation Ernst - Georg Haffner Fachbereich IV - Informatik Universit¨at Trier Abstract Due to the breath - taking growth of the World Wide Web ( WWW ) , the need for fast and eﬃcient web applications becomes more and more urgent . In this doctoral thesis , the emphasis will be on two concrete tasks for improving Internet applications . On the one hand , a major problem of many of today’s Internet applications may be described as the performance of the Client / Server - communication : servers often take a long time to respond to a client’s request . There are several strategies to overcome this problem of high user - perceived latencies ; one of them is to predict future user - requests . This way , time - consuming calculations on the server’s side can be performed even before the corresponding request is being made . Further - more , in certain situations , also the pre - fetching or the pre - sending of data might be appropriate . Those ideas will be discussed in detail in the second part of this work . On the other hand , a focus will be placed on the problem of proposing hyperlinks to improve the quality of rapid written texts , at ﬁrst glance , an entirely diﬀerent problem to predicting client re - quests . Ultra - modern online authoring systems that provide possibilities to check link - consistencies and administrate link management should also propose links in order to improve the usefulness of the produced HTML - documents . In the third part of this elaboration , we will describe a possibility to build a hyperlink - proposal module based on statistical information retrieval from hypertexts . These two problem categories do not seem to have much in common . It is one aim of this work to show that there are certain , similar solution strategies to look after both problems . A closer comparison and an abstraction of both methodologies will lead to interesting synergetic eﬀects . For example , advanced strategies to foresee future user - requests by modeling time and document aging can be used to improve the quality of hyperlink - proposals too .