‘Interdisciplinary strategies’ in U . S . research universities Creso M . Sa´ Published online : 8 June 2007 (cid:1) Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2007 Abstract In the context of increasing support for interdisciplinary modes of research , many in the policy , scientiﬁc , and academic communities propose that universities should change structurally to reduce the barriers to investigation that involves researchers from multiple disciplines . This paper examines ‘interdisciplinary strategies’ in U . S . research universities—deliberate efforts to spur collaborative research across traditional depart - mental and disciplinary boundaries , including the creation and adaptation of university policies , practices , and structures . It identiﬁes and analyzes the use of incentive grants to initiate new interdisciplinary units , the establishment of ‘campus - wide institutes’ that steer campus investments in interdisciplinary areas , and new modes of faculty hiring and evaluation . Illustrative examples are provided , and the implications of these strategies are discussed . Keywords Research universities (cid:1) Interdisciplinary research (cid:1) Organizational strategies (cid:1) Organized research units (cid:1) Research centers and institutes (cid:1) Organizational change Interdisciplinarity has become a laudable goal for federal agencies , scientiﬁc associations , industry , and academic leaders in the US . Proponents contend that academic institutions risk impairing scientiﬁc advancement and diminishing the contributions of science to society by retaining traditional organizational forms and modes of work associated with disciplinary specialization ( National Academies 2005 ; Rhoten 2004 ) . A sense that the ‘needed’ science does not follow from the ways of organizing research in academia underlies federal , state , and philanthropic funding of interdisciplinary centers ( Feller 2005 ; Geiger and Sa´ 2005 ; Hackett 2000 ) Two inﬂuential academic associations—the National Academies of Sciences and the Association of American Universities—recently released reports on how universities can facilitate interdisciplinary research . The reports present examples of practices from several C . M . Sa´ ( & ) University of Toronto , 252 Bloor Street West , Toronto , ON , Canada M5S 1V6 e - mail : csa @ oise . utoronto . ca 123 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10734 - 007 - 9073 - 5 institution ; universities are called upon to reshape themselves to break the structural barriers that prevent researchers from engaging in interdisciplinary collaborations across organizational boundaries ( AAU 2005 ; National Academies 2005 ) . The reformed univer - sity would purportedly allow for leaps in scientiﬁc progress and greater economic and social beneﬁts to society . On the other hand , there is also skepticism about the rhetoric of interdisciplinarity in academia ( Weingart 2000 ) . A particularly skeptical view is that if interdisciplinarity were to signiﬁcantly affect the disciplinary arrangements of academia this would have happened already , given the historical cycles of support to the former ( Abbott 2001 ) . Creating adequate environments for the practice of interdisciplinary research is often viewed as a managerial problem that requires academic leadership . Rhoten ( 2004 ) claims that there is no lack of external support to or motivation from the faculty to engage in interdisciplinary research , but of systematic implementation of measures to facilitate such work . Feller ( 2002 , pp . 113 – 114 ) asserts , ‘‘where an interdisciplinary culture does not already permeate the institution , or where such culture in threatened , central administration action is needed to nurture heads who pursue collaborative research relationships that cross boundaries . ’’ In this context , promoting interdisciplinarity is viewed as an organizational problem—enabling collaborative research among faculty from different disciplines . Recent studies indicate the widespread adoption of interdisciplinarity as an institutional goal or strategy among research universities over the past 10 years ( Feller 2002 ; Brint 2005 ) . These studies noted that most leading universities boast commitments to fostering interdisciplinary activity on their campuses , while some institutions aspire to differentiate themselves as propitious places for interdisciplinarity . Feller ( 2004 ) has suggested that those institutions more apt at effectively adapting to interdisciplinary thrusts may gain an edge in the research market if current federal funding trends persist . The political and ﬁnancial support to , and the proclaimed interest of academic leaders in interdisciplinarity suggest the potential for a creative tension between institutional aspirations and traditional academic structures ( Brint 2005 ) . Such tension would generate alternative organizational arrangements , policy priorities , and sources of recognition to academic research . While it is known that many universities have incorporated interdisciplinarity in their planning documents since the late 1990s , we know less about whether and how such emphasis has brought about organizational change . This study investigated organizational strategies to foster interdisciplinary science in US research - intensive universities : what are they ? How do they change traditional norms , organizational structures , and practices ? What are their implications ? This paper identiﬁes and characterizes ‘interdisciplinary strategies’—deliberate efforts to spur collaborative research across traditional departmental and disciplinary boundaries , including the creation and adaptation of university policies , practices , and structures . The focus is on strategies at the institutional level , rather than at the college or departmental levels . This was a two - phased study , involving an initial survey of institutional documents for 100 research - intensive universities ; from this analysis , ﬁve institutions were selected for campus visits , where distinctive strategies were investigated in greater detail . While space limitations do not allow for an extended account of the cases , this paper distills key insights from them to illustrate more general patterns . The section below sets the background for the study’s ﬁndings by discussing the disciplinary basis of university organization , the problem it raises for interdisciplinary research , and some general understandings about interdisci - plinary centers and institutes . 538 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 Interdisciplinary research as an organizational problem The disciplinary departmental nexus The modern research university ﬁnds in the nexus between disciplines and academic departments its basic organizational framework ( Blau 1994 ; Clark 1995 ) . This association between the social structure of disciplines and the organizational structure of academic departments became institutionalized early on in the history of American universities . Veysey ( 1965 ) locates the origins of clear departmental structures at leading universities in the 1890s . Thereafter , Geiger ( 2004 , p . 37 ) argues , disciplines and departments ‘‘had powerful reciprocal effects upon one another’’ as both institutions developed , with the growing authority of one reﬂecting upon the other . The number of disciplines and ﬁelds of study grew throughout the 20th century , creating their own professional associations , conferences , journals and gaining departmental homes in universities ( Clark 1996 ) . For all the expansion and diversiﬁcation of knowledge production inside and outside of academia ( Gibbons et al . 1994 ) , disciplines and their departmental counterparts are remarkably resilient across time and space . Abbott ( 2001 ) asserts that the resilience of disciplines results from the ‘dual institu - tionalization’ of the macrostructure of disciplinary labor markets and the microstructure of individual universities , each containing similar departments . University departments are both ‘producers’ and ‘consumers’ of academic professionals in these disciplinary labor markets . Thus , Abbott argues , there are disincentives for universities to deviate from established disciplinary - departmental forms , since that may threaten the academic career prospects of Ph . D . graduates . He contends that ‘the current social structure of disciplines will endlessly re - create itself’ ( p . 127 ) as departments participate in and draw faculty from the disciplinary labor markets . Similarly , Turner ( 2000 ) points to academic labor markets as the source of similarity among and continuity of departmental organizational forms . The idea that disciplines reunite common intellectual cores is debatable for Turner , who claims that popular distinctions between interdisciplinary and disciplinary forms of knowledge are ‘the product of the historical accidents that created disciplines in the ﬁrst place’ ( p . 52 ) . Abbott ( 2001 , p . 126 ) notes that Carnegie Mellon University is successful but unique as ‘perhaps the only major university in the US organized in nontraditional departments . ’ One can add to the list Rockefeller University , a specialized institution that historically adopted interdisciplinary forms of organization ( Hollingsworth and Hollingsworth 2000 ) . The insights of institutional theorists illuminate these views on disciplines and their nexus with university departments . Institutional theory highlights the historically contin - gent and contested nature of social institutions , such as ( higher ) education systems and their particular conﬁgurations ( Powell and DiMaggio , 1991 ; Meyer and Rowan 2006 ) . It emphasizes cultural - cognitive and political processes that shape the selection and endur - ance of particular institutional arrangements . Institutionalized arrangements come to be seen as ‘natural’ and deﬁne legitimate ways of organizing and transacting . Institutional theorists highlight the path - dependent nature of institutions , whose pace of change is generally slow , regardless of whether they generate the most efﬁcient outcomes or not . Legitimacy , as opposed to efﬁciency , is the main currency of institutional survival . But power and interests are also important forces in the continuity of institutions , which may serve the interests of dominant coalitions that may oppose and prevent institutional change . At the organizational level , Zucker ( 1987 ) argues that institutional elements ( e . g . , actions , roles , structures ) are resistant to change , are maintained without justiﬁcation for High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 539 123 long periods of time , and are easily transmittable to new organizational members . Change in prevailing arrangements entails overcoming ‘sunk costs’ associated to longstanding patterns of organization , and the taken - for - granted assumptions that sustain the status quo ( Jepperson 1991 ) . Viewed from an institutional perspective , the presumable beneﬁts of prevailing arrangements in academic structure , such as the quality control afforded by discipline - based departments ( Turner 2000 ; Feller 2004 ) , have a normative , rule - like status for university actors . Change is possible , but requires agents to question the underlying assumptions of traditional norms and to counteract ingrained modes of thinking , habits , and traditions . Since its early institutionalization , the departmental structure has organized and legit - imated academic work , despite cyclical interest in interdisciplinary modes of scholarship ( Klein 1990 ; Lattuca 2001 ) . Through the control over faculty appointment , promotion , and tenure decisions , departments shape the intellectual capital of the campus in tune with the cultures , norms and intellectual orientations of the disciplines . Universities also derive recognition and prestige through the collective achievement of their departments as probed by discipline - based mechanisms ( e . g . , the National Research Council’s assessment of doctoral programs ) . Ranking and rating systems often rely on peer assessments that capture and reward disciplinary achievements and departmental reputations ( Feller 2002 ) . Barriers to interdisciplinary research Proponents of interdisciplinarity have historically argued that the disciplinary mode of research production leads to an excessive fragmentation of knowledge ( Klein 1990 ; National Academies 2005 ; Caruso and Rhoten 2001 ) . The continuing specialization of ﬁelds is reﬂected on the organizational structure of universities . Clark ( 1995 , p . 245 ) asserts , ‘‘the steady decomposing of disciplines into specialties , and then of specialties into more specialties , operates across universities as an uncontrollable , self - amplifying phenomenon . Disciplinary subdivision is a powerful pressure for departmental substructuring . ’’ This phenomenon is often criticized as leading to the formation of departmental ‘silos’ whose researchers do not communicate across disciplinary and organizational boundaries . While such critique has been usual of late , it is far from a new . About 40 years ago , Jencks and Riesman ( 1968 , pp . 523 – 525 ) argued for the need for more ‘mobility and anarchy’ among disciplines and sub - disciplines . They contended that the former are eminently administrative units , while the latter are the true intellectual units of the uni - versity . Jencks and Riesman called for a continuing process of assembling and reassem - bling faculty whose interests intersect on the basis of research problems , to offer new kinds of Ph . D . programs . Far from generating a static , problem - driven organizational alternative to academic departments , Jencks and Riesman proposed that universities should engage in a continuous state of creative destruction , akin to Jefferson’s revolution every 20 years . Interestingly , a similar notion is suggested in the recent National Academies ( 2005 , p . 174 ) report , when it suggests ‘‘a more dramatic or ‘revolutionary’ vision of interdisciplinarity … in which institutions strive for a more complete integration of disciplines , institutions ‘without walls , ’ a high degree of ﬂexibility and mobility for students and faculty , and research efforts that are organized around problems rather than disciplines . ’’ Reviews of interdisciplinarity in academia suggest that this nexus between disciplines and departments , brieﬂy characterized above , produces several disincentives for interdis - ciplinary research ( Klein 1990 ; Lattuca 2001 ; Feller 2002 ) . As noted above , the very ‘production’ and ‘absorption’ of researchers in the disciplinary labor markets constraint the 540 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 appearance and career success of a relatively large number of interdisciplinary scientists . At the individual level , early training and socialization in doctoral programs is conducive to disciplinary specialization . So is the academic reward structure , based upon the judg - ments of disciplinary peers . Clark ( 1984 ) describes university professors as holding mul - tiple allegiances to departments and the national and international networks of disciplines and research ﬁelds , from which they derive professional recognition . Interdisciplinary research is usually regarded as harder to evaluate in terms of funding proposals , manuscript submissions , and published work ( Feller 2006 ; Mansilla et al . 2006 ; Lamont et al . 2006 ; Langfeldt 2006 ) . Faculty pursuing interdisciplinary research may ﬁnd it hard to secure funding , publish , and to have publications recognized by disciplinary peers . Thus , the institutionalized arrangements under discussion generate ‘transaction costs’ for university faculty to conduct interdisciplinary research , particularly in collaboration with colleagues from different academic units . Some are inherent to the process of col - laboration , such as communication issues , the management of research teams , and the need to catch up with the knowledge and methods of other ﬁelds . Others relate to the organi - zational context of universities , such as resource allocation and credit systems that do not fund and / or reward individuals and units for crosscutting collaborations ; evaluation , pro - motion , and tenure processes that do not properly evaluate or undervalue collaborative and interdisciplinary work ; and departmental and campus cultures and climates that are indifferent or hostile to such activities . Allowing for variation across ﬁelds and institutions , these are recurring issues in reviews on interdisciplinary research in American universities ( see National Academies 2005 , Feller 2002 ; Lattuca 2001 , pp . 35 – 37 ) . Interdisciplinary centers and institutes In order to circumvent such difﬁculties , universities have traditionally created interdisci - plinary research centers and institutes ( also called organized research units [ ORUs ] ) ( Ikenberry and Friedman 1972 ; Geiger 1990 ; Stahler and Tash 1994 ) . Organized research units display huge variability in goals , purposes , functions , organizational structures , and underlying activities . Several studies have attempted to make sense of the diversity of centers and institutes by proposing typologies ( Kruytbosch 1970 ; Ikenberry and Friedman 1972 ; Alpert 1985 ; Geiger 1990 ; Bozeman and Boardman 2003 ; Mallon and Bunton 2005 ) . Some authors have observed that interdisciplinary centers are often problem or mission - oriented , accountable to external sponsors ( Kruytbosch 1970 ; Alpert 1985 ) ; others contend that size is a key variable shaping the nature of interdisciplinary units , as described in Table 1 ( Epton et al . 1985 ; National Academies 2005 ) . While they are hardly a new phenomenon in American science , centers have only grown in numbers and importance over the decades ( Geiger 1990 ) . The biomedical research enterprise is particularly reliant on centers , given the growing interdisciplinarity in the life sciences , the funding patterns of the National Institutes of Health , and the business model of medical schools ( Mallon and Bunton 2005 ) . In the 1980s , survey studies suggested a prevalence of disciplinary work in large samples of ORUs ( Friedman and Friedman 1982 , 1986 ) . Recent surveys of centers in medical schools suggest an increase in the proportion of units dedicated to interdisciplinary research ( Mallon and Bunton 2005 ) . Interdisciplinary centers are increasingly important in other areas of science and technology as well . The National Science Foundation Engineering Research Centers and Science and Technology Centers are regarded as powerful programs in changing the culture in academia and industry towards multi - institutional , interdisciplinary collaborations ( Bozeman and High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 541 123 Boardman 2003 ) . Bozeman and Boardman ( 2003 ) argue that federal funding agencies ( and the NSF in particular ) have helped institutionalize the ‘‘multi - discipline , multi - purpose , ’’ center , whose purposes include collaborating with industry , resource and equipment sharing , and technology transfer . Despite the multiplication of interdisciplinary ORUs overtime , some observers are frustrated by the lack of administrative leadership in bringing about organizational change to facilitate interdisciplinarity in universities . Exhortations for change include calls for greater autonomy for interdisciplinary centers ( Rhoten 2003 ) and the diffusion of ‘best practices’ ( AAU 2005 ; National Academies 2005 ) . Other arrangements at the individual faculty level include the granting of joint - appointments in two departments , and grants for faculty to temporarily join a department in a different discipline to learn more about it . Such arrangements are still marginal in scope and scale within and across institutions . Organizational strategies to foster interdisciplinary research Most universities still promote interdisciplinary research chieﬂy through the establishment of ORUs that draw on faculty from multiple departments . Novel models of support and organization have appeared , although distinctions between the ‘old’ and the ‘new’ are tricky given the scant and scattered knowledge of interdisciplinary centers and institutes . The arrangements identiﬁed represent subtle evolutions and variations on old themes . Formal and systematic processes to create and fund interdisciplinary ORUs have appeared , and previously undocumented types of such units have gained prominence . While these developments involve signiﬁcant resources , they do not directly challenge the disciplinary - departmental structure of the university . A few institutions , however , defy earlier asser - tions that departments retain exclusive control over academic life through hiring and tenure decisions ( Feller 2004 ; Brint 2005 ) . New models of faculty recruitment and evaluation have been implemented , and early signs of dissemination are apparent . Incentive grants Several universities have implemented formal funding programs to support the establish - ment of new inter - departmental and inter - college research collaborations . 1 These may appear as ‘seed grant’ schemes or as targeted investments within strategic planning efforts . In common is the competitive provision of one - time funding , with the expectation that some level of self - sustainability is achieved in the near future . While the speciﬁc approaches vary substantially across institutions , the overall pattern is clear : universities pool resources centrally and redistribute them competitively to form interdisciplinary ‘centers of excellence . ’ If successful , these ‘start - up’ research units may evolve into larger and more permanent structures . 1 Through 2005 , these included : Auburn University , Case Western University , George Washington Uni - versity , Indiana University , Kansas State University , North Carolina State University , Ohio State University , Rutgers University , SUNY Stony Brook , University of California - Berkeley , University of Connecticut , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , University of Iowa , University of Nebraska , University of Virginia , Vanderbilt University , Virginia Tech , Washington State University . Some programs are not exclusively dedicated to interdisciplinary programs . 542 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 The availability of federal center grants and large interdisciplinary awards is a clear external incentive for these programs . Federal center grants assure a revenue stream over several years and are usually regarded as prestigious . As center grant proposals tend to be elaborate and demand signiﬁcant effort from investigators to build the scientiﬁc basis for long - term collaborations , universities have felt the need to provide support for faculty in pursuit of these major awards . Signiﬁcantly , Ohio State University calls its funding scheme ‘Large Interdisciplinary Grants Development Program . ’ To compete for seed funding , faculty members must commit to apply for federal awards of a certain dollar amount . Duke University tied central allocations to interdisciplinary units to its strategic plan - ning cycle in 2000 – 2001 . Centers receive central funding over a delimited time - period , and undergo 5 - year reviews whose default outcome is termination . A faculty member who directs an inter - school unit that has received central funding explains the expectations : They [ the administration ] view this as seed money , and they’ll view how the [ X ] center succeeds in the review format by how much grant money we bring back in . That would be one of the metrics … if a working group produces a Science or Nature paper , that matters too … but they’re looking for more than just a peer - reviewed article that’s interdisciplinary . They want something more substantive than that … . I think the expectation also is that they want us to go out and try for bigger grants in different ﬁelds , you know , million - dollar plus grants … they’re not going through all this so that someone can write a 250 , 000 dollar grant . I can do that on my own , I don’t need a center’s help . They want to change the makeup of research on campus . So they produce 10 or 20 of these centers and some of them will be cut off and some of them will continue , depending on their success , which I think is fair . While central seed funding is not new , the convergence among universities in the rational - izationofthispracticeinformal , systematicprogramsisillustrativeofthecontemporarytrend towards the rationalization of university management and budgeting processes ( Rhoades 2000 ) . The centralized schemes to fund new inter - departmental collaborations resemble in part the provision of ‘venture capital’ for entrepreneurs to initiate ( risky ) new ﬁrms . As venture capitalists , university administrations hope that researchers succeed in generating their own revenues , from which the campus can ultimately beneﬁt through indirect cost recoveries on external awards , purchased research equipment added to the overall infra - structure , and the visibility of the unit’s scientiﬁc program . Interdisciplinary groups sup - ported through these mechanisms are expected to behave as ‘quasi - ﬁrms’ ( Etzkowitz 2003 ) , actively seeking external sources of support . This is not fundamentally different from the usual behavior of research groups in general , or interdisciplinary ORUs in particular . The interesting nuance of these arrangements is on the valuation posed on the establishment of inter - departmental and inter - college collaborations . Such valuation may reﬂect an increased emphasis on such forms of cooperative research by federal agencies , although it is unclear what exact proportion of programs from which agencies actually enforce such requirements . These seed funding schemes also suggest that small interdisciplinary structures are not necessarily initiated from the ‘bottom up , ’ as previously suggested ( see Table 1 ) : senior administrators have provided the incentives for small interdisciplinary ‘start ups’ to form . Steering structures At the other hand of the spectrum , universities have established interdisciplinary research units that do not conform easily to previous classiﬁcations such as ‘large academic High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 543 123 structures , ’ although they share some of the characteristics listed in Table 1 . These ‘campus - wide’ institutes are in effect ‘steering structures’ that oversee and coordinate resources in broad segments of the university , encompassing a multitude of academic units . They ‘steer’ institutional investments towards core facilities—research infrastructure and services shared by faculty in a number of departments , often containing laboratory space for multidisciplinary collaborations . 2 As science becomes increasingly expensive , such facilities are an efﬁcient way to rationalize institutional resources amid constant compet - itive pressure to enhance the research enterprise . Campus - wide institutes also ‘steer’ faculty recruitment and time allocation towards certain areas and modes of research identiﬁed with their interdisciplinary mandates , although their ability to do so relates to the resources they control . Penn State and Stanford provide illustrative examples . Penn State established four such institutes in materials research , environment , social sciences and life sciences between the mid - 1990s and the early 2000s . The administration enacted compulsory cost reductions in the academic units in the mid - 1990s , pooling the savings into a fund to develop these strategic initiatives ( see also AAU 2005 ) . The largest unit is the Huck Institute for the Life Sciences , which has co - recruited around 60 faculty with several departments on campus and occupies a new research facility . The Penn State institutes were formed at the initiative of the central administration and are centrally funded to build research capacity in strategic areas for the university , through faculty co - hiring and facilities . Occasional gifts and grants , such as the donation that named the life sciences institute and a state appropriation to help build a new material science building , have been supplementary to the internal budget . Penn State administrators implemented the current model of interdisciplinary institutes in response to the university’s previous experience with the ‘Inter - college Research Pro - grams , ’ units that were separately budgeted and expected to raise their own revenues . In the new model , the institutes are entirely funded by the administration and are not expected to generate grant income . External awards are administered through the academic units , to avoid competition between interdisciplinary units on one hand , and colleges and depart - ments on the other : ‘‘While there is fundamental recognition for the value of interdisci - plinary research and collaboration , units have historically competed for credit and the resources that credit yield , and for real or perceived reputation’’ ( Pennsylvania State Table 1 Interdisciplinary research structures Small academic ( < 10 Persons ) Bottom - up initiation Research is primary ; training is byproduct Loose management structure Many participants have disciplinary research commitments as well Large academic Bottom - up initiation , top - down incubation and management Research and training components Management by directors who report directly to vice president for research or equivalent Tend to be permanent features : new building , instrumentation Some centers ‘‘co - hire’’ faculty , but faculty are afﬁliated with departments Space allocation : mix of permanent and ‘‘hotel’’ facilities Source : National Academies ( 2005 ) 2 For examples of new interdisciplinary research facilities , see Sa´ ( 2007 ) . 544 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 University 2002 , p . 35 ) . The function of the institutes is therefore to rationalize the use of resources ( e . g . , research facilities , equipment ) and make targeted investments to enhance the research enterprise , through faculty co - funding and planning grants . At Stanford , similar units in the health sciences , environmental studies , and interna - tional studies emerged from the bottom up and have become staples of the university’s commitment to interdisciplinary research and advanced training . Stanford relies heavily on fundraising to build its institutes , although some central funds have been used for pro - grammatic activities . Indeed , they are a key element of Stanford’s $ 4 . 3 billion fundraising campaign launched in late 2006 . Of the total fundraising target , $ 1 billion is targeted to the three initiatives . 3 Bio - X , the campus - wide institute in health sciences , is the most devel - oped unit . It occupies a modern new facility—the Clark Center—built with around $ 150 million in gifts . The center houses about 35 faculty from multiple departments , arranged in contiguous laboratory spaces along interdisciplinary themes . A university ofﬁcial views the goal of Bio - X / Clark Center as to ‘‘to change the way people do and view science . ’’ Faculty are also appointed in academic units , and research grants are managed through the schools and departments . These initiatives , as Penn State’s institutes , are established to provide a single and visible face for decentralized scientiﬁc expertise on campus that is not captured by traditional departmental divisions ( e . g . , ‘environmental research’ ) . Such visibility is regarded as an important factor in the external recognition and appraisal of the university’s research strengths . Control over a research facility enhances internal visibility and helps attract faculty , as is often the case with ORUs ( Ikenberry and Friedman 1972 ; Mallon 2006 ) . Nevertheless , these units are often intended to have porous boundaries , allowing a large number of researchers to participate . Campus leaders ( e . g . , upper administrators , senior faculty , deans ) make strategic decisions about the direction of growth of the research enterprise as they create and support these units , effectively steering the course of institutional development . It does not follow that such direction is necessarily at odds with faculty governance and the traditional disciplinary structure . Faculty may have strong participation in the initiation of these units , and inter - school committees composed by professors and college deans can participate in the institute’s academic policy - making and governance . Informal channels of power and inﬂuence are also reportedly used to circulate ideas among faculty and administrators . Models of faculty recruitment and evaluation A few universities have changed policies and practices in key areas such as faculty recruitment and evaluation to accommodate researchers with interdisciplinary interests . These strategies are noteworthy for changing institutionalized norms that are central to the academic operation , always a difﬁcult and sensitive task . Duke University and the University of Southern California have reformed their faculty promotion , evaluation and recognition policies to account for interdisciplinary interests . Both institutions now require colleges and schools to accommodate the interdisciplinary work of faculty in the evaluation , promotion , and tenure processes . 4 At Duke , about a year of discussions preceded the new policy , which requires the administrators of academic units to appoint experts from outside the department or school to participate in and co - chair 3 See http : / / thestanfordchallenge . stanford . edu / get / layout / tsc / TheStanfordChallenge ? indexredir = r 4 See University of Southern California ( 2005 ) , and Duke University ( 2004 ) . High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 545 123 tenure review committees in cases of faculty with interdisciplinary interests . This long process was devised not only to obtain buy - in , but also to instill cultural change , as explained by a senior administrator : … we vetted it at meetings of all the department chairs of the interested schools , we brought it to the dean’s cabinet , we brought it to the advisory council of the academic council , we brought it to the full academic council , and took it to the board of trustee . I don’t know that it needed to take that long , but it felt like it was so signiﬁcant that we wanted everyone to hear about it and everyone to feel like they had had par - ticipation in doing it . In other words , part of the process of taking it around all those committees was changing the culture … . At the time that the vote came , it was a unanimous vote , as opposed to something divisive . Duke is particularly noteworthy in the scale and scope of its efforts to remove structural obstacles to inter - departmental collaborations , create incentives for such activities , and instill a favorable culture to interdisciplinarity . 5 The university seems to count on the leadership necessary to implement a ‘steady state of change’ ( Clark , 2004 ) regarding interdisciplinarity . The University of Wisconsin - Madison implemented in the late 1990s the Cluster Hiring Initiative , as a response to the state budget cuts that caused severe faculty attrition ( c . 250 positions ) . The university successfully raised state and private matching funds ( c . $ 15 million ) to support new hires into interdisciplinary ‘clusters’ of up to 5 researchers , proposed by the faculty and selected competitively . Five rounds of competitions took place between 1997 and 2001 , whereby about 140 faculty members were recruited into 49 clusters . Inter - deparmental search committees recruit individuals into the cluster , and then identify an adequate department to be the academic home of the faculty member . The cluster positions are fully funded and ‘owned’ by the central administration , but faculty for all purposes belong in the assigned department . The ‘cluster’ itself is a virtual entity that is not part of any governance or organizational framework , and faculty members are free to shape their activities as they wish . As one senior administrator explains : If people are going to be successful you have to respect how they operate in their own cultures . You can’t force a one size ﬁts all structure on how clusters ought to be organized , and how they ought to be administered . We sort of let them do their own thing , and then try to get some handle on whether this is working or a disaster , a waste of $ 15 million . I don’t think even in the worst circumstances this would be a waste , I think what would happen is that people would spring back into the standard faculty model , and we’d end up with 150 new faculty looking like the other faculty . UW - Madison has set up a ‘natural experiment’ with the clusters , and has attempted to take hold of their experience through internal assessments ( University of Wisconsin - Madison 2003 , 2007 ) and conferences . ‘Cluster hiring’ has since been announced and implemented in other institutions . Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is forming a few faculty ‘constellations’ funded through private gifts . RPI’s constellations are focused on the priority research areas of the insti - tutional strategic plan , emphasizing technological areas with potential for economically relevant discoveries . Florida State University has recently announced a 200 - faculty ‘cluster 5 For a detailed case study , see Sa ´ ( 2006 ) . Others have also cited Duke as an example in this regard ( Feller 2004 ; Brint 2005 ) . 546 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 hiring initiative’ in 2006 , following the Wisconsin’s model , but creating clusters of 5 – 8 members . Louisiana State University is also in the process of establishing 2 – 4 clusters of 5 – 8 faculty members ( 2006 / 2007 ) following the Wisconsin model . In all these cases , the clusters are framed as a mechanism to attract distinguished researchers and create ‘peaks of excellence . ’ A different approach has been taken at the Penn State through the institutes described above , which manage a faculty co - funding scheme . Institutes support half the cost of a new faculty position proposed by a department , on the condition that the position will con - tribute to fostering inter - college collaborations . This is different from the dual - appointment of faculty to a research center and a department , which may have different physical locations and disparate research agendas . As departments initiate the positions , they have to align the goals for the new hire with the institutes’ mandate , but faculty remain for all purposes housed within the department . The institutes review co - funded positions peri - odically to assess the continuity of co - funding , in relation to the established goals for the positions . The four institutes have co - funded about 150 faculty members . These hiring models generated controversy ( to different degrees ) on their campuses , as faculty recruitment is usually understood as a departmental prerogative . Preliminary internal assessments of UW - Madison’s cluster faculty and Penn State’s co - funded faculty employ research productivity data to assess their efforts . 6 At UW - Madison , cluster faculty have reported the usual perceptions of interdisciplinary work being undervalued at the time of evaluation and promotion ( University of Wisconsin - Madison 2003 , 2007 ) . At Penn State , the process of academic evaluation for promotion and tenure purposes and the institute review of the co - funding arrangement are regarded as separate , and the latter is not supposed to inﬂuence the former . The practical implications of these models will become clearer as universities learn more about faculty experiences hired through new means and evaluated under revised guidelines . A sense of experimentation is shared among admin - istrators and faculty involved in these new strategies . Discussion This paper sought to identify and analyze emerging organizational strategies to foster interdisciplinary research , and consider their implications . Above , three ‘generic’ approaches were considering , subsuming comparable and yet diverse strategies of several campuses . The ﬁrst two approaches concern interdisciplinary ORUs , and the third concerns changes in the core policies and practices of faculty recruitment and evaluation . This section considers implications and suggestions for further research . University efforts to nurture interdisciplinary research teams and centers attempt to reduce the transaction costs of such work . Incentive grants address the long noted funding gap for these activities ( ‘orphans in the ﬁscal structure of the university , ’ see Feller 2002 ) . They provide , as an academic administrator suggests , ‘a reason for faculty to get out of their labs’ and engage with colleagues from other disciplines . The ﬁnancial incentives provided help offset the costs of necessary inputs , such as faculty time , research and administrative support , and materials and equipment , all of which might not be available otherwise . Such incentives are clearly important as scientiﬁc research is increasingly costly 6 UW - Madison’s reports also employ descriptions of the research activities of some clusters to portray their achievements . For Penn State’s , see Pennsylvania State University ( 2005 ) . High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 547 123 ( Ehrenberg et al . 2003 ) , and they may indeed motivate faculty to pursue innovative ideas ( Powers 2000 ) . Conspicuously missing , however , are critical appraisals and assessments of the short - and long - term outcomes of the use of institutional funds as ‘seed money . ’ Considering the rationalizing trend driving the adoption of such incentive mechanisms , it would be expected that universities attempt to develop more systematic ways of gauging their effectiveness . While administrators usually view them positively and regard them as effective , the evidence presented to substantiate these claims is largely anecdotal ( e . g . , examples of groups that obtained major grants ) . If the use of institutional grants by incumbent groups or centers is considered valuable in and of itself , that is not a major concern . But as ‘investments’ in the quality and mode of research carried out on campus , the experience of universities with such programs can be examined more systematically . For example , do university ofﬁcials consider the returns on the investment of these pro - grams vis - a ` - vis opportunity costs ? What are some acceptable parameters to determine the success or relative effectiveness of institutional incentive grants ? What are ( and should be ) the relative weighs of productivity measures of success and qualitative gains in the nature of the science performed ? Investigation of a number of such funding schemes across campuses could help illuminate these questions . Some studies suggest that targeted institutional investments oftentimes generate unintended consequences , including declines in the morale among the faculty whose proposals are not funded ( Rhoades 2000 ; Powers 2000 ) . Comparative studies might elucidate the mechanisms that heighten or minimize such consequences . It seems clear that episodic ﬁnancial incentives are important but not sufﬁcient to cause lasting change . As one senior administrator notes , ‘‘so much of success in interdisci - plinarity is a cultural issue , and an incentives issue , and it’s both . The incentives by themselves will not succeed . ’’ In spite of recurrent observations about the importance of culture and climate ( Feller 2002 ; Lattuca 2001 ) , the relative hospitability of different campus cultures to interdisciplinary work , as well as the means through which such cul - tures get established or changed , remain by and large unexplored ( but see Hollingsworth and Hollingsworth 2000 ) . Further work is also needed to reﬁne our understanding of the speciﬁc aspects of campus cultures that inﬂuence faculty research behaviors . Some universities have taken steps to extend the degree to which they operate in matrix - like arrangements . The organizational image of a matrix structure serves as an explicit metaphor of how the university operates or should operate for several administrators and faculty interviewed ( see also Roberts 2004 ) . Campus - wide institutes stand orthogonally to the traditional academic structure , drawing on the faculty from departments for crosscut - ting projects , catalyzing collaborations through the provision of workspace and planning grants , inﬂuencing university investments in core facilities , and participating in faculty recruitment along with departments . These and other interdisciplinary ORUs can be viewed as ‘project units’ in a university matrix , which focus part of institutional resources and energies on boundary - crossing areas of research . For all the use of the matrix metaphor in the higher education literature and policy reports ( Alpert 1985 ; National Academies 2005 ; Roberts 2004 ) , research that examines the operation of ORUs in light of studies of matrix management in other types of organizations ( Gailbraith 1971 , 1972 ; Davies and Lawrence 1977 ; Kolodny 1979 ; Larson and Gobeli 1987 ; Burns 1989 ) are missing . This is particularly surprising , given the similarities in the issues raised in studies of ORUs and matrix structures . Such issues include power and priority disputes between the ‘project’ and the ‘functional’ units , confusing reporting relationships , tensions over resource allocation , and uncertainty about handling the continuity or termination of project units . 548 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 Indeed , much empirical research remains to be done to enlarge our understanding of interdisciplinary ORUs . The roles of different funding models , modes of coordination , managerial styles , and incentive structures in shaping the outcomes of such units remain poorly understood ( Mallon 2006 ) . Based on this and previous studies , one can hypothesize that the more these campus - wide institutes compete , or are perceived to compete with colleges and schools for resources ( e . g . , operating budget , programmatic funding , infrastructure ) , the more likely are deans and academic administrators to antagonize these units . Conversely , more cooperation tends to occur if these ORUs are viewed as generating additional resources to the academic units and helping them enhance their research roles . In the examples pro - vided above , the universities attempted to avoid dynamics of competition and emphasized the integration of the boundary - crossing and academic units . This was done primarily through central funding for the former , eliminating the need for them to compete with the latter for priority over faculty time and credit in external research grants . In both cases , there is also involvement from the colleges and schools in the governance of the institutes , in order to increase consensus over the overall research direction of such units . The ‘business model’ of campus - wide institutes is different from the usual generalization of ORUs as revenue - seeking units ( Ikenberry and Friedman 1972 ; Stahler and Tash 1994 ; Mallon and Bunton 2005 ) . Given the deep roots of traditional academic structures , the small number of institutions that engage in the reform of core academic policies and organizational frameworks is to be expected . In scale , the recruitment models examined still innovate at the margin , responding for a relatively small fraction of faculty hiring . They build upon existing pol - icies and practices in evolutionary ways , rather than represent ‘radical innovations . ’ They do introduce new terms in the vocabulary of university models , however , which might sound foreign to critics in the Veblenian tradition and intuitive to enthusiasts of strategic change and innovation in academia . To reform campus policies to facilitate interdisci - plinarity , as exempliﬁed by promotion and tenure procedures that are recognized as salient obstacles ( National Academies 2005 ) , the greatest effort for campus actors seems to lie in conceiving of such change as legitimate and desirable . Studies that compare the experience and trajectories of faculty on campuses with widely different norms regarding the evaluation of interdisciplinary research could determine the effects of such arrangements . Finally , future work that allies the richness of ethnographic studies of faculty involved in interdisciplinarity ( e . g . , Lattuca 2001 ) to identiﬁable organizational conditions would be an invaluable addition to the knowledge base . Reports of organizational units considered successful ( National Academies 2005 ; AAU 2005 ; Klein 1990 ) often lack a more detailed examination of the actual experience of researchers , raising questions about how consensus emerges regarding their ‘success . ’ Concluding remarks The strategies discussed here expand the repertoire of organizational arrangements in research universities , some in subtle , others in substantive ways . Incentive grants , steering structures , and new models of faculty recruitment and evaluation create organizational conditions that are expected to contribute to the practice of interdisciplinary research . It is important to note that correlates to these strategies may and do also take place at lower organizational levels , i . e . , divisions , colleges , and departments . But the focus here has been on examining strategies at the institutional level , involving the central administration . High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 549 123 Proposals for radical transformation of universities to facilitate interdisciplinarity , based on the belief in its inevitability and desirability , and on a view of the disciplinary - departmental model as a source of constraint for the advancement of knowledge , are not likely to have a meaningful impact on U . S . research - intensive institutions in the near future . The ability to accommodate multiple and competing demands for knowledge production through increasingly complex , layered , and intersecting organizational arrangements over several generations is a central feature of the U . S . university model , which preserves at its core the nexus between disciplines and departments . More probable is the continuing experimentation with strategies that are perceived to address relevant , context - speciﬁc organizational problems and aspirations ; such strategies ultimately help enhance the research enterprise , generate external support and funding , augment institu - tional prestige , and attract and retain talent . It is through those means of ‘validation’ that new organizational structures , policies , and practices are likely to take root on campuses , and not through appeals to broad shifts in knowledge production . Acknowledgements This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . 0451828 . I thank all the university administrators and faculty who agreed to participate in this study and generously shared their time , as well as those individuals who facilitated campus visits and provided me with access to institutional data . Any errors or omissions remain solely the author’s . References AAU – Association of American Universities . ( 2005 ) . Report of the interdisciplinarity task force . Wash - ington , DC : Author . Abbott , A . ( 2001 ) . The chaos of disciplines . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Alpert , D . ( 1985 ) . Performance and paralysis : The organizational context of the American research university . Journal of Higher Education , 56 , 241 – 281 . Blau , P . M . ( 1994 ) . The organization of academic work ( 2nd ed . ) . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Publishers . Bozeman , B . , & Boardman , P . C . ( 2003 ) . Managing the new Multipurpose , Multidiscipline University Research Centers : Institutional innovation in the academic community . Washington , DC : IBM Endowment for the Business of Government . Brint , S . ( 2005 ) . Creating the future : ‘New directions’ in American research universities . Minerva , 43 ( 1 ) , 23 – 50 . Burns , L . R . ( 1989 ) . Matrix management in hospitals : Testing theories of matrix structure and development . Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 , 349 – 368 . Caruso , D . & Rhoten , D . ( 2001 ) . Lead , follow , get out of the way : Sidestepping the barriers to effective practice of interdisciplinarity—A new mechanism for knowledge production and re - integration in the age of information . Hybrid Vigor White Paper . Retrieved from www . hybridvigor . net / interdis / pubs / hv _ pub _ interdis - 2001 . 04 . 30 . pdf . Clark , B . ( 1984 ) . The organizational conception . In B . Clark ( Ed . ) , Perspectives on higher education : Eight disciplinary perspectives and comparative views ( pp . 106 – 131 ) . Berkeley : University of California Press . Clark , B . ( 1995 ) . Places of inquiry : Research and advanced education in modern universities . Berkeley : University of California Press . Clark , B . R . ( 1996 ) . Substantive growth and innovative organization : New categories for higher education research . Higher Education , 32 ( 4 ) , 417 – 430 . Clark , B . ( 2004 ) . Sustaining change in universities : Continuities in case studies and concepts . New York : Open University Press . Davis , S . M . , & Lawrence , P . R . ( 1977 ) . Matrix . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Duke University . ( 2004 ) . The Duke University faculty handbook . Durham , NC : Author . Epton , S . R . , Payne , R . L . , & Pearson , A . W . ( 1985 ) . Contextual issues in managing cross - disciplinary research . In B . Mars , W . Newell , & B . Saxberg ( Eds . ) , Managing high technology : An interdisciplinary perspective ( pp . 209 – 229 ) . New York : Elsevier . 550 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123 Ehrenberg , R . G . , Rizzo , M . & Jakubson , G . ( 2003 ) . Who bears the growing cost of science at universities ? Paper presented at CHERI’s 2003 Conference , Ithaca , NY . Etzkowitz , H . ( 2003 ) . Research groups as ‘quasi - ﬁrms’ : The invention of the entrepreneurial university . Research Policy , 32 , 109 – 121 . Feller , I . ( 2002 ) . New organizations , old cultures : Strategy and implementation of interdisciplinary programs . Research Evaluation , 11 , 109 – 116 . Feller , I . ( 2004 ) . Whither interdisciplinarity ( in an era of strategic planning ) ? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , Seattle , WA . Feller , I . ( 2005 ) . Who races with whom ; Who is likely to win ( or survive ) ; Why . Paper presented at the symposium The Future of the American Public Research University , The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , PA . Feller , I . ( 2006 ) . Multiple actors , multiple settings , multiple criteria : Issues in assessing interdisciplinary research . Research Evaluation , 15 , 5 – 15 . Friedman , R . , & Friedman , R . C . ( 1982 ) . The role of university organized research units in academic science . University Park , PA : The Pennsylvania State University , Center for the Study of Higher Education , Center for the Study of Science Policy , Institute for Policy Research and Evaluation . Friedman , R . , & Friedman , R . C . ( 1986 ) . Sponsorship , organization and program change at 100 universities . University Park , PA : Pennsylvania State University Institute for Policy Research and Evaluation Center for the Study of Science Policy . Gailbraith , J . ( 1971 ) . Matrix organization designs : How to combine functional and project forms . Business Horizons , 14 , 29 – 40 . Gailbraith , J . ( 1972 ) . Organization design : An information processing view . In J . W . Lorsch & P . R . Lawrence ( Eds . ) , Organization planning : Cases and concepts ( pp . 49 – 74 ) . Homewood , IL : Irwin . Geiger , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Organized Research Units – Their role in the development of university research . Journal of Higher Education , 61 , 1 – 19 . Geiger , R . L . ( 2004 ) . To advance knowledge : The growth of American research universities , 1900 – 1940 . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Publishers . Geiger , R . L . , & Sa´ , C . ( 2005 ) . Beyond technology transfer : US state policies to harness university research for economic development . Minerva , 43 , 1 – 21 . Gibbons , M . , Limoges , C . , Nowotny , H . , Schwartzman , S . , Scott , P . , & Trow , M . ( 1994 ) . The new pro - duction of knowledge : The dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies . London : Thousand Oaks , Calif . : Sage Hackett , E . J . ( 2000 ) . Interdisciplinary research initiatives at the U . S . National Science Foundation . In P . Weingart & N . Stehr ( Eds . ) , Practising interdisciplinarity ( pp . 248 – 259 ) . Toronto : University of Toronto Press . Hollingsworth , J . R . , & Hollingsworth , E . J . ( 2000 ) . Major discoveries in biomedical research organizations : Perspectives on interdisciplinarity , nurturing leadership , integrated structures and cultures . In P . Weingart & N . Stehr ( Eds . ) , Practising interdisciplinarity ( pp . 215 – 244 ) . Toronto : University of Toronto Press . Ikenberry , S . , & Friedman , R . ( 1972 ) . Beyond academic departments : The story of institutes and centers . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Jenks , C . , & Riesman , D . ( 1968 ) . The academic revolution . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Jepperson , R . ( 1991 ) . Institutions , institutional effects , and institutionalism . In W . Powell & P . DiMaggio ( Eds . ) , The new institutionalism in organizational analysis ( pp . 143 – 163 ) . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Klein , J . T . ( 1990 ) . Interdisciplinarity : History , theory , and practice . Detroit : Wayne State University Press . Kolodny , H . F . ( 1979 ) . Evolution to a matrix organization . The Academy of Management Review , 4 , 543 – 553 . Kruytbosch , C . E . ( 1970 ) . The organization of research in the university : The case of research personnel . Dissertation , University of California , Berkeley . Lamont , M . , Mallard , G . , & Guetzkow , J . ( 2006 ) . Beyond blind faith : Overcoming obstacles to interdis - ciplinary evaluation . Research Evaluation , 15 , 43 – 55 . Langfeldt , L . ( 2006 ) . The policy challenges of peer review : Managing bias , conﬂicts of interest and interdisciplinary assessments . Research Evaluation , 15 , 31 – 41 . Larson , E . W . , & Gobeli , D . H . ( 1987 ) . Matrix management : Contradictions and insights . California Management Review , 29 , 126 – 138 . Lattuca , L . R . ( 2001 ) . Creating interdisciplinarity : Interdisciplinary research and teaching among college and university faculty . Nashville : Vanderbilt University Press . Mallon , W . , & Bunton , S . ( 2005 ) . Characteristics of research centers and institutes at U . S . medical schools and universities . Washington , DC : Association of American Medical Colleges . High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 551 123 Mallon , W . ( 2006 ) . The beneﬁts and challenges of research centers and institutes in academic medicine : Findings from six universities and their medical schools . Academic Medicine , 81 , 502 – 512 . Mansilla , V . , Feller , I . , & Gardner , H . ( 2006 ) . Quality assessments in interdisciplinary research and edu - cation . Research Evaluation , 15 , 69 – 74 . Meyer , H . & Rowan , B . ( 2006 ) . The new institutionalism in education . Albany , NY : The State University of New York Press . National Academies . ( 2005 ) . Facilitating interdisciplinary research . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . Pennsylvania State University . ( 2002 ) . Ofﬁce of the Vice President for Research strategic plan 2002 – 2005 . University Park , PA : Author . Pennsylvania State University . ( 2005 ) . Ofﬁce of the Vice President for Research strategic plan 2005 – 2008 . University Park , PA : Author . Powers , J . ( 2000 ) . The use of institutional incentive grants for strategic change in higher education . The Review of Higher Education , 23 , 281 – 298 . Powell , W . W . & DiMaggio , P . ( 1991 ) . The new institutionalism in organizational analysis . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Rhoades , G . ( 2000 ) . Who’s doing it right ? Strategic activity in public research universities . The Review of Higher Education , 24 , 41 – 66 . Rhoten , D . ( 2003 ) . Final report National Science Foundation BCS - 0129573 – A multi - method analysis of the social and technical conditions for interdisciplinary collaboration . Retrieved from http : / / www . hybridvigor . net / interdis / pubs / hv _ pub _ interdis - 2003 . 09 . 29 . pdf . Rhoten , D . ( 2004 ) . Interdisciplinary research : Trend or transition . Items & Issues , 5 , 6 – 11 . Roberts , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Riding the momentum : Interdisciplinary research centers to interdisciplinary graduate programs . In M . Rice ( Ed . ) , Riding the momentum of research : Leadership challenges in public research universities ( pp . 73 – 82 ) . MASC Report No . 108 . Lawrence , KS : University of Kansas . Sa´ , C . ( 2006 ) . Interdisciplinary Strategies at Research - Intensive Universities . Doctoral Dissertation , The Pennsylvania State University , University Park . Sa´ , C . ( 2007 ) . Planning for interdisciplinary research . Planning for Higher Education , 35 ( 2 ) , 18 – 28 . Stahler , G . J . , & Tash , W . R . ( 1994 ) . Centers and institutes in the research university (cid:2) Issues , problems , and prospects . Journal of Higher Education , 65 ( 5 ) , 540 – 554 . Turner , S . ( 2000 ) . What are disciplines ? And how is interdisciplinarity different ? In P . Weingart & N . Stehr ( Eds . ) , Practising interdisciplinarity ( pp . 46 – 65 ) . Toronto : University of Toronto Press . University of Southern California . ( 2005 ) . Guidelines of the University Committee on Appointments , Promotions and Tenure . Los Angeles , CA : University of Southern California . University of Wisconsin - Madison . ( 2003 ) . Report of the ad hoc advisory committee to evaluate the Cluster Hiring Initiative . Madison , WI : Author . University of Wisconsin - Madison . ( 2007 ) . Cluster Hiring Initiative Evaluation Report 2006 – 2007 . Draft manuscript . Retrieved from http : / / www . provost . wisc . edu / clusterconference / report . html . Veysey , L . R . ( 1965 ) . The emergence of the American university . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Weingart , P . ( 2000 ) . Interdisciplinarity : The paradoxical discourse . In P . Weingart & N . Stehr ( Eds . ) , Practising interdisciplinarity ( pp . 25 – 41 ) . Toronto : University of Toronto Press . Zucker , L . ( 1987 ) . Institutional theories of organization . Annual Review of Sociology , 13 , 443 – 464 . 552 High Educ ( 2008 ) 55 : 537 – 552 123