Group Decis Negot ( 2014 ) 23 : 961 – 978 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10726 - 012 - 9323 - 5 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes Fang Chen · Jay F . Nunamaker Jr . · Robert O . Briggs · Gail Corbitt · James Sager · Stanley C . Gardiner Published online : 3 January 2013 © Springer Science + Business Media Dordrecht 2012 Abstract This article presents the ﬁndings of an exploratory study of the degree to which Focus Theory , a general theory about group productivity , can be used to improve the productivity of project management activities . Guided by the theory and the principles of collaboration engineering , we developed a collaborative template for project progress status reporting . We evaluated the template in both face - to - face and distributed group interactions . The study indicated that a collaborative template helped structure status reporting activity and provided a permanent record of project F . Chen ( B ) Department of Finance and Accounting , I . H . Asper School of Business , University of Manitoba , 181 Freedman Crescent , Winnipeg , MB R3T 5V4 , Canada e - mail : fang _ chen @ ad . umanitaba . ca J . F . Nunamaker Jr . The University of Arizona , McClelland Hall 430 , 1130 East Ellen Street , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA e - mail : nunamaker @ cmi . arizona . edu R . O . Briggs Department of Management Information Systems , College of Business Administration , San Diego State University , 5500 Campanile Drive , San Diego CA 92182 , USA e - mail : rbriggs @ mail . sdsu . edu G . Corbitt SAP University Alliance , 4550 Pavlov Ave 127 , San Diego , CA 92122 , USA e - mail : g . corbitt @ sap . com J . Sager · S . C . Gardiner DepartmentofAccountingandManagementInformationSystems , CaliforniaStateUniversityatChico , Chico , CA , USA e - mail : jlsager @ csuchico . edu S . C . Gardiner e - mail : sgardiner @ csuchico . edu 123 962 F . Chen et al . status for future reference . As a result , it was efﬁcient and effective for team leaders to prepare topics for project status meetings by using the template . The meetings became focused on topics outlined on the template and meeting participants commented that the meeting record helped them keep track of what had been either accomplished or decided . The major limitation observed for use of the template was that , when used in distributed and synchronous interactions , it needed to be augmented by voice commu - nication because communication in text - only format , as provided by the template , was too time - consuming . We discuss implications of the research outcomes with respect to the usefulness and limitations of Focus Theory . Keywords Focus Theory · Virtual team · Virtual project · Group Support Systems · Project management · Project process management · Project progress tracking · Collaboration engineering 1 Introduction The use of project teams to accomplish work objectives is pervasive in organizations . According to statistics from the Project Management Institute ( PMI ) , the US public and private sectors spend in excess of a combined $ 2 . 3 trillion annually , roughly one fourth of the gross domestic product ( GDP ) , on project - based activity such as con - struction , software development , and systems integration ( Wheatley 2005 ) . In addi - tion , organizations are employing greater numbers of temporary or contract workers who contribute their expertise to a project for only a limited amount of time rather than occupying a permanent full - time position ( Krumboltz and Worthington 1999 ) . Furthermore , these projects often employ “virtual” or geographically distributed pro - jects teams rather than collocated project teams ( Rad and Levin 2003 , p . 7 ; Project Management Fact Book 2001 ) . Giventhewidespreaduseof bothvirtual andcollocatedproject teams , it is important to understand the factors that affect project team performance . Previous information systems ( IS ) research has identiﬁed a number of general determinants of team per - formance including task type , team characteristics ( e . g . , team size , team history , and team composition ) , leadership , communication ( e . g . , communication frequency and predictability ) , interpersonal relationship ( e . g . , trust , group cohesion ) , culture , and the information technologies used to manage teamwork ( e . g . , Fjermestad and Hiltz 1999 – 2000 , 2000 – 2001 ; Powell et al . 2004 ) . One area of investigation that may provide additional insights into the performance of project teamwork is to examine project management . A factor that is critical for successful project management is project process management , the monitoring and controlling of project execution in support of project goals and plans ( Chen et al . 2006 ) . The overall objective of project process management is to increase awareness and visibility of a project’s process , which in turn increases the likelihood of project success . For traditional collocated or face - to - face teams , the project manager can “manage by walking around” ; watching what team members are doing and tracking the day - to - day project progress by water - cooler or hallway chatting . However , this management approach will not work for distrib - uted teams where face - to - face interaction is greatly reduced or eliminated . Without an 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 963 explicit and structured mechanism for project process management , the project process can easily become a black box wherein the progress or status of the project is not readily visible to team members . For example , project members may not be completely aware of their assignments or may not understand how their work affects other team mem - bers . They may lose track of a critical change in the project requirements , or lose track of the general direction of project execution . As a result , the projects may be at risk for poor quality , cost and schedule over - runs , or even cancellation ( Chen et al . 2006 ) . Project process management can be examined from two levels of task granularity . Viewed from a macro or holistic level , process management includes management of workﬂow , task integration , change , and risk . Viewed from a micro or day - to - day operational level , process management includes management of tasks , issues , prob - lems and actions ( Chen et al . 2006 ) . Project progress tracking which produces periodic project progress reports , is a principal focus of operational process management and is a commonly used and well - established project management practice ( Besner and Hobbs 2006 ) . During project execution , task progress and task deadlines need to be monitored while any issues and problems that arise need to be identiﬁed , articulated and addressed . When actions are taken to address speciﬁc problems , those correc - tive actions need to be accounted for as well . Project progress tracking ensures that misunderstanding and confusion over project process is reduced or eliminated and that there are smooth transitions when tasks are handed off among team members . Project progress tracking further ensures that project changes are monitored and the impact of change is well understood , anticipated , and managed ( Chen et al . 2006 ) . The importance of project tracking is summarized by McConnell ( 1997 ) “If you don’t track your project , you can’t control it . ” However , project tracking is challenging . Kitson and Masters ( 1993 ) found that 75 % of the 59 software development project sites they assessed needed to improve project tracking and oversight . Jones ( 1995 ) reported that “software progress monitoring is so poor that several well - known soft - ware disasters were not anticipated until the very day of expected deployment” . The lacking of project status tracking persisted , according to a nationwide survey of sales and project managers conducted in U . S . in 2003 , communications , status tracking and consolidating information from multiple sources are key challenges among corporate workgroups . Sixty percent of respondents reported “getting and keeping everyone on the same page” as their top concern in managing group projects ( Intuit Survey 2003 ) . One method for project progress tracking is to use technology to maintain a task list for team members ( Callahan and Ramakrishnan 1996 ; Lam and Maheshwari 2001 ) , or to use email to send progress updates to team members ( Brush and Borning 2005 ) , or to post the task progress on team discussion board ( Chiocchio 2007 ) Moreover , there are a variety of commercial Web services , such as eGroup , iTeamWork , and OnPro - ject , which assist clients in keeping track of task status and task - related documents . In addition to these methods , it is a common practice for project teams to hold periodic meetings to review their progress . There are several beneﬁts associated with tracking project progress in a group setting . When all team members are involved in discus - sion and decision making , project awareness , collaboration and decision consent may be enhanced . Furthermore , any source of confusion can be promptly clariﬁed and subsequent misunderstandings may be avoided . According to Koehler ( 1992 ) , project team meetings are key events for project management , because these meetings resolve 123 964 F . Chen et al . problems and establish common understanding of the project process . ( Adams et al . 2008 , p . xi ) also pointed out that meetings provide “a means for collaborative thinking , discussion , and deliberation that is invaluable in getting project work done” . Among project meetings , project status meeting is “probably the best known of all project meetings” . ( Adams et al . 2008 , p . 141 ) . But many meetings “are short of their poten - tials” ( Adams et al . 2008 , p . xi ) and are perceived to be a waste of time ( e . g . , Hunt 1998 ; Adams et al . 2008 , p . 1 ) . Some of the complaints for meetings are that there are no clear objectives ; discussions were not focused ; and there is no follow - up action ( Hunt 1998 ) . To increase effectiveness of the project meetings , some articles or books provide guidelines about how to conduct project meetings ( e . g . , Lee 2008 ; Adams et al . 2008 ; Kendrick 2010 ) However , there is little empirical research to implement a meeting guideline / design and test its efﬁciency and / or effectiveness in project teams . Prior research in project process management has largely been targeted at the macro level and concerns such as workﬂow and risk management . With the exception of studies mentioned above , very little research has targeted micro - level concerns , such as project progress tracking . Still fewer studies have been done on project progress tracking in a meeting format . Blomquist et al . ( 2010 ) called for more research on the micro - processes of project management . They argue that this type of research is more relevant to project management practice because it is “based on practice , rather than on ( organizing or management ) principles” and is “organized bottom - up , rather than top - down” . We responded to this call by investigating project progress tracking at a micro - level : tracking tasks at the team level in the form of team meetings . This paper investigates how to structure the progress tracking meeting , and how to use information technology to facilitate the structured meeting . When virtual teams conduct progress tracking meetings , information technology is required . According to Focus Theory ( Briggs 1994 ) , technologies that facilitate communication , information access , or deliberation ( thinking ) can increase group productivity . Focus Theory is a general theory about the productivity of groups which engage in intellectual work . It suggests that team productivity is a function of cognitive effort ( attention ) over time . Three cognitive processes are necessary to accomplish a task : communication , information access , and deliberation . Focus Theory is based on an assumption that attention is a limited resource and that allocating more attention to one process may reduce the amount of attention that can be allocated to the other two processes . Furthermore , the three processes may covary because making one process more difﬁcult will make the others more difﬁcult and making one process easier will make the others easier . For example , it is easy for a face - to - face ( FtF ) group to com - municate and the immediate feedback of FtF communication makes the deliberation process easier . Please refer to Fig . 1 for the adapted model of Focus Theory . Focus Theory is not technology speciﬁc but it suggests that technology may improve group productivity by facilitating any or all of the three cognitive processes . Some col - laboration technologies , such as video conferencing and audio conferencing , primar - ily support communication . Other technologies , such as email and electronic message board may support information access in addition to communication . However , these technologies usually do not provide structure to support the group deliberation pro - cess . In contrast , Group Support Systems ( GSS ) support all three processes . First , GSS facilitate communication in text format by allowing participants to log onto the 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 965 Communication Deliberation Access Productivity Cognitive Effort Over Time Information Fig . 1 Model of focus theory . Source : adapted from ( Briggs 1994 ) system and post messages anytime and anywhere as long as they have an Internet connection . Second , GSS provide a permanent group memory which helps with infor - mation access . Participants can access information before , during , and after group interactions . Third , GSS facilitate group deliberation by providing task and process structure and support . For example , GSS tools supports divergent thinking , such as group electronic brainstorming , and convergent thinking , such as prioritizing ideas and voting on ideas . We designed a GSS template to facilitate project progress tracking sessions by using collaboration engineering . Collaboration engineering is concerned with the design and deployment of collaboration processes for recurring high - value collaborative tasks ( Kolfschoten and Vreede 2009 ; Vreede et al . 2009 ; Briggs et al . 2009 ) . Progress track - ing meetings , which are both very important and routinely repeated , are an example of a recurring high - value collaborative task . When Blomquist et al . ( 2010 ) called for research that is more relevant to project management practice , they also warned researchers to avoid an approach that only pro - duces “trivial and random observations , lacking insights , coherence , and implications” Keeping this warning in our minds , we designed and evaluated a GSS template for pro - ject progress tracking meetings under the guidance of Focus Theory and collaboration engineering . The remainder of the paper is organized in the following manner , in Sect . 2 , we review pertinent literature and explain why project progress tracking can be enhanced through the use of GSS . In Sect . 3 , we outline the research methodology and research questions . In Sect . 4 , we report our ﬁndings from an evaluation of the GSS template in empirical settings and in Sect . 5 we conclude with a discussion of the limitations and implications of the study . 2 Collaboration Engineering Collaboration Engineering is a methodology for designing collaborative work pro - cesses for high value recurring tasks and transferring those designs to practitioners to execute for themselves without the ongoing intervention of professional facilitators ( Kolfschoten and Vreede 2009 ; Vreede et al . 2009 ; Briggs et al . 2009 ) . Collaboration Engineering consists of “a design phase , where the repeatable collaboration processes are designed and piloted , and a deployment phase , where the new collaboration process is introduced into the organization and practitioners are trained” ( Vreede et al . 2009 ) . 123 966 F . Chen et al . In the design phase , a collaboration engineer ﬁrst identiﬁes and deﬁnes a recurring collaborative task , then identiﬁes the best practice for the task , and at the last step , the collaboration engineer selects collaboration tools , such as GSS tools , to support the task . When the ﬁrst version of the collaboration process design is completed , the collaborative engineer and the practitioner can validate it in one or more pilots and the process can be ﬁne tuned according to the pilots . Once the process results are satisfactory , the collaboration process can be implemented in the organization , thus starting the deployment phase . We used GSS technology to implement the design in the ﬁeld . A GSS is a col - lection of collaboration tools that can be used to support a variety of techniques for generating , consolidating , organizing , and evaluating ideas , and for building consen - sus ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) . Communication in GSS is primarily text based . Under certain circumstances , groups using GSS can attain substantial increases in productiv - ity and participant satisfaction ( Fjermestad and Hiltz 1999 – 2000 , 2000 – 2001 ) . GSS are often valued for four capabilities : anonymity , parallel input , group memory , and structured group interaction . Although anonymity and parallel input are very useful for brainstorming , we spec - ulate that they are of little use for project progress tracking . When team members report progress on assigned tasks , they need to identify themselves rather than remain anonymous . Furthermore , since project members need to focus on discussion and information exchange , which require conversations and “turn management” , parallel input might interrupt the ﬂow of ideas . Group memory , however , is quite useful since all content entered into the GSS is automatically recorded for later reference by the team . Another useful feature of GSS is that it provides structured interaction for group activities . GSS can organize discussion content into different categories , and it can embed one interaction tool inside another to provide a layered interface for group communication . This hierarchically structured interaction may help with information capture and retrieval . It is this feature of supporting structured group interactions that differentiate GSS from other online tools ( e . g . , chat , electronic bulletin board , and email ) and makes it a promising candidate to facilitate team project progress tracking . 3 Research Methodology and Research Questions Since there has been little research in project progress tracking in group settings , and Focus Theory has not been subjected to empirical testing before , this study adopted an action research approach ( Argyris et al . 1985 ; Susman and Evered 1978 ; Gilmore et al . 1986 ) . According to Gilmore et al . ( 1986 ) : Action research . . . aims to contribute both to the practical concerns of people in an immediate problematic situation and to further the goals of social science simultaneously . Thus , there is a dual commitment in action research to study a system and concurrently to collaborate with members of the system in changing it in what is together regarded as a desirable direction . Accomplishing this twin goal requires the active collaboration of researcher and client , and thus it stresses the importance of co - learning as a primary aspect of the research process . 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 967 Action research is similar to case study research in that both allow researchers to gain an in - depth understanding of the phenomena of interest in the rich context where it manifests . As Yin ( 1984 ) suggests , the case study approach is appropriate for research that asks how and why questions that are examined within the context of a phenomenon of interest . In case studies , however , the researcher seeks to remain an external observer and seeks to minimize researcher impact on the phenomenon being studied . In action research , the researcher , under the guidance of a theory , begins with a situation then intervenes actively with the goal of improving the situation . As a result , the researcher is a participatory observer : an active participant of the situation under observation . Lab experiments will be more appropriate when we test our hypotheses , at this stage , however , we do not have speciﬁc hypotheses to test . Rather , we need to ﬁnd out how to formulate the hypotheses that will later be worthy of testing . The dual purpose of action research is to both improve the situation and gain more understanding of the guiding theory . The dual purposes of our study were to ﬁrst solve a practice problem , i . e . investigating whether a GSS template can make project pro - gress tracking meeting more efﬁcient and / or effective , and second , since Focus Theory has not been subjected to empirical testing , to gain a greater understanding of Focus Theory in empirical settings , two research questions drove this study : ( 1 ) Is use of a GSS template an efﬁcient and / or effective means to facilitate project progress tracking meetings in various meeting modes ( FtF , Distributed - Synchro - nous , and Asynchronous ) ? And why or why not ? ( 2 ) In what ways is Focus Theory useful and in what ways is it limited in terms of explaining observed phenomena ? Qualitative data were collected by the ﬁrst author , who participated in all group meetings and wrote detailed notes on her observations of the face - to - face and dis - tributed meetings . In addition , the ﬁrst author conducted individual interviews , and compiled participants’ online anonymous comments regarding use of using the tem - plate . 3 . 1 Design Project Progress Tracking This study is situated at a large public university in the Western United States that has adopted a project - based methodology for teaching systems development and Enter - prise Resources Planning ( ERP ) implementation classes for Management Information Systems ( MIS ) students . The purpose of these classes is to provide students with a hands - on learning experience in a context that simulates a real - world project environ - ment . Even though these projects are school projects , they are non - trivial . The entire class spends an entire semester working on a single project , the ﬁnal deliverables of which are either a working software system or a successful ERP implementation complete with documentation . Students understand that they need to put serious effort into these projects since the majority of their ﬁnal grade is based on their team’s per - formance and overall project deliverables . Each student is a member of a team with speciﬁc responsibility for a portion of the project implementation , and the team of teams ( the class as a whole ) is an overall project team responsible for a single set of class deliverables at the end of the semester . 123 968 F . Chen et al . Each class usually spends the ﬁrst few weeks deﬁning their project , outlining con - stituent tasks and activities , dividing into teams , and allocating tasks to teams . Teams then work on the project for the remainder of the semester . Once a week , the entire class spends a class session ( approximately 1 h in length ) holding a project status meeting to determine the project progress for all teams . Since some items , such as the week’s accomplishments and roadblocks encountered , are repeatedly discussed during the project progress tracking sessions regardless of the context of the project , one instructor , also an author of this paper , developed a template for project progress tracking ( in effect , a weekly status report form ) based on her classroom and industry experience . This project progress tracking template developed for this study is similar to peri - odic status reports widely used to serve the needs of project teams in industry . Although the granularity ( e . g . individual , group , or team ) and frequency ( e . g . daily , bi - weekly , weekly , or monthly ) as well as the exact structure of these progress reports vary con - siderably among organizations , they all serve to promote awareness and visibility of a project’s process . Typically , a periodic status report contains entries in three primary categories : ( 1 ) Activities and Accomplishments ( prior time period ) ; ( 2 ) Planned Activ - ities and Goals ( upcoming time period ) ; ( 3 ) Issues and Challenges . These common elements were identiﬁed in examples provided by three large companies in software development and oil industries conjunction with a small sample of templates gath - ered from Project Management text books . Evidence that this kind of project status meeting tracking agenda is widely used in industry is that it is similar to the agenda for a stand - up meeting , a type of meeting often used in software development meth - odologies such as SCRUM , an agile software development methodology developed by Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland in the mid - 1990s ( Schwaber and Beedle 2002 ) . A stand - up meeting is a daily team meeting held to provide a status update to the team members . This kind of meeting is called “stand - up” meeting , because the discomfort of having the participants stand during the meeting helps to keep the meetings short . In a stand - up meeting , each team member takes a turn answering three basic questions : ( 1 ) What tasks did I work on yesterday ? ( 2 ) What tasks do I plan to work on today ? ( 3 ) What risks or obstacles stand in the way of my plan ? In our case , the progress reporting items were classiﬁed into ﬁve categories : ( 1 ) Tasks completed in the Past Week , ( 2 ) Tasks for coming Week , ( 3 ) Approaching Deadlines , ( 4 ) Other Agenda Items , and ( 5 ) Open Issues / Questions . When the class ﬁrst began using the template , a strict paper - based approach was employed . Before the meeting , the instructor listed these ﬁve categories and associated subtopics under each category on a piece of paper . During the meeting , groups discussed the topics on the list one by one . One student in the class was tasked with taking brief notes during the meeting as a record of the discussion and any decisions reached . The instructor had used the template to structure project status sessions in two prior semesters and believed there were three main advantages of using the template : ( 1 ) it helps project managers prepare the agenda for project progress tracking ; ( 2 ) it focuses team mem - bers’ discussion on the prepared topics ; and , ( 3 ) it facilitates note taking for group interactions . The instructor also believed that individual teams accrue additional ben - eﬁts if they use the template for weekly team - speciﬁc meetings held outside of class . 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 969 Fig . 2 The categorizer There are two issues , however , with the paper - based approach . First , a single indi - vidual was designated to take notes at each meeting , therefore the level of detail in the note taking varied with the student taking the notes for a particular week and important points could be missed . Second , the paper - based notes are somewhat difﬁcult to share among all project members . To address these two concerns , a decision was made to investigate implementing the progress tracking template using Cognito , an Internet - based GSS . In order to use Cognito , each user had to download the graphical interface and install it on a their personal computer . There are three steps to collaboration engineering : ﬁrst , identifying and deﬁning a recurring collaborative task , second , identifying the best practice for the task , and third , designing collaboration tools to support the task . The instructor had already completed the ﬁrst two steps . Since the existing thinkLets tool in Cognito did not sup - port our tasks , we implemented the GSS template by using a collaborative tool called Categorizer . On startup , Categorizer presents the users with a window divided into two columns . The category list consisting of ﬁve standard progress - tracking catego - ries appeared pre - loaded with in the left hand column . When a user double - clicked one of the categories , a set of associated topics would appeared in the right hand column ( Fig . 2 ) . If a user then clicked a topic , a discussion window would appear contain - ing two tabs : a comment interface ( labeled “Discussion” ) and a shared list ( labeled “Specifics” ) ( Fig . 3 ) . Project managers would enter an explanation of a topic under the “Specifics” tab and team members would enter associated discussion or debate under the “Discussion” tab . If a team member had a comment or question about a particular idea displayed on the discussion screen , she could double - click on the idea to bring up a shared anno - tation window . A yellow sticky - note icon would then appear next to any comment in the discussion window that had an annotation . Although the template was originally designed to support collocated teams in tracking their project progress , it also has 123 970 F . Chen et al . Fig . 3 Discussion screen the potential to support distributed teams since it is accessed through an Internet web browser . 3 . 2 Using the GSS Template Our investigation was conducted using two project - based classes . Class 1 helped a ﬁctitious company conﬁgure and implement SAP / R3 , an ERP ( Enterprise Resource Planning ) system . The class had 19 students who were divided into ﬁve teams : FI ( ﬁnancial and accounting ) , PP ( process planning ) , SD ( sales and distribution ) , MM ( manufacture ) , and PMT ( project management team ) . Class 2 developed a Web - based application to maintain background information on faculty members , extract enrollment data from the university enrollment management system , and generate various summary reports required by the AACSB International ( an accrediting body for degree programs in business administration and accounting ) . The class had 40 students who were divided into eight teams : DES ( design ) , SW ( soft - ware development ) , DOC ( documentation ) , DB ( database ) , TST ( testing ) , QA ( quality assurance ) , IMP ( implementation ) , and MGT ( management ) . The collaborative progress tracking template was used at the team level and not at the class level . During weeks 1 and 2 of the study , teams were given GSS access , but without the template . In other words , we did not ask team leaders to use the ﬁve categories that we had developed : ( 1 ) Tasks completed in the Past Week , ( 2 ) Tasks for coming Week , ( 3 ) Approaching Deadlines , ( 4 ) Other Agenda Items , and ( 5 ) Open Issues / Questions . Instead , team leaders were instructed to set up their own agenda before each meeting by putting in their own categories and then specifying speciﬁc sub - topics under each category . In week 3 , team leaders were trained to use the tem - plate with the pre - loaded categories . They then used the template for the remainder of 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 971 the study ( i . e . for the remaining 4 weeks ) . One of the authors created the Categorizer template with pre - loaded categories several days before the team leader needed to use it . Second , to examine the template’s usefulness in different communication modes , we asked teams to use it in each of three different modes of interaction : face - to - face ( FtF ) , distributed synchronous , and distributed asynchronous . Teams were assigned a speciﬁc rotation of the three interaction modes and used each mode of interaction for two consecutive weeks . In any given week , all three modes : FtF , asynchronous , and synchronous were being used . In FtF interaction mode , all team members met in a computer - equipped classroom where each team member logged into the GSS system to access the template . Anyone could enter ideas and comments on the template as well as engage in oral communica - tion . In distributed synchronous mode , team members were divided and seated in two different rooms . Again , all participants had access to the template via networked PCs . Team members occupying the same room could engage in oral communication , but they had to use the text - based GSS to communicate with team members in the other room . In asynchronous mode , team members simply logged into the system from any available location , at any time within a 48 - h time window . One of the authors participated in every FtF and distributed synchronous session . In addition , that author also frequently logged into and monitored the asynchronous - dis - tributed sessions to observe the use of the template and the group interaction process . That author also conducted informal interviews with participants and collected online anonymous feedback . 4 Findings Weanalyzedtheinterviewdatathroughaniterativeprocessofcontinuous“reﬂectionofthedata , asking analytic questions and writing memos throughout the study” ( Creswell 2003 : 190 ) . In reviewing detailed observation notes , interview notes , and online feed - backs , we identiﬁed and examined concrete examples that illustrated points related to our research questions . We present our ﬁndings with respect to each of our research questions . The ﬁrst question : Is use of a GSS template an efﬁcient and / or effective means to facilitate project progress tracking meetings in various meeting modes ( FtF , Dis - tributed - Synchronous , and Asynchronous ) ? And why or why not ? The short answer to this question is that the GSS template was efﬁcient and effective in terms of pro - viding structure so that meetings were focused and in providing a group memory for the meetings . It was not efﬁcient or effective in terms of facilitating communication , especially in the distributed modes , since text is the only GSS communication media and typing was too time - consuming . Details are explained in the following . During weeks 1 and 2 of the study , team leaders were instructed how to develop their own categories and topics for their team’s project progress tracking . It turned out that the level of abstraction for the categories and topics varied widely . Some topics were too speciﬁc to be useful ; others were overly broad . Furthermore , topics often appeared in the wrong category . In week 3 , team leaders were trained to use the template with the pre - loaded categories , and they used the template for the remain - 123 972 F . Chen et al . der of the study . Before each project tracking session , a team leader logged into the system and entered topics for discussion under each category . The template helped them organize what needed to be discussed . After adopting the template , group ses - sion preparation became more systematic . Topics tended to be recorded at more useful levels of abstraction in the pre - deﬁned categories , and more often ﬁt in the category in which they were placed . Meanwhile , introduction of structured group interaction helped team members focus on thinking about and discussing items on the template . When participants responded to the question “What do you like about the meeting , ” eight individuals mentioned the template and reported that they appreciated the structure it provided . The following comments and notes quoted from online anonymous feedback indicate that participants recognize the value of the structured group interaction support . Question : What do you like about the meeting ? Answer : I like the organization or structure imposed on the discussion . – ( Class 2 MGT Team Week 4 Asyn Feedback ) Answer : Was able to organize discussion topics nicely – ( Class 1 MM Team Week 3 FtF Feedback ) Answer : The ability to have a structured meeting makes the meeting go faster and smoother – ( Class 2 TST Team Week 2 FtF Feedback ) In addition to providing meeting structure support , the template function of pro - viding permanent group memory proved useful for information access . Teams posted minutes of their project tracking sessions on a project web site . Participants reported that this easily accessible , permanent record of project progress was beneﬁcial . One participant reported that “the best feature ( of the system ) is a written record” ( Class 1 PP Team Week 6 Syn Feedback ) . Another participant said that “It is a good way to keep track of comments given during the meeting” ( Class 1 MGT Team Week 2 FtF Feedback ) . When asked whether they regularly read the online session notes , all participants who answered this question indicated that they had . There were 10 com - ments regarding online notes . One participant said “I read them so I can stay up to speed w / [ ith ] what’s going on” ( Class 2 MGT Team Week 4 Asyn Feedback ) . Another participant noted “I read most of the notes . It is good if you are unclear about some - thing that happened at the meeting . ” ( Class 2 QA Team Week 6 FtF Feedback ) . These comments provided evidence that keeping a record of project progress increased team members’ information access and project progress awareness . Our analysis of the usefulness of the template across different modes focused on communication . The template did not facilitate communication for face - to - face and distributed synchronous mode , and the facilitation of asynchronous communication needed improvement . In FtF mode , participants could engage in talking and typing at the same time . Some FtF participants found this distracting . Teams overcame this difﬁculty by appointing one team member to function as the team secretary and to type all of the notes . The other participants reviewed the online notes as they were 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 973 submitted and made corrections or added material in real time . Although real time corrections were practiced by the teams in our study , the alternative would have been for teams to reserve time at the end of their meeting for participants to view the notes and make corrections . Some participants reported that , in FtF mode , the template functioned like a struc - tured , shared note - taking technology . In distributed synchronous mode , participants were assigned to separate rooms and they were linked only by the GSS . Because the GSS template provided support solely for text - based communication , participants were required to type everything into the system . This was reported to be very time - consuming . One participant said , “it took 30 minutes to accomplish what we could accomplish in ﬁve minutes in an FtF situation” . Moreover , in distributed synchronous mode , unstructured parallel communication proved difﬁcult for group discussion because more than one topic might appear in a single discussion thread and it could interrupt the ﬂow of conversation . The following messages or comments are copied from the minutes of a session interaction to illus - trate this point . The notes inside parentheses contain information about the interaction session from which the comments were copied . For the protection of participant iden - tities , all name tags were replaced with “Tom” for male participants , and “Jenny” for female participants . Most messages have a system generated line number appended to the end of the entry . ( 1 ) we are here [ Tom1 ] [ # 33 ] ( 2 ) Hola [ Tom2 ] [ # 34 ] ( 3 ) so are we [ Tom3 ] [ # 35 ] ( 4 ) Where ? [ Tom2 ] [ # 36 ] ( 5 ) why aren’t the names showing up [ Tom4 ] [ # 37 ] ( 6 ) 306 [ Tom1 ] [ # 38 ] ( 7 ) don’t know [ Tom1 ] [ # 39 ] – ( Class 2 TST Week 3 Syn ) Note that statement 6 is the reply to statement 4 , and statement 7 is the reply to statement 5 . The existence of multiple conversation threads can easily lead to a misun - derstanding of the messages . To solve this problem , oral communication ( e . g . , video or audio conferencing ) may be used to augment the template so that the template serves as a common visual aid rather than the primary means of communication . Either option simultaneously addresses the inefﬁciency issues associated with text - based commu - nication . We also predicted that the anonymity feature of GSS is not particularly useful for communication in the context of project progress tracking and our empirical testing conﬁrms this prediction . Participants in FtF mode did not care much whether com - munication was anonymous or identiﬁed . However , when participants interacted in distributed mode they wanted to see name tags posted with all messages and they used identiﬁed communication almost exclusively . For synchronous interaction , the template can be conﬁgured so that name tags are appended to each message posted . However , for asynchronous interaction , the template does not support automatic name tagging . In this mode , users were forced to type name tags manually . Participants 123 974 F . Chen et al . reported feeling quite inconvenienced by this and suggested that a future version of the system should support automatic name tagging in all interaction modes . Partic - ipants in asynchronous interaction also preferred to see a date and time stamp for each message posted . It seems they preferred explicit communication and the ability to interpret messages in a much more speciﬁc context : i . e . who had said what and when . This makes sense because participants can interpret messages more accurately by identifying the message owner and time posted . Some participants reported that the asynchronous sessions were very convenient because team members could log in at any time from any location . One student stated that “Even though it seems to take a block of time , I like the idea of logging in at my convenience . ” Another student said “we can access , read , and put some more com - ment in the issue at any time we want . ” Another student also indicated the value of the template for asynchronous meeting “would increase in relation to a team’s inability to meet regularly” ( individual interviews with students ) . Other participants , who failed to install the GSS interface on their home computers , understandably reported that asynchronous sessions were not convenient . “I tried to download the webstart ( the GSS interface ) and it gave me an error when I tried to launch it—it said to re - download but then it never would let me do it again so now I can’t get on at home and it’s really inconvenient for me to ﬁnd time to do this at school” ( Meeting Feedback From a student ) . Still others reported that the GSS tem - plate was somewhat slow when accessed from home , “It is hard to log on home” ( Meeting Feedback From a student ) . Some participants also reported that it was very frustrating if some team members did not log in the system to participate in the discussion , as one student commented “I don’t like it because no give respon [ s ] e back quickly” ( Meeting Feedback From a student ) . In sum , the template helped structure the project progress tracking meetings and kept a detailed meeting record for future reference . Instead of relying solely on a text - based GSS for synchronous meetings , audio communication ( such as phone or audio conferencing ) should be used . However , in order to keep a permanent record of the meeting , one or more participants need to be designated as note takers . If other participants do not want to be distracted by reviewing the notes as they are being taken , teams can reserve time at the end of the meeting to verify the notes before dismissing the meeting . In asynchronous mode , confusion regarding group communication can be reduced if each message posted is date and time stamped . Question 2 : In what ways is Focus Theory useful and in what ways is it limited in terms of explaining observed phenomena ? Focus Theory is useful in terms of specify - ing three group processes that inﬂuence group interactions in a parsimonious model : communication , deliberation , and information access . Thus we can explain whether the template is efﬁcient and / or effective by explaining how these three processes are facilitated or prohibited . This study also revealed several limitations or issues with Focus Theory First , the three processes cannot all be easily observed . In this study , the process of communication could be observed and so could some forms of information access . Information access was manifested as reading agenda items , notes , and documents , and requesting information from team members and instructors . Requesting informa - 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 975 tion from others always involved communication , and in that case it was very difﬁcult to differentiate between communication and information access . It was impossible to observe deliberation directly . We could only observe a few manifestations or effects of the group deliberation process . For example , structured problem solving ( under - standing the problem , brainstorming solutions , discussing and ranking solutions , and selecting one of the solutions ) usually facilitate a group deliberation process . The fact that three processes may be tightly interwoven and that some processes are dif - ﬁcult or impossible to observe gives rise to a measurement issue : how to measure the amount of attention resources consumed by the three processes identiﬁed in Focus Theory ? The second limitation with Focus Theory is measurement related to cognitive effort and cognitive load . Cognitive effort refers only to attention resources that are used for task - related thinking or activities . Cognitive load refers to all the attention resources used for a task and includes attention resources consumed by irrelevant diversions tak - ing place during the time span used to accomplish the task . In other words , cognitive load includes both cognitive effort and distraction . If we measure perceived cognitive effort , we likely end up with perceived cognitive load . Without being able to accurately measure cognitive effort , investigation of the relationship between cognitive effort and productivity cannot proceed . The third limitation of the theory is that the theory does not specify the relative importance of the three cognitive processes . The authors’ observations and student feedback in this study both indicated that information access and deliberation were not as important as communication . In most cases , when participants communicated clearly , their interaction was more effective and / or efﬁcient , and the participants were more satisﬁed . In terms of their impact on group productivity , how should the individ - ual cognitive processes be weighted ? Which process is most important and which pro - cess might be a bottleneck for group productivity in a particular interaction scenario ? For a simple group activity such as deciding upon a meeting date and time , partici - pants who communicate well can easily get results without any additional information access and with very little deliberation . In this scenario , communication may be the only process that is important . 5 Discussion The study is action research that had dual purposes : making project progress tracking meetings efﬁcient and effective , and gaining more understanding of Focus Theory . We designed a GSS template to facilitate project progress tracking meeting under the guidance of Focus Theory and Collaboration Engineering . We followed collaboration engineering steps to create the template . First , identifying an important repeatable task , we identiﬁed group process for progress tracking that can be used irrespective of project content . Second , identifying the best practice for the task , we identiﬁed com - mon agenda items for project progress tracking . And third , designing collaboration tools to support the task , we designed a GSS template to support the task . According to template users , there are two best features of the template : ( 1 ) provid - ing a structure for team meetings so that it was easier for team leaders to set up speciﬁc 123 976 F . Chen et al . topics for the meeting and kept the meetings more focused on the topics , ( 2 ) keeping a permanent record of the meeting notes for future references . By implication , other technologies can be used to support the group meeting / interaction as long as they pro - vide structure to the meeting and keep a permanent record of the meeting . However , voice communication is needed for extensive discussion . For FtF stand - up meetings , team members can take turns taking notes and following the template agenda items . In this case , a word processor such as MS Word may be sufﬁcient since there is only one person taking notes at any particular time . Template users also found that the template could be a very convenient tool for team members to post updates in asynchronous format . This has an important implication for virtual projects where team members rely heavily or exclusively on computer - mediated communication . Virtual project members could use the template as a vir - tual place—a virtual “water cooler” for informal chat about their daily or weekly progress . For example , this template could be used to facilitate daily or weekly stand - up meetings for distributed project teams . Meanwhile , web conferences , or audio conferences could be scheduled for extensive discussion that requires oral communication . 5 . 1 Study Limitations The ﬁndings from this study should be interpreted with the following limitations in mind : the participants were students and our sample is small since we only tested the template in two project scenarios . On the other hand , it could be argued that the students were junior and senior business students who are more mature than fresh - men and sophomores . In addition , the projects were non - trivial , requiring techni - cal skills , interpersonal skills , and serious effort for successful completion . These attributes are similar to those of industry projects . ( In fact , the university’s indus - try partners report that both of these classes help prepare students for day one productivity due to the complexity of the projects ) . We therefore believe that this study has implications for project process management by typical organizations and businesses . Second , although we investigated whether using the GSS template was efﬁcient and effective in different meeting modes , we should also compare meetings that utilize the GSS template with those that do not utilize the GSS template in the same meeting mode to see whether GSS template is more efﬁcient and effective than other traditional approach without GSS template . Third , we did not measure meeting efﬁciency and effectiveness quantitatively . We considered using meeting duration , number of problems solved or number of items discussed , and team members’ satisfaction as the indicators of meeting efﬁciency and effectiveness . However , the contents and formats ( FtF or distributed ) were different and the quantitative measures inherently unreliable . Without quantitative measure - ment of meetings’ efﬁciency and effectiveness , our argument that the template made meetings more efﬁcient and effective is not strongly supported . Fourth , the data were from a limited source—two classes . Future study should investigate whether the template approach is applicable to large industry projects . 123 An Application of Focus Theory to Project Management Processes 977 6 Conclusion Despite the limitations , the study made two contributions : ﬁrst , project progress track - ing meetings can be approached in a more systematic way by using a template regard - less of the project contents . In a broader sense , the study illustrates that collaborative engineering is a useful technique for helping users deﬁne repeated group processes and select information technologies to facilitate those group processes . Other users can follow the collaborative engineering steps used herein to select other information technologies to support other types of group activity . Second , we gained some insights into Focus Theory . The value of Focus Theory illustrated in this study is that it pro - poses three group processes that need to be considered when information technologies are used to support group activities : communication , information access , and deliber - ation . A ﬂaw in the theory , however , is that it does not differentiate between cognitive effort and cognitive load . In addition , measurement issues ( e . g . it is nearly impossible to measure cognitive effort ) need to be addressed before the theory can be tested in empirical settings . References Adams T , Means JA , Spivey M ( 2008 ) The project meeting facilitator : facilitation skills to make the most of project meetings . Jossey – Bass Publishers Argyris C , Putnam R , Smith DM ( 1985 ) Action science . Jossey – Bass Publishers , San Francisco Besner C , Hobbs B ( 2006 ) The perceived value and potential contribution of project management practices to project success . Proj Manag J 37 ( 3 ) : 37 – 48 Blomquist T , Hällgren M , Nilsson A , Söderholm A ( 2010 ) Project - as - practice : in search of project man - agement research that matters . Proj Manag J 41 ( 1 ) : 5 – 16 Briggs , R . O . ( 1994 ) The focus theory of group productivity and its application to the design , development , and testing of electronic Group Support Technology . Dissertation , MIS Department . University of Arizona , Tucson Briggs RO , Kolfschoten GL , De Vreede GJ , Dean DL , Lukosch S ( 2009 ) a seven layer model of collab - oration : good technology is not enough . In : 30th International conference on information systems , Phoenix Brush AJB , Borning A ( 2005 ) Today messages : lightweight group awareness via email . In : Proceedings of the 38th annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences . IEEE Computer Society Press , Big Island , Hawaii Callahan J , Ramakrishnan S ( 1996 ) Software project management and measurement on the World - Wide - Web ( WWW ) . In : Proceedings of the 5th international workshops on enabling technologies : infra - structure for collaborative enterprises ( WET ICE’96 ) , IEEE Computer Society Press , Stanford , CA Chen F , Romano NC Jr , Nunamaker JF Jr ( 2006 ) A collaborative project management approach and sup - porting software architecture . J Int Technol Inf Manag 15 ( 2 ) : 1 – 16 Chiocchio F ( 2007 ) Project team performance : a study of electronic task and coordination communication . Proj Manag Inst 38 ( 1 ) : 97 – 109 Creswell JW ( 2003 ) Research design : qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches , 2nd edn . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks Fjermestad J , Hiltz SR ( 1999 – 2000 ) An assessment of group support systems experimental research : meth - odology and results . J Manag Inf Syst 15 ( 3 ) : 7 – 149 Fjermestad J , Hiltz SR ( 2000 – 2001 ) Group support systems : a descriptive evaluation of case and ﬁeld studies . J Manag Inf Syst 17 ( 3 ) : 115 – 161 Gilmore T , Krantz J , Ramirez R ( 1986 ) Action based modesof inquiryand the host - researcher relationship . Consultation 5 ( 3 ) : 161 Hunt JW ( 1998 ) Meetings are not working : there is no avoiding team meetings as companies expand and diversify , but they can be made to function more effectively . Financial Times , p 15 123 978 F . Chen et al . Intuit Survey ( 2003 ) E - Mail and spreadsheets add to workgroup confusion ; tracking progress and commu - nications are top concerns , Business Editors / High - Tech Writers . Business Wire , New York Jones C ( 1995 ) Patterns of large software systems : failure and success , IEEE Software Kendrick T ( 2010 ) Project management tool kit—100 tips and techniques for getting the job done right , 2nd edn . Book Division of American Management Association Kitson DH , Masters S ( 1993 ) An analysis of SEI software process assessment results , 1987 – 1991 . In : 15th International conference software engineering , IEEE Computer Soc . Press Koehler K ( 1992 ) Project team management . CMA Mag 66 ( 7 ) : 8 Kolfschoten GL , Vreede GJ De ( 2009 ) A design approach for collaboration processes : a multi - method design science study in collaboration engineering . J Manag Inf Syst 26 ( 1 ) : 225 – 256 Krumboltz JD , Worthington RL ( 1999 ) The school - to - work transition from a learning theory perspective . Career Development Quarterly ( CDQ ) Special Issue : School - to - Work Transitions 47 ( 4 ) : 312 – 325 Lam HE , Maheshwari P ( 2001 ) Task and team management in the distributed software project management tool . In : Proceedings of the 25th annual international computer software and applications conference ( COMPSAC . 01 ) , IEEE Computer Society Press Lee SF ( 2008 ) How should team meetings ﬂow ? R . A ! R . A ! approach as a meeting process . J Qual Particip 31 ( 1 ) : 25 – 28 McConnell S ( 1997 ) Tool support for project tracking . IEEE Software , September / October Nunamaker JF Jr , Dennis AR , Valacich JS , Vogel DR , George JF ( 1991 ) Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Commun ACM 34 ( 7 ) : 40 – 61 Powell A , Piccoli G , Ives B ( 2004 ) Virtual teams : a review of current literature and directions of future research . ACM SIGMIS Database 35 ( 1 ) : 6 – 36 Project Management Fact Book ( 2001 ) Newtown Square , Pennsylvania Project Management Institute Rad RF , Levin G ( 2003 ) Achieving project management success using virtual teams . J . Ross Publishing , Inc . , Florida , Boca Raton Schwaber K , Beedle M ( 2002 ) Agile software development with Scrum . The Addison Wesley Agile Soft - ware Development Series Susman GI , Evered RD ( 1978 ) An assessment of the scientiﬁc merits of action research . Adm Sci Q 23 ( 4 ) : 582 – 603 Vreede GJ De , Briggs RO , Massey A ( 2009 ) Collaboration engineering : foundations and opportunities . J Assoc Inf Syst 10 ( 3 ) : 121 – 137 Wheatley M ( 2005 ) The importance of project management : new research into the role of project management in a modern developed economy . http : / / www . projectsmart . co . uk / the - importance - of - project - management . html . Accessed 21 Nov 2012 Yin RK ( 1984 ) Case study research : design and methods . Sage , Newbury Park , CA 123