Exchange of Actin Subunits at the Leading Edge of Living Fibroblasts : Possible Role of Treadmilling YU - LI WANG Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , National Jewish Hospital and Research Center , Denver , Colorado 80206 ; and Department of Biochemistry , Biophysics and Genetics , University of Colorado Health Sciences Center , Denver , Colorado 80220 ABSTRACT Previous observations indicated that the lamellipodium ( " leading edge " ) of fibro - blasts contains a dense meshwork , as well as numerous bundles ( microspikes ) of actin filaments . Most , if not all , of the filaments have a uniform polarity , with the " barbed " end associated with the membrane . I investigated whether and how actin subunits exchange in this region by microinjecting living gerbil fibroma cells ( IMR - 33 ) with actin that had been labeled with iodoacetamidotetramethylrhodamine . After incorporation of the labeled actin into the lamellipodium , I used a laser microbeam to photobleach a 3 - 4 - ~ , m region at and surrounding a microspike , without disrupting the integrity of the structure . I then recorded the pattern of fluorescence recovery and analyzed it using a combination of TV image intensification and digital image processing techniques . Fluorescence recovery was first detected near the edge of the cell and then moved toward the cell ' s center at a constant rate of 0 . 79 + 0 . 31 ~ m / min . When only part of the lamellipodium near the edge of the cell was photobleached , the bleached spot also moved toward the cell ' s center and through an area unbleached by the laser beam . These results indicated that steady state incorporation of actin subunits occurred predominantly at the membrane - associated end of actin filaments , and that actin subunits in the lamellipodium underwent a constant movement toward the center of the cell . I suggest that treadmilling , possibly in combination with other molecular interactions , may provide an effective mechanism for the movement of actin subunits and the protrusion of cytoplasm in the lamellipodium of fibroblasts . The organization of actin filaments in many types of non - muscle cells has been investigated extensively during the past years . Through a combination of light - and electron - micro - scopic observations , it is clear that actin filaments are capable of rapid rearrangement in nonmuscle cells ( see , for example , reference 26 ) . However , at the molecular level , little is known about how this dynamic reorganization is achieved . In vitro , actin is capable of a wide spectrum of activities , including polymerization , gelation , bundling , fragmentation , and translocation , either by itself or in combination with other proteins ( for reviews see references 5 , 15 , and 21 ) . Of particular significance is the distinct polarity of the filaments , which not only causes myosin heads to interact with the filaments at a preferred angle but also accounts for the differ - ent rates of assembly at the two ends . The fast , or " barbed , " end has a higher rate of assembly as compared with the slow , or " pointed , " end ( 11 , 31 ) . In 1976 , Wegner raised the possi - THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY , VOLUME 101 AUGUST 1985 597 - 602 © The Rockefeller University Press - 0021 - 9525 / 85 / 08 / 059706 $ 1 . 00 bility that the two ends could have different critical concen - trations of polymerization , thus causing the subunits to " treadmill " continuously through the filament at steady state ( 29 ) . Subsequent measurements of kinetic constants at the two ends indicated that treadmilling may indeed occur in vitro ( 4 , 16 ) . In addition , Kirschner pointed out that tread - milling may play various important roles , ranging from trans - port of organelles to regulation of filament stability , in living cells ( 10 ) . However , without direct correlation with observa - tions in vivo , it is not even certain whether this phenomenon actually occurs in living cells . A particularly interesting area in which to study the dy - namic behavior ofactin in vivo is the lamellipodium ( " leading edge " ) of fibroblasts . Previous electron microscopic observa - tions demonstrated the presence of a meshwork of apparently continuous actin filaments , as well as numerous actin filament bundles ( microspikes ) , extending from the edge of the cell 597 toward the center ( 18 - 20 ) . In addition , most , if not all , actin filaments in this region have a uniform polarity , with the fast , or " barbed " ends associated with the membrane ( 19 ) . Myosin , on the other hand , is either absent or present in only a very small amount ( 7 ) . The dynamic aspects of actin filaments in this region , however , remain largely unknown . Kreis et al . have studied the mobility of actin in embryonic chick fibro - blasts ( 12 ) . They measured the percentage and the apparent diffusion coefficient of the " mobile " fraction , which presum - ably corresponds to actin monomers or oligomers , in the lamellipodium . However , since the exchange of subunits would probably fall under the " immobile " ( apparent diffusion coefficient < 3 x 10 - 12 cm2 / s ) category when their approach is used , few important questions about subunit exchange were answered . For example , does subunit exchange occur in this region ? If so , does it occur along the length of the filament or only at the ends ? Is the fast end , which appears to be blocked by the attachment to the membrane , active in subunit ex - change ? I have been trying to answer these questions through the use of fluorescent analogue cytochemistry ( 22 , 27 ) , in con - junction with the technique of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching . In brief , my approach involves the microin - jection of fluorescently labeled actin intoflving gerbil fibroma cells ( IMR - 33 ) . After the incorporation of the fluorescent actin analogue into cellular structures , fluorescence in a small area of the lamellipodium is bleached with a laser microbeam without damaging the structure . The recovery of fluorescence is then measured . Since I am interested in not only the rate , but also the pattern , of recovery , I use a TV image intensifier to record the image ( 17 ) , and analyze the data with digital image processing techniques . The results not only indicate a clear polarity in steady state subunit incorporation , favoring the membrane - associated end , but also reveal a constant flux of actin subunits toward the center of the cell . I suggest that treadmilling , possibly in combination with other molecular interactions , may play an important role in this region of the cell . MATERIALS AND METHODS Protein Preparation and Cell Culture : Actin was prepared from rabbit skeletal muscle and labeled with iodoacetamidotetramethylrhodamine ( Research Organics , Inc . , Cleveland , OH ) as described previously ( 26 ) . The gerbil fibroma cell line IMR - 33 was obtained from American Type Culture Colleclion ( RockviUe , MD ) , and maintained in F12K medium ( KC Biological Inc . , Lenexa , KS ) containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( KC Biological Inc . ) , 50 U / ml penicillin , and 50 ~ g / ml streptomycin . The cells were replated 16 - 20 h before an experiment in Dulbecco ' s modified Eagle ' s medium ( Gibco Labora - tories , Grand Island , NY ) containing 2 % fetal calf serum and antibiotics as described above . This condition facilitates the formation oflamellipodium . The culture dish , formed by attaching a coverslip to the bottom of a Plexiglas plate , was described previously ( 26 ) . Microinjection and Photobleaching : Cells were maintained on the microscope stage under a Plexiglas incubator ( 26 ) . Microinjection was performed as described by Graessman et al . ( 6 ) . The intracellular concentration of labeled actin was estimated to be 5 - 10 % that of endogenous actin . The culture dish was returned to the regular CO2 incubator for 1 h after microinjec - tion to allow complete dispersion and incorporation of injected molecules . Photobleaching was performed with a laser microbeam at a wavelength of 515 nm , generated from a 2 - W argon ion laser ( model 94 ; Lexel Corp . , Palo Alto , CA ) . The optical components for the formation of microbeams were essentially as described by Jacobson et al . ( 8 ) . The duration of the laser pulse was controlled by an electronic shutter and a shutter timing control unit ( Vincent Associates , Rochester , NY ) . Cells were bleached with a power of 50 - 75 mW for 20 - 50 ms . The bleached area had a diameter of 3 - 4 ~ m . Similar results were obtained from cells bleached to various extents . 598 THI JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 101 , 1985 Image Recording and Analyses : Fluorescence images were ob - served with a Zeiss IM35 microscope equipped with an epi - illuminator and either a 100X / numerical aperture 1 . 30 Neofluar or a 63X / numerical aperture 1 . 25 Neofluar objective ( Carl Zeiss Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) . A 100 - W quartz - halogen lamp , operated at an input of 6 - 7 V , was used as the light source . No cell damage was detectable during image recording . Images were recorded using an intensified silicon intensified target video camera ( model ISIT - 66 : Dage - MTI Inc . , Michigan City , IN ) coupled to an image processing computer ( G . W . Hannaway & Associates , Boulder , CO ) . The signal - to - noise ratio of the image was improved dramatically by averaging 128 frames . Averaged images were then stored on a hard disk ( Fujitsu America Inc . , Santa Clara , CA ) . Each image was stored in 512 pixel x 480 pixel x 8 bit . With a 100X objective , each pixel corresponded to an area of 0 . 1 x 0 . 08 t * m . Distance measurements were performed by specifying points on the monitor using a graphics tablet ( GTCO Corp . , Rockville , MD ) and calculating the distance based on the number of pixels between the points , taking into account the rectangular shape of the pixel . To obtain the intensity profile along the spike , background intensity immediately outside the edge of the cell was first averaged and subtracted from the entire image . The cursor , controlled using the graphics tablet , was then moved along the image of the spike on the monitor , and intensities in a 5 x 5 pixel area surrounding various points were averaged . Phase - contrast images were recorded with a vidicon camera ( model TC2521 ; RCA Electro - Optics & Devices , Lancaster , PA ) then contrast en - hanced using a shadow - casting convolution algorithm . Phalloidin Staining : Cells were injected and photobleached as de - scribed above . Immediately after photobleaching , an averaged image was stored , the exact position of the cell was marked , and the coverslip was removed for fixation . The interval between photobleaching and fixation was - 1 - 2 min . Fixation was performed as described by Small et al . ( 20 ) , using a mixture of 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 during the first step and l % glutaraldehyde during the second step . The coverslip was rinsed after the second fixation , treated with sodium borohydride , and then stained with fluorescein - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Junction City , OR ) without further extraction in Triton . Fluorescence of fluorescein - phalloidin was observed with a Zeiss 48 77 16 filter set and an extra barrier filter ( cut - off wavelength 550 nm ) . No cross - over of rhodamine fluorescence was detectable . Fluorescence of tetramethyl - rhodamine - labeled actin was observed using a Zeiss 48 77 15 filter set , which excludes any fluorescein fluorescence to a level beyond detection . RESULTS When cultured under appropriate conditions , > 80 % of the IMR - 33 cells showed prominent leading lamellipodium . Most cells , however , exhibited little net translocation during the period of observation ( < 10 min ) . A pair of photographs of a living cell microinjected with tetramethylrhodamine - actin , taken with phase optics and fluorescence optics , respectively , are shown in Fig . 1 . The lamellipodium , 2 - 6 um wide , was discerned under phase optics as a slightly phase - dense band . In addition , microspikes , either embedded within the lamel - lipodium or projecting out of the cell , were readily detected . The stress fibers were located in the more central region of the cell . Under fluorescence optics , the lamellipodium showed an increased concentration in microinjected actin compared to the adjacent cytoplasm , as well as distinctly fluorescent microspikes . The general morphology of the lamellipodium was similar to that described by Abercrombie et al . ( 2 ) and Small et al . in chick embryonic fibroblasts ( l 8 , 20 ) . Because of the discrete morphology of the microspikes , which facilitates the analysis and interpretation of data , pho - tobleaching was performed predominantly at microspikes and adjacent areas . However , similar results were also obtained in areas of diffuse fluorescence through the lamellipodium . The microspikes were highly dynamic structures , with a lifetime usually shorter than 10 min . Besides assembly and disassem - bly , reorientation , merging , and splitting of microspikes were frequently observed . The rapid change in microspikes has limited the period of time for the observation of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching . However , as described below , since the recovery process was fast , I was able to follow FIGURE 2 Fluorescence recovery of an almost completely bleached microspike . The cell before photobleaching is shown in a . A microspike ( arrow ) and its surrounding area are photobleached at t = O . Images are then recorded at t = 35 s ( b ) , 63 s ( c ) , 95 s ( d ) , 123 s ( e ) , 160 s ( f ) , 188 s ( g ) , 217 s ( h ) , 245 s ( i ) , and 275 s ( j ) . The recovery begins at the membrane and moves toward the center of the cell . Bar , 5 # m . x 1 , 570 . microspikes through most of the recovery processes . Through the use of a laser microbeam , an area 3 - 4 um in diameter was bleached at and surrounding a microspike . The recovery of fluorescence after photobleaching followed a highly polar pattern . It was first detected near the edge of the cell and then moved toward the cell ' s center ( Fig . 2 ) . Both the microspikes and the surrounding diffuse area have similar kinetics , forming a uniform boundary during recovery . When the length of the recovered segment of the microspike was plotted against time , a straight line was obtained . From nine such plots , I obtained a rate of movement of 0 . 79 _ + 0 . 31 # m / min ( Fig . 3 ) . If the laser beam was aligned so that only the distal portion FIGURE 1 A living IMR - 33 cell cul - tured under the specified condition and microinjected with iodo - acetamidotetramet hylrhodamine - la - beled actin . The lamellipodium ( long arrow ) and microspikes ( arrowheads ) are evident in a , the computer - en - hanced phase - contrast image , and in b . Stress fibers are located in the more posterior region of the cell ( short arrow ) . Fluorescence image of injected actin is shown in b . Some changes at the lamellipodium oc - curred during the time required to change from the vidicon camera to the intensified silicon intensified tar - get image intensifier . Bar , 5 # m . × 1 , 800 . 5 . 0 4 . 0 3 . 0 E2° 1 . 0 I I I J 60 120 180 240 s FIGURE 3 Time course of the fluorescence recovery . Lengths of the microspikes during recovery are measured and plotted as a function of time . The lines are obtained by least - square fitting . Data from four different cells are shown here . of the microspike was photobleached , the subsequent recovery appeared to involve a translocation of the bleached spot toward the center of the cell and through an area unbleached by the laser beam ( Fig . 4 ) . This was clearly demonstrated with the intensity profiles of the microspike during various stages of recovery ( Fig . 5 ) . The pattern and kinetics of recovery were specific for actin . When tetramethylrhodamine - labeled ovalbumin was mi - croinjected into the cell , it entered the lamellipodium with a slightly higher intensity than it entered the adjacent cyto - plasm . This was probably due to a larger accessible volume in the lamellipodium ( 27 ) . However , when the fluorescence was photobleached , the recovery was so fast that no bleached spot could be detected even in the first averaged image im - mediately after photobleaching ( not shown ) . To ensure that the recovery of fluorescence reflected normal exchange of actin subunits rather than repair of structures damaged by the laser beam , a microspike was partially bleached at the membrane - associated end . Immediately after the recording of the bleached image , the cell was extracted and fixed using a protocol that preserves the lamellipodium ( 20 ) . Actin in the remaining cytoskeleton was stained with fluorescein - phalloidin . As shown in the image of injected actin ( Fig . 6 c ) , some recovery occurred near the edge of the cell before fixation . However , the bleached spot was still clearly WANG Fluorescence Recovery after Pholobteaching of Actin Bundles 599 FIGURE 4 Fluorescence recovery of a microspike partially bleached near the edge of the cell . The cell before bleaching is shown in a . A small portion of a microspike ( arrow ) near the edge of the cell is bleached at t = 0 . Images are then recorded at t = 24 s ( b ) , 50 s ( c ) , 77 s ( d ) , 105 s ( e ) , 133 s ( f ) , 159 s ( g ) , 185 s ( h ) , 212 s ( i ) , 241 s ( j ) , 274 s ( k ) , 307 s ( I ) , and 438 s ( m ) . The microspike later splits into multiple small microspikes ( m ) . Two neighboring unbleached microspikes merge and subsequently undergo partial disassembly during the period of observation ( arrowhead ) . Bar , 5 ~ m . x 3 , 700 . 600 / " FIGURE 5 Intensity profilesof the microspike shown in Fig . 4 . Intensities in a 5 x 5 pixel area surrounding various points along the microspike are averaged and plotted as a function of the distance from the membrane - associated end . Each line represents the profile of the microspike in the corresponding micrograph shown in Fig . 4 . FIGURE 6 Phalloidin staining of a photobleached microspike . The living cell and the microspike ( arrow ) before bleaching are shown in a . The microspike was partially bleached near the edge of the cell ( b ) . The cell was then fixed , extracted , and stained with fluo - rescein - phalloidin . The bleached spot is still readily detectable in the image of injected actin after staining , although it had moved toward the center of the cell before the cell was fixed ( c ) . The image of fluorescein - phalloidin indicates that the integrity of the microspike is maintained during recovery ( d ) . Bar , 5 # m . x 1 , 180 . detectable . The image of fluorescein - phalloidin , on the other hand , showed an intact microspike similar to that before photobleaching ( Fig . 6 d ) . DISCUSSION One important concern for experiments that involve photo - bleaching recovery is the possibility of structural damage induced by the intense laser beam . Although it is difficult to rule out entirely the possibility of a laser - induced artifact , several arguments indicate that it is unlikely . First , the results with phalloidin - stained Triton cytoskeletons indicate that the microspike maintains its structural integrity , its resistance to Triton extraction , and its phalloidin binding sites after a partial photobleaching at the membrane - associated end . If recovery involved a repair of the damaged part of the spike rather than an exchange of subunits , then during recovery of partially bleached spikes one would expect to detect a discon - tinuity along the length of the spike with phalloidin staining . This is not the case here . In addition , if the physical continuity of the spike were disrupted at a level beyond the resolution of fluorescence microscopy , it would be difficult to explain the transport of the bleached spot along the microspike toward the center of the cell , as shown in Figs . 4 and 5 . Finally , the pattern and the rate of recovery are not affected by the extent of photobleaching . If photobleaching damaged the actin in a way that affects its dynamic behavior , one would expect to detect a change in recovery dynamics and / or pattern as a function of the extent of photobleaching . An explanation of the observed pattern of fluorescence recovery should consider several possible mechanisms . First , actin filaments in the lamellipodium may continuously detach from the edge of the cell and move toward the center . In addition , assembly of new filaments may occur constantly near the edge . This mechanism is improbable , since , under the electron microscope , most filaments in this region appear to associate with the edge of the cell and extend all the way across the iamellipodium ( 18 , 20 ) . Alternatively , if filaments are indeed continuous and maintain a constant length during recovery , the highly biased pattern of recovery can only be generated by a highly biased incorporation of subunits into the membrane - associated end , even though this end appears to be blocked by the membrane association . In addition , since both the microspikes and the surrounding area recover at a similar rate , forming a uniform boundary , it is likely that the entire lamellipodium is covered with filaments of similar kinetic properties . At least in three specialized systems , similar accessibility of actin filaments at the fast , membrane - associated end has been suggested . First , Mooseker et al . observed that when isolated intestinal brush border was incubated with excess actin mon - omers , the core microfilaments , which have a uniform polar - ity with the fast ends associated with the membrane , can incorporate additional actin subunits at the membrane - asso - ciated end ( 14 ) . Second , Tilney and Inou6 analyzed the exten - sion of the acrosomal process of the Thyone sperm ( 25 ) . The elongation of actin filaments slowed with time , consistent with a requirement for the subunits to diffuse to the distal , fast end . Finally , Tilney et al . examined the pattern of the elongation of actin bundles in differentiating Limulus sper - matids ( 24 ) . Since the number of filaments of the bundle during early stages of differentiation was similar to that at the slow end in the mature sperm , they suggested that it was probably the fast , membrane - associated end that elongated during differentiation . The present experiments indicate that accessibility and exchangeability of subunits may be a general property of the fast , membrane - associated end of actin fila - ments , and may be involved in functions more general than those in microvilli or sperm . The recovery at the fast end of the filament could be mediated through two possible mechanisms : same - end asso - ciation - dissociation and opposite - end association - dissociation ( treadmilling ) . As Zeeberg et al . ( 32 ) and Salmon et al . ( 17 ) pointed out , the two mechanisms have very different kinetics . If the recovery occurs predominantly through same - end as - sociation - dissociation , the movement of the boundary of re - covery should slow rapidly as it reaches into the interior of the filaments . On the other hand , if treadmilling is the pre - dominant mechanism , then a constant movement should be detected . Our data are clearly more consistent with the second mechanism . However , they do not exclude the possibility that same - end association - dissociation also occurs to some extent . Another way to distinguish the two mechanisms is to pho - tobleach only the distal portion of the spikes . If recovery occurs through association - dissociation at the membrane - WANG fluorescence Recovery after Photobteaching of Actin Bundles 601 associated end , the bleached subunits should not move appre - ciably during the recovery . On the other hand , if treadmilling occurs , then the flux generated should carry the bleached subunits toward the center of the cell into unbleached areas , and eventually result in the dissociation of those subunits at the end away from the membrane . Our results , again , are consistent with the mechanism oftreadmilling . According to published kinetic constants ( 4 , 16 ) , one can calculate that treadmilling of pure actin filaments in vitro has a flux rate of 0 . 06 to 0 . 11 um / min , which is much slower than the movement of the bleached spot ( 0 . 79 _ _ _ 0 . 31 um / min ) . Therefore , if treadmilling does represent the mechanism of the movement of actin subunits in the lamellipodium , its rate is probably enhanced significantly by the interactions with other proteins and / or by the local ionic environment . For example , the rate of flux can be increased in the presence of profilin , which preferentially inhibits the addition of sub - units to the pointed end ( 23 ) . The proteins that mediate the association of the filament with the membrane may further promote the addition , or inhibit the dissociation , of subunits at the barbed end . Finally , since the exchange of subunits in vitro is highly dependent on ionic conditions ( 4 , 16 , 28 , 30 ) , the environment in the cytoplasm may further facilitate the treadmilling process . The centripetal flux and possible treadmilling of actin sub - units may play an important role in cell motility . First , based on simple microscopic observations , Abercrombie pointed out many years ago the possibility of a " steady retreat " of actin in the leading lamella ( I ) , which is consistent with the present observation . Second , it has been observed that on the surface of lamellipodium there is a continuous centripetal flow of receptors and associated particles ( 3 , 9 ) . If the mem - brane components are directly or indirectly connected to the underlying actin filaments , a flux of actin subunits would cause a similar flux of membrane components and associated particles . Third , if treadmilling does occur in the lamellipo - dium , it may provide an effective mechanism for the protru - sion of the cytoplasm in this region . During the insertion of subunits to the membrane - associated end of the filament , either the entire filament must move toward the center of the cell , or the membrane must yield and protrude to offer the extra space required . The force involved may be generated as a result of treadmilling alone or in combination with other ( e . g . , actin - myosin ) molecular interactions . The resulting cell movement may then be regulated by the rigidity of the membrane relative to the submembranous cortex . Finally , as Kirschner ( 13 ) and Mooseker et al . ( 19 ) pointed out , tread - milling would allow fine regulation of the stability of actin filaments , through the binding of capping proteins to the fast end . When this end is capped , the filament will continue to disassemble at the opposite end until all the subunits are removed and reassembled onto other uncapped filaments . This would allow the cell to use efficiently its energetic and mechanical resources , and assemble and disassemble its mo - tile machinery in response to specific signals . l thank Dr . N . M . McKenna for helpful discussions , J . B . Meigs and C . S . Johnson for technical assistance , and three reviewers for con - structive suggestions . This study is supported by American Cancer Society grant CD - 200 , National Science Foundation grant PCM - 8306971 , and a grant from the Muscular Dystrophy Association . ReceivedJbr publication 11 February 1985 , and in revisedJbrm 11 April1985 . REFERENCES 1 . Abercrombie , M . 1980 . The crawling movement of metazoan cells . Proc . R Soc . Lond B . Biol . Sci . 207 : 129 - 147 . 2 . Abercrombie , M . . J . E . M . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1970 . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp . Cell Rex 59 : 393 - 398 . 3 . Abercrombie , M . , J . E . M . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1970 . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . III . Movements of particles on the dorsal surface of the leading lamella . Exp . Celt Res . 62 : 389 - 398 . 4 . Bonder , E . M . , D . J . Fishkind , and M . S . Mooseker . 1983 . Direct measurement of critical concentrations and assembly rate constants at two ends of an actin filament . Cell . 34 : 491 - 501 . 5 . Craig , S . W . , and T . D . Pollard . 1982 . Actin - binding proteins . Trends Biochem . Sei . 7 : 88 - 92 . 6 . Graessman , A . , M . Graessman , and C , Mueller . 1980 . Microinjection of early SV40 DNA fragments and T antigen . Methods Enzymol . 65 : 816 - 825 . 7 . Herman . I . M . , N . J . Crisona , and T . D . Pollard . 1981 . Relation between cell activity and the distribution of cytoplasmic actin and myosin . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 84 - 91 . 8 . Jacobson , K . , Z , Derzko , E . - S . Wu , Y . Hou , and G . Poste . 1977 . Measurement of the lateral mobility of cell surface components in single living cells by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching . J . Supramol . Struct . 5 : 565 - 576 . 9 . Jacobson , K . , D . O ' Dell , B . Holifteld , T . k Murphy , and J . T . August . 1984 . Redistri - bution of a major cell surface glycoprotein during cell movement . J . Cell BioL 99 : 1613 - 1623 . 10 . Kirschner , M . W . 1980 . Implications of treadmilling for the stability and polarity of actin and tubulin polymers in vivo . Z Cell BioL 86 : 330 - 334 . I 1 , Kondo , H . , and S . lshiwata . 1976 . Unidirectional growth of F - actin , J . Biochem . Tok ~ , , oL 79 : 159 - 171 . 12 . Kreis , T . E . , B . Geiger . and J . Schlessinger . 1982 . Mobility of microinjected rhodamine actin within living chicken gizzard cells determined by fluorescence photobleaching recovery . Cell . 29 : 835 - 845 . 13 . Mooseker , M . S . , E . D . Bonder , K . A . Conselman , D . J . Fishkind , C . L . Howe , and T . C . S . Keller II1 . 1984 . Brush border cytoskeleton and integration of cellular functions . Z CelIBiol . 99 ( No . 1 , Pt . 2 ) : 104s - - 112s . 14 . Mooseker , M . S . , T . D . Pollard , and K . A , Wharton . 1982 . Nucleated polymerization of actin from the membrane - associated ends of microvillar filaments in the intestinal brush border . J . Cell Biol . 95 : 223 - 233 . 15 . Pollard , T . D . , and S . W . Craig . 1982 . Mechanism of actin polymerization . Trends Biochem . Sci . 7 : 55 - 58 . 16 . Pollard , T . D . , and M . S . Mooseker . 1981 . Direct measurement ofactin polymerization rate constants by electron microscopy of actin filaments nucleated by isolated microvillus cores . £ Cell Biol . 88 : 654 - 659 . 17 . Salmon , E . D . , R . J . Leslie , W . M . Saxton , M . L . Karow , and J . R . Mclntosh . 1984 . Spindle microtubule dynamics in sea urchin embryos : analysis using a fluorescein - labeled tubulin and measurements of ftuorescence redistribution after laser photobleach - ing . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 2165 - 2174 . 18 . Small , J . V . 1981 . Organization of actin in the leading edge of cultured cells : influence of osmium tetroxide and dehydration on the ultrastructure of actin meshworks . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 695 - 705 . 19 . Small , J . V . , G . Isenberg ~ and J . E . Cells . 1978 . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature ( Lond ) . 272 : 638 - 639 . 20 . Small , J . V . , G , Rinnerthaler , and H . Hinssen . 1982 , Organization of actin meshworks in cultured cells : the leading edge . ( . ' old Spring Harbor Syrup . Quant . Biol . 46 : 599 - 61 I . 21 . Stosscl , T . P . 1984 . Contribution of actin to the structure of the cytoplasmic matrix . J . CellBioL 99 { No . 1 . Pt . 2 ) : 15s - 21s . 22 . Taylor , D . L . , and Y . - L Wang . 1978 . Molecular cytochemistry : incorporation of fluorescently labeled actin into living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 75 : 857 - 861 . 23 . Tilney , L G . . E . M . Bonder , L . M . Coluccio , and M . S . Mooseker . 1983 . Actin from Thyone sperm assembles on only one end of an actin filament : a behavior regulated by profilin , d . Cell Biol . 97 : 112 - 124 . 24 . Tilney , L . G . . E . M . Bonder , and D . J . DeRosier . 198l . Actin filaments elongate from their membrane associated ends . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 485 - 494 , 25 . Tilney , L G . , and S . lnou & 1982 . Acrosomal reaction of Thyonesperm . 11 . The kinetics and possible mechanism of acrosomal process elongation . J . ( ' ell Biol . 93 : 820 - 827 . 26 . Wang , Y , - L . 1984 . Reorganization ofactin filament bundles in living fibroblasts . Z Cell Biol . 99 : 1478 - 1485 . 27 . Wang , Y . - L . , J . M , Heiple , and D . L . Taylor . 1981 . Fluorescent analog cytochemistry of contractile proteins . Methods Cell Biol . 25 ( Pt . B ) : I - 11 . 28 , Wang , Y . - L . , and D . L . Taylor . 1981 . Probing the dynamic equilibrium of actin polymerization by fluorescence energy transfer . Cell . 27 : 429 - 436 . 29 . Wegner , A . 1976 . Head to tail polymerization ofactin . J . Mol . Biol . 108 : t39 - 150 . 30 . Wegner . A . , and J . - M . Neuhaus . 1981 , Requirement of divalent cations for fast exchange of actin monomers and actin filament subunits . J . Mol . BioL 153 : 681 - 693 . 3 I . Woodrum , D , I . , S , A . Rich , and T . D . Pollard . 1975 . Evidence for biased unidirectional polymerization ofactin filaments using heavy meromyosin by an improved method . J . Cell BioL 67 : 231 - 237 , 32 . Zeeberg , B . , R . Reid , and M . Caplow . 1980 . Incorporation of radioactive tubulin into microtubules at steady state . £ Biol Chem 255 : 9891 - 9899 . 602 THE JOURNAl OF CELL BIOtOGY . VOLUME 101 , 1085