Imaging Gene Expression Yaron Shav - Tal Editor Methods and Protocols Second Edition Methods in Molecular Biology 2038 M E T H O D S I N M O L E C U L A R B I O L O G Y Series Editor John M . Walker School of Life and Medical Sciences University of Hertfordshire Hatfield , Hertfordshire , UK For further volumes : http : / / www . springer . com / series / 7651 For over 35 years , biological scientists have come to rely on the research protocols and methodologies in the critically acclaimed Methods in Molecular Biology series . The series was the ﬁrst to introduce the step - by - step protocols approach that has become the standard in all biomedical protocol publishing . Each protocol is provided in readily - reproducible step - by - step fashion , opening with an introductory overview , a list of the materials and reagents needed to complete the experiment , and followed by a detailed procedure that is supported with a helpful notes section offering tips and tricks of the trade as well as troubleshooting advice . These hallmark features were introduced by series editor Dr . John Walker and constitute the key ingredient in each and every volume of the Methods in Molecular Biology series . Tested and trusted , comprehensive and reliable , all protocols from the series are indexed in PubMed . Imaging Gene Expression Methods and Protocols Second Edition Edited by Yaron Shav - Tal The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences and the Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan , Israel Editor Yaron Shav - Tal The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences and the Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Bar - Ilan University Ramat Gan , Israel ISSN 1064 - 3745 ISSN 1940 - 6029 ( electronic ) Methods in Molecular Biology ISBN 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9673 - 5 ISBN 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 ( eBook ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 This work is subject to copyright . All rights are reserved by the Publisher , whether the whole or part of the material is concerned , speciﬁcally the rights of translation , reprinting , reuse of illustrations , recitation , broadcasting , reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way , and transmission or information storage and retrieval , electronic adaptation , computer software , or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed . The use of general descriptive names , registered names , trademarks , service marks , etc . in this publication does not imply , even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement , that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use . The publisher , the authors , and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication . Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty , express or implied , with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made . The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations . This Humana imprint is published by the registered company Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature . The registered company address is : 233 Spring Street , New York , NY 10013 , U . S . A . Dedication In memory of my beloved student , Noa Neufeld v Preface Gene expression can be a term of many meanings , depending on the type of research ﬁeld one belongs to . The activity of genes has been measured since the days when radioactive labeling of nucleic acids became possible and ever since the ﬁeld has been ploughed through by scores of biochemical and molecular analyses , and as of recent , bioinformatics and genomics approaches . Imaging of gene expression , the topic that this book deals with , has also made an impact on our understanding of the gene expression pathway , particularly since the ﬁeld uniquely deals with gene activity within single cells rather than taking a population view like the abovementioned techniques . As imaging technologies and approaches have evolved , the scope of certain imaging techniques has moved far beyond the production of purely illustrative images or appealing time - lapse movies to provide the scientist with a rich range of ways to measure and quantify the biological process and outcome of the gene expression pathway . Close interactions between biologists and physicists trying to better understand the mechanistics of gene activity have allowed the import of techniques and terminology once solely used in physics , thereby bringing to light the emerging ﬁeld of biophysics . This book aims to offer up - do - date microscopy approaches and protocols that scientists in the ﬁeld have developed , which would beneﬁt the broader scientiﬁc community . The methods not only describe the technical design of the experiments but also focus on the expected outcome and provide tips and personal insights for the beneﬁt of the user , which we all know can sometimes tip the outcome between failure and success of a technique . This volume is divided into two parts . The ﬁrst section deals with the output of a gene , namely , the RNA molecules that are transcribed from the gene and the way by which these molecules can be tracked or quantiﬁed in ﬁxed or living cells as well as in organisms . The second section provides protocols that focus on chromosomes , chromatin , and factors that bind DNA . The methods detailed in this book portray a variety of ways by which nuclear processes inter - twined with gene expression can be followed and quantiﬁed in living cells using various microscopy techniques , as well as approaches for studying several subnuclear structures found in eukaryotic cells . The chapters have been contributed by both well - established and young scientists , and I am ever grateful to all the authors who have participated and invested time , thought , and energy in the bringing of this collection to light . Ramat Gan , Israel Yaron Shav - Tal vii Contents Dedication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi P ART I I MAGING RNA S AND G ENE E XPRESSION IN C ELLS AND O RGANISMS 1 Imaging Single mRNA Molecules in Mammalian Cells Using an Optimized MS2 - MCP System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Maria Vera , Evelina Tutucci , and Robert H . Singer 2 Live - Cell Imaging of Long Noncoding RNAs Using Molecular Beacons . . . . . . . 21 Yachen Ying , Shiqi Mao , Christopher J . Krueger , and Antony K . Chen 3 Real - Time Observation of Localization and Expression ( ROLEX ) System for Live Imaging of the Transcriptional Activity and Nuclear Position of a Speciﬁc Endogenous Gene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 Hiroshi Ochiai 4 Visualization of Single mRNAs in Live Neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 Jae Youn Shim , Byung Hun Lee , and Hye Yoon Park 5 Lighting Up Gene Activation in Living Drosophila Embryos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha 6 Quantiﬁcation of mRNA Turnover in Living Cells : A Pipeline for TREAT Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 Franka Voigt , Jan Eglinger , and Jeffrey A . Chao 7 Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria by MR - FISH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 Kristina A . Ganzinger , Martin R . Challand , James Spencer , David Klenerman , and Rohan T . Ranasinghe 8 Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells in Coculture by Single - Molecule Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization ( smFISH ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst 9 Live - Cell Imaging of mRNP – NPC Interactions in Budding Yeast . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 Azra Lari , Farzin Farzam , Pierre Bensidoun , Marlene Oefﬁnger , Daniel Zenklusen , David Grunwald , and Ben Montpetit 10 Detection of mRNAs Anchored to the Nuclear Envelope During Export Inhibition in Living Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal P ART II I MAGING C HROMOSOMES , G ENES , AND T RANSCRIPTION F ACTORS 11 Programmable Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce ix 12 Imaging Chromosome Territory and Gene Loci Positions in Cells Grown on Soft Matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta 13 Targeted Manipulation / Repositioning of Subcellular Structures and Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso 14 Visualization of Endogenous Transcription Factors in Single Cells Using an Antibody Electroporation - Based Imaging Approach . . . . . . . . . . . 209 Sascha Conic , Dominique Desplancq , Alexia Ferrand , Nacho Molina , Etienne Weiss , and La´szl (cid:1) o Tora 15 Monitoring Transcription Factor Oligomerization in Single Living Cells by Number and Brightness Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza 16 Visualizing Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes Using Single - Molecule Live - Cell Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239 James Z . J . Kwan , Thomas F . Nguyen , and Sheila S . Teves 17 Light - Induced Transcription Activation for Time - Lapse Microscopy Experiments in Living Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251 Jorge Trojanowski , Anne Rademacher , Fabian Erdel , and Karsten Rippe Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271 x Contents Contributors P IERRE B ENSIDOUN (cid:1) De´partement de Biochimie et Me´decine Mole´culaire , Universite´ de Montre´al , Montre´al , QC , Canada ; Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montre´al , Montre´al , QC , Canada R AKEFET B EN - Y ISHAY (cid:1) The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences and the Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan , Israel E UGENIA C AMMAROTA (cid:1) Istituto Scientiﬁco Ospedale San Raffaele , Centro di Imaging Sperimentale , Milano , Italy ; Fondazione CEN , European Center for Nanomedicine , Milano , Italy M . C RISTINA C ARDOSO (cid:1) Cell Biology and Epigenetics , Technische Universit € at Darmstadt , Darmstadt , Germany M ARTIN R . C HALLAND (cid:1) School of Biochemistry , University of Bristol , Bristol , UK J EFFREY A . C HAO (cid:1) Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research , Basel , Switzerland A NTONY K . C HEN (cid:1) Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Engineering , Peking University , Beijing , China S ASCHA C ONIC (cid:1) Institut de Ge´ne´tique et de Biologie Mole´culaire et Cellulaire , Illkirch , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , UMR7104 , Illkirch , France ; Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , U1258 , Illkirch , France ; Universite´ de Strasbourg , Illkirch , France D OMINIQUE D ESPLANCQ (cid:1) Universite´ de Strasbourg , Illkirch , France ; Biotechnology and Cell Signaling , UMR 7242 , Illkirch , France J AN E GLINGER (cid:1) Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research , Basel , Switzerland F ABIAN E RDEL (cid:1) Division of Chromatin Networks , German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) and Bioquant , Heidelberg , Germany ; Centre de Biologie Inte´grative ( CBI ) , CNRS , UPS , Toulouse , France F ARZIN F ARZAM (cid:1) RNA Therapeutics Institute , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA , USA C AROLA F ERNANDEZ (cid:1) Institut de Ge´ne´tique Mole´culaire de Montpellier , University of Montpellier , CNRS , Montpellier , France A LEXIA F ERRAND (cid:1) Imaging Core Facility , Biozentrum , University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland K RISTINA A . G ANZINGER (cid:1) Department of Living Matter , AMOLF , Amsterdam , The Netherlands J EFFREY E . G ERST (cid:1) Department of Molecular Genetics , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel D AVID G RUNWALD (cid:1) RNA Therapeutics Institute , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA , USA G AL H AIMOVICH (cid:1) Department of Molecular Genetics , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot , Israel K ATHRIN S . H EINZ (cid:1) Cell Biology and Epigenetics , Technische Universit € at Darmstadt , Darmstadt , Germany E RIC F . J OYCE (cid:1) Department of Genetics , Penn Epigenetics Institute , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA xi D AVID K LENERMAN (cid:1) Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK C HRISTOPHER J . K RUEGER (cid:1) Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Engineering , Peking University , Beijing , China ; Wallace H Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA , USA J AMES Z . J . K WAN (cid:1) Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , BC , Canada M OUNIA L AGHA (cid:1) Institut de Ge´ne´tique Mole´culaire de Montpellier , University of Montpellier , CNRS , Montpellier , France A ZRA L ARI (cid:1) Department of Cell Biology , University of Alberta , Edmonton , Canada B YUNG H UN L EE (cid:1) Department of Physics and Astronomy , Seoul National University , Seoul , Korea S HIQI M AO (cid:1) Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Engineering , Peking University , Beijing , China D AVIDE M AZZA (cid:1) Istituto Scientiﬁco Ospedale San Raffaele , Centro di Imaging Sperimentale , Milano , Italy ; Fondazione CEN , European Center for Nanomedicine , Milano , Italy N ACHO M OLINA (cid:1) Institut de Ge´ne´tique et de Biologie Mole´culaire et Cellulaire , Illkirch , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , UMR7104 , Illkirch , France ; Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , U1258 , Illkirch , France ; Universite´ de Strasbourg , Illkirch , France B EN M ONTPETIT (cid:1) Department of Cell Biology , University of Alberta , Edmonton , Canada ; Department of Viticulture and Enology , University of California , Davis , Davis , CA , USA S ON C . N GUYEN (cid:1) Department of Genetics , Penn Epigenetics Institute , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA , USA T HOMAS F . N GUYEN (cid:1) Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , BC , Canada H IROSHI O CHIAI (cid:1) JST , PRESTO , Higashi - Hiroshima , Japan ; Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life , Hiroshima University , Higashi - Hiroshima , Japan M ARLENE O EFFINGER (cid:1) De´partement de Biochimie et Me´decine Mole´culaire , Universite´ de Montre´al , Montre´al , QC , Canada ; Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montre´al , Montre´al , QC , Canada ; Faculty of Medicine , Division of Experimental Medicine , McGill University , Montre´al , QC , Canada H YE Y OON P ARK (cid:1) Department of Physics and Astronomy , Seoul National University , Seoul , South Korea ; The Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics , Seoul National University , Seoul , South Korea ; The Institute of Applied Physics , Seoul National University , Seoul , South Korea R OOPALI P RADHAN (cid:1) Biology , Indian Institute of Science Education and Research ( IISER ) , Pune , Maharashtra , India A NNE R ADEMACHER (cid:1) Division of Chromatin Networks , German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) and Bioquant , Heidelberg , Germany R OHAN T . R ANASINGHE (cid:1) Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK K ARSTEN R IPPE (cid:1) Division of Chromatin Networks , German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) and Bioquant , Heidelberg , Germany K UNDAN S ENGUPTA (cid:1) Biology , Indian Institute of Science Education and Research ( IISER ) , Pune , Maharashtra , India Y ARON S HAV - T AL (cid:1) The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences and the Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan , Israel xii Contributors J AE Y OUN S HIM (cid:1) Department of Physics and Astronomy , Seoul National University , Seoul , South Korea R OBERT H . S INGER (cid:1) Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA ; Janelia Research Campus of the HHMI , Ashburn , VA , USA J AMES S PENCER (cid:1) School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine , University of Bristol , Bristol , UK S HEILA S . T EVES (cid:1) Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , BC , Canada L A´SZLO´ T ORA (cid:1) Institut de Ge´ne´tique et de Biologie Mole´culaire et Cellulaire , Illkirch , France ; Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , UMR7104 , Illkirch , France ; Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , U1258 , Illkirch , France ; Universite´ de Strasbourg , Illkirch , France J ORGE T ROJANOWSKI (cid:1) Division of Chromatin Networks , German Cancer Research Center ( DKFZ ) and Bioquant , Heidelberg , Germany E VELINA T UTUCCI (cid:1) Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY , USA M ARIA V ERA (cid:1) Department of Biochemistry , McGill University , Montreal , Canada F RANKA V OIGT (cid:1) Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research , Basel , Switzerland E TIENNE W EISS (cid:1) Universite´ de Strasbourg , Illkirch , France ; Biotechnology and Cell Signaling , UMR 7242 , Illkirch , France Y ACHEN Y ING (cid:1) Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Engineering , Peking University , Beijing , China D ANIEL Z ENKLUSEN (cid:1) De´partement de Biochimie et Me´decine Mole´culaire , Universite´ de Montre´al , Montre´al , QC , Canada Contributors xiii Part I Imaging RNAs and Gene Expression in Cells and Organisms Chapter 1 Imaging Single mRNA Molecules in Mammalian Cells Using an Optimized MS2 - MCP System Maria Vera , Evelina Tutucci , and Robert H . Singer Abstract Visualization of single mRNAs in their native cellular environment provides key information to study gene expression regulation . This fundamental biological question triggered the development of the MS2 - MCP ( MS2 - Capsid Protein ) system to tag mRNAs and image their life cycle using wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy . The last two decades have evolved toward improving the qualitative and quantitative char - acteristics of the MS2 - MCP system . Here , we provide a protocol to use the latest versions , MS2V6 and MS2V7 , to tag and visualize mRNAs in mammalian cells in culture . The motivation behind engineering MS2V6 and MS2V7 was to overcome a degradation caveat observed in S . cerevisia e with the previous MS2 - MCP systems . While for yeast we recommend the use of MS2V6 , we found that for live - cell imaging experiments in mammalian cells , the MS2V7 has improved reporter properties . Key words Single - molecule imaging , MS2 system , smFISH , MS2V6 , MS2V7 , Quantitative ﬂuores - cence microscopy , Short - lived mRNAs , Single cell 1 Introduction The ﬁeld of quantitative gene expression analysis in individual live cells was pioneered by the MS2 - MCP system designed to image single mRNA molecules [ 1 ] . The MS2 - MCP system has two com - ponents . The MS2 sequence is a bacteriophage - derived RNA apta - mer that is integrated within the mRNA sequence as an array of 24 repeats that form 24 stem loops . Each of the stem loops is tightly bound by the second component of the system , a homodimer of the MCP ( MS2 Capsid Protein ) with each MCP fused to a ﬂuores - cent protein ( FP ) . In cells expressing both components , the speciﬁc binding of the MCP to the MS2 tentatively decorates each mRNA with 48 FPs . This concentrated ﬂuorescent signal allows for the detection of the single mRNA molecules and can inform on their fate [ 2 , 3 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . Hence , it is imperative for the reporter to preserve the transcription , transport , translation , and decay proper - ties of the tagged mRNA . Nonetheless , in yeast it was found that Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 1 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 3 the tight binding of the MCP to the MS2 and the short distance between the stem loops impaired the accessibility of the mRNA decay enzymes to the MS2 array , which led to a slower degradation rate of the MS2 array . Consequently , ﬂuorescent fragments and aggregates were formed inside cells , impairing the interpretations from studies of mRNA decay and localization [ 4 – 8 ] . Hence , this limitation prevented the use of the latest MS2 version , MS2V5 , in yeast . To avoid homologous recombination , MS2V5 was made of 24 loops with synonymized sequences separated by linkers of 30 nucleotides ( nts ) . Alike other MS2 versions , each stem loop was bound by the MCP with high afﬁnity ( Kd ’ 0 . 6 nM ) [ 8 , 9 ] . To solve the MS2 - MCP degradation problem , we engineered the MS2V6 and MS2V7 systems . MS2V6 and MS2V7 have the same randomized sequence of the MS2 array . The only difference between these two sequences is an additional 10 nt longer linker region in MS2V6 , that separates each MS2 stem - loop with a 50 nt linker . We created high and low afﬁnity MCP - binding stem loops by replacing the cytidine ( C ) at position - 5 of the loop , present in all high afﬁnity MS2 versions , by uridine ( U ) , in the low afﬁnity stem - loops ( Fig . 1 ) . We used S . cerevisiae to compare the systems in terms of single - molecule detection and degradation kinetics [ 8 ] , and showed that the low afﬁnity version of MS2V6 ( U variant ) was the best system for yeast because most of the mRNAs have short half - lives . We have provided the protocol to use MS2V6 in yeast elsewhere [ 10 ] . Although MS2V6 - U allows the visualization of mRNAs in mammalian cells , we learned that , in this model system , its reporting capabilities under demanding imaging conditions requiring long experimental times with high frequency acquisi - tions , were not optimal . Here , we show that the MS2V7 ( C variant ) is an accurate reporter of the life cycle of mRNAs in mammalian cells : ( 1 ) It provides brighter single molecules and for 24x MS2 MCP FP FP Linker AA V6 = 50 nts V7 = 40 nts U = Low affinity C = High affinity mRNA STOP Fig . 1 Detection of single mRNAs with the MS2 - MCP system . The left panel is a snapshot of a live cell expressing mRNAs tagged with the MS2 - MCP system . Expression of MCP fused to GFP is restricted to the nucleus of the cell . Single mRNA molecules are observed in the cytoplasm as discrete bright spots , as an example , one mRNA is indicated with a green square . The panel on the right is a scheme of an mRNA tagged in the 3 0 - UTR with the MS2 - MCP system . Usually an array of 24 stem loops is inserted . The blue stars indicate the position of the nucleotide ( U or C ) in the loop that inﬂuences the binding afﬁnity of the MCP and differentiates the low to the high afﬁnity MS2 versions . The length of the linker between the loops differentiates the MS2V6 from the MS2V7 version . Scale bar is 5 μ m 4 Maria Vera et al . longer periods of time than the MBSV6 - U version ( Fig . 2 ) , and ( 2 ) it is degraded simultaneously with the coding sequences of the tagged mRNA ( Fig . 3 ) . To assess for the simultaneous degradation of the coding sequence and the MS2V7 sequence , we have used a highly regulated mRNA , the heat shock protein 70 ( HSP70 ) [ 11 ] . This chapter focuses on how to use MS2V7C - MCP for live - cell imaging and how to validate that the decay of the tagged mRNA is not delayed by MCP binding , by using two - color sin - gle - molecule ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) [ 12 ] . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Plasmid Cloning 1 . Reporter plasmid containing 24 (cid:2) MBSV7 like MV102 or pET263 [ 8 ] . In MV102 we replaced the MS2V5 sequence in the SINAP plasmid ( Addgene # 84561 ) by the MS2V7 sequence . 2 . Expression plasmids containing tandem MCP fused to a ﬂuo - rescent protein like GFP ( Addgene # 98916 ) . 3 . Plasmids to produce second generation lentiviruses ( Addgene # 8454 and # 12260 ) . M S2 V6 - U M S2 V7 - C 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 A B C Frame 1 Frame 60 M S 2 V 6 _ U M S 2 V 7 _ C 0 5 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 3 5 4 0 4 5 5 0 5 5 6 0 4 6 8 1 0 MS2V6 - U MS2V7 - C I n t en s i t y ( A . U . ) % o f m RN A s i n f r a m e 60 Frame Fig . 2 Live - cell imaging and quantiﬁcation of mRNAs tagged with MSV6 - U or MS2V7 - C variants . ( a ) Maximum projection of 7 Z - stacks from the ﬁrst and last frame ( 60 ) acquired during a 20 - min experiment ( 3 f . p . s ) . Scale bar is 5 μ m . ( b ) Quantiﬁcation of the intensity of single mRNAs in the cytoplasm using AIRLOCALIZE . Data presented are the average and the standard deviation of n ¼ 10 cells and ~ 1000 mRNAs . A . U . is arbitrary units . ( c ) % of mRNAs that remain visible in frame 60 , relative to the ﬁrst frame ( after 413 acquisitions ) Imaging Single mRNAs 5 4 . High ﬁdelity Taq polymerase like Platinum Taq DNA polymerase . 5 . Restriction and cloning enzymes : AgeI , ClaI , StuI , CIP , and T4 DNA ligase . 6 . Competent E - coli strain like DH5 α . 7 . Luria Broth ( LB ) and ampicillin ( 100 μ g / mL ) containing media and plates to grow bacteria . 8 . DNA puriﬁcation kits . 24x MS2 AA mRNA STOP CDS smFISH MS2 smFISH A B C D R square = 0 . 9 Slope = 0 . 84 SunTag ( CDS ) MBSV7 Merge SunTag MBSV7 Merge Fig . 3 Quantiﬁcation of single mRNAs by two - color smFISH . ( a ) Scheme of an mRNA tagged with 24 (cid:2) MS2 stem loops . Pink and green dotted lines indicate the localization of the smFISH probes used in the two - color smFISH experiment . ( b ) Image of a two - color smFISH experiment done during recovery from stress in U2OS cells expressing MCP - GFP . Name in the image indicate the sequence recognized by the probes . The SunTag sequence is in the CDS of the mRNA , and the MBSV7 sequence is in the 3 0 - UTR . Merge is the overlap between both signals . Nucleus is stained with DAPI . Scale bar is 10 μ m . ( c ) Magniﬁcation of the area marked with the white rectangle . Each spot is a single mRNA that has been made visible by the two sets of probes . ( d ) Correlation between the number of single SunTag and MS2V7 molecules per cell . Pearson value and slope are calculated by combining two independent experiments ( n ¼ 96 cells ) 6 Maria Vera et al . 9 . Primers to amplify the sequence of MBSV6 and MBSV7 : Primer Forward ( 5 0 GATCCCAGAGCCCCCTGGCA ) and Primer Reverse ( 5 0 GATCTTCCGTGTGAGGGTCTCTG ) . 2 . 2 Cell Lines and Lentivirus Production 1 . Cell lines : HEK293T ( ATCC # CRL - 3216 ) , U2OS ( ATCC # HTB96 ) , and Mouse Embryonic Fibroblast ( MEFs , Immor - talized using the large T antigen ) . 2 . Tissue culture dishes . 3 . Glass bottom dishes for imaging . 4 . Cell ﬁlter for cell sorting : 30 μ m ﬁlter . 5 . Filter for lentivirus puriﬁcation : PVDF 45 μ m ﬁlter . 6 . Lenti - X concentrator . 7 . Transfection reagents : Lipofectamine 3000 and jetPRIME . 2 . 3 Media 1 . Tissue culture media : DMEM containing 4 . 5 g / L glucose and 0 . 584 g / L L - glutamine , 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and 10 IU penicillin and 100 μ g / mL streptomycin . The % of FBS is reduced to 5 % for lentivirus production and infection of the cells . 2 . Imaging media : carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ) free system , Leibovitz’s L - 15 Medium without phenol red supplemented with 2 % FBS and Penicillin / Streptomycin ( 10 IU / 100 μ g / mL ) . 3 . Opti - MEM . 4 . Sorting media : phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) with 5 % of FBS and penicillin – streptomycin ( 10 IU / 100 μ g / mL ) . 2 . 4 Microscopy 1 . To visualize single mRNAs in live cells , we use a home - built microscope built around an IX81 stand ( Olympus ) . The back - port of the microscope was removed to allow custom laser illumination . For excitation of the GFP , a 491 - nm laser ( Calypso - 25 ; Cobolt ) was delivered through the back port . The laser was reﬂected by a four - band excitation dichroic mir - ror ( Di01 - R405 / 488 / 561 / 635 ; Semrock ) to a 150 (cid:2) 1 . 45 NA oil immersion objective ( Olympus ) . The ﬂuorescence was collected by the same objective , passed through the dichroic mirror , a notch ﬁlter ( NF01 - 405 / 488 / 561 / 635 ) , and emis - sion ﬁlters and was recorded on an EMCCD camera ( Andor iXon3 , model DU897 , pixel size 16 μ m ) . The microscope also was equipped with an automated XY stage ( MS2000 - XY with an extraﬁne lead - screw pitch of 0 . 635 mm and a 10 - nm linear encoder resolution ; Applied Scientiﬁc Instrumentation ) and a piezo - Z stage ( Applied Scientiﬁc Instrumentation ) for fast z - stack acquisition . The AOTF , ﬂipping mount , and piezo - Z stage were all controlled by a data acquisition board Imaging Single mRNAs 7 ( DaqBoard / 2001 ; IOtech , Inc . ) . The cells were kept at 37 (cid:3) C with a stage - top incubator ( INUBH - ZILCS - F1 ; Tokai Hit ) . 2 . To visualize single mRNAs in ﬁxed cells , we use an Olympus BX - 63 epiﬂuorescence wideﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscope equipped with an UPlanApo 60 (cid:2) , 1 . 35 NA , oil - immersion objective ( Olympus ) . An X - Cite 120 PC Lamp ( EXFO ) and an ORCA - R2 Digital Interline CCD Camera ( C10600 - 10B ; Hamamatsu ; 6 . 45 μ m - pixel size ) mounted using U - CMT and 1X - TVAD Olympus c - Mount Adapters and zero - pixel shift ﬁlter sets : DAPI - 5060C - Zero , Cy3 - 4040C - Zero , and Cy5 - 4040C - Zero from Semrock . A Nomarski prism for the (cid:2) 60 and the (cid:2) 100 objectives is also installed . To acquire optical sections with a z - step size of 0 . 2 μ m , we use the ULTRASONIC STAGE for BX3 / IX3 , PIEZO TECH LIN ENCO . 3 . Fluorescent microspheres : TetraSpeck ™ Fluorescent Micro - spheres Size Kit ( mounted on a slide ) . 2 . 5 Single - Molecule FISH 1 . Stellaris probes from Biosearch Technologies . MS2V7 probes ( cgcaagcgagagtgaagacg , tttgacggggaacagagtgt , gactgtacgagtagacatgc , atctgcacaccatgtatgat , gccatagcagagtgtaaact , tcgcaaggcagatgcaatac , cagaagtatccgcacgagtg , atgttctttgtagcaccgtg , ctccacatgtgagcaatacg , ggataatggtgcgatgcttc , ctcgtgaatacctgcacaac , gaagtaatgcaacggcaggg , gcgcaaatgacgacgacaga , gatagatctgtgtgagggtc , taatcctgcgtgtcgattgt , aggtagtcgagaagcgtaat , tattcctccattggcaaaaa , atgatatatgcgcggtgatc ) and SunTag probes ( ccacttcgttctcaagatga , ccctttttcagtctagctac , aatttttgctcagcaactcc , ttctttagtcgtgctacttc , tttcgagagtaactcctcac , ccacttcgttttcgagatga , acttcccttttttaagcgtg , tcttggatagtagctcttca , acctcgttctcaagatgata , cggaacccttcttcaaacgc , agttcttcgagagcagttcc , gatcccttttttaatcgagc , tgaaagtagttcctcaccac , cttcgttttcgaggtggtaa , ccctgaacctttctttaatc , tactcagtaattcttcaccc , tttcgatagcaactcttcgc , tttttgagcctagcaacttc , ttttcgagagcaactcctcg , acctcattttccaagtggta , tttgctcaataactcctcgc , cgcgacttcgttctctaaat , ttcgataagagttcttcgcc , ctcattttcgaggtggtagt , agtggtagttcttgctcaag , ttcaatctcgcgacctcatt , attcttgctgagcaattcct , cgacttcgttctccaaatga , cgacttcattttccaagtgg , ttgctcaataactcttcgcc , ttcgttctccaagtggtaat , agttcttcgataagagctcc , gcgacttcattctctaagtg , ttcttgctcaagagctcttc , cacctcattttccaagtggt , ttagatagtaactcttcccc , cctcgttctcgagatgataa , 8 Maria Vera et al . gatagttcttcgacaggagt , cctttttaagtcttgcaacc , ttactgagtagttcctcacc , ttcgttttccaggtggtaat , tcctgatcctttcttcaaac , cttttgagagcagttcttcg , gcaacctcattttccaaatg , tgccacttcccttttttaaa , tttcgacagaagttcctcac , gctacttcattctcgagatg , gagccagaaccctttttaag ) . 2 . Fixation buffer : PBS and 5 mM MgCl 2 ( PBSM ) , and 4 % PFA . Prepare fresh with ultrapure distilled water . 3 . Quenching buffer : PBSM and 0 . 1 M glycine . Prepare fresh with ultrapure distilled water . 4 . Permeabilization solution : PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 10 mM Ribonuclease Vanadil Complex ( VRC ) . Prepare fresh with ultrapure distilled water . 5 . Prehybridization buffer : 2 (cid:2) saline – sodium citrate ( SSC ) and 10 % deionized formamide . Prepare fresh with ultrapure dis - tilled water . 6 . Hybridization solution : 2 (cid:2) SSC , 10 % formamide , 1 mg / mL E . coli tRNA , VRC 10 mM , 10 % dextran sulfate , 0 . 2 mg / mL ultrapure BSA . Prepare fresh with ultrapure distilled water . 7 . ProLong Gold mounting media with DAPI . 8 . Microscope cover glass . 2 . 6 Data Analysis 1 . Fiji ( Java software for image - processing analysis ; freely available at https : / / ﬁji . sc / ) . 2 . Image analysis software ( AIRLOCALIZE [ 13 ] , free software developed in the MATLAB programming language ( Math - Works ) . Download the Airlocalize script ( available upon request from Timothee Lionnet , NYU ) together with the MCRInstaller , which allows one to run a MATLAB algorithm without separately installing MATLAB on the computer . 3 . Image analysis software ( FISH - quant [ 14 ] , free software devel - oped in the MATLAB programming language ( MathWorks ) . Download the FISH - quant package ( http : / / code . google . com / p / ﬁsh - quant / ) . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Create the Plasmids to Tag mRNAs with the MS2 System We created two different types of plasmids to ( 1 ) compare the brightness of the new MS2 systems ( MBSV6 - U variant and MBSV7 - C variant ) by live - cell imaging and ( 2 ) study the degrada - tion of the MBSV7 - C variant mRNA sequence when bound to the MCP by two - color smFISH . The ﬁrst set of plasmids are based on a reporter system , SINAP system , with constitutive expression described in Wu et al . [ 15 ] ( see Note 1 on where to clone the Imaging Single mRNAs 9 MS2 sequence in the mRNA ) . The second plasmid ( MV71 ) is a highly regulated system based on the HSP70 gene tagged in the coding sequence with the SunTag system [ 16 ] and tagged in the 3 0 - UTR with 24 (cid:2) MBSV7 - C variant loops ( see Note 2 on how to check the integrity of the tagged mRNAs ) . We chose the HSP70 mRNA because it is degraded within 4 h upon recovery from stress [ 11 ] . 1 . MBSV6 and MBSV7 24 (cid:2) cassettes are made by duplication of the 12 (cid:2) cassette . 12 (cid:2) sequences have been synonymized and can be easily ampliﬁed by PCR . Amplify the 24 (cid:2) MBSV6 or MBSV7 stem - loop cassette from their plasmids using Platinum Taq DNA polymerase and speciﬁc primers . Final PCR reaction volume is 400 μ L divided in eight reactions of 50 μ L each , ﬁnal MgCl 2 concentration is 200 μ M . PCR program : 1 cycle of 4 min at 94 (cid:3) C , 35 cycles of 30 s at 94 (cid:3) C , 30 s at 58 (cid:3) C , and 2 min and 30 s at 72 (cid:3) C , 1 cycle of 7 min at 72 (cid:3) C . 2 . Run the PCR product on a 1 % agarose gel ( wt / vol ) and purify the DNA with a gel puriﬁcation kit . 3 . Digest the PCR fragments at 37 (cid:3) C overnight and the cloning vector with the speciﬁc restriction enzymes . In our case we used AgeI and ClaI sites in vector ( to compare the brightness of MBSV6 - U variant ( MV101 ) and MBSV7 - C variant ( MV102 ) ) and StuI site in vector MV71 ( with the HSP70 construct to analyze the simultaneous degradation of the cod - ing sequence and the MBSV7 - C bound to MCP ) . 4 . Purify the insert and vector with a PCR puriﬁcation kit . Quan - tify the DNA concentration using a NanoDrop . Set 20 μ L of ligation reaction for 2 h at room temperature . We used a ratio 1 : 3 of vector : PCR insert . 5 . Transform DH5 competent cells with 2 μ L of the ligation reaction by heat shock at 42 (cid:3) C for 40 s . Plate all the transfor - mation solution on LB - Amp plates overnight at 37 (cid:3) C . Grow individual colonies in 3 mL of LB - Amp for DNA extraction and screen for positive clones using restriction enzymes . Send the plasmid for sequencing with forward and reverse sequenc - ing primers for your plasmid . 3 . 2 Lentivirus Production 1 . Plate HEK 293T cells in a tissue culture treated dish of 100 (cid:2) 20 mm at 40 % conﬂuence and grow them in complete DMEM media . 2 . Twenty - four hours after plating , transfect with plasmids tat , rev , gag / pol , vsv - g , and MCP - GFP at a ratio of 1 : 1 : 1 : 2 : 20 using 30 μ L of Lipofectmine3000 in a ﬁnal transfection reac - tion of 37 . 5 μ g of DNA mix and a volume of 1 mL . 10 Maria Vera et al . 3 . Collect the supernatant at 24 , 48 , and 72 h posttransfection and replace with 10 mL of fresh media ( see Note 3 on lentiviral manipulation ) . 4 . Centrifuge the supernatants for 5 min at 1500 g and ﬁlter with a PVDF 45 μ m ﬁlter . Concentrate the viruses by adding Lenti - X concentrator to a ﬁnal dilution of 1 : 3 ( v : v ) in the media containing viruses . Mix gently by inversion and incubate the mixture between 2 h and overnight at 4 (cid:3) C . Centrifuge for 45 min at 1500 g and 4 (cid:3) C . Remove the supernatant and resuspend the pellet containing the viruses in 250 μ L of DMEM . Virus aliquots of 50 μ L can be stored at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C or used immediately . 3 . 3 Create Stable Cell Lines Expressing MCP - GFP for Live Imaging Choosing the cell line for imaging . In this paper , we used U2OS cells and immortalized MEFs because they have a ﬂat and long cytoplasm ideal for imaging conditions . We chose GFP as the ﬂuorescent protein , but the MCP can be fused to any other ﬂuo - rescent protein ( see Note 4 on other ﬂuorescent proteins that can be fused to MCP ) . 1 . Plate the cells ( U2OS or MEFs ) for the imaging experiments at a 30 % conﬂuence . 2 . Twenty - four hours after plating , infect the cells by replacing the media with 6 mL of infection mix media containing 50 μ L of lentivirus . 3 . Forty - eight hours postinfection , trypsinize the cells and centri - fuge for 3 min at 1000 g . Discard the supernatant and resus - pend the pellet in 1 mL of sorting media . Filter the cells using a 30 μ m ﬁlter before sorting . From the cell population expressing GFP , sort those cells with dim expression of GFP ( see Note 5 on the expression of MCP - FP ) . 3 . 4 Expression of the MS2 - Tagged mRNAs for Imaging Experiments in this study have been performed by transient trans - fection of the plasmids encoding the mRNA tagged with the MS2 system . Another approach to express a reporter mRNA is by lenti - viral infection . Advantages of using lentiviral infection are the long - term expression of the tagged mRNA , the selection of cells expres - sing the tagged mRNA , and the possibility of using primary cul - tures , like neurons , that are difﬁcult to transfect . Yet the most accurate approach to investigate the life cycle of an mRNA using the MS2 system would be to tag an endogenous gene of interest using the CRISPR / Cas9 system [ 17 ] ( see Note 6 on tagging of the endogenous mRNA ) . Imaging Single mRNAs 11 3 . 4 . 1 For Live Imaging Experiments to Compare the Brightness of the Two MS2 Versions 1 . Plate U2OS cells expressing MCP - GFP in a bottom glass dish at 30 % conﬂuence ( see Note 7 on cell conﬂuence ) . 2 . Twenty - four hours after plating , transfect the plasmid to express the mRNA of interest with 24 (cid:2) MBS inserted in the 3 0 - UTR . In our case we transfect two constructs based on the SINAP system [ 15 ] , SINAPV6 - U or SINAPV7 - C , using 2 μ g of DNA and 5 μ L of Lipofectamine 3000 in ﬁnal transfection volume of 250 μ L of Opti - MEM . 3 . Thirty - six hours after transfection and before starting the imaging session , change the media with prewarmed ( 37 (cid:3) C ) imaging media . 3 . 4 . 2 For Experiments in Fixed Cells to Analyze the Decay of MBSV7 - MCP System 1 . Plate MEFs or U2OS cells expressing MCP - GFP in a live - cell imaging dish at 30 % conﬂuence . 2 . Twenty - four hours after plating , transfect the plasmid to express your mRNA of interest with 24 (cid:2) MS2 inserted in the 3 0 - UTR . In our case we transfect HSP70 - MBSV7 using 2 μ g of DNA and 4 μ L jetPRIME in a ﬁnal transfection volume of 250 μ L ( see Note 8 on transient transfection ) . 3 . Thirty - six hours after transfection , heat - shock the cells at 42 (cid:3) C for 1 h and let them recover for 3 h at 37 (cid:3) C . 3 . 5 Live Imaging 3 . 5 . 1 Setting Up the Microscope and Imaging Choosing the microscope . We use wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence micros - copy to image single mRNA molecules , but other imaging techni - ques can be used ( see Note 9 on microscopes ) . The microscope is equipped with a 150 (cid:2) 1 . 45 NA oil immersion objective ( Olympus ) and ﬂuorescence is recorded on an EMCCD camera . The cells are kept at 37 (cid:3) C with a stage - top incubator . We use MetaMorph software to automate acquisition and for device control . 1 . Turn on the microscope system , heater and laser ( 491 - nm laser ) at least 2 h before imaging . 2 . Set exposure time to 50 ms . Longer times lead to blurring images due to the high motility of the mRNAs in the cell cytoplasm . Set the camera settings to the maximum gain . 3 . Set time intervals taking into consideration the temporal reso - lution required for the experiment , photobleaching , and pho - totoxicity . Highly demanding experiments like single particle tracking and translation dynamics require high - frequency image acquisition during short periods of time . To evaluate the performance of MS2V6 and MSV7 we imaged every 20 s for 20 min ( total of 427 images ) . 4 . Set the Z - stack acquisition to cover the cell volume . We took seven stacks of 0 . 4 μ m each ( see Note 10 on Z - stacks ) . 5 . Set the laser power ( LP ) to obtain the best signal - to - noise ratio without precluding single mRNA molecule detection at the 12 Maria Vera et al . end of the time - lapse experiment or saturating the camera . We used 15 % LP ( 1 – 2 mW ) . 6 . Find the cells that provide optimal MCP - GFP expression and mRNA levels for imaging and analysis using a low LP ( 2 % ) to avoid photobleaching . Optimal single - molecule imaging with the MS2 - MCP system is usually obtained in cells showing low GFP expression in the nucleus and few mRNAs in the cyto - plasm . High mRNA concentration in the cytoplasm reduces single - molecule detection . Set the multistage position and change the LP to one optimal for imaging . 7 . Start imaging acquisition ( Fig . 2a ) . 3 . 5 . 2 Detection of Single mRNAs The analysis software of choice has to enable the detection of single RNA molecules and provide information on their localization and brightness . There is commercial software , like Imaris Image Analy - sis Software for mRNA detection and tracking , or custom devel - oped software , like AIRLOCALIZE which is used in this protocol ( see Note 11 on AIRLOCALIZE [ 13 ] ) . 1 . Install AIRLOCALIZE and open the interface . Select 3D sin - gle images from a movie . 2 . Select detection / quantiﬁcation parameters . A window to select the parameters opens and enables to modify them so they match the characteristics of the equipment and quality of the images . There are options to select an ROI for the region of interest , the units for the threshold value ( intensity or abso - lute ) , the quantiﬁcation method and the background correction . 3 . Select an image from all the images of the time lapse experi - ment to deﬁne the characteristics of a single mRNA . Select a signal that belongs to a single mRNA with the cursor , apply a local Gaussian ﬁt , and record the ﬁt result . Repeat this selection with the most distinct ﬂuorescent signals in each Z - section of the image . 4 . Once done , a window with the detected mRNAs in yellow will appear . Each yellow signal indicates an mRNA which bright - ness is above the detected threshold . To determine if the detec - tion is correct , open the Output image ﬁle in Fiji . 5 . A text document containing ﬁve columns is automatically saved in the image folder . Each row has the information for a single mRNA . The ﬁrst three columns indicate its localization in x , y , and z , the fourth one is the ﬂuorescent intensity and the last one the identity of the cell to which it belongs ( Fig . 2b ) . This information can be used for further analysis . We have used it to compare the intensity of single mRNAs tagged with either the MS2V6 - U or the MS2V7 - C systems and determine the Imaging Single mRNAs 13 percentage of molecules that were photobleached by the end of the experiment , ( Fig . 2c ) and ( see Note 12 on MS2 versions ) . 3 . 6 Quality Control Analysis of the Tagged mRNAs by Two - Color smFISH Every time that the MS2 - MCP system is used to tag an mRNA ( reporter or endogenous ) , its capacity to accurately report on the mRNA life cycle should be tested . Two possible means by which tagging an mRNA can cause perturbation are ( 1 ) altering its expres - sion , localization , and decay , and ( 2 ) creating degradation resistant intermediates that contain only the MS2 sequence bound by the MCP . Therefore , we always compare by smFISH the behavior of the mRNA of interest before and after tagging . Once the mRNA has been tagged , a two - color smFISH experiment assesses the integrity of the mRNA and veriﬁes that MS2 degradation inter - mediates do not accumulate ( Fig . 1a ) . One set of probes should hybridize to the mRNA before the stop codon and the second set of probes should bind the MS2V7 sequence in the 3 0 - UTR [ 8 ] ( see Note 13 for quality control experiments ) . To investigate the proper degradation of MS2V7 in mammalian cells , we created a reporter based on HSP70 mRNA because its half - life decreases from hours to minutes during recovery from stress ( see Note 14 for half - life of HSP70 mRNA ) . This reporter plasmid contains the promoter and 3 0 - UTR of HSP70 and the SunTag sequence in the coding region and the MS2V7 in the 3 0 - UTR . Both probes should report on the same mRNA molecule by smFISH . 3 . 6 . 1 Single - Molecule FISH 1 . There are different protocols to prepare probes to detect single mRNA molecules [ 18 ] . We usually use Stellaris ™ FISH probes and purchase them from LGC Biosearch Technologies ( https : / / www . biosearchtech . com / support / tools / design - soft ware / stellaris - probe - designer ) . Stellaris probes are usually a mix of > 40 DNA oligos , each of them of 20 nts and labeled with a single ﬂuorophore . Spectrally different labeled probes are used in two - color smFISH experiments . We recommend to order one set of probes labeled with Quasar 670 and the other one with Quasar 570 . 2 . Aspirate the culture media and wash cells once with PBSM . 3 . Fix cells for 10 min at room temperature with 4 % paraformaldehyde . 4 . Aspirate ﬁxation solution and incubate with quenching buffer for 10 min . 5 . Cells can be either left over night at 4 (cid:3) C in PBSM or permea - bilized for 10 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 6 . Wash twice with PBSM . 7 . Incubate with prehybridization buffer for 30 – 60 min at room temperature . 14 Maria Vera et al . 8 . Aspirate well the prehybridization buffer and add 100 μ L of hybridization solution to cover the well of the live - cell imaging dish where the cells were seeded . The ﬁnal concentration of the SunTag and the MS2V7 probes is 150 nM ( see Note 15 for choosing of smFISH probes ) . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C between 3 and5 h in a humidiﬁed chamber . We usually put the live - cell dishes on a petri dish with a napkin soaked in hybridization solution and we seal it with Paraﬁlm . Incubate the remaining prehybridization solution in the same incubator . 9 . Wash the hybridization mix with 500 μ l of prehybridization solution . Incubate with 1 mL of prehybridization solution for 40 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 10 . Aspirate the prehybridization solution and do two washes of 5 min each with 2 (cid:2) SSC . 11 . Let the samples air dry before mounting with an antifade agent . We use one drop of Prolong gold with DAPI . 12 . Wait for at least 12 h before imaging . 3 . 6 . 2 Setting up the Microscope and Imaging The optimal equipment to image smFISH experiments is a wide - ﬁeld microscope equipped with a digital CCD camera ( e . g . , we have the ORCA - R 2 , pixel size is 6 . 5 μ m ) and objectives with high NA . Our microscope has a (cid:2) 60 NA 1 . 35 and a (cid:2) 100 NA 1 . 4 Olympus objectives . Appropriate light sources are a mercury lamp or an LED . We use MetaMorph software to automate acquisition and device control . 1 . Turn on the microscope system and let the light source warm up ( see manufacturer speciﬁcations ) before starting to image . 2 . Set the order of the channels to acquire images . Always start imaging in the far red channel because far red ﬂuorophores are more susceptible to photobleaching . Finish by imaging DAPI . For two - color smFISH experiments we image Quasar 670 ( MBSV7 probes ) , Quasar 570 ( SunTag probes ) and DAPI . 3 . Set the exposure time . Signal from the smFISH probes is weak and needs long exposure times , between 0 . 5 and 1 s with 100 % of power of the light source . Longer exposure times could lead to increased photobleaching and background , and hence decreased the signal - to - noise ratio . They can also lead to satu - ration of the camera pixels by bright transcription sites or mRNA aggregates that will preclude quantiﬁcation purposes . DAPI is imaged with 12 % power of the light source and 50 ms exposure time . For all channels we keep the camera gain to 2 ( low gain ) . 4 . Set the Z - stack sections . For analysis purposes , we image 41 Z - stacks at 0 . 2 μ m interval . Imaging Single mRNAs 15 5 . Set multiple stage positions using a lower exposure time to avoid photobleaching ( i . e . , 200 ms ) . 6 . For two - color experiments that aim to determine colocaliza - tion , image three ﬁelds of ﬂuorescent microspheres ( ~ 200 nm ) to enable the correction of chromatic aberration . 7 . Proceed to image and analysis ( Fig . 3b , c ) . 3 . 6 . 3 Detection of Single mRNAs Detection of the smFISH signal can be done by any software that ﬁts the diffraction limit signal with a 3D Gaussian ﬁtting algorithm . We choose FISH - quant [ 14 ] because of its user friendly interface , reliability and accuracy detecting ﬂuorescent spots and their bright - ness . It also provides the means to analyze transcription sites , mRNA localization , intensity distribution and colocalization stud - ies . FISH - quant is a free software developed using the MATLAB programming language ( Mathworks ) . 1 . Convert all your images to TIF format using Fiji . 2 . Install FISH - quant V3 . 3 . Create folders for images , outlines and results , and choose them in the FISH - quant main window . 4 . Set the experimental parameters , pixel size , objective ampliﬁca - tion and NA , excitation , and emission wavelengths . 5 . Open the image , either in Cy3 or Cy5 , and create the outline . In FISH - quant _ V3 , outlines can be also created using CellPro - ﬁler . Open the DAPI images and determine the outline of the cell and the nucleus . Save it . Repeat this process for all the images of the experiment . 6 . Use one image to set the ﬁlter , detection and ﬁt spots para - meters and save the detection settings . 7 . Set batch processing mode to analyze all the images with the same settings . Once the analysis is completed , the detection of the spots can be veriﬁed for each image . 8 . Save the FISH - quant results , detection settings , summary : mature mRNA , thresholded spots and results from each image ﬁles . 9 . The same outlines should be used to analyze the imaging results obtained with the other wavelength . To this aim the name of each outline ﬁle and the name of the image saved within the ﬁle have to be changed accordingly ( i . e . , from w1Cy5 to w2Cy3 ) . 10 . The ﬁle “summary : mature mRNA” contains the information on the number of mRNAs per cell and their localization , nuclear or cytoplasmic . We have plotted the # of mRNAs detected with the SunTag vs the MS2V7 probes for each cell ( Fig . 3d ) . This approach is the easiest to determine the 16 Maria Vera et al . correlation between the coding sequence spots and the MBSV7 spots within single cells . If there are more spots detected with the MS2V7 probes , this will indicate a delay in degradation of the MS2 array . In the case of MSV7 the number of spots detected with the MSV7 probes correlate well with those detected with the SunTag probes indicating that there is not a detectable delay in the degradation of the loops protected by the mRNA ( see Note 13 for quality control experiments ) . 11 . Other more accurate ways can be used to analyze spots colo - calization . One of them is the spot colocalization Plugin Com - Det in Fiji . For experiments that require an accurate measurement on intermolecular distances , we recommend the superregistration algorithm developed by Eliscovich et al . [ 19 ] that has been written for FISH - quant output data . 4 Notes 1 . Integration of the MS2 system . MBSV6 and MBSV7 are integrated in the 3 0 - UTR of the gene . Their sequences lack STOP codons but have several START codons in all three reading frames . Therefore , if integrated in the 5 0 - UTR , the reading frame of the tagged mRNA and the sequence of the encoded protein should be taken into consideration . 2 . Check the integrity of the mRNA . The SunTag sequence pro - vides a unique sequence to assess for the integrity of the HSP70 reporter tagged with the MS2V7 by two - color smFISH . If there was a delay in the degradation of the MS2V7 - MCP system , the number of single molecules detected with the MS2V7 probes should be higher than those detected by the SunTag probes at the time of degradation . 3 . Lentivirus manipulation . Lentiviral vector production and manipulation requires speciﬁc biosafety considerations . The MS2V7 is shorter than the MS2V6 and therefore favors the packaging of long reporter in lentiviral particles . 4 . Fluorescent protein fused to the MCP . The MCP has been tagged with different ﬂuorescent proteins ( i . e . , GFP , mCherry , or the Halo system ) . Use of the Halo system requires treating cells with JF dyes [ 20 ] . JF676 and 549 have been successfully used to visualize individual mRNAs in long time lapse experi - ments [ 15 ] . Pick the ﬂuorescent label for MCP depending on the experimental design of the multicolor imaging . 5 . Expression of MCP - FP . Most MCP expression systems have an NLS to deplete the cytoplasm from unbound MCP - FP and favor the detection of single mRNA molecules by reducing the background . Likewise , sorting for cells with low levels of GFP Imaging Single mRNAs 17 favors the visualization of single mRNAs during live cell imaging . 6 . System to tag mRNAs . Most experiments done with the MS2 system in mammalian cells use reporter constructs . The CRISPR / Cas9 system enables to tag endogenous mRNAs and therefore preserves the endogenous mRNA expression context [ 17 ] . 7 . Cell conﬂuence . Single - cell experiments beneﬁt from 60 % con - ﬂuence cultures because ( 1 ) it favors optimal mRNA expression levels ( 2 ) it facilitates imaging by providing a good ﬁeld of view where a cell has an extended and ﬂat cytoplasm and is isolated from other cells expressing different GFP levels and , ( 3 ) simpli - ﬁes analysis by enabling efﬁcient drawing of the cell outlines . 8 . Transient transfection reagents . Most of transient transfection reagents lead to the formation , in some cells , of intracellular artifacts that are auto ﬂuorescent and impair the quality of smFISH experiments . 9 . Microscope to image single mRNAs . We use wideﬁeld ﬂuores - cence microscopy for both live and ﬁxed experiments . Single mRNA detection is achieved through the combination of the digital camera with a proper pixel size and Quantum Efﬁciency ( QE ) and the objective with proper magniﬁcation and NA . Other modalities like TIRF [ 21 ] , to image mRNAs teth - ered to the membranes , multipoint spinning disk microscopy [ 22 ] , to image the ﬁrst round of translation , and structured illumination microscopy , to deﬁne the spatial mRNA organiza - tion [ 23 ] , have been successfully used . 10 . Choose the number of Z - stacks . Acquiring high number of Z - stacks increases the photobleaching and reduces the total imaging time during live imaging experiments . Balance the number of Z - stacks , the frequency of acquisition and total experimental time . 11 . AIRLOCALIZE . Use the ROI function to select an area in the image or in the cell with low background and optimal density of mRNAs , where single molecules can be easily distinguished from one another . Check and adjust the detection settings to be optimal for single mRNA detection and background thresh - old for each image in the time lapse experiment . 12 . Comparison of the new MS2 systems , MS2V6 and MS2V7 . The brightness of the mRNAs tagged with the MS2V6 - U system is about 75 % of that of the ones tagged with the MS2V7 - C system . Therefore , MS2V6 - tagged mRNAs bleach faster than MS2V7 - tagged mRNA , getting undetectable sooner and limiting the capabilities of live imaging experi - ments . The recycling of the MCP - GFP in the U system favors 18 Maria Vera et al . the degradation of the MS2 cassette in yeast but worsens the analysis of single RNA experiments in mammalian cells . 13 . Quality control of the MS2 - MCP signal . Live imaging experi - ments fully rely on the ﬂuorescent signal collected from the MCP - FP protein , which should report on the mRNA . To assure that the detected signal is not an artifact derived from the binding of the MS2 by the MCP , we perform two - color smFISH experiments . The same mRNA is detected by a set of probes complementary to the CDS and by a set of probes complementary to the MS2 sequence . Merge of both images should show a good overlapping ( 80 – 90 % ) of the signals [ 10 ] . Additionally , cells should not have MS2 spots brighter than a single molecule , unless the signal is also obtained with the CDS probes . Single - molecule counting should be similar with both sets of probes ( usually the detection efﬁciency for a smFISH experiment is ~ 90 % ) . The easiest is to plot these results and ﬁt a linear regression model to obtain the coefﬁcient of determination ( R square ) and the slope . An R square between 0 . 8 and 0 . 9 and a slope that does not favor the MS2 probes usually suggest that the mRNA decay occurs correctly . 14 . HSP70 mRNA reporter . Since the caveats of the previous MS2 - MCP system was its slower degradation , we use an HSP70 mRNA reporter to discard such problem with MS2V7 . HSP70 mRNA is highly regulated , and it has a robust induction upon heat stress and a fast decay after 2 h of recovery [ 11 ] . 15 . smFISH probes . Stellaris lyophilized probes are resuspended in TE at a concentration of 25 μ M . Prepare aliquots and store at - 20 (cid:3) C . The optimal concentration to use a probe usually ranges between 75 nM and 150 nM but it is determined empirically on concentrations that range between 50 and 250 nM . The higher the probe concentration , the higher the background , especially in the cell nucleus . Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Xihua Meng and Lydia Tesfa ( Grant P30CA013330 ) for technical help . Support was provided by National Institutes of Health Grants R01GM057071 to R . H . S . and R21AG055083 to M . V . and by the Swiss National Science Foundation for Fellowships P2GEP3 _ 155692 and P300PA _ 164717 to E . T . Imaging Single mRNAs 19 References 1 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M et al ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol Cell 2 : 437 – 445 2 . Tutucci E , Livingston NM , Singer RH et al ( 2018 ) Imaging mRNA in vivo , from birth to death . Annu Rev Biophys 47 : 85 – 106 3 . Vera M , Biswas J , Senecal A et al ( 2016 ) Single - cell and single - molecule analysis of gene expression regulation . Annu Rev Genet 50 : 267 – 291 4 . Garcia JF , Parker R ( 2015 ) MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 0 to 3 0 degrada - tion and trap mRNA decay products : implica - tions for the localization of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system . RNA 21 : 1393 – 1395 5 . Garcia JF , Parker R ( 2016 ) Ubiquitous accu - mulation of 3 0 mRNA decay fragments in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae mRNAs with chromosomally integrated MS2 arrays . RNA 22 : 657 – 659 6 . Haimovich G , Zabezhinsky D , Haas B et al ( 2016 ) Use of the MS2 aptamer and coat pro - tein for RNA localization in yeast : a response to “MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 0 to 3 0 degradation and trap mRNA decay products : implications for the localiza - tion of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system” . RNA 22 : 660 – 666 7 . Heinrich S , Sidler CL , Azzalin CM et al ( 2017 ) Stem - loop RNA labeling can affect nuclear and cytoplasmic mRNA processing . RNA 23 : 134 – 141 8 . Tutucci E , Vera M , Biswas J et al ( 2018 ) An improved MS2 system for accurate reporting of the mRNA life cycle . Nat Methods 15 : 81 – 89 9 . Wu B , Miskolci V , Sato H et al ( 2015 ) Synony - mous modiﬁcation results in high - ﬁdelity gene expression of repetitive protein and nucleotide sequences . Genes Dev 29 : 876 – 886 10 . Tutucci E , Vera M , Singer RH ( 2018 ) Single - mRNA detection in living S . cerevisiae using a re - engineered MS2 system . Nat Protoc 13 ( 10 ) : 2268 – 2296 11 . Balakrishnan K , De Maio A ( 2006 ) Heat shock protein 70 binds its own messenger ribonucleic acid as part of a gene expression self - limiting mechanism . Cell Stress Chaperones 11 : 44 – 50 12 . Femino AM , Fay FS , Fogarty K et al ( 1998 ) Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 : 585 – 590 13 . Lionnet T , Czaplinski K , Darzacq X et al ( 2011 ) A transgenic mouse for in vivo detec - tion of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat Meth - ods 8 : 165 – 170 14 . Mueller F , Senecal A , Tantale K et al ( 2013 ) FISH - quant : automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat Methods 10 : 277 – 278 15 . Wu B , Eliscovich C , Yoon YJ et al ( 2016 ) Translation dynamics of single mRNAs in live cells and neurons . Science 352 : 1430 – 1435 16 . Tanenbaum ME , Gilbert LA , Qi LS et al ( 2014 ) A protein - tagging system for signal ampliﬁcation in gene expression and ﬂuores - cence imaging . Cell 159 : 635 – 646 17 . Pichon X , Bastide A , Saﬁeddine A et al ( 2016 ) Visualization of single endogenous polysomes reveals the dynamics of translation in live human cells . J Cell Biol 214 : 769 – 781 18 . Pichon X , Lagha M , Mueller F et al ( 2018 ) A growing toolbox to image gene expression in single cells : sensitive approaches for demanding challenges . Mol Cell 71 : 468 – 480 19 . Eliscovich C , Shenoy SM , Singer RH ( 2017 ) Imaging mRNA and protein interactions within neurons . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 : E1875 – E1884 20 . Grimm JB , English BP , Chen J et al ( 2015 ) A general method to improve ﬂuorophores for live - cell and single - molecule microscopy . Nat Methods 12 : 244 – 250 , 243 p following 250 21 . Katz ZB , Wells AL , Park HY et al ( 2012 ) Beta - actin mRNA compartmentalization enhances focal adhesion stability and directs cell migra - tion . Genes Dev 26 : 1885 – 1890 22 . Halstead JM , Lionnet T , Wilbertz JH et al ( 2015 ) Translation . An RNA biosensor for imaging the ﬁrst round of translation from sin - gle cells to living animals . Science 347 : 1367 – 1671 23 . Adivarahan S , Livingston N , Nicholson B et al ( 2018 ) Spatial organization of single mRNPs at different stages of the gene expression pathway . Mol Cell 72 : 727 – 738 e725 20 Maria Vera et al . Chapter 2 Live - Cell Imaging of Long Noncoding RNAs Using Molecular Beacons Yachen Ying , Shiqi Mao , Christopher J . Krueger , and Antony K . Chen Abstract Long noncoding RNAs ( lncRNAs ) are a family of non - protein - coding RNA transcripts greater than 200 nucleotides in length that have been regarded as crucial modulators of gene expression in various biological and disease contexts , but mechanisms underlying such regulation still remains largely elusive . In addition to cell lysate - based approaches that have proven invaluable for studies of lncRNAs , live - imaging methods can add value by providing more in - depth information on lncRNA dynamics and localizations at the single - molecule level . Recently , we have developed a versatile imaging approach based on molecular beacons ( MBs ) , which are a class of ﬂuorogenic oligonucleotide - based probes with the capacity to convert RNA target hybridization into a measurable ﬂuorescence signal . In this chapter , we describe the detailed protocol of using MBs to illuminate lncRNA transcripts at the single - molecule level in living cells . Key words Molecular beacons , lncRNA , Tandem repeats , Single - molecule 1 Introduction With advances in high - throughput sequencing technology and techniques for mapping RNA interactomes , our view of long non - coding RNAs ( lncRNAs ) has transformed from being seen as junk transcripts to serving as a class of crucial regulators of gene expres - sion at the epigenetic , transcriptional , and posttranscriptional levels [ 1 – 4 ] . With the function and the physiological signiﬁcance of more and more lncRNAs being reported , there has been interest in development of methodologies that enable full elucidation of the relationship between lncRNA activities and regulation of gene expression . Live - cell imaging approaches have the potential to offer spatiotemporal information regarding RNA activities that are not easily attainable by biochemistry - based techniques . Thus , their implementation for investigating lncRNAs is expected to unravel new discoveries , expanding our current knowledge of lncRNA biology . Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 2 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 21 One tool that has been used to study RNA dynamics is the molecular beacon ( MB ) [ 5 ] , a class of stem - loop forming antisense oligonucleotide probe labeled with a synthetic dye and a quencher at the two termini . When unhybridized to the target RNA , self - complementation of the stem sequences at the termini hold the dye and the quencher in close spatial proximity , causing quenching of ﬂuorescence . Hybridization of the target RNA to the loop domain overcomes the energy barrier imposed by the stem duplex , causing separation of the dye from the quencher and ultimately the restora - tion of ﬂuorescence emission upon proper excitation . We have previously shown that , to visualize RNA transcripts at the single - molecule level , a target RNA can be engineered to harbor eight tandem repeats of an MB target sequence ( MTS ) without affecting its intracellular stability and activities [ 6 ] . Collective hybridization of MBs to the MTS on the same RNA transcript can thus illuminate the engineered RNA as a bright spot ( Fig . 1 ) when imaged by a standard epiﬂuorescence wideﬁeld microscope . In this chapter , we Fig . 1 Schematic of MB - based imaging of single RNA transcripts . The MB , labeled with a reporter dye ( red ) and a quencher ( black ) , is signiﬁcantly quenched in the absence of MTS . Collective hybridization of the MBs to the engineered RNA transcripts harboring multiple tandem repeats of the MTS can illuminate the target RNA as a single bright spot , as the MTSs and the RNA of interest are transcribed as one molecule 22 Yachen Ying et al . describe in detail the applications of this MB - based approach for imaging subcellular localization and trafﬁcking of HOX Transcript Antisense RNA ( HOTAIR ) , an lncRNA with a known role in scaffolding protein activities [ 7 , 8 ] . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Plasmids 1 . pEGFP - N1 - 8x . This plasmid harbors eight tandem repeats of the 50 - base sequence : 5 0 - CAGGAGTTGTGTTTGTGGACG AAGAGCACCAGCCAGCTGATCGACCTCGA - 3 0 upstream of the EGFP coding sequence , and was used to create plasmids that encode engineered HOTAIR transcripts ( see Notes 1 and 2 ) . The underlined sequence is the MTS used in our experiment . 2 . pHOTAIR - 8x . This plasmid encodes an engineered RNA tran - script that harbors the eight tandem repeats of the 50 - base sequence upstream of the HOTAIR lncRNA . It was con - structed by ﬁrst generating the PCR product of the HOTAIR cDNA derived from HEK293 cells using the forward primer : 5 0 - AGAACCGGTGACTCGCCTGTGCTCTGGAGCTTGA TCCGA - 3 0 and the reverse primer : 5 0 - ATAAGAATGCGG CCGCTTTTTTTTTTGAAAATGCATCCAGATATTA - 3 0 . The PCR product was then inserted into the AgeI - and NotI - digested pEGFP - N1 - 8x . 2 . 2 MBs ( See Notes 3 – 5 ) Anti - MTS MB synthesized with a backbone composed of 2 0 - O - methyl RNA ( 2Me ) and a fully phosphorothioate ( PS ) - modiﬁed loop domain : 5 0 - mCmUmUmCmG * mU * mC * mC * mA * mC * mA * mA * mA * mC * mA * mC * mA * mA * mC * mU * mC * mC * mU * mG - mAmAmG - 3 0 . Underlined letters indicate the MB stem . m represents 2Me modiﬁcation . * represents PS linkage modiﬁcation . The MBs are labeled with an ATTO647NN ﬂuorophore at the 5 0 - end and an Iowa Black ® RQ - Sp quencher at the 3 0 - end . 2 . 3 Cell Culture 1 . HeLa cells . 2 . NIH3T3 cells . 3 . HeLa cells stably expressing pHOTAIR - 8x , denoted as HeLa - HOTAIR - 8x . 4 . Cell culture media : Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium ( DMEM ) without phenol red and antibiotics , supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FBS and 1 (cid:2) GlutaMAX . 5 . Phenol red - free solution of 0 . 25 % trypsin and 1 mM EDTA . 6 . 100 (cid:2) penicillin – streptomycin . 7 . T25 - ﬂask . Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 23 2 . 4 Microporation 1 . Microporation system ( e . g . , Thermo Fisher Neon transfection system ) . 2 . 1 (cid:2) phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) , without Mg 2 + and Ca 2 + . 3 . Cell culture media ( as in Subheading 2 . 3 , see Note 6 ) . 4 . Resuspension buffer R . 5 . Electroporation buffer . 6 . Electroporation Gold Tips ( 10 μ L size ) . 7 . Electroporation tube . 8 . 8 - well chambered cover glass . 9 . 10 μ g / mL ﬁbronectin . 10 . Refrigerated microcentrifuge . 11 . Cell counter . 2 . 5 Single - Molecule Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization 1 . Nuclease - free water . 2 . 4 % ( w / v ) paraformaldehyde diluted in 1 (cid:2) PBS ( 4 % PFA ) . 3 . 70 % ( v / v ) ethanol , prepared from anhydrous ethanol . 4 . 2 (cid:2) saline – sodium citrate ( SSC ) buffer . 5 . Wash buffer : 2 (cid:2) SSC , 10 % ( v / v ) formamide . 6 . Hybridization buffer : 10 % ( w / v ) dextran sulfate , 2 (cid:2) SSC , 10 % ( v / v ) formamide . 7 . HOTAIR FISH probes [ 6 ] , a set of singly TAMRA - labeled probes complementary to different regions of the human HOTAIR sequence . 8 . RNase / DNase - free pipette tips . 9 . 4 0 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) . 10 . Paraﬁlm . 2 . 6 Microscope and Imaging Software 1 . An inverted wideﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscope with a light source and with an EMCCD camera . A (cid:2) 100 UPLAN APO 1 . 4NA objective lens . Filter set for DAPI , EGFP , and TAMRA and a separate ﬁlter set for Cy5 ( ET620 / 60x , ET700 / 75m ) . 2 . Image acquisition software . 3 . Image analysis software such as Fiji . 4 . MATLAB . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Cellular Delivery of MBs We employed microporation to deliver anti - MTS MBs into HeLa cells stably expressing pHOTAIR - 8x ( HeLa - HOTAIR - 8x ) or into a murine cell line ( NIH3T3 ) . The protocol is described as follows : 24 Yachen Ying et al . 3 . 1 . 1 Day 0 1 . Precoat chambered cover glass with ﬁbronectin : Add 200 μ L ﬁbronectin solution into each well of an 8 - well chambered cover glass . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C overnight ( see Note 7 ) . 2 . Seed proper number of cells into a T25 - ﬂask with cell culture media such that cells reach ~ 70 % conﬂuency the next day . 3 . 1 . 2 Day 1 1 . Aspirate the cell culture media and then wash cells with 5 mL prewarmed 1 (cid:2) PBS . Incubate at room temperature for 2 min . 2 . Aspirate the PBS and then add 1 mL of phenol red - free trypsi - n – EDTA into the ﬂask . Incubate for 1 min at room temperature . 3 . Aspirate the trypsin ( leaving a trace amount ) . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C to detach all of the cells from the ﬂask surface . 4 . Add ~ 5 mL of cell culture media to resuspend the cells . Pipet gently ( see Note 8 ) . 5 . Transfer 1 mL of the cell suspension to a 1 . 5 mL microcentri - fuge tube and pellet the cells by centrifugation at 400 (cid:2) g for 5 min at 4 (cid:3) C ( see Note 9 ) . 6 . Aspirate the media and gently resuspend the cell pellet in 1 mL of 1 (cid:2) PBS . 7 . Count the cells using the cell counter . 8 . Pellet the required number of cells necessary for microporation ( 50 , 000 cells per microporation ) by centrifugation at 400 (cid:2) g for 5 min at 4 (cid:3) C . 9 . Aspirate the 1 (cid:2) PBS carefully and resuspend the cell pellet in resuspension buffer R at 5000 cells per μ L . 10 . Add 1 μ L of the MB solution ( 50 μ M stock solution , dissolved in nuclease - free water ) to every 10 μ L of cells to achieve ﬁnal MB concentration of 5 μ M . 11 . Pipet gently to mix the cells with MBs . 12 . Microporate 10 μ L of the cell suspension . Set microporation parameters to 1005 V with a 35 ms pulse width and two pulses total for HeLa cells , and to 1200 V with a 20 ms pulse width and three pulses total for NIH3T3 cells ( see Note 10 ) . 13 . Gently transfer the microporated cells from the microporation tip to a microcentrifuge tube preﬁlled with 1 . 5 mL of fresh cell culture media ( see Note 9 ) . 14 . Pellet the cells by centrifugation at 400 (cid:2) g for 5 min at 4 (cid:3) C . 15 . Aspirate the media . Avoid disturbing the cell pellet . Then gently resuspend the pellet with 1 . 5 mL of fresh cell culture media . 16 . Repeat steps 14 and 15 two more times ( see Note 11 ) . Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 25 17 . After the last wash , resuspend the cells in 250 μ L of fresh cell culture media . 18 . Seed the cells into a ﬁbronectin - coated well of an 8 - well cham - bered cover glass ( see Note 12 ) . 19 . Incubate the cover glass at 37 (cid:3) C . Care should be taken not to move the cover glass before cells can sufﬁciently adhere to the cover glass ( ~ 5 h ) . 3 . 2 Single - Molecule Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization Single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) is regarded as the gold standard for mapping the distribution of speciﬁc RNA molecules [ 9 ] . In this technique , a set of singly labeled oligonucleotide probes each with a target sequence designed to be perfectly complementary to a unique region on the target RNA is applied to ﬁxed and permeabilized cells . In our study , we employed the smFISH signal as the reference for validating the capacity of anti - MTS MBs for labeling pHOTAIR - 8x transcripts . We should emphasize that validation should be performed in a nonhuman cell line such as NIH3T3 , whose endogenous HOTAIR transcripts cannot be detected by smFISH probes targeting the human HOTAIR . 3 . 2 . 1 Day 1 1 . Carefully pipet out the media from each well the 8 - well cham - bered cover glass . Gently wash the cells thrice with 350 μ L of 1 (cid:2) PBS . 2 . After the last PBS wash , gently add 250 μ L of 4 % PFA pre - warmed at 37 (cid:3) C into each well . 3 . Incubate the cells in 4 % PFA for 20 min at room temperature . 4 . Carefully pipet out the PFA , and then incubate the cells in 350 μ L 1 (cid:2) PBS for 5 min . Carefully pipet out the PBS and repeat this step two more times . 5 . After the last wash , replace 1 (cid:2) PBS with 400 μ L of 70 % ethanol . 6 . Close the lid and wrap the chambered cover glass with Paraﬁlm to minimize evaporation . 7 . Store the chambered cover glass at 4 (cid:3) C overnight ( > 16 h ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Day 2 1 . Carefully pipet out the ethanol . Gently add 350 μ L wash buffer into each well and incubate at room temperature for 5 min . 2 . Repeat the above washing step one more time . 3 . After the second wash , replace wash buffer with 250 μ L of the TAMRA - labeled human HOTAIR RNA smFISH probes ( 250 nM in hybridization buffer ) . 4 . Close the lid and wrap the chambered cover glass with Paraﬁlm to minimize evaporation . 5 . Store the chambered cover glass , protected from light , at 37 (cid:3) C overnight ( > 16 h ) . 26 Yachen Ying et al . 3 . 2 . 3 Day 3 1 . Gently pipet out the unbound smFISH probes . 2 . Gently add 400 μ L wash buffer and incubate at room tempera - ture for 5 min . Then gently pipet out the wash buffer . 3 . Repeat the above washing step one more time . Do not let samples dry between washes . 4 . After the last wash , gently add 400 μ L wash buffer into each well . Close the lid and store the chambered cover glass , pro - tected from light , at 37 (cid:3) C for 30 – 60 min . 5 . Aspirate the wash buffer and add 400 μ L 2 (cid:2) SSC . Repeat this step two more times . Do not let the samples dry between washes . 6 . Aspirate the 2 (cid:2) SSC and gently add 300 μ L of 1 (cid:2) PBS to each sample . 7 . Add DAPI in 1 (cid:2) PBS to stain the nucleus ( 100 ng / mL ) . 8 . Use DAPI , TRITC , and Cy5 ﬁlter sets or their equivalents to image the nuclear , FISH , and MB signals , respectively , in each cell . For the FISH and MB signals , 3D image stacks should be obtained , with images recorded at an increment of 0 . 25 μ m in the z - direction . 9 . Save the images in TIFF format for further analysis . 3 . 3 Single lncRNA Transcript Identiﬁcation and Colocalization Analysis Since the engineered lncRNA transcripts can be simultaneously labeled by MBs and smFISH probes , the colocalization of MB to smFISH signals represents a direct measure for assessing the accu - racy of MBs for illuminating the engineered transcripts at the single - molecule level . Following microporation of anti - MTS MBs and smFISH processing in NIH3T3 cells transiently transfected with pHOTAIR - 8x , colocalization can be measured as described below : 1 . Open the image stack acquired in the Cy5 channel ( MB signal ) using Fiji ( see Note 13 ) . 2 . Draw a region of interest ( ROI ) around the cell using the Freehand Selections tool . 3 . Open the ROI manager by selecting Analyze > Tools > ROI Manager . 4 . Add the selected ROI ( from step 2 ) to the list in the ROI Manager . This ROI is required in the following steps and should also be used for the TRITC channel ( smFISH signal ) . Therefore , do not close the ROI Manager toolbar or delete the selected ROI . 5 . Enhance the particulate objects by selecting Process > Subtract Background . Set the Rolling ball radius to 2 . 0 pixels and click OK to start . Make sure all images in the stack are processed ( see Note 14 ) . Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 27 6 . Identify particles in an image sequence by selecting Run Plu - gins > LoG3D . Set sigma X and sigma Y to 1 , sigma Z to 0 . Select Process slice per slice . Images will appear in grayscale after processing ( see Note 15 ) . 7 . Filter out particles contributed by background noise by select - ing Image > Adjust > Threshold . Apply the properly adjusted threshold to all images in the stack . The background pixels should be set to NaN . 8 . Apply the preset ROI to the ﬁltered stack . The ROI will appear in all slices of the image sequence . 9 . Identify local maxima within the ROI in each slice ( i . e . , 2D local maxima ) by selecting Plugins > Macros > FindStackMax - ima . Set the Noise Tolerances to 10 , Output Types to Single Points , and select Exclude Edge Maxima . Click OK to process all images in the stack ( see Note 16 ) . 10 . Invert the local maxima stack by selecting Edit > Invert . Click Yes to process all the images ( see Note 17 ) . 11 . Repeat steps 1 – 10 for the images acquired in the TRITC channel using the same ROI saved in the ROI manager . 12 . Identify which 2D local maxima are 3D local maxima to remove over - counted maxima in each processed stack and perform 3D colocalization analysis between the two stacks using a custom MATLAB program ( see Notes 18 and 19 ) . Representative ﬂuorescence images are shown in Fig . 2 and the accuracy analysis result is described in Fig . 2 legend . 3 . 4 Single Particle Tracking Analysis Following microporation of anti - MTS MBs into HeLa - HOTAIR - 8x cells , dynamic properties of single pHOTAIR - 8x transcripts can be determined by single particle tracking ( SPT ) analysis as described below ( see Note 20 ) : 1 . Open time - lapse images using Fiji . The images are acquired at 100 ms per frame for 600 frames . 2 . Adjust image interval properties by selecting Image > Proper - ties . Set Channels ( c ) to 1 , Slices ( z ) to 1 , Frames ( t ) to 600 , Unit of length to “ μ m , ” Pixel width and Pixel height to 0 . 16 , Voxel depth to 0 , Frame interval to 104 ms ( see Note 21 ) , and Origin to 0 , 0 . Select Global . 3 . Select Plugins > Tracking > TrackMate . The parameters input in step 2 will appear . 4 . Click next and select “LoG detector . ” Then , click next again . 5 . To preﬁlter spots , set Estimated blob diameter to 0 . 5 μ m and Threshold to 800 . Select Do sub - pixel localization . 6 . Click next to review the settings for the preﬁltering process in step 4 . 28 Yachen Ying et al . 7 . Click next to further restrict the number of spots by adjusting the threshold on the Quality feature . 8 . Click next to select a view . Select HyperStack Displayer so that the spots can be manually edited . 9 . Click next and apply more ﬁlters on spots . Apply the ﬁlters : Quality , Minimal Intensity and Maximal intensity . Adjust the settings properly so that the ﬁltered spots correctly represent spots in the original image sequences . 10 . Click next and select Simple LAP tracker . 11 . Click next and set Linking max distance to 1 μ m , Gap - closing max distance to 2 μ m and Gap - closing max frame gap to 4 μ m ( see Note 22 ) . 12 . Click next to review the previous settings . 13 . Click next and set ﬁlters on tracks by selecting Number of spots in track . 14 . Click next and set display options . Select Display spots and set Spot display radius ratio to 1 . Select Display tracks and set Limit frame depth to 10 . Click Analysis to obtain track statistics . Fig . 2 Single - molecule detection of engineered HOTAIR transcripts harboring 8 (cid:2) MTS in cells by MBs and smFISH . 8 h postmicroporation of the anti - repeat MBs , cells were ﬁxed and permeabilized and then subject to smFISH processing . Representative images of anti - repeat MB and smFISH signals in NIH3T3 cells transiently expressing pHOTAIR - 8x . Colocalization of MB to smFISH signals was 94 % (cid:4) 3 % ( Mean (cid:4) SD ) . DAPI ( blue ) stains the nucleus . This ﬁgure is adapted from [ 6 ] with permission in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International ( CC BY 4 . 0 ) license Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 29 15 . Spots in Track Statistics needs to be saved in the “ . txt” format for further SPT analysis , which can be performed using @ msda - nalyzer written in MATLAB ( see Notes 23 and 24 ) . Results for SPT analysis of pHOTAIR - 8x are shown in Fig . 3 . 4 Notes 1 . Tandem repeats of the 50 - base sequence can be constructed according to the method described by van den Bogaard and Tyagi ( 2009 ) [ 10 ] . The resulting repeat sequence was then inserted into pEGFP - N1 ( from Clontech ) using EcoRI and BamHI restriction enzymes . 2 . We create and amplify pHOTAIR - 8x and pEGFP - N1 - 8x using Escherichia coli MAX Efﬁciency ® Stbl2 ™ ( Thermo Fisher ) at 30 (cid:3) C , as plasmids encoding multiple tandem repeats are sus - ceptible to recombination . 3 . We have previously shown that this modiﬁed MB is highly resistant to nonspeciﬁc opening and is highly biocompatible in cells [ 11 ] . Other MBs with similar features could be used , but their accuracy for imaging single RNA transcripts should be evaluated . Fig . 3 MB - based measurement of single - molecule dynamics of single engineered HOTAIR transcripts in cells . 8 h postmicroporation of the anti - repeat MBs , time - lapse images were acquired in HeLa cells stably expressing pHOTAIR - 8x . Single particle tracking analysis was performed to determine the diffusion coefﬁcient ( D eff ) of the engineered transcripts in the nucleus and the cytoplasm . Mean (cid:4) SEM D eff are shown in the Inset . This ﬁgure was created by modifying Figure 4 of [ 6 ] with permission in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International ( CC BY 4 . 0 ) license 30 Yachen Ying et al . 4 . Anti - MTS MBs are designed not to be complementary to endogenous RNAs in mammalian cells , and therefore should remain quenched unless hybridized to their MTS . 5 . MB probes can be purchased from Integrated DNA Technol - ogies ( Coralville , IA , USA ) . 6 . During microporation , antibiotic - free cell culture media should be used to minimize cell death . 7 . Precoating the cover glass with ﬁbronectin generally helps cells adhere faster and spread better on the glass surface , thus mini - mizing cell death and beneﬁting ﬂuorescence imaging follow - ing microporation experiment . 8 . Gentle pipetting minimizes damaging of cells . 9 . Do not use low - retention microcentrifuge tubes as it can be difﬁcult for cell pellets to form after centrifugation . 10 . The microporation parameter settings vary for different cell lines . Optimized parameters for different cell lines can be found at https : / / www . thermoﬁsher . com / cn / zh / home / life - science / cell - culture / transfection / transfection % 2D % 2D - selec tion - misc / neon - transfection - system / neon - protocols - cell - line - data . html . 11 . We recommend leaving a small volume of media ( ~ 50 μ L ) in the microcentrifuge tube after every wash to avoid aspirating out the loose cell pellet formed by the small number of cells . 12 . Be sure to remove unbound ﬁbronectin by washing the cover glass with enough 1 (cid:2) PBS , as unbound ﬁbronectin in solution can saturate the binding sites on the cells , inhibiting cell attach - ment to the ﬁbronectin - coated glass surface . 13 . Fiji can be downloaded at http : / / ﬁji . sc / . 14 . The Rolling ball radius should be adjusted to achieve particle signal enhancement while retaining the sufﬁcient signal infor - mation after background subtraction . In our experiments , 2 . 0 pixels is the optimal value . 15 . The LoG3D plugin ﬁle can be downloaded at http : / / bigwww . epﬂ . ch / sage / soft / LoG3D / and needs to be placed in the “Plugin” folder of Fiji for activation . 16 . The macro ﬁle “FindStackMaxima . ijm” can be downloaded at https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / macros / and needs to be placed in the “Macros” folder of Fiji . Install this macro by selecting Plugins > Macros > Install . 17 . This step inverts black spot images to white spot images and is necessary for our MATLAB analysis . 18 . Discrete RNA transcripts appear to be at least one pixel apart in distance according to our smFISH results . Accordingly , a MATLAB script was written to compare the intensity of each Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 31 local maximum in each slice with the intensity of the eight neighboring pixels in that slice , nine pixels in the slice above , and nine pixels in the slice below . The resulting 3D maximum is computed as a single RNA transcript . 19 . In our MATLAB script , a colocalization event is deﬁned by the detection of an MB 3D local maximum within a 3 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 3 voxel of an smFISH 3D local maximum . A bigger voxel can be used to reduce the impact of local maxima uncertainty if necessary . 20 . All of the parameters used in this experiment are determined based on our dataset . The operators should determine the optimal parameters and ﬁlter settings for their own datasets . 21 . Frame interval was set to 100 ms in cellSens Dimension for time - lapse acquisition . The actual frame interval was ~ 104 ms due to the downtime between acquisitions . 22 . Linking max distance sets the maximal displacement allowed between two particles in adjacent frames that may be consid - ered to belong to the same track . Gap - closing max frame gap sets the maximal frame interval allowed between particle obser - vations that may be considered to be the same particle . Gap - closing max distance sets the maximum displacement allowed between particles observed during the Gap - closing max frame gap that may be considered to belong to the same track . These settings were chosen based on our experience and are dataset dependent . 23 . In order to calculate the mean square displacement ( MSD ) , tracks containing at least 15 time lags ( Δ τ ) were selected for further analysis . Then the 2D diffusion coefﬁcient ( D eff ) was calculated by linear regression of the ﬁrst 25 % of total time lags of the MSD vs . Δ τ data set . The minimum ﬁtting threshold of R 2 was set to be 0 . 9 . 24 . Particles with D eff larger than 0 . 0006 μ m 2 / s are considered to be mobile . The threshold was determined based on D eff calcu - lated for Tetraspek beads ( Thermo Fisher ) immobilized on a coverslip as a control for xy - drift . Acknowledgments This project was supported by grants from the National Key R & D Program of China ( Nos . 2016YFA0501603 and 2016YFA0100702 ) , the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( Nos . 31771583 and 81371613 ) , and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation ( 7162114 ) . 32 Yachen Ying et al . References 1 . Ulitsky I , Bartel DP ( 2013 ) lincRNAs : geno - mics , evolution , and mechanisms . Cell 154 ( 1 ) : 26 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 06 . 020 2 . Sabin LR , Delas MJ , Hannon GJ ( 2013 ) Dogma derailed : the many inﬂuences of RNA on the genome . Mol Cell 49 ( 5 ) : 783 – 794 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 02 . 010 3 . Quinn JJ , Chang HY ( 2016 ) Unique features of long non - coding RNA biogenesis and func - tion . Nat Rev Genet 17 ( 1 ) : 47 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrg . 2015 . 10 4 . Holoch D , Moazed D ( 2015 ) RNA - mediated epigenetic regulation of gene expression . Nat Rev Genet 16 ( 2 ) : 71 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrg3863 5 . Tyagi S , Kramer FR ( 1996 ) Molecular beacons : probes that ﬂuoresce upon hybridization . Nat Biotechnol 14 ( 3 ) : 303 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt0396 - 303 6 . Chen M , Ma Z , Wu X , Mao S , Yang Y , Tan J , Krueger CJ , Chen AK ( 2017 ) A molecular beacon - based approach for live - cell imaging of RNA transcripts with minimal target engi - neering at the single - molecule level . Sci Rep 7 ( 1 ) : 1550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 01740 - 1 7 . Yoon JH , Abdelmohsen K , Kim J , Yang X , Martindale JL , Tominaga - Yamanaka K , White EJ , Orjalo AV , Rinn JL , Kreft SG , Wilson GM , Gorospe M ( 2013 ) Scaffold function of long non - coding RNA HOTAIR in protein ubiqui - tination . Nat Commun 4 : 2939 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms3939 8 . Tsai MC , Manor O , Wan Y , Mosammaparast N , Wang JK , Lan F , Shi Y , Segal E , Chang HY ( 2010 ) Long noncoding RNA as modular scaffold of histone modiﬁca - tion complexes . Science 329 ( 5992 ) : 689 – 693 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1192002 9 . Raj A , van den Bogaard P , Rifkin SA , van Oudenaarden A , Tyagi S ( 2008 ) Imaging indi - vidual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat Methods 5 ( 10 ) : 877 – 879 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1253 10 . van den Bogaard PT , Tyagi S ( 2009 ) Using molecular beacons to study dispersal of mRNPs from the gene locus . Methods Mol Biol ( Clifton , NJ ) 464 : 91 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60327 - 461 - 6 _ 6 11 . Zhao D , Yang Y , Qu N , Chen M , Ma Z , Krue - ger CJ , Behlke MA , Chen AK ( 2016 ) Single - molecule detection and tracking of RNA tran - scripts in living cells using phosphorothioate - optimized 2’ - O - methyl RNA molecular bea - cons . Biomaterials 100 : 172 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2016 . 05 . 022 Visualization of LncRNAs with Molecular Beacons 33 Chapter 3 Real - Time Observation of Localization and Expression ( ROLEX ) System for Live Imaging of the Transcriptional Activity and Nuclear Position of a Speciﬁc Endogenous Gene Hiroshi Ochiai Abstract Long genomic DNA is folded in a cell - type - speciﬁc manner and stored in the cell nucleus . The higher - order structure of genomic DNA is thought to be important for DNA transcription , repair , and replication . Recent advancements in live cell imaging techniques that enable the labeling of speciﬁc genomic loci and RNA have made it possible to capture the dynamic relationships between higher - order genomic structure and gene expression . We have established the real - time observation of localization and expression ( ROLEX ) system for live imaging of the transcriptional state and nuclear position of a speciﬁc endogenous gene . In this chapter , I will introduce the detailed protocol of ROLEX imaging in mouse embryonic stem cells . Key words Transcription , Gene locus , Dynamics , CRISPR , MS2 1 Introduction Within human cells , genomic DNA measuring approximately 2 m in length is folded and stored in cell nuclei measuring approxi - mately 10 μ m in diameter . This “folding” is not random and shows cell - type - speciﬁc characteristics . The structural details of genomic DNA have been clariﬁed using technological innovations such as chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) and related tech - nologies ( 4C , 5C , and Hi - C ) , which provide information on how frequently speciﬁc genomic regions interact with each other [ 1 , 2 ] . The higher - order structure of genomic DNA is thought to be important for DNA transcription , repair , and replication [ 3 ] . How - ever , to obtain the frequencies at which genomic regions contact each other with a higher resolution , genomic DNA samples from a large number of cells ( ~ 10 6 cells ) are required . In recent years , a single - cell Hi - C method has been reported to enable the elucida - tion of higher - order genomic structure at the single - cell level [ 4 – 6 ] . However , since there are only one or two copies of the Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 3 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 35 genomic region in a diploid cell and sample losses during prepara - tion are technically unavoidable , the data that can be obtained from single - cell Hi - C is quite sparse . By contrast , the use of sequential rounds of ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization ( FISH ) makes it possible to acquire spatial information about a chromosomal region in a single cell , and the resulting average distance matrix shows a signif - icant correlation with the contact matrix obtained by the Hi - C method [ 7 , 8 ] . Importantly , however , it has become apparent that the higher - order genomic structure of a chromosomal region shows large diversity among cells , indicating that the interphase genomic DNA does not have a static structure , but rather it might be highly dynamic and has large diversity among cells . Such varia - tion in nuclear organization among cells might contribute to cell - to - cell variability in gene expression [ 9 ] . Although several attempts have been made to understand the relationships between gene expression and the dynamic process of nuclear organization in cell populations [ 4 , 10 ] , it has been difﬁcult to gain detailed insights into these relationships thus far . Recent technological breakthroughs have made it possible to perform simultaneous imaging of the transcription and intranuclear localization of endogenous genes [ 11 , 12 ] . The MS2 and PP7 system has been used for a long time as a method of visualizing transcription [ 13 , 14 ] . MS2 and PP7 are sequences derived from a bacteriophage and their transcripts form a speciﬁc stem - loop struc - ture . Furthermore , the MS2 / PP7 coat protein ( MCP / PCP ) spe - ciﬁcally binds to the stem - loop structure as a dimer . Therefore , RNA molecules can be visualized by inserting MS2 / PP7 repeats into the target gene and expressing a fusion of MCP or PCP and ﬂuorescent protein ( FP ) . In particular , bright ﬂuorescent spots can be detected at transcription sites because of transcriptional burst - ing , which is a fundamental property of genes that is observed in diverse organisms [ 15 – 18 ] . The timing of the bursts is highly variable among cells and even among alleles , but several transcripts are produced per event . It is thought that several consecutive RNA polymerase complexes are released from an active promoter during the transcriptional burst period , followed by a refractory period with little or no activity . In addition to RNA imaging , techniques for the visualization of speciﬁc genomic loci have also been established . The lacO / LacI - FP and tetO / TetR - FP systems are well established and used in several model systems [ 19 , 20 ] . The Lac repressor ( LacI ) and Tet repressor ( TetR ) proteins bind to the lac operator ( lacO ) and tet operator ( tetO ) , respectively , with strong afﬁnities . Therefore , by inserting repeats of lacO or tetO ( generally , 96 – 256 repeats ) into a speciﬁc genomic locus of interest and expressing a LacI - FP or TetR - FP fusion protein , the locus can be ﬂuorescently labeled . In yeast , this technique has been widely used because the insertion of these repeats into a speciﬁc genomic locus is relatively easy through 36 Hiroshi Ochiai homologous recombination . By contrast , it remains difﬁcult to introduce these relatively large repeats into speciﬁc genomic loci even through the use of genome editing technology in organisms other than yeast . Thus , these techniques are often applied through the random integration of lacO or tetO repeats into the host genome . In recent years , the ParB - INT system has been developed , which offers a potential alternative to the lacO / LacI and tetO / TetR systems [ 21 ] . In this system , the parS sequence derived from Burkholderia cenocepacia ( the authors called this sequence INT ) needs to be inserted into the target genomic locus in advance . Then , when the fusion protein of ParB and FP is expressed in the cell , ParB - FP binds to the INT sequence and becomes multimer - ized , making it possible to visualize the locus of interest [ 21 ] . The INT sequence is a 1 kbp or shorter nonrepetitive sequence , and it has been conﬁrmed that it does not interfere with the structure of chromatin . Recently , the simultaneous live imaging of the tran - scription and intranuclear localization of an exogenous reporter gene in human cells [ 22 ] and an endogenous gene in fruit ﬂy [ 12 ] has been reported . As a further alternative method , the dCas9 - FP system does not require the insertion of a speciﬁc sequence into the host genome in advance . In 2013 , shortly after the “clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and CRISPR - associated proteins” ( CRISPR - Cas ) system was adopted as a genome editing tool , it became possible to ﬂuorescently label speciﬁc endogenous genomic loci within a living cell using a fusion protein of FP and Cas9 lacking nuclease activity ( dCas9 - FP ) [ 23 ] . dCas9 binds to a speciﬁc DNA sequence in a single - guide RNA ( sgRNA ) - dependent manner . Therefore , by introducing at least about 30 species of sgRNAs targeting a genomic locus , the locus can be ﬂuorescently labeled , even when the locus is comprised of nonrepetitive sequence [ 23 ] . Since the only requirement for the labeling of speciﬁc endog - enous genomic loci is to change the sequence of the sgRNAs and thus alter the binding speciﬁcity of dCas9 , the use of this technique has been reported in several systems [ 24 ] . Recently , by combining the MS2 / MCP and dCas9 - FP systems , we established the real - time observation of localization and expression ( ROLEX ) system for live imaging of the transcriptional state and nuclear position of a speciﬁc endogenous gene [ 11 ] . In this system , the insertion of a MS2 repeats into a speciﬁc gene of interest not only enables the visuali - zation of gene transcription using the MCP fused with near - infrared red - ﬂuorescent protein ( iRFP ) , but also allows the deter - mination of the nuclear localization of a gene using a fusion protein of dCas9 and green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) . Using this system , we detected mobility changes of the Nanog gene locus depending on the state of its transactivation in mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) . This system will help to overcome the current knowledge ROLEX System for Live Imaging of Transcription 37 gap regarding the association between gene transcription and nuclear dynamics by increasing our insight into the fundamental mechanisms of genomic organization and gene regulation . In this chapter , I introduce detailed protocols of ROLEX imag - ing using mESC lines including the maintenance of mESC lines , transfection of sgRNA - expressing vectors , live imaging , and image processing . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Cell Culture 1 . ROLEX imaging compatible MS2 knockin mESC line : a cell line that constitutively expresses MCP - iRFP and expresses dCas9 - GFP in a doxycycline ( Dox ) - inducible manner ( see Notes 1 – 4 ) . 2 . mESC maintenance medium : Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium supplemented with 4500 mg / mL glucose , 110 mg / L sodium pyruvate , 15 % fetal bovine serum , 0 . 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol , 1 (cid:1) MEM nonessential amino acids , 2 mM L - alanyl - L - glutamine ( or L - glutamine ) solution , 1000 U / mL leukemia inhibitory factor , 20 μ g / mL gentami - cin , 3 μ M CHIR99021 , and 1 μ M PD0325901 . Alternatively , if using another mESC cell line , use an appropriate medium for maintaining the selected cell line . 3 . Gelatin solution ( 0 . 1 % wt / vol ) . 4 . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . 5 . Culture dish ( 60 mm in diameter ) . 6 . Conical tube ( 15 mL volume ) . 7 . Trypsin – ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( trypsin – EDTA ; 0 . 25 % wt / vol ) . 8 . Cell counter . 9 . Centrifuge . 10 . CO 2 incubator . 11 . Water bath . 2 . 2 ROLEX Imaging 1 . Cell culture plate ( 24 - well ) . 2 . Lab - Tek ™ II chambered cover glass ( 8 - well ) . 3 . PBS ( + ) : PBS containing 100 mg / L of calcium chloride ( CaCl 2 ) and magnesium chloride ( MgCl 2 ·6H 2 O ) . 4 . Laminin 511 coating solution : Laminin - 511 diluted to 5 μ g / mL in PBS ( + ) . 5 . Lipofectamine ® 3000 Transfection Reagent . 38 Hiroshi Ochiai 6 . Transfection grade plasmids expressing sgRNA ( at least 200 ng / μ L ; see Notes 3 – 5 ) . 7 . Opti - MEM ™ reduced serum medium . 8 . Doxycycline ( 1 mg / mL ) . 9 . Puromycin ( 2 mg / mL ) . 10 . mESC imaging medium : FluoroBrite ™ Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium supplemented with 110 mg / L sodium pyru - vate , 15 % fetal bovine serum , 0 . 1 mM β - mercaptoethanol , 1 (cid:1) MEM nonessential amino acids , 2 mM L - alanyl - L - glutamine ( or L - glutamine ) solution , 1000 U / mL leukemia inhibitory factor , 20 μ g / mL gentamicin , 3 μ M CHIR99021 , and 1 μ M PD0325901 . 11 . Fluorescence microscope equipped with a 100 (cid:1) oil - immer - sion objective lens and a stage - top microscope incubator using appropriate settings for imaging the GFP and iRFP channels : I recommend using a confocal microscope , especially a spinning disk confocal microscope such as the CSU - W1 microscope ( Yokogawa , Tokyo , Japan ) with a piezo z - stage ( such as the MS - 2000 model from ASI , Eugene , OR ) for fast imaging ( see Note 6 ) . 2 . 3 Image Processing 1 . ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . 2 . Imaris ( Bitplane , Zurich , Switzerland ) with the Imaris Cell and Measurement Pro modules . 3 Methods In this chapter , I introduce the ROLEX system and the methodol - ogy for data analysis using an MS2 - repeat knockin cell line in which MCP - iRFP and dCas9 - GFP are expressed constitutively and in a Dox - inducible manner , respectively . I do not explain how to estab - lish an MS2 - knockin cell line here , since the general method for knockin using CRISPR has previously been described in detail [ 25 ] . However , some speciﬁc considerations pertaining to the ROLEX system are detailed in Note s 1 – 4 . 3 . 1 ROLEX - Imaging Compatible Mouse ESC Thawing 1 . Add 0 . 1 % ( wt / vol ) gelatin solution to a 60 - mm culture dish . Incubate at room temperature for at least 30 min . 2 . Prewarm 5 mL of mESC maintenance medium . 3 . Take a cryotube that contains frozen ROLEX - imaging com - patible ESCs ( in conventional DMSO - containing freezing solution ) from the liquid nitrogen tank . 4 . Thaw the cells as quickly as possible in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath . ROLEX System for Live Imaging of Transcription 39 5 . Just before the cells are completely thawed , transfer them with a pipette into a 15 - mL tube containing 10 mL of mESC maintenance medium . 6 . Centrifuge at 190 (cid:1) g for 2 min at room temperature . 7 . Remove the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 5 mL of mESC maintenance medium . Remove the gelatin solution from the culture dish set up in Subheading 3 . 1 , step 1 , and then transfer the cells to the culture dish . 8 . Incubate the cells in a CO 2 incubator at 37 (cid:3) C under 5 % CO 2 for 2 days . 3 . 2 ESC Maintenance 1 . Add 2 mL of 0 . 1 % gelatin solution to a 60 - mm culture dish . Incubate at room temperature for at least 30 min . 2 . Aspirate the mESC maintenance medium from the tissue cul - ture dish containing the mESCs , then wash once with 5 mL prewarmed PBS and aspirate . 3 . Add 1 mL of prewarmed 0 . 25 % trypsin – EDTA to the cells and incubate for 2 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 4 . Dissociate mouse ESC colonies into single cells by pipetting . 5 . Transfer the cell suspension into a 15 - mL conical tube contain - ing 2 mL of mESC maintenance medium . 6 . Centrifuge at 190 (cid:1) g for 2 min at room temperature . 7 . Remove the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 1 mL of mESC maintenance medium . 8 . Count the number of cells using a cell counter . 9 . Remove the gelatin solution from the culture dish set up in Subheading 3 . 2 , step 1 . 10 . Pour 4 mL of maintenance medium into the gelatin - coated dish . 11 . Plate the cells at 5 (cid:1) 10 5 cells . 12 . Incubate the cells in a CO 2 incubator at 37 (cid:3) C under 5 % CO 2 for 2 or 3 days . 3 . 3 ROLEX Imaging 1 . Plate the ROLEX - imaging compatible mESCs ( 2 . 5 (cid:1) 10 5 / 500 μ L medium ) ( see Notes 1 – 4 ) onto gelatin - coated 24 - well culture plates and incubate them at 37 (cid:3) C under 5 % CO 2 for 1 h . 2 . Transfect the mESCs with 1 μ g of sgRNA expression vectors using Lipofectamine ® 3000 . Prepare a mixture of 1 μ g of sgRNA expression vectors ( see Notes 3 – 5 ) in a 1 . 5 - mL tube . 3 . Add 25 μ L of Opti - MEM ™ medium and 1 μ L of the P3000 reagent included in the Lipofectamine ® 3000 kit to the tube containing plasmid DNA . 40 Hiroshi Ochiai 4 . Prepare another 1 . 5 mL tube and add 25 μ L of Opti - MEM ™ medium and 1 . 8 μ L of Lipofectamine ® 3000 . Mix well by pipetting . 5 . Combine the plasmid DNA and the Lipofectamine ® mixture then mix well by pipetting and incubate for 15 min at room temperature ( 25 (cid:3) C ) . 6 . Add the whole plasmids - Lipofectamine ® mixture to the mESCs that were plated in Subheading 3 . 3 , step 1 . Mix gently by pipetting and incubate for 12 h . 7 . Aspirate the mESC medium from the tissue culture dish con - taining the mESCs and add 1 mL of fresh mESC medium containing Dox at an appropriate concentration ( see Note 2 ) . If the sgRNA - expressing vector can express a puromycin resis - tance gene , also add puromycin at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 μ g / mL . 8 . After 23 h , prepare a laminin - 511 - coated 8 - well Lab - Tek ™ II chambered cover glass by adding 120 μ L of laminin - 511 coat - ing solution to each well of an 8 - well Lab - Tek ™ II chambered cover glass . Incubate the chamber at 37 (cid:3) C for 1 h . 9 . Aspirate the mESC medium from the tissue culture dish con - taining the mESCs , then wash once with 1 mL PBS and aspirate . 10 . Add 0 . 5 mL of 0 . 25 % trypsin – EDTA to the cells and incubate for 2 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 11 . Aspirate the laminin - 511 coating solution from the 8 - well Lab - Tek ™ II chambered cover glass and add 200 μ L of PBS ( + ) . 12 . Dissociate the mESCs into single cells by pipetting with a 1 - mL pipette tip . 13 . Transfer the cell suspension into a 15 - mL conical tube contain - ing 1 mL of mESC imaging medium . 14 . Centrifuge at 190 (cid:1) g for 2 min at room temperature . 15 . Remove the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 250 μ L of mESC imaging medium . 16 . Count the number of cells using a cell counter . 17 . Remove the PBS ( + ) from the Lab - Tek ™ II chamber . 18 . Plate the cells at 5 (cid:1) 10 4 cells and make the volume up to 200 μ L by adding ESC imaging medium . 19 . Add Dox at an appropriate concentration . 20 . Incubate the cells at 37 (cid:3) C under 5 % CO 2 overnight . 21 . On the next day , aspirate the mESC imaging medium from the tissue culture dish containing the mESCs and add 0 . 2 mL of ROLEX System for Live Imaging of Transcription 41 fresh mESC imaging medium containing Dox at an appropri - ate concentration . 22 . Acquire live images of the cells using a ﬂuorescence microscope equipped with a 100 (cid:1) oil - immersion objective lens and a stage - top microscope incubator using appropriate settings for imaging the GFP and iRFP channels . I recommend using a confocal microscope , especially a spinning disk confocal micro - scope such as the CSU - W1 microscope ( Yokogawa , Tokyo , Japan ) with a piezo z - stage ( such as the MS - 2000 model from ASI , Eugene , OR ) for fast imaging ( see Note 6 ) . For analyzing genomic locus dynamics and transcriptional activity , acquire 46 z - planes per site , spanning a total distance of 9 μ m ( each z - step ¼ 200 nm ) with a 10 s interval time for 500 s ( Fig . 1 ) . 3 . 4 Image Processing 1 . Filter acquired images with a one - pixel diameter 3D Gaussian blur ﬁlter using ImageJ software ( Fig . 1 ) . 2 . Perform background subtraction on the obtained dCas9 - GFP images using an ImageJ plugin with a rolling ball radius of ﬁve pixels ( Fig . 1 ) . dCas9 - GFP raw image 3D Gaussian blur filter Rolling Ball Background Subtraction MCP - tdiRFP merge Fig . 1 Representative images obtained by the ROLEX system . NMP - R cells [ 11 ] transfected with the MS2 sgRNA expression vectors were subjected to live imaging using spinning disk confocal microscopy . All images show maximum intensity projection reveling simultaneous visualization of transcription and localization of Nanog - MS2 loci ( arrowheads ) . By processing the images as described in the image processing section ( see Subheading 3 . 4 ) , the signal - to - noise ratio of the dCas9 - GFP spot substantially increased . White dashed lines and arrowheads represent edges of nuclei and dCas9 - GFP spots , respectively . Scale bars : 5 μ m 42 Hiroshi Ochiai 3 . Detect ﬂuorescent spots using the Imaris “Spot” function with the spot diameter set at 0 . 8 μ m . 4 . Estimate the center of mass of each nucleus from nuclear - localized MCP - tdiRFP ﬂuorescence using the Imaris “Cell” function , with the parameters of cell smooth ﬁlter width and cell background subtraction width set at 1 and 0 . 64 μ m , respectively . 4 Notes 1 . Generally , gene knockin by genome editing has a low efﬁciency in mammalian cells . Thus , for the insertion of MS2 repeats into the 3 0 untranslated region of a protein - coding gene , a reporter gene is typically inserted in - frame into the target gene together with MS2 repeats immediately upstream of the stop codon so that the knockin cells that contain the inserted MS2 repeats can be easily identiﬁed . However , in some cases , such reporter cassettes should be excised afterward because their presence can decrease the expression of endogenous genes . 2 . Once MS2 knockin cells are established , the next step is the establishment of cell lines expressing MCP - iRFP and dCas9 - GFP . MCP - FP and dCas9 - FP expression vectors are available from Addgene ( Watertown , MA ) [ 11 ] . If the expression levels of these proteins are too high , the target ﬂuorescent spots will be difﬁcult to identify because of a high background signal . Con - versely , if their expression levels are too low , the target ﬂuores - cent spots cannot be detected because of an insufﬁcient strength of the ﬂuorescent signal . Therefore , it is necessary to screen for cell clones showing an appropriate expression level . Since the appropriate expression level may differ depending on the cell line used and the microscopy setup , the expression level should be empirically determined . Especially in the ROLEX system , the expression of dCas9 - GFP should be kept low because the signal - to - noise ratio of dCas9 - GFP target ﬂuorescent spots is relatively low . Therefore , the expression of dCas9 - GFP is recommended to be regulated in a Dox - inducible manner , and it is necessary to determine the appropriate concentration of Dox by titration to obtain an optimal expression level [ 11 , 23 ] . 3 . The original ROLEX method used three sgRNAs targeting MS2 repeats , but I have observed that when the transcriptional activity of the target gene is high , the brightness of the dCas9 - GFP spots tends to weaken [ 11 ] . This is probably because dCas9 - GFP is peeled from binding sites by the passage of RNA pol II . In recent years , it has been reported that a speciﬁc endogenous genomic locus can be efﬁciently labeled by the delivery of highly multiplexed gRNAs with a molecular ROLEX System for Live Imaging of Transcription 43 assembly strategy , and this technique is termed chimeric array of gRNA oligonucleotides ( CARGO ) [ 26 ] . By adopting this approach , it may be possible to label the region near the target gene by introducing sgRNA expression vectors created by the CARGO method instead of the MS2 sgRNA expression vectors used in the original ROLEX method . 4 . We noticed that the transcribed ﬂuorescent spots of MS2 / MCP almost disappeared when MS2 sgRNAs were con - stitutively expressed in cells . Since the amounts of the target protein and mRNA were not greatly affected , it seems possible that the formation of the MS2 stem loop is inhibited by a stable supply of complementary RNAs ( sgRNAs ) to MS2 repeats . Therefore , when introducing sgRNAs targeting MS2 repeats , transient expression is recommended . 5 . The original sgRNA expression vector is available from Addgene ( Addgene Plasmid # 62348 ) [ 11 ] . If the same MS2 repeats as employed by Ochiai et al . are used , the following three target sequences of MS2 sgRNA work well : MS2 _ 1 : GGCTGATGCTCGTGCTTTCT , MS2 _ 2 : CGTCGTTT GAAGATTCGACC , and MS2 _ 3 : TCTGATGAACCCT GGAATAC . Note that the target MS2 sequence of the sgRNAs may differ depending on the type of MS2 knocked into the host genome . In particular , when using an MS2 sequence different from that used by Ochiai et al . [ 11 ] , different MS2 sgRNAs are required . Depending on the purpose of the analysis , sgRNAs targeting other endogenous gene loci could be simultaneously introduced together with the MS2 sgRNAs [ 11 ] . 6 . The expression level of dCas9 - GFP may differ even among cells that are derived from an isolated clone . Additionally , even if a spinning disk confocal microscope is used for ROLEX imaging , the ﬂuorescent spot of dCas9 - GFP cannot be detected if the expression level of dCas9 - GFP is too high because it has a relatively low ﬂuorescence intensity . Therefore , it is necessary to select cells that show an appropriate expression level for ROLEX imaging . Alternatively , dCas9 - GFP ﬂuorescent spots could be detected in some cases by taking time - lapse images over a short period of time and processing them as described in Subheading 3 . 4 . References 1 . Dekker J , Marti - Renom MA , Mirny LA ( 2013 ) Exploring the three - dimensional organization of genomes : interpreting chromatin interaction data . Nat Rev Genet 14 : 390 – 403 2 . Dekker J , Belmont AS , Guttman M et al ( 2017 ) The 4D nucleome project . Nature 549 : 219 – 226 3 . Pombo A , Dillon N ( 2015 ) Three - dimensional genome architecture : players and mechanisms . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 16 : 245 – 257 4 . Nagano T , Lubling Y , Stevens TJ et al ( 2014 ) Single - cell Hi - C reveals cell - to - cell variability in chromosome structure . Nature 502 : 59 – 64 44 Hiroshi Ochiai 5 . Ramani V , Deng X , Qiu R et al ( 2017 ) Mas - sively multiplex single - cell Hi - C . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 263 – 266 6 . Nagano T , Lubling Y , Va´rnai C et al ( 2017 ) Cell - cycle dynamics of chromosomal organiza - tion at single - cell resolution . Nature 547 : 61 – 67 7 . Wang S , Su J - H , Beliveau BJ et al ( 2016 ) Spa - tial organization of chromatin domains and compartments in single chromosomes . Science 353 : aaf8084 – aaf8602 8 . Bintu B , Mateo LJ , Su J - H et al ( 2018 ) Super - resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains and cooperative interactions in single cells . Sci - ence 362 : eaau1783 9 . Noordermeer D , de Wit E , Klous P et al ( 2011 ) Variegated gene expression caused by cell - speciﬁc long - range DNA interactions . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 944 – 951 10 . Giorgetti L , Galupa R , Nora EP et al ( 2014 ) Predictive polymer modeling reveals coupled ﬂuctuations in chromosome conformation and transcription . Cell 157 : 950 – 963 11 . Ochiai H , Sugawara T , Yamamoto T ( 2015 ) Simultaneous live imaging of the transcription and nuclear position of speciﬁc genes . Nucleic Acids Res 43 : e127 – e127 12 . Chen H , Levo M , Barinov L et al ( 2018 ) Dynamic interplay between enhancer – promo - ter topology and gene activity . Nat Genet 50 : 1296 – 1303 13 . Tyagi S ( 2009 ) Imaging intracellular RNA dis - tribution and dynamics in living cells . Nat Methods 6 : 331 – 338 14 . Larson DR , Zenklusen D , Wu B et al ( 2011 ) Real - time observation of transcription initia - tion and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 : 475 – 478 15 . Golding I , Paulsson J , Zawilski SM , Cox EC ( 2005 ) Real - time kinetics of gene activity in individual bacteria . Cell 123 : 1025 – 1036 16 . Chubb JR , Trcek T , Shenoy SM , Singer RH ( 2006 ) Transcriptional pulsing of a develop - mental gene . Curr Biol 16 : 1018 – 1025 17 . Raj A , Peskin CS , Tranchina D et al ( 2006 ) Stochastic mRNA synthesis in mammalian cells . PLoS Biol 4 : e309 18 . Suter DM , Molina N , Gatﬁeld D et al ( 2011 ) Mammalian genes are transcribed with widely different bursting kinetics . Science 332 : 472 – 474 19 . Straight AF , Belmont AS , Robinett CC , Murray AW ( 1996 ) GFP tagging of budding yeast chromosomes reveals that protein - protein interactions can mediate sister chroma - tid cohesion . Curr Biol 6 : 1599 – 1608 20 . Viollier PH , Thanbichler M , McGrath PT et al ( 2004 ) Rapid and sequential movement of individual chromosomal loci to speciﬁc subcel - lular locations during bacterial DNA replica - tion . Proc Natl Acad Sci 101 : 9257 – 9262 21 . Saad H , Gallardo F , Dalvai M et al ( 2014 ) DNA dynamics during early double - strand break processing revealed by non - intrusive imaging of living cells . PLoS Genet 10 : e1004187 22 . Germier T , Kocanova S , Walther N et al ( 2017 ) Real - time imaging of a single gene reveals transcription - initiated local conﬁnement . Bio - phys J 113 : 1383 – 1394 23 . Chen B , Gilbert LA , Cimini BA et al ( 2013 ) Dynamic imaging of genomic loci in living human cells by an optimized CRISPR / Cas sys - tem . Cell 155 : 1479 – 1491 24 . Anton T , Karg E , Bultmann S ( 2018 ) Applications of the CRISPR / Cas system beyond gene editing . Biol Methods Protoc 3 ( 1 ) : bpy002 25 . Koch B , Nijmeijer B , Kueblbeck M et al ( 2018 ) Generation and validation of homozygous ﬂuorescent knock - in cells using CRISPR - Cas9 genome editing . Nat Protoc 13 : 1465 – 1487 26 . Gu B , Swigut T , Spencley A et al ( 2018 ) Transcription - coupled changes in nuclear mobility of mammalian cis - regulatory ele - ments . Science 359 : 1050 – 1055 ROLEX System for Live Imaging of Transcription 45 Chapter 4 Visualization of Single mRNAs in Live Neurons Jae Youn Shim , Byung Hun Lee , and Hye Yoon Park Abstract Transcription and post - transcriptional regulations are critical in gene expression . To study the spatiotem - poral regulation of RNA inside a cell , techniques for high - resolution imaging of RNA have been developed . In this chapter , we describe RNA ﬂuorescent labeling methods using MS2 and PP7 systems to detect single RNA molecules in live neurons . We use hippocampal neurons cultured from knock - in mouse models in which β - actin or Arc mRNAs are tagged with MS2 or PP7 stem - loops . Adeno - associated virus ( AAV ) or lentiviral vectors are used to express MS2 or PP7 capsid proteins fused with GFP in those neurons . Then , GFP - labeled RNAs in live neurons can be detected by epiﬂuorescence microscopy , and their moving pathways can be analyzed using single - particle tracking software . For these processes , we introduce proto - cols for neuron culture , transfection , imaging , and particle tracking methods . Key words Single - molecule imaging , Endogenous mRNA , Neuron , Arc , β - Actin , MS2 - GFP , PP7 - GFP 1 Introduction In response to cellular stimulation , cells synthesize proteins using genetic information encoded in the DNA , through the processes of transcription and translation . Many aspects of gene expression are controlled at the level of the intermediate molecule , RNA . There - fore , quantifying RNA levels is an important step in studying gene expression . Conventional methods for measuring the RNA level in a popu - lation of cells include quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction ( qRT - PCR ) [ 1 ] and northern blotting [ 2 ] , but these methods do not provide the absolute amount of RNA in a single cell . Fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) is employed to visualize single RNA molecules in ﬁxed cells using single - stranded DNA probes with ﬂuorescent dyes [ 3 , 4 ] . However , these approaches cannot provide dynamic information about RNA in living cells . There are various labeling techniques for RNA detec - tion in vivo [ 5 , 6 ] . Among them , MS2 - GFP and PP7 - GFP systems have been widely used for labeling and imaging single RNA in live Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 4 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 47 cells . RNA stem - loops containing the MS2 or PP7 binding site ( MBS or PBS ) are bound with a high afﬁnity by the MS2 or PP7 bacteriophage capsid protein ( MCP or PCP ) , respectively [ 7 , 8 ] . For labeling endogenous β - actin mRNA , 24 MBS repeats were inserted into the 3 0 untranslated region ( 3 0 UTR ) of the β - actin gene to generate the Actb - MBS knock - in mouse model [ 9 ] . By crossing the Actb - MBS mouse with a transgenic mouse that expresses MCP - GFP , single endogenous β - actin RNA molecules can be labeled with a maximum of 48 copies of MCP - GFP and detected in live cells as a bright spot compared to the background signal [ 10 ] . We cultured hippocampal neurons from hybrid MCP (cid:2) MBS mice to visualize endogenous β - actin RNA in live neurons . In the case of the Arc - PBS knock - in mouse , PBS RNA stem - loop sequences were inserted into the 3 0 UTR of the Arc gene [ 11 ] . The Arc gene is an immediate early gene ( IEG ) involved in long - term memory formation [ 12 ] . Hippocampal neurons cultured from Arc - PBS mice were infected with AAV - hSyn - stdPCP - stdGFP virus to label Arc mRNA with up to 48 copies of GFP . To detect Arc mRNAs , we stimulated neurons with bicucul - line , which activates neurons by blocking gamma - aminobutyric acid A ( GABA A ) receptors . Additionally , transient transfection of red ﬂuorescence protein can be used to visualize the morphology of the neurons . In this chapter , we describe the protocols for disso - ciated hippocampal neuron culture , virus production and infection , transient transfection , single RNA imaging in live cells , and single - particle tracking analysis . 2 Materials All animal experiments should be performed in accordance with a protocol approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Com - mittee ( IACUC ) . 2 . 1 Neuron Culture Use ultrapure water ( 18 M Ω ∙ cm equivalent at 25 (cid:3) C ) for all solutions . 1 . 10 (cid:2) Boric acid buffer ( BAB ) : 50 mM ( ﬁnal concentration in the solution ) Boric acid , 12 . 5 mM Sodium tetraborate decahy - drate . Dissolve 0 . 31 g of boric acid powder and 0 . 48 g of sodium tetraborate decahydrate powder in 100 mL water . Adjust the pH to 8 . 5 with 5 M NaOH . 2 . 2 mg / mL 10 (cid:2) poly - D - lysine ( PDL ) solution in 10 (cid:2) BAB : Dissolve 20 mg of PDL powder in 10 mL of 10 (cid:2) BAB solution and store 1 mL aliquots at (cid:4) 20 (cid:3) C . 3 . Neural dissection solution ( NDS ) : 10 mM no calcium , no magnesium , no phenol red , Hank’s balanced salt solution , 48 Jae Youn Shim et al . ( HBSS ) , 19 mM HEPES . Mix 5 mL of 10 (cid:2) HBSS and 0 . 5 mL of 1 M HEPES in 44 . 5 mL water in a 50 mL conical tube and keep on ice . The brain is soaked in NDS for hippocampus dissection . 4 . Plating medium ( PM ) : 10 % Fetal bovine serum ( FBS , certiﬁed , heat inactivated , US origin ) , 1 (cid:2) GlutaMAX supplement , 0 . 1 mg / mL Primocin , Neurobasal - A medium . Mix 2 mL of FBS , 200 μ L of GlutaMAX and 40 μ L of 50 mg / nL Primocin in 17 . 8 mL of Neurobasal - A medium in a 50 mL conical tube . Pre - warm in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath at least 15 minutes before neuron culture . Store at 4 (cid:3) C . 5 . B27 medium : 1 (cid:2) B27 supplement , 1 (cid:2) GlutaMAX supple - ment , 0 . 1 mg / mL Primocin , Neurobasal - A medium . Mix 800 μ L of 50 (cid:2) B27 , 400 μ L of GlutaMAX , and 80 μ L of 50 mg / nL primocin in 38 . 7 mL of Neurobasal - A medium in a 60 mL cell culture ﬂask . Before use , store in the incubator for at least 1 h for equilibration . 6 . 1 (cid:2) Trypsin , no phenol red . 7 . Syringe ﬁlter ( 0 . 46 μ m pore , 33 mm diameter ) . 8 . Cell strainer ( 40 μ m pore ) . 9 . 50 mL and 15 mL conical tubes . 10 . 60 mL cell culture ﬂask ( T25 ﬂask / ﬁlter / nontreated ) . 11 . 35 mm glass - bottom dish ( 0 . 17 μ m cover - glass thickness ) . 12 . 60 mm petri dish . 13 . Incubator ( 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 ) . 14 . Dissection tools : dissection stereoscope , curved forceps , two stainless - steel forceps ( ﬁne tip , straight ) , scissors , a spatula , a scalpel blade ( No . 10 ) , hemocytometer , a transfer pipette . 2 . 2 Transfection 2 . 2 . 1 Transient Transfection Staining all the cells in a dish makes it difﬁcult to distinguish the morphology of a neuron . By expressing ﬂuorescent proteins in only a few neurons , we can accurately detect the morphologies of neur - ites and follow single mRNA particles moving inside the complex neuronal arbors . In this section , we describe a transient transfection method to express ﬂuorescent proteins in neurons . 1 . Lipofectamine 2000 reagent . 2 . Opti - MEM . 3 . DNA ( 0 . 5 – 5 μ g / L ) . 4 . Neurons within 12 days in vitro ( DIV ) . 2 . 2 . 2 AAV ( Adeno - Associated Virus ) Transfection The length of DNA sequence that can be delivered by AAV infec - tion is limited to 4 . 7 kb between the two inverted terminal repeats ( ITRs ) . The time required for expression differs depending on the Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 49 virus titer . With a high titer AAV , approximately 1 – 2 days are required for expression in the infected cells . AAV - 293 cells are human embryonic kidney 293 ( HEK - 293 ) cells that have been improved to produce AAV ( see Note 1 ) . The expected titer is approximately 10 7 virus particles / mL . 1 . DMEM growth medium without penicillin / streptomycin ( P / S ) : DMEM ( high glucose , pyruvate ) , 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS , certiﬁed , heat inactivated , US origin ) , 1 (cid:2) Gluta - MAX supplement . Mix 44 . 5 mL of DMEM , 5 mL FBS and 0 . 5 mL GlutaMAX to compose DMEM + + growth medium . 2 . 2 (cid:2) HBS : 280 mM NaCl , 1 . 5 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 50 mM HEPES . Fill a 50 mL conical tube with approximately 44 mL water and add 2 . 8 mL of 5 M NaCl , 0 . 5 mL of 150 mM of Na 2 HPO 4 , and 2 . 5 mL of 1 M HEPES . Adjust the pH to 7 . 1 with NaOH ( see Note 2 ) . 3 . Three plasmids : pAAV - pHelper , pAAV - 2 / 1 serotype ( pAAV - RC ) , pAAV - target gene . 4 . AAV - 293 cells . 5 . 0 . 05 % trypsin – EDTA . 6 . 0 . 3 M CaCl 2 . 7 . Dry ice - ethanol bath . 8 . 50 mL centrifuge tube . 9 . 10 % bleach ( see Note 3 ) 2 . 2 . 3 Lentiviral Transfection Lentiviral vectors can be used to transfer DNA up to 10 kb although lentiviral cDNA integration into the host DNA causes a higher mutation rate risk than AAV . This protocol uses the third generation lentiviral vectors . The plasmids needed to make the third generation lentiviral vectors can be obtained from Addgene ( https : / / www . addgene . org / ) . 1 . DMEM growth medium ( high glucose , pyruvate ) with P / S : DMEM ( high glucose , pyruvate ) , 10 % Fetal bovine serum ( FBS , certiﬁed , heat inactivated , US origin ) , 1 (cid:2) GlutaMAX supplement , 1 (cid:2) Penicillin - streptomycin . Mix 44 mL of DMEM , 5 mL of FBS , 0 . 5 mL of GlutaMAX and 0 . 5 mL of P / S . 2 . DMEM growth medium without P / S . 3 . 2 (cid:2) HBS . 4 . Four plasmids : pCMV - VSV - G ( Addgene : # 8454 ) , pMDLg / pRRE ( Addgene : # 12251 ) , pRSV - Rev ( Addgene : # 12253 ) , lentiviral vector plasmid . 5 . 293T cells . 6 . 0 . 05 % trypsin – EDTA . 50 Jae Youn Shim et al . 7 . 0 . 3 M CaCl 2 . 8 . 10 % bleach ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . 3 Single mRNA Imaging MS2 - labeled mRNA can be observed by a confocal or a wideﬁeld microscope . For live cell imaging , imaging media should be trans - parent and maintained at 37 (cid:3) C with a stable pH at 7 . 4 ( see Note 4 ) . We usually image live neurons within imaging media called HEPES - buffered saline ( HBS ) in a 37 (cid:3) C chamber on a wideﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscope equipped with an electron - multiplying charged coupled device ( EMCCD ) . 1 . HEPES - buffered saline ( HBS ) : 119 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 30 mM D - glucose , 50 mM HEPES . To make 50 mL HBS , add 1 . 19 mL of 5 M NaCl , 0 . 25 mL of 1 M KCl , 0 . 1 mL of 1 M CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 mL of 1 M MgCl 2 , 0 . 27 g of D - glucose and 1 mL of 1 M HEPES to 44 mL of deionized water . Adjust the pH to 7 . 4 with NaOH . Store at 4 (cid:3) C for 1 – 2 weeks . 2 . Microscopy equipment : An inverted microscope ( Olympus , IX73 or IX83 ) equipped with a 150 (cid:2) objective lens ( Olympus , UAPON 150 (cid:2) TIRF ) and an EMCCD camera ( Andor , iXon Life ) can be used to detect single mRNA . An LED light source ( Lumencor , SOLA light engine ) , a GFP ﬁlter cube ( Chroma , 49020 ) , and a temperature - controlled chamber are also needed for live cell imaging . The microscope system can be controlled using free software , Micro - Manager , which is available at https : / / micro - manager . org / . 3 Methods 3 . 1 PDL Coating The PDL coating , which forms an electrostatic interaction between the cell membranes and surface of the plate , allows neurons to stick and grow in vitro . For imaging , culture on a 0 . 17 mm thick optical - quality glass - bottom dish is required . 1 . Dilute 1 mL of 10 (cid:2) PDL solution in 9 mL water . 2 . Filter the solution through a 0 . 46 μ m pore syringe ﬁlter . 3 . Add 200 μ L diluted and ﬁltered PDL solution in the dented portion of a glass - bottom dish . 4 . Incubate overnight at 37 (cid:3) C . If you incubate the dish over 1 day , add an additional 100 μ L of PDL so that the PDL does not dry out . 5 . On the day of hippocampus dissection , remove the dish from the incubator and wash three times to remove PDL . Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 51 6 . Let the dishes dry at room temperature before seeding the neurons . Steps 5 and 6 can be conducted while waiting for the incubation of trypsin in the seeding step . 3 . 2 Dissection 1 – 2 day - old pups can be used for primary neuron culture . A quick progression through all steps is required to prevent neuron exhaus - tion as neurons are more susceptible than other cell types . Approxi - mately four pups will yield 20 glass - bottom dishes at a concentration of 400 , 000 cells / mL . 1 . Put Kimwipes inside a beaker and ﬁll with 70 % ethanol . Place sterilized dissection tools inside the beaker . Kimwipes prevent sharp dissection tools from becoming damaged . 2 . Fill a 60 mm petri dish with ice . 3 . Prepare a 15 mL conical tube ﬁlled with 5 mL of NDS and place in an ice bucket . 4 . On the stereoscope , place a 60 mm petri dish with NDS on an iced 60 mm petri dish to keep NDS cool during dissection . 5 . Decapitate a pup , keeping the head only . 6 . Hold the nose with curved forceps . With a blade , make a T - shaped cut in the skin and skull between the eyes . Peel off the cut skin and skull with sharp forceps . Carefully scoop out the brain with a spatula . Place the brain in the 60 mm petri dish containing NDS . 7 . Brain dissection : With a blade , make a T - shaped cut in the brain to remove the hindbrain and separate the two hemispheres . 8 . On one hemisphere , separate the midbrain and cerebral cortex and remove the midbrain . 9 . Carefully remove the blood vessels and meninges from the surface of the hemisphere . 10 . Find the hippocampus at the inner edge of the hemisphere and separate it from the cerebral cortex using two sharp forceps . 11 . Collect the dissected hippocampus with a transfer pipette and put it in a 15 mL conical tube ﬁlled with 5 mL of NDS . 12 . Dissect and collect the hippocampus in the other hemisphere . 13 . Repeat dissection steps 7 – 12 for all pups . ( If you become proﬁcient at hippocampus dissection , decapitate two mice at once . ) 3 . 3 Seeding 1 . Pre - warm the PM in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath . 2 . Bring the 15 mL conical tube containing the hippocampus and 5 mL NDS into the clean bench . Carefully aspirate the NDS , leaving the hippocampus untouched , until 2 mL of NDS is left . 52 Jae Youn Shim et al . 3 . Add 200 μ L of 2 . 5 % trypsin ( 10 (cid:2) ) and incubate in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath for 15 min . 4 . During the 15 min , remove the glass - bottom dishes coated with PDL from the incubator and wash out PDL with water three times in the clean bench . Let the dishes dry at room temperature before seeding the neurons . 5 . After 15 min , transfer the 15 mL tube from the water bath to the clean bench after wiping the tube surface with ethanol . 6 . Remove trypsin carefully and rinse once more with 2 mL of fresh PM without crushing the hippocampus . 7 . Add 3 mL of PM . The FBS in PM stops trypsin activity . Dissect the hippocampus ( at the tissue level ) with a 1000 μ L pipette 20 – 30 times to triturate it to the cellular level . 8 . Filter 3 mL of PM solution with digested cells using a cell strainer to remove undigested tissues . 9 . Measure the cell density using a hemocytometer ( 10 μ L of PM solution is used for cell counting ) . If the cell density is high , you can dilute the density to 300 , 000 – 400 , 000 cells / mL . 10 . Seed 200 μ L of PM with neurons in the dented portion ( glass part ) of a PDL - coated glass - bottom dish . Store in an incubator ( 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 ) for 2 – 4 h until the cells stick to the glass bottom . 11 . Prepare equilibrated B27 medium . 12 . After 2 – 4 h , carefully add 2 mL of equilibrated B27 to each glass - bottom dish . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 in the incubator until used for the experiment ( see Note 5 ) . 3 . 4 Culture in a Microﬂuidic Device Depending on the subject of study , axons may need to be distin - guished from the dendrites of neurons . One way to separate axons is to use microﬂuidic devices with long thin channels . The experi - menter can make the microﬂuidic device using polydimethylsilox - ane ( PDMS ) soft - lithography . Otherwise , this device can be purchased from a company ( XC450 , Xona ) . If the microﬂuidic device has been purchased , begin with step 7 . 1 . Mix the prepolymer mixture of the Sylgard 184 silicone elasto - mer base ( Dow Corning ) and Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer curing agent at a 9 : 1 weight ratio . Mixing with a hand mixer is recommended . 2 . Pour the mixture into the lithographic mold . 3 . Place the mold in the vacuum chamber and vacuum up to 0 . 8 bar or 0 . 08 MPa . 4 . You will see air bubbles rise . Wait 15 min . Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 53 5 . Use a blower to remove the remaining bubbles and leave on a 90 (cid:3) C heating plate for 20 – 25 min . 6 . If the PDMS is hardened , cut the PDMS into pieces using a razor . 7 . Clean a cover glass ( sized 22 mm (cid:2) 60 mm , 0 . 17 mm thick - ness ) in a plasma cleaner . 8 . Attach a PDMS piece onto the cover glass . 9 . Put 100 μ L of 10 mg / mL PDL in two reservoirs . Make sure the PDL ﬂows into the remaining reservoirs . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C for 2 h or more . 10 . Wash three times by pouring water into the two reservoirs containing the PDL . Fill the reservoirs with media and wait longer than 3 h . 11 . After cell dissociation , bring the concentration of the cells to 6 , 000 , 000 cell / mL ( * important ) . If the concentration is low , centrifuge carefully at 90 (cid:2) g for 10 min . 12 . Seed 20 μ L of cells into the reservoir of the microﬂuidic device . It is important to seed the cells directly in front of the channel . 13 . Four hours after plating , carefully add 200 μ L of B27 medium into all reservoirs . 14 . Two to three days later , one can see that axons have grown through the channels . Change the B27 medium every 3 days . 3 . 5 Transient Transfection The amount of all materials is for one glass - bottom dish . All pro - cedures are conducted in the clean bench . 1 . Add 0 . 5 μ L of Lipofectamine in 50 μ L of Opti - MEM . Mix gently . 2 . Add 1 μ g of DNA reagent in 50 μ L of Opti - MEM and vortex . 3 . Add DNA diluted with Opti - MEM to Lipofectamine diluted with Opti - MEM . Mix by pipetting up and down . 4 . Incubate for 5 min at room temperature . 5 . Take a glass - bottom dish with neurons from the incubator and leave 1 mL of B27 growth medium per well . 6 . Add 100 μ L of the DNA and Lipofectamine solution mixture to a dish with neurons in a dropwise manner . 7 . Store in the incubator at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 for 2 – 4 h . 8 . Wash a dish with 1 mL of fresh B27 ( equilibrated for 1 h ) twice . 9 . Add 2 mL of new B27 and store in the incubator overnight . 10 . Visualize the transfected neurons . The transfected cells can be detected for 1 – 3 days . 54 Jae Youn Shim et al . 3 . 6 AAV Transfection Protocol overview : AAV 293 cell thawing—cell growing for 2 days—ﬁrst passage ( to increase the number of cells ) —cell grow - ing for 2 days—second passage—cell incubation for 48 h ( before transfection ) —transfection—cell incubation for 6 h ( after transfec - tion ) —medium replacement—cell incubation for 6 h ( before virus collection ) —AAV collection . 3 . 6 . 1 AAV - 293 Cell Seeding 1 . Fill a 15 mL conical tube with 10 mL of DMEM growth medium . 2 . Thaw a cryovial with frozen AAV - 293 cells in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath for a few minutes . 3 . Transfer the cells to 10 mL of DMEM growth medium . 4 . Centrifuge at 200 (cid:2) g for 3 min . Check that a cell pellet is at the bottom of the 15 mL conical tube and remove DMEM growth medium . 5 . Resuspend cells with 5 mL of fresh and pre - warmed DMEM growth medium . 6 . Fill a 100 mm cell culture dish with 5 mL of DMEM growth medium and 5 mL of the resuspended cells . Mix gently and store in the incubator . 7 . After 1 – 2 days , if the cell concentration is approximately 50 % , a cell passage is required . 3 . 6 . 2 AAV - 293 Cell Culture 1 . Pre - warm 50 mL of DMEM growth medium and 5 mL trypsin in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath for 10 min . 2 . Aspirate all DMEM growth medium in 100 mm cell culture dishes . 3 . Add 5 mL of trypsin and incubate at 37 (cid:3) C for 1 – 2 min . 4 . Add 5 mL of DMEM growth media to inactivate trypsin . 5 . Resuspend the cells by pipetting up and down gently 20 – 30 times . 6 . Put 1 mL of DMEM with cells and 9 mL of DMEM media in a new 100 mm cell culture dish , making 3 – 5 dishes to increase the total number of AAV - 293 cells . 7 . After 2 days , repeat steps 3 – 5 . 8 . Seed the cells in 100 mm cell culture dishes with 2 (cid:2) 10 6 , 3 (cid:2) 10 6 , and 4 (cid:2) 10 6 concentrations . ( If you want to make a control , you can seed cells in other dishes at each concentra - tion . ) This step occurs 2 days before transfection . 3 . 6 . 3 AAV Plasmid Transfection 1 . Thaw the three plasmids from a (cid:4) 20 (cid:3) C freezer . 2 . After 48 h of AAV plasmid transfection , check which dishes of those cultured with 2 (cid:2) 10 6 , 3 (cid:2) 10 6 , and 4 (cid:2) 10 6 cells have 70 – 80 % cell conﬂuency . Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 55 3 . Choose a dish with 70 – 80 % cell conﬂuency . 4 . Mix 10 μ g of each of the three plasmids and 1 mL of 0 . 3 M CaCl 2 gently in a 15 mL conical tube . 5 . Fill a new 15 mL conical tube with 1 mL of 2 (cid:2) HBS and add the total volume of the three plasmids and the 0 . 3 M CaCl 2 mixture in a dropwise manner . 6 . Gently add the mixture of the three plasmids , 0 . 3 M CaCl 2 and 2 (cid:2) HBS to a cell culture dish with 70 – 80 % cell conﬂuency in a dropwise manner . ( Transfection fails if all of the cells come off from the bottom of the dish . ) 7 . Place cells in the 37 (cid:3) C cell incubator for 6 h . 8 . Remove the DMEM growth medium and replace with 10 mL of fresh pre - warmed DMEM growth medium . 9 . Place cells in the 37 (cid:3) C cell incubator for 66 – 72 h . 10 . After 66 – 72 h , scrape the cells in the dish . Collect the DMEM media and cells in a 15 mL conical tube . Because the solution contains viruses , always immerse all the materials such as tips and pipettes that come in contact with the virus solution in 10 % bleach . 11 . Fill a bucket with 70 – 100 % ethanol and dry ice in an amount sufﬁcient to contain all 15 mL tubes . 12 . Pre - warm a 37 (cid:3) C water bath . 13 . Place a 15 mL conical tube in the ethanol – dry ice bucket for 10 min before transferring it to the 37 (cid:3) C water bath for 10 min . Repeat this step four times . The rapid freeze – thaw cycles help the virus inside the cell come out into the external solution . 14 . Centrifuge at 10 , 000 (cid:2) g at room temperature for 10 min . 15 . Collect only the virus solution on top of the submerged cells . Store 500 μ L aliquots in cryovials in a (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C deep freezer . 3 . 6 . 4 AAV Infection 1 . Thaw a cryovial and put 445 , 50 , and 5 μ L of virus in three 35 mm cell culture plates to optimize the virus concentration ( usually , 50 μ L of the virus is the optimal volume ) . 2 . Incubate the cells in a 37 (cid:3) C incubator for at least 1 – 2 days and check the cell conditions and expression . 3 . 7 Lentiviral Transfection As in the AAV protocol , everything that touches the lentiviral vector must be inactivated by 10 % bleach . The time required for virus production takes approximately 3 days from cell seeding . 3 . 7 . 1 293T Cell Seeding 1 . Prepare 293T cells that have undergone at least one passage since thawing . 2 . Aspirate the medium and add 1 mL of trypsin – EDTA . 56 Jae Youn Shim et al . 3 . Incubate the cells at 37 (cid:3) C for 1 min . When the cells are detached from the bottom of the dish , put them in a 15 mL tube and add DMEM growth medium . 4 . Seed 4 , 500 , 000 cells in a 10 cm tissue culture dish . Low - passage cells are recommended . 5 . After 24 h , replace the medium with fresh DMEM growth medium . 3 . 7 . 2 Lentiviral Plasmid Transfection 1 . Mix pCMV - VSV - G ( 3 . 5 μ g ) , pMDLg / pRRE ( 5 μ g ) , pRSV - Rev ( 2 . 5 μ g ) and the vector ( 10 – 15 μ g ) . 2 . Add 500 μ L of CaCl 2 and mix gently . 3 . Wait for 5 min and add 500 μ L of 2 (cid:2) HBS dropwise . 4 . Immediately apply the mixture to the cells . 5 . Incubate the cells for 12 h and replace the medium with low P / S DMEM growth medium . 3 . 7 . 3 Lentivirus Collection 1 . After 36 h , collect the medium into a 15 mL tube . 2 . Filter the medium with 0 . 22 μ m syringe ﬁlter . 3 . Apply the virus solution to the cells . 4 . Keep the rest of the solution at (cid:4) 80 (cid:3) C . However , once the solution is frozen , virus efﬁciency is reduced to 10 % . 3 . 8 Imaging mRNA in Neurons 1 . Remove the cells from the incubator and carefully change the media to pre - warmed imaging media ( see Note 4 ) . 2 . Before mounting the dish on the microscope , apply approxi - mately 50 μ L of objective oil on the objective lens . Mount the dish and pull the objective lens up until the oil touches the bottom of the dish . 3 . Using bright - ﬁeld illumination , adjust the focus carefully . Be careful that the lens does not touch the dish . 4 . Once you ﬁnd the focus , turn off all lights in the microscope room and start the ﬂuorescence imaging by running the Micro - Manager program . 5 . Find the appropriate imaging condition that can observe the mRNA without causing severe photobleaching . The image will appear as shown in the ﬁgure below ( Fig . 1a ) . 6 . You can save the image in a “ . tif” format in the Micro - Manager program . The image ﬁle can be opened in the ImageJ program ( available at https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . 7 . You can generate a kymograph to follow the trajectory of mRNA ( Fig . 1b ) . The vertical axis represents time , and the horizontal axis represents distance . The kymograph can be generated in ImageJ . First crop the region of interest ( crop as in the orange box in Fig . 1a ) . After cropping , reslice the time Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 57 stack ( Image menu » Stacks » Reslice ) . Then , create a maxi - mum projection of the resliced image ( Image menu » Stacks » Z Project » Projection type : Max intensity ) . 3 . 9 mRNA Tracking After observing the mRNAs , tracking is required to quantify the characteristics of RNA such as intracellular localization , speed and diffusivity [ 13 – 15 ] . In cells cultured from MCP (cid:2) MBS mice , a single β - actin mRNA is labeled with about 26 MCP - GFPs on average [ 16 ] . Although the imaging conditions vary depending on the time scale to be observed , mRNAs in neurons are usually observed with a signal to noise ratio ( SNR ) less than 4 using our microscopy set up . Therefore , it is difﬁcult to track mRNA in neurons using automatic tracking programs . We developed a track - ing program called HybTrack that combines automatic and manual tracking methods [ 17 ] . HybTrack in MATLAB script , GUI and compiled versions are available at https : / / github . com / bhlee1117 / HybTrack . Installation and instruction are shown in the supple - mentary note of the paper [ 17 ] . Here , we brieﬂy introduce the tracking process using the compiled version of HybTrack . 1 . Download the compiled version of HybTrack at GitHub . 2 . The compiled version of HybTrack does not require full MATLAB . However , to run the compiled version , the user may need to install MATLAB Runtime available at https : / / www . mathworks . com / products / compiler / matlab - runtime . html . 3 . Run HybTrack . exe . 4 . Load a time - lapse image by clicking the Image select button . Fig . 1 ( a ) mRNA image taken with an epiﬂuorescence microscope . The bright particles are β - actin mRNA labeled using the MS2 system . The inset shows mRNAs localized in the dendrite . ( b ) Cropped image of the orange box in ( a ) and its kymograph 58 Jae Youn Shim et al . 5 . Next , you need to enter # Particle , Scan row , Scan col , Win - dow size , Threshold , ﬁtting method , and two - particle overlap method . All parameters must have integer values . # Particle : number of particles to track . Scan row and col : This parameter deﬁnes the scanning region and usually has a value of 5 . The value should be increased if the particle moves away from the scanning region . Window size : This parameter is proportional to the lateral width of the point - spread function ( PSF ) . For example , we are imaging a diffraction limited spot of GFP - labeled mRNA with a 1 . 45 NA objective lens and a camera that has a 107 nm pixel size . The full - width half - maximum ( FWHM ) of the PSF in our condition is approximately 176 nm . Therefore , we set 3 (cid:2) 3 pixel - sized window to quantify the signal from the diffraction limited spot . Then , the window size should be 9 ( 3 (cid:2) 3 ) . Threshold : This parameter determines the frequency of manual selection . If the threshold is high , the frequency of manual selection is lower but the tracking result could be inaccurate . Fitting method : HybTrack provides Gaussian and centroid ﬁtting . We recommend Gaussian ﬁtting . Two - particle overlap method : HybTrack provides a “Linear motion” option and “Manual selection” option for an over - lapping event . The linear motion option predicts the particle position based on the velocity of the particle . However , “Linear motion” only works when the particle velocity is constant . In other cases , manual selection is recommended . 6 . Set the output path by clicking the “Output Path” button . 7 . Start tracking by clicking the “Tracking” button . 8 . If a pop - up window appears , you need to click the ﬁrst position of the particle . 9 . Then , the program automatically tracks the particle . If the program loses the particle , a pop - up window will appear and let you manually select the particle position . 10 . When the tracking is complete , enter the range of image frames to be saved and press the “Save” button . 11 . You can check the tracking results in the output path . The results are shown in three columns , denoting the x position , y position , and amplitude , respectively . 4 Notes 1 . Maintenance of AAV - 293 cells at over 50 % conﬂuence can cause a low titer of the virus . For higher virus titers , transfec - tion of AAV - 293 cells with low - passage numbers is recommended . Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 59 2 . Store HBS and 2 (cid:2) HBS at 4 (cid:3) C for 1 – 2 weeks . Outdated HBS can cause a failure of viral plasmid transfection . 3 . All materials that come in contact with the virus should be immersed in 10 % bleach for virus inactivation . Store the 10 % bleach with materials in the chemical hood for 3 – 7 days and discard it . 4 . Two milliliters of B27 medium without phenol red or HBS can be used as the imaging solution . With B27 medium , CO 2 supply during image acquisition is necessary . When using HBS , CO 2 is not needed . However , HBS is not appropriate for long - term imaging because of its phototoxicity ( no signiﬁcant problems observed up to approximately 6 h ) . 5 . Neurons in vitro can be viable for a maximum of 30 days in an incubator . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Creative - Pioneering Researchers Program through Seoul National University . References 1 . Bustin SA ( 2000 ) Absolute quantiﬁcation of mRNA using real - time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction assays . J Mol Endo - crinol 25 ( 2 ) : 169 – 193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1677 / jme . 0 . 0250169 2 . Alwine JC , Kemp DJ , Stark GR ( 1977 ) Method for detection of speciﬁc RNAs in aga - rose gels by transfer to diazobenzyloxymethyl - paper and hybridization with DNA probes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74 ( 12 ) : 5350 – 5354 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 74 . 12 . 5350 3 . Femino A , Fay FS , Fogarty K , Singer RH ( 1998 ) Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 ( 5363 ) : 585 – 590 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 280 . 5363 . 585 4 . Raj A , van den Bogaard P , Rifkin SA , van Oudenaarden A , Tyagi S ( 2008 ) Imaging indi - vidual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat Methods 5 ( 10 ) : 877 – 879 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1253 5 . Moon HC , Lee BH , Lim K , Son JS , Song MS , Park HY ( 2016 ) Tracking single mRNA mole - cules in live cells . J Phys D Appl Phys 49 ( 23 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0022 - 3727 / 49 / 23 / 233001 6 . Kim SH , Vieira M , Shim JY , Choi H , Park HY ( 2018 ) Recent progress in single - molecule studies of mRNA localization in vivo . RNA Biol : 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15476286 . 2018 . 1536592 7 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M , Shenoy SM , Singer RH , Long RM ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol Cell 2 ( 4 ) : 437 – 445 8 . Chao JA , Patskovsky Y , Almo SC , Singer RH ( 2008 ) Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA - protein complex . Nat Struct Mol Biol 15 ( 1 ) : 103 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb1327 9 . Lionnet T , Czaplinski K , Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , Wells AL , Chao JA , Park HY , de Turris V , Lopez - Jones M , Singer RH ( 2011 ) A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat Methods 8 ( 2 ) : 165 – 170 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / Nmeth . 1551 10 . Park HY , Lim H , Yoon YJ , Follenzi A , Nwokafor C , Lopez - Jones M , Meng X , Singer RH ( 2014 ) Visualization of dynamics of single endogenous mRNA labeled in live mouse . Sci - ence 343 ( 6169 ) : 422 – 424 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1239200 11 . Das S , Moon HC , Singer RH , Park HY ( 2018 ) A transgenic mouse for imaging activity - dependent dynamics of endogenous Arc mRNA in live neurons . Sci Adv 4 ( 6 ) : 60 Jae Youn Shim et al . eaar3448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aar3448 12 . Ploski JE , Pierre VJ , Smucny J , Park K , Monsey MS , Overeem KA , Schafe GE ( 2008 ) The activity - regulated cytoskeletal - associated pro - tein ( Arc / Arg3 . 1 ) is required for memory con - solidation of pavlovian fear conditioning in the lateral amygdala . J Neurosci 28 ( 47 ) : 12383 – 12395 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 / Jneurosci . 1662 - 08 . 2008 13 . Park HY , Buxbaum AR , Singer RH ( 2010 ) Single mRNA tracking in live cells . Method Enzymol 472 : 387 – 406 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 10 ) 72003 - 6 14 . Park HY , Trcek T , Wells AL , Chao JA , Singer RH ( 2012 ) An unbiased analysis method to quantify mRNA localization reveals its correla - tion with cell motility . Cell Rep 1 ( 2 ) : 179 – 184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2011 . 12 . 009 15 . Song MS , Moon HC , Jeon JH , Park HY ( 2018 ) Neuronal messenger ribonucleoprotein transport follows an aging Le´vy walk . Nat Commun 9 ( 1 ) : 344 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 02700 - z 16 . Wu B , Chao JA , Singer RH ( 2012 ) Fluores - cence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy enables quanti - tative imaging of single mRNAs in living cells . Biophys J 102 ( 12 ) : 2936 – 2944 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 05 . 017 17 . Lee BH , Park HY ( 2018 ) HybTrack : A hybrid single particle tracking software using manual and automatic detection of dim signals . Sci Rep 8 ( 1 ) : 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 18569 - 3 Visualizing Single mRNAs in Live Neurons 61 Chapter 5 Lighting Up Gene Activation in Living Drosophila Embryos Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha Abstract With its rapid development , ease of collection , and the presence of a unique layer of nuclei located close to the surface , the Drosophila syncytial embryo is ideally suited to study the establishment of gene expression patterns during development . Recent improvements in RNA labeling technologies and confocal micros - copy allow for visualizing gene activation and quantifying transcriptional dynamics in living Drosophila embryos . Here we review the available tools for mRNA ﬂuorescent labeling and detection in live embryos and precisely describe the overall procedure , from design to mounting and confocal imaging . Key words Live imaging , Transcription , Embryo , Drosophila , mRNA , MS2 / MCP system 1 Introduction Progress in science depends on new techniques , new discoveries and new ideas , probably in that order —Sidney Brenner Two major recently developed technological breakthroughs , CRISPR / Cas9 gene editing and the deployment of fast imaging microscopy techniques have opened up new avenues for the study of gene expression during the development of multicellular organ - isms . Owing to decades of genetic manipulations , whole genome proﬁling and large scale in situ hybridization experiments , the Drosophila embryonic blastoderm embryo provides among the best - characterized gene expression patterns . However , the majority of these studies have been performed on dead embryos , ﬁxed at speciﬁc development stages , thus lacking the temporal aspects of transcription . By adapting the MS2 / MCP mRNA labeling system to the Drosophila embryo [ 1 , 2 ] , it is now possible to visualize transcrip - tional activation from endogenous loci ( or transgenes ) , with a high temporal resolution ( in the order of seconds ) , in an live developing embryo . Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 5 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 63 In this technical review , we precisely describe the protocol to image nascent mRNAs in living early Drosophila embryos , from the creation of transgenic ﬂies to image acquisition and analysis . 2 Materials In developing Drosophila embryos , transcription is usually moni - tored using a two - component tagging strategy : mRNAs containing multimerized tags and a ﬂuorescently labeled detector . By binding several ﬂuorescent detectors , mRNAs containing repeated tags will appear as diffraction - limited spots . Multiple tag / detector couples have been used in cell culture and yeast [ 13 – 16 ] but so far only the MS2 / MCP and PP7 / PCP systems , both adapted from bacterio - phages , have been implemented in Drosophila embryos [ 1 – 12 ] . 2 . 1 Tags Used in Drosophila Two types of vectors are engineered ; depending on whether the goal is to monitor transcription from a transgene or from an endogenous locus . To monitor nascent transcription from a transgene , an enhancer - promoter - reporter construct is inserted into an appropri - ate receiving plasmid for either targeted genomic or random inser - tion [ 17 , 18 ] . To monitor transcription from an endogenous locus , gene editing by CRISPR / Cas9 has become the tool of choice [ 4 , 11 , 12 ] . In addition to one or two guide RNAs containing plasmids , a donor plasmid with homology arms fused to MS2 or PP7 tags is generated and co - injected . A key consideration in the design strategy is the location of the tag : 5 0 UTR , introns or 3 0 UTR ( Fig . 1 ) . The three locations have pros and cons ( see Note 1 ) [ 19 ] . Another important choice is the number of repeats . Multimer - izing the tags signiﬁcantly enhances the signal but may potentially impeding RNA biogenesis ( see Note 2 ) . 1 . MS2 tag : the MS2 tag is the most popular system used to visualize transcriptional dynamics in real time . A typical strategy is to clone a 24X repeated sequence ( ~ 1 . 3 kb ) in the 5 0 UTR region of a reporter gene [ 1 , 5 – 11 ] ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . PP7 tag : PP7 repeats are often used as an orthogonal system , which when combined to MS2 , allows for the simultaneous tagging of two parts of an mRNA [ 9 ] or of two different mRNAs [ 10 ] . In Drosophila , 12X PP7 repeats have been successfully used to image mRNA in ovaries [ 20 ] but its detection in embryos is typi - cally achieved using 24X PP7 repeats [ 4 , 10 – 12 ] . 64 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha Importantly , increasing the length of the reporter gene will increase the signal persistence . In the example schematized in Fig . 1 , the coding sequence of the yellow gene ( not expressed during early ﬂy embryogenesis ) is used because it contains a 2 . 7 kb long intronic sequence , which has recently been further extended by inserting a 1 kb long sequence [ 10 ] . 2 . 2 Detectors MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) and PP7 coat protein ( PCP ) are the RNA - binding proteins that speciﬁcally recognize MS2 and PP7 Enhancer Promoter 5’UTR Exon1 Exon2 3’UTR Splicing Splicing Splicing Release Release Release Tag ( A ) A Tag ( B ) Tag ( C ) B C Pol II RNA binding protein - FP Intron DNA RNA Tag Fig . 1 Three possible locations for insertion of the stem loop repeats ( mRNA tag ) . Schematic representation of an enhancer - promoter - reporter construct with three possible locations of the tag : in the 5 0 UTR ( a ) , in an intron ( b ) and in the 3 0 UTR ( c ) . As exempliﬁed with multiple elongating RNA Pol II ( orange circles ) , the position of the tag ( purple box ) will inﬂuence the signal intensity and its persistence Lightening Up mRNA in Living Drosophila Embryos 65 loops contained in mRNA respectively . They can be fused to a variety of ﬂuorescent proteins listed in Table 1 [ 1 , 4 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 20 – 22 ] . Until 2013 , the MCP detector was found to generate aggre - gates , which appeared as bright nuclear spots even in the absence of MS2 containing mRNAs [ 23 ] . This artifact signiﬁcantly delayed the wide deployment of MS2 type of technologies for imaging tran - scription in living ﬂy embryos . Moreover , free unbound detector molecules always result in signiﬁcant background signal . These two important challenges were unraveled by playing with the localization of free diffusing ﬂuorescently - tagged MCP [ 13 ] and by tuning its expression level [ 24 ] . For example , Garcia et al . , [ 1 ] created an MCP - GFP plasmid without a nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) under the control of the nanos ( nos ) enhancer and promoter sequences . When expressed in a transgenic ﬂy , this MCP - GFP does not form aggregates in embryos and results in a low nuclear background signal . However , if the goal is to monitor cytoplasmic mRNAs , ﬂuorescently - tagged MCP must be trapped in the nucleus to allow a minimum amount of free cytoplasmic MCP using an NLS [ 20 ] . 2 . 3 Transgenic Fly Lines To image nascent mRNAs in living Drosophila blastoderm embryos , a minimum of three ﬂy stocks are typically required : 1 . A stock expressing the tagged gene of interest ( e . g . , MS2 - reporter ) . Table 1 Fluorescent MS2 and PP7 detectors in Drosophila Detector Reference hsp83 - MCP - GFP Forrest and Galvis ( 2003 ) [ 21 ] nos - MCP - GFP - NoNLS Garcia et al . ( 2013 ) [ 1 ] pNOS - NoNLS - MCP - mCherry Huang et al . ( 2017 ) [ 22 ] NLS - PCP - GFP Halstead et al . ( 2015 ) [ 20 ] NLS - MCP - RFP Halstead et al . ( 2015 ) [ 20 ] nos - SV40NLS - tdTomato - PCP Fukaya et al . ( 2016 ) [ 9 ] nos - SV40NLS - mCherry - PCP , His2AV - eBFP2 Lim et al . ( 2017 ) [ 11 ] nos - MCP - GFP , His2Av - mRFP Lim et al . ( 2018 ) [ 12 ] nos - NLS - PCP - ( mKate2 ) 3 Chen et al . ( 2018 ) [ 4 ] vas - NLS - MCP - ( mTagBFP2 ) 3 Chen et al . ( 2018 ) [ 4 ] 66 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha 2 . A stock containing the maternally expressed ﬂuorescent detec - tor ( e . g . , nos - MCP - GFP ) , necessarily deposited by the mother since the MCP needs to be present in the freshly laid embryos . 3 . Optional , but highly recommended , a transgene for nuclei detection , typically a ﬂuorescently tagged histone or nucleo - porin transgene ( e . g . , H2av - mRFP / eBFP2 ) [ 1 , 11 ] or ( e . g . , mRFP - Nup107 ) [ 2 , 25 ] . 2 . 4 Embryo Collection and Mounting 2 . 4 . 1 Embryo Collection 1 . Apple juice agar plates ( 35 mm ) . 2 . Small cages ( 35 mm ) . 3 . Active dry yeast . 4 . Paintbrush . 2 . 4 . 2 Mounting 1 . Breathable Biofoil ﬁlm . 2 . Heptane - glue . 3 . Double - sided tape . 4 . 10S Oil . 5 . Cover glass ( 20 (cid:2) 20 mm ) . 6 . Plastic embryo holder ( mounting slide ) . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Embryo Collection and Mounting 1 . Fly stocks and crosses : virgin females carrying a ﬂuorescently tagged MCP and a nuclear marker ( e . g . , nos - MCP - GFP , His2Av - mRFP ) are crossed with males carrying an integrated reporter - transgene of interest ( Enhancer > promoters > MS2 / PP7 stem loops > reporter gene ) or an endogenous locus edited with MS2 / PP7 repeats . Since ﬂuorescent detectors ( and nuclear marker ) are expressed from a maternal promoter , it is essential to perform the cross in this order . The cross is performed in a normal feeding tube ( Fig . 2a left ) , at least 1 day in advance , to allow fertilization of all females . The optimal temperature is between 21 (cid:3) C and 25 (cid:3) C but should be kept consistent between experiments [ 8 ] . 2 . To collect embryos , 1 day before the collection , transfer the cross into a collection cage ( Fig . 2a right ) covered with an apple juice agar plate containing fresh yeast . 3 . For embryo mounting , prepare a mounting slide with a breath - able Biofoil ﬁlm ( Fig . 2b ) . Identify the hydrophobic side of the ﬁlm , on which the embryo will be mounted . Note that the hydrophobic side of the membrane will resist to labeling with a permanent marker , while the hydrophilic side will be easily labeled . Mount the membrane into the membrane holder ( Fig . 2b ) . Lightening Up mRNA in Living Drosophila Embryos 67 With a Pasteur pipette , put a few drops of heptane - glue ( ~ 25 μ L , see Note 4 ) on the hydrophobic side of the mounting slide . While waiting for the heptane - glue to dry , proceed with the embryo manual dechorionation procedure . 4 . Embryo dechorionation is performed under a binocular mag - niﬁer ( Nikon SMZ745 ) 2 – 5X , preferentially under a nonheat - ing light source to avoid embryo dehydration . After the proper timing of egg - laying , replace the plate containing the freshly laid eggs with a new plate . Transfer several embryos gently with a paintbrush to a dechorionation slide , which consists of a microscope slide where a piece of double - sided tape has been attached . Fig . 2 Procedure for collecting and mounting Drosophila embryos for live imaging . ( a ) Collection tube ( left ) to set up the cross and collection cage ( right ) . ( b ) Image of a mounting slide and schematic representation of mounting set - up . ( c , d ) Images of a Drosophila embryo before ( c ) and after ( d ) manual dechorionation with double - sided tape 68 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha With another small piece of double - sided tape , roll the embryo on the tape to manually remove the chorion , ( this step must be performed rapidly to avoid embryo dehydration ) ( Fig . 2d ) . It is also possible to remove the chorion chemically with bleach . 5 . For mounting and orienting , transfer each dechorionated embryo immediately to the mounting slide ; place them on top of the heptane - glue surface ( which should be dry ) ( see Note 5 ) . Each embryo must be oriented according to the region of expression of interest ( see Note 6 ) . Proceed with the next embryo , trying to mount it in a line . Aligning and orienting the mounted embryos ( horizontally or vertically ) will facilitate setting up the positions on the microscope . Put a drop of 10S Oil on the surface of a coverslip ( ~ 80 μ L ) then invert the coverslip over the mounting slide to cover the embryos and carefully press the coverslip over the mounting slide to slightly ﬂatten embryos without moving them . 3 . 2 Imaging 1 . Imaging is performed using laser scanning confocal microscopy ( see Note 7 ) . The latest generation of confocal microscope allows for a signiﬁcant gain in temporal resolution . For exam - ple , with the Zeiss LSM 880 Fast AiryScan microscope , it is possible to image up to four times faster than a classical confo - cal while gaining a factor of 1 . 3 in resolution . We typically image a square region of 70 (cid:2) 70 μ m with 25 z - stacks spaced by 0 . 5 μ m , with a zoom of 3X ( Fig . 3a – d ) . This area corre - sponds to about 15 % of the whole embryo ( Fig . 3 ) . With the settings described , it is possible to reach a 4 s temporal resolu - tion per frame . 2 . We use a magniﬁcation of 40X . 3 . A lens with a 1 . 3 Numerical Aperture is used . The NA needs to be high enough to improve the spatial resolution . Indeed , the size of the ﬁnest detail that can be resolved is proportional to λ / 2NA . 4 . Excitation wavelength used is 488 nm for the green channel , but depends on the dye used ( here GFP ) and 561 nm for the red channel ( nuclei labeling ) . 5 . The excitation power of the 488 nm laser is maintained around 0 . 8 % and the 561 nm laser at 0 . 7 % . When the signal is strong ( for example with 5 0 tags ) , we recommend choosing a low laser power to avoid photobleaching , phototoxicity and signal satu - ration ( see Note 8 ) . 6 . Resolution : the pixel size is 120 nm . 7 . Detector Gain : master gain ¼ 850 ; digital gain ¼ 1 . 5 . The gain should be carefully ﬁxed ; if it is too high , the background will Lightening Up mRNA in Living Drosophila Embryos 69 be ampliﬁed . If modiﬁcations have to be made , ﬁrst lower the digital gain . 8 . At the end of each acquisition , it is important to locate the position of the imaging area with respect to the whole embryo . To this end , we recommend recording a tile scan of the embryo after gastrulation , centered on the imaged area , with typically ﬁve horizontal and three vertical tiles and a 10 % overlap . With this information , it is possible to extract precise anteroposterior and dorsoventral coordinates ( Fig . 3e ) . 3 . 3 Data Analysis 3 . 3 . 1 Nuclei Segmentation and Tracking In general , nuclei are automatically segmented using either DNA labeling ( Histone - RFP / Histone - BFP transgenes ) or nuclear enve - lope labeling ( Nup - RFP ) . While this segmentation can be automat - ically achieved in early interphases using several commercial software ( e . g . , Imaris ) or already developed routines ( e . g . , ImageJ plugins ) , it is more challenging when nuclear density becomes important in nc14 or during mitosis , when nuclei move and change Fig . 3 Live imaging of nascent mRNA in an early Drosophila embryo . Maximum intensity projected ( MIP ) image extracted from a typical movie showing the transcriptional foci in green ( MCP - GFP ) and the nuclei in red ( His2Av - mRFP ) . ( a ) Snapshot of a MIP Z - stack image at nuclear cycle ( nc ) nc13 . ( b ) Snapshot of a MIP Z - stack image at mitosis between nc13 and nc14 . ( c ) Snapshot of a MIP Z - stack image at mid nc14 . ( d ) Snapshot of a MIP Z - stack image at the end of nc14 when gastrulation occurs ( the ventral furrow is indicated with a dashed line ) . Gastrulation is used as a landmark to determine the dorsoventral ( D / V ) axis . ( e ) MIP Z - stack tile scan at the end of the nc14 ( ventral view ) . The typical area of acquisition is indicated in orange , while the blue lines indicate the various tiles ( A anterior , P posterior ) 70 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha their shape . Recently , we have developed a user - friendly open access software ( coded in Python ) named MitoTrack , able to automatically segment and track nuclei during mitosis [ 26 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 2D vs 3D Spot Segmentation Two types of quantitative analyses can be envisaged . If the objective is to record the timing of ﬁrst detection of the transcription site for each nucleus , spots segmentation can be performed in 2D . In this case , custom - made or commercial software will segment and track nuclei and transcription spots in maximum intensity projected images . However , if the aim is to quantify ﬂuctuations intensities of transcription spots to infer promoter dynamics , it is then essential to analyze the data involving all the z - planes in order to determine intensities of the spots in 3D [ 27 ] ( see Notes 8 and 9 ) . 4 Notes 1 . To monitor transcriptional dynamics , three different locations of tag insertion are possible : 5 0 UTR , introns and 3 0 UTR ( Fig . 2 ) . 5 0 UTR insertions maximize signal intensity , as ﬂuorescence will be produced by all elongating polymerases along the whole length of the transcribed locus . Fluorescence appearance will closely follow transcriptional initiation and will faithfully reﬂect the initiation of a burst . However , ﬂuorescence signal will vanish only after all elongating polymerases will reach the 3 0 end and be released . Thus , the signal will persist for some time , even if the promoter is in an inactive ( off ) state ( Fig . 2a ) . Moreover , 5 0 - tagging can perturb mRNA biogenesis . As an alternative to a 5 0 insertion , multimerized tags can be inserted into intronic sequences . If splicing is cotranscriptional , signal persistence will be rather short and intensity will depend on intron length . If splicing is post - transcriptional , signal per - sistence at the transcription site will depend on un - spliced mRNA retention . The main advantage of intronic tagging is its compatibility with endogenous key developmental genes targeting . Since the tag will be spliced , it is unlikely to perturb mRNA export and translation ( Fig . 2b ) . However , care should be taken not to perturb intronic enhancers and splicing donor and acceptor sites . Finally , 3 0 UTR tag insertions allow for a more accurate estimation of promoter activities . The main inconvenience of 3 0 UTR tagging is that tagged mRNAs signals are generally weak , as the ﬂuorescence has less time to accumulate ( Fig . 2c ) . This tagging strategy can perturb mRNA stability . Lightening Up mRNA in Living Drosophila Embryos 71 2 . Depending on the aims in terms of signal ampliﬁcation , differ - ent numbers of tag multimers can be used . In Drosophila embryos the current popular strategy is to insert a 24X tag repetition . This signal ampliﬁcation permits the visualization of transcriptional sites ( TS ) but is not able to reach single mole - cule sensitivity in the early Drosophila embryo . However recent improvements of the MS2 tag , with multimerization up to 128 repeats ( packed into a 3 kb sequence ) opens new oppor - tunities for single molecule visualization [ 28 ] . 3 . When constructing the tagged reporter , it is important to check that the multimerized tags ( MS2 or PP7 ) are devoid of transcription factor binding sites that operate during the embryonic stage and the spatial domain of interest . For exam - ple , it was recently reported that the initial version of the 24X MS2 repeats contained several binding sites for the transcrip - tion factor Zelda [ 3 ] . 4 . The surface of heptane glue on the hydrophobic side of the membrane must be even to correctly ﬂatten the embryos . It is essential not to use too much heptane - glue as it will create an uneven surface and will take longer to dry . 5 . When mounting the embryos , do not align more than 20 embryos . Otherwise they tend to dehydrate , which usually leads to embryonic lethality . 6 . Some confocal microscopes ( e . g . , LSM880 Fast Scan mode ) do not allow stage rotation , therefore , is important to correctly orient each embryo during the mounting step . 7 . In principle , imaging could be achieved with other technolo - gies than confocal microscopy . For example , imaging with a light sheet microscope certainly provides better illumination of the acquired area [ 30 ] , nevertheless , Drosophila embryo orien - tation remains difﬁcult . When imaging with a light sheet micro - scope , each embryo is mounted into an agarose block . Once mounted , the overall block can be rotated to correctly orient the embryo , however , the embryo itself cannot be moved directly . 8 . In order to perform quantitative analyses and compare various acquisitions , it is important to record the laser power after each acquisition with a power - meter ( ie : thorlab PM100A ) . Indeed , lasers always display intrinsic ﬂuctuations . 9 . With current labeling methods , single molecule detection has not yet been reached in living Drosophila embryos . Each tran - scriptional dot therefore contains several nascent mRNAs . In order to estimate the average number of ﬂuorescent signals corresponding to a single mRNA molecule , it is possible to calibrate the live data with information from single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) experiments 72 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha [ 29 ] . Given the intensity of a single molecule , extracted from smFISH experiments , one can estimate the average number of nascent mRNAs at the transcription site . With this information , it is possible to calibrate ﬂuorescent signals from live imaging data and infer the average ﬂuorescent signal corresponding to a unique molecule of tagged mRNA [ 1 ] . Acknowledgments We are very grateful to J . Dufourt for critical reading and insightful suggestions on the manuscript . We thank M . Bellec , M . Dejean , and A . Trullo for helpful discussions . We acknowledge the imaging facility MRI , member of the national infrastructure France - BioImaging supported by the French National Research Agency ( ANR - 10 - INBS - 04 , “Investments for the future” ) . The ERC Sync - Dev and HFSP - CDA grants supported this work . References 1 . Garcia HG , Tikhonov M , Lin A et al ( 2013 ) Quantitative imaging of transcription in living Drosophila embryos links polymerase activity to patterning . Curr Biol 23 : 2140 2 . Lucas T , Ferraro T , Roelens B et al ( 2013 ) Live imaging of Bicoid - dependent transcription in Drosophila embryos . Curr Biol 23 : 2135 3 . Lucas T , Tran H , Perez Romero CA et al ( 2018 ) 3 minutes to precisely measure mor - phogen concentration . PLoS Genet 14 : e1007676 4 . Chen H , Levo M , Barinov L et al ( 2018 ) Dynamic interplay between enhancer – promo - ter topology and gene activity . Nat Genet 50 : 1296 – 1303 5 . Bothma JP , Garcia HG , Esposito E et al ( 2014 ) Dynamic regulation of eve stripe 2 expression reveals transcriptional bursts in living Drosoph - ila embryos . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 : 10598 6 . Esposito E , Lim B , Guessous G et al ( 2016 ) Mitosis - associated repression in development . Genes Dev 30 ( 13 ) : 1503 – 1508 7 . Ferraro T , Esposito E , Mancini L et al ( 2016 ) Transcriptional memory in the Drosophila embryo . Curr Biol 26 : 212 – 218 8 . Dufourt J , Trullo A , Hunter J et al ( 2018 ) Temporal control of gene expression by the pioneer factor Zelda through transient interac - tions in hubs . Nat Commun 9 : 5194 9 . Fukaya T , Lim B , Levine M ( 2017 ) Rapid rates of pol II elongation in the Drosophila embryo . Curr Biol 27 : 1387 – 1391 10 . Fukaya T , Lim B , Levine M ( 2016 ) Enhancer control of transcriptional bursting . Cell 166 : 358 11 . Lim B , Heist T , Levine M et al ( 2018 ) Visuali - zation of transvection in living Drosophila embryos . Mol Cell 70 : 287 – 296 . e6 12 . Lim B , Fukaya T , Heist T et al ( 2018 ) Tempo - ral dynamics of pair - rule stripes in living Dro - sophila embryos . Proc Natl Acad Sci 115 ( 33 ) : 10430 13 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M et al ( 2017 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol Cell 2 : 437 – 445 14 . Larson DR , Zenklusen D , Wu B et al ( 2011 ) Real - time observation of transcription initia - tion and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 : 475 – 478 15 . Urbanek MO , Galka - marciniak P , Olejniczak M et al ( 2014 ) RNA imaging in living cells methods and applications . RNA Biol 11 ( 8 ) : 1083 – 1095 16 . Pichon X , Lagha M , Mueller F et al ( 2018 ) A growing toolbox to image gene expression in single cells : sensitive approaches for demanding challenges . Mol Cell 71 ( 3 ) : 468 – 480 17 . Groth AC , Fish M , Nusse R , Calos MP ( 2004 ) Construction of transgenic Drosophila by using the site - speciﬁc integrase from phage φ C31 . Genetics 166 : 1775 – 1782 18 . Ren X , Sun J , Housden BE et al ( 2013 ) Opti - mized gene editing technology for Drosophila melanogaster using germ line - speciﬁc Cas9 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 : 19012 Lightening Up mRNA in Living Drosophila Embryos 73 19 . Ferraro T , Lucas T , Cle´mot M et al ( 2016 ) New methods to image transcription in living ﬂy embryos : the insights so far , and the pro - spects . Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 5 ( 3 ) : 296 – 310 20 . Halstead JM , Lionnet T , Wilbertz JH et al ( 2015 ) Translation . An RNA biosensor for imaging the ﬁrst round of translation from sin - gle cells to living animals . Science 347 : 1367 – 1671 21 . Forrest K , Gavis E ( 2003 ) Live imaging of endogenous RNA reveals a diffusion and entrapment mechanism for nanos mRNA local - ization in Drosophila . Curr Biol 13 : 1159 – 1168 22 . Huang A , Amourda C , Zhang S et al ( 2017 ) Decoding temporal interpretation of the mor - phogen bicoid in the early drosophila embryo . elife 6 : 1 – 21 23 . Weil TT , Parton RM , Davis I ( 2010 ) Making the message clear : visualizing mRNA localiza - tion . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 380 – 390 24 . Fusco D , Accornero N , Lavoie B et al ( 2003 ) Single mRNA molecules demonstrate probabilistic movement in living mammalian cells . Curr Biol 13 : 161 25 . Katsani KR , Karess RE , Nathalie Dostatni VD ( 2008 ) In vivo dynamics of Drosophila nuclear envelope components . Mol Biol Cell 19 : 3652 – 3666 26 . Trullo et al . , in preparation 27 . Tran H , Perez - romero CA , Ferraro T et al ( 2018 ) LiveFly : a toolbox for the analysis of transcription dynamics in live Drosophila embryos . Methods Mol Biol 1863 : 183 – 195 28 . Tantale K , Mueller F , Kozulic - Pirher A et al ( 2016 ) A single - molecule view of transcription reveals convoys of RNA polymerases and multi - scale bursting . Nat Commun 7 : 12248 29 . Femino AM , Fay FS , Fogarty K et al ( 1998 ) Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science 280 : 585 – 590 30 . Keller PJ , Schmidt AD , Santella A et al ( 2010 ) Fast , high - contrast imaging of animal develop - ment with scanned light sheet - based structured - illumination microscopy . Nat Methods 7 : 637 – 642 74 Carola Fernandez and Mounia Lagha Chapter 6 Quantiﬁcation of mRNA Turnover in Living Cells : A Pipeline for TREAT Data Analysis Franka Voigt , Jan Eglinger , and Jeffrey A . Chao Abstract mRNA turnover plays an important role in the regulation of post - transcriptional gene expression . While many protein factors involved in mRNA degradation have been identiﬁed , we still lack a basic understand - ing of the principles that regulate the spatiotemporal dynamics of mRNA turnover within single cells . To overcome this limitation , we have developed the TREAT biosensor , which allows for discrimination of intact reporter transcripts and stabilized decay intermediates using single RNA imaging . Here , we present an image analysis pipeline that performs semiautomated detection and tracking of individual mRNA particles . It colocalizes tracks and applies the colocalization information to quantify the number of intact transcripts and degradation intermediates . Based on the analysis of control data , the workﬂow further determines detection efﬁciencies and uses them to correct RNA particle numbers . Key words mRNA turnover , TREAT , MS2 / PP7 stem - loops , Fluorescence microscopy , Live cell imaging , Single - molecule 1 Introduction RNA turnover is a highly regulated process that controls cellular mRNA levels and eliminates aberrant RNAs . Canonical mRNA decay is mediated by 5 0 - 3 0 and 3 0 - 5 0 exonucleases , which are acti - vated after deadenylation , decapping , and / or endonucleolytic cleavage steps [ 1 ] . The cytoplasmic 5 0 - 3 0 exoribonuclease 1 ( XRN1 ) has been shown to be the main 5 0 - 3 0 exonuclease respon - sible for the turnover of cytoplasmic mRNAs [ 2 ] . Ensemble measurements have contributed to our understand - ing of the mechanisms and protein factors involved in mRNA degradation , however , the inherent instability of degradation inter - mediates has prevented detailed mechanistic studies of the spatio - temporal dynamics of mRNA turnover . To overcome this limitation , we have developed an assay that applies XRN1 - resistant pseudoknots to generate stabilized degradation intermediates ( Fig . 1a ) [ 3 ] . These pseudoknots ( PKs ) inhibit XRN1 - mediated Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 6 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 75 A ORF PP7 PKs MS2 XRN1 B Ch1 Ch2 T r a ck i ng A li gn m en t ROI S eg m en t a t i on C o l o c a li z a t i on Quantiﬁcation N u c l eu s Cytoplasm Fig . 1 Quantiﬁcation of mRNA turnover via the TREAT assay . ( a ) Schematic representation of the TREAT assay : Reporter transcripts are transcribed in the nucleus and exported to the cytoplasm . They can be labeled using orthogonal PP7 and MS2 stem loop cassettes ( green , magenta ) that are included in the 3 0 UTR and separated by viral pseudo knots ( PKs , orange ) . XRN1 degrades mRNAs via 5 0 - 3 0 exonucleolytic digest until it is blocked by the PK sequences . This produces stabilized decay intermediates , which can be detected as single labeled 76 Franka Voigt et al . decay by sequestering the phosphorylated 5 0 end of the RNA substrate from the nuclease active site [ 4 ] thereby increasing the half - life of the degradation intermediate and enabling its detection by standard biochemistry techniques [ 5 ] . Additional integration of PP7 and MS2 stem loop cassettes ﬂanking the PKs in the 3 0 UTR of a reporter construct allows detection of single mRNAs using live cell imaging techniques . This design , which relies on the protection of the MS2 stem loops from XRN1 - mediated digest by PKs positioned upstream of the cassette , enables discrimination of intact transcripts ( PP7 and MS2 ) and stabilized degradation intermediates ( MS2 only ) . Detection of reporter mRNAs in living cells is mediated by ﬂuorescently labeled PP7 and MS2 coat proteins ( PCPs and MCPs ) that speciﬁcally recognize each stem loop cassette and are fused to spectrally distinct ﬂuorophores . To increase labeling efﬁciency synonymous ( identical amino acid , but slightly different codon usage ) tandem PCP fused to synonymous tandem GFP ( stdPCP - stdGFP ) and synonymous tandem MCP fused to Halo ( stdMCP - Halo ) were used [ 6 ] . In addition , both fusion proteins contain nuclear localization signals ( NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP and NLS - stdMCP - Halo ) to sequester unbound proteins in the nucleus . Quantiﬁcation of single - and dual - labeled particles allows assessment of mRNA decay dynamics at any point in time after induction of mRNA reporter expression . Since this technique relies on the quantiﬁcation of stabilized 3 0 decay intermediates , we refer to it as Three ( 3 0 ) - RNA End Accumulation during Turnover ( TREAT ) . The following chapter ﬁrst provides instructions on how to perform TREAT experiments using reporter and colocalization control transcripts . It brieﬂy describes how to acquire TREAT imaging data and then focuses on step - by - step instructions on how to analyze the images using a custom KNIME data analysis workﬂow that allows semiautomated image processing as well as batch - tracking of single mRNAs through application of user - deﬁned tracking parameters . (cid:1) Fig . 1 ( continued ) ( MS2 only ) particles . TREAT turnover can be assessed via quantiﬁcation of dual and single labeled reporter transcripts per cell . ( b ) Overview of the analysis steps included in the image processing pipeline . The workﬂow ﬁrst aligns image series from both channels according to a user deﬁned input . It then generates a nuclear segmentation to generate the cytoplasmic region of interest ( ROI ) for single - particle tracking . Next , spot detection and tracking are performed based on a user deﬁned input of tracking parameters and for both channels independently . Track coordinates are colocalized to identify dual and single labeled particles and the fraction of intact transcripts and stabilized decay intermediates is quantiﬁed after correction for detection efﬁciencies TREAT Assay 77 2 Materials 2 . 1 Sample Preparation 1 . Cell lines stably expressing TREAT reporter and control tran - scripts as well as ﬂuorescently labeled MCP and PCP . To this aim , we have integrated TREAT reporter and control con - structs ( Addgene : 104095 , 104097 ) via ﬂp recombinase - mediated cassette exchange into HeLa 11ht cells [ 7 ] so that constructs can be expressed from a single doxycycline - inducible locus . In addition , the cell lines stably express NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP and NLS - stdMCP - Halo that were genomi - cally integrated via lentivirus - mediated transduction ( Addgene : 104098 , 104099 ) . The cell lines are available upon request from the Chao laboratory . 2 . Cell culture incubator . 3 . Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) tetracycline - free FBS and 1 % ( v / v ) penicillin and streptomycin ( pen / strep ) . 4 . Automated cell counter and counting slides . 5 . Imaging dish ( μ - Dish ) , 35 mm , high , glass bottom . 6 . Fluorobrite ™ DMEM imaging medium + 10 % FBS . 7 . 1 μ g / mL Doxycycline in Fluorobrite ™ DMEM imaging medium + 10 % FBS . 8 . 100 nM Halo - labeling Janelia Fluor 549 ( JF 549 ; Tocris ) [ 8 ] in DMEM + 10 % FBS . 9 . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . 2 . 2 Image Acquisition 1 . Inverted multipoint confocal spinning disk microscope ( e . g . , Olympus IX81 ) . We use one equipped with a CSU - X1 scan - head ( Yokogawa ) and two back - illuminated EvolveDelta EMCCD cameras ( Photometrics ) . Images are collected using a 100 (cid:2) 1 . 45 NA PlanApo TIRFM oil immersion objective ( Olympus ) , green ( Semrock , FF01 - 617 / 73 - 25 ) and red ( Sem - rock , FF02 - 525 / 40 - 25 ) emission ﬁlters , beam - splitter between cameras ( Chroma , 565DCXR ) , solid - state lasers ( 100 mW 491 nm and 100 mW 561 nm ; Cobolt ) , and motor - ized X , Y , Z - Piezo controlled stage ( ASI ) . 2 . Incubation chamber for live cell imaging that provides heating and CO 2 regulation . Before starting the experiment , equili - brate incubation chamber and microscope to 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . 3 . Multicolor calibration slide for channel alignment ( e . g . , Argo - light , type SLF - 001 ) . Before starting the experiment apply calibration slide to make sure that cameras are precisely aligned . 78 Franka Voigt et al . 2 . 3 Data Processing and Analysis 1 . Fiji [ 9 ] including the TrackMate plugin [ 10 ] . 2 . KNIME Analytics Platform ( version 3 . 7 . 0 or later ) [ 11 ] . Con - ﬁgure additional update sites ( File > Preferences > Install / Update > Available Software Sites ( using the Add . . . button ) ) to add the FMI software site ( https : / / community . knime . org / download / ch . fmi . knime . plugins . update / ) . Then add the FMI KNIME Plugins via Help > Install New Software . . . and select - ing FMI KNIME Plugins from the newly added update site . 3 . R ( version 3 . 5 . 2 ) ( https : / / cran . r - project . org / ) with the rserve , ggplot2 and cairo packages installed . To install R in KNIME save R locally and conﬁgure KNIME to use it ( File > Preferences and under KNIME > R provide the path to your R home directory ) . 4 . Analysis workﬂow and training datasets available from the Chao lab ( https : / / data . fmi . ch / PublicationSupplementRepo / ? group ¼ gchao ) . Download workﬂow and install ( File > Import KNIME workﬂow . . . ) . 3 Methods TREAT is a single - molecule technique that distinguishes intact mRNAs from stabilized decay intermediates by assessing the pres - ence of two spectrally distinct ﬂuorescent labels bound to stem loop sequences in the 3 0 UTR of a reporter transcript ( Fig . 1a ) . Dual - labeled reporter transcripts ( NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP and NLS - stdMCP - Halo ) are intact mRNAs while particles exhibiting only a single label ( NLS - stdMCP - Halo alone ) are stabilized decay intermediates . Quantiﬁcation of decay dynamics therefore relies on correct identiﬁcation of mRNA particles as either intact transcripts or degradation intermediates , which in turn depends on the accu - rate detection of both ﬂuorescent labels . The following protocol provides a general description of how to obtain and quantify TREAT data using a custom semiautomated image processing pipeline in KNIME ( Fig . 1b ) . The workﬂow incorporates quantiﬁcation of the detection efﬁciencies for both ﬂuorescent labels based on image acquisition of a colocalization control reporter ( lacking PKs ) that is always labeled by both ﬂuor - ophores . In depth discussion of colocalization control reporter design and the principles underlying detection efﬁciency calculation have been described previously [ 12 ] . Subheadings 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 give an overview of how to perform TREAT experiments for acquisition of experimental and colocaliza - tion control data . Step - by - step instructions on how to design reporter constructs , generate stable cell lines and acquire images have been described by Horvathova et al . ( 2017 ) [ 3 ] . Subheading 3 . 3 then provides basic instructions on how to determine batch TREAT Assay 79 tracking parameters using the Fiji plugin TrackMate [ 10 ] . For more detailed guidelines on how to perform single - molecule tracking of mRNA reporters using TrackMate refer to Voigt et al . ( 2018 ) [ 13 ] . Finally , Subheading 3 . 4 focuses on how to perform semiautomated tracking and track colocalization analysis using the custom KNIME workﬂow mentioned above . All analysis software as well as sample experimental and control data sets are available from the Chao lab publication repository ( https : / / data . fmi . ch / PublicationSupplementRepo / ? group ¼ gchao ) . 3 . 1 Performing a TREAT Experiment 1 . Approximately 48 h before starting the experiment , seed 30 , 000 HeLa cells stably expressing NLS - stdMCP - Halo , NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP as well as the TREAT or control reporter construct in 2 mL DMEM + 10 % FBS + 1 % Pen / Strep into a 35 mm imaging dish . Make sure that cells are homogeneously distributed within the dish ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . Grow cells for approximately 2 days at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . Depending on the cell line , longer or shorter incubation times are possible . 3 . Before starting the experiment , prewarm PBS and Fluoro - brite ™ DMEM + 10 % FBS to 37 (cid:3) C . 4 . For ﬂuorescent labeling of Halo - tags incubate with 1 mL 100 nM JF 549 dye in DMEM + 10 % FBS for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . 5 . Take medium off cells to remove dye . Wash three times with PBS . 6 . Add prewarmed Fluorobrite ™ DMEM + 10 % FBS + 1 μ g / mL doxycycline to induce TREAT or control reporter expression ( see Note 2 ) . 7 . Consider the timing of induction and image acquisition to guarantee particle densities that are suitable for single - particle tracking ( SPT ) . To characterize reporter transcript expression proﬁles over time quantify particle densities in the cytosol via imaging trials at different time points after induction . For the HeLa cell lines used here , TREAT and control transcripts are transcribed ~ 20 min after doxycycline induction and are exported into the cytoplasm ~ 25 min later in most cells . Shorter or longer expression times are possible depending on the experiment performed ( see Note 3 ) . 3 . 2 Image Acquisition 1 . Begin image acquisition at the appropriate time point after doxycycline induction . Expression times can vary depending on the reporter used and experimental set up . Consider remov - ing doxycycline from the imaging dish at deﬁned time points to stop induction and limit the particle density in the cytoplasm . 80 Franka Voigt et al . 2 . Use the red channel ( NLS - stdMCP - Halo ) to ﬁnd suitable cells for image acquisition as Halo + JF 549 bleaches slower than GFP . Make sure to use low laser intensities to reduce photobleaching prior to the experiment and select cells with well - resolved spots ( high SNR ) at densities that permit SPT ( see Note 4 ) . 3 . Acquire images in both channels simultaneously . Use acquisi - tion settings suitable for SPT . In particular , choose exposure times (cid:4) 50 ms that allow for unambiguous assignment of fast moving particles in subsequent frames and laser powers that achieve maximum spot intensities without excessive bleaching of the sample . Adjust camera gains accordingly to yield an optimal SNR without detector saturation . 4 . Collect short image series in a single plane using the streaming mode in both channels simultaneously . Acquire 5 – 50 frames per ﬁeld of view . 5 . Make sure to perform image acquisition for both TREAT and colocalization control reporter expressing cell lines using iden - tical acquisition settings in several independent replicates . 3 . 3 Determination of Batch Tracking Parameters Using TrackMate To assess mRNA turnover via live cell imaging of single mRNAs , it is essential to reconstruct mRNA trajectories using SPT . The Fiji plugin TrackMate [ 10 ] ﬁrst assesses the positions of individual mRNAs in all frames of the input image series ( spot detection ) and then links spot positions in successive frames into trajectories ( tracking ) . The semiautomated image processing pipeline described below uses a custom plugin , which runs TrackMate and applies deﬁned spot detection and tracking parameters within the KNIME environment . To this aim , it is necessary to ﬁrst perform manual SPT of several image series in order to determine para - meters that allow accurate tracking of the entire dataset using ﬁxed parameter settings . 1 . Select a small number of image series ( 3 – 10 frames ) obtained from at least three independent experiments for manual SPT . If image quality varies in between image series and replicates , analyze more data until the heterogeneity in image quality can be estimated . Exclude outlier datasets that are heteroge - neous with respect to spot intensity , size or SNR . 2 . Compare input data to the training data sets provided for this manuscript on the Chao group publication repository ( https : / / data . fmi . ch / PublicationSupplementRepo / ? group ¼ gchao ) , where example experimental and colocalization control data sets are available under Live _ TestData / RawData and Live _ - ControlData / RawData respectively . 3 . Determine if image series are calibrated correctly . If needed , use the “Properties” command to calibrate global image TREAT Assay 81 parameters in Fiji . For the training data provided here , the pixel size equals 0 . 09 μ m . 4 . Deﬁne channel offsets for all datasets by inspection of super - posed spots in both channels and align them by using , for example , the “Translate” command in Fiji . For the TREAT and colocalization control image series provided here , the operation that superposes both channels most closely requires a pixel shift from channel 1 to channel 2 of (cid:5) 2 / (cid:5) 8 ( x / y ) for the test data and of 0 / 0 ( x / y ) for the colocalization control data . Take note of the channel offsets to be able to apply them during the batch analysis below . 5 . Decide how many frames to include in the analysis . To perform accurate track colocalization , not more than 3 – 5 frames are needed . Limit the number of frames to a minimum since this facilitates more accurate manual tracking ( less data points to be manually inspected ) and reduces the processing time during the analysis steps . 6 . Perform manual SPT using the TrackMate GUI in Fiji . For detailed instructions on how to perform SPT of mRNA tran - scripts in TrackMate consult Voigt et al . ( 2018 ) [ 13 ] . Deter - mine the spot intensity “Threshold” for each channel as well as the spot size ( “Estimated blob diameter” in the TrackMate GUI ) that allows accurate spot detection in all inspected image series . Further identify the “Linking max distance , ” allowed frame “Gap size” and “Gap - closing max distance” that allow most accurate tracking in all image series ( see Note 5 ) . For the training datasets provided here , these parameters are listed in Table 1 . Table 1 Spot detection and tracking parameters TrackMate parameters Values used to obtain results provided along with training datasets Threshold Ch1 control [ AU ] 550 Threshold Ch2 control [ AU ] 650 Estimated blob diameter / spot radius [ μ m ] 0 . 38 / 0 . 19 Linking max distance [ μ m ] 0 . 4 Gap size [ frames ] 2 Gap - closing max distance [ μ m ] 0 . 8 Frame interval [ s ] 0 . 05 Threshold Ch1 test [ AU ] 550 Threshold Ch2 test [ AU ] 1200 82 Franka Voigt et al . 3 . 4 High - Throughput Image Processing in KNIME To quantify the number of intact reporter mRNAs and stabilized degradation intermediates , it is necessary to accurately track and colocalize the tracks obtained from a large number of image series . The image processing pipeline described in the following paragraph is designed to enable nonexpert users to quantify the results of a TREAT experiment in a reasonable amount of time . Since it per - forms high - throughput tracking and track colocalization of control and test datasets it aims to reduce the user input necessary to perform robust SPT . 3 . 4 . 1 Data Selection and Input 1 . Assemble raw data ﬁles from TREAT and colocalization control experiments in two separate folders . For the training datasets provided here , these can be found under Live _ TestData / Raw - Data and Live _ ControlData / RawData for the example experi - mental and colocalization control datasets respectively . 2 . Open the “Batch - Track - Colocalization - Analysis . knwf” work - ﬂow in KNIME ( see Note 6 ) . Throughout the workﬂow , nodes that require user input are framed in red and labeled according to the order of their execution . All nodes framed in orange are visualization and quality control nodes , which are designed to allow the user to evaluate the successful execution of the analysis steps following a required input . Output nodes are shown in blue and allow export of the results of the analysis . 3 . Conﬁgure and execute the “Load image data” metanode ( INPUT 1 ) . To this aim , choose the folder that contains the TREAT data as “Input directory” and the folder that contains the colocalization control data as “Input directory for control data . ” Enter the “Image ﬁle extension” ( nd for the training data provided here ) and choose to “Override pixel spacing metadata” if raw data are not properly calibrated . If this is the case , also set “New xy pixel spacing” ( 0 . 09 μ m for training data provided here ) to provide the pixel size for recalibration . Choose the “Number of frames to load” for both , test and colocalization control data ( load ﬁve frames to reproduce the results provided along with the training datasets ) and select “Swap Z and Time in input data” in case the image series is mislabeled as a Z - stack . 4 . Execute and view the loaded images using the “Image Viewer” ( VISUALIZATION 1 ) downstream of the “Load image data” metanode in order to make sure that image ﬁles are loaded correctly . 3 . 4 . 2 Channel Alignment and ROI Generation 1 . Conﬁgure and execute the “Correct channel shift and segment nucleus” metanode ( INPUT 2 ) . It aligns channel 1 to channel 2 by translating channel 1 images according to the pixel shifts provided by user input during conﬁguration ( and as deﬁned in Subheading 3 . 3 ) . The metanode then generates cytoplasmic TREAT Assay 83 ROIs for SPT by segmentation of the cell nuclei using a global thresholding algorithm that applies the Huang method . 2 . Execute the “Image Viewer” node ( VISUALIZATION 2 ) directly connected to the INPUT 2 metanode in order to inspect the segmentation results provided in the last column of the image table . 3 . 4 . 3 Detection Efﬁciency Calculation from Control Data The detection efﬁciencies for channel 1 and channel 2 labels can be derived via quantiﬁcation of colocalization control data , in which all mRNA transcripts should appear dual - labeled [ 3 , 12 ] . The branch described in the following paragraph performs SPT and track colo - calization through application of user - deﬁned input parameters . It then quantiﬁes the numbers of single - and dual - labeled particles and applies them to calculate detection efﬁciencies that will later be used to correct the particle numbers obtained through track colo - calization in the TREAT dataset ( Subheading 3 . 4 . 4 ) . 1 . Conﬁgure and execute the “Tracking and colocalization para - meters—Control data” metanode ( INPUT 3 ) . Insert batch tracking parameters for the colocalization control dataset as determined under Subheading 3 . 3 or provided for the training control dataset in Table 1 . Further conﬁgure the “Distance cutoff” below which a spot pair is classiﬁed as colocalizing ( default ¼ 0 . 3 μ m ) , choose the “Minimum track length” to be included in the analysis ( default ¼ 3 frames ) and the “Mini - mum number of ( spot ) colocalizations” necessary to deﬁne a track as colocalizing ( default ¼ 2 events ) . Last , choose “chan - nel 1 and 2 plotting colors” from the scroll down menus ( default channel 1 ¼ red and channel 2 ¼ green ) . 2 . Execute the “Plot tracks per cell” metanode ( VISUALIZA - TION 3 ) . The branch leading to this node performs spot detection , SPT and track colocalization for the control data . For details of the track colocalization algorithm , see Voigt et al . ( 2018 ) [ 13 ] . Brieﬂy , track colocalization relies on pairwise spot colocalization , which depends on distance measurements of all spots in the ﬁrst channel to all spots in the second channel . The workﬂow deﬁnes colocalizing pairs of spots by recursively selecting mutual nearest neighbors and only classiﬁes spot pairs as colocalizing if their distance is below the user - deﬁned cutoff provided above . Next , tracks are deﬁned as colocalizing if they contain at least the user - deﬁned number of colocalizing spot pairs . If multiple tracks from one channel colocalize with one or multiple tracks from the other channel ( in different frames ) , the track pair with the largest number of spot colocalizations is considered genuine ( recursive track pairing ) . Noncolocalizing tracks are called orphans . 84 Franka Voigt et al . 3 . Inspect the results from SPT and track colocalization in the output table generated by the VISUALIZATION 3 metanode . Scroll through the table to look at track maps of individual cells . Colocalizing tracks are depicted opaque while orphan tracks are shown semitransparent . The color scheme corre - sponds to the plotting color for each channel chosen above . Large numbers of colocalizing tracks indicate good detection efﬁciencies while equal track numbers ( in both channels ) com - bined with low colocalization rates might be due to suboptimal data quality even though spot detection and tracking is per - formed accurately . If many more ( short , often 2 - frame ) tracks are depicted in one but not the other channel , this likely indicates suboptimal spot detection thresholds . Refer to Voigt et al . ( 2018 ) [ 13 ] for instructions on how to troubleshoot SPT parameters . 4 . Execute the “Export results for control data” metanode ( OUTPUT 1 ) . It activates the branch calculating detection efﬁciencies for each channel and outputs all results obtained for the colocalization control dataset in a single excel ﬁle called “ResultsControlData . xlsx” , which is automatically saved into the input data directory . Compare results obtained for the training control dataset with the results provided under Live _ - ControlData / Results . Inspect the detection efﬁciencies calcu - lated per cell ( DetEff—per Cell ) and on average ( DetEff— Mean ) in the corresponding tabs of the results ﬁle . For the control data provided along with this text , mean channel 1 and 2 detection efﬁciencies should equal 0 . 89 (cid:6) 0 . 08 and 0 . 94 (cid:6) 0 . 05 respectively . Values of ~ 90 % indicate good data quality . 3 . 4 . 4 Quantiﬁcation of TREAT Data Including Particle Number Correction Quantiﬁcation of single - and dual - labeled TREAT reporter mRNAs is performed analogous to the quantiﬁcation of colocalizing and orphan control transcripts explained above ( Subheading 3 . 4 . 3 ) . In addition , the branch described in the following paragraph , uses the detection efﬁciencies determined above to correct the numbers of intact transcripts ( colocalizing tracks ) and stabilized decay inter - mediates ( orphans ) for the detection bias of the speciﬁc experimen - tal setup . 1 . Conﬁgure and execute the “Tracking parameters—Test data” metanode ( INPUT 4 ) . To this aim , deﬁne intensity thresholds for both channels of the TREAT dataset as determined under Subheading 3 . 3 or provided for the training test dataset in Table 1 . All other parameters must be identical in the control and TREAT datasets and do not need to be entered again . TREAT Assay 85 2 . Execute the “Plot tracks per cell” metanode ( VISUALIZA - TION 4 ) and inspect the SPT and track colocalization results for the TREAT dataset in the output table provided by this node . Interpret tracking results ( analogous to the control data tracking results ) as described above ( Subheading 3 . 4 . 3 ) . 3 . Execute the “Export results for test data” metanode ( OUT - PUT 2 ) . The branch leading to this node applies the detection efﬁciencies determined above ( Subheading 3 . 4 . 3 ) to correct the colocalizing and orphan track numbers determined via colocalization analysis of the TREAT dataset . It then exports a single excel ﬁle called “ResultsTestData . xlsx” , which is auto - matically saved into the input data directory . Compare results obtained for the training dataset with the results provided under Live _ TestData / Results . Inspect the “Summary— Mean” tab within the results ﬁle . For the TREAT data provided here , the mean fraction of colocalizing particles corresponding to the fraction of intact mRNA transcripts should equal 0 . 48 (cid:6) 0 . 11 ( see Note 7 ) . This result ( obtained from cells that were imaged approximately 2 h after induction of reporter expression ) is in good agreement with the half - life time of the TREAT reporter transcript ( 1 . 63 (cid:6) 0 . 24 h ) . 4 Notes 1 . If cells are seeded at lower densities and more than 48 hours before the experiment they can grow larger and have more time to widely spread out on the imaging dish . This can result in reduced cell thickness , which in turn increases SNR due to a reduction of overall background ﬂuorescence originating from out - of - plane particles . 2 . Consider using shorter induction times to reduce the number of particles in the cytoplasm , which will facilitate robust SPT . 3 . Consider supplementing Fluorobrite imaging medium with 4 mM L - glutamine for long time course experiments . 4 . In order to minimize photobleaching , try to reduce the overall radiation that cells are exposed to by adapting laser intensities and exposure times . 5 . For determination of batch tracking parameters , make sure that tracking parameters yield robust results for all image series analyzed . If not , consider generating a more homogeneous cell population by sorting to uniformly low ﬂuorescent protein levels . 86 Franka Voigt et al . 6 . For any questions about the tools employed ( KNIME , Fiji , TrackMate ) as well as about usage of the workﬂow , please consider asking on https : / / forum . image . sc . 7 . Make sure the results obtained from the TREAT experiment match the half - life of the applied reporter transcript as obtained from an unrelated experiment ( qPCR , smFISH ) . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank all members of the Chao lab for their joint efforts in developing the TREAT assay . In particular , we thank Ivana Horvathova for generation of the reporter transcripts . We further thank the Facility for Advanced Imaging and Micros - copy at FMI for data acquisition and analysis support . Research in the Chao lab is funded by the Novartis Research Foundation ( J . A . C . ) , a Swiss National Science Foundation ( SNF ) grant 31003A _ 182314 ( J . A . C . ) , the SNF - NCCR RNA & Disease ( J . A . C . ) , and an SNF Marie Heim - Vo¨gtlin fellowship ( F . V . ) . References 1 . Schoenberg DR , Maquat LE ( 2012 ) Regula - tion of cytoplasmic mRNA decay . Nat Rev Genet 13 ( 4 ) : 246 – 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrg3160 2 . Chang CT , Bercovich N , Loh B , Jonas S , Izaurralde E ( 2014 ) The activation of the dec - apping enzyme DCP2 by DCP1 occurs on the EDC4 scaffold and involves a conserved loop in DCP1 . Nucleic Acids Res 42 ( 8 ) : 5217 – 5233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gku129 3 . Horvathova I , Voigt F , Kotrys AV , Zhan Y , Artus - Revel CG , Eglinger J , Stadler MB , Giorgetti L , Chao JA ( 2017 ) The dynamics of mRNA turnover revealed by single - molecule imaging in single cells . Mol Cell 68 ( 3 ) : 615 – 625 e619 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 09 . 030 4 . Chapman EG , Costantino DA , Rabe JL , Moon SL , Wilusz J , Nix JC , Kieft JS ( 2014 ) The structural basis of pathogenic subgenomic ﬂa - vivirus RNA ( sfRNA ) production . Science 344 ( 6181 ) : 307 – 310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1250897 5 . Boehm V , Gerbracht JV , Marx MC , Gehring NH ( 2016 ) Interrogating the degradation pathways of unstable mRNAs with XRN1 - resistant sequences . Nat Commun 7 : 13691 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms13691 6 . Wu B , Miskolci V , Sato H , Tutucci E , Ken - worthy CA , Donnelly SK , Yoon YJ , Cox D , Singer RH , Hodgson L ( 2015 ) Synonymous modiﬁcation results in high - ﬁdelity gene expression of repetitive protein and nucleotide sequences . Genes Dev 29 ( 8 ) : 876 – 886 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 259358 . 115 7 . Weidenfeld I , Gossen M , Low R , Kentner D , Berger S , Gorlich D , Bartsch D , Bujard H , Schonig K ( 2009 ) Inducible expression of cod - ing and inhibitory RNAs from retargetable genomic loci . Nucleic Acids Res 37 ( 7 ) : e50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkp108 8 . Grimm JB , English BP , Chen J , Slaughter JP , Zhang Z , Revyakin A , Patel R , Macklin JJ , Normanno D , Singer RH , Lionnet T , Lavis LD ( 2015 ) A general method to improve ﬂuor - ophores for live - cell and single - molecule microscopy . Nat Methods 12 ( 3 ) : 244 – 250 , . 243 p following 250 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3256 9 . Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , Preibisch S , Rueden C , Saalfeld S , Schmid B , Tinevez JY , White DJ , Hartenstein V , Eliceiri K , Tomancak P , Cardona A ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 676 – 682 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 TREAT Assay 87 10 . Tinevez JY , Perry N , Schindelin J , Hoopes GM , Reynolds GD , Laplantine E , Bednarek SY , Shorte SL , Eliceiri KW ( 2017 ) TrackMate : an open and extensible platform for single - particle tracking . Methods 115 : 80 – 90 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2016 . 09 . 016 11 . Dietz C , Berthold MR ( 2016 ) KNIME for open - source bioimage analysis : a tutorial . Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 219 : 179 – 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 28549 - 8 _ 7 12 . Voigt F , Gerbracht JV , Boehm V , Horvathova I , Eglinger J , Chao JA , Gehring NH ( 2019 ) Detection and quantiﬁcation of RNA decay intermediates using XRN1 - resistant reporter transcripts . Nat Protoc 14 : 1603 – 1633 13 . Voigt F , Eglinger J , Chao JA ( 2018 ) Detection of the ﬁrst round of translation : the TRICK assay . Methods Mol Biol 1649 : 373 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 7213 - 5 _ 25 88 Franka Voigt et al . Chapter 7 Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria by MR - FISH Kristina A . Ganzinger , Martin R . Challand , James Spencer , David Klenerman , and Rohan T . Ranasinghe Abstract Methylation of RNA is normally monitored in puriﬁed cell lysates using next - generation sequencing , gel electrophoresis , or mass spectrometry as readouts . These bulk methods require the RNA from ~ 10 4 to 10 7 cells to be pooled to generate sufﬁcient material for analysis . Here we describe a method—methylation - sensitive RNA in situ hybridization ( MR - FISH ) —that assays rRNA methylation in bacteria on a cell - by - cell basis , using methylation - sensitive hybridization probes and ﬂuorescence microscopy . We outline step - by - step protocols for designing probes , in situ hybridization , and analysis of data using freely available code . Key words Fluorescence imaging , FISH , In situ hybridization , DNA probes , Bacteriology , Antibiotic resistance , Ribosomal RNA , RNA modiﬁcation , Epitranscriptomic modiﬁcations , RNA methylation , Single - cell methods , Microscopy , Automated image analysis 1 Introduction Detection of methylated RNA bases has been practiced for 60 years [ 1 ] and methylation of ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) has been known about since 1964 [ 2 ] . There are therefore very longstanding meth - ods that are able to locate methylated bases ( Fig . 1 ) . These involve digesting cellular RNAs to individual nucleosides which are sepa - rated by chromatography [ originally thin layer chromatography ( TLC ) , now more commonly high - performance liquid chromatog - raphy ( HPLC ) or liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry , ( LCMS ) ] to identify modiﬁed bases . The digestion process deletes sequence context , which can be recovered by reverse transcription assays coupled with gel electrophoresis [ 3 ] . The recent renewed interest in RNA methylation in epitranscriptomics has been trig - gered by a range of new next - generation sequencing methods that use immuoprecipitation to locate speciﬁc modiﬁcations in the tran - scriptome [ 4 ] . However , these state - of - the - art techniques as well as historic bulk methods have detection limits in the femtomole to picomole range , which even for abundant species like rRNAs Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 7 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 89 therefore report the average methylation state of ~ 10 4 – 10 7 cells [ 5 , 6 ] . As more methylations are discovered by these techniques , interest grows in new site - speciﬁc methods to detect modiﬁed bases in order to study their roles in biology [ 7 ] . Recently , we described a method called “methylation - sensitive RNA ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization” ( MR - FISH ) , which detects rRNA methylations in single cells ( Fig . 1 ) [ 8 ] . We have shown that MR - FISH can detect three different methylations of rRNA , [ N 6 - dimethyladenosine ( m 62 A ) , 1 - methylguanosine ( m 1 G ) and 3 - methyluridine ( m 3 U ) ] , quantify antibiotic - resistant bacteria in mixtures of cells , and simul - taneously detect multiple methylations using multicolor ﬂuores - cence imaging . MR - FISH assays posttranscriptional modiﬁcations inside ﬁxed cells rather than in extracted RNA , which greatly enhances sensitiv - ity : the concentration of rRNA inside exponentially growing bacte - ria can reach > 50 μ M [ 9 ] , so methylation - sensitive ﬂuorogenic probes generate a signal within each cell that can be detected with a basic ﬂuorescence microscope . Methylation can be detected by hybridization because methyl groups on the Watson – Crick faces can impair base pairing [ 10 , 11 ] . To maximize this thermodynamic discrimination , MR - FISH uses molecular beacons [ 12 ] as hybridi - zation probes . Molecular beacons are more sensitive to single - base changes than linear probes , because they can retain their hairpin structure in preference to making a less - stable duplex with a mis - matched nucleic acid [ 13 ] . We use two such probes in MR - FISH , labeled with different ﬂuorophores : one methylation - sensitive probe and a second probe that binds rRNA at a sequence remote from the modiﬁcation site that does not undergo methylation . Fig . 1 Comparison of MR - FISH to existing methods for detecting base methylations 90 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . This methylation - insensitive probe acts as an internal calibrant , meaning that the two - color ratio of each cell—rather than the intensity of the methylation - sensitive probe alone—indicates the extent of methylation . This ratio distinguishes between cells with a high proportion of methylated rRNA and cells which simply have a low concentration of rRNA . Fluorescence images are analyzed using custom software , which has four main functions : ( 1 ) ensuring registration of the images in each color channel by cross - correlation ; ( 2 ) generating a binary mask by thresholding the image generated by hybridization of the methylation - insensitive probe ; ( 3 ) selecting single , isolated bacteria by tracing continuous regions of 1’s in the binary image to exclude aggregates of bacteria ; ( 4 ) integrating the ﬂuorescence intensity of selected single - cells in each color channel and calculating the two - color ratio . The entire analysis procedure is fully automated and does not require the user to select control areas or individual bacteria , and can return infor - mation about the methylation status of thousands of single cells in minutes . 2 Materials 2 . 1 DNA Probes 1 . Select suitable ﬂuorophore – quencher pairs for your ﬂuores - cence microscope . Table 1 lists ﬂuorophore – quencher pairs we have used for MR - FISH , but more comprehensive lists for molecular beacons have been compiled [ 14 ] . Order molecular beacons ( synthesized on the 0 . 2 μ mol scale and puriﬁed by double HPLC ) and any helper probes oligonucleotides ( synthesized on either 0 . 2 or 1 μ mol scale and puriﬁed by HPLC ) from your preferred oligonucleotide supplier ( see Sub - heading 3 . 1 for guidance on probe design ) . 2 . DEPC - treated water . Add 1 mL DEPC ( 0 . 1 % by volume ) to 1 L of 18 . 2 M Ω / cm water and stir vigorously for 2 h . Remove stirrer bar , ﬁlter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into 50 mL centrifuge tubes and autoclave for 2 h . 3 . Dissolve lyophilized molecular beacons and unlabeled helper probes in DEPC - treated water to concentrations of 20 – 100 μ M and conﬁrm by OD 260 . Divide into 20 - μ L aliquots and store at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C until required . Defrosted aliquots can be stored at 4 (cid:3) C for up to 2 weeks ; we avoid freeze - thaw cycles . 2 . 2 Bacterial Cultures 1 . LB broth : Weigh 25 g of LB broth powder and transfer to a 1 L beaker . Add ~ 800 mL of deionized water and dissolve by magnetic stirring . Remove the stirrer bar and add deionized water to a total volume of 1 L . Using a 100 mL measuring cylinder , aliquot into 10 (cid:4) 100 mL in 100 mL Schott bottles and autoclave for 2 h . Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 91 2 . LB agar plates : Weigh 2 . 5 g of LB broth powder and transfer to a 100 mL beaker . Add ~ 80 mL of deionized water and dissolve by magnetic stirring . Remove the stirrer bar and add deionized water to a total volume of 100 mL . Weigh 1 . 6 g of agar powder and transfer to a 100 mL Schott bottle . Add the 100 mL of LB broth , shake gently to disperse the agar , and autoclave for 2 h . The agar will not dissolve until the suspension is autoclaved . When the solution has cooled to 55 (cid:3) C , pour 20 mL into a 9 cm diameter petri dish and allow to set by cooling to room temperature . Store plates at 4 (cid:3) C for up to 1 week . 3 . 50 % ( v / v ) glycerol solution : Weigh out 62 . 5 g of glycerol into a 100 mL Schott bottle . Add 50 mL of deionized water , mix by gentle shaking and autoclave for 2 h . 4 . Bacterial glycerol stock : Transfer 0 . 5 mL of liquid bacterial culture to a 1 . 5 mL microcentrifuge tube . Add 0 . 25 mL of 50 % glycerol and mix using a vortex shaker . Snap freeze the sample in liquid nitrogen and store at (cid:1) 80 (cid:3) C . 5 . Phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) : Weigh 8 g of NaCl , 0 . 2 g of KCl , 1 . 44 g of Na 2 HPO 4 , 0 . 24 g of KH 2 PO 4 and transfer to a 1 L volumetric ﬂask . Add ~ 800 mL of deionized water and dissolve by magnetic stirring . Adjust the pH to 7 . 4 with 2 M HCl . Remove the stirrer bar and add deionized water to a total volume of 1 L . Transfer to a 1 L Schott bottle and autoclave for 2 h . 6 . 1 M sodium hydroxide : Gently stir 800 mL of deionized water using magnetic stirring . Carefully add 40 g of sodium hydrox - ide pellets making sure the solution does not get too hot . Once dissolved , allow the solution to cool and adjust the volume to 1 L . 7 . 4 % formaldehyde solution in PBS : Add ~ 800 mL of PBS to a glass beaker and add a stirrer bar . In a fume cupboard heat to 60 (cid:3) C on a hot plate and stir using magnetic stirring , taking care that the solution does not boil . Add 40 g of paraformalde - hyde powder . The powder may not immediately dissolve . Table 1 Fluorophore – quencher pairs for MR - FISH Fluorophore Excitationwavelength ( nm ) Emissionwavelength ( nm ) Quencher Alexa Fluor 488 495 519 DABCYL FAM 490 514 DABCYL Cy3 / Cy3B 548 / 558 562 / 572 BHQ2 Alexa Fluor 647 650 668 BHQ1 92 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . Slowly raise the pH by adding 1 M sodium hydroxide dropwise from a pipette until the solution clears . Allow the solution to cool , then check the pH using a pH meter and adjust the pH to 6 . 9 using 2 M HCl . Transfer the solution to a 1 L volumetric ﬂask and adjust the volume to 1 L with PBS . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into 50 mL centrifuge tubes ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) . Tip . Best results are achieved if the 4 % formaldehyde solution is freshly prepared , but it can be stored at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C for 1 month . Be sure to thaw thoroughly before use . Caution : Paraformaldehyde is toxic and a suspected carcino - gen , and sodium hydroxide causes severe skin burns , eye dam - age , and may be corrosive to metals . Always conduct a thorough risk assessment and handle in a fume cupboard wear - ing gloves , eye protection and a lab coat . 2 . 3 In Situ Hybridization Prepare stock solutions of all buffer components ( except formam - ide ) for FISH using 18 . 2 M Ω / cm water , treat with diethylpyrocar - bonate ( DEPC ) to inactivate RNases and then autoclave to decompose DEPC prior to use . Use certiﬁed RNase - free micro - centrifuge tubes and pipette tips and clean bench surfaces with RNaseZAP ™ according to the manufacturer’s instructions . 1 . DEPC - treated water . 2 . 0 . 2 M Tris – HCl stock solution : Weigh 31 . 52 g Tris – HCl and transfer to a 1 L volumetric ﬂask . Add water to a volume of 900 mL . Dissolve by magnetic stirring and adjust pH to 7 . 5 using 6 M HCl . Add 10 mL DEPC ( 1 % by volume , see Note 1 ) and stir vigorously for 2 h . Remove stirrer bar and make up to 1 L with water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into 50 mL centrifuge tubes ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) and autoclave for 2 h . 3 . 4 . 5 M NaCl stock solution : Weigh 263 . 0 g NaCl and transfer to a 1 L volumetric ﬂask . Add water to a volume of ~ 900 mL . Dissolve by magnetic stirring , add 1 mL DEPC ( 0 . 1 % by volume ) and stir vigorously for 2 h . Remove stirrer bar and make up to 1 L with water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into 50 mL centrifuge tubes ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) and autoclave for 2 h . 4 . 1 % Sodium dodecylsulfate ( SDS ) stocksolution : Weigh0 . 5 gSDS and transfer to a 50 mL volumetric ﬂask . Add water to a volume of 45 mL . Dissolve by magnetic stirring , add 50 μ L DEPC ( 0 . 1 % by volume ) and stir vigorously for 2 h . Remove stirrer bar and make up to 50 mL with water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into 15 mL centrifuge tubes and autoclave for 2 h . Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 93 5 . Hybridization buffer : 0 . 9 M NaCl , 0 . 02 M Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 01 % SDS , 20 % v / v formamide ( see Note 2 ) . Mix 3 mL of 4 . 5 M NaCl stock solution , 1 . 5 mL of 0 . 2 M Tris – HCl stock solution , 150 μ L of 1 % SDS stock solution , 3 mL of formamide ( (cid:5) 99 . 5 % , ACS Reagent Grade , Sigma Aldrich ) and make up to 15 mL with DEPC - treated water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into a 15 mL centrifuge tube ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) . Caution : formamide is a suspected carcin - ogen , may damage fertility or the unborn child and may cause damage to organs through prolonged or repeated exposure . Always conduct a thorough risk assessment and handle in a fume cupboard , wearing gloves , eye protection and a lab coat . 6 . Wash buffer B : 0 . 9 M NaCl , 0 . 02 M Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 01 % SDS . Mix 3 mL of 4 . 5 M NaCl stock solution , 1 . 5 mL of 0 . 2 M Tris – HCl stock solution 150 μ L of 1 % SDS stock solution and make up to 15 mL with DEPC - treated water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into a 15 mL centrifuge tube ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) . 7 . Imaging buffer : 0 . 025 M NaCl , 0 . 02 M Tris – HCl , pH 7 . 5 . Mix 83 μ L of 4 . 5 M NaCl stock solution , 1 . 5 mL of 0 . 2 M Tris – HCl stock solution and make up to 15 mL with DEPC - treated water . Filter through a 0 . 2 - μ m syringe ﬁlter into a 15 mL centrifuge tube ( replacing the ﬁlter if the back pressure increases to a point where ﬁltration becomes difﬁcult ) . 8 . Coverslips : 22 (cid:4) 22 mm , thickness 0 . 13 – 0 . 17 mm , precleaned with argon plasma for at least 30 min . 9 . Frame - Seal slide chamber : 9 (cid:4) 9 mm . 10 . Mounting medium : Hydromount slide mounting medium . 2 . 4 Fluorescence Microscopy 1 . To read out the MR - FISH signal in individual cells , we image bacteria using multicolor wideﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( ideal laser lines are 488 , 561 and 640 nm ) , equipped with a suitable objective ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . The different emission colors ( e . g . , green and red ﬂuorescence ) can be recorded simultaneously if colors can be spectrally sepa - rated , or sequentially , depending on the microscope used . Fluorescence emission was recorded on an EMCCD camera in our previous work ; however , sCMOS cameras would be equally well suited . 2 . 5 Image Analysis 1 . A computer with > 8 GB memory , running MATLAB R2010b ( or later releases ) and the following MATLAB tool boxes : Image Processing , Curve Fitting and Statistics . 94 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . 2 . Custom analysis software ; the ready - to - run code is available for download on github : https : / / github . com / kganzinger / Analy sis - Software - for - in - situ - hybridization - data - in - single - cells / . The code is actively maintained , so any bugs should be reported via github or by emailing K . A . G . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Probe Design 1 . Select a 15 – 20 nt section of the rRNA target sequence with the modiﬁcation site in the center and generate its reverse comple - ment as a probe sequence . As with molecular beacons used to detect single mismatches , molecular beacons for MR - FISH should be designed with relatively short probe sequences to maximize the thermodynamic effect of methylation on hybri - dization . Simulate the properties of the probe – target duplex using the DINAMelt [ 15 ] Web Server ( http : / / unafold . rna . albany . edu / ? q ¼ DINAMelt / Hybrid2 ) , using the following parameters : l Temperature range : 0 – 100 (cid:3) C ( these are the default settings ) . l NA ( nucleic acid ) type : DNA ( this is the default setting , see Note 4 ) . l Salt Conditions : [ Na + ] ¼ 1 M and [ Mg 2 + ] ¼ 0 M ( these are the default settings ) . l Initial concentrations : [ A 0 ] and [ B 0 ] ¼ 1 μ M . Molecular beacons which we have successfully used to discriminate between methylated and unmethylated RNA return Δ G values in the range of 22 – 35 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 for the probe – target duplex . Δ G values for molecular beacons that we have used to discriminate single methylations fall within a narrower range ( 22 – 27 . 5 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 ) , but we have not system - atically studied this . 2 . Add 5 – 6 self - complementary nucleotides comprising either all G’s and C’s or containing one A : T pair to each end of the probe sequence ( e . g . , 5 0 - CCGCCX 1 X 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 Z X 8 X 9 X 10 X 11 X 12 X 13 X 14 GGCGG - 3 0 , where the underlined section forms the stem of the molecular beacon , Z is complementary to the modiﬁcation site , and X’s are complementary to the bases either side of the modiﬁcation site ) . Avoid stem designs with a G , and especially runs of consecutive G’s , next to the ﬂuores - cent label , because these can quench ﬂuorescence and reduce the signal in FISH ; we normally attach the dye at the 5 0 end of the molecular beacon , but most dyes can be added at either the 5 0 or 3 0 end if required . Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 95 3 . Use the mfold [ 16 ] webserver ( http : / / unafold . rna . albany . edu / ? q ¼ mfold ) to simulate the secondary structure of the molecular beacon you designed , using a folding temperature of 37 (cid:3) C , [ Na + ] ¼ 1 M and [ Mg 2 + ] ¼ 0 M ( these are the default settings ) . In our experience , the ideal molecular beacon folds into a hairpin loop where the stem is formed by the intended 5 – 6 nucleotides , with a Δ G of 2 . 5 – 7 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 ( and 5 . 5 – - 7 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 for discrimination of single methylations ) and minimal self - complementarity in the loop , but we have not systematically studied this . 4 . Because rRNA is highly structured , it is common to ﬁnd sub - stantial secondary structure in the probe section of the molec - ular beacon . Isolated structures with 2 – 3 base pairs are not normally a problem , but self - complementarity which extends the stem length beyond six base pairs can inhibit hybridization and should be eliminated if possible . Various strategies can achieve this , but typically this will involve removing nucleotides from the original or extended stem . For example , if simulation reveals the structure to be 5 0 - CCGCCX 1 X 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 Z X 8 X 9 X 10 X 11 X 12 X 13 X 14 GGCGG - 3 0 due to self - complementarity between X 1 / X 14 and X 2 / X 13 , alternative designs might include 5 0 - CCGX 1 X 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 Z X 8 X 9 X 10 X 11 X 12 X 13 X 14 CGG - 3 0 , CCGCX 2 X 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 Z X 8 X 9 X 10 X 11 X 12 X 13 GCGG - 3 0 or CCGCCX 3 X 4 X 5 X 6 X 7 Z X 8 X 9 X 10 X 11 X 12 X 13 X 14 GGCGG - 3 0 . Repeat step 3 until the stem is formed by the intended 5 – 6 nucleotides , with a Δ G of 2 . 5 – 7 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 ( and 5 . 5 – 7 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 for discrimination of single methyla - tions ) . This can require multiple iterations ( see Note 5 ) . 5 . Estimate the extent of discrimination between methylated and unmethylated targets with the DINAMelt Web Server ( http : / / unafold . rna . albany . edu / ? q ¼ DINAMelt / Hybrid2 ) by simulat - ing melting of your full molecular beacon sequence with the target sequence , using the following parameters : l Temperature range : 0 – 100 (cid:3) C ( these are the default settings ) . l NA ( nucleic acid ) type : DNA ( this is the default setting , see Note 4 ) . l Salt Conditions : [ Na + ] ¼ 1 M and [ Mg 2 + ] ¼ 0 M ( these are the default settings ) . l Initial concentrations : [ A 0 ] and [ B 0 ] ¼ 1 μ M . Repeat this after modifying the target or molecular beacon sequence to have a C : A or G : T mismatch at the methylation site . The smallest difference in simulated melting temperature between the fully matched and mismatched beacon – target duplexes ( labeled AB in the generated plot ) for molecular 96 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . beacons we have successfully used in MR - FISH is > 15 (cid:3) C . If the difference is much smaller than this in your simulation , we suggest modifying the beacon design , by increasing the stabil - ity of the stem relative to the stability of the loop section , repeating steps 3 – 5 . This can require several iterations . 6 . Helper DNA oligonucleotides that hybridize adjacent to the rRNA targeted by the molecular beacon can be used to increase hybridization efﬁciency if required ( e . g . , in case of low signal in FISH ) [ 17 ] . This is more likely when the methylation site is in a relatively inaccessible region of the ribosome [ 18 , 19 ] . To design these , select the 15 – 20 nt of the rRNA target sequence immediately adjacent to each end of the molecular beacon’s binding site and generate their reverse complement to give a helper probe sequence . Estimate the stability of the duplex made by the helper probes with the DINAMelt Web Server ( http : / / unafold . rna . albany . edu / ? q ¼ DINAMelt / Hybrid2 ) by simulating melting of each probe with their reverse comple - ment , using the following parameters : l Temperature range : 0 – 100 (cid:3) C ( these are the default settings ) . l NA ( nucleic acid ) type : DNA ( this is the default setting , see Note 4 ) . l Salt Conditions : [ Na + ] ¼ 1 M and [ Mg 2 + ] ¼ 0 M ( these are the default settings ) . l Initial concentrations : [ A 0 ] and [ B 0 ] ¼ 1 μ M . Helper oligonucleotides that we have successfully used for MR - FISH return Δ G values of 30 – 40 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 when simulated with these parameters . Lengthen or shorten the DNA sequence if Δ G falls far outside this range . To generate a second pair of helper sequences , select the 15 – 20 nt of the rRNA target sequence immediately adjacent to each end tar - geted by the ﬁrst set of helper probes and simulate melting as above , applying the same selection criterion ( Δ G of 30 – 40 kcal mol (cid:1) 1 ) . 3 . 2 Bacterial Culture Use sterile technique up to the point of ﬁxing the bacteria . For best results use a sterile laminar ﬂow hood or if this is not available work close to a ﬂame and avoid leaving cultures , broth or agar exposed to the laboratory environment for longer than necessary ( see Note 6 ) . 1 . Grow isolated colonies of each strain you plan to use to gener - ate biological replicates . Using a single use sterile plastic loop , streak out a glycerol stock onto an LB agar plate and incubate at 37 (cid:3) C overnight for 12 – 18 h . 2 . Prepare a starter culture . Aliquot 10 mL of sterile LB broth into sterilized glass universal tubes . Prepare three tubes per Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 97 bacterial strain . Using a single - use sterile plastic loop , pick a well isolated single bacterial colony from the cultured agar plate and dip the loop into one of the 10 mL aliquots of the LB broth . Repeat so you have three starter cultures per strain . Incubate these at 37 (cid:3) C overnight for 12 – 18 h on an orbital shaker at 180 rpm . 3 . Inoculate experimental culture . Aliquot 50 mL of sterile LB broth into sterilized , Pyrex 250 mL conical ﬂasks . Prepare one ﬂask per starter culture . Using a clean , sterile pipette tip , add 0 . 5 mL of your starter culture . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C until the culture reaches mid - log phase ( see Note 7 ) . 4 . Inactivate ( i . e . , ﬁx ) bacteria with formaldehyde . When the OD 600 is between 0 . 4 and 0 . 8 units , pour 7 . 5 mL of bacterial culture into a clean , sterile 15 mL centrifuge tube . Add 7 . 5 mL of 4 % formaldehyde in PBS and leave the resulting suspension at room temperature for 90 min . 5 . Wash inactivated bacteria . Centrifuge the suspension for 10 min at 4000 g to pellet the inactivated cells . Carefully pour off the supernatant and invert the tube over a piece of clean tissue to remove the residual liquid . Add 10 mL of PBS and gently suspend the pellet by pipetting the contents of the tube up and down . Repeat this twice to wash off the majority of the formaldehyde . 6 . Storage of inactivated bacteria . Add 0 . 5 mL of PBS to the washed pellet of inactivated cells and suspend by gently pipet - ting up and down . Transfer to a clean , sterile 1 . 5 mL micro - centrifuge tube . Add 0 . 5 mL of ethanol . The expected yield of 1 mL at ~ 4 . 5 (cid:4) 10 9 ﬁxed E . coli per mL is sufﬁcient for ~ 25 – 50 MR - FISH experiments . Store at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C until required . 3 . 3 In Situ Hybridization 1 . Pellet ~ 1 . 35 (cid:4) 10 8 ﬁxed E . coli by centrifugation , resuspend in hybridization buffer , pellet by centrifugation and then resus - pend in 20 μ L of hybridization buffer , containing 1 μ M methylation - insensitive molecular beacon and 1 μ M methylation - sensitive molecular beacon ( in our case these are typically Alexa Fluor - 647 and Alexa Fluor - 488 labeled respec - tively , but these can be substituted with any pair of dyes spec - trally resolved by your microscope , see Subheading 2 . 1 ) . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C for 21 h ( see Note 8 ) with agitation at 200 rpm . 2 . Pellet cells by centrifugation , resuspend in 30 μ L wash buffer A , then agitate at 200 rpm for 15 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 3 . Pellet cells by centrifugation , resuspend in 30 μ L wash buffer B , then agitate at 200 rpm for 15 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 4 . Pellet cells by centrifugation and resuspend in 10 μ L imaging buffer . 98 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . 5 . Attach a Frame - Seal slide chamber to a coverslip , add 5 μ L of the cell suspension and a drop of mounting medium to the coverslip . Seal with another plasma - cleaned coverslip and allow to set for at least 30 min at room temperature before imaging ( see Note 9 ) . 3 . 4 Fluorescence Microscopy 1 . Collect ﬂuorescent images for each color , taking care to mini - mize bleed - through between channels by selecting appropriate ﬁlters and acquiring the channels sequentially if required . 2 . Adapt the exposure time to the dynamic range of your camera and sample . If you are imaging a range of samples , start , if possible , with the samples for which you expect your maximal signal . Pick an exposure time ( and camera gain ) for which the average intensity of your signal is about half the dynamic range of your camera . Use 16 - bit imaging if possible , as this will increase the dynamic range , allowing you to resolve smaller intensity differences between bacteria . 3 . Collect sufﬁcient images to yield > 450 cells per sample for analysis after thresholding . In our experience , for samples prepared as in Subheading 3 . 3 , this requires imaging an area of ~ 0 . 7 mm 2 , or approximately 50 ﬁelds of view of area 82 (cid:4) 164 μ m . 3 . 5 Image Analysis 3 . 5 . 1 Data Prerequisites 1 . Data need to be in . tif format with separate , equally sized images for the different colors . ImageJ [ 20 ] can be used to convert images to . tif format . Set the exact ﬁle extension ( . tif , . tiff , . stk ) in Graphical User Interface 1 ( GUI - 1 ) ( see Subhead - ing 3 . 5 , step 7 and Fig . 2a ) . To get started , all the data from our previously published work are available on ﬁgshare and can be used as test data for the code [ 21 ] . 2 . Pairs or triplets of ﬁles need to be identiﬁed by their ﬁle name , which must start with an Arabic number ( index ) , followed by the letter “B” or “R” ( or “Y” for three - color data ) to indicate the color channel ( e . g . , 1B , 1R or 23R , 23B , 23Y ) ( see Note 10 for instructions on how to change this nomenclature if desired ) . 3 . Batch processing of a series of datasets is implemented ; datasets need to be organized in directories ( one directory per dataset ) . Since run time linearly increases with dataset size , we recom - mend optimizing the analysis on a single dataset ﬁrst to select the analysis parameters before running larger datasets . 3 . 5 . 2 Running the Software 1 . Copy the main function Single _ cell _ FISH _ analysis . m and the source code ( folder : “source codes” ) into a local directory . 2 . Open the main function in MATLAB and run the code by pressing F5 / “Run” . Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 99 3 . You will be prompted to set some parameters in four subsequent GUIs ( Fig . 2 and Table 2 ) . 4 . Use GUI - 1 to set parameters that should be customized for each dataset analyzed ( Fig . 2a ) . These include parameters that are speciﬁc to a dataset , such as the dataset name and image width . Other parameters that need adaptation are those used to detect bacteria in the ﬂuorescent images , as this requires setting a threshold for detection that needs to be empirically opti - mized . All parameters are summarized and explained in Table 2 . See Note 11 for a description of AND / OR / REDONLY criterion for detection , Note 12 for a detailed explanation on parameter range ﬁnding for the image thresh - olding step and Note 13 for a guide to the parameters used for discriminating between signals from single and aggregated bacterial cells . In GUI - 2 ( Fig . 2b ) , the user is asked to choose between running the analysis on multiple datasets in a row ( “batch mode , ” “Yes” ) or just a single dataset ( “No” ) . GUI - 3 and GUI - 4 asks for the path to the parent directory in Fig . 2 GUIs displayed on start - up of the MATLAB analysis software . ( a ) GUI - 1 for entering user - deﬁned parameters . Default options can be changed in the code . The red box highlights the parameters required for isolated object ( bacteria ) detection ( explained in Notes 11 – 13 ) . ( b ) GUI - 2 to select mode for batch or single dataset analysis and the corresponding GUI - 3 and GUI - 4 to enter the path to the raw data to be analyzed ( c , d ) 100 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . Table 2 Explanation of user - dependent parameters for automated data analysis Parameter Explanation “Experiment name” Deﬁnes name of experiment ( identiﬁer / name of results directory ) “Correction of channel offset ( no ¼ 0 , auto ¼ 1 , ﬁxed ¼ 2 ) ” Optional correction of positional offset between different color channels ( offset in x and / or y ) Set to 0 for no correction Set to 1 for automatic ( cross - correlation - based ) correction ; calculated for each image pair / triplet Set to 2 for correction using ﬁxed values across all images . Opens another GUI prompting you to deﬁne the x / y offset in pixels “mask criterion : AND ( 0 ) / OR ( 1 ) / REDonly ( 2 ) ” Set this parameter To 0 for detection of bacteria in all color channels and analysis according to the ‘AND’ criterion To 1 for detection of bacteria in all color channels and analysis according to the ‘OR’ criterion To 2 for detection of bacteria only in the red channel and analysis according to regions deﬁned by the red channel for all colors ( see also Note 11 ) Initial threshold Empirical parameter that deﬁnes the binarization threshold for the images ; binary images are required for object tracing / detection ( see also Note 12 ) Single size threshold ? ( 0 / 1 ) Set to 1 to reject bacteria / objects solely based on a lower size limit ( see also Note 13 ) Threshold based on perimeter / area ratio ? ( 0 / 1 ) Set to 1 if additional discrimination based on the ratio of perimeter to area is desired ( cf . methods of Ranasinghe et al . [ 8 ] ) ( see also Note 13 ) “Lower threshold bac size” Deﬁne lower limit for bacteria / object size ( pixel 2 ) ( see also Note 13 ) “Upper threshold bac size” Deﬁne upper limit for bacteria / object size ( pixel 2 ) ( see also Note 13 ) “Maximum num of empty px in ROI ( region of interest ) ” Maximum number of background pixels ( value zero ) that are allowed to be contained within an ROI ( high values expected for grouping multiple bacteria into one ROI ) ( see also Note 13 ) Path to results dir Deﬁne full path to results directory Display detected bacs ( 0 / 1 ) Set to 0 for noninteractive mode Set to 1 for interactive mode : Masks and detected bacteria are displayed for each image [ user input ( any key ) is required to continue the analysis and move to the next image ] Number of color channels ( 2 / 3 ) Set to 2 for two - color experiment and to 3 for three - color experiment ( continued ) Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 101 which the data directories are located ( Fig . 2c , batch mode ) or the path to the data directory ( Fig . 2d , single dataset analysis ) . 5 . After conﬁrmation of the settings in GUI - 4 , the software will run without user input unless an interactive option is selected in GUI - 1 ( i . e . , if “Display detected bacs” is set to 1 ) . 6 . Analysis output ( single dataset ) : The following plots are created as output : histograms of bacteria intensities for each color , histograms for coincidence between the channels ( only mean - ingful if the “OR” criterion is selected ; we used the REDONLY criterion in our previous work ) ; plot of ln ( red / green ) intensity , or ln ( green / yellow ) in the case of three - color experiments ; text ﬁles with lists of intensity values for replotting using other software if desired . Analysis output ( batch mode ) . Additionally , the intensities and intensity ratios extracted from all datasets are combined and saved as a single excel spreadsheet after analysis of the last dataset . 4 Notes 1 . The higher concentration of DEPC is required because Tris deactivates it via chemical reaction . Alternatively , dissolve Tris – HCl in DEPC - treated water ( see Subheading 2 . 1 , item 2 ) . 2 . The formamide concentration can be optimized to enhance signal and / or discrimination of methylation . Because formam - ide destabilizes the molecular beacon stem , rRNA secondary structure , and the probe – target duplex , it is difﬁcult to predict the appropriate concentration for a given set of probes and methylations , so we determine this empirically if needed ( i . e . , when 20 % formamide gives low signal and / or poor discrimina - tion of methylation ) . Table 2 ( continued ) Parameter Explanation Image width [ px ] Set the width of the image in pixels “Pixel size [ nm / px ] ” Set the pixel size of the imaging system in nanometers DUAL VIEW ( 0 / 1 ) The user is asked whether images were acquired with a dual - view in the emission path . If the user selects “1 , ” the image is split , assuming that dual - view divides the [ width ] (cid:4) [ length ] image into two [ width ] / 2 (cid:4) [ length ] images , one for each color . At present , this option is only implemented for two - color data Image type Set the image format ( . tif , . tiff or . stk ) 102 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . 3 . We found that using an inexpensive , low - magniﬁcation objec - tive ( Plan Fluor (cid:4) 20 air , numerical aperture ( NA ) 0 . 50 , Nikon ) gave similar results as objectives with a higher numerical aper - ture ( CFI Plan Apochromat λ (cid:4) 40 air , NA 0 . 95 and (cid:4) 60 Plan Apo TIRF oil immersion , NA 1 . 45 , both by Nikon ) , with the added advantage of higher throughput due to the larger ﬁeld - of - view obtained at lower magniﬁcations . 4 . There is currently no option for DNA / RNA hybrids . 5 . Remove bases from the loop section with caution , as hairpin loops with very small loops may be too stable to hybridize with the target sequence ; this will be reﬂected in a large Δ G of the hairpin loop structure . In our experience , loop lengths below 12 nucleotides can require stems shorter than six base pairs to hybridize . Shift methylation site from center if needed or shorten the stem . 6 . The protocol given is for culturing Escherichia coli BW25113 . If culturing different strains or species , refer to any available data as the optimal culturing conditions may require modiﬁca - tions to the procedure given here . If the strain you are using includes an antibiotic resistance gene or is transformed with a plasmid containing an antibiotic resistance gene , you can include appropriate antibiotics at the appropriate concentration in the LB agar and LB broth . 7 . Under optimal conditions , mid - log phase is usually reached in 2 – 3 h . The most convenient method to monitor bacterial growth is to transfer 1 mL of culture to a 1 cm pathlength cuvette using a sterile pipette and measure the absorbance at 600 nm ( OD 600 ) in a spectrophotometer . Mid - log can be deﬁned as when the OD 600 is between 0 . 4 and 0 . 8 units . 8 . The duration of in situ hybridization can be varied . Methyla - tion can be discriminated within 0 . 5 h of hybridization [ 8 ] , but this will vary depending on the hybridization kinetics of the speciﬁc probes used . 9 . Cells which have had insufﬁcient time to rehydrate in imaging buffer have poor morphology when imaged . 10 . The letter code for the color can be changed in function “get _ tiffs” or “get _ tiffs _ threecolours” in lines 10 , 11 , 12 . 11 . We use only the signal from the red channel for bacteria detec - tion , since the red - labeled methylation - insensitive probe is used to label ribosomes irrespective of methylation state . Using only the red channel thus minimized bias due to the expected large variation in ﬂuorescence brightness in the green and yellow channels ( reporting the methylation state ) . How - ever , in different experiments it may be beneﬁcial to ﬁrst detect bacteria in in all channels , and then select objects based on Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 103 whether they are recorded in any channel ( “OR” criterion ) or all channels [ “AND” criterion ; in principle , this can reduce the number of false positive events ( e . g . , detecting background rather than bacteria ) ] . This is already implemented for two - color data . 12 . To detect bacteria , ﬁrst the 2D Fourier transform of the image is calculated and a low - pass ﬁlter is applied that removes fre - quencies corresponding to structures smaller than 8 μ m . After this , the ﬁltered image is obtained by reverse Fourier transfor - mation , then converted to a binary image ( mask ) using a threshold intensity , set to be the mean single pixel intensity of the ﬁltered red image plus “initial threshold” times this value . This threshold is set by parameter “ initial threshold ” in GUI - 1 ( Fig . 2a and Table 2 ) . Pixels with intensity values below the threshold are set to zero and considered to be background , while pixels with values above the threshold are set to one and potential candidates for bacteria signals . Good values for the “initial threshold” need to be determined empirically by visual inspection of the resulting mask and comparison with the original data , and will depend on the signal - to - noise ratio of the data ( Fig . 3b – d ) . To display this mask during an analysis run , the parameter “ Display detected bacs ” should be set to 1 ( Table 2 ) . The analysis will be paused as long as the image is displayed ; press “space” to continue to the next image of a dataset . 13 . After obtaining an image mask , objects ( bacteria ) are detected in the next step by tracing continuous regions of ones in the binary image ( mask ) . We have previously only used the signal from the red channel for bacteria detection , and apply this mask to both color channels , but it is also possible to create a mask from each channel individually . Segmentation of individual cells is directly dependent on the bacteria density in the sample , so this may require some optimization in the sample prepara - tion step ( see also Subheading 3 . 3 ) . However , we encountered aggregates of bacteria under any conditions we tried . Since these aggregates may consist of bacteria belonging to different strains , it is necessary to include further selection criteria for robust discrimination of single cells and cell aggregates . We have explored selection criteria based on region size , continu - ity , and ellipticity . We expected that single cells should have , on average , a higher ellipticity than aggregates and cell debris , but we found that this criterion did not improve discrimination independently of the threshold ellipticity value used . However , this could potentially aid discrimination for other bacteria , and this criterion can be activated if the parameter “ threshold based on perimeter / area ratio ” is set to 1 ( Table 2 ) . For our data analysis , we selected regions based on their size 104 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . and continuity : regions were assumed to correspond to single bacteria if the area of the region is within a certain size range by setting a lower and upper threshold ( parameter : “ lower / upper threshold bac size , ” Table 2 ) . It is best to estimate the expected size distribution by manual analysis of the raw data , for example , using ImageJ [ 20 ] . A size threshold of 1 – 10 μ m 2 worked well for E . coli bacteria ( Fig . 3e , f ) . The Fig . 3 Effect of thresholding parameters on image segmentation ( detection of bacteria ) . ( a ) Typical raw data ; heat map goes from blue ( low ) to red ( high ) intensity . ( b – d ) Effect of parameter “initial threshold” on converting the raw data into a binary image in which ROI ( bacteria ) are separated from the background . If the threshold is too low ( b , c ) , multiple bacteria in close proximity show up as a single ROI ( red arrows ) . ( e – f ) Effect of parameters “lower / upper size threshold” on selecting only ROIs corresponding to single bacteria . The range needs to be adjusted to the expected size distribution in order to achieve good discrimination ( cf . also ( g ) ) . If the parameter “Display detected bacs” is set to 1 , these images ( showing selected ROI by tracing them on the mask image generated ) are displayed for each data ﬁle analyzed . ( g ) Distribution of bacteria sizes in ( a ) as determined from the analysis software after parameter optimization ( see image in e ) Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 105 continuity criterion is set by the parameter “ maximum num of empty px in ROI ” and it corresponds to the number of pixels with value zero contained within the region of interest ( group of pixels of value 1 , Table 2 ) . Since these “empty” regions most likely correspond to the space between bacteria incorrectly merged into one single region , introducing this parameter helps to discriminate between groups of bacteria and individual cells . We required regions to contain fewer than 50 background pixels ( value zero ) , corresponding to a total area of 5 . 15 μ m 2 . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the EU Innovative Medicines Initia - tive , IMI ( RAPP - ID project , grant agreement , no . 115153 ) , the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council , BBSRC ( Project Grant : BB / J017906 / 1 ) , and the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council , EPRSC ( Project Grant : EP / M027546 / 1 ) . D . K . is supported by the Royal Society . References 1 . Adler M , Weissmann B , Gutman AB ( 1958 ) Occurrence of methylated purine bases in yeast ribonucleic acid . J Biol Chem 230 : 717 – 723 2 . Starr JL , Fefferman R ( 1964 ) The occurrence of methylated bases in ribosomal ribonucleic acid of Escherichia coli K12 W - 6 . J Biol Chem 239 : 3457 – 3461 3 . Kellner S , Burhenne J , Helm M ( 2010 ) Detec - tion of RNA modiﬁcations . RNA Biol 7 : 237 – 247 4 . Helm M , Motorin Y ( 2017 ) Detecting RNA modiﬁcations in the epitranscriptome : predict and validate . Nat Rev Genet 18 : 275 – 291 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrg . 2016 . 169 5 . Motorin Y , Muller S , Behm - Ansmant I , Bran - lant C ( 2007 ) Identiﬁcation of modiﬁed resi - dues in RNAs by reverse transcription - based methods . Methods Enzymol 425 : 21 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 07 ) 25002 - 5 6 . Dominissini D , Moshitch - Moshkovitz S , Salmon - Divon M et al ( 2013 ) Transcriptome - wide mapping of N ( 6 ) - methyladenosine by m ( 6 ) A - seq based on immunocapturing and mas - sively parallel sequencing . Nat Protoc 8 : 176 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2012 . 148 7 . Ovcharenko A , Rentmeister A ( 2018 ) Emerging approaches for detection of methylation sites in RNA . Open Biol 8 : 180121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsob . 180121 8 . Ranasinghe RT , Challand MR , Ganzinger KA et al ( 2018 ) Detecting RNA base methylations in single cells by in situ hybridization . Nat Commun 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 02714 - 7 9 . Dennis PP , Bremer H ( 2008 ) Modulation of chemical composition and other parameters of the cell at different exponential growth rates . EcoSal Plus 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / ecosal . 5 . 2 . 3 10 . Micura R , Pils W , Ho¨bartner C et al ( 2001 ) Methylation of the nucleobases in RNA oligo - nucleotides mediates duplex - hairpin conver - sion . Nucleic Acids Res 29 : 3997 – 4005 11 . Roost C , Lynch SR , Batista PJ et al ( 2015 ) Structure and thermodynamics of N 6 - Methyladenosine in RNA : a spring - Loaded Base modiﬁcation . J Am Chem Soc 137 : 2107 – 2115 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ja513080v 12 . Tyagi S , Kramer FR ( 1996 ) Molecular beacons : probes that ﬂuoresce upon hybridization . Nat Biotechnol 14 : 303 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt0396 - 303 13 . Bonnet G , Tyagi S ( 1999 ) Thermodynamic basis of the enhanced speciﬁcity of structured DNA probes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 6171 – 6176 106 Kristina A . Ganzinger et al . 14 . Marras SAE , Kramer FR , Tyagi S ( 2002 ) Efﬁ - ciencies of ﬂuorescence resonance energy trans - fer and contact - mediated quenching in oligonucleotide probes . Nucleic Acids Res 30 : e122 15 . Markham NR , Zuker M ( 2005 ) DINAMelt web server for nucleic acid melting prediction . Nucleic Acids Res 33 : 577 – 581 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gki591 16 . Markham NR , Zuker M ( 2008 ) UNAFold : software for nucleic acid folding and hybridiza - tion . Methods Mol Biol 453 : 3 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60327 - 429 - 6 _ 1 17 . Fuchs BM , Glockner FO , Wulf J , Amann R ( 2000 ) Unlabeled helper oligonucleotides increase the in situ accessibility to 16S rRNA of ﬂuorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes . Appl Environ Microbiol 66 : 3603 – 3607 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 66 . 8 . 3603 - 3607 . 2000 18 . Fuchs BM , Wallner G , Beisker W et al ( 1998 ) Flow cytometric analysis of the in situ accessibility of Escherichia coli 16S rRNA for ﬂuorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes . Appl Environ Microbiol 64 : 4973 – 4982 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00214 - 011 - 0990 - 0 19 . Fuchs BM , Syutsubo K , Ludwig W , Amann R ( 2001 ) In situ accessibility of Escherichia coli 23S rRNA to ﬂuorescently labeled oligonucle - otide probes . Appl Environ Microbiol 67 : 961 – 968 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 67 . 2 . 961 - 968 . 2001 20 . Rueden CT , Schindelin J , Hiner MC et al ( 2017 ) ImageJ2 : ImageJ for the next genera - tion of scientiﬁc image data . BMC Bioinfor - matics 18 : 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12859 - 017 - 1934 - z 21 . Ranasinghe RT , Challand MR , Ganzinger KA et al ( 2017 ) Detecting RNA base methylations in single cells by in situ hybridization ( data - sets ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 6084 / m9 . ﬁgshare . 4667959 . v1 Imaging rRNA Methylation in Bacteria 107 Chapter 8 Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells in Coculture by Single - Molecule Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization ( smFISH ) Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst Abstract In eukaryotic cells , a small percentage of mRNA molecules can undergo transfer from one cell to another . mRNA transfer occurs primarily via membrane nanotubes , which are long thin protrusions that are produced by numerous cell types and can connect cells that can be up to hundreds of microns apart . Potentially , mRNAs might also transfer via extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) . Here we describe a method to detect transferred mRNA in cocultures of two different cell types and to distinguish between nanotube - and EVs - mediated transfer . This method uses single molecule ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) to provide an accurate and quantitative detection of transferred mRNA molecules and their subcellular localization . Following the guidelines presented here will allow the user to investigate mRNA transfer of most transcripts in any co - culture system . In addition , we present modiﬁcations that improve nanotube preservation during the smFISH procedure . Key words mRNA , Membrane nanotubes , Extracellular vesicles , Exosomes , Single - molecule ﬂuores - cent in situ hybridization , β - Actin , Glutaraldehyde 1 Introduction The gold standard method used to obtain absolute quantitative data on the number of RNA molecules of a speciﬁc transcript in single cells is single - molecule ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) [ 1 , 2 ] . This method uses multiple short ﬂuorescent - labeled DNA antisense oligonucleotides which tile along the length of the RNA . This increases the signal - to - noise ( SNR ) ratio and allows for the detection of single molecules and absolute quantita - tive analysis of both transcript numbers and spatial localization within the cell [ 3 ] ( Fig . 1a ) . Recently , we used smFISH to show that mRNA molecules can transfer between mammalian cells through unique cellular exten - sions called membrane nanotubes ( a . k . a . tunneling nanotubes ) [ 4 ] . These nanotubes are long thin protrusions that can be produced by Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 8 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 109 many cell types and transfer cargo between cells , such as ions , proteins , miRNA , mRNA , viral particles and whole organelles [ 5 – 8 ] . Nanotubes are structurally distinct from ﬁlopodia [ 9 ] . Nev - ertheless , there are no known nanotube markers and nanotube visualization is achieved primarily by membrane staining or staining for the cytoskeletal ﬁbers ( typically F - actin , although some nano - tubes contain microtubules ) . Since nanotubes are very thin and fragile , it is difﬁcult to image them and their cargo . This is particu - larly true in assays such as smFISH , which requires the ﬁxation of cells , followed by multiple rounds of washing the samples prior to imaging . It was also suggested that mRNA can transfer via extra - cellular vesicles ( EVs ) [ 10 , 11 ] , although some studies suggest that only mRNA fragments ( and not full - length mRNAs ) are present in EVs [ 12 – 14 ] . There are several advantages for using smFISH for detection of transferred mRNA , compared to other methods that detect and quantify RNA ( e . g . RT - qPCR , RNA sequencing or single - cell RNA sequencing ( scRNA - seq ) ) . One major advantage is that smFISH Fig . 1 Different strategies for probe design . ( a ) Left : A schematic depicting 25 – 50 probes that are tiled along the entire length of an mRNA . Right : The image shows FISH staining for β - actin mRNA with Cy5 - labeled probes tiled to the CDS . The cells shown are a wild - type MEF ( right ) cocultured for 3 h with a MBS - MEF ( left ) . ( b ) Left : The probes are designed against a unique tag [ e . g . MS2 - coat binding sequence x24 ( MBS ) or GFP ] genetically integrated into the mRNA sequence . Right : The image of the same cells in ( a ) shows FISH staining for β - actin - MBS mRNA with Cy3 - labeled probes tiled to the MBS tag . It is evident from the FISH signal that the left cell is a donor ( i . e . , MBS - MEF ) , whereas the right cell is an acceptor ( i . e . , wild - type MEF ) . ( c ) Left : The same mRNA is detected by two sets of probes , each labeled with a different color . Right : The image shows merging of the FISH images from ( a ) and ( b ) . Magenta— β - actin CDS Cy5 - labeled probes . Green—MBS Cy3 - labeled probes . Inset : zoom - in on a single transferred mRNA that shows the colocalization of both colors . FISH probe sequences can be found in [ 23 ] . All images are maximum projections of the z - sections 110 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst allows for spatial resolution of the transcript , which is lost when cells are lysed for RNA extraction , a required step for the other methods . Thus , smFISH makes it possible to determine the spatial organization of both the RNA donor and acceptor cells in the culture , as well as intracellular localization of the mRNA itself . A second advantage to using smFISH is that it does not necessitate cell separation , whereas to measure the level of mRNA transfer by other methods , e . g . RNA - seq , the acceptor cells must be separated completely from donor cells . Due to the low level of mRNA trans - fer , even a minute contamination of donor cells can skew the sequencing results . Third , current scRNA - seq technology has a lower limit of detection of ~ 10 molecules / cell [ 15 ] , whereas smFISH can detect as little as 1 mRNA molecule / cell . It should be noted that all mRNAs that we tested , except for β - actin mRNA , were transferred at levels averaging less than 10 molecules / cell [ 4 ] . Thus , smFISH shows higher sensitivity and is especially useful for detecting low levels of mRNA transfer . Yet there are disadvantages of smFISH compared to RNA - seq . First , only a small number of different transcripts can be detected simultaneously by smFISH , as compared to whole transcriptome analysis afforded by RNA - seq . Second , compared to smFISH , RNA - seq has no difﬁculty in determining transcript variability ( e . g . , splice variants , RNA editing , single - nucleotide polymorph - isms ( SNPs ) ) . However , recent developments in smFISH technol - ogy do allow for the detection of multiple transcripts [ 16 – 18 ] , as well as transcript variations [ 19 – 22 ] , that could be implemented based on the guidelines that are presented here . The method presented here was developed using cocultures of mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) in which donor cells are derived from mice endogenously expressing MS2 - labeled β - actin mRNA [ 23 ] and acceptor cells derived from wild - type ( WT ) mice , as well as using heterologous cocultures of MEFs with human cell lines [ 4 ] . However , this protocol can be used for any combination of cells and for any mRNA ( or long noncoding RNA ) species . In addition , we provide optional modiﬁcations that improve nanotube preservation during the smFISH procedure , although they may occur at the expense of the ability of smFISH to detect transferred mRNA . 2 Materials Prepare all solutions using ultrapure nuclease - free water . Prepare and store all reagents at room temperature , unless otherwise indi - cated . Follow institutional guidelines for working with , and dispos - ing of , hazardous chemicals and biohazard materials . Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 111 2 . 1 Choosing Cells for Coculture The choice of cells depends on the system being investigated . In order to conﬁdently detect mRNA transfer , the acceptor cells should be completely devoid of the query mRNA prior to cocul - ture . The following guidelines will help in the detection of mRNA transfer in the coculture of choice : 1 . Genetically modify the query mRNA in the donor cells by the addition of a long and unique RNA sequence ( e . g . , we provide the example of MS2x24 labeling , but other long labels such as GFP gene fusions would also work ) ( Fig . 1b ) . Do not use transient transfection of donor cells with the gene encoding the modiﬁed transcript , since the plasmid DNA might transfer as well ( [ 24 ] and our unpublished observations ) . Use only stable cell lines . It should be taken into consideration that addition of such a nucleotide sequence might affect the behav - ior ( e . g . , stability , localization ) of the mRNA and , therefore , its ability to undergo transfer . 2 . Alternatively , the gene encoding the query mRNA can be knocked - out in the acceptor cells . In this case , it is imperative to verify that the knock - out cell - line does not express any fragment of the RNA that can hybridize with the FISH probes being used for detection . 3 . A third possibility is to use a heterologous coculture system of cells that are derived from different species ( e . g . , human vs . mouse ) . In this case , it is important to verify that the gene is either absent in acceptor cells , or that the nucleotide sequence of the mRNA is sufﬁciently different to allow for the use of species - speciﬁc probes ( see also Subheading 2 . 2 ) . 4 . Both cell types should be able to proliferate in the same culture medium and under the same culture conditions . 5 . The researcher should be able to positively distinguish donor from acceptor cells in coculture . In some cases , expression of the query mRNA in donor cells ( i . e . , by examining cytoplasmic mRNA levels and the presence of transcription sites in the nucleus ) is sufﬁcient to distinguish donor from acceptor cells in coculture . However , other means to distinguish the two cell types should be considered ( e . g . , cell morphology , the expres - sion pattern of a ﬂuorescent protein , performing co - FISH with probes for another unique RNA , or by staining one of the cell types with a distinct dye ) ( Fig . 1b , c ) . 2 . 2 Design and Labeling of Oligonucleotide Probes Probes are 18 – 22 mer DNA oligonucleotides that are ﬂuorescently labeled with a ﬂuorescent organic dye at one or both ends . We recommend using the Stellaris probe design web tool ( https : / / www . biosearchtech . com / support / tools / design - software / stellaris - probe - designer ) and to order the Stellaris RNA FISH probes from Biosearch Technologies . The probes arrive in powder 112 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst form and should be dissolved in nuclease - free water to a concentra - tion of 25 mM . The amount is sufﬁcient for 200 samples , when using the default concentration of 250 nM . For more details and alternative labeling methods , see [ 3 ] . The researcher should consider the following guidelines : 1 . Good detection requires a high signal - to - noise ratio . Typically , a minimal set of 25 probes is required , but more is better . Therefore , the mRNA should be long enough to allow for the creation of at least 25 unique probes . 2 . When using a heterologous system , the 3 0 - UTR and 5 0 - UTR are probably the most divergent sequences . Thus , species - speciﬁc antisense probes could be designed for these regions . It should be noted that a single nucleotide variance within the 20 nt probe is insufﬁcient for speciﬁcity and specialized FISH protocols should be utilized [ 19 – 21 ] . The user should also take into consideration that some transcripts have multiple isoforms that are different in 5 0 - UTR and 3 0 - UTR sequences and / or length due to alternative splicing , alternative transcription start sites , and alternative cleavage and polyadenylation . Thus , the probes might not identify all isoforms . 3 . The expression level of the mRNA in the donor cell could affect the efﬁciency of mRNA transfer [ 4 ] . High expression could lead to increased transfer , but this might not be the case for every mRNA . Moreover , since mRNA transfer rate is ~ 1 – 5 % [ 4 ] , transfer of mRNAs that are expressed at less than 50 – 100 copies / cell in donor cells may have a low chance to be detected over background staining . 4 . When probes are designed to tile along the entire length of the mRNA ( Fig . 1a ) , the full - length mRNA may be detected . However , when probes are designed to a partial sequence ( e . g . a speciﬁc tag or gene sequence , see Subheading 2 . 1 , item 1 , Fig . 1b ) , there is a possibility that only this fragment is detected . In order to distinguish between transfer of a full - length mRNA and that of an mRNA fragment , design two sets of probes using two different colors . One set can be complementary to the 5 0 - UTR and the coding sequence ( CDS ) and the other set complementary to the tag ( Fig . 1c ) . Each set should contain at least 25 probes as explained in Subheading 2 . 2 , item 1 . If it is not possible to design two full sets of donor - unique probes , then one unique set ( i . e . , for the tag ) is sufﬁcient . Co - localization of the signal from the two sets indicates it is a full - length mRNA . 2 . 3 Cell Culture on Fibronectin - Coated Coverslips and Tripods 1 . Fibronectin coating solution : Dilute ﬁbronectin at a 1 : 100 ratio in prewarmed ( 37 (cid:2) C ) sterile PBS 1 (cid:3) . Prepare fresh , 1 mL per coverslip . See Note 1 . Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 113 2 . 70 % ethanol . 3 . Culture medium ( e . g . , DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum [ FBS ] and penicillin / streptomycin ) . Store at 4 (cid:2) C . Prewarm to 37 (cid:2) C prior to use . 4 . PBS 1 (cid:3) pH 7 . 4 without Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + , sterile . Store at 4 (cid:2) C . Prewarm to 37 (cid:2) C prior to use . 5 . Cell detachment reagent ( e . g . , trypsin ) . Store at 4 (cid:2) C . Prewarm to 37 (cid:2) C prior to use . 6 . Cell cultures of choice ( see Subheading 2 . 1 ) . 7 . 12 - well plate 8 . Glass coverslips , round , 18 mm , # 1 . 9 . Parafﬁn wax . 10 . Glass Pasteur pipette . 11 . Tweezers—straight , pointed , stainless steel tip . 12 . Heating block for 1 . 5 mL tubes capable of reaching 110 (cid:2) C . 2 . 4 smFISH 1 . Wash buffer : PBS 1 (cid:3) supplemented with 5 mM MgCl 2 ( PBSM ) . 2 . 32 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . 3 . Fixation buffer ( prepare fresh ) : 4 % PFA in PBSM ( see Note 2 and Table 1 ) . 4 . Glycine stock solution : 2 M glycine in water . 5 . Quenching buffer ( prepare fresh ) : 0 . 1 M glycine in PBSM . 6 . Permeabilization buffer : 0 . 1 % Surfact - Amps X - 100 ( high - grade Triton X - 100 ) in PBS 1 (cid:3) . 7 . Optional : add Phalloidin - FITC ( 25 – 50 nM ) to Permeabiliza - tion buffer . Keep in the dark . 8 . 2 (cid:3) Saline sodium citrate ( SSC ) : dilute 20 (cid:3) SSC 1 : 10 in water . 9 . Formamide ( store stock at 4 (cid:2) C ) . Warm to room temperature prior to use . 10 . Prehybridization buffer ( prepare fresh ) : 10 % formamide in 2 (cid:3) SSC . 11 . Dextran sulfate stock solution : 20 % solution ( W / V ) in water . 12 . E . coli tRNA stock solution : 10 mg / mL in water ( aliquot and store at (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) C ) . 13 . Vanadyl ribonucleoside complex ( VRC ) 200 mM ( store at (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) C ) . 14 . Hybridization buffer without probes : 10 % formamide , 1 mg / mL E . coli tRNA , 10 % dextran sulfate , 2 mM VRC , 0 . 2 mg / mL bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ( Stock 20 mg / mL ; store at (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) C ) , 2 (cid:3) SSC . The hybridization buffer can be 114 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst Table 1 Different conditions that were tested for nanotube preservation and transferred mRNA detection by smFISH Condition Altered solutions / steps 1 Regular FISH [ 3 ] 2 Short FISH protocol Reduce Subheading 3 . 3 , steps 6 , 8 , and 19 to one wash 3 Regular or short protocol , cells facing up Choose Subheading 3 . 3 , step 13 4 PFA ; 1 h 4 (cid:2) C directly to medium Do not perform Subheading 3 . 3 , step 3 , add PFA directly to medium . Keep on ice 1 h 5 Condition # 1 or # 4 with 0 . 05 % Surfact - Amps X - 100 Permeabilization buffer ( Subheading 2 . 4 , step 6 ) prepared with 0 . 05 % Surfact - Amps X - 100 6 Condition # 4 , air dry Samples are left to dry between Subheading 3 . 3 , steps 5 and 6 [ 28 ] 7 MES + sucrose ﬁxation buffer Fixation buffer in Subheading 2 . 4 , step 3 : 4 % PFA , 10 mM MES pH 6 . 1 , 138 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 320 mM sucrose [ 29 ] 8 PIPES ﬁxation buffer Fixation buffer in step 2 . 4 . 3 : 4 % PFA , 80 mM PIPES pH 6 . 8 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA [ 30 ] 9 Turbo FISH We used the protocol from [ 31 ] 10 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( GA ) Fixation buffer in Subheading 2 . 4 , step 3 : 3 . 5 % PFA , 0 . 5 % GA , 0 . 1 M Sorensens phosphate buffer pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgCl 2 ( see Fig . 2 ) 11 Condition # 10 , Cy5 - labeled probes Instead of Cy3 - labeled probes 12 1 . 5 % or 2 . 5 % GA Fixation buffer in Condition # 10 , but with 2 . 5 % PFA / 1 . 5 % GA or 1 . 5 % PFA / 2 . 5 % GA 13 Condition # 10 , 6 min ﬁxation Fixation buffer in Condition # 10 , but Subheading 3 . 3 , step 4 for 6 min 14 0 . 1 % , 0 . 2 % , or 0 . 25 % GA Fixation buffer in Condition # 10 but with 3 . 9 % PFA / 0 . 1 % GA ; 3 . 8 % PFA / 0 . 2 % GA ; or 3 . 75 % PFA / 0 . 25 % GA ( see Fig . 3a ) 15 0 . 1 % GA in 0 . 2 M HEPES Fixation buffer in Condition # 14 , but change Sorensens to 0 . 2 M HEPES 16 2 % PFA / 0 . 5 % GA ! 4 % PFA Fixation buffer in Condition # 10 , but with 2 % PFA / 0 . 5 % GA Followed by a second ﬁxation step in 4 % PFA in 0 . 2 M HEPES 17 Condition # 10 , increase formamide Formamide in buffers Subheading 2 . 4 , steps 10 and 14 was increased to 15 % , 20 % , or 30 % ( continued ) Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 115 prepared in advance and stored in 1 mL aliquots at (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) C until use . Before use , thaw an appropriate amount of hybridi - zation buffer ( 50 μ L / sample ) and add probes to the buffer . See Note 3 . 15 . DAPI stain solution : 0 . 5 μ g / mL in 2 (cid:3) SSC . Store at 4 (cid:2) C in the dark . Warm to room temperature prior to use . 16 . ProLong glass antifade reagent ( store at 4 (cid:2) C ) . Warm to room temperature prior to use . See Note 4 . Table 1 ( continued ) Condition Altered solutions / steps 18 Condition # 10 , quench with NaBH 4 Fixation buffer in Condition # 10 , After Subheading 3 . 3 , step 5 , add additional quenching with 1 , 3 , 5 , or 10 mg / mL NaBH 4 for 10 min , RT , once or twice . Follow by repeat of Subheading 3 . 3 , step 5 ( see Fig . 3a ) 19 Condition # 10 or 18 , pepsin Same as Condition # 10 or 18 ( with 1 mg / mL NaBH 4 ) . After Subheading 3 . 3 , step 8 ( ﬁrst wash ) treat for 30 , 45 , or 60 s with 100 μ g / mL pepsin in 10 mM HCl followed by three washes in PBSM [ 29 ] 20 Condition # 18 , Tween 20 0 . 1 % or 0 . 2 % Tween 20 added to buffers Subheading 2 . 4 , items 10 and 14 21 Condition # 18 , 65 (cid:2) C Samples in Subheading 3 . 3 , step 9 are incubated for 15 min at 65 (cid:2) C followed by 15 min at RT 22 Condition # 18 , urea Replace formamide in buffers Subheading 2 . 4 , items 10 and 14 with 1 , 2 , or 4 M urea [ 32 ] 23 Condition # 18 , cycloheximide Add 100 μ g / mL cycloheximide to the culture 15 min prior to ﬁxation 24 Condition # 18 , 1 , 6 hexanediol Add 1 , 3 . 5 , or 5 % of 1 , 6 hexanediol to the culture 1 min prior to ﬁxation [ 33 ] 25 Condition # 24 , but during ﬁxation Add 1 , 3 . 5 , or 5 % of 1 , 6 hexanediol to ﬁxation buffer ( Condition # 18 ) 26 Condition # 18 , acetate ( optional addition of Tween 20 or urea ) After Subheading 3 . 3 , step 7 , samples are placed on ice and incubated with 5 % acetate in PBSM for 5 min [ 34 ] We also tested this in combination with Condition # 20 —0 . 1 % Tween 20 or Condition # 22 —1 M urea 27 Combine Conditions # 20 and 22 With 0 . 1 % Tween 20 and 1 M urea 28 Condition # 18 , proteinase K Treat with proteinase K ( 1 or 5 μ g / mL in PBSM for 2 , 5 , 10 , 20 , or 30 min ) , between Subheadings 3 . 3 , steps 7 and 8 29 Combine Condition # 28 ( 1 μ g / mL , 2 or 10 min ) and # 22 ( 1 M urea ) Best results ( see Fig . 3b – d ) 116 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst 17 . Hybridization chamber : use a plastic box or plastic dish ( e . g . , petri dish or 15 cm tissue culture dish ) . The size of the chamber should accommodate all the coverslips allowing for at least a few millimeters between the coverslips . Place a sized piece of Paraﬁlm ﬂat on the bottom of the chamber to ﬁt snugly . Avoid placing coverslips on wrinkles . ( Optional ) Draw a grid ( each square should ﬁt a single coverslip ) and label the squares . Take the cap of a 15 mL conical tube and place it at the edge of the chamber . Fill the cap with 1 mL of water or buffer ( this is required to maintain humidity in the chamber ) . Prepare a piece of Paraﬁlm to seal the chamber after coverslips are placed . Prepare aluminum foil to cover chamber to protect from light . The plastic chamber can be reused multiple times . 18 . Microscope slides . 19 . Tweezers—straight , pointed , stainless steel tip . 20 . Optional : High - quality nail polish . 21 . Pipet aid . 22 . Optional : vacuum aspirator . 2 . 5 Imaging Wide - ﬁeld microscope ( e . g . , Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 ) equipped with the following : 1 . Fluorescent light source ( e . g . , Illuminator HXP 120 V light source ( Zeiss ) ) . 2 . Filter sets suitable for the ﬂuorophores used + DAPI ( blue ) ﬁlter . 3 . Automated motorized stage for submicron movement in X , Y , and Z axes ( e . g . , motorized XYZ scanning stage , 130x100 PIEZO ( Zeiss ) ) . 4 . Plan - Apo (cid:3) 100 ( preferred ) or 63 (cid:3) oil immersion objective with high NA ( 1 . 35 NA or more ) . 5 . CCD or sCMOS high - resolution digital camera ( e . g . , Flash 4 sCMOS ( Hamamatsu ) ) . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Cell Culture : Coculture with Cells in Direct Contact For efﬁcient mRNA transfer , we recommend seeding the acceptor cells prior to donor cells [ 4 ] . However , seeding both donor and acceptor cells together is possible . It is imperative to have a negative control culture of acceptor cells alone . It is advisable to have a culture of donor cells alone , as well . Important : when plating the cells , aim for a maximum of ~ 80 – 90 % conﬂuence of the single cultures and co - cultures at the time of ﬁxation ( Subheading 3 . 3 , step 2 ) . See Note 5 . Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 117 1 . Prewarm PBS 1 (cid:3) , culture medium , and trypsin solution . Pre - pare coating solution ( fresh ) . 2 . For each sample , place a coverslip in a well of a 12 - well plate . Rinse ( add solution and remove after a few seconds ) with 1 mL / well 70 % ethanol , then rinse with 1 mL / well PBS 1 (cid:3) . Add 1 mL / well of ﬁbronectin coating solution ( see Note 1 ) and incubate in a cell culture incubator for 10 – 20 min . Rinse once with 1 mL / well PBS (cid:3) 1 . Add 1 mL / well of culture medium . 3 . Verify that the coverslip does not ﬂoat in the medium and seed acceptor cells of choice on the glass coverslips . Swirl the plate ( medium ) slowly a few times to spread the cells evenly . Incu - bate for several hours to overnight in the cell culture incubator . 4 . Seed the donor cells of choice on top of the acceptor cells . Swirl the plate slowly a few times to spread the cells evenly . Incubate for the desired duration of the co - culture . See Note 6 . 3 . 2 Cell Culture : Coculture with Tripods In order to distinguish between contact - dependent mRNA transfer ( e . g . via nanotubes ) or diffusion - mediated mRNA transfer ( e . g . via EVs ) , the donor and acceptor cells are separated from each other to prevent direct contact , but still share medium that allows for the free diffusion of materials between cells ( see Note 7 ) . Preparation of tripods : 1 . Fill ~ half of a 1 . 7 mL tube with parafﬁn wax ﬂakes and place in a heating block at 110 (cid:2) C . Wait until the parafﬁn melts . 2 . Place coverslips in a 12 - well plate . 3 . Dip a glass Pasteur pipette in the melted parafﬁn ( i . e . , while in the heating block ) . Seal the top of the pipette with your gloved ﬁnger . 4 . Very quickly , place drops of melted parafﬁn , 2 – 3 mm high , in a triangular arrangement , at the edges of the coverslips . Note that the parafﬁn solidiﬁes within a few seconds after removing it from the heating block . 5 . Tripods can be kept dry in a 12 - well plate at room temperature indeﬁnitely . 6 . Tripod coverslips are treated and plated with donor cells as described in Subheading 3 . 1 . Donor cells can be up to 70 – 80 % conﬂuence at the time of coculture , but care should be taken that the cells do not reach full conﬂuence by the end of the designated co - culture time . 7 . Acceptor cells are plated on regular coverslips as described in Subheading 3 . 1 . Acceptor cells can be up to 70 – 80 % conﬂu - ence at time of co - culture , but care should be taken so that the 118 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst cells do not reach full conﬂuence by the end of the designated coculture time ( see Note 5 ) . 8 . When it is time to begin coculture , use the tweezers to pick up a donor cell - seeded tripod , and ﬂip it , cells facing down , over a coverslip pre - seeded with acceptor cells . Both coverslips should be completely covered by the culture medium . When per - formed correctly , the donor tripod will stand on its three legs at a 2 – 3 mm distance above the acceptor cells . 9 . In tripod experiments , always compare to co - culture of cells in contact and acceptor alone culture ( Subheading 3 . 1 ) . 3 . 3 smFISH 1 . General Comments ( a ) To avoid RNase contamination of samples , wear gloves , use barrier tips and avoid working on surfaces where there is regular use of RNases ( e . g . , from plasmid prep kits ) . ( b ) All steps except “hybridization” are performed while the coverslips remain in the well , with 1 mL of solution added per well . ( c ) Pipet liquids onto the walls of the well and not directly onto the cells . ( d ) Do not shake the plates during any of the incubations or washes . ( e ) At any step—do not let the cells to dry , since they will lose their form and might also acquire autoﬂuorescent back - ground signals . ( f ) Optional : to improve preservation of nanotubes , use the pipet aid at the slowest setting and do not use a vacuum aspirator at all . See also Note 2 and Table 1 for more details on nanotube preservation during smFISH and the consequences . 2 . If performing a tripod experiment ( Subheading 3 . 2 ) , remove the donor ( top ) tripod coverslip ﬁrst . 3 . Rinse cells once with PBSM . 4 . Fix cells by incubating them with ﬁxation buffer ( prepared fresh ) for 10 min at room temperature ( RT ) . 5 . Wash with quenching buffer for 10 min at RT . 6 . Wash with PBSM for 10 min at RT . Repeat this step . Samples can be left overnight at 4 (cid:2) C at this point . 7 . Permeabilize cells by incubating with Permeabilization buffer for 10 min at RT . If the Permeabilization buffer contains phalloidin - FITC , cover the plate with aluminum foil from this step onward . 8 . Wash with PBSM for 10 min at RT . Repeat this step . 9 . Incubate with Prehybridization buffer for 30 min at RT . Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 119 10 . While waiting ( Subheading 3 . 3 , step 9 ) , mix the thawed , pre - made hybridization buffer with the probes , and prepare the hybridization chamber . 11 . Place 45 μ L of hybridization buffer at each intended coverslip position in the hybridization chamber . There is no need to remove large bubbles , but avoid small foam - like bubbles . 12 . With the tweezers , gently lift each coverslip from the well , remove excess liquid by touching the edge on a Kimwipe and place the coverslips with the cells facing down on the hybridiza - tion buffer . 13 . Alternative : to improve preservation of nanotubes , place cover - slips in the hybridization chamber with cells facing up , and add 45 μ L of hybridization buffer on top of the cells ( pipette from the edge of the coverslip , slowly ) . Make sure that the liquid covers the entire surface . 14 . Seal the hybridization chamber with Paraﬁlm , wrap with alu - minum foil , and place in a 37 (cid:2) C incubator for 3 h to overnight . 15 . Prepare a new ( or same ) 12 - well plate with Prehybridization buffer . 16 . Use the tweezers to transfer the coverslips back to the 12 - well plate , cells facing up . 17 . Cover the plate with aluminum foil and incubate in the 37 (cid:2) C incubator for 15 min . 18 . Wash again in Prehybridization buffer , 15 min at 37 (cid:2) C . 19 . Quick rinse with 2 (cid:3) SSC at RT ( two quick rinses ) . 20 . Stain in DAPI stain solution ( prewarmed to RT ) for 60 – 90 s at RT . 21 . Wash for 5 min with 2 (cid:3) SSC . 22 . During this ﬁnal wash step , label the microscope slide ( s ) . 23 . Just before lifting the coverslips , place 20 μ L of ProLong antifade onto the microscope slides , one drop for each cover - slip ( there can be two per slide ) . Remove any air bubbles . See Note 4 . 24 . Use tweezers to lift coverslips , remove excess liquid on Kim - wipes and place cell - side facing down , on the ProLong anti - fade drop . 25 . Let dry at RT in the dark for at least several hours ( for best images , wait > 24 h ) . 26 . ( Optional ) For long - term storage , seal with nail polish around the edges of the coverslip after the ProLong dries . 27 . Slides can be stored at RT for at least 2 weeks ( we have not checked for longer than that ) . Keep at (cid:4) 20 (cid:2) C for long - term storage ( months to years ) . 120 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst 3 . 4 Imaging 1 . Imaging can be performed on any wide - ﬁeld microscope that is equipped as detailed in Subheading 2 . 5 . See Note 8 . 2 . Images should be taken at the relevant channels with descend - ing color order ( e . g . , Cy5 ( 670 nm , far - red ) , Cy3 ( 570 nm , yellow - orange ) , FITC ( 520 nm , green ) , and DAPI ( 460 nm , blue ) ) . 3 . Exposure time : for FISH ﬂuorophores , it is recommended to use maximum ( 100 % ) power of the light source and a long exposure time of 1 – 3 s for each FISH channel . In order to detect the thin nanotubes by phalloidin - FITC staining it is recommended to use an exposure time that is longer than typically used for cellular F - actin . This means that cellular F - actin will be over - exposed . For DAPI , use a low power setting and a very short exposure time ( e . g . 30 % power , 20 – 40 ms ) . 4 . Z - sections : In order to detect RNA spots throughout the vol - ume of the cell , multiple z - sections should be collected . It is recommended to use 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 μ m steps . Note that nanotubes are above the substratum and sometimes even pass above a neighboring cell ( Fig . 2 ) so it is better to have z sections that go at least 1 – 2 μ m above the cells . When imaging , choose the option to image all z - sections in one channel before switching to the next channel . 5 . Binning : for better resolution , use pixel binning 1 (cid:3) 1 . How - ever , sometimes for the beneﬁt of signal enhancement over resolution , a 2 (cid:3) 2 binning may be used . 3 . 5 FISH Spot Analysis FISH spot analysis is performed by programs that ﬁt the diffraction - limited spots using a 3D Gaussian ﬁtting algorithm . Many labs produce their own software / scripts . We recommend FISH - quant ( https : / / bitbucket . org / muellerﬂorian / ﬁsh _ quant ) [ 25 , 26 ] since it is user - friendly and can perform multiple analyses ( i . e . , mature mRNA and transcription site analysis ) . The images for FISH - quant need to be in TIFF format as a separate ﬁle of multiple z - sections obtained for each channel . If the microscope does not save ﬁles in TIFF format , convert the images by using another program ( e . g . , FIJI [ 27 ] ) . Follow the instructions accompanying FISH - quant to perform the analysis . Here is a brief description of the steps , with special emphasis on the detection of mRNA transfer : 1 . Install MATLAB ( version 2015b or higher ) and then install FISH - quant . 2 . In the main interface of FISH - quant : ( a ) Choose folders ( e . g . , main folder , images folder , outlines folder , results folder ) . Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 121 ( b ) Insert the experimental parameters : XY pixel size ( based on camera and binning ) , Z pixel size , refractive index of the immersion oil , NA of the objective and excitation and emission wavelengths of the FISH probe ﬂuorophore . ( c ) Under “Tools” ! “outline designer” : draw outlines for cells , nuclei and transcription sites ( TS ) ( hint : use the automatic “detect nucleus” and “TS auto detect” based on the DAPI and TS / FISH staining , respectively ) . ( d ) Upload an outline ﬁle of an image of a donor cell . ( e ) Filter the background ( try different modes and para - meters for best ﬁltering ) . ( f ) Perform predetection according to the accompanying instructions . ( g ) Fit spots using the Gaussian algorithm . ( h ) Use thresholding parameters to achieve the best detection of mRNA spots . The “Spot inspector” button can assist in estimating this analysis . It does not have to be perfect , this is ﬁne - tuned later . ( i ) Save the detection settings . 3 . From “Tools” ! “Batch processing” it is possible to perform analysis of multiple images . Upload the saved settings ﬁle from Subheading 3 . 5 , step 2 . i and the outlines of all the images , and run the batch processing . 4 . After Batch processing is complete , inspect the thresholded spots as listed in the status window of the “Batch processing” graphical user interface ( GUI ) . The number of spots in cells from acceptor alone cultures should be close to zero . If there are false - positive spots in these cells , highlight an outline ﬁle - name of an image from an acceptor cell only culture in the “Outline ﬁles to be processed” box and use the “Spot inspec - tor” from within the “Batch processing” GUI to check the parameters of the detected false positive spots . Change the thresholding parameters to exclude background spots in accep - tor only cells , but with minimal effect on the number of spots in donor cells . See Note 9 . Thresholding is performed automati - cally when changing the parameters and the status window is updated accordingly . Continue to modify the parameters until satisﬁed . 5 . Save “Results for each image [ All spots ] , ” “Summary : mature mRNA” and the detection settings . 6 . Use “Tools” ! “Spot inspector” to eliminate obvious false positives [ 4 ] ( e . g . , areas of high autoﬂuorescence , spots that are due to inaccurate outlining of the nucleus , and spots that are present at the interface of donor - acceptor cells in the coculture ) . 122 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst 7 . The data from FISH - quant is saved as a “ . txt” ﬁle . The data can be copied and pasted to Excel for further analysis . 8 . If the mRNA transfers , the number of spots in acceptor cells in coculture will be signiﬁcantly higher than in acceptor culture alone , but signiﬁcantly lower than the number of mRNA spots in donor cells . 3 . 6 Image Analysis We use FIJI for other image analysis requirements . 1 . Use the “Straight” tool to measure the length of nanotubes . Nanotubes will be visible by the phalloidin - FITC staining . Nanotubes connect two cells , are above the substratum and typically go in a straight line ( Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 2 Glutaraldehyde ﬁxation increases nanotube stability . Images of MBS - MEF cultures labeled with Cy3 - MBS probes ( I , III ) and phalloidin - FITC ( II , IV ) after ﬁxation with 4 % PFA ( I , II ; Table 1 , Condition # 3 ) or with 3 . 5 % PFA / 0 . 5 % GA ( III , IV ; Table 1 , Condition # 10 ) . All four images are maximum projections of the z - sections , excluding out - of - focus slices ( i . e . , below and above the cells ) . The box below IV highlights a long nanotube poorly visualized in the general image ( yellow arrowheads ) , since it was detected in the upper three z - sections and passes above the cell marked X Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 123 2 . To determine if mRNA is in nanotubes , use the “Image” ! “Color” ! “Merge channels” option to merge the FISH and phalloidin - FITC channels . Look for appearance of FISH signal at the x , y , and z of the nanotube . Verify that these spots are also recognized as positive spots by FISH - quant ( Subheading 3 . 5 ) . 3 . To determine if two - color FISH signals colocalize ( e . g . , when trying to assess if the mRNA is full - length , see Subheading 2 . 2 , step 4 ) , use “Merge channels” to merge the two FISH images . Use the “Straight” tool to pass a line through the spot and use “Analyze” ! “Plot proﬁle” to plot the spot intensity along the pixels in both channels . If the spots colocalize , the intensity peaks should colocalize . Verify that these spots are also recog - nized as positive spots by FISH - quant ( Subheading 3 . 5 ) . 4 Notes 1 . Coating with ﬁbronectin increases mRNA transfer , as com - pared to uncoated or polylysine - coated coverslips [ 4 ] . How - ever , some cell types might prefer a different extracellular matrix ( e . g . , collagen ) and the efﬁciency of cell attachment , membrane nanotube production , and mRNA transfer should be determined empirically . 2 . During the preparation of this manuscript , we tested many conditions that were aimed to better preserve membrane nano - tubes ( Table 1 ) . All these conditions included phalloidin - FITC staining , which allowed much better detection of nanotubes and other thin protrusions . Testing a variety of conditions and buffers with 4 % PFA did not improve nanotube preservation ( Table 1 , Conditions # 2 – 9 ) and , in some cases , reduced the SNR of the FISH signal due to increased background staining ( Table 1 , Conditions # 2 , 4 – 6 , 9 ) . Using Subheading 3 . 3 , step 13 slightly improved nanotube preservation and , therefore , we used this step for Conditions # 3 – 29 . A ﬁxative of 3 . 5 % PFA / 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( GA ) has increased the number of preserved nanotubes by three to four fold compared to 4 % PFA ( Table 1 , Condition # 10 ) . GA also improved the preservation of long nanotubes ( > 10 μ m ) compared to 4 % PFA ( Fig . 2 ) . However , GA causes a signiﬁcant increase in autoﬂuorescence at the FITC and Cy3 channels . This can be quenched by 1 mg / mL NaBH 4 ( Table 1 , Condition # 18 ) . Increasing NaBH 4 concentration did not improve the quenching signiﬁcantly , but performing two 10 min incubations , instead of one , did . Note that NaBH 4 should be prepared immediately prior to use . NaBH 4 ﬁzzles like carbonated water , and requires a repeat of Subheading 3 . 3 , step 5 and at least two washes in PBSM 124 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst ( Subheading 3 . 3 , step 6 ) , which decreases the efﬁciency of nanotube preservation ( from a three to four fold with GA to ~ twofold with NaBH 4 ) . Unexpectedly , transferred mRNA was not detected when cells were ﬁxed with GA , whereas endoge - nous mRNA was readily detected . This was not due to the increased autoﬂuorescence since using a Cy5 - labeled probe or quenching autoﬂuorescence with NaBH 4 did not improve the detection of transferred mRNA ( Table 1 , Conditions # 11 and 18 ; Fig . 3a ) . Reducing GA concentration also had not improved the detection of transferred mRNA ( Fig . 3a ) . We suspected that a distinctive GA cross - linked protein or RNA structure is blocking the hybridization of the probes to the transferred mRNA . We therefore tried multiple treatments Fig . 3 Glutaraldehyde ﬁxation prevents detection of transferred mRNA . ( a ) GA ﬁxation prevents detection of transferred mRNA regardless of GA concentration or quenching with NaBH 4 ( Table 1 , Conditions # 10 , 14 , and 18 ) . The graph shows the number of transferred MBS mRNAs detected in wild - type MEFs cocultured with MBS - MEFs for 3 h . Each dot represents a single cell . ( b ) Treatment with proteinase K ( 1 μ g / mL for 2 or 10 min ) followed by 1 M urea ( Table 1 , Condition # 29 ) allows for the detection of 25 – 30 % of transferred mRNA in GA - ﬁxed acceptor cells in cocultures . The graph shows the number of transferred MBS mRNAs detected in wild - type MEFs cocultured with MBS - MEFs for 3 h . Each dot represents a single cell . ( c ) Average ( + SEM ) number of nanotubes per cell ( as detected by phalloidin - FITC staining ) in the experiment depicted in ( b ) . ( d ) Length of nanotubes from cells measured in panel ( c ) . Each dot represents a single nanotube Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 125 that were aimed at opening such structures ( Table 1 , Condi - tions # 17 , 19 – 29 ) . Only the treatment with proteinase K ( 1 μ g / mL for 2 – 10 min ) after permeabilization , which was combined with replacement of formamide with urea ( 1 M ) ( Table 1 , Condition # 29 ) allowed for the detection of trans - ferred mRNA , but was three to four fold less than the expected level ( i . e . , when compared to regular FISH ) ( Fig . 3b ) . How - ever , this treatment also reduced the level of nanotube preser - vation ( Fig . 3c , d ) . Our results suggest that a protein “shell” may prevent the FISH probes from accessing the mRNA in samples that are cross - linked with GA . Thus , until the GA cross - linked protein “shell” is identiﬁed , we decided to revert to the regular smFISH protocol as the main approach of this methods paper . However , we made a few minor changes com - pared to the regular smFISH [ 3 ] . In particular , we reduced the number of rinses in Subheadings 3 . 3 , steps 3 and 19 , and added an alternative hybridization step ( Subheading 3 . 3 , step 13 ) . This slightly improves nanotube preservation , but without affecting the smFISH signal . Finally , smFISH with Conditions # 10 or 18 might allow for the investigation of endogenous mRNAs that localize to the base of nanotubes . For more details on the conditions that we tested for nanotube preservation , see Table 1 . 3 . It is recommended to calibrate probe concentration when using probes for the ﬁrst time . The default concentrations are 250 nM or 10 ng / sample . Test a range of concentrations on samples of donor only cells to calibrate probe concentration . Comparing donor alone to acceptor alone can assist in choos - ing the concentration that gives the best spot detection with minimal background in acceptor cells . 4 . There are other commercially available antifade solutions , as well as lab - made antifade solutions that can be used ( e . g . , by using glucose oxidase ) . However , we have no experience with those and these might not be suitable for FISH or for long - term storage . 5 . We typically culture donor and acceptor cells at a 1 : 1 ratio and aim for ~ 90 % conﬂuence at time of ﬁxation . Higher conﬂuence will limit the ability to accurately outline individual cells . In particular , it may result in many occurrences where donor and acceptor cells partially overlap . In such a case , the entire over - lapped region should be excluded from the FISH - quant analy - sis . We were able detect β - actin - MBS mRNA transfer at a lower ratio of donor to acceptor ( even down to 1 : 99 ) or down to 50 % conﬂuence of a 1 : 1 coculture . In these cases , we detected less transferred mRNA . Therefore , the efﬁciency of transfer of the query mRNAs under different ratios / conﬂuence levels should be determined empirically . 126 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst 6 . We detected β - actin mRNA transfer in MEFs within 30 min after seeding the donor cells on top of pre - seeded acceptor cells , with a peak at ~ 2 . 5 h [ 4 ] . For some mRNAs ( e . g . , β - actin , SV40 large T antigen , HER2 ) coculturing for 3 h or 24 h yielded the same levels of transferred mRNA . 7 . A commercial alternative to the tripods are “Transwell” plates , which allow for a coculture of two cell types separated by a porous membrane . Care should be taken to use “Transwell” plates with pores that will enable ( or exclude ) EVs of particular sizes to pass through . 8 . Do not use a confocal microscope for smFISH imaging . The higher light intensity of the lasers can cause rapid bleaching of the FISH signal . Since the smFISH signal is relatively weak and requires long exposure times to collect enough light , photo - bleaching limits the total amount of light collected . This is particularly problematic when taking multiple z sections in order to create the 3D image stack . 9 . Sometimes false - positive spots in acceptor cells are detected due to inaccurate outlining of the nucleus . In this case , most of the “positive” spots will appear around the nucleus . Acknowledgments G . H . was funded by the Koshland Foundation and McDonald - Leapman Grant Senior Postdoctoral Fellowships . This work was funded by grants to J . E . G . from the Joel and Mady Dukler Fund for Cancer Research , the Jean - Jacques Brunschwig Fund for the Molecular Genetics of Cancer , a Proof - of - Principle Grant from the Moross Integrated Cancer Center ( Weizmann Institute of Sci - ence ) , and the US - Israel Binational Science Foundation - National Science Foundation ( # 2015846 ) . References 1 . Buxbaum AR , Haimovich G , Singer RH ( 2015 ) In the right place at the right time : visualizing and understanding mRNA localiza - tion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 16 ( 2 ) : 95 – 109 2 . Pichon X , Lagha M , Mueller F , Bertrand E ( 2018 ) A growing toolbox to image gene expression in single cells : sensitive approaches for demanding challenges . Mol Cell 71 ( 3 ) : 468 – 480 3 . Haimovich G , Gerst JE ( 2018 ) Single - molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) for RNA detection in adherent ani - mal cells . Bio - protocol 8 ( 21 ) : e3070 4 . Haimovich G , Ecker CM , Dunagin MC , Eggan E , Raj A , Gerst JE , Singer RH ( 2017 ) Intercellular mRNA trafﬁcking via membrane nanotube - like extensions in mammalian cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 ( 46 ) : E9873 – e9882 5 . Nawaz M , Fatima F ( 2017 ) Extracellular vesi - cles , tunneling nanotubes , and cellular inter - play : synergies and missing links . Front Mol Biosci 4 : 50 6 . Mittal R , Karhu E , Wang JS , Delgado S , Zukerman R , Mittal J , Jhaveri VM ( 2019 ) Cell communication by tunneling nanotubes : Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 127 implications in disease and therapeutic applica - tions . J Cell Physiol 234 ( 2 ) : 1130 – 1146 7 . Sisakhtnezhad S , Khosravi L ( 2015 ) Emerging physiological and pathological implications of tunneling nanotubes formation between cells . Eur J Cell Biol 94 ( 10 ) : 429 – 443 8 . Austefjord MW , Gerdes HH , Wang X ( 2014 ) Tunneling nanotubes : diversity in morphology and structure . Commun Integr Biol 7 ( 1 ) : e27934 9 . Sartori - Rupp A , Cordero Cervantes D , Pepe A , Gousset K , Delage E , Corroyer - Dulmont S , Schmitt C , Krijnse - Locker J , Zurzolo C ( 2019 ) Correlative cryo - electron microscopy reveals the structure of TNTs in neuronal cells . Nat Commun 10 ( 1 ) : 342 10 . Valadi H , Ekstrom K , Bossios A , Sjostrand M , Lee JJ , Lotvall JO ( 2007 ) Exosome - mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells . Nat Cell Biol 9 ( 6 ) : 654 – 659 11 . Tomasoni S , Longaretti L , Rota C , Morigi M , Conti S , Gotti E , Capelli C , Introna M , Remuzzi G , Benigni A ( 2012 ) Transfer of growth factor receptor mRNA via exosomes unravels the regenerative effect of mesenchy - mal stem cells . Stem Cells Dev 22 ( 5 ) : 772 – 780 12 . Batagov AO , Kurochkin IV ( 2013 ) Exosomes secreted by human cells transport largely mRNA fragments that are enriched in the 3 - 0 - untranslated regions . Biol Direct 8 : 12 13 . Hung ME , Leonard JN ( 2016 ) A platform for actively loading cargo RNA to elucidate limit - ing steps in EV - mediated delivery . J Extracell Vesicles 5 : 31027 14 . Shurtleff MJ , Yao J , Qin Y , Nottingham RM , Temoche - Diaz MM , Schekman R , Lambowitz AM ( 2017 ) Broad role for YBX1 in deﬁning the small noncoding RNA composition of exo - somes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 ( 43 ) : E8987 – e8995 15 . Svensson V , Natarajan KN , Ly LH , Miragaia RJ , Labalette C , Macaulay IC , Cvejic A , Teich - mann SA ( 2017 ) Power analysis of single - cell RNA - sequencing experiments . Nat Methods 14 ( 4 ) : 381 – 387 16 . Lee JH , Daugharthy ER , Scheiman J , Kalhor R , Ferrante TC , Terry R , Turczyk BM , Yang JL , Lee HS , Aach J , Zhang K , Church GM ( 2015 ) Fluorescent in situ sequencing ( FISSEQ ) of RNA for gene expression proﬁling in intact cells and tissues . Nat Protoc 10 ( 3 ) : 442 – 458 17 . Wang G , Mofﬁtt JR , Zhuang X ( 2018 ) Multi - plexed imaging of high - density libraries of RNAs with MERFISH and expansion micros - copy . Sci Rep 8 ( 1 ) : 4847 18 . Mofﬁtt JR , Zhuang X ( 2016 ) RNA imaging with multiplexed error - robust ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( MERFISH ) . Methods Enzymol 572 : 1 – 49 19 . Ginart P , Kalish JM , Jiang CL , Yu AC , Barto - lomei MS , Raj A ( 2016 ) Visualizing allele - speciﬁc expression in single cells reveals epige - netic mosaicism in an H19 loss - of - imprinting mutant . Genes Dev 30 ( 5 ) : 567 – 578 20 . Hansen CH , van Oudenaarden A ( 2013 ) Allele - speciﬁc detection of single mRNA mole - cules in situ . Nat Methods 10 ( 9 ) : 869 – 871 21 . Levesque MJ , Ginart P , Wei Y , Raj A ( 2013 ) Visualizing SNVs to quantify allele - speciﬁc expression in single cells . Nat Methods 10 ( 9 ) : 865 – 867 22 . Mellis IA , Gupte R , Raj A , Rouhanifard SH ( 2017 ) Visualizing adenosine - to - inosine RNA editing in single mammalian cells . Nat Meth - ods 14 ( 8 ) : 801 – 804 23 . Lionnet T , Czaplinski K , Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , Wells AL , Chao JA , Park HY , de Turris V , Lopez - Jones M , Singer RH ( 2011 ) A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat Methods 8 ( 2 ) : 165 – 170 24 . Kanada M , Bachmann MH , Hardy JW , Fri - mannson DO , Bronsart L , Wang A , Sylvester MD , Schmidt TL , Kaspar RL , Butte MJ , Matin AC , Contag CH ( 2015 ) Differential fates of biomolecules delivered to target cells via extra - cellular vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 ( 12 ) : E1433 – E1442 25 . Mueller F , Senecal A , Tantale K , Marie - Nelly - H , Ly N , Collin O , Basyuk E , Bertrand E , Darzacq X , Zimmer C ( 2013 ) FISH - quant : automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat Methods 10 ( 4 ) : 277 – 278 26 . Tsanov N , Samacoits A , Chouaib R , Traboulsi AM , Gostan T , Weber C , Zimmer C , Zibara K , Walter T , Peter M , Bertrand E , Mueller F ( 2016 ) smiFISH and FISH - quant—a ﬂexible single RNA detection approach with super - resolution capability . Nucl Acids Res 44 ( 22 ) : e165 27 . Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , Preibisch S , Rueden C , Saalfeld S , Schmid B , Tinevez JY , White DJ , Hartenstein V , Eliceiri K , Tomancak P , Cardona A ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 676 – 682 28 . Lou E , Fujisawa S , Morozov A , Barlas A , Romin Y , Dogan Y , Gholami S , Moreira AL , Manova - Todorova K , Moore MA ( 2012 ) Tun - neling nanotubes provide a unique conduit for intercellular transfer of cellular contents in 128 Gal Haimovich and Jeffrey E . Gerst human malignant pleural mesothelioma . PLoS One 7 ( 3 ) : e33093 29 . Buxbaum AR , Wu B , Singer RH ( 2014 ) Single beta - actin mRNA detection in neurons reveals a mechanism for regulating its translatability . Science 343 ( 6169 ) : 419 – 422 30 . Leyton - Puig D , Kedziora KM , Isogai T , van den Broek B , Jalink K , Innocenti M ( 2016 ) PFA ﬁxation enables artifact - free super - resolu - tion imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and asso - ciated proteins . Biol Open 5 ( 7 ) : 1001 – 1009 31 . Shaffer SM , Wu MT , Levesque MJ , Raj A ( 2013 ) Turbo FISH : a method for rapid single molecule RNA FISH . PLoS One 8 ( 9 ) : e75120 32 . Sinigaglia C , Thiel D , Hejnol A , Houliston E , Leclere L ( 2018 ) A safer , urea - based in situ hybridization method improves detection of gene expression in diverse animal species . Dev Biol 434 ( 1 ) : 15 – 23 33 . Wheeler JR , Matheny T , Jain S , Abrisch R , Parker R ( 2016 ) Distinct stages in stress gran - ule assembly and disassembly . elife 5 : e18413 34 . Long X , Colonell J , Wong AM , Singer RH , Lionnet T ( 2017 ) Quantitative mRNA imag - ing throughout the entire Drosophila brain . Nat Methods 14 ( 7 ) : 703 – 706 Detection of mRNA Transfer Between Mammalian Cells by smFISH 129 Chapter 9 Live - Cell Imaging of mRNP – NPC Interactions in Budding Yeast Azra Lari , Farzin Farzam , Pierre Bensidoun , Marlene Oefﬁnger , Daniel Zenklusen , David Grunwald , and Ben Montpetit Abstract Single - molecule resolution imaging has become an important tool in the study of cell biology . Aptamer - based approaches ( e . g . , MS2 and PP7 ) allow for detection of single RNA molecules in living cells and have been used to study various aspects of mRNA metabolism , including mRNP nuclear export . Here we outline an imaging protocol for the study of interactions between mRNPs and nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) in the yeast S . cerevisiae , including mRNP export . We describe in detail the steps that allow for high - resolution live - cell mRNP imaging and measurement of mRNP interactions with NPCs using simultaneous two - color imaging . Our protocol discusses yeast strain construction , choice of marker proteins to label the nuclear pore complex , as well as imaging conditions that allow high signal - to - noise data acquisition . Moreover , we describe various aspects of postacquisition image analysis for single molecule tracking and image registra - tion allowing for the characterization of mRNP – NPC interactions . Key words mRNP export , Nuclear pore complex , NPC , Live - cell imaging , Single molecule , Budding yeast , S . cerevisiae , Fluorescent imaging , PP7 , Superregistration 1 Introduction Transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is required for mes - senger ribonucleic acids ( mRNAs ) to assemble with ribosomes in the cytoplasm for translation . mRNAs in complex with associated proteins are referred to as messenger ribonucleoprotein particles ( mRNPs ) . Export of mRNPs occurs through nuclear pore com - plexes ( NPCs ) , large protein assemblies imbedded in the double membrane lipid bilayer of the nuclear envelope [ 1 ] . Built from ~ 30 nucleoporin proteins ( Nups ) , NPCs form an eight - fold symmetri - cal assembly that can be divided into three functionally distinct domains . A central scaffold anchors the NPC into the nuclear envelope and forms the central transport channel that allows Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 9 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 Azra Lari , Farzin Farzam and Pierre Bensidoun contributed equally to this work . 131 nucleocytoplamic exchange . Attached to the central scaffold are a number of asymmetrically distributed Nups on the nuclear and cytoplasmic side of the NPC . The cytoplasmic asymmetric Nups play a role in mRNP release after translocation through the central channel , a process that requires the dynamic association of the DEAD - box protein Dbp5 ( DDX19b in humans ) with the NPC [ 2 ] . On the nuclear side , long ﬁlamentous proteins , Mlp1 / Mlp2 ( TPR in humans ) , protrude into the nucleoplasm converging in a distal ring structure called the nuclear basket . Mlp1 / 2 , as well as basket associated proteins , interact with mRNPs through associated RNA binding proteins ( RBPs ) to provide a docking site for mRNPs , thereby regulating access to the central transport channel [ 3 , 4 ] . Upon entering the central channel , translocation is not rate limiting , with mRNAs reaching the other side of the nuclear pore within tens of milliseconds [ 5 – 8 ] . The yeast S . cerevisiae has been a valuable model system to study mRNA transport . The combination of proteomic and genetic approaches were instrumental to identify most players in this pro - cess and in the development of current models describing mRNP export [ 9 – 11 ] . However , how this process is coordinated in space and time , or coupled to upstream and downstream events in gene expression , is still largely unexplored . Live cell single molecule microscopy is an important tool to study this process , and when combined with the power of yeast genetics , has the potential to reveal mechanistic details about this process [ 4 , 6 , 12 ] . However , studying mRNP export using high resolution single molecule microscopy is technically challenging . For example , the size of an NPC in relation to diffraction limited imaging makes it difﬁcult to assign the position of a single mRNP to a subregion of the NPC . Gaussian ﬁtting does allow for subdiffraction localization of single mRNPs , but mRNP signals have to be aligned to a reference nuclear pore signal acquired in a different channel . Moreover , a yeast cell possesses a 200 nm thick cell wall that induces signiﬁcant light scattering affecting signal - to - noise ratio and therefore locali - zation precision . Of the various methods allowing for RNA visualization in cells , including molecular beacons and , more recently , variants of Cas9 and Cas13 , not all methods allow for single molecule detection in a living cell under fast imaging regimes [ 13 ] . The PP7 and MS2 RNA labeling approaches are currently the most robust method for single molecule resolution mRNA imaging . These aptamer - based approaches use the high afﬁnity and speciﬁcity of bacteriophage capsid proteins ( CP ) to bind to an RNA stem - loop that can be inserted into mRNAs of interest . Fusion of the CP to a ﬂuorescent protein allows for the tagged RNA to be ﬂuorescently marked and multimerizing CP binding sites increases signal - to - noise ratio , with 12 – 24 repeats being typically used for mRNA labeling and detec - tion in yeast [ 4 , 6 , 14 – 17 ] . 132 Azra Lari et al . To track mRNP – NPC interactions and export events , NPCs are visualized by the labeling of speciﬁc nuclear pore proteins using ﬂuorescent proteins . mRNP export is then measured using a micro - scope setup that allows simultaneous acquisition of both mRNP and NPC signals using laser illumination and sensitive EMCCD cameras for detection . Because of the spectral shift associated with imaging two channels , measuring the interaction of an mRNP with an NPC , and in particular a subregion of the NPC , requires precise registration of the two imaging channels . This is achieved by a combination of mechanical alignment and image processing using a common signal detected on both cameras [ 5 ] . Moreover , mRNP movement must be tracked in each frame using Gaussian ﬁtting with information regarding mRNP movement in prior and subsequent frames used to identify mRNP export events . In this chapter , we describe a detailed protocol to image mRNP transport with high spatial and temporal resolution by combining the PP7 mRNA labeling strategy with ultrafast image acquisition and image registration allowing the study mRNP export in real time . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Yeast Strains and Plasmids 1 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4743 with genotype MAT a / α his3 Δ 1 / his3 Δ 1 leu2 Δ 0 / leu2 Δ 0 LYS2 / lys2 Δ 0 met15 Δ 0 / MET15 ura3 Δ 0 / ura3 Δ 0 ( EUROSCARF ) . 2 . pDZ417 - 24xPP7 - loxP - KanMX - loxP is used as a template for PCR to generate product to integrate stem loops into target gene ( T7 promoter , integrating plasmid ) [ 14 ] . 3 . pSH47 ( pRS416 - GAL1 - Cre ) used to express Cre recombinase ( GAL1 promoter , URA3 CEN plasmid ) [ 18 ] . 4 . Nuclear pore complex protein tagged using pFA6a - 3xmKATE - caURA3 ( pKW4019 ) [ 19 ] . 5 . GFP - PP7 - CP is integrated using pMET25 - GFP - PP7 - CP plas - mid ( MET25 promoter , LEU2 integrating plasmid ) ( pKW3616 ) [ 19 ] . 2 . 2 Media and Solutions 1 . 20 % Dextrose stock solution : Dissolve 200 g of dextrose ( D - ( + ) - glucose ) in 800 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Store at room temperature . 2 . YEPD liquid medium ( Yeast Extract Peptone Dextrose ) : Dis - solve 10 g of yeast extract and 20 g of peptone to 880 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Allow medium to cool and then add 100 mL of dextrose stock solution . Store at room temperature . Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 133 3 . 250 mg / ml G418 stock solution : Dissolve 2 . 5 g of G418 into 10 mL of ultrapure water . Store at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C in 1 mL aliquots . 4 . YEPD + G418 solid medium ( Yeast Extract – Peptone – Dextrose with G418 ) : Prepare YEPD medium described above and add 20 g of agar before autoclaving ( agar will not dissolve until autoclaved ) . Allow solution to cool enough to be handled but not solidiﬁed ( ~ 65 (cid:3) C ) , and then add 100 mL of the dextrose stock solution and 1 mL of the G418 stock solution . Pour medium ( 25 mL ) into petri dishes , allow to solidify at room temperature , and then dry for ~ 3 days ( 1 L of medium will make ~ 40 plates ) . Store at 4 (cid:3) C . 5 . SC - Ura liquid or solid medium ( synthetic complete medium lacking uracil ) : Dissolve 6 . 7 g of yeast nitrogenous base ( with - out amino acids , with ammonium sulfate ) , and - Uracil dropout supplement in 900 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Allow medium to cool and then add 100 mL of dextrose stock solution . Store at room temperature . To make solid medium add 20 g of Agar and prepare as described above for YEPD plates . Store at 4 (cid:3) C . 6 . 20 % Galactose stock solution : Dissolve 200 g of D - galactose in 800 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Store at room temperature . 7 . SC - Ura + GAL liquid medium ( synthetic complete medium lacking uracil with 2 % galactose ) : Prepare SC - Ura liquid medium as described above , but substitute glucose with a 100 mL of the galactose stock solution . 8 . 2 mg / mL Uracil stock solution : Dissolve 1 g of uracil in 500 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Store at room temperature . 9 . SC + 5 - FOA solid medium ( synthetic complete medium with 5 - ﬂuoroorotic acid ) : Dissolve 6 . 7 g of yeast nitrogenous base ( without amino acids , with ammonium sulfate ) , and complete dropout supplement in 700 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then add 20 g of agar and autoclave . Allow medium to cool ( ~ 65 (cid:3) C ) and then add 100 mL of dextrose stock solution and 200 mL of 5 - FOA solution ( 1 g of 5 - FOA dissolved in 5 mL of uracil stock solution and 195 mL of ultrapure water heated to 50 (cid:3) C before adding the 5 - FOA ) . Pour medium ( 25 mL ) into petri dishes , allow to solidify at room temperature , and then dry for ~ 3 days ( 1 L of medium will make ~ 40 plates ) . Store at 4 (cid:3) C . 10 . SC - Leu liquid medium ( synthetic complete medium lacking leucine ) : Dissolve 6 . 7 g of yeast nitrogenous base ( without amino acids , with ammonium sulfate ) , and - Leucine dropout supplement in 900 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and 134 Azra Lari et al . then autoclave . Allow medium to cool and then add 100 mL of dextrose stock solution . Store at room temperature . 11 . Sporulation medium : Dissolve 10 g of potassium acetate and 1 g of yeast extract in 997 . 5 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and autoclave . Allow to cool and then add 2 . 5 mL of dextrose stock solution . Store at room temperature . 12 . 15 g / L Methionine stock solution : Dissolve 15 g of methionine in 1 L of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then ﬁlter - sterilize ( 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter ) . Store at room temperature . 13 . SC - Leu + Met liquid medium ( synthetic complete medium lack - ing leucine supplemented with methionine ) : Prepare SC - Leu medium as described above and supplement with 1 mL of methionine stock solution . 14 . SC - Leu + Met + 1 . 2 M Sorbitol ( synthetic complete medium lack - ing leucine supplemented with methionine and sorbitol ) : Dis - solve 6 . 7 g of yeast nitrogenous base ( without amino acids , with ammonium sulfate ) , and - Leucine dropout supplement , and 218 . 6 g of sorbitol to an adjusted volume of 900 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and then autoclave . Allow medium to cool and then add 100 mL of dextrose stock solution and 1 mL of methionine stock solution . Store at room temperature . 15 . 1 M DTT stock solution : Dissolve 1 . 5 g of DTT in 10 mL of ultrapure water . Filter to sterilize ( 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter ) , and store at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C in 1 mL aliquots . 16 . 1 M Tris – HCl buffer pH 9 . 5 stock solution : Dissolve 121 . 14 g of Tris base in 800 mL of ultrapure water . Adjust pH to 9 . 5 with concentrated HCl . Stir to dissolve and adjust volume to 1 L . Autoclave and store at room temperature . 17 . 1 M magnesium chloride ( MgCl 2 ) stock solution : Dissolve 9 . 52 g of magnesium chloride in 100 mL of ultrapure water . Filter to sterilize ( 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter ) and store at room temperature . 18 . 20 mg / mL zymolyase ( 20 T ) stock solution : dissolve 20 mg of zymolyase in 1 mL of spheroplast buffer ( below ) . Aliquot and store at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C . 19 . Spheroplast buffer ( 1 . 2 M sorbitol , 50 mM KPO 4 pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 250 μ g / mL zymolyase ) : Dissolve 218 . 6 g of sorbitol , 3 . 03 g of potassium phosphate monobasic ( K 2 HPO 4 ) , and 1 . 035 g of potassium phosphate dibasic ( KH 2 PO 4 ) in an adjusted volume of 999 mL of ultrapure water . Stir to dissolve and add 1 mL of magnesium chloride stock solution . Filter to sterilize ( 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter ) and store at room temperature . Before use for spheroplasting , add zymolyase to a ﬁnal concentration of 250 μ g / mL . Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 135 20 . Concanavalin A solution ( ConA ) : Dissolve 10 mg of ConA in 10 mL of a solution of 5 mM manganese chloride , 5 mM calcium chloride , and 5 mM Tris – HCl buffer pH 7 in ultrapure water . Store in 1 mL aliquots at (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) C . 2 . 3 Consumables 1 . Toothpicks to inoculate yeast cultures . 2 . Petri dishes for agar plates . 3 . PCR tubes . 4 . 35 mm glass bottom plates for imaging . 5 . Focus check beads ( e . g . , FocalCheck Microspheres or similar ) . 6 . Diffraction limited multicolor ﬂuorescent beads ( e . g . , Tetra - Speck Microspheres or similar ) . 2 . 4 Equipment 1 . PCR machine . 2 . Micropipettes . 3 . Test tubes for liquid yeast cultures . 4 . Incubators with rotators / shakers for yeast growth . 5 . Autoclave . 6 . Spectrophotometer to measure yeast growth . 7 . Centrifuge . 8 . Tetrad dissection microscope . 3 Methods Standard yeast growth and transformation methods are followed as described previously [ 20 , 21 ] . 3 . 1 Tagging of an Endogenous Nuclear Pore Complex ( NPC ) Component with a Fluorescent Protein To track mRNPs in relation to NPCs , a protein constituent of the complex must be ﬂuorescently tagged . We do this as the ﬁrst step in strain construction , since once the strain is veriﬁed , the same strain can be used for the subsequent tagging of genes of interest with the PP7 cassette . Yeast PCR - based tagging methods are followed to C - terminally tag the component of interest [ 22 ] , which is only brieﬂy described below . 1 . Design oligos containing a sequence homologous to the end of the coding region of the target protein ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . Use oligos and template plasmid ( e . g . , pKW4019 ) to generate a PCR product that can be transformed into the BY4743 yeast strain ( see Note 2 ) . 3 . Test resulting transformants by PCR , western blotting , and / or microscopy for proper expression and localization of the tagged protein . 136 Azra Lari et al . 3 . 2 Tagging of an Endogenous Gene with the 24xPP7 Stem Loop Cassette A detailed method to tag genes with an aptamer - based RNA - tag has been recently described in detail by Tutucci et al . [ 23 ] . Refer to this method for detailed instructions for each step including oligo design , PCR , and transformation conditions ( see Note 3 ) . 1 . Amplify the 24xPP7 stem loop cassette from plasmid pDZ617 with oligos each containing 40 base pairs of homologous sequence to the 3 0 - UTR region of the target gene ( see Notes 4 – 6 ) . 2 . Grow the yeast strain expressing the ﬂuorescent NPC marker overnight , dilute , and grow to mid - log phase . Transform cells with the PCR product , allow cells to recover in liquid medium , and then plate on YEPD plates supplemented with 200 μ g / mL G418 to select for transformants . 3 . Select multiple transformants and conﬁrm integration of the PP7 cassette in the correct location of the genome by PCR , as well as continued presence and expression of the NPC marker . 4 . Transform two or more strains with the correct insertion with plasmid pSH47 and select for transformants on synthetic medium lacking uracil ( SC - Ura ) plates . Multiple transformants should then be grown overnight in SC - Ura supplemented with 2 % galactose to allow for expression of Cre recombinase . Cells are then plated for single colonies on YEPD and tested for growth on G418 to identify colonies that do not grow on G418 due to excision of the selectable marker from the 3 0 - UTR region of the target gene . Loss of the pSH47 plasmid can be selected by growing cells on medium containing 5 - FOA . 5 . Genomic DNA PCR can be used to conﬁrm both the genomic location of the loops , as well as the size of the 24xPP7 cassette to ensure the cassette is full length . At this step , also conﬁrm the presence and expression of the NPC marker once again . 6 . To generate a haploid strain expressing both the mRNA with PP7 stem loops and the NPC marker , sporulate the diploid heterozygous strain by growing cells for ~ 5 days ( or until tetrads are formed ) in 5 mL of sporulation medium . 7 . To dissect and isolate tetrads follow the protocol previously described by Amberg et al . [ 24 ] . If insertion of the PP7 loops , tagging of the NPC component , or the combination of the two impact ﬁtness of the cell , this is often observed here through a reduction is spore viability and / or slow growth of the haploids containing the cassette and NPC marker . 8 . Analyze resulting haploid strains for presence of both the 24xPP7 tagged gene and ﬂuorescently tagged NPC compo - nent to isolate haploids of each mating type . These two strains can subsequently be mated to generate a diploid strain Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 137 homozygous for both the 24xPP7 cassette and NPC marker ( see Note 7 ) . 9 . Analyze resulting 24xPP7 and NPC tagged strains to conﬁrm functionality of the tagged mRNA and Nup protein ( see Note 8 ) . 3 . 3 Expression of the PP7 Coat Protein 1 . Digest ~ 1 μ g of the pMET - GFP - PP7 - CP containing plasmid , transform into the veriﬁed haploid or homozygous diploid strains carrying the 24xPP7 cassette and NPC marker , and select for transformants on SC - Leu ( see Notes 2 and 9 ) . 2 . Test multiple transformants for CP expression and the presence of ﬂuorescently marked mRNPs using a ﬂuorescence micro - scope under careful growth conditions in liquid culture using SC - Leu supplemented with 150 mg / liter of methionine ( Met ) and grown until early - log phase ( O . D 600 of 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 ) at 25 (cid:3) C . Single mRNP particles are often visible as is a general diffuse cell ﬂuorescence from the free PP7 - CP ( Fig . 1a and Notes 10 and 11 ) . 3 . 4 Growth and Preparation of Budding Yeast Cells for Imaging and Data Collection The protocol below uses spheroplasting to remove the yeast cell wall for the purpose of reducing light scatter , which improves signal - to - noise ratios for imaging rapid events ( e . g . , mRNP export ) . This may not be required for events that are longer lived ( see Note 12 ) . The protocol below can be shortened by omitting steps 2 – 4 , which will not require sorbitol to be added to the medium in steps 7 and 8 . 1 . Grow cells overnight at 25 (cid:3) C in SC - Leu + Met , being careful to not allow the cultures to reach saturation by the following morning . Dilute the culture into fresh SC - Leu + Met medium to an O . D 600 of 0 . 05 and grow at 26 (cid:3) C for at least three doublings to ~ O . D 600 of 0 . 4 . 2 . Collect 2 . 0 O . Ds of cells by centrifugation , wash one time with water , and resuspend in 50 mM Tris – HCl , pH 9 . 5 and 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 15 min . 3 . Collect cells again by centrifugation and resuspend in 0 . 3 mL of spheroplast buffer and incubate at 26 (cid:3) C for 45 min , while rotating . 4 . Collect cells by centrifuging at 500 g for 2 min and gently resuspending the cells with 1 mL of synthetic complete medium supplemented with 1 . 2 M sorbitol . 5 . During steps 2 – 4 , coat the glass surface of a 35 mm glass bottom dish ( MatTek or similar ) with ~ 0 . 25 mL of the Conca - navalin A solution for 5 min and then remove by pipetting and allow to dry . 138 Azra Lari et al . 6 . Add 1 mL of spheroplasted cells to the ConA - coated plate and slowly move the plate to coat the glass bottom with the liquid . Allow cells to adhere to the glass surface for ~ 5 min , or in a swinging bucket centrifuge , spin the plate at 500 g for 2 min to adhere the cells to the glass bottom . This requires that the plate and lid be secured to the rotor . We use tape for this , being careful to prevent the dish glass imaging surface from coming in contact with the tape adhesive . 7 . Remove unadhered cells by removing the culture liquid in the plate and gently washing the adhered cells and plate with 1 mL of fresh medium with sorbitol . 8 . Add 2 mL of fresh SC + sorbitol and incubate the plates in the microscope room for ~ 30 min to allow the cells to recover from stresses induced by spheroplasting and plating ( see Note 13 ) . Fig . 1 ( a ) Fluorescent images showing a cell in which PP7 - CP has formed a bright aggregate . Raw and Laplacian ﬁltered images are shown , each scaled to show the presence of the aggregate ( asterisk ) and single mRNP ( arrow ) . Scaling to observe single mRNPs leads to difﬁculty in tracking single due to the presence of a bright foci . ( b ) Merged and registered images showing the bright PP7 - CP aggregate in panel ( a ) persists in the same location through the imaging series , whereas single mRNPs are usually dynamic . Green channel ¼ CP , red channel ¼ nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 139 Fig . 2 Optical design of the custom - built microscope . ( a ) Optical setup described previously in Grunwald et al . [ 5 ] . ( b ) Optical setup described here for data acquisition and described previously by Smith et al . [ 6 ] . ( c ) Optical setup to use as an adapter for imaging with commercial microscopes 140 Azra Lari et al . 3 . 5 Live - Cell Two - Color Imaging Setup and Data Acquisition For imaging mRNP export events a custom microscope has been used , as described below . Commercial single and dual color imag - ing systems may also be used to collect data detailing NPC – mRNP interactions on different time scales depending on the instrument ( Fig . 2 ) . 1 . Imaging is performed on a custom - built dual channel micro - scope setup using a (cid:4) 60 1 . 3 NA silicone oil immersion objec - tive ( refractive index 1 . 405 ; Olympus ) ( see Note 14 ) . The objective is combined with 500 - mm focal length tube lenses , resulting in an effective (cid:4) 167 magniﬁcation and a back pro - jected pixel size of 95 . 8 - nm on sample plane . The primary emission beam path is split onto two electron - multiplying charge - coupled devices ( DU897 BI ; iXon ; Andor Technology ) by a dichroic mirror ( z543rdc Chroma ) . For excitation of ﬂuorescent proteins , solid - state 514 - nm and 561 - nm laser lines ( SE ; Cobolt ) are used and intensity and on / off are con - trolled by an acoustooptic tunable ﬁlter ( AA Opto - Electronics ) . Laser lines are merged into a mono mode optical ﬁber ( Qioptiq ) . The output of the ﬁber is collimated and delivered through the back port of a stand ( IX71 ) and reﬂected toward the objective by a dichroic mirror ( z514 - 561 - 1064rpc , Chroma ) . Alignment onto the optical axis of the objective is achieved with a 4 - axis controlled support for the collimator . An adjustable size iris is used to restrict the illumination to an area of approximately 25 - μ m in diameter . The intensity proﬁle in this area has a ﬂatness of about 5 % . Each laser is utilized with a shutter ( Uniblitz ) controlled from the imaging software . To allow reasonably fast switching ( 100 - ms ) between high and low power settings with the 561 - nm line , a motorized ﬁlter wheel with appropriate neutral density ﬁlters is placed behind the shutter and before the merging dichroic of the laser module . The notch ﬁlters 514 . 5 - nm and 568 - nm ( Semrock ) are used to prevent excitation light from entering the emission path . The latter ﬁlter is rotated by 17 degrees with respect to the normal to achieve blocking 561 - nm scattered light ( see Note 15 ) . Mirrors and adjustable custom built camera holders are used to impose control on ﬁve degrees of freedom ( x , y , z , ϕ - and θ - angle ) and prealign both CCDs . CCDs are synchronized by a start signal generated by one CCD that is directly delivered to the second CCD . The offset between the two CCDs was determined to be three orders of magnitude below the integra - tion time ( 2 . 1 (cid:5) 0 . 2 ns / frame / ms ) . The microscope is equipped with a heated stage inset ( Warner Scientiﬁc ) and an objective heater ( Bioptechs ) ( see Note 16 ) . 2 . After initial coarse alignment , use ﬂuorescent focus check beads and diffraction limited multicolor beads for ﬁne mechanical alignment . To do the ﬁne mechanical alignment , image Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 141 ﬂuorescent beads on both cameras in both channels to compare alignment . Adjust positions by changing the x , y , z of the camera holders so that beads have the same location on both cameras . To check the tilt of the camera plane , prepare a bead sample of uniform distribution that is not saturated and check the focus at center vs . the edges for each camera separately . If you see a difference , change the ϕ - and θ - angles on the camera holders accordingly . 3 . Find cells for imaging taking care to limit bleaching . First , use transmitted light and the whole camera ﬁeld of view to position 1 – 3 cells in the active imaging area focused on what is judged to be the middle of the cell ( s ) . Use the reddest channel in the experiment to set the focus for the equatorial plane , as described here this is the NPC marker channel . Images need to be recorded in the equatorial plane of the yeast nucleus to minimize false - positive detection of mRNAs that diffuse above or below the nucleus . Using maximal signal ampliﬁcation ( for EMCCDs ) and the lowest possible laser power setting that produces a very noisy live image , adjust focus to image the equatorial plane of the cell nucleus . Start automated imaging protocol for registration image and tracking data ( step # 4 ) . 4 . Perform simultaneous imaging on two channels using sub - frames ( approximately two - ﬁfths of each camera chip , e . g . , 200 (cid:4) 200 pixel ) on both cameras at a frame rate of 67 Hz , equaling a time resolution of 15 - ms . For each cell , acquire four datasets , two in each color . First , record a registration image for 375 - ms , save , and 500 - ms later , record the tracking dataset for 7 . 5 s ( 500 frames ) in parallel for both channels . Time values refer to published work and may need to be adjusted for new experiments and the imaging system used ; hence , the given values present a starting point for optimization . Imaging sub - frames is critical for data collection at fast rates , allows for cells to be selected that are present in the same imaging plane , and acquired images can be rapidly screened during data collection to determine if the dataset should be saved for analysis or discarded due to signal quality or lack of signal ( i . e . , cells in which no mRNAs are expressed ) . Finally , a small imaging area also makes it easier to fulﬁll the 5 % intensity ﬂatness criteria ( step # 1 above ) . 3 . 6 Super - Registration and Colocalization Precision All image processing and visual analysis is done using FIJI or ImageJ [ 25 , 26 ] . Custom Plugins for registration and particle tracking are available upon request . 1 . Superregistration is achieved by a combination of precise mechanical alignment and image processing using transforma - tions based on the registration signal that is detected on both cameras ( Fig . 3a ) ( see Note 17 ) . 142 Azra Lari et al . Fig . 3 ( a ) Example of the color overlay used for registration . Using an RGB scheme , images before and after registration are overlaid to visualize the shift in nuclear envelope position in each cell . This method aids in quantiﬁcation of whether the correlation factor for the linear shift is higher than the set threshold for 0 . 95 or not . The red pixels shown help to visualize the shift . ( b ) Example of an mRNP export event through selected frames of a tracking dataset . Second to last square shows all frames merged . Green ¼ CP and red ¼ nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) . Scale bars ¼ 1 μ m Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 143 2 . In the registration images , make the NPC signal visible in both channels by using (cid:4) 10 more excitation power from the 561 - nm laser than for the tracking videos . Using the sensitivity of the EM CCD cameras and the surface reﬂection of the dichroic , the NPC signal will be visible in both the mRNP ( one image taken for 375 ms ) and the NPC channel ( 25 images taken in 375 ms , and the mean time projected for analysis ) . Fine register the mRNP and NPC channels postexperimentally by shifting the NPC channel registration image onto the mRNA channel registration image to calculate the parameters to be used for registration of the tracking videos [ 27 ] . To make this alignment more robust , ﬁlter the mRNP channel with a Gaussian kernel ( 1 . 5 pixel width ) before registration . Save RGB images of the two registration images before and after registration and evaluate if the correlation factor of the linear shift is better than 0 . 95 ( see Note 18 ) . 3 . Determine registration precision by calculating the remaining offset between the imaging data from the two cameras after linear translation ( see Note 19 ) . 4 . Create two copies of each tracking video ( NPC and mRNP channel ) ; one is the raw data for quantitative image analysis and the other is enhanced for visual inspection ( see Note 20 ) . 5 . Test each dataset for drift during acquisition by generating 10 mean projections of 50 frames of the NPC signal that are normalized and fused into a color - coded hyperstack . If the color separation in the resulting stack indicates drift , these datasets should be discarded . 3 . 7 Tracking mRNPs and Analyzing mRNP – NPC Interactions 1 . Data analysis is performed using a custom manual - tracking interface within FIJI , in which the ﬁltered and raw data are presented simultaneously and a particle of interest is tracked by consecutively clicking through image frames . The maximal displacement from frame to frame is displayed in the tracking channel to identify situations where two particles can be inter - changed . In such cases , tracking is stopped . 2 . Identify mRNP signals visually in either the ﬁltered or raw images . To do a 2D Gaussian ﬁt , ﬁnd the center of mass within 5 pixels around the signal and click the position to identify the coordinate for the ﬁt . All ﬁts should be done in the raw data , with all ﬁt parameters and initiation parameters reported to the user for inspection [ 5 ] . 3 . To enhance images for visual inspection , use a running mean and a subtraction of a Laplacian ﬁlter for the NPC marker channel and a Laplacian ﬁlter for the mRNP channel . The kernel size should be set relative to the theoretical width of the emission point spread function , adjust the contrast in the 144 Azra Lari et al . ﬁnal RGB videos after processing . After ﬁltering , apply the transition matrix to the NPC marker channel to overlay it onto the mRNP channel . 4 . During manual tracking , assign a descriptive state to the parti - cle in each frame based on the distance from the NE using the following guidelines : nuclear diffusive or cytoplasmic diffusive if the distance is > 250 nm , nuclear docked or cytoplasmic docked if the distance is between 250 and 100 nm , and transi - tion if the distance is < 100 nm . The dynamic behavior of the particle ( i . e . , the direction and distance the particle moved with respect to the NE ) in prior and subsequent frames should also be used to inform state decisions ( Fig . 3b ) . 5 . Using these descriptors , perform an analysis in MATLAB ( MathWorks ) using routines to search for speciﬁc events ( e . g . , export or scanning ) based on these ﬁve states [ 6 ] ( see Note 21 ) . 6 . Estimate dwell times using two methods ; the dwell time ﬁt based on the histogram ( exponential distribution ) and an MLE based on the assumption that the data follow an expo - nential distribution [ 28 , 29 ] ( see Note 22 ) . 4 Notes 1 . When choosing a nuclear pore complex component to tag with a ﬂuorescent protein , it is important to consider both the stability and localization of the protein within the NPC . For example , some Nups are dynamic and known to localize to other structures within the cell , which may complicate analysis . Currently , we use Ndc1 and Nup188 . Additionally , not every NPC component can be tagged without impacting function , which should be considered when choosing a Nup to tag . We have observed that tagging of Nup49 , previously used in vari - ous studies as an NPC marker , shows a weak poly ( A ) - RNA accumulation phenotype and should therefore be avoided as an NPC marker ( unpublished observations ) . 2 . For high single - to - noise ratio , ﬂuorophore choice should be optimized or chosen carefully . Ideally ﬂuorophores with improved brightness and photostability should be used . Exam - ples of enhanced ﬂuorescent proteins include the far - red variant mKATE or GFP variants such as mNeonGreen [ 30 , 31 ] . Fluo - rescent tagging of more than one NPC component may also result in brighter signals ; however , some combinations of dou - ble tagged Nups are known to result in NPC dysfunction , and it is important to test various combinations for ﬁtness defects [ 32 ] . Currently , dye - based labeling systems are less suited for this application ( e . g . , Spinach & Mango ) due to the inability to Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 145 fuse multiple dye binding aptamers and achieve signals that are bright enough to allow robust single mRNP detection . 3 . Tutucci et al . have outlined a method for detection of mRNAs using a reengineered MS2 aptamer - based RNA tagging system [ 23 ] . Here , we use a stem loop tagging system derived from the Pseudomonas phage PP7 , however the same methods described by Tutucci et al . can be followed to generate PP7 stem loop tagged strains . Furthermore , a shorter version of the PP7 repeat cassette containing 12 copies has been used successfully to track single mRNPs [ 4 ] . 4 . Integration of the stem loops into the 3 0 - UTR is preferred over the 5 0 - UTR region of the target gene as it is less likely to impact expression of the gene ( insertion into the 5 0 - UTR can affect mRNA translation and mRNA stability ) . In the 3 0 - UTR , stem loops can be inserted just after the stop codon with the endog - enous terminator sequence or an exogenous terminator sequence can be used . 5 . In order to allow single mRNP tracking in living cells , the target mRNA must be expressed at a low copy number ( less than 20 transcripts per cell ) , as this will minimize issues related to differentiating signals from multiple mRNPs from frame to frame . Inducible reporter systems ( e . g . , GAL1 promoter ) can also be utilized to control expression of the target mRNA , but single mRNP tracking will only be possible at early stages of induction , as transcript levels will increase rapidly and spatial separation of individual mRNPs becomes challenging [ 33 ] . 6 . Ampliﬁcation of the repetitive stem loop sequence by PCR can be more difﬁcult when compared to other templates . Tutucci et al . outline a method using Taq DNA polymerase for MS2 stem loop ampliﬁcation [ 23 ] . We have had success using a high - ﬁdelity DNA polymerase such as Phusion ( New England Biolabs ) . 7 . Diploid strains are preferred due to the larger size of the cell nucleus , but this does require generation of homozygous dip - loid strains by isolating both haploid mating types and mating the strains . 8 . Addition of the 24xPP7 cassette will disrupt the 3 0 - UTR and add a signiﬁcant amount of sequence to the mRNA transcript , which may impact expression , stability , and functionality . Therefore , we target essential genes , as nonfunctional tran - scripts will result in lethality that will be observed during tetrad dissection . Growth of the tagged strain should also be com - pared to the parental strain under multiple conditions to verify that there are no growth defects as a result of the addition of the PP7 stem loops when combined with the ﬂuorescent NPC 146 Azra Lari et al . marker . Additionally , single - molecule FISH ( smFISH ) , RT - qPCR , and / or northern blotting experiments should be used to determine expression level and proper decay of the modiﬁed mRNA , especially due to the fact that the 24xPP7 cassette can alter mRNA decay or accumulate in cells as partial decay products , [ 23 , 34 – 36 ] . 9 . Integration of the PP7 - CP coding sequence into the yeast genome is not required and PP7 - CP can be expressed on a CEN plasmid instead [ 6 , 23 , 33 ] . However , integration of the PP7 - CP cassette provides homogenous expression of the pro - tein and less frequent aggregation of the CP . Aggregation of the CP is a common issue that causes formation of bright foci that will preclude imaging and tracking of single mRNA parti - cles ( Fig . 1a , b ) . 10 . Expression of the PP7 - CP is driven by the MET25 promoter , which is expressed under conditions of low available methio - nine . Leaky expression from this promoter is sufﬁcient to pro - duce enough PP7 - CP required for live - cell imaging in medium containing methionine ; therefore , the strain is grown in syn - thetic medium supplemented with methionine . Conditions with low amounts or no methionine result in high expression of the PP7 - CP , which can produce CP aggregates and a high background that masks signals from individual mRNP parti - cles . Constitutive low expression by using an ADE3 promoter has also been shown to allow robust single mRNA detection [ 4 ] . 11 . It is important to keep cells in exponential growth phase and to not allow cells to reach saturation phase of growth ( O . D 600 > 1 ) in liquid media , as this is accompanied by an increase in PP7 - CP expression / aggregation and yeast autoﬂuorescence ( Fig . 1a , b ) . 12 . Spheroplasting to remove the yeast cell wall decreases light scatter and signiﬁcantly increases the signal - to - noise ratio of the tagged Nup and mRNA ﬂuorescent signals [ 6 ] . However , be careful when handling the cells after digestion . DO NOT VORTEX or pipette the cells too vigorously at or beyond this point . The cells are fragile and susceptible to lysis . 13 . After removal of the cell wall and recovery of the cells in fresh medium supplemented with sorbitol , there are ~ 30 – 60 min for imaging before the cell regrows enough of the cell wall to begin to signiﬁcantly scatter light and decrease signal - to - noise ratios . 14 . Use of a 1 . 3 NA objective enables imaging of ~ 60 % of the yeast nuclear volume within a single focal plane . This allows for tracking of mRNPs for an increased number of frames . Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 147 15 . A dedicated 561 nm NOTCH ﬁlter is commercially available from several sources . 16 . Any heating system that ﬁts the microscope will be suitable for this imaging setup . 17 . Two - color colocalization by wide - ﬁeld microscopy lacks the resolution to determine whether two molecules are close enough to be in physical contact or simply nearby by chance due to chromatic aberrations in the objective lens . A robust methodology can be used to generate an internal registration signal from each cell imaged that can be used to register spectrally different channels relative to each other to achieve spatial precision below the optical resolution limit . This meth - odology , superregistration , can be used to correct for chro - matic aberration in the objective lens across the entire image ﬁeld to within 10 nm , which is capable of determining whether two molecules are physically close enough to interact or not [ 5 ] . 18 . Registration can fail because of aberrations caused by hetero - geneity in spheroplasting . We have found the failure rate to occur at a frequency of ~ 50 % . In successful cases the resulting registration precision is determined to be 0 . 14 pixel . 19 . To determine registration precision , NPC positions from both imaging channels must be ﬁtted . To do this , apply a linear transformation matrix to match the NPC positions on the mRNP channel with the NPC channel [ 27 ] . We use a linear translation since we need to match the features only in 2D and on the XY plane . The transformation is needed since the quality of the registration data does not reach the level of individual nuclear pores [ 5 ] . The SD using this method is in the order of the mean . 20 . Always display raw data images next to the enhanced images during visual analysis when tracking , and double check all traces of interest in the raw dataset to prevent a false - positive identiﬁcation of an event as a result of image processing . 21 . This classiﬁcation can be made because the localization preci - sion of single molecules follows a Gaussian distribution described by θ (cid:1) ^ θ ~ N ( 0 , C ( θ ) ) , where θ ¼ ( x , y , I , bg ) , ^ θ is the corresponding MLE , and C ( θ ) is CRLB [ 37 ] . 22 . Due to imaging in a single focal plane , the number of mRNP – NPC interactions that will be observed is greatly reduced . Therefore , two methods are used to estimate mRNP dwell times . 148 Azra Lari et al . Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge the laboratories of Drs . Robert Singer and Karsten Weis for reagents and support of previous works related to the methods described here . A . L . was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Canada Graduate Scholarship ; D . Z . is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health ( Project Grant - 366682 ) , Fonds de recherche du Que´ - bec—Sante´ ( Chercheur - boursier Junior 2 ) , Canada Foundation for Innovation , and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council ; D . G . by a National Institute of General Medical Sciences award ( 5R01GM123541 ) ; B . M . and D . G . by a National Institute of General Medical Sciences award ( 5R01GM124120 ) . The con - tent is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not neces - sarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institutes of Health . References 1 . Kim SJ , Fernandez - Martinez J , Nudelman I et al ( 2018 ) Integrative structure and func - tional anatomy of a nuclear pore complex . Nature 555 : 475 2 . Folkmann A , Noble K , Cole C ( 2011 ) Dbp5 , Gle1 - IP6 , and Nup159 : a working model for mRNP export . Nucleus 2 ( 6 ) : 540 – 548 3 . Green DM , Johnson CP , Hagan H , Corbett AH ( 2003 ) The C - terminal domain of myosin - like protein 1 ( Mlp1p ) is a docking site for heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleopro - teins that are required for mRNA export . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 : 1010 – 1015 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0336594100 4 . Sarouﬁm M - A , Bensidoun P , Raymond P et al ( 2015 ) The nuclear basket mediates perinuc - lear mRNA scanning in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 211 : 1131 – 1140 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201503070 5 . Gru¨nwald D , Singer RH ( 2010 ) In vivo imag - ing of labelled endogenous β - actin mRNA dur - ing nucleocytoplasmic transport . Nature 467 : 604 – 607 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09438 6 . Smith C , Lari A , Derrer CP et al ( 2015 ) In vivo single - particle imaging of nuclear mRNA export in budding yeast demonstrates an essen - tial role for Mex67p . J Cell Biol 211 : 1121 – 1130 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201503135 7 . Siebrasse JP , Kaminski T , Kubitscheck U ( 2012 ) Nuclear export of single native mRNA molecules observed by light sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 : 9426 – 9431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1201781109 8 . Mor A , Suliman S , Ben - Yishay R et al ( 2010 ) Dynamics of single mRNP nucleocytoplasmic transport and export through the nuclear pore in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 543 – 552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2056 9 . Nin˜o CA , He´rissant L , Babour A , Dargemont C ( 2013 ) mRNA nuclear export in yeast . Chem Rev 113 : 8523 – 8545 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / cr400002g 10 . Floch AG , Palancade B , Doye V ( 2014 ) Fifty years of nuclear pores and nucleocytoplasmic transport studies : multiple tools revealing com - plex rules . Methods Cell Biol 122C : 1 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 417160 - 2 . 00001 - 1 11 . Oefﬁnger M , Zenklusen D ( 2012 ) To the pore and through the pore : a story of mRNA export kinetics . Biochim Biophys Acta 1819 : 494 – 506 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbagrm . 2012 . 02 . 011 12 . Heinrich S , Derrer CP , Lari A et al ( 2017 ) Temporal and spatial regulation of mRNA export : single particle RNA - imaging provides new tools and insights . BioEssays 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bies . 201600124 13 . Pichon X , Lagha M , Mueller F , Bertrand E ( 2018 ) A growing toolbox to image gene expression in single cells : sensitive approaches for demanding challenges . Mol Cell 71 : 468 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . MOLCEL . 2018 . 07 . 022 Imaging mRNP - NPC Interactions in Yeast 149 14 . Hocine S , Raymond P , Zenklusen D et al ( 2013 ) Single - molecule analysis of gene expression using two - color RNA labeling in live yeast . Nat Methods 10 : 119 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2305 15 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M et al ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol Cell 2 : 437 – 445 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 00 ) 80143 - 4 16 . Larson DR , Zenklusen D , Wu B et al ( 2011 ) Real - time observation of transcription initia - tion and elongation on an endogenous yeast gene . Science 332 : 475 – 478 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1202142 17 . Tutucci E , Vera M , Biswas J et al ( 2018 ) An improved MS2 system for accurate reporting of the mRNA life cycle . Nat Methods 15 : 81 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4502 18 . Gu¨ldener U , Heck S , Fielder T et al ( 1996 ) A new efﬁcient gene disruption cassette for repeated use in budding yeast . Nucleic Acids Res 24 : 2519 – 2524 19 . Chan LY , Mugler CF , Heinrich S et al ( 2018 ) Non - invasive measurement of mRNA decay reveals translation initiation as the major deter - minant of mRNA stability . elife 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 32536 20 . Sherman BF , Sherman MF , Enzymol M ( 2003 ) Getting started with yeast . Contents 41 : 3 – 41 21 . Gietz RD , Woods RA ( 2002 ) Transformation of yeast by lithium acetate / single - stranded car - rier DNA / polyethylene glycol method . Meth - ods Enzymol 350 : 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 02 ) 50957 - 5 22 . Longtine MS , McKenzie A 3rd , Demarini DJ et al ( 1998 ) Additional modules for versatile and economical PCR - based gene deletion and modiﬁcation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast 14 : 953 – 961 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0061 ( 199807 ) 14 : 10 < 953 : : AID - YEA293 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - U 23 . Tutucci E , Vera M , Singer RH ( 2018 ) Single - mRNA detection in living S . cerevisiae using a re - engineered MS2 system . Nat Protoc 13 : 2268 – 2296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41596 - 018 - 0037 - 2 24 . Amberg DC , Burke DJ , Strathern JN ( 2006 ) Tetrad dissection . Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2006 : pdb . prot4181 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot4181 25 . Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E et al ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 : 676 – 682 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 26 . Schneider CA , Rasband WS , Eliceiri KW ( 2012 ) NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat Methods 9 : 671 – 675 27 . Preibisch S , Saalfeld S , Tomancak P ( 2009 ) Globally optimal stitching of tiled 3D micro - scopic image acquisitions . Bioinformatics 25 : 1463 – 1465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bio informatics / btp184 28 . Colquhoun D , Hawkes AG ( 1982 ) On the stochastic properties of bursts of single ion channel openings and of clusters of bursts . Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci 300 : 1 – 59 29 . Kubitscheck U , Gru¨nwald D , Hoekstra A et al ( 2005 ) Nuclear transport of single molecules . J Cell biol 168 : 233 – 243 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200411005 30 . Shaner NC , Lambert GG , Chammas A et al ( 2013 ) A bright monomeric green ﬂuorescent protein derived from Branchiostoma lanceola - tum . Nat Methods 10 : 407 31 . Shcherbo D , Merzlyak EM , Chepurnykh TV et al ( 2007 ) Bright far - red ﬂuorescent protein for whole - body imaging . Nat Methods 4 : 741 32 . Ryan KJ , McCaffery JM , Wente SR ( 2003 ) The Ran GTPase cycle is required for yeast nuclear pore complex assembly . J Cell Biol 160 : 1041 – 1053 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200209116 33 . Bensidoun P , Raymond P , Oefﬁnger M , Zenk - lusen D ( 2016 ) Imaging single mRNAs to study dynamics of mRNA export in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Methods 98 : 104 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2016 . 01 . 006 34 . Trcek T , Rahman S , Zenklusen D ( 2018 ) Mea - suring mRNA decay in budding yeast using single molecule FISH . Methods Mol Biol 1720 : 35 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 7540 - 2 _ 4 35 . Garcia JF , Parker R ( 2015 ) MS2 coat proteins bound to yeast mRNAs block 5 0 to 3 0 degrada - tion and trap mRNA decay products : implica - tions for the localization of mRNAs by MS2 - MCP system . RNA 21 : 1393 – 1395 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1261 / rna . 051797 . 115 36 . Heinrich S , Sidler CL , Azzalin CM , Weis K ( 2017 ) Stem - loop RNA labeling can affect nuclear and cytoplasmic mRNA processing . RNA 23 : 134 – 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1261 / rna . 057786 . 116 37 . Sengupta SK , Kay SM ( 1995 ) Fundamentals of statistical signal processing : estimation theory . Technometrics 37 : 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1269750 150 Azra Lari et al . Chapter 10 Detection of mRNAs Anchored to the Nuclear Envelope During Export Inhibition in Living Cells Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal Abstract Export of mRNA transcripts from the cell nucleus is a complex and multistep process , regulated by various proteins and control mechanisms . Recent studies have demonstrated the rapid passage of mRNA – protein complexes ( mRNPs ) through the nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) as well as the ability to detect mRNPs stalled at the NPC during inhibition of the mRNA export process . In this chapter , we describe ways to block mRNA export and present an image analysis method to identify mRNPs stuck at the NPC during such blocks . Using the MS2 mRNA - tagging system to track single mRNPs in living cells we are able to examine their intracellular distribution and dynamics both in the nucleoplasm and at the nuclear periphery . We use this method to identify and count the number of static mRNPs anchored to the nuclear envelope under different conditions of mRNA export inhibition . Key words mRNP , mRNA export , Nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) , Gene expression , Live cell imaging , Single particle tracking , Image processing and analysis 1 Introduction mRNA export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm through the nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) is one of the most critical stages of gene expression in eukaryotic cells . In order to be exported to the cytoplasm , the transcribed pre - mRNA is processed and bound by many RNA - binding proteins ( RBPs ) that package it into an export competent mRNP . The NPC is a ~ 185 – 285 nm long eight - fold symmetry channel , composed of three major domains : the nuclear basket , the central channel and the cytoplasmic ﬁbrils [ 1 – 5 ] . Upon arrival at the cytoplasmic side of the NPC , Dbp5 , an RNA helicase situated on the cytoplasmic ﬁbrils of the NPC , remodels the mRNP to remove export factors bound to the mRNA . This results in the release of the transcript to the cytoplasm , ensuring the unidirec - tionality of the mRNA export process [ 6 – 11 ] . The ﬁrst clear documentation of mRNPs in transit through the NPC was the case of the large Balbiani ring granules ( ~ 30 kb Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 10 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 151 mRNA ) in Chironomus tentans , that were detected at different stages of mRNA export using electron microscopy in ﬁxed cells [ 12 ] . Since then , RNA tagging systems were developed , allowing for the detection and tracking of single mRNPs during nucleoplas - mic transport and mRNA export in living cells . The most common method utilized for detecting mRNPs in living cells is the MS2 tagging system , which is based on addition of repeated sequences , originating from a bacteriophage , to the investigated mRNA . Those sequences form secondary structures that are then speciﬁ - cally bound by multiple MS2 - coat proteins ( MCP ) fused to a ﬂuorescent protein , resulting in ﬂuorescently detectable single mRNPs ( Fig . 1a ) . Using this system , it was shown that mRNPs usually traverse the nucleoplasm in a diffusive manner with rela - tively slow diffusion coefﬁcients and in dependence on the chroma - tin environment [ 13 – 22 ] . All studies on mRNA export performed in living cells found that the translocation of an mRNA through the NPC is very rapid , and occurs on the timescale of ~ 200 millise - conds . The passage is not dynamically uniform , and is composed of three dynamic stages : docking at the nuclear basket , fast transition through the central channel , and then slowing down at the cyto - plasmic side of the pore [ 14 , 15 , 19 , 23 – 25 ] . Due to the rapid rates of mRNA translocation through the NPC , it is rarely common to detect single mRNPs at the nuclear pore , so characterizing their interactions with NPC components in living cells is challenging . However , detection of mRNPs stalled at the NPC can be obtained when mRNA export is blocked [ 8 , 14 , 26 ] . We present here a method for detecting and counting the number of static mRNPs at the nuclear envelope in living cells , using two mRNA export inhibition methods we have previously used that were found to stall mRNPs at the nuclear periphery : ( a ) overexpression of a dominant negative Dbp5 helicase ( Dbp5 - DN ) , that cannot bind RNA [ 8 ] ; and ( b ) blocking of the NPC by Wheat Germ Agglutinin ( WGA ) , a lectin that binds FG residues at the NPC ( enriched in the tails of nucleoporins that compose the NPC ) , and prevents the passage of macromolecules through the pore [ 14 , 26 – 28 ] . We demonstrate the stages of the procedure from cell preparation and export inhibition , through live - cell imaging , image processing , detection and single particle tracking , and fur - ther analysis of their dynamics . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Cell Preparation and mRNA Export Inhibition 1 . Cell line stably expressing a gene containing MS2 repeats under a speciﬁc transcription induction system ( e . g . , Stratagene com - plete control or Tet - on ) and a GFP or YFP - tagged MS2 coat protein [ 29 , 30 ] . 152 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal 2 . 10 cm tissue culture plates . 3 . Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium ( DMEM ) . 4 . Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS ) . 5 . L - glutamine . 6 . Pen - Strep antibiotics solution . 7 . Trypsin . 8 . PBS solution . Fig . 1 Fluorescent labeling of single mRNPs in living cells . ( a ) scheme describing the MS2 tagging system . A series of MS2 repeats is inserted into the 3’ - UTR of the investigated gene , and transcription is driven by an inducible promoter . In the transcribed mRNA , the MS2 repeats folds into stem - loop structures , which are then bound by YFP - MS2 coat proteins . ( b ) U2OS cells stably expressing YFP - MS2 tagged Cerulean - mini - dystrophin - MS2 mRNPs [ 14 ] were cotransfected with Cerulean - Dbp5 - DN for export inhibition and with POM121 - mCherry for NPC detection . Only the YFP - MS2 signal is shown . 24 h after transfection , cells were induced to transcribe and imaged every 800 ms under a ﬂuorescent microscope . Left : frame from a live - cell movie showing single mRNPs accumulating in the nucleus . White arrows point at the sites of transcription , and magenta arrowheads point at representative single mRNPs . Right : average time projection image of the movie . Static mRNPs are marked with magenta arrowheads . Scale bar , 5 μ m Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 153 9 . Glass bottomed live imaging plates . 10 . Transfection reagent ( see Note 1 ) . 11 . Fluorescently tagged ( Cerulean or mCherry is recommended ) mutant Dbp5 - DN expression vector [ 8 ] . 12 . Fluorescently tagged NPC marker expression vector . We used POM121 - mCherry . 13 . Digitonin . 14 . WGA . Fluorescently labeled is preferable . Fluorophore should differ from other tags used in the experiment . 15 . Appropriate transcription inducer . 2 . 2 Live - Cell Imaging 1 . Fluorescent microscope ( preferably a wideﬁeld microscope ) equipped with an inverted (cid:1) 60 oil lens with high numerical aperture ( we recommend 1 . 42 ) . 2 . Microscope incubation chamber that includes temperature and CO 2 control . 2 . 3 Image Processing and Analysis 1 . Deconvolution software such as Huygens Essential II . 2 . ImageJ or FIGI image analysis program . 3 . Bitplane Imaris software . 4 . Microsoft Excel . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Cell System 1 . Use a cell line in which the studied gene of interest contains MS2 repeats . 2 . YFP - MS2 expression : it is recommended to create a stable cell line with low expression levels of the ﬂuorescent MS2 coat protein so that the background of the free MS2 coat protein will be low , and the signal of the tagged mRNPs coated with numerous MS2 coat proteins will be easily detectable over the background . Because the Dbp5 - DN protein must be overex - pressed to obtain an mRNA export block , it is not recom - mended to perform a cotransfection with the MS2 coat protein but have it stably expressed . 3 . It is recommended to transfect the cells with a ﬂuorescently tagged NPC marker ( e . g . , POM121 ) . This can help detecting the nuclear borders / envelope ( see Note 2 ) . 4 . Optimization of the transcriptional activation times is required to ensure that mRNA export reaches steady state , and most mRNAs are detected in the cytoplasm . For the Cerulean - Mini - Dystrophin gene that we used [ 14 ] , 8 kb long , the optimal activation time was 4 – 5 h . 154 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal 3 . 2 Cell Preparation and mRNA Export Inhibition Via Dbp5 - DN Expression Generate a ﬂuorescently tagged version of the Dbp5 - DN mutant helicase . Make sure to use a ﬂuorescent protein that is distinct from YFP . We recommend mCherry or Cerulean . 1 . Day before transfection ( Day 1 ) : Seed the cells in a glass - bottomed plate to reach 80 – 90 % conﬂuence ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . Day of transfection ( Day 2 ) : Change the growth medium to fresh prewarmed medium . Transfect the cells with a ﬂuorescent Dbp5 - DN ( and with YFP - MS2 , if using a cell line that does not stably express the coat protein ) . We recommend using trans - fection reagents such as PolyJet or Lipofectamine 2000 ( see Note 1 ) . 3 . 24 h after transfection ( Day 3 ) : Change the cell medium and induce transcription of the MS2 - tagged gene by adding the appropriate inducer to the cells , for the optimal time calibrated in Subheading 3 . 1 , step 4 . 3 . 3 Cell Preparation and mRNA Export Inhibition Via WGA Treatment 1 . Day before treatment ( Day 1 ) : Seed the cells in a glass bot - tomed plate to reach 60 – 80 % conﬂuence . 2 . Day of treatment ( Day 2 ) : In order for WGA to penetrate into the cells , permeabilize the cell membrane with digitonin ( see Note 4 ) . Incubate the cells for 5 min with digitonin and ﬂuorescently labeled WGA at 37 (cid:3) C ( for control experiments use digitonin without WGA ) . We used 30 μ g / mL digitonin together with 5 μ g / mL Cy5 - WGA diluted in the growth medium . Then wash the cells three times with the growth medium and induce transcription of the MS2 - tagged gene by adding the appropriate inducer to the cells , for the optimal time calibrated in Subheading 3 . 1 , step 4 . 3 . 4 Live - Cell Imaging 1 . Transfer the plate with the transcriptionally induced export inhibited cells to a prewarmed ﬂuorescent microscope , equipped with an incubator providing 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . 2 . Search for cells expressing the YFP - MS2 - tagged mRNPs . In control cells , ( i . e . , cells that do not express Cer - Dbp5 - DN or cells treated with digitonin only ) , the free YFP - MCP is diffu - sively spread in all cell compartments , and single mRNPs are detected as small particles / dots , most of them in the cyto - plasm . The site of transcription is seen as a relatively large and bright spot in the nucleus . For mRNA export inhibition by Dbp5 - DN , choose cells that express high levels of the protein , which is usually cytoplasmic . In export inhibited cells , the Dbp5 mutant or WGA cause mRNA retention in the nucleus and single mRNPs are detected predominantly in the nucleoplasm ( Fig . 1b ) . 3 . Focusing on the central plane of the nucleus ( see Note 5 ) , optimize the imaging parameters for time - lapse imaging in Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 155 the YFP channel and in the appropriate NPC marker ﬂuores - cent channel ( if used ) . We recommend using a (cid:1) 60 / (cid:1) 100 magniﬁcation lens with high numerical aperture ( 1 . 42 at least ) . To minimize photobleaching and increase time resolu - tion , use minimal light intensity and exposure times sufﬁcient for mRNP detection . Recommended time interval is less than 1 s , with total movie length of ~ 1 min ( see Note 6 ) . After time - lapse image acquisition , image the cell also in the Dbp5 - DN or WGA ﬂuorescent channels and DIC or brightﬁeld channels . 3 . 5 Image Processing 1 . For analysis , choose cells that did not move and did not dra - matically lose the YFP signal due to photobleaching . 2 . To increase the signal - to - noise ratio for better mRNP detec - tion , and for minor photobleaching corrections , it is advisable to perform de - convolution of the movie with mild iterations . We used Huygens Essential II with a time - series option , set to SNR : 40 and 5 iterations . 3 . To produce qualitative information about the location of static mRNPs , create an average - intensity image of the time - lapse movie . Load the movie to ImageJ or FIGI program , select image ! stacks ! Z project . “Start slice” stands for the ﬁrst slice of the movie ( i . e . , 1 ) , and “stop slice” stands for the last . Choose “average intensity” as projection type and press OK . The algorithm calculates the average value of each pixel along the movie , and outputs the results into one image . Moving particles will disappear from the ﬁnal image , while static objects that spent a certain time at speciﬁc location will be prominent . As a result , this function provides a good over - view of the static mRNPs in the cell ( Fig . 1b ) . 4 . Proceed to the separation of the nucleus and the nuclear periphery ( Fig . 2 ) . In ImageJ , double click the “color picker” tool , and select “black color” for both ﬁll and outline . To mark the nucleus , use the DIC image , the average projection image , or the tagged - NPCs image . Select the polygon selection tool , draw the nucleus borders , and save the region of interest ( ROI ) : Edit ! Selection ! Add to Manager . Load the nucleus ROI over the time - lapse movie by selecting this ROI in the ROI manager window . To separate the nucleus , select : Edit ! Clear outside . All signal outside the ROI will become black . Save the movie as “Nucleus . ” To obtain a time - lapse movie of the nuclear envelope , load the Nucleus movie and the nuclear borders ROI , and select : Edit ! Selection ! Enlarge . This function changes the size of the ROI according to the number of pixels loaded by the user . Hence , a negative value shrinks the ROI . Number of pixels should be approximately the same as the diameter of a single mRNP . In our conditions , the appropriate value was - 7 pixels . After shrinking the ROI , 156 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal Fig . 2 Separation of the nucleoplasm from the nuclear envelope area in images from a live - cell movie , using ImageJ . Left : Deﬁning the nuclear borders according to the NPC signal ( POM121 ) , and creation of the “nucleus” movie . Right : Deﬁning the nuclear envelope area . Yellow lines represent the selected ROIs . Scale bar , 5 μ m Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 157 discard the nucleoplasm by selecting : Edit ! Fill . The resulting movie shows the nuclear periphery only . Save the movie as “Nuclear envelope , ” and proceed to mRNA detection . 3 . 6 Single mRNA Tracking and Detection of Static mRNPs in the Nuclear Periphery 1 . For single mRNA detection , load the Nucleus movie into the Imaris software ( see Note 7 ) , and add the Nuclear envelope movie by selecting : Edit ! Add channels . To deﬁne the ﬁles as time - lapse movies , press Image processing ! Swap time and z . Make sure that the image properties are correct : Select Edit ! Image properties , and enter the appropriate voxel size values , according to the microscope settings . The display prop - erties of both channels ( e . g . , pseudo - colors , brightness , and contrast ) can be determined using the “Display Adjustment” window . 2 . Find the estimated diameter of a single mRNP . Pressing the “slice” button allows viewing the movie in slice mode . Mark two points across a chosen mRNP , and the distance between them will appear on the right side of the screen , under the “Distance” rubric . Perform this measurement on several mRNPs , and estimate the diameter of an average mRNP . Nor - mal values for wideﬁeld microscope movies are between ~ 200 and 400 nm . 3 . Detect single mRNPs in the nucleoplasm . ( a ) Press the “Add new spots” button and check “Track spots ( over time ) . ” ( b ) Press the “Next” button , select channel 1 as the source channel and enter the estimated mRNA size from Sub - heading 3 . 6 , step 2 into the “Estimated XY diameter” ﬁeld . Press “Next . ” Imaris software analyses the movie and detects all spots in the appropriate diameter . This process may take a few seconds . All detected particles are usually marked as gray spheres ( see Note 8 ) . ( c ) Change the “Quality” threshold so that all , and only , reliable mRNPs are detected ( see Note 9 ) . ( d ) Proceed to steps 5 and 6 in the algorithm : Tracking . ( e ) The “Max Distance” parameter determines the maximal distance a spot can pass between two adjacent frames . If the spot passed a higher distance , the track will be termi - nated and the spot that appeared in the second frame will be considered as the start of a new track . By deﬁnition , static mRNPs travel a small distance per time - point . Therefore , in order to detect static mRNPs , the max distance value has to be relatively low . For mRNPs imaged every 800 ms , we used a max distance of 250 nm ( see Note 10 ) . 158 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal ( f ) The “Max Gap Size” parameter determines the number of time points a particle can be not detected by the program , but still be part of the same track . We recommend setting this parameter to zero , in order to detect continuous tracks only . ( g ) After setting the “Max Distance” and “Max Gap Size” parameters , press “Next” and determine the minimal track duration . We recommend using tracks that last at least four frames . Press the green button labeled with “ > > ’”to ﬁnish the analysis . At this stage , all static mRNPs in the nucleoplasm are detected and tracked ( see Note 11 ) ( Fig . 3a ) . ( h ) Under the “Statistics” tab , press the “Conﬁgure list of visible statistics values” button , and check “Number of spots per time point” and “Track duration” under “Spots . ” To export the data to an excel ﬁle , press the “Export all statistics to ﬁle” button under the “detailed” tab . The ﬁle consists of two tabs . The “Overall” tab repre - sents the number of static mRNPs detected in each frame , and the “Track duration” tab shows the duration of each track detected ( Fig . 3b ) ( see Note 12 ) . ( i ) To isolate the static mRNPs located at the nuclear periph - ery , select the “Filter” tab , press the “Add” button and select “Intensity Max Ch ¼ 2” . This ﬁlter sorts the spots according to the intensity of the second channel loaded to the software , that is , the nuclear envelope signal . Selected spots are shown in yellow . Change the threshold to reach optimal identiﬁcation of particles in the nuclear periphery , and press “Duplicate Selection to new Spots . ” This creates a separate set of spots , containing only the static mRNPs localized at the periphery of the nucleus , as deﬁned by the user ( Fig . 3a ) . Extract the statistical data as in ( f ) . 4 . Perform statistical analysis ( i . e . , average number of static mRNPs within the nucleoplasm per time point , distribution of track duration , etc . ) . 4 Notes 1 . Because Dbp5 - DN inhibits mRNA export by competing with endogenous Dbp5 for Gle1 activation [ 8 ] , high levels of the mutant must be expressed in the cell . We found that transfec - tion by electroporation or calcium phosphate did not yield the appropriate outcome , and are less recommended . 2 . In some cases , incorporation of exogenously expressed nucleo - porins ( Nups ) into the NPCs requires more than one day of Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 159 Fig . 3 Detection and single particle tracking of static mRNPs at the nuclear envelope in living cells . ( a ) Detection of static mRNPs in the nucleoplasm ( left , white spots ) and at the nuclear envelope ( right , blue spots ) by Imaris software . Single particle tracking of the mRNP marked with the white box is shown at the bottom . ( b ) Output Excel charts presenting the number of static mRNPs at the nuclear periphery per time point along the time - lapse movie ( top ) , and the time each mRNP was anchored to this area ( bottom ) . Scale bar , 5 μ m 160 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal transient expression . It is recommended to perform calibration of the speciﬁc Nup used in the experiment . We found that for POM121 , 24 h was sufﬁcient . 3 . If using PolyJet , avoid seeding cells to less than 80 % conﬂu - ence , as this reagent might be toxic and cells might not survive the transfection . 4 . Prior to the experiment , calibrate the optimal concentration of digitonin that yields good permeabilization with minimal dam - age to the cells . For U2OS cells , we used 30 μ g / mL digitonin for 5 min . 5 . If the cells express a ﬂuorescently tagged NPC marker , use its signal to focus on the appropriate plane . 6 . It is critical to make sure that the cells do not move in the ﬁeld of view and out of focus during the acquisition . Placing the plate in the preheated microscope a few minutes prior to imag - ing can reduce vibrations . 7 . There are several versions of Imaris software . The steps described in this section are valid for Imaris versions 6 . 0 . 2 , 7 . 6 . 3 , 7 . 7 . 2 ; note that minor changes may occur in later ver - sions of the software . 8 . The visual properties of the spots can be adjusted by the user at every stage . Select the “Setting” tab to set the shape and size of the spots , and the “Color” tab to set their color . 9 . Determining the appropriate quality threshold for single parti - cle identiﬁcation requires that all movies in the experiment are analyzed under similar conditions to avoid bias . 10 . To estimate the appropriate maximum distance , move to “Slice” mode . Focus on one representative mRNP and click at the center of the spot . Then role the movie to the next frame and click at the center of the mRNP at the new position . The distance between the two positions appears on the right hand side of the screen , under the “distance” rubric . Repeat this measurement with a few static mRNPs at different time points throughout the movie , and determine the approximate maximal distance that a typical static mRNP passes between two adjacent time points . 11 . Avoid false - positive spot detection . Sometimes the site of tran - scription or single pixels at the nuclear borders are marked as spots representing single mRNA particles . To discard them from the analysis , check “Select” mode in the “Camera” menu , and move to the “Edit” tab in the spot detection algorithm . Mark the relevant spots and press “Delete . ” 12 . In some cases , the outputted Excel ﬁle represents the time frames with units in seconds . If the actual time frame of the movie is different , load the appropriate time values into the ﬁle . Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 161 Acknowledgments Y . S . T . is supported by the Israel Science Foundation and Germa - n – Israeli Foundation . References 1 . Fahrenkrog B , Aebi U ( 2003 ) The nuclear pore complex : nucleocytoplasmic transport and beyond . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4 ( 10 ) : 757 – 766 2 . Fernandez - Martinez J , Rout MP ( 2012 ) A jumbo problem : mapping the structure and functions of the nuclear pore complex . Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 ( 1 ) : 92 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2011 . 12 . 013 3 . Adams RL , Wente SR ( 2013 ) Uncovering nuclear pore complexity with innovation . Cell 152 ( 6 ) : 1218 – 1221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 02 . 042 4 . Maimon T , Elad N , Dahan I , Medalia O ( 2012 ) The human nuclear pore complex as revealed by cryo - electron tomography . Struc - ture 20 ( 6 ) : 998 – 1006 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2012 . 03 . 025 5 . Walde S , Kehlenbach RH ( 2010 ) The Part and the Whole : functions of nucleoporins in nucleocytoplasmic transport . Trends Cell Biol 20 ( 8 ) : 461 – 469 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2010 . 05 . 001 6 . Lund MK , Guthrie C ( 2005 ) The DEAD - box protein Dbp5p is required to dissociate Mex67p from exported mRNPs at the nuclear rim . Mol Cell 20 ( 4 ) : 645 – 651 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2005 . 10 . 005 7 . Ledoux S , Guthrie C ( 2011 ) Regulation of the Dbp5 ATPase cycle in mRNP remodeling at the nuclear pore : a lively new paradigm for DEAD - box proteins . Genes Dev 25 ( 11 ) : 1109 – 1114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 2062611 8 . Hodge CA , Tran EJ , Noble KN , Alcazar - Roman AR , Ben - Yishay R , Scarcelli JJ , Folk - mann AW , Shav - Tal Y , Wente SR , Cole CN ( 2011 ) The Dbp5 cycle at the nuclear pore complex during mRNA export I : dbp5 mutants with defects in RNA binding and ATP hydrolysis deﬁne key steps for Nup159 and Gle1 . Genes Dev 25 ( 10 ) : 1052 – 1064 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 2041611 9 . Noble KN , Tran EJ , Alcazar - Roman AR , Hodge CA , Cole CN , Wente SR ( 2011 ) The Dbp5 cycle at the nuclear pore complex during mRNA export II : nucleotide cycling and mRNP remodeling by Dbp5 are controlled by Nup159 and Gle1 . Genes Dev 25 ( 10 ) : 1065 – 1077 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 2040611 10 . Tran EJ , Zhou Y , Corbett AH , Wente SR ( 2007 ) The DEAD - box protein Dbp5 controls mRNA export by triggering speciﬁc RNA : pro - tein remodeling events . Mol Cell 28 ( 5 ) : 850 – 859 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2007 . 09 . 019 11 . Wente SR , Rout MP ( 2010 ) The nuclear pore complex and nuclear transport . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 ( 10 ) : a000562 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a000562 12 . Daneholt B ( 1997 ) A look at messenger RNP moving through the nuclear pore . Cell 88 ( 5 ) : 585 – 588 13 . Shav - Tal Y , Darzacq X , Shenoy SM , Fusco D , Janicki SM , Spector DL , Singer RH ( 2004 ) Dynamics of single mRNPs in nuclei of living cells . Science 304 ( 5678 ) : 1797 – 1800 14 . Mor A , Suliman S , Ben - Yishay R , Yunger S , Brody Y , Shav - Tal Y ( 2010 ) Dynamics of single mRNP nucleocytoplasmic transport and export through the nuclear pore in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 12 ( 6 ) : 543 – 552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2056 15 . Grunwald D , Singer RH ( 2010 ) In vivo imag - ing of labelled endogenous beta - actin mRNA during nucleocytoplasmic transport . Nature 467 ( 7315 ) : 604 – 607 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09438 16 . Vargas DY , Raj A , Marras SA , Kramer FR , Tyagi S ( 2005 ) Mechanism of mRNA transport in the nucleus . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 ( 47 ) : 17008 – 17013 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0505580102 17 . Ben - Ari Y , Brody Y , Kinor N , Mor A , Tsukamoto T , Spector DL , Singer RH , Shav - Tal Y ( 2010 ) The life of an mRNA in space and time . J Cell Sci 123 ( Pt 10 ) : 1761 – 1774 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 062638 18 . Halstead JM , Lionnet T , Wilbertz JH , Wippich F , Ephrussi A , Singer RH , Chao JA ( 2015 ) Translation . An RNA biosensor for imaging the ﬁrst round of translation from sin - gle cells to living animals . Science 347 ( 6228 ) : 1367 – 1671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aaa3380 162 Rakefet Ben - Yishay and Yaron Shav - Tal 19 . Ma J , Liu Z , Michelotti N , Pitchiaya S , Veerapaneni R , Androsavich JR , Walter NG , Yang W ( 2013 ) High - resolution three - dimen - sional mapping of mRNA export through the nuclear pore . Nat Commun 4 : 2414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms3414 20 . Querido E , Gallardo F , Beaudoin M , Menard C , Chartrand P ( 2011 ) Stochastic and reversible aggregation of mRNA with expanded CUG - triplet repeats . J Cell Sci 124 . ( Pt 10 : 1703 – 1714 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 073270 21 . Thompson MA , Casolari JM , Badieirostami M , Brown PO , Moerner WE ( 2010 ) Three - dimensional tracking of single mRNA particles in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a double - helix point spread function . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 ( 42 ) : 17864 – 17871 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1012868107 22 . Veith R , Sorkalla T , Baumgart E , Anzt J , Haberlein H , Tyagi S , Siebrasse JP , Kubitscheck U ( 2010 ) Balbiani ring mRNPs diffuse through and bind to clusters of large intranuclear molecular structures . Biophys J 99 ( 8 ) : 2676 – 2685 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 08 . 004 23 . Ben - Yishay R , Ashkenazy AJ , Shav - Tal Y ( 2016 ) Dynamic encounters of genes and tran - scripts with the nuclear pore . Trends Genet 32 ( 7 ) : 419 – 431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tig . 2016 . 04 . 003 24 . Siebrasse JP , Kaminski T , Kubitscheck U ( 2012 ) Nuclear export of single native mRNA molecules observed by light sheet ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 ( 24 ) : 9426 – 9431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1201781109 25 . Smith C , Lari A , Derrer CP , Ouwehand A , Rossouw A , Huisman M , Dange T , Hopman M , Joseph A , Zenklusen D , Weis K , Grunwald D , Montpetit B ( 2015 ) In vivo single - particle imaging of nuclear mRNA export in budding yeast demonstrates an essen - tial role for Mex67p . J Cell Biol 211 ( 6 ) : 1121 – 1130 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201503135 26 . Kylberg K , Bjork P , Fomproix N , Ivarsson B , Wieslander L , Daneholt B ( 2010 ) Exclusion of mRNPs and ribosomal particles from a thin zone beneath the nuclear envelope revealed upon inhibition of transport . Exp Cell Res 316 ( 6 ) : 1028 – 1038 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2009 . 10 . 016 27 . Mohr D , Frey S , Fischer T , Guttler T , Gorlich D ( 2009 ) Characterisation of the passive per - meability barrier of nuclear pore complexes . EMBO J 28 ( 17 ) : 2541 – 2553 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2009 . 200 28 . Davis LI , Blobel G ( 1986 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a nuclear pore complex pro - tein . Cell 45 ( 5 ) : 699 – 709 29 . Kalo A , Kafri P , Shav - Tal Y ( 2013 ) Single mRNP tracking in living mammalian cells . Methods Mol Biol 1042 : 87 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 526 - 2 _ 7 30 . Yunger S , Shav - Tal Y ( 2011 ) Imaging mRNAs in living mammalian cells . Methods Mol Biol 714 : 249 – 263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 61779 - 005 - 8 _ 16 Detecting Stalled mRNPs During an mRNA Export Block 163 Part II Imaging Chromosomes , Genes , and Transcription Factors Chapter 11 Programmable Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce Abstract Current methods for chromosome painting via ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) are costly , time - consuming , and limited in complexity . In contrast to conventional sources of probe , Oligopaints are computationally designed , synthesized on microarrays , and ampliﬁed by PCR . This approach allows for precise control over the sequences they target , which can range from a few kilobases to entire chromosomes with the same basic protocol . We have utilized the ﬂexibility and scalability of Oligopaints to generate low - cost and renewable chromosome paints for Drosophila , mouse , and human chromosomes . These Oligopaint libraries can be customized to label any genomic feature ( s ) in a chromosome - wide manner . Additionally , this method is compatible with sequential FISH to label entire genomes with a single denaturation step . Here , we outline a protocol and considerations to scale the Oligopaint technology for ﬂuorescent labeling of whole chromosomes . Key words FISH , Oligopaint , Chromosome painting , Oligonucleotide 1 Introduction The discovery of nonrandom chromosome folding and positioning in the nucleus [ 1 , 2 ] has precipitated ongoing efforts to determine the contribution of this spatial organization to gene function . Fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) has been instrumental in relating gene positioning to transcriptional outputs , as seen at the chromosomal level with X - inactivation [ 3 – 7 ] and with the positioning of genes relative to their chromosome and to the nuclear periphery [ 8 – 13 ] . With advances in computing power and next - generation sequencing , however , bulk genomic assays such as Hi - C [ 14 – 17 ] have outpaced the implementation of traditional FISH methodologies in elucidating the structure and spatial char - acteristics of chromosomes . FISH , on the other hand , can more readily capture single - cell variability that is lost with ensemble genomic assays and inherently adds positioning information [ 18 – 20 ] . The Oligopaints pipeline for FISH utilizes in silico screening of candidate probe sequences for favorable criteria , including uniqueness and melting temperature , that can be easily Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 11 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 167 synthesized as short and renewable oligo probes [ 21 , 22 ] . Oligo - paints avoid issues with traditional FISH probes that use genomic DNA or degenerate primers for random ampliﬁcation by avoiding nonunique and repetitive sequences [ 23 – 27 ] . This greatly diminishes batch effects common with FISH , ultimately leading to more reproducible results . Oligopaints has already been successfully employed by a num - ber of groups to visualize relatively small genomic regions ( 5 – 300 kb ) [ 14 , 19 , 20 , 28 – 32 ] . Recently , we have successfully scaled the Oligopaint technology for the visualization of large genomic regions ( several Mbs ) up to entire chromosomes for sev - eral species without added cost or loss in resolution ( Fig . 1 ) . Com - pared to conventional chromosome painting strategies , we ﬁnd that Oligopaints greatly reduce background signal permitting accurate measurements of chromosome size , shape , and position in the nucleus [ 33 ] . Indeed , this strategy has been used in cells and tissues in both ﬂies and worms to identify factors necessary for large - scale chromosome folding [ 31 , 33 ] . Finally , multi - Mb Oligopaints can be further functionalized by assigning multiple primer pairs to each probe , allowing a single genomic sequence to be used for multiple probe sets ( Fig . 2 ) . For example , oligos assigned to a chromosome can be selectively ampliﬁed to interrogate different scales of chro - mosome organization , from whole chromosomes to sub - chromosomal domains and individual genes . The control over probe production is also crucial when generating allele - speciﬁc probes , which can address biological questions regarding allele - speciﬁc alterations in structure and / or expression [ 28 ] . Here , we outline a protocol and considerations to scale the Oligopaint tech - nology for ﬂuorescent labeling of whole chromosomes . Fig . 1 Representative images from a single z - slice of chromosome territories in Drosophila ( Kc167 cells ) , mouse ( 3T3 cells ) , and human ( HCT - 116 cells ) interphase nuclei . Chromosome target , total probe count , and average density of probe labeling across each chromosome are given . Scale bar , 5 μ m 168 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce 2 Materials Complex oligo pools synthesized on microarray from commercial vendor . 2 . 1 Initial PCR Ampliﬁcation 1 . Complex oligo pool . 2 . Phusion High - Fidelity PCR Master Mix . 3 . Forward primer . 4 . Reverse primer . 5 . PCR puriﬁcation kit . 2 . 2 Secondary PCR Ampliﬁcation 1 . Forward primer with secondary binding sequence on 5 0 end ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . Reverse primer with T7 promoter sequence on 5 0 end : TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG . 3 . PCR cleanup kit . 4 . Taq polymerase and appropriate reaction buffer . 5 . 10 mM dNTP mix . Fig . 2 Design , production , and detection of Oligopaints . ( a ) Probe sequences with homology to speciﬁc genomic regions are ﬂanked with a pair of indices . For chromosome paints , an additional pair of “universal” indices is used across all probe sequences . ( b ) The unique indices allow the same oligo pool to be used for the creation of multiple Oligopaints . Primers to the universal indices ( red ) amplify the entire pool , and the nested primers ( blue and green ) amplify subsets of the pool , leading to the generation of chromosome - and region - speciﬁc Oligopaints , respectively . The primers contain extra “overhang” sequences , usually the secondary binding site and T7 primer sequence , which are incorporated into the probe PCR product . ( c ) Unlabeled primary probes hybridized to their genomic target can be detected using labeled secondary probes . With the proper probe design , simultaneous detection of the chromosome - and region - speciﬁc probes can be accomplished using two different secondary probes ( red and blue , respectively ) Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 169 2 . 3 T7 Reaction 1 . HiScribe T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit . 2 . RNaseOUT recombinant ribonuclease inhibitor ( see Note 2 ) . 2 . 4 Reverse Transcription 1 . Maxima H Minus RT Transcriptase . 2 . 100 mM dNTP Mix : add 100 mM dNTPs in equal ratio to each other . 2 . 5 Probe Puriﬁcation 1 . DNA Clean and Concentrator - 100 kit ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . 1 M NaOH . 3 . 0 . 5 M EDTA . 4 . Oligo binding buffer . 5 . 100 % ethanol . 2 . 6 Sample Fixation 1 . Poly - L - lysine coated slides ( see Note 4 ) . 2 . 10 (cid:2) PBS solution : 3 . 1 (cid:2) PBS solution : dilute 10 (cid:2) PBS solution with ddH 2 O . 4 . Fixation solution : Add 10 mL of 16 % ( vol / vol ) paraformalde - hyde , 26 mL of ddH 2 O , and 4 mL of 10 (cid:2) PBS . 5 . Coplin staining jar for slides . 6 . Kimwipes . 2 . 7 Sample Permeabilization ( see Note 5 ) 1 . Permeabilization solution : Add 200 μ L of Triton X - 100 to 40 mL of ddH 2 O . Prepared fresh . 2 . 70 % ethanol : Add 12 mL of 100 % ethanol to 28 mL of ddH 2 O . 3 . 90 % ethanol : Add 4 mL of 100 % ethanol to 36 mL of ddH 2 O . 4 . 100 % ethanol : Set aside 50 mL . 5 . 20 (cid:2) SSC : 3 M NaCl , 300 mM sodium citrate . 6 . 4 (cid:2) SSCT : For 1 L , add 200 mL of 20 (cid:2) SSC , 2 mL of Tween - 20 , and 798 mL of ddH 2 O . 7 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT + 50 % formamide : Combine 20 mL of 4 (cid:2) SSCT with 20 mL of formamide ( see Note 6 ) . 2 . 8 Sample Pretreatment 1 . Water bath set at 92 (cid:3) C ( or lower temperatures , see Note 7 ) . 2 . Water bath set at 60 (cid:3) C . 3 . Heat block , mostly immersed in 92 (cid:3) C water bath . Top of the heat block should be above the water to rest the slide . 4 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT + 50 % formamide . Fill a Coplin jar with this solution and place into each water bath . 2 . 9 Hybridization of Primary Probe 1 . Probe ( see Note 8 ) . 2 . Dextran sulfate mix : For a 10 mL mix , add 4 g of dextran sulfate , 4 mL of 20 (cid:2) SSC , and 40 μ L of Tween - 20 . Add 170 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce ddH 2 O up to 10 mL . Optional : addition of PVSA ( up to 4 % ﬁnal conc . ) ( see Note 9 ) . 3 . Formamide . 4 . Optional : 100 mM dNTPs mix ( see Note 10 ) . 5 . Incubator set at 37 (cid:3) C ( see Note 11 ) . 2 . 10 Post - Hybridization Wash 1 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT : For 1 L , add 100 mL of 20 (cid:2) SSC , 1 mL of Tween - 20 , and 899 mL of ddH 2 O . 2 . 0 . 2 (cid:2) SSC : For 1 L , add 10 mL of 20 (cid:2) SSC and 990 mL of ddH 2 O . 2 . 11 Hybridization of Secondary Probe 1 . Secondary probe : a ﬂuorophore - labeled oligo with reverse complementarity to the secondary binding site . 2 . Dextran sulfate mix ( see above ) . 3 . Formamide . 2 . 12 Post - Secondary Wash and Mounting 1 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT ( see above ) . 2 . 0 . 2 (cid:2) SSC ( see above ) . 3 . Hoechst 33342 , 10 mg / mL . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Oligopaint Probe Design Considerations 1 . Generation of probe sequences : The original Oligopaints were designed using the BLAST algorithm [ 21 ] , but newer Oligo - Miner pipeline takes advantage of next - generation sequence alignment , making Oligopaint design more feasible without the need for a high performance computing cluster [ 22 ] . Pre - mined probe sequences to popular model organisms are pub - licly available [ 34 ] , but any genomic sequence in fasta format can be mined for probes . Importantly , the quality and quantity of probe is highly dependent on the quality and completeness of the genome build . Oligopaint probes , in general , can toler - ate some mismatches along the hybridization sequence , but while this allows Oligopaint probes to be used across different genomes containing polymorphisms relative to the reference genome , improper screening of repetitive sequences can lead to the inadvertent design and nonspeciﬁc probes . 2 . Probe density : Density of probes targeting a genomic region can be relaxed when targeting multimegabases to entire chro - mosomes compared to submegabase genomic targets . While the original Oligopaint and OligoMiner bioinformatics pipe - line will automatically ﬁnd all candidate probes across a region of interest , with a typical density of 5 – 20 probes per kilobase ( probes / kb ) , we have found that ~ 0 . 5 to ~ 2 probes / kb is sufﬁcient to label entire chromosomes [ 33 ] ( see Fig . 1 ) . Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 171 3 . Multiplexing probe design and production : Because Oligo - paints are made by primer - based ampliﬁcation , nested primers can be used to assign a probe sequence for multiple purposes ( see Fig . 2a , b ) . For instance , a single oligo pool can be used to differentially label different chromosomes or different regions of an entire chromosome . This has recently been used to seg - ment the chromosome into megabase - and kilobase - sized chunks [ 31 ] . 4 . Multiplex probe labeling : Since the primer sequences are incorporated into the probe themselves , they can be used to dock “secondary” ﬂuorophore - labeled probes for indirect labeling , akin to the use of primary and secondary antibody pairs for immunolabeling applications [ 21 , 28 ] . As an example , whole chromosomes in Drosophila cells can be hybridized with unlabeled primary probe , and then secondary probes can simultaneously label the whole chromosome as well as sub - Mb regions within it [ 33 ] ( see Fig . 2c ) . This approach to labeling also simpliﬁes probe production , as one would only need to synthesize one chromosome probe to enable ad hoc labeling of features of interest of that chromosome . Finally , these secondary probes can either be bleached [ 19 ] or stripped off with competing unlabeled oligos called “toeholds” [ 20 , 33 ] to allow for these ﬂuorescent dyes to be reassigned to other secondaries for the detection of many features in the same cell . This strategy has worked well to achieve genome - wide ﬁve - color chromosome painting in Drosophila nuclei [ 33 ] . 3 . 2 Probe Production 1 . PCR amplify the oligo pool by assembling a 50 μ L reaction with the following : 1 . 25 μ L of 20 μ M forward primer , 1 . 25 μ L of 20 μ M reverse primer , 1 μ L of 100 pg / μ L oligo pool , 21 . 5 μ L of ddH 2 O , and 25 μ L of 2 (cid:2) Phusion Master Mix . 2 . Run PCR with the following cycle : initial denaturation of 98 (cid:3) C for 3 min , then 30 cycles of 98 (cid:3) C for 5 s and 72 (cid:3) C for 15 s , then 72 (cid:3) C for 2 min . 3 . Purify the reaction using a PCR puriﬁcation kit and measure the DNA concentration . Dilute to 20 ng / μ L . 4 . Perform second PCR to attach a T7 sequence and secondary binding sequence , using the oligo pool PCR product as a template ( see Note 12 ) . Assemble a 200 μ L reaction with the following : 0 . 4 μ L of 200 μ M forward primer containing sec - ondary binding sequence , 0 . 4 μ L 200 of μ M reverse primer containing T7 sequence , 4 μ L of 10 mM dNTP mix , 1 μ L of 20 ng / μ L oligo pool PCR product , PCR buffer , Taq polymer - ase , and ddH 2 O . The 200 μ L reaction can be split across multiple tubes . 172 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce 5 . Run a standard PCR reaction based on the manufacturer’s suggestion , such as the following : initial denaturation of 94 (cid:3) C for 5 min , then 35 cycles of 94 (cid:3) C for 45 s , 56 (cid:3) C for 30 s , and 72 (cid:3) C for 30 s , then 72 (cid:3) C for 5 min . 6 . Combine the PCR reactions , purify , and elute in 50 μ L . A typical yield is at least 30 ng / μ L . 7 . Synthesize RNA in a 20 μ L reaction with the following com - ponents from the HiScribe T7 kit : 7 μ L of the PCR product , 2 μ L of each ribonucleotide , 2 μ L of 10 (cid:2) T7 buffer , and 2 μ L of T7 polymerase . Add 1 μ L of RNAseOUT to help prevent RNA degradation . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C overnight . 8 . The following day , bring the T7 reaction to room temperature and assemble a 150 μ L reverse transcription ( RT ) reaction directly with the T7 reaction mix . Include the following : 20 μ L of T7 sample , 7 . 5 μ L of 200 μ M forward primer contain - ing the secondary sequence , 9 . 6 μ L of a 100 mM dNTP mix , 30 μ L 1 (cid:2) RT buffer , 2 μ L of Maxima H Minus enzyme , 1 . 5 μ L RNaseOUT , and 79 . 4 μ L of ddH 2 O ( see Note 13 ) . 9 . Incubate the RT reaction at 50 (cid:3) C for 2 h . 10 . Degrade the RNA using the following alkaline hydrolysis reac - tion : add 75 μ L of EDTA and 75 μ L of 1 M NaOH directly to the RT reaction . Heat at 95 (cid:3) C for 10 min . 11 . Purify the probe by adding the following : 600 μ L of oligo binding buffer and 1 . 2 mL of 100 % ethanol to the RT - EDTA - NaOH mix ( see Note 14 ) . Vortex brieﬂy , then purify with the DNA Clean and Concentrator - 100 kit using the manufacturer’s protocol . Elute the probe in 150 μ L of ddH 2 O . 12 . Measure the concentration of the probe on a spectrophotome - ter . Convert the concentration to pmol / μ L by using the for - mula : [ concentration of probe in pmol / μ L ] ¼ [ concentration of probe in ng / μ L ] ∗ 3 . 03 ∗ ( 1 / number of nucleotides ) . 3 . 3 Sample Fixation 1 . Harvest cells in normal culture conditions and create a cell suspension ( see Note 15 ) . 2 . Place slides in a container that can be closed . 3 . Seed slides with a ~ 200 μ L aliquot of cells from the suspension ( see Note 4 ) . 4 . Carefully move slides to incubator and allow them to settle for 30 min to 4 h . Remember to keep them at culture conditions ( temperature and humidity ) . 5 . Make ﬁxative fresh , add to Coplin jar . 6 . Quickly wash slides in 1 (cid:2) PBS Coplin jar ; switch out after every batch ( ten ) of slides . 7 . Transfer slides to ﬁxative and incubate for 10 min . Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 173 8 . Transfer slides to PBS for another quick rinse then either store at 4 (cid:3) C or proceed to next steps . 3 . 4 Sample Permeabilization ( see Note 5 ) 1 . Create fresh permeabilization and ethanol mixes and add to Coplin jars . 2 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar with permeabilization mix and incubate for 15 min . 3 . Quickly rinse slide with 1 (cid:2) PBS , then transfer slide to Coplin jar with 70 % ethanol and incubate for 2 min . 4 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar with 90 % ethanol and incubate for 2 min . 5 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar with 100 % ethanol and incubate for 2 min . 6 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar with 2 (cid:2) SSCT and proceed to next steps ( see Note 16 ) . 3 . 5 Sample Pretreatment 1 . Preheat water baths , and allow the Coplin jars to reach set temperature . 2 . Transfer slide to 2 (cid:2) SSCT + 50 % formamide at room tempera - ture and allow to incubate for 5 min . 3 . Transfer slide to submerged 92 (cid:3) C Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT + formamide and incubate for 2 . 5 min . 4 . Transfer slide to submerged 60 (cid:3) C Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT + formamide and incubate for 20 min . 5 . Prepare the hybridization mix containing probe , formamide , dNTPs , and dextran sulfate . 6 . After the 20 min incubation , transfer slide to empty Coplin jar to dry and allow slides to come to room temperature for 5 min . Keep slides in this Coplin jar until ready to mount ( see Note 17 ) . 3 . 6 Hybridization of Probe 1 . Dry excess buffer from borders of slide with a Kimwipes , while avoiding the sample . 2 . Add the hybridization mix to a coverslip , then invert slide onto coverslip . The coverslip will adhere to the slide , and then the slide can be reinverted such that the coverslip is facing up . 3 . Apply rubber cement to the borders of the coverslip to create a seal between the coverslip and the slide . 4 . Allow rubber cement to dry completely ( ~ 10 min ) ; otherwise , it will bubble up and hybridization mix will leak out . 5 . Place the slide facing up onto 92 (cid:3) C heat block and incubate for 2 . 5 min ( see Note 7 ) . 6 . Remove the slide and place in a humidiﬁed chamber to prevent drying of slides . We use an old pipette box wherein the slides 174 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce are placed on top of the rack and water is placed on the bottom of the box . 7 . Store the humidiﬁed chamber in a 37 (cid:3) C incubator overnight for at least 16 h . 3 . 7 Post - Primary Hybridization Wash 1 . Prepare Coplin jars with 2 (cid:2) SSCT in water baths set at 60 (cid:3) C . 2 . Remove slides from chamber and start removing the rubber cement and coverslips . A razor blade can be used to slip under the coverslip , and gently lift the coverslip away from the slide . 3 . After removal of the coverslip , transfer the slide to 2 (cid:2) SSCT solution at room temperature for a quick rinse . 4 . Transfer slide to 2 (cid:2) SSCT solution at 60 (cid:3) C and incubate for 15 min . 5 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT at room temperature and incubate for 10 min ( see Note 18 ) . 6 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 0 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT at room temperature and incubate for 10 min . 7 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT and prepare for secondary hybridization . 3 . 8 Hybridization of Secondary Probe 1 . Prepare hybridization mix for secondary probe ( see Note 19 ) . 2 . Remove slide from Coplin jar and wipe borders of slide dry , avoiding the sample area . 3 . Add hybridization mix to coverslip , then invert slide onto coverslip . The coverslip will adhere to the slide . Reinvert and apply rubber cement to seal . Allow to dry completely . 4 . Transfer slide to humidiﬁed chamber and incubate at room temperature away from light , for 30 min to 2 h . 3 . 9 Post - Secondary Hybridization Wash 1 . Prepare Coplin jars with 2 (cid:2) SSCT in water baths set at 60 (cid:3) C . 2 . Take slides out of the chamber and start removing the rubber cement and coverslips . A razor blade can be used to slip under the coverslip , and gently lift the coverslip away from the slide . 3 . After removal of the coverslip , place slide in 2 (cid:2) SSCT solution at room temperature for a quick rinse . 4 . Transfer slide to 2 (cid:2) SSCT solution at 60 (cid:3) C and incubate for 15 min . 5 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT at room temperature and incubate for 10 min ( see Note 18 ) . 6 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 0 . 2 (cid:2) SSCT at room temperature and incubate for 10 min . 7 . Transfer slide to Coplin jar containing 2 (cid:2) SSCT and prepare for mounting . Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 175 3 . 10 Mount for Imaging 1 . Remove slide from Coplin jar and wipe borders of slide dry , avoiding the sample . 2 . Add 15 μ L of mounting medium to a new coverslip , then invert slide onto the coverslip . The coverslip will adhere to the slide . Remove excess medium and seal coverslip to the slide using nail polish . 4 Notes 1 . We use secondary binding sequences that have been previously published [ 28 ] . 2 . If using a different RNase inhibitor , make sure it can withstand the 50 (cid:3) C reverse transcriptase step , as some RNase inhibitors are heat labile . 3 . If the reaction is scaled up or down , the columns can be changed to improve the workﬂow . The main consideration when choosing columns is the binding capacity . 4 . Some samples have difﬁculty adhering to slides during the settling period . One alternative is to grow cells directly on the coverslip by placing the coverslips in a 6 - well plate , then cul - turing cells in the well . Fixation and permeabilization can be done in the well itself . It is preferable to seed the slides or coverslips with cells prior to ﬁxation since this allows greater control over cell density and clumpiness , which may impact downstream microscopy analysis . Alternatively , especially in the case of cells grown in suspension , cytospinning of cells can be used to attach cells onto slides . 5 . The goal with the permeabilization is to help the probes reach their target by partially solubilizing the cell and nuclear mem - branes . As such , different sample types require different per - meabilization protocols [ 28 , 31 , 35 ] , or is sometimes the case with cultured cells , may not require any permeabilization what - soever . If there are no permeabilization methods published in the literature , one can leave out the permeabilization step as a ﬁrst run , then add different permeabilization conditions to see if probe detection improves . 6 . Formamide should be stored at 4 (cid:3) C . Formamide quality is very important for efﬁcient hybridization , and keeping the formamide at 4 (cid:3) C will help prevent its degradation for several months . 7 . This water bath is set for both the predenaturation and dena - turation steps . Samples can be denatured using lower tempera - tures and longer times ; we have also successfully tested 80 (cid:3) C at 5 min . Lower temperatures may help with speciﬁc sample types and / or with the preservation of epitopes for detection via 176 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce immunoﬂuorescence . Likewise , increased formamide concen - trations can be increased to help with the denaturation of the genome at lower temperatures . 8 . The amount of probe that is needed can vary depending on the sample type and the probe density . We ﬁnd that it is good to test a range of amounts , from 50 to 200 pmol . The amount of dNTPs can be varied with the amount of probe paint to ﬁnd an acceptable signal - to - noise ratio . Probes to multiple chromo - somes can be added simultaneously as long as probes contain different secondary binding sites . However , we have found that too much total probe can cause degradation of overall signal across all probes . The amount of probe that can be added simultaneously will have to be determined empirically , but as a rule of thumb , we ﬁnd that adding more than ~ 600 pmol of probe can lead to loss of signal . 9 . PVSA is macromolecular crowder , similar to dextran sulfate , that assists in hybridization [ 36 ] . PVSA is not required for hybridization if dextran sulfate is used , but it can improve the signal - to - noise detection of FISH signals . 10 . We ﬁnd that dNTPs also improves hybridization , similar to reported uses of salmon sperm DNA and other carriers . We prefer dNTPs over other carriers to avoid signal when using DAPI to stain DNA . 11 . In order to reduce background and improve signal - to - noise detection , hybridization temperature above 37 (cid:3) C can be used . Please keep in mind the Tm of the probe sequences to deter - mine the maximum temperature that can be used to avoid loss of probe binding . 12 . We routinely use a second PCR step to produce more material for RNA synthesis , but this is not necessary . The initial PCR step can be used for T7 reaction as long as the forward and reverse primers containing the secondary binding site and T7 site , respectively , are used . 13 . Fluorophore - labeled primers can also be used to create probes with conjugated dyes . We have observed increased background signal using these types of probes , and opt for an unlabeled primary / labeled secondary probe strategy . Also , if labeled pri - mers are used , a different RNA degradation step may be required since alkaline hydrolysis can lead to loss of the ﬂuorophore . 14 . The manufacturer’s protocol suggests using double the etha - nol , which does lead to higher DNA concentration readings but may be due to unincorporated primers and dNTPs . The amount of ethanol outlined in the protocol is more stringent in purifying oligos 80 nucleotides and longer . Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 177 15 . Cell concentration will have to be determined empirically due to variations in cell sizes . The main objective is to minimize overlapping cells while maximizing cell density in a microscopic ﬁeld of cells . 16 . Air - drying the slide after the last ethanol step and prior to submerging in 2 (cid:2) SSCT is optional but may improve the signal ; however , this step may require optimization as some samples or some environments may lead to overdrying . When this step is included , do not dry slides beyond 2 min . 17 . Slides at this step do not tend to overdry , possibly due to the residual 2 (cid:2) SSCT and formamide . This step tends to improve signal , but if slides do seem to dry out , slides can be placed back into the Coplin jar containing room temperature 2 (cid:2) SSCT + formamide . 18 . Care should be taken not to leave samples at 60 (cid:3) C in SSCT or at room temperature in 0 . 2 (cid:2) SSC beyond the recommended time , as high temperatures and low salt conditions can lead to loss of probe . Washes at room temperature with 2 (cid:2) SSCT can be extended up to a couple of hours in order to reduce background . 19 . Secondary hybridization requires less probe and less formam - ide for primary probe detection , due to the fact that the sec - ondary binding site is already single stranded . The original hybridization mix , however , can be used as well . We have also tested shorter incubation times of 30 min and also hybridiza - tion temperatures of 37 (cid:3) C and have seen good signal in most cases . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank members of the Joyce laboratory for extensive conversations and experience . This work was sup - ported by an NIH grant to E . J . ( R35GM128903 ) . References 1 . Cremer T , Cremer C , Baumann H et al ( 1982 ) Rabl’s model of the interphase chromosome arrangement tested in Chinese hamster cells by premature chromosome condensation and laser - UV - microbeam experiments . Hum Genet 60 ( 1 ) : 46 – 56 2 . Cremer T , Cremer M ( 2010 ) Chromosome territories . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 ( 3 ) : a003889 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a003889 3 . Eils R , Dietzel S , Bertin E et al ( 1996 ) Three - dimensional reconstruction of painted human interphase chromosomes : active and inactive X chromosome territories have similar volumes but differ in shape and surface structure . J Cell Biol 135 ( 6 . Pt 1 ) : 1427 – 1440 4 . Clemson CM , Hall LL , Byron M et al ( 2006 ) The X chromosome is organized into a gene - rich outer rim and an internal core containing silenced nongenic sequences . Proc Natl Acad 178 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce Sci U S A 103 ( 20 ) : 7688 – 7693 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0601069103 5 . Splinter E , de Wit E , Nora EP et al ( 2011 ) The inactive X chromosome adopts a unique three - dimensional conformation that is dependent on Xist RNA . Genes Dev 25 ( 13 ) : 1371 – 1383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 633311 6 . Chen C , Blanco M , Jackson C et al ( 2016 ) Xist recruits the X chromosome to the nuclear lam - ina to enable chromosome - wide silencing . Sci - ence 354 ( 6311 ) : 468 – 472 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aae0047 7 . Chaumeil J , Le Baccon P , Wutz A et al ( 2006 ) A novel role for Xist RNA in the formation of a repressive nuclear compartment into which genes are recruited when silenced . Genes Dev 20 ( 16 ) : 2223 – 2237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 380906 8 . Mahy NL , Perry PE , Gilchrist S et al ( 2002 ) Spatial organization of active and inactive genes and noncoding DNA within chromo - some territories . J Cell Biol 157 ( 4 ) : 579 – 589 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200111071 9 . Mahy NL , Perry PE , Bickmore WA ( 2002 ) Gene density and transcription inﬂuence the localization of chromatin outside of chromo - some territories detectable by FISH . J Cell Biol 159 ( 5 ) : 753 – 763 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200207115 10 . Branco MR , Pombo A ( 2006 ) Intermingling of chromosome territories in interphase suggests role in translocations and transcription - dependent associations . PLoS Biol 4 ( 5 ) : e138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0040138 11 . Finlan LE , Sproul D , Thomson I et al ( 2008 ) Recruitment to the nuclear periphery can alter expression of genes in human cells . PLoS Genet 4 ( 3 ) : e1000039 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1000039 12 . van Steensel B , Belmont AS ( 2017 ) Lamina - associated domains : links with chromosome architecture , heterochromatin , and gene repression . Cell 169 ( 5 ) : 780 – 791 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 04 . 022 13 . Shah S , Takei Y , Zhou Wet al ( 2018 ) Dynamics and spatial genomics of the nascent transcrip - tome by intron seqFISH . Cell 174 ( 2 ) : 363 – 376 . e16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 035 14 . Rao SS , Huntley MH , Durand NC et al ( 2014 ) A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin loop - ing . Cell 159 ( 7 ) : 1665 – 1680 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 11 . 021 15 . Lieberman - Aiden E , van Berkum NL , Williams L et al ( 2009 ) Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding princi - ples of the human genome . Science 326 ( 5950 ) : 289 – 293 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1181369 16 . Dekker J , Mirny L ( 2016 ) The 3D genome as moderator of chromosomal communication . Cell 164 ( 6 ) : 1110 – 1121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 02 . 007 17 . Fraser J , Williamson I , Bickmore WA et al ( 2015 ) An overview of genome organization and how we got there : from FISH to Hi - C . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 79 ( 3 ) : 347 – 372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 00006 - 15 18 . Flyamer IM , Gassler J , Imakaev M et al ( 2017 ) Single - nucleus Hi - C reveals unique chromatin reorganization at oocyte - to - zygote transition . Nature 544 ( 7648 ) : 110 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature21711 19 . Wang S , Su J , Beliveau BJ et al ( 2016 ) Spatial organization of chromatin domains and com - partments in single chromosomes . Science 353 ( 6299 ) : 598 – 602 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aaf8084 20 . Bintu B , Mateo LJ , Su J et al ( 2018 ) Super - resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains and cooperative interactions in single cells . Sci - ence 362 ( 6413 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aau1783 21 . Beliveau BJ , Joyce EF , Apostolopoulos N et al ( 2012 ) Versatile design and synthesis platform for visualizing genomes with Oligopaint FISH probes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 ( 52 ) : 21301 – 21306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1213818110 22 . Beliveau BJ , Kishi JY , Nir G et al ( 2018 ) Oli - goMiner provides a rapid , ﬂexible environment for the design of genome - scale oligonucleotide in situ hybridization probes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 ( 10 ) : E2192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1714530115 23 . Scalenghe F , Turco E , Edstro¨m JE et al ( 1981 ) Microdissection and cloning of DNA from a speciﬁc region of Drosophila melanogaster polytene chromosomes . Chromosoma 82 ( 2 ) : 205 – 216 24 . Carter NP , Ferguson - Smith MA , Perryman MT et al ( 1992 ) Reverse chromosome paint - ing : a method for the rapid analysis of aberrant chromosomes in clinical cytogenetics . J Med Genet 29 ( 5 ) : 299 – 307 25 . Meltzer PS , Guan XY , Burgess A et al ( 1992 ) Rapid generation of region speciﬁc probes by chromosome microdissection and their appli - cation . Nat Genet 1 ( 1 ) : 24 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng0492 - 24 26 . Rabbitts P , Impey H , Heppell - Parton A et al ( 1995 ) Chromosome speciﬁc paints from a Chromosome Painting with Oligopaints 179 high resolution ﬂow karyotype of the mouse . Nat Genet 9 ( 4 ) : 369 – 375 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng0495 - 369 27 . Liehr T , Heller A , Starke H et al ( 2002 ) Micro - dissection based high resolution multicolor banding for all 24 human chromosomes . Int J Mol Med 9 ( 4 ) : 335 – 339 28 . Beliveau BJ , Boettiger AN , Avendano MS et al ( 2015 ) Single - molecule super - resolution imag - ing of chromosomes and in situ haplotype visu - alization using Oligopaint FISH probes . Nat Commun 6 : 7147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms8147 29 . Sanborn AL , Rao SSP , Huang S et al ( 2015 ) Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild - type and engineered genomes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 ( 47 ) : 6456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1518552112 30 . Boettiger AN , Bintu B , Mofﬁtt JR et al ( 2016 ) Super - resolution imaging reveals distinct chro - matin folding for different epigenetic states . Nature 529 ( 7586 ) : 418 – 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature16496 31 . Fields BD , Nguyen SC , Nir G et al ( 2019 ) A multiplexed DNA FISH strategy for assessing genome architecture in C . elegans . eLife 8 : e42823 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 42823 32 . Nir G , Farabella I , Pe´rez Estrada C et al ( 2018 ) Walking along chromosomes with super - resolution imaging , contact maps , and integra - tive modeling . PLoS Genet 14 ( 12 ) : e1007872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1007872 33 . Rosin LF , Nguyen SC , Joyce EF ( 2018 ) Con - densin II drives large - scale folding and spatial partitioning of interphase chromosomes in Drosophila nuclei . PLoS Genet 14 ( 7 ) : e1007393 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1007393 34 . Wu Lab ( 2017 ) Oligopaints—Harvard Medical School . https : / / oligopaints . hms . harvard . edu / 35 . Lee JH , Daugharthy ER , Scheiman J et al ( 2015 ) Fluorescent in situ sequencing ( FIS - SEQ ) of RNA for gene expression proﬁling in intact cells and tissues . Nat Protoc 10 ( 3 ) : 442 – 458 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2014 . 191 36 . Frei AP , Bava F , Zunder ER et al ( 2016 ) Highly multiplexed simultaneous detection of RNAs and proteins in single cells . Nat Methods 13 ( 3 ) : 269 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3742 180 Son C . Nguyen and Eric F . Joyce Chapter 12 Imaging Chromosome Territory and Gene Loci Positions in Cells Grown on Soft Matrices Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta Abstract It is well established that the genome is non - randomly organized in the interphase nucleus with gene rich chromosome territories toward the nuclear interior , while gene poor chromosome territories are proximal to the nuclear periphery . In vivo tissue stiffness and architecture modulates cell type - speciﬁc genome organization and gene expression programs . However , the impact of external mechanical forces on the non - random organization of the genome is not completely understood . Here we describe a modiﬁed protocol for visualizing chromosome territories and gene loci positions in cells exposed to reduced matrix stiffness by employing soft polyacrylamide matrices . 3 - Dimensional Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization ( 3D - FISH ) protocol followed by image analyses performed on cells exposed to extracellular matrices of varying stiffness properties , enables the determination of the dynamics of chromosome territories as well as gene loci in the interphase nucleus . This will be useful in understanding how chromosome territories respond to changes in substrate stiffness and the potential correlation between the repositioning of chromosome territories and their respective transcriptional proﬁles . Key words 3D - FISH , Polyacrylamide matrices , Stiffness , Chromosome territories , Gene loci 1 Introduction Each chromosome occupies a distinct sub - volume in the interphase nucleus referred to as “chromosome territory” ( CT ) . Chromosome territories are non - randomly organized in the interphase nucleus , in a manner that largely correlates with transcription . Gene - rich chro - mosomes are closer to the nuclear interior , while gene poor chro - mosomes are proximal to the nuclear periphery . Non - random organization of chromosome territories also correlates with ( i ) gene density ( No . of genes / Mbp ) in most cell types or ( ii ) chromosome size , with smaller chromosomes positioned near the nuclear interior and larger chromosomes toward the nuclear periphery , in relatively ﬂatter nuclei [ 1 – 4 ] . The study of chromo - some positions in the interphase nucleus has been largely per - formed using chromosome painting methodologies that involve Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 12 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 181 two - dimensional or three - dimensional ﬂuorescence in situ hybridi - zation ( 2D and 3D - FISH ) , followed by imaging and image ana - lyses . More recently , high - throughput approaches of chromosome conformation capture ( CCC ) such as Hi - C , which maps contact frequencies of chromatin [ 5 , 6 ] , have shown greater cis interactions within the same chromosome rather than interchromosomal con - tacts , further reiterating the organization of chromosomes as terri - tories in the interphase nucleus [ 7 ] . Chromosome positioning studies are routinely performed on cells cultured on tissue culture plastic or glass surfaces , with stiffness which is orders of magnitude higher ( ~ 2 – 60 GPa ) [ 8 ] , than that experienced by cells under physiological conditions [ in vivo tissue stiffness typically ranges from ~ 0 . 1 ( brain ) to > 50 kPa ( bone ) [ 9 – 13 ] . The observation that chromosome territories ( Mbp ) as well as gene loci ( Kbp ) show tissue - speciﬁc positioning patterns in the interphase nucleus , is a further testimony that chromosome organization and function is modulated by stiffness experienced by the tissue [ 14 – 17 ] . In vivo tissue stiffness and architecture , as well as the extracel - lular matrix stiffness , enforces cell type - speciﬁc genome organiza - tion and gene expression programs [ 18 – 20 ] . However , the impact of external mechanical forces on non - random organization of chro - mosome territories is not completely understood . Hi - C studies coupled with RNA sequencing , reveal that chromatin organization and gene expression proﬁles are signiﬁcantly different in human ﬁbroblasts grown on 2D versus 3D microenvironments [ 21 , 22 ] . Interestingly , 3D chromosome positions , degree of inter - mingling between chromosome territories , and transcriptional activity were signiﬁcantly altered in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts grown on isotropic ( circular ) and anisotropic ( rectangular ) micropatterns [ 23 ] . These studies reveal that changes in mechanical forces per - ceived by cells signiﬁcantly impact chromosome organization and function . Using soft polyacrylamide matrices , we examined the impact of altered extracellular substrate stiffness on the non - random organi - zation of chromosome territories in the interphase nucleus and the functional response elicited in terms of transcription proﬁles [ 24 ] . We studied morphological changes upon exposing diploid DLD - 1 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells to polyacrylamide matrices of two extreme stiffness properties , with collagen - coated glass that served as reference . We performed RNA sequencing of these cells to identify chromosomes that are transcriptionally deregulated and exhibit an enrichment of deregulated genes upon lowered substrate stiffness . These studies revealed that transcriptionally deregulated human chromosomes , namely , Chr . 1 and 19 , as well as Chr . 18 ( with considerably lower gene expression changes ) , were reposi - tioned signiﬁcantly toward the nuclear interior in cells on softer matrices within a relatively short duration of ~ 90 min [ 24 ] . 182 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta In this chapter , we provide a modiﬁed three - dimensional ﬂuo - rescence in situ hybridization ( 3D - FISH ) protocol for visualizing chromosome territories and gene loci in cells exposed to softer polyacrylamide matrices of ~ 2 kPa and ~ 55 kPa stiffness . Aspects covered in this chapter include ( 1 ) preparation of soft polyacryl - amide matrices for cell culture ( adapted from [ 25 ] ) , ( 2 ) ﬁxation of cells on soft PAA gels and preparation of nuclei for 3D - FISH , and ( 3 ) Hybridization conditions for visualizing chromosome terri - tories or gene loci in nuclei on soft PAA gels . Using this 3D - FISH protocol , we demonstrate the localization of chromo - some 18 and 19 territories across cell types and the visualization of genes that are upregulated in cells grown on the softer matrices . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Preparation and Activation of Polyacrylamide Matrices 1 . 22 (cid:1) 22 mm coverslips . 2 . Milli - Q water . 3 . 70 % ethanol . 4 . Freshly prepared 1 M potassium hydroxide solution in Milli - Q water . [ CAUTION : Prepare the solution in a glass beaker . KOH is corrosive , handle with care ] . 5 . Freshly prepared APTES solution : 1 % APTES [ ( 3 - aminopropyl ) triethoxysilane ] , 5 % acetic acid in methanol . [ CAUTION : APTES gets oxidized , so preferably store the stock in a desiccator . Concentrated solutions should be han - dled with care . ] 6 . 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde solution ( in 1X PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) . 7 . 1 (cid:1) phosphate buffered saline ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 8 . 30 % acrylamide solution . 9 . 2 % bisacrylamide solution . 10 . 10 % ammonium persulfate solution . 11 . TEMED . 12 . Sigmacote . 13 . 50 mM HEPES solution ( pH 7 . 5 ) . 14 . Sulfo - SANPAH ( 25 mg / mL stock solution is prepared in DMSO , stored at (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C as 40 μ L aliquots—ﬂash - frozen in liquid nitrogen ) . 15 . Collagen I solution . 16 . Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline . 17 . Probe sonicator . 18 . Platform shaker . 19 . Tissue culture laminar ﬂow cabinet with UV tube ( 300 – 350 nm wavelength ) . Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 183 2 . 2 Plating Cells on Polyacrylamide Matrices 1 . Cell lines—DLD - 1 ( colorectal adenocarcinoma ) , HCT116 ( colorectal carcinoma ) , U2OS ( osteosarcoma ) , and HT1080 ( ﬁbrosarcoma ) . 2 . RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and antibiotics : penicillin ( 100 U / mL ) and streptomycin ( 100 μ g / mL ) . 3 . DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and anti - biotics : penicillin ( 100 U / mL ) and streptomycin ( 100 μ g / mL ) . 4 . 0 . 05 % trypsin – EDTA . 5 . Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline ( DPBS ) . 6 . CSK Buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) : 0 . 1 M sodium chloride , 0 . 3 M sucrose , 3 mM magnesium chloride , 10 mM PIPES , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ; prepared in Milli - Q water . 7 . 4 % Paraformaldehyde solution ( in 1 (cid:1) PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) . 8 . 0 . 1 M Tris – HCl solution ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 9 . 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 solution ( in 1 (cid:1) PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) . 10 . 20 % glycerol solution ( in 1 (cid:1) PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) . 11 . Liquid Nitrogen . 12 . 0 . 1 N HCl . 13 . 50 % formamide in 2 (cid:1) Saline Sodium Citrate ( SSC , pH 7 . 4 ) . 14 . Brightﬁeld microscope . 15 . Platform shaker . 2 . 3 Probe Preparation ( 3D - FISH ) 1 . Puriﬁed BAC clone for the gene of interest . 2 . dATP , dGTP , dCTP , and dTTP ( Stock : 2 . 5 mM each ) . 3 . dUTP - Rhodamine ( Stock : 1 mM ) . 4 . dUTP - Texas Red ( Stock : 1 mM ) . 5 . Nick Translation Mix . 6 . 0 . 5 M EDTA solution . ( pH 8 . 0 ) . 7 . 3 M sodium acetate ( pH 5 . 2 ) . 8 . Absolute ethanol ( Molecular Biology grade ) . 9 . 1 mg / mL human Cot I DNA . 10 . 10 mg / mL salmon sperm DNA . 11 . Deionized formamide . 12 . Master Mix : 20 % dextran sulfate in 2 (cid:1) SSC ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 13 . Chromosome paints ( Applied Spectral Imaging ) . 14 . 50 % formamide in 2 (cid:1) Saline Sodium Citrate ( SSC ) buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 15 . 0 . 1 (cid:1) SSC buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 184 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta 16 . 0 . 1 % Tween 20 in 4 (cid:1) SSC buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) . 17 . 0 . 05 μ g / mL DAPI ( 4 0 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ) solution ( in 2 (cid:1) SSC , pH 7 . 4 ) . 18 . Antifade . 19 . Thermomixer with adapter for 1 . 5 mL Eppendorf tubes ( 2 (cid:1) ) . 20 . Thermomixer with adapter for glass slides ( 1 (cid:1) ) . 21 . High speed cooling centrifuge for 1 . 5 mL Eppendorf tubes . 22 . Platform shaker . 23 . Water baths ( 2 (cid:1) ) . 2 . 4 Imaging and Analyses 1 . Confocal microscope : Confocal images are acquired on a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NJ , USA ) with (cid:1) 63 Plan - Apochromat 1 . 4 NA oil immersion objective using charge - coupled device camera ( AxioCam MRm Rev . 3 , Zeiss ) , ZEN software and scan zoom of 2 . 0 . Z - stacked images are acquired at 512 (cid:1) 512 pixels per frame using 8 - bit pixel depth for each channel at a voxel size of 0 . 105 μ m (cid:1) 0 . 105 μ m (cid:1) 0 . 34 μ m and line averaging set to 4 . 0 , collected sequentially in a three - channel mode . Fluoro - phores used are as follows : DAPI , Rhodamine , and Texas Red [ 24 ] . 2 . Image - Pro Plus software ( v 7 . 1 ) . 3 . Huygens Professional software . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Preparation of Polyacrylamide Matrices ( Adapted from [ 25 ] ) 1 . Clean 22 (cid:1) 22 mm coverslips are stored in 70 % ethanol . 2 . Dry the coverslips by ﬂaming to remove the ethanol . 3 . Place the desired number of coverslips ( after removing ethanol ) in freshly prepared KOH solution ( see Note 1 ) . 4 . Sonicate the solution using a probe sonicator and the following program ( we use a Sonics VibraCell Model No . VCX130 ) , Time—20 min , Pulse—4 s ON , 3 s OFF , Amplitude—50 % . 5 . Post sonication , discard KOH solution with care . Wash cover - slips with Milli - Q water . Repeat this steps 4 and 5 times . Post washes , store coverslips in Milli - Q . 6 . Prepare fresh APTES solution in a Falcon tube . Dispense 1 mL in each well of a 6 - well plate . Cover the plate with lid . 7 . Lift a single coverslip using ﬁne forceps and dip it into 100 % methanol ( around 15 – 20 mL in a Falcon tube ) to remove traces of water and then place it in a well of the 6 - well plate Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 185 containing the APTES silanizing solution . Repeat this step with the remaining coverslips . 8 . Place the 6 - well plate ( s ) for 30 – 45 min on a shaker with very slow uniform shaking . 9 . After the silane treatment , wash the coverslips with Milli - Q water 3 – 4 times in the 6 - well plate itself . 10 . In a 15 cm petri dish with lid , spread a soft tissue paper . Carefully place the washed coverslips in the dish , with treated side facing up . Close the lid and place in a hybridization oven set to 50 (cid:4) C for 30 – 45 min for drying the coverslips . 11 . After the coverslips are completely dry , place them back in the 6 - well plates and add freshly prepared ~ 1 . 5 mL of 0 . 5 % Glutar - aldehyde solution ( in 1 (cid:1) PBS ) to each well . Place the plate ( s ) on a shaker with fast shaking ( such that the coverslips stay immersed in the solution and air bubbles are not formed ) for 30 min . 12 . Wash the coverslips with Milli - Q water 3 – 4 times . Post - wash , place the coverslips face up in the 15 cm dish containing soft tissue and allow the coverslips to completely dry . 13 . Polyacrylamide matrices of well - deﬁned compliances can be generated by mixing acrylamide and bisacrylamide solutions in speciﬁc concentrations . For matrices of ~ 2 kPa and ~ 55 kPa , prepare acrylamide – bisacrylamide solution as follows : ~ 2 kPa polyacrylamide matrices : 5 % acrylamide and 0 . 2 % bisacrylamide . ~ 55 kPa polyacrylamide matrices : 12 % acrylamide and 0 . 6 % bisacrylamide . 14 . First , prepare acrylamide – bisacrylamide solution in Milli - Q water without APS and TEMED . Then , arrange glass slides in 15 cm dishes—three slides ﬁt in one dish . Each slide can be used to prepare polyacrylamide matrices on two coverslips . Next , polish each slide with ~ 50 μ L Sigmacote solution to make them hydrophobic . 15 . Add APS and TEMED to the acrylamide – bisacrylamide solu - tion and mix it gently . Dispense 35 μ L on one end of the glass slide . Similarly , dispense another 35 μ L on the other end of the glass slide . 16 . Gently invert a completely dry coverslip over the drop ensuring that air bubbles are not introduced , leaving a small edge of the coverslip hanging over the edge of the slide . Repeat this proce - dure for the remaining coverslips . 17 . These matrices ( prepared by the “sandwich method” ) take ~ 10 min to completely polymerize . Once polymerization of the gel is evident , submerge the slides in a petri dish containing 186 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta 50 mM HEPES solution . The coverslips are removed by apply - ing gentle pressure to the overhanging edge of the coverslip with forceps—the coverslip ( with PAA matrix ) will be dis - lodged from the slide . Gently lift the coverslip and place it in a 6 - well plate containing 50 mM HEPES buffer—gel side facing up ( see Note 2 ) . 18 . These coverslips with the polyacrylamide matrices can be stored at 4 (cid:4) C for 2 weeks in 50 mM HEPES buffer . 3 . 2 Activation of Polyacrylamide Matrices 1 . Thaw a 40 μ L Sulfo - SANPAH aliquot and prepare a working solution by diluting it up to 1 mL with Milli - Q water . 2 . Place the coverslip with the PAA matrices—gel side facing up , on a Paraﬁlm laid out in a 15 cm petri dish , inside tissue culture laminar - ﬂow cabinet . Add ~ 150 μ L of Sulfo - SANPAH working solution on the matrix . Repeat this for all the coverslips , making sure that the gel does not dry . 3 . Place the petri dish at ~ 10 cm from the UV source ( 300 – 350 nm ) and perform 2 UV cycles of ~ 20 min each . 4 . After the UV cycles , place the polyacrylamide matrices in 6 - well plate containing 1 . 5 mL DPBS ( gel side facing up ) . Wash the coverslips 2 – 3 times with DPBS to remove excess Sulfo - SANPAH . To each polyacrylamide gel , add ~ 1 . 5 mL Collagen I solution ( 100 μ g / mL in DPBS ) . Store the coverslips at either 4 (cid:4) C for later use or at 37 (cid:4) C for 3 h for immediate use . 5 . Clean and sterile glass coverslips ( without PAA matrix ) are also kept for coating with Collagen I solution ( 100 μ g / mL in DPBS ) at 4 (cid:4) C ( or 37 (cid:4) C ) to be used as controls ( see Note 3 ) . 3 . 3 Plating Cells on Polyacrylamide Matrices and Fixation for 3D - FISH 1 . Wash 70 – 80 % conﬂuent cells growing on tissue culture plastic with 2 – 3 mL DPBS twice . 2 . Add 0 . 05 % trypsin – EDTA solution and incubate the cells at 37 (cid:4) C for 3 – 4 min . As the cells detach from the culture dish , neutralize the trypsin with culture medium – either RPMI 1640 or DMEM . 3 . Centrifuge the cell suspension at 110 g , 10 (cid:4) C for 5 min . 4 . Remove the coverslips—with and without polyacrylamide matrices , from 4 (cid:4) C and discard the Collagen I solution . Wash the coverslips with ~ 1 . 5 mL DPBS thrice by gentle swir - ling . Add culture medium ( RPMI 1640 or DMEM , 2 mL in a single well of a 6 - well plate ) and incubate at 37 (cid:4) C until cells are ready for plating . 5 . After centrifugation , discard the supernatant and resuspend the cell pellet in 1 mL culture medium . Count and seed ~ 0 . 5 (cid:1) 10 6 cells per coverslip for ~ 2 kPa , ~ 55 kPa polyacrylamide matrices and glass coverslips ( without any PAA matrix ) . Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 187 6 . Incubate cells in 37 (cid:4) C / 5 % CO 2 incubator , in contact with extracellular matrices of different stiffness properties for the desired duration . 7 . Take the cells out of the incubator and gently wash with 1 (cid:1) PBS twice for 5 min ( see Note 4 ) . 8 . Following the second PBS wash , add fresh 1 (cid:1) PBS to the cells and place on ice for 4 – 5 min . 9 . Discard PBS , and incubate cells with 1 mL CSK buffer for 5 – 7 min ( cell type speciﬁc ) in order to digest the cytoskeleton . This step is carried out on ice . 10 . After 5 – 7 min ( cell type speciﬁc ) , remove CSK and immediately add 4 % Paraformaldehyde solution to the cells for ﬁxation for 12 – 14 min . 11 . CSK mediated cytoskeletal digestion must be monitored under a brightﬁeld microscope , until ( 1 ) the nucleus appears darker than its surroundings ( i . e . , enhanced contrast ) and ( 2 ) only a few cells lift off the coverslip , suggestive of optimal digestion . Suboptimal CSK treatment compromises hybridization of ﬂuo - rescent probes or chromosome paints . While prolonged CSK treatment leads to considerable loss of cells . 12 . Following ﬁxation with PFA , gently wash cells with 0 . 1 M Tris – HCl solution ( pH 7 . 4 ) for 7 min , and thrice with 1 (cid:1) PBS for 5 min each . 13 . Permeabilize cells with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 solution for 15 min . 14 . Discard the Triton X - 100 solution and immediately add 20 % Glycerol solution . Incubate cells for 45 – 60 min at RT . 15 . Subject cells to freeze - thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen . Dis - pense liquid nitrogen in an open styrofoam container . Using a pair of ﬁne forceps , gently lift the coverslip and brieﬂy dip it in liquid nitrogen . Remove the coverslip and place it face up on a soft tissue for it to thaw , without allowing it to dry . As soon as the coverslip thaws , place it back in the glycerol solution . This step is carried out for each coverslip 5 – 7 times [ CAUTION : PAA matrices crack upon excessive liquid nitrogen treatment . The matrices should be carefully monitored for cracks during freeze - thaw cycles . Terminate freeze – thaw cycles if matrices crack . Importantly , nuclei on polyacrylamide matrices and glass coverslips are typically subject to an equal number of freeze – thaw cycles ] . 16 . Wash the nuclei with 1 (cid:1) PBS , thrice for 5 min each . 17 . Incubate in 0 . 1 N HCl for 10 min at RT . 18 . Wash the coverslips with 1 (cid:1) PBS , thrice for 5 min each . After the ﬁnal wash , add 2 mL of 50 % Formamide / 2 (cid:1) SSC to the coverslips . These can be stored in 50 % Formamide / 2 (cid:1) SSC at 4 (cid:4) C till further use ( preferably use within 1 – 2 weeks ) . 188 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta 3 . 4 Probe Preparation and 3D - FISH 1 . Puriﬁed BAC DNA ( RP11 - 702H12 for LAMTOR2 and RP11 - 805D24 for CRABP2 ) is used for generating ﬂuores - cently labeled probes . Labeling reaction is carried out following instructions for the Nick Translation Mix , at 15 (cid:4) C for 3 h and terminated using 0 . 5 M EDTA solution ( pH 8 . 0 ) at 65 (cid:4) C for 10 min . Nick translated DNA is precipitated using Salmon sperm DNA , ethanol and 3 M Sodium Acetate , while Human Cot I DNA ( 1 μ g per reaction ) is added to decrease back - ground due to cross - hybridization of repeat rich sequences . Fluorescently labelled probes are re - suspended in deionized formamide and Master Mix containing dextran sulfate and 2 (cid:1) SSC . 2 . Take required volumes of chromosome paints or ﬂuorescently labeled BAC DNA probes ( 6 – 7 μ L ) is sufﬁcient for a 22 (cid:1) 22 mm coverslip ) and equilibrate at 37 (cid:4) C and 750 rpm ( 60 g ) for 7 min in a thermomixer , followed by denaturation at 80 (cid:4) C for 6 min and quick chill on ice for 2 – 3 min . Preanneal - ing is carried out at 37 (cid:4) C for 60 min without shaking . 3 . Thaw coverslips at RT . After preannealing the probe , spot ~ 6 – 7 μ L of chromosome paint or ﬂuorescently labeled BAC DNA probe onto a clean slide and invert the coverslip ( with the ﬁxed nuclei facing down ) on it , taking care that no bubbles are introduced . 4 . Seal the coverslip using nail polish and co - denature the ﬁxed nuclei with the chromosome paint / probe at 80 (cid:4) C for ( 1 ) 10 min—nuclei on glass coverslips , ( 2 ) 12 min—nuclei on 2 kPa matrices and ( 3 ) 15 min—nuclei on 55 kPa matrices . [ NOTE : These time points are only indicative and need to be optimized for each cell and matrix type independently . ] 5 . Place slides in a humid hybridization chamber , prepared by placing moist paper towels soaked in 50 % Formamide / 2 (cid:1) SSC inside an air - tight container and store at 37 (cid:4) C for 48 h . 6 . After hybridization , carefully remove nail polish , and place the coverslips in a 6 - well plate ( gel side facing up ) containing ~ 2 mL 2 (cid:1) SSC buffer per well . 7 . Rinse coverslips thrice for 5 min each in 50 % Formamide / 2 (cid:1) SSC ( prewarmed at 45 (cid:4) C for at least 45 min before use ) . 8 . Rinse coverslips thrice for 5 min each in 0 . 1 (cid:1) SSC ( prewarmed at 60 (cid:4) C for at least 45 min before use ) . 9 . Incubate coverslips in 0 . 1 % Tween 20 / 4 (cid:1) SSC at RT for 30 – 45 s , followed by counterstaining using 0 . 05 μ g / mL DAPI solution for ~ 2 – 2 . 5 min . 10 . Rinse coverslips once with 2 (cid:1) SSC for 5 min . Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 189 11 . Mounting coverslips—Spot 5 – 6 μ L Antifade on a clean glass slide and invert the coverslip ( gel side facing down ) on it taking care that no bubbles are introduced . The excess Antifade is wiped off using soft tissue and the coverslip sealed with nail polish ( see Notes 5 and 6 ) . 3 . 5 Imaging and Analyses Confocal imaging is performed as described in Subheading 2 . 4 , and images are analyzed as follows : Radial distance measurements of chromosome territories —3D reconstructions and distance measurements are performed using Image - Pro Plus software ( v 7 . 1 ) . Brieﬂy , LSM ﬁles with optical sections ( z ¼ 0 . 34 μ m ) of hybridized nuclei are subjected to 3D surface rendering . Individual nuclei are cropped for 3D reconstruc - tion . The acquired images are thresholded for each of the red , green , and blue channels . The geometric center of the DAPI - stained nucleus ( blue channel ) and the chromosome territories ( red and green channels ) are determined using Image - Pro Plus software , and the distance between the center of the nucleus and that of the territory is measured ( A ) . The vector A from the center of nucleus ( N ) to that of the chromosome territory ( C ) is extended to a third collinear point on the nuclear periphery ( R ) . The distance ( B ) between the center of the nucleus and point R is calculated . The relative distance of a chromosome territory from the center of the nucleus is expressed as a percentage of its total distance from the center of the nucleus to the nuclear periphery , % Radial Dis - tance ¼ ( A / A + B ) (cid:1) 100 ( Fig . 1 ) [ 13 ] . Measurement of shortest distance from DAPI edge —Distances of gene loci from the nuclear periphery ( in μ m ) in 3D using the DAPI staining to demarcate the edge of the nucleus . Brieﬂy , surface rendering is performed for the gene loci ( red and green channel ) and the nucleus ( DAPI signal—blue channel ) using Huygens Pro - fessional software . The surface rendered DAPI signal is used as an envelope anchor , Centre of Mass ( CM ) is determined for each gene locus and closest distance between the CM and surface of anchor is measured . Figures 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 show 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and 19 in DLD - 1 , HCT116 , U2OS and HT1080 cells . Figure 6 shows 3D - FISH hybridization for LAMTOR2 and CRABP2 . Both genes are present on Chr . 1 and upregulated in DLD - 1 cells exposed to softer 2 kPa matrices for 90 min— LAMTOR2 ( 1q22 , ~ nine fold up ) and CRABP2 ( 1q23 . 2 , ~ three fold up ) . 4 Notes 1 . Coverslips may crack anytime during the entire procedure . It is therefore advisable to have backup coverslips prepared . 190 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta 2 . If the treatment of the coverslips is non - uniform ( e . g . , the coverslips are not fully immersed in all the solutions ) , the polyacrylamide matrix will not completely adhere to the cover - slips . Such a matrix , detached from any region of the coverslip , should not be used for further experiments . 3 . If cells do not adhere to the collagen - coated polyacrylamide matrices , either the activation of Sulfo - SANPAH or the colla - gen coating is suboptimal . ( 1 ) Activation of Sulfo - SANPAH — Upon UV treatment , the color of Sulfo - SANPAH darkens ( light orange to dark orange ) , which is indicative of successful UV treatment . ( 2 ) Collagen coating —In our hands , collagen coating is uniform and optimal when performed at 4 (cid:4) C for at least 24 h prior to cell plating . 4 . Each cell type spreads to varying extents on PAA matrices of different stiffness properties . This duration needs to be care - fully optimized for each cell type before performing FISH . 5 . If chromosome territory or gene loci hybridization is unsuc - cessful , either CSK treatment or nuclear permeabilization is suboptimal . ( 1 ) CSK treatment —As mentioned previously , CSK digestion is a crucial step and should be optimized for every cell line . ( 2 ) Cell and nuclear permeabilization —Permea - bilization using 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 can be prolonged up to 20 min . However , if longer incubation times are required , the Fig . 1 ( a ) Representative maximum intensity projection of confocal z - stacks showing 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and 19 in diploid DLD - 1 cells plated on glass . ( b ) 3D reconstruction of a single representative nucleus depicting radial measurements of chromosome territory positions . A : Distance between center of the nucleus and center of the chromosome territory , B : Distance between center of the chromosome territory and a collinear point at the nuclear periphery , % Radial Distance ¼ ( A / A + B ) ∗ 100 Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 191 Fig . 2 ( a ) Stacked bar graph depicting % deregulation ( up and down from RNA Sequencing ) in DLD - 1 cells on 2 kPa matrices , on all the chromosomes . (cid:5) log two - fold deregulated genes ( up and down separately ) on each chromosome were normalized to the total number of transcribing genes ( FPKM > 1 ) on that chromosome . ( Arrow ) Chromosome 1 shows the maximum deregulation on 2 kPa ( ~ 13 . 15 % ) . ( Red box ) Chromosome 18 is amongst the chromosomes showing least transcriptional changes , while chromosome 19 is amongst the chromosomes showing relatively higher transcriptional deregulation . ( b ) Stacked bar graph depicting % deregulation ( up and down from RNA Sequencing ) in cells on 55 kPa matrices , on all the chromosomes . (cid:5) log twofold deregulated genes ( up and down separately ) on each chromosome were normalized to the total number of transcribing genes ( FPKM > 1 ) on that chromosome . ( Red box ) Chromosome 18 shows less transcriptional deregulation as compared to chromosome 19 . ( c ) Representative mid - optical sections from confocal z - stacks of 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and CT19 in DLD - 1 cells on soft matrices ( 2 and 55 kPa ) 192 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta concentration of Triton X - 100 may be reduced to 0 . 1 – 0 . 25 % . The number of liquid nitrogen freeze – thaw cycles can be increased , bearing in mind that the integrity of the PAA matrix in unaffected . 6 . In our hands , the FISH hybridization is best captured when nuclei are imaged 24 – 48 h after mounting in Antifade . (cid:1) Fig . 2 ( continued ) and glass after 90 min . ( d ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT18 on 2 kPa ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 56 . 56 % ) , 55 kPa ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 59 . 72 % ) matrices and glass ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 66 . 38 % ) for 90 min . ( e ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT19 on 2 kPa ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 49 . 40 % ) , 55 kPa ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 50 . 01 % ) matrices and glass ( N ¼ 3 , M ¼ 54 . 73 % ) for 90 min . ( d , e ) : Pooled data from N independent biological replicates , n number of CTs , M Median % R . D . , X - axis : 0 % —Nuclear center and 100 % —Nuclear periphery , Error bar : SEM , Mann – Whitney test ) . ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 0001 , Scale bar ~ 10 μ m [ 24 ] Fig . 3 ( a ) Representative mid - optical sections from confocal z - stacks of 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and 19 in HCT116 cells on 2 kPa matrix and glass for 90 min . ( b ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT18 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 53 . 64 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 70 . 64 % ) . ( c ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT19 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 47 . 92 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 51 . 06 % ) . ( b , c ) Data from single experiment , n number of CTs , X - axis : 0 % —Nuclear center and 100 % —Nuclear periphery ) . ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 0001 , ∗ p < 0 . 05 , Scale bar ~ 10 μ m Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 193 Acknowledgments This work is supported by IISER Pune and Wellcome Trust – De - partment of Biotechnology India Alliance ( Grant number : 500164 / Z / 09 / Z ) by funding through an intermediate fellowship to K . S . Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research , New Delhi supported RP by Senior Research Fellowship . We gratefully acknowledge facilities and equipment of Indian Institute of Science Education and Research ( IISER ) , Pune . We thank the IISER Pune Microscopy Facility and Chromosome Biology Lab ( CBL ) mem - bers for their comments and suggestions . Fig . 4 ( a ) Representative mid - optical sections from confocal z - stacks of 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and 19 in U2OS cells on 2 kPa matrix and glass for 90 min . ( b ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT18 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 51 . 47 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 64 . 25 % ) . ( c ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT19 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 53 . 89 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 59 . 18 % ) . ( b , c ) Data from single experiment , n number of CTs , X - axis : 0 % —Nuclear centre and 100 % —Nuclear periphery ) . ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 0001 , ∗ p < 0 . 05 , Scale bar ~ 10 μ m 194 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta Fig . 5 ( a ) Representative mid - optical sections from confocal z - stacks of 3D - FISH hybridization for CT18 and 19 in HT1080 cells on 2 kPa matrix and glass for 90 min . ( b ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT18 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 65 . 39 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 62 . 89 % ) . ( c ) Radial distance distribution proﬁles for CT19 on 2 kPa matrix ( Median R . D . ~ 58 . 35 % ) and glass ( Median R . D . ~ 55 . 12 ) . ( b , c ) Data from single experimemt , n number of CTs , X - axis : 0 % —Nuclear center and 100 % —Nuclear periphery ) . Scale bar ~ 10 μ m Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 195 References 1 . Bolzer A , Kreth G , Solovei I et al ( 2005 ) Three - dimensional maps of all chromosomes in human male ﬁbroblast nuclei and prometa - phase rosettes . PLoS Biol 3 : e157 2 . Cremer M , Ku¨pper K , Wagler B , Wizelman L , von Hase J , Weiland Y , Kreja L , Diebold J , Speicher MR , Cremer T ( 2003 ) Inheritance of gene density - related higher order chromatin arrangements in normal and tumor cell nuclei . J Cell Biol 162 : 809 – 820 3 . Sun HB , Shen J , Yokota H ( 2000 ) Size - dependent positioning of human chromo - somes in interphase nuclei . Biophys J 79 : 184 – 190 4 . Mayer R , Brero A , von Hase J , Schroeder T , Cremer T , Dietzel S ( 2005 ) Common themes and cell type speciﬁc variations of higher order chromatin arrangements in the mouse . BMC Cell Biol 6 : 44 5 . Lieberman - Aiden E , van Berkum NL , Williams L et al ( 2009 ) Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding princi - ples of the human genome . Science 326 : 289 – 293 6 . van Berkum NL , Lieberman - Aiden E , Williams L , Imakaev M , Gnirke A , Mirny LA , Dekker J , Lander ES ( 2010 ) Hi - C : a method to study the three - dimensional architecture of genomes . J Vis Exp https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 1869 7 . Kalhor R , Tjong H , Jayathilaka N , Alber F , Chen L ( 2011 ) Genome architectures revealed Fig . 6 ( a ) Representative mid - optical sections from confocal z - stacks of 3D - FISH hybridization for LAMTOR2 and CRABP2 in DLD - 1 cells on 2 kPa matrix and glass for 90 min . ( b ) Scatter plot depicting shortest distances of LAMTOR2 loci from the nuclear edge ( demarcated by DAPI ) on glass ( M ¼ 0 . 621 μ m ) and 2 kPa matrix ( M ¼ 0 . 460 μ m ) . ( d ) Scatter plot depicting shortest distances of CRABP2 loci from the nuclear edge ( demarcated by DAPI ) on glass ( M ¼ 0 . 576 μ m ) and 2 kPa matrix ( M ¼ 0 . 672 μ m ) . ( b , c ) Data from single experiment , n number of gene loci , Horizontal bar : M Median ) . Scale bar ~ 10 μ m 196 Roopali Pradhan and Kundan Sengupta by tethered chromosome conformation cap - ture and population - based modeling . Nat Bio - technol 30 : 90 – 98 8 . Acevedo - Acevedo S , Crone WC ( 2015 ) Sub - strate stiffness effect and chromosome misse - gregation in hIPS cells . J Negat Results Biomed 14 : 22 9 . Cremer M , von Hase J , Volm T , Brero A , Kreth G , Walter J , Fischer C , Solovei I , Cremer C , Cremer T ( 2001 ) Non - random radial higher - order chromatin arrangements in nuclei of diploid human cells . Chromosom Res 9 : 541 – 567 10 . Croft JA , Bridger JM , Boyle S , Perry P , Teague P , Bickmore WA ( 1999 ) Differences in the localization and morphology of chromo - somes in the human nucleus . J Cell Biol 145 : 1119 – 1131 11 . Georges PC , Janmey PA ( 2005 ) Cell type - speciﬁc response to growth on soft materials . J Appl Physiol 98 : 1547 – 1553 12 . Miller RT , Janmey PA ( 2015 ) Relationship of and cross - talk between physical and biologic properties of the glomerulus . Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 24 : 393 – 400 13 . Tanabe H , Mu¨ller S , Neusser M , von Hase J , Calcagno E , Cremer M , Solovei I , Cremer C , Cremer T ( 2002 ) Evolutionary conservation of chromosome territory arrangements in cell nuclei from higher primates . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 4424 – 4429 14 . Parada LA , McQueen PG , Misteli T ( 2004 ) Tissue - speciﬁc spatial organization of gen - omes . Genome Biol 5 : R44 15 . Zink D , Amaral MD , Englmann A et al ( 2004 ) Transcription - dependent spatial arrangements of CFTR and adjacent genes in human cell nuclei . J Cell Biol 166 : 815 – 825 16 . Meaburn KJ , Gudla PR , Khan S , Lockett SJ , Misteli T ( 2009 ) Disease - speciﬁc gene reposi - tioning in breast cancer . J Cell Biol 187 : 801 – 812 17 . Meaburn KJ , Agunloye O , Devine M , Leshner M , Roloff GW , True LD , Misteli T ( 2016 ) Tissue - of - origin - speciﬁc gene reposi - tioning in breast and prostate cancer . Histo - chem Cell Biol 145 : 433 – 446 18 . Roskelley CD , Desprez PY , Bissell MJ ( 1994 ) Extracellular matrix - dependent tissue - speciﬁc gene expression in mammary epithelial cells requires both physical and biochemical signal transduction . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 : 12378 – 12382 19 . Caron JM ( 1990 ) Induction of albumin gene transcription in hepatocytes by extracellular matrix proteins . Mol Cell Biol 10 : 1239 – 1243 20 . Assoian RK , Klein EA ( 2008 ) Growth control by intracellular tension and extracellular stiff - ness . Trends Cell Biol 18 : 347 – 352 21 . Chen H , Comment N , Chen J , Ronquist S , Hero A , Ried T , Rajapakse I ( 2015 ) Chromo - some conformation of human ﬁbroblasts grown in 3 - dimensional spheroids . Nucleus 6 : 55 – 65 22 . Chen H , Seaman L , Liu S , Ried T , Rajapakse I ( 2017 ) Chromosome conformation and gene expression patterns differ profoundly in human ﬁbroblasts grown in spheroids versus mono - layers . Nucleus 8 : 383 – 391 23 . Wang Y , Nagarajan M , Uhler C , Shivashankar GV ( 2017 ) Orientation and repositioning of chromosomes correlate with cell geometry - dependent gene expression . Mol Biol Cell 28 : 1997 – 2009 24 . Pradhan R , Ranade D , Sengupta K ( 2018 ) Emerin modulates spatial organization of chro - mosome territories in cells on softer matrices . Nucleic Acids Res 46 : 5561 – 5586 25 . Fischer RS , Myers KA , Gardel ML , Waterman CM ( 2012 ) Stiffness - controlled three - dimen - sional extracellular matrices for high - resolution imaging of cell behavior . Nat Protoc 7 : 2056 – 2066 Imaging the Effect of Matrix Stiffness on the Genome 197 Chapter 13 Targeted Manipulation / Repositioning of Subcellular Structures and Molecules Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso Abstract Technical advances in live - cell imaging have made cell biology into a highly dynamic ﬁeld , allowing the visualization and quantiﬁcation of complex processes in individual cells and in real time . To follow changes and to speciﬁcally manipulate factors potentially involved in processes like DNA replication , transcription or repair , we set up a universal targeting approach , allowing directed manipulation of subcellular structures and molecules therein . This strategy is based on the very strong and speciﬁc interaction of GFP and GFP - binding nanobody . We describe in detail how to set up the targeting approach with appropriate controls , as well as how to improve and validate its efﬁciency and ﬁnally provide exemplary applications . Key words Green ﬂuorescent protein , GFP - binding nanobody , Live - cell microscopy , Protein – protein interaction , Targeted manipulation , Targeted repositioning 1 Introduction The visualization and quantiﬁcation of processes in individual cells and in real time enables the tracking of spatiotemporal changes and evaluating their potential impact and function . To answer funda - mental questions and understand the function of individual factors on multiplex processes it is important to be able to study the role of any factor X on any process Y . Thus , it is of major advantage to speciﬁcally manipulate DNA , RNA , proteins , or even subcellular structures in a controlled and targeted manner . The manipulation of proteins localization via bait and prey type of approaches , such as ﬂuorescence two - hybrid / tri - hybrid assays [ 1 , 2 ] among others , is a very useful tool to study protein – protein interactions . It would be of major advantage to use the same principles to manipulate the localization of entire subcellular structures and study complex questions like the effect of location on function . Here , we describe a strategy that is based on the strong and highly speciﬁc interaction of GFP and GFP - binding protein ( GBP ) . GBP is a recombinant 13 - kDa GFP binding fragment derived from Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 13 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 199 a llama single chain V H H antibody [ 3 , 4 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . Because of the high afﬁnity of GFP and GBP with a K d in the subnanomolar range , it is possible to target any desired factor and even reposition large genomic regions when both factors are coexpressed in cells . The efﬁciency and strength of this targeting approach becomes obvious , since it is possible to even reposition constitutive heterochromatin in murine cells to the nuclear periphery to study the effect of nuclear position on basic cellular processes such as DNA replication and epigenetic composition [ 5 ] . In this chapter , we explain in detail how to design an individual and successful targeting assay and how to develop the appropriate controls . Depending on the question to be addressed , different control setups are possible ( Fig . 2a ) . A control setup with no targeting or manipulation is achieved by transfection of X - GFP alone without the additional transfection of the GBP - carrying counterpart ( Fig . 2a setup 1 ) . To rule out any effect caused by the overexpression of factor Y one could remove the GBP part and simply transfect factor Y with X - GFP , leading to no interaction ( Fig . 2a setup 2 ) . Furthermore , the disruption of the targeting for a control setup can be achieved by replacing GFP by RFP , which does not interact with GBP ( Fig . 2a setup 3 ) . Lastly , it is possible to cotransfect X - GFP with a GBP—carrying an inactive form of pro - tein Y ( Fig . 2a setup 4 ) . In the case of enzymes one could inactivate the catalytic activity by site - directed mutagenesis and thus target an D ES I G N CMV GBP Y CMV X GFP TARGETING APPROACH A B DNA replication . . . Chromocenter inactive X active X MeCP2 C2C12 MEF J1 Microtus cabrerae DNA , RNA , subcellular structures . . . G F P X G B P X Y APPLICATION RANGE Epigenetics DNA repair DNA transcription Targeting of / to . . . in . . . . . . . . . Fig . 1 ( a ) Schematic representation of the targeted manipulation approach . The strategy is based on the strong interaction of GFP and GFP binding protein ( GBP ) . Both counterparts can be designed and cloned to any desired factor X and Y to target DNA , RNA , or even subcellular structures . Upon coexpression of both constructs , the interaction of GFP with GBP is strong enough to even reposition large genomic regions . ( b ) The application range of the targeting approach is broad and potential processes include DNA replication , epigenetics , DNA repair , and DNA transcription . Targeting of structures to reposition them is one application but also targeting of factors to a desired locus . Successful targeting can be achieved in different cell lines , depending on the factors used and processes under study 200 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso inactive version of the factor to the desired location . Furthermore , we present in detail how the validation of the targeting and control setup is accomplished ( Fig . 2b ) . Different parameters need to be considered when optimizing the targeting approach , from the best ratio of both plasmid constructs during transfection to incubation time after transfection up to validation of transfection efﬁciency . C O N T R O L D ES I G N A B CMV X GFP DNA , RNA , subcellular structures . . . G F P X 1 G F P X X Y CMV X GFP CMV Y DNA , RNA , subcellular structures . . . 2 CMV GBP Y CMV X GFP * DNA , RNA , subcellular structures . . . G F P X G B P X Y * i n ac t i ve 4 G B P X DNA , RNA , subcellular structures . . . CMV GBP Y CMV X RFP X R F P Y 3 VA L I D A T I O N & O P T I M I Z A T I O N Transfection efficiency C2C12 MEF J1 Microtus . . . Optimization of ratio of plasmids ( 1 : 1 - 3 : 3 ) Incubation time Transfection CMV GBP Y CMV X GFP low mid high % % % Targeting level Fig . 2 Schematic representation of the design of appropriate controls and the validation thereof . ( a ) The design of appropriate controls is ﬂexible and dependent on the question to be answered . Here , we show different strategies to disrupt targeting , leading to a control setup . First , an untargeted state is achieved by transfecting only the X - GFP part without any interaction partner ( setup 1 ) . Furthermore , the X - GFP is transfected with Y alone , without the GBP part , which is required for interaction of both constructs . One advantage of this method is to elucidate , whether the overexpression of Y alone already leads to an effect on the investigated process ( setup 2 ) . Another strategy to achieve an untargeted control state , especially when targeting a factor to a desired locus , is the inactivation of factor Y . If Y is an enzyme , one could inactivate the catalytic activity by point mutation ( setup 4 ) . As GBP interacts with GFP but not with RFP , another strategy includes the design of an RFP - tagged X , which no longer interacts with the GBP - Y counterpart ( setup 3 ) . ( b ) After successful design of controls , the validation thereof as well as of the targeting is of upmost importance . The ﬁrst step is to transfect cells with the appropriate constructs and validate the perfect ratio of plasmids to achieve a targeting signal . The incubation time after transfection needs also to be optimized . When cells show a targeted signal , the transfection efﬁciency can be determined , meaning the percentage of cells expressing the constructs and showing the desired targeted signal . The power of targeting could be categorized into different levels ( e . g . , low , mid , and high targeting ) to check which level is the most desired one and depicts no toxic effects . Control and targeted cells should show their characteristic morphology to rule out toxic effects , which can lead to cell death Targeted Manipulation 201 B INACTIVE FACTOR ACTIVE FACTOR CMV GBP Y * CMV macroH2a GFP for Xi CMV HP1 beta GFP for Xa or CMV GBP Y CMV macroH2a GFP for Xi CMV HP1 beta GFP for Xa or T AR G E T I N G O F F AC T O R S M i c r o t u s ca b r e r ae Xa Xi TARGETING CMV MeCP2 GFP CMV LaminB1 GBP CHR O M O C E N T E R R EP O S I T I O N I N G CONTROL CMV MeCP2 GFP CMV LaminB1 A Fig . 3 Application of the targeting approach to constitutive and facultative in different cell lines and species . ( a ) Repositioning of constitutive heterochromatin in various cell lines . MeCP2 - GFP was coexpressed with LaminB1 without the GBP . No interaction of both targeting parts took place and thus constitutive heterochro - matin was distributed throughout the whole nucleus . Upon coexpression of MeCP2 - GFP and GBP - LaminB1 , constitutive heterochromatin was repositioned to the nuclear lamina , resulting in a clear peripheral targeting ring . The targeting strategy was performed in different somatic and embryonic mouse cell lines : MEF , C2C12 , and J1 . ( b ) Macro - H2a and HP1 - beta were tagged to GFP to either recognize the heterochromatin of the inactive X chromosome ( Xi ) or the active X chromosome ( Xa ) in Microtus cabrerae female ﬁbroblasts . Upon coexpression with GBP - Y , where Y is any desired factor , Y is transported to the Xi or Xa . For the control setup , factor Y could be inactivated by , for example , point mutation 202 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso This targeting strategy was successfully used to study the effect of nuclear position of DNA on its DNA replication timing . For this study constitutive heterochromatin was repositioned to the nuclear periphery into an environment of mid - replicating facultative het - erochromatin [ 6 ] . MeCP2 as a methyl - cytosine binding protein [ 7 ] was used as X and tagged to GFP . MeCP2 binds methylated cyto - sines , which are highly abundant in constitutive heterochromatin . The latter forms micrometer sized aggregates in mouse cells termed chromocenters [ 8 ] . LaminB1 , as a component of the nuclear lamina , was used as Y and was transfected without the GBP - counterpart to give normally localized GFP - labeled chromo - centers ( Fig . 3a ) . To reposition constitutive heterochromatin , MeCP2 - GFP and GBP - LaminB1 were coexpressed , leading to a clear green targeting ring at the nuclear periphery . With this approach constitutive heterochromatin was recognized , labeled , and repositioned in different cells , including mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEF [ 9 ] ) , embryonic stem cells ( J1 [ 10 ] ) , and myo - blasts ( C2C12 [ 11 ] ) . Additionally , we were able to transport spe - ciﬁc factors to a desired location . We transported factor Y ( a histone acetylating enzyme ) to the heterochromatin of the inactive X chro - mosome ( Xi ) with the help of the macroH2a histone variant [ 12 ] and to the active X chromosome ( Xa ) with the help of HP1 beta [ 13 , 14 ] in Microtus cabrerae [ 15 ] cells ( Fig . 3b ) . For this purpose , an additional control should be added including the inactive form of the enzyme . All in all , this experimental strategy enables speciﬁc tethering of any DNA , RNA , protein , or even subcellular structures of interest to any desired location and lays the ground for controlled manipu - lation of factors such as epigenetic regulators , transcription factors , or ultimately subcellular localization of structures . 2 Materials All materials and solutions used for cell culture , ﬁxed cell studies , and live - cell microscopy must be sterile . 1 . Cell lines used for live - cell microscopy should be adherent cell cultures or be spun down on a support , such as glass coverslip . While the cell line to be used depends on the interest of the scientist , there are various considerations simplifying the data acquisition ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . Culture medium : use the standard medium required for the particular cell line . 3 . Prewarmed PBS containing 0 . 5 mM EDTA and 0 . 25 % trypsin in PBS . 4 . 0 . 2 % gelatin for coating the microscopy dishes or coverslips . Targeted Manipulation 203 5 . Plasmids : mammalian expression vectors coding for the setup of the targeting strategy of interest ( one carrying the GBP counterpart and one carrying the GFP ; see Notes 2 and 3 ) . Additional ﬂuorescent markers should be chosen according to the wavelengths that can be imaged using the microscope available . 6 . Transfection reagents : nucleofection system from Amaxa ( Lonza ) or Neon nucleofection system ( Thermo Fisher Scien - tiﬁc ) [ 16 ] , nucleofection solutions , cuvettes / tubes , and pip - ettes ( see Notes 4 and 5 ) . 7 . Microscopy dishes : form and size depends on the optical table inset available for the microscope . The bottom of the dish needs to be thin enough for higher magniﬁcation immersion lenses to be able to image through the sample . Material can be either glass or optical plastic ( see Note 6 ) . Glass lids are recom - mended for optimal contrast images . 8 . Microscope : for imaging of live cells and ﬁxed cells , we recom - mend the use of a spinning disc confocal microscope , charac - terized by high - speed acquisition and low level of phototoxicity to cells . The stage should be motorized to allow the acquisition of 3D stacks at several time points and several stage positions in one experiment . 3 Methods Here , we present a detailed protocol to target , manipulate or reposition speciﬁc factors and genomic regions to any desired loca - tion . The protocol is adapted to image ﬁxed cells on glass coverslips or to image living cells in a 35 mm diameter glass - bottomed dish : 1 . Prewarm growing medium and PBS – EDTA to 37 (cid:1) C and trypsin as well as transfection solutions to room temperature . 2 . Prepare the dish where transfected cells will be seeded by coating for 20 min with 0 . 2 % gelatin . Wash twice with pre - warmed medium to fully remove gelatin and add the ﬁnal volume of growing medium ( 2 mL for a 35 mm diameter dish ) and keep it in an incubator so that the medium reaches 37 (cid:1) C and CO 2 diffuses into it . 3 . Use 3 (cid:3) 10 5 adherently growing cells of a 10 cm diameter plate ( see Note 7 ) . Remove growing medium and wash carefully with 5 mL PBS – EDTA , avoiding detaching cells from the surface . Add 0 . 5 mL trypsin and incubate at 37 (cid:1) C for 2 – 5 min . Check cell detachment under a microscope . When most of the cells have detached from the substrate and are separated from each other , stop the enzymatic reaction by adding 4 . 5 mL growing medium . If cells are clumped together , carefully break up the 204 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso cell clumps by pipetting up and down a couple of times . Cen - trifuge the cells for 6 min at 300 (cid:3) g . 4 . Prepare 100 μ L of transfection solution with the appropriate and optimized amount of plasmid DNA ( see Notes 8 and 9 ) . 5 . Once the cells are pelleted , discard the supernatant and care - fully resuspend in transfection solution . Transfer the cell sus - pension into an electroporation cuvette / tube . Make sure to avoid bubbles and that the solution is clear without phenol red , because this can cause error messages during the electropora - tion process . Immediately perform the electroporation using the appropriate program for your cells ( see Note 5 ) . Use the previously prepared dish from the incubator and seed cells into the dish . Carefully shake the plate to homogenously distribute the cell suspension and return it into the incubator . Incubate overnight ( see Notes 10 and 11 ) . 6 . On the next day , remove the medium and wash twice with prewarmed medium to remove dead cells , debris and add fresh medium . 7 . For ﬁxed cell studies , cells are ﬁxed with 4 % formaldehyde for 10 min , permeabilized for 20 min with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 – PBS prior to immunostainings with the desired anti - bodies ( see Note 12 ) . 8 . In case of live - cell imaging make sure that your incubation chamber is ready : 37 (cid:1) C , 5 % CO 2 and over 40 % humidity level . 9 . Place the dish with the transfected cells on the microscope . Allow the dish to acclimatize to new conditions prior to start - ing imaging . Slight changes in temperature may affect the material in such a way that the focal plane can change dramati - cally during the ﬁrst 10 – 20 min . 10 . Look for transfected cells by using short exposure times to minimize phototoxicity . Select cells that express the minimal amount of the ﬂuorescent proteins that can be imaged prop - erly . Too high expression levels may lower the chances that transfected cells will pass normally through S - phase and / or increases the chances that the cells undergo apoptosis . 11 . Set up the imaging conditions ﬁnding a compromise between phototoxicity and undersampling . The ideal conditions depend strongly on the cell line , since some cells are more sensitive to transfection and phototoxicity , as well as of course on the transfection strategy you have set up . In general , acquiring z - stacks at a time interval of 20 min is usually enough to follow changes of , for example , S - phase . The minimal amount to acquire an entire cell cycle depends on how fast the cells divide ( see Note 3 ) . Under normal conditions cells can be kept on the microscope stage and be imaged over 2 days . Targeted Manipulation 205 4 Notes 1 . Factors to consider when choosing a cell line to perform tar - geted manipulation and live - cell imaging of the targeting approach : – How well the cells can be transfected ( transfection and expression rate ) . – How the cells can tolerate imaging - derived phototoxicity . – How much the cells move , which makes long term imaging difﬁcult . – How fast cells divide and how they handle targeting in the subsequent cell cycles . 2 . Factors to consider when setting up your targeting approach : – Which factor is targeted ? – Where is the factor targeted ? – Are the target and / or the location speciﬁc enough for a manipulation ? 3 . We always suggest linking the GBP to the leading part of the targeting assay and the targeted factor to the GFP . With this setup you are directly able to check by eye whether your factor is targeted by visual inspection of the GFP signal . 4 . While a good transfection rate is a factor to consider when choosing your transfection method , when following cell cycle progression at a single cell level , it is more important to achieve a moderate expression level . We recommend the nucleofection system from Amaxa ( Lonza ) for somatic cells and Neon Nucleofection ( Thermo Fisher ) for embryonic stem cells , although other methods can be used . 5 . We suggest for myoblasts and ﬁbroblasts the B - 032 program ( e . g . , C2C12 , Microtus cabrerae ) and for mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts the A - 024 program ( e . g . , MEF ) of the Amaxa machine . For mouse embryonic stem cells like J1 we suggest to use the Neon nucleofection system with a transfection setup of 1250 V , 20 ms width , and two pulses . 6 . Irrespective of whether you use your targeting approach for ﬁxed cell studies or live - cell imaging we highly suggest to coat glass surfaces with gelatin as this improved the fast attachment of transfected cells and increased the general transfection efﬁciency . 7 . Cell density is a key factor for live - cell imaging and to provide enough cells prior to transfection as a higher amount of cells is dying during the process of electroporation . While a too high density can result in cell contact inhibition , preventing cells from cycling , a too low density can result in cells moving 206 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso more freely along growing surface , making it extremely hard to keep them in frame over several hours . In case of low transfec - tion efﬁciency the likelihood of having enough cells for your studies is further decreased . The optimal cell density depends on the cell line used : mouse myoblasts and ﬁbroblasts tend to move and a rather high density is recommended . In case of embryonic stem cells like for J1 for instance , a lower density makes more sense to avoid large colonies of cells , further complicate the imaging and validation of targeting in single cells . 8 . The optimal ratio of both plasmids is of upmost importance . Therefore we suggest ratio measurements before starting experiments . We always used combinations ( in μ g ) from 1 : 1 up to 3 : 3 , changing for every plasmid to make sure to achieve the perfect combination , resulting in healthy cells with typical morphology but an efﬁcient targeting with high transfection efﬁciency . 9 . Further optimization is needed when you want to combine your targeting approach with , for example , a PCNA transfec - tion to label active replication sites . We checked triple transfec - tions as well as quadruple transfections , both is suitable , but requires further optimization step . As already indicated , use as less plasmid as possible to not harm the cells too much but still enough to have an appropriate targeting efﬁciency . 10 . During optimization we recommend to check for the perfect incubation time after transfection . Too high expression levels may lower the chances that transfected will pass normally through S - phase and / or increases the chances that the cells undergo apoptosis . High targeted cells often appear fast after nucleofection but also die quite fast , so make sure to estimate the right level of targeting for your experiments . For imaging and reliable cell cycle studies , cells with low or mid expression rate are preferable . These cells appear slightly later after trans - fection process . 11 . During the establishment of different targeting strategies in different cell lines we always incubated in a range in between 20 and 24 h for ﬁrst cell cycle studies and up to 49 h for second cell cycle studies . But these numbers strongly depend on the cell line you are using and its doubling time . 12 . When targeted cells are used for ﬁxed cell studies like FISH , pulse labeling setups , or immunostainings in general , we sug - gest to boost the signal with an additional GBP ( 1 mg / mL ) incubation step prior to DAPI staining when the GFP signal is very weak . We suggest a step of 1 hour at room temperature . Targeted Manipulation 207 Acknowledgments We thank H . Leonhardt ( LMU - Munich , Germany ) for providing plasmids and the C2C12 and MEF cell lines stably expressing RFP - PCNA . We thank Juan Alberto Marchal ( University of Jaen , Spain ) for the Microtus cabrerae ﬁbroblasts and all present and past members of the laboratory for their contributions over the years . The laboratory of M . Cristina Cardoso is supported by grants of the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) . References 1 . Zolghadr K , Rothbauer U , Leonhardt H ( 2012 ) The ﬂuorescent two - hybrid ( F2H ) assay for direct analysis of protein - protein interactions in living cells . Methods Mol Biol 812 : 275 – 282 2 . Herce HD , Deng W , Helma J , Leonhardt H , Cardoso MC ( 2013 ) Visualization and tar - geted disruption of protein interactions in liv - ing cells . Nat Commun 4 : 2660 3 . Rothbauer U , Zolghadr K , Tillib S , Nowak D , Schermelleh L , Gahl A , Backmann N , Conrath K , Muyldermans S , Cardoso MC et al ( 2006 ) Targeting and tracing antigens in live cells with ﬂuorescent nanobodies . Nat Methods 3 : 887 – 889 4 . Rothbauer U , Zolghadr K , Muyldermans S , Schepers A , Cardoso MC , Leonhardt H ( 2008 ) A versatile nanotrap for biochemical and functional studies with ﬂuorescent fusion proteins . Mol Cell Proteomics 7 : 282 – 289 5 . Heinz KS , Casas - Delucchi CS , Torok T , Cmarko D , Rapp A , Raska I , Cardoso MC ( 2018 ) Peripheral re - localization of constitu - tive heterochromatin advances its replication timing and impairs maintenance of silencing marks . Nucleic Acids Res 46 : 6112 – 6128 6 . Casas - Delucchi CS , Cardoso MC ( 2011 ) Epi - genetic control of DNA replication dynamics in mammals . Nucleus 2 : 370 – 382 7 . Brero A , Easwaran HP , Nowak D , Grunewald I , Cremer T , Leonhardt H , Car - doso MC ( 2005 ) Methyl CpG - binding pro - teins induce large - scale chromatin reorganization during terminal differentiation . J Cell Biol 169 : 733 – 743 8 . Vissel B , Choo KH ( 1989 ) Mouse major ( gamma ) satellite DNA is highly conserved and organized into extremely long tandem arrays : implications for recombination between nonhomologous chromosomes . Genomics 5 : 407 – 414 9 . Peters AH , O’Carroll D , Scherthan H , Mechtler K , Sauer S , Schofer C , Weipoltshammer K , Pagani M , Lachner M , Kohlmaier A et al ( 2001 ) Loss of the Suv39h histone methyltransferases impairs mammalian heterochromatin and genome stability . Cell 107 : 323 – 337 10 . Li E , Bestor TH , Jaenisch R ( 1992 ) Targeted mutation of the DNA methyltransferase gene results in embryonic lethality . Cell 69 : 915 – 926 11 . Yaffe D , Saxel O ( 1977 ) Serial passaging and differentiation of myogenic cells isolated from dystrophic mouse muscle . Nature 270 : 725 – 727 12 . Abbott DW , Chadwick BP , Thambirajah AA , Ausio J ( 2005 ) Beyond the Xi : macroH2A chromatin distribution and post - translational modiﬁcation in an avian system . J Biol Chem 280 : 16437 – 16445 13 . Nielsen AL , Oulad - Abdelghani M , Ortiz JA , Remboutsika E , Chambon P , Losson R ( 2001 ) Heterochromatin formation in mam - malian cells : interaction between histones and HP1 proteins . Mol Cell 7 : 729 – 739 14 . Cheutin T , McNairn AJ , Jenuwein T , Gilbert DM , Singh PB , Misteli T ( 2003 ) Maintenance of stable heterochromatin domains by dynamic HP1 binding . Science 299 : 721 – 725 15 . Fernandez R , Barragan MJ , Bullejos M , Marchal JA , Martinez S , Diaz de la Guardia R , Sanchez A ( 2001 ) Molecular and cytogenetic characterization of highly repeated DNA sequences in the vole Microtus cabrerae . Heredity ( Edinb ) 87 : 637 – 646 16 . Kim JA , Cho K , Shin MS , Lee WG , Jung N , Chung C , Chang JK ( 2008 ) A novel electropo - ration method using a capillary and wire - type electrode . Biosens Bioelectron 23 : 1353 – 1360 208 Kathrin S . Heinz and M . Cristina Cardoso Chapter 14 Visualization of Endogenous Transcription Factors in Single Cells Using an Antibody Electroporation - Based Imaging Approach Sascha Conic , Dominique Desplancq , Alexia Ferrand , Nacho Molina , Etienne Weiss , and La´szlo´ Tora Abstract In this chapter , we describe an antibody electroporation - based imaging approach that allows for precise imaging and quantiﬁcation of endogenous transcription factor ( i . e . , RNA Polymerase II ) distributions in single cells using 3D structured illumination microscopy ( 3D - SIM ) . The labeling is achieved by the efﬁcient and harmless delivery of ﬂuorescent dye - conjugated antibodies into living cells and the speciﬁc binding of these antibodies to the targeted factors . Our step - by - step protocol describes the procedure of the labeling of the speciﬁc antibodies , their electroporation into living cells , the sample preparation and 3D - SIM imaging as well as the postimaging analyses of the labeled endogenous transcription factors to obtain information about their nuclear distribution as well as their function . This protocol can be applied to a plethora of endogenous nuclear factors by using target speciﬁc noninhibiting antibodies . Key words Antibodies , Antibody delivery , Single cells , Endogenous proteins , RNA polymerase II , Transcription , Imaging , Nucleus , Factor distribution , 3D structured illumination microscopy ( 3D - SIM ) 1 Introduction Recent developments in high - resolution microscopy techniques [ 1 ] have revolutionized ﬂuorescence microscopy . Single - cell imaging has become a method of choice to visualize cellular components under physiological conditions and to decipher cellular processes . The detection of native proteins in their cellular context remains challenging , however . Imaging of proteins in live cells is widely achieved by exogenous overexpression of the proteins of interest fused to ﬂuorescent proteins ( FPs ) [ 2 – 4 ] . However , these fusions do not always behave like their unmodiﬁed counterparts [ 5 ] and do not always behave as native endogenous proteins . Moreover , post - translational modiﬁcations ( PTMs ) cannot directly be visualized Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 14 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 209 with FPs . To overcome these limitations , mammalian expression constructs comprising the antigen - binding domains of nanobodies , chromobodies , or intrabodies were designed in fusion with green FP ( GFP ) to target endogenous proteins in living cells [ 6 – 8 ] . How - ever , these approaches are hampered by constitutive expression of the antibody probes that make it difﬁcult to discriminate between antigen - bound and unbound antibody - GFP signals [ 9 ] . Aggrega - tion of the antibody molecules in the reducing environment of the cytoplasm is a further limitation of the exogenous expression of certain recombinant antibodies [ 10 ] . For years , dye - conjugated antibodies have proven their efﬁ - ciency in immunoﬂuorescence experiments . As antibodies cannot efﬁciently penetrate through the cell membrane of living metazoan cells , to deliver antibodies in living cells methods such as microin - jection , osmotic lysis of pinocytic vesicles , loading with glass beads , pore - forming bacterial toxins , or protein transfection using various cationic lipids or polymers have been developed [ 11 – 13 ] . Such methods often require specialized know - how , are harmful to cells and / or suffer from low efﬁciency . We have developed an antibody - electroporation based imaging approach for conventional and high - resolution microscopy , which allows visualization of endogenous proteins in living cells using dye - conjugated antibodies or Fab fragments [ 14 ] . The labeled antibody probes are delivered into the cytoplasm of living cells by electroporation , with a cell viability of greater than 90 % [ 15 ] . Once in the cytoplasm , the labeled antibody ( 150 kDa ) binds to its endogenous target protein . For nuclear targets , the labeled antibody bound to its neosynthetized target is transported to the nucleus via a piggybacking mechanism . Dye - conjugated Fab fragments that are sufﬁciently small ( 50 kDa ) can be used to target nuclear proteins and to detect transient PTM in the nucleus because they can freely diffuse into the nucleus [ 14 , 16 ] . Interestingly , the percentage of antibody molecules deliv - ered into the cell is proportional to the antibody concentration in the electroporation mix , allowing for the delivery of desired num - ber of molecules of antibody probes in the cell . Thus , the desired number of endogenous targets can be visualized [ 17 ] . Further - more , the method is easy to carry out and can be used with many different dyes to perform multicolor imaging . Here we describe how to label , electroporate , image , and quantify an endogenous transcription factor in single cells using our method . As an example , we chose the visualization of the DNA - dependent RNA polymerase II transcription factor complex ( Pol II ) in human cell nuclei . Pol II has 12 subunits and RPB1 is its largest subunit that contains its C - terminal domain ( CTD ) that is composed of 52 CTD repeats in human cells . We describe our protocol to label anti - RPB1 monoclonal antibodies with ﬂuores - cent dyes ( Subheading 3 . 1 ) , deliver them into living cells by elec - troporation ( Subheading 3 . 2 ) , prepare the samples for 3D 210 Sascha Conic et al . structured illumination microscopy ( 3D - SIM ) ( Subheadings 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 ) and ﬁnally analyze the superresolution images to obtain information about endogenous RNA Pol II distribution ( Subhead - ing 3 . 5 ) . 2 Materials and Reagents 2 . 1 Antibody Labeling 1 . Mouse monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) ( for Pol II we use the anti - RPB1 7G5 mAb ) [ 18 ] . 2 . DiaEasy dialyzer ( 800 μ L ) MWCO 6 – 8 kDa . 3 . Amicon Ultra - 0 . 5 centrifugal ﬁlter units 10 kDa . 4 . AlexaFluor - 488 antibody labeling kit . 5 . 10 (cid:1) PBS : Dissolve the whole powder of one bottle in 1 L of ﬁltered and sterile dH 2 O . Autoclave the solution to get sterile 10 (cid:1) PBS . Store at RT . 6 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate : Dissolve 42 g of sodium bicarbonate in 500 mL of sterile dH 2 O . Filter the solution through a 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter . Store at 4 (cid:3) C for a maximum of 2 weeks . 7 . 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate : Dilute 100 mL of 1 M sodium bicarbonate with 900 mL of sterile dH 2 O . Filter the solution through a 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter . Store at 4 (cid:3) C for a maximum of 2 weeks . 2 . 2 Electroporation of Antibodies 1 . 12 - well clear ﬂat bottom cell culture plate . 2 . 18 mm high precision cover glasses . 3 . Countess ™ cell counting chamber slides . 4 . U2OS osteosarcoma cells [ American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) ] . 5 . Neon transfection 10 μ L kit ( including the Neon 10 μ L tips ) . 6 . Neon Transfection System . 7 . Jeweler’s forceps , Dumont No . 5 . 8 . U2OS growth medium : Supplement 450 mL of DMEM medium with 50 mL of FCS ( 10 % FCS ) and 40 μ g / ml genta - micin ( not added for antibiotic free growth medium ) . Store at 4 (cid:3) C . 9 . 2 . 5 % Trypsin : Weigh 1 g of trypsin and dissolve it in 40 mL of PBS . Filter the solution through a 0 . 22 μ m ﬁlter to sterilize it . Store at 4 (cid:3) C for a maximum of 1 month . 2 . 3 Sample Preparation for Imaging 1 . Microscope slides ground edges plain . 2 . Jeweler’s forceps , Dumont No . 5 . 3 . Vectashield antifade mounting medium without DAPI . Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 211 4 . 4 % PFA : Dilute 10 mL of 16 % PFA with 30 mL of PBS . 5 . Triton X - 100 solutions . ( a ) 10 % Triton X - 100 Dilute 1 mL of Triton X - 100 in 9 mL of PBS Store at RT in the dark for several months ( b ) 0 . 02 % Triton X - 100 Dilute 0 . 1 ml of 10 % Triton X - 100 in 50 ml of PBS Store at RT in the dark for several months 6 . 1 mg / mL DAPI solution : Dissolve 1 mg of DAPI powder in 1 mL of dH 2 O . 7 . Tissue paper . 8 . Nail polish . 2 . 4 Superresolution Microscopy 1 . DeltaVision OMX - Blaze V4 microscope . 2 . Tetraspeck beads . 3 . DeltaVision OMX SoftWoRx software . 2 . 5 Image Processing and Quantiﬁcation 1 . Fiji / Image J software . 2 . Imaris software . 3 . MATLAB software . 3 Methods All procedures in this protocol were performed at room tempera - ture if not mentioned otherwise . This protocol was optimized for human U2OS cells , but can be adapted to any adherent metazoan cell line . Use 500 μ L of buffer for every wash - step if 12 - well plates are used , otherwise the volume needs to be adjusted . In our experience , all ﬂuorophores from the Alexa Fluor and Atto families work very well for the labeling of antibodies . Other dyes and kits would need to be tested and optimized . The antibody used in this protocol for the labeling of the endogenous RNA Pol II was the anti - RPB1 7G5 [ 18 ] . Any other previously tested noninhibiting speciﬁc antibody can be used for the method , but needs to be tested before by immunoﬂuorescence for its binding properties to its target factor in cells [ 16 ] . The electroporation of antibodies is performed using the Neon transfection system and the corresponding Neon transduction kits . All buffers and solu - tions need to be ﬁltered and sterilized for electroporation to avoid contamination of the cells . Prewarm 2 . 5 % trypsin and the growth culture medium without antibiotics at 37 (cid:3) C prior to the electro - poration experiment . 212 Sascha Conic et al . 3 . 1 Fluorescent Labeling of Monoclonal Antibodies for the Imaging of Endogenous Factors 1 . Prepare 1 L of 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate pH 8 . 2 labeling buffer as described . Afterward , dialyze 100 μ g of antibody ( 7G5 mAb ) solution in a volume of 100 μ L ( 1 mg / mL ) against 1 L of 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate for 4 h at 4 (cid:3) C using DiaEasy dialyzing tubes ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . The labeling is performed using the Alexa Fluor 488 Monoclonal Antibody labeling kits from Invitrogen . Mix the anti - RPB1 anti - body solution with the Alexa 488 ﬂuorescent dyes as written in the manufacturer’s protocol and incubate at RT for 1 h in the dark . Mix the solution every 15 min by inverting the tube . Nonbound Alexa 488 dyes are removed by purifying the labeling mix using the gel ﬁltration columns supplied in the labeling kit ( see Note 2 ) . 3 . Concentrate the labeled anti - RPB1 antibody by using 0 . 5 mL Amicon ﬁlter units with a cutoff of 10 kDa . Centrifuge for 10 min at 14 , 000 (cid:1) g to concentrate the solution to a volume of approximately 50 μ L . Measure the concentration of the labeled antibody using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer and the Protein and Labels mode . 4 . Labeling efﬁciency can be calculated by measuring the absorp - tion at 280 and 494 nm ( Alexa 488 dye speciﬁc wavelength ) . The dye – antibody labeling ratio can then be calculated using the formula mentioned in the protocol of Invitrogen ( see Note 3 ) . 3 . 2 Electroporation of Fluorescently Labeled Antibodies Into U2OS Cells 1 . Prepare Eppendorf tubes containing 2 μ g of ﬂuorescently labeled anti - RPB1 antibodies ( one tube for each electropora - tion ) and keep them in the dark on ice ( see Note 4 ) . For example , transfer 2 μ L of anti - RPB1 – 488 antibody solution with a concentration of 1 mg / mL into each tube ( see Note 5 ) . 2 . Also prepare 12 well culture plates with high precision cover glasses ( see Note 6 ) and antibiotics free growth medium and store the plates in the incubator at 37 (cid:3) C to prewarm the medium ( see Note 7 ) . 3 . Trypsinize the cells by washing them ﬁrst twice with 5 mL of PBS and afterward by incubating them with 2 . 5 % trypsin for 4 min at 37 (cid:3) C . Dilute the detached cells in antibiotic - free growth medium . 4 . Count the cells and transfer a ﬁnal cell number of 8 (cid:1) 10 5 cells to a 15 - mL tube . Afterward , pellet the cells by centrifuging them at 200 (cid:1) g for 5 min . A total of eight transductions can be performed with this pellet as each electroporation uses 10 5 cells ( see Note 8 ) . 5 . Remove the growth medium and wash the cells with 4 mL of PBS . Pellet them again and resuspend the pellet in 80 μ L of resuspension buffer ( R - buffer ) ( see Note 9 ) . 6 . Mix 10 μ L of the resuspended cells with the antibody solution and pipet this mix with the Neon pipette using the 10 μ L Neon Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 213 tips . Air bubbles in the pipette tip should be avoided as they will induce an electric short - circuit which will kill the cells during the electroporation . 7 . After putting the Neon pipette into the pipette station , the electroporation is performed using the following parameters : Voltage : 1550 V . Number of pulses : 3 . Time width of pulse : 10 ms . 8 . Pipet the cells directly into the prewarmed medium of the 12 - well cell culture plate that was prepared in step 2 after the electric pulse and repeat the steps 6 and 7 until all transduction experiments have been performed . Afterward , incubate the cells at 37 (cid:3) C with 5 % CO 2 for 24 h ( see Notes 10 and 11 ) . 3 . 3 Sample Preparation for Superresolution Microscopy 1 . Prepare fresh 4 % PFA in PBS from a 16 % stock solution and prewarm it to 37 (cid:3) C in a water bath . 2 . 24 h after the electroporation , remove the growth medium and wash the cells once with PBS . Afterward , add 0 . 5 mL of pre - warmed 4 % PFA and incubate the cells for 5 min under shaking to ﬁx the cells . 3 . Wash the cells twice with PBS supplemented with 0 . 02 % Triton X - 100 and once with PBS for 5 min each ( see Note 12 ) . 4 . For DAPI staining , prepare a 1 / 2500 dilution of DAPI from a 1 mg / mL stock solution in dH 2 O and add it to the cells . Incubate the cells for 30 s under shaking before removing the DAPI solution and washing the cells with PBS . 5 . To mount the sample , take the coverslip and dip it in dH 2 O shortly , put the edge of the coverslip on a tissue paper to absorb the excess water by capillary forces . Mount the coverslip with 6 μ L of Vectashield mounting medium on a microscope slide and seal it with nail polish ( see Note 13 ) . Let the samples dry at room temperature for an hour , then store at 4 (cid:3) C in the dark . Examine the slides shortly after preparing them under the microscope ( same day or next day ) . 3 . 4 3D Structured Illumination Microscopy of Endogenous Transcription Factors 1 . Three - dimensional structured illumination microscopy ( 3D - SIM ) is performed on a DeltaVision OMX - Blaze V4 sys - tem equipped with a Plan Apo N (cid:1) 60 1 . 42 NA oil immersion objective lens ; four liquid - cooled sCMOS cameras ( pco . edge 5 . 5 , full frame 2560 (cid:1) 2160 ; PCO ) ; and 405 , 445 , 488 , 514 , 568 , and 642 nm solid - state lasers . 2 . Before imaging , use 0 . 5 μ m Tetraspeck beads to adjust the algorithm parameters . The images of a single bead acquired at different wavelength need to be overlapping . If this is not the 214 Sascha Conic et al . case , then the alignment parameters need to be adjusted which is usually done by the facility / lab owning the microscope . 3 . Use the 405 and 488 nm laser lines for DAPI and Alexa Fluor 488 detection respectively . Acquisition of endogenous RNA Pol II is performed with optical z - sections separated by 0 . 125 μ m and attenuated laser power of 10 or 31 . 3 % as well as exposure times between 75 and 400 ms ( see Note 14 ) . 4 . The raw images are processed and reconstructed using the DeltaVision OMX SoftWoRx software package ( v6 . 1 . 3 , Applied Precision , Issaquah , WA ) . Set the Wiener ﬁlter constant to 0 . 0050 for an optimal image reconstruction ( see Note 15 ) . 3 . 5 Image Analysis and Quantiﬁcation to Analyze Endogenous Transcription Factor Distribution 1 . The image processing to produce 3D images of the nucleus containing endogenous RNA Pol II is performed using the Imaris software ( Bitplane , Zurich , Switzerland ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . 2 . The Fiji / Image J software is used to count the RNA Pol II spots in the image and to obtain the 3D position as well as the volume of each spot . In particular , a Fiji / Image J Macro com - bining the 3D spot segmentation [ 19 ] as well as the 3D object counter [ 20 ] plugins is used for this quantiﬁcation . By using these plugins , the spots can be segmented by ﬁnding local maxima in the image and afterward a local Gaussian distribu - tion ﬁtting is performed . After obtaining the mask of each spot , factors like spot number or volume are computed . 3 . MATLAB ( MathWorks , Natick , MA ) is used to analyze the spot data and quantify the distribution of the number and volume of the spots corresponding to the endogenous tran - scription factor ( RNA Pol II ) molecules inside the nucleus and cytoplasm . DAPI images are used to determine whether a spot is inside or outside the nucleus . This is performed by smooth - ening and segmenting the DAPI images using a 3D Gaussian ﬁlter and the Minimum Cross Entropy thresholding algorithm ( see Fig . 2a , b ) [ 21 ] . Afterward , the distributions of spot volumes inside and outside the nucleus can be calculated ( see Fig . 2c and Note 16 ) . 4 Notes 1 . It is important to raise the pH of the antibody solution over a pH of 8 for the labeling reaction to increase labeling efﬁciency . It has been shown in our hands that a dialysis against the labeling buffer ( 0 . 1 M sodium bicarbonate ) results in better labeling efﬁciencies ( 3 – 4 dyes per molecule more ) than the pH raising step described in the protocol of Invitrogen . Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 215 2 . It is recommended to wash the gel ﬁltration column with PBS before loading the labeling reaction as any traces of NaN 3 that is present in the storage buffer of the gel ﬁltration beads will be removed . Fig . 1 Imaging of endogenous RNA Pol II in the nuclei of a human cell using 3D - SIM microscopy . U2OS cells were transduced with Alexa488 Fluor labeled anti - RPB1 antibodies and ﬁxed after 24 h . Afterward , the cells were analyzed using 3D - SIM microscopy . One representative 3D image of a nucleus is shown with antibody - labeled endogenous RNA Pol II spots . Scale bar : 2 μ m 216 Sascha Conic et al . 3 . The labeling kits from Invitrogen contain N - hydroxysuccinimide ester ﬂuorophores that react with the amine group at the tip of the side chain of lysines to label the antibodies . This works ﬁne with antibodies that do not harbor lysine residues in their binding site ( paratope ) . A more site - speciﬁc labeling strategy can be followed if the binding capacity of the labeled antibodies ( that can be easily tested by IF ) is affected by this technique . For this labeling procedure ( Fab’ ) 2 fragments need to be prepared , which can be speciﬁcally labeled at the typical cysteine residues in the C - terminal of the Fab’ ( hinge region ) with maleimide - activated ﬂuorophores upon mild reduction . This method preserves theoretically the antibody - binding site from any deleterious chemical alteration [ 22 ] . However , it only allows the addition of a maximum of two to three ﬂuorophore molecules per Fab’ fragment which is enough for confocal microscopy but too low for 3D - SIM microscopy . Fig . 2 Image analysis and quantiﬁcation of transcription factor clusters ( i . e . , RNA Pol II ) . ( a ) Smoothed and binarized projected image in the DAPI channel used to classify spots as inside or outside the nucleus . ( b ) Distribution of grey levels of the smoothed DAPI images . The red dot shows the threshold obtained with the Minimum Cross Entropy thresholding algorithm used in A to binarized the image . ( c ) Distribution of spot volumes of endogenous RNA Pol II in the cytoplasm ( blue ) and the nucleus ( red ) Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 217 4 . The puriﬁed antibodies need to be diluted in sterile PBS with no other ingredients prior to labeling and electroporation as preservatives like NaN 3 or traces of BSA will decrease the viability of your cells after electroporation signiﬁcantly . 5 . The working solution of labeled antibodies should have a concentration of 1 – 2 mg / mL . Higher concentration of the antibody solution decreases the volume needed for electropo - ration which should not exceed 5 μ L to avoid that the cells are getting too diluted . 6 . Make sure to use high quality cover glasses for the experiments with a precise thickness ( # 1 . 5 ) as they are important for the 3D - SIM imaging . It is also recommended to rinse them prior to use with 100 % acetone , distilled water and then 70 % ethanol . After washing , let them dry completely under the hood before use . 7 . If the cover glasses are transferred into the cell culture plate containing medium it is possible that air bubbles are formed under them which can lead to the settlement of cells under the cover glass instead of on it . Therefore , it is recommended to push them to the bottom of the well with the help of a pipette tip before adding the cells . 8 . In this protocol , 10 μ L Neon tips are used for the electropora - tion , but 100 μ L Neon tips can be used as well . However , the number of cells and labeled antibodies need to be adjusted accordingly . Every transduction uses 2 μ g of labeled anti - RPB1 antibodies and 10 5 cells . Therefore , with a pellet of 8 (cid:1) 10 5 cells , a total of eight electroporation experiments can be performed . However , even if a lower number of electropo - ration experiments are planned it is still recommended to keep a higher cell number as lower cell numbers will result in very small pellets and inaccuracies which can lower cell viability after electroporation drastically . 9 . After resuspending the cells in R - buffer , it is important to proceed quickly to the electroporation . If the cells remain longer than 15 min in R - buffer , it is possible that cell viability is decreasing signiﬁcantly . As the resuspension buffer ( R - buffer ) is part of the electroporation kit from Invitrogen , its composition is conﬁdential . However , we also tested 250 mM sucrose buffer in 1 (cid:1) PBS [ 23 ] or just simple 1 (cid:1) PBS which worked the same way as R - buffer for the electropo - ration of antibodies . 10 . The incubation time of the cells after electroporation of an anti - RPB1 antibody is approximately 24 h before the cells can be imaged under the microscope . This incubation time is speciﬁc for imaging RNA Pol II as the antibodies need to bind to the newly synthesized RPB1 protein in the cytoplasm 218 Sascha Conic et al . to get transported into the nucleus . Therefore , it depends on the neosynthesis rate of the nuclear target protein that is ana - lyzed using versatile antibody - based imaging approach ( VANIMA ) with labeled full - length antibodies . If other anti - bodies against other nuclear targets are used for VANIMA , this incubation time needs to be adjusted accordingly . However , it is also possible to use ﬂuorescently labeled Fab fragments , which are smaller than full length antibodies and can freely diffuse into the nucleus . This can lower the incubation time drastically and is especially important if the target protein has a very low neosynthesis rate or if PTMs in the nucleus want to be imaged [ 14 , 16 ] . 11 . It is also possible to perform live cell imaging of endogenous RNA Pol II using VANIMA . The labeling and electroporation steps are exactly the same for performing live cell imaging except that the cells should be transferred into a live imaging suitable cell culture dish after electroporation ( like 8 - well glass bottom μ - slides from ibidi ) . The sample preparation can be skipped afterward and the cells can be used directly for confocal live imaging of endogenous RNA Pol II [ 14 , 16 ] . 12 . It is possible that bright speckles can be detected during image acquisition outside of the cells on the cover glass . These speck - les correspond to nonelectroporated labeled antibodies , which stick to the cover glass surface . They are typically very bright and can induce artifacts during image reconstruction and therefore , if too many of these spots are detected it is recom - mended to increase the number of wash - steps from 3 to 6 after ﬁxation of the sample . It is also possible to include one more wash - step of 10 min with a buffer containing a higher concen - tration of Triton X - 100 ( 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS ) to get rid of these speckles . 13 . It is recommended to use Vectashield H1000 or Prolong Dia - mond mounting medium for the experiments as they preserve the three - dimensional structure of the cells and are therefore highly suitable for 3D - SIM imaging . 14 . Test different refractive index oils to ﬁnd the best that match the sample . To get the best OMX - SIM reconstruction , it is recommended to image three channels maximum and the oil has to be chosen on the channel of most interest . Note that the choice of the oil is temperature dependent , so keep the tem - perature of the room constant during imaging . Select an expo - sure time that reduces photobleaching , while still achieving a signal to background ratio superior to 10 . Additionally , on the OMX Blaze microscope , select laser power and exposure time so that at least 2000 counts of intensity in the channel of interest are achieved . Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 219 15 . All reconstructed 3D - SIM images should be tested using the SIMCheck plugin for Fiji / Image J [ 24 ] . This plugin is a quality control for the acquired data and ensures that the detected and reconstructed data originates from real signal of the labeled antibodies and not from artifacts generated during image acquisition and reconstruction . 16 . Notice that the quantiﬁcation of the spot volume could be further used to estimate the number of endogenous transcrip - tion factor molecules in each spot by using the median volume of the cytoplasmic spots as a conversion factor . Like this , it would be possible to estimate how many transcription factor molecules are present in bigger clusters within the nucleus . Acknowledgments This work was supported by funds from CNRS , INSERM , Univer - sity of Strasbourg , Ligue Re´gionale contre le Cancer ( CCIRGE - BFC ) ( to EW ) , by the European Research Council ( ERC ) Advanced grant ( ERC - 2013 - 340551 , Birtoaction ) ( to LT ) and a grant ANR - 10 - LABX - 0030 - INRT , a French State fund managed by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche under the frame program Investissements d’Avenir ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0002 - 02 ( to IGBMC ) . References 1 . Godin AG , Lounis B , Cognet L ( 2014 ) Super - resolution microscopy approaches for live cell imaging . Biophys J 107 ( 8 ) : 1777 – 1784 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 08 . 028 2 . Ellenberg J , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Presley JF ( 1999 ) Dual - colour imaging with GFP var - iants . Trends Cell Biol 9 ( 2 ) : 52 – 56 3 . Betzig E , Patterson GH , Sougrat R , Lindwas - ser OW , Olenych S , Bonifacino JS , Davidson MW , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Hess HF ( 2006 ) Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 ( 5793 ) : 1642 – 1645 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1127344 4 . Schneider AF , Hackenberger CP ( 2017 ) Fluo - rescent labelling in living cells . Curr Opin Bio - technol 48 : 61 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . copbio . 2017 . 03 . 012 5 . Burgess A , Lorca T , Castro A ( 2012 ) Quanti - tative live imaging of endogenous DNA repli - cation in mammalian cells . PLoS One 7 ( 9 ) : e45726 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0045726 6 . Rothbauer U , Zolghadr K , Tillib S , Nowak D , Schermelleh L , Gahl A , Backmann N , Conrath K , Muyldermans S , Cardoso MC , Leonhardt H ( 2006 ) Targeting and tracing antigens in live cells with ﬂuorescent nanobo - dies . Nat Methods 3 ( 11 ) : 887 – 889 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth953 7 . Cassimeris L , Guglielmi L , Denis V , Larroque C , Martineau P ( 2013 ) Speciﬁc in vivo labeling of tyrosinated alpha - tubulin and measurement of microtubule dynamics using a GFP tagged , cytoplasmically expressed recombinant antibody . PLoS One 8 ( 3 ) : e59812 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0059812 8 . Freund G , Desplancq D , Stoessel A , Weinsanto R , Sibler AP , Robin G , Martineau P , Didier P , Wagner J , Weiss E ( 2014 ) Generation of an intrabody - based reagent suitable for imaging endogenous pro - liferating cell nuclear antigen in living cancer cells . J Mol Recognit 27 ( 9 ) : 549 – 558 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jmr . 2378 9 . Traenkle B , Rothbauer U ( 2017 ) Under the microscope : single - domain antibodies for live - cell imaging and super - resolution microscopy . Front Immunol 8 : 1030 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / ﬁmmu . 2017 . 01030 220 Sascha Conic et al . 10 . Renaud E , Martineau P , Guglielmi L ( 2017 ) Solubility characterization and imaging of intrabodies using GFP - fusions . Methods Mol Biol 1575 : 165 – 174 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 6857 - 2 _ 9 11 . Manders EM , Kimura H , Cook PR ( 1999 ) Direct imaging of DNA in living cells reveals the dynamics of chromosome formation . J Cell Biol 144 ( 5 ) : 813 – 821 12 . Teng KW , Ishitsuka Y , Ren P , Youn Y , Deng X , Ge P , Belmont AS , Selvin PR ( 2017 ) Labeling proteins inside living cells using external ﬂuor - ophores for microscopy . eLife 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 20378 13 . Courtete J , Sibler AP , Zeder - Lutz G , Dalkara D , Oulad - Abdelghani M , Zuber G , Weiss E ( 2007 ) Suppression of cervical carci - noma cell growth by intracytoplasmic codeliv - ery of anti - oncoprotein E6 antibody and small interfering RNA . Mol Cancer Ther 6 ( 6 ) : 1728 – 1735 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 06 - 0808 14 . Conic S , Desplancq D , Ferrand A , Fischer V , Heyer V , Reina San Martin B , Pontabry J , Oulad - Abdelghani M , Babu NK , Wright GD , Molina N , Weiss E , Tora L ( 2018 ) Imaging of native transcription factors and histone phos - phorylation at high resolution in live cells . J Cell Biol 217 ( 4 ) : 1537 – 1552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201709153 15 . Freund G , Sibler AP , Desplancq D , Oulad - Abdelghani M , Vigneron M , Gannon J , Van Regenmortel MH , Weiss E ( 2013 ) Targeting endogenous nuclear antigens by electrotransfer of monoclonal antibodies in living cells . MAbs 5 ( 4 ) : 518 – 522 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4161 / mabs . 25084 16 . Conic S , Desplancq D , Tora L , Weiss E ( 2018 ) Electroporation of labeled antibodies to visua - lize endogenous proteins and posttranslational modiﬁcations in living metazoan cell types . Bio Protoc 8 ( 21 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21769 / BioProtoc . 3069 17 . Desplancq D , Freund G , Conic S , Sibler AP , Didier P , Stoessel A , Oulad - Abdelghani M , Vigneron M , Wagner J , Mely Y , Chatton B , Tora L , Weiss E ( 2016 ) Targeting the repli - some with transduced monoclonal antibodies triggers lethal DNA replication stress in cancer cells . Exp Cell Res 342 ( 2 ) : 145 – 158 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2016 . 03 . 003 18 . Besse S , Vigneron M , Pichard E , Puvion - Dutilleul F ( 1995 ) Synthesis and maturation of viral transcripts in herpes simplex virus type 1 infected HeLa cells : the role of interchroma - tin granules . Gene Expr 4 : 143 – 161 19 . Ollion J , Cochennec J , Loll F , Escude C , Bou - dier T ( 2013 ) TANGO : a generic tool for high - throughput 3D image analysis for studying nuclear organization . Bioinformatics 29 ( 14 ) : 1840 – 1841 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btt276 20 . Bolte S , Cordelieres FP ( 2006 ) A guided tour into subcellular colocalization analysis in light microscopy . J Microsc 224 . ( Pt 3 : 213 – 232 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2006 . 01706 . x 21 . Li CH , Lee CK ( 1993 ) Minimum cross entropy thresholding . Pattern Recogn 26 ( 4 ) : 617 – 625 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0031 - 3203 ( 93 ) 90115 - D 22 . Weiss E , Van Regenmortel MH ( 1989 ) Use of rabbit Fab’ - peroxidase conjugates prepared by the maleimide method for detecting plant viruses by ELISA . J Virol Methods 24 ( 1 – 2 ) : 11 – 25 23 . Brees C , Fransen M ( 2014 ) A cost - effective approach to microporate mammalian cells with the Neon Transfection System . Anal Bio - chem 466 : 49 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ab . 2014 . 08 . 017 24 . Ball G , Demmerle J , Kaufmann R , Davis I , Dobbie IM , Schermelleh L ( 2015 ) SIMcheck : a toolbox for successful super - resolution structured illumination microscopy . Sci Rep 5 : 15915 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep15915 Visualization of Endogenous Factors Using Antibodies 221 Chapter 15 Monitoring Transcription Factor Oligomerization in Single Living Cells by Number and Brightness Analysis Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza Abstract One key step in the activation of inducible transcription factors is their homooligomerization , which can be measured in individual living cells by a ﬂuorescence microscopy technique called Number and Brightness analysis ( N & B ) . In this chapter we describe how to acquire and analyze confocal microscopy time - series to provide information about transcription factor oligomerization in living cells using this technique . Key words Number and brightness , Oligomerization , Transcription factor , Live cell imaging , Image analysis 1 Introduction In response to speciﬁc external stimuli , inducible transcription factors ( iTFs ) stimulate the transcription of target genes by sequence - speciﬁc binding to responsive elements in their enhan - cers / promoters [ 1 ] . The activation of an iTF is typically a complex process that involves several phenomena that can be potentially regulated independently . First , in response to activating stimuli , the nuclear concentration of eukaryotic iTFs often increases : for example , following induction of hormone receptors , NF - kB trans - locates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus [ 2 ] . For other iTFs , such as the tumor - suppressor p53 , the increase of the nuclear abundancy is achieved by modulating the iTF degradation rate [ 3 ] . In addition to an increase of nuclear abundancy , many iTFs respond to the activating stimulus by homooligomerizing : For example , hormone receptors homodimerize—although higher order oligomers have also been observed [ 4 ] —while p53 tetra - merizes [ 5 , 6 ] . In vitro , the oligomers typically display higher afﬁnity to their speciﬁc binding sites than monomers , potentially providing a functional role to iTF homooligomerization . Further , activated iTFs often accumulate posttranslational modiﬁcations Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 15 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 223 that can further modulate their capability to bind responsive ele - ments and to stimulate transcription of their target genes [ 7 , 8 ] . Notably , in the case of p53 we have recently shown that the binding kinetics of p53 to its binding sites are tuned in living cells in response to activating stimuli ( DNA damage ) , possibly as a consequence of a modulation in p53 levels , in p53 oligomerization kinetics and / or in p53 posttranslational modiﬁcations [ 8 ] . Dissecting which and to what extent each of these phenomena contribute to the stimulation of target genes transcription is funda - mental to provide a complete description of the iTF action , and to identify the steps in iTF activation that are compromised in disease . In this context , techniques with single - cell sensitivity are emerging , as they allow capturing the heterogeneity in TF behavior in the cellular population and they provide a means of relating different observables together ( e . g . , TF abundancy , TF oligomerization , and TF binding kinetics ) . Several ﬂuorescence microscopy techniques allow for monitor - ing iTF properties at the single - cell level and have been covered in previous volumes of this book series and elsewhere . Time - lapse imaging of ﬂuorescently tagged TFs can be used to quantify the TF abundancy in living cells [ 9 ] , while techniques such as ﬂuores - cence recovery after photobleaching [ 9 , 10 ] , ﬂuorescence correla - tion spectroscopy [ 11 , 12 ] , and single molecule tracking ( SMT ) [ 8 , 13 ] can provide quantitative estimates of the TF binding rates with single cell sensitivity . Protein oligomerization can be also monitored cell by cell , by a ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation technique known as number and brightness analysis ( N & B ) . Originally implemented in the 2008 by Digman et al . [ 14 ] , N & B consists in the statistical analysis of intensity ﬂuctuations from time - lapse acquisitions of live cells expressing ﬂuorescently labeled TFs . Such intensity ﬂuctuations contain information about the dynamic of TFs , and their statistical analysis allows to measure the amount of ﬂuorescent light emitted by each complex crossing the observation volume called brightness , ε , as well as average the number of complexes n in the observation volume ( see Note 1 ) . By comparing the brightness of our complex of interest with the brightness measured for a control protein with known oligomeri - zation state ( e . g . , monomeric ﬂuorescent tag ) , it is possible to estimate the oligomerization state of our protein of interest [ 6 , 15 ] . For example , we can consider having two samples with the same concentration of ﬂuorescent molecules : in the ﬁrst sample the molecules are in monomeric form , while in the second sample the molecules are bound as dimers . Under these conditions , the two samples will generate images with the same average ﬂuores - cence intensity . If the molecules can move in and out of the obser - vation volume , the ﬂuctuations in the ﬂuorescence intensity will be higher for the dimeric sample than for the monomeric one , as each dimer moving in and out of the observation volume brings a 224 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza ﬂuctuation in the ﬂuorescent signal that is twice the ﬂuctuation brought by a monomer ( Fig . 1a ) . Information about the brightness ε , of the “diffusing unit” in the sample can be therefore calculated by measuring the average and the variance of the ﬂuorescence signal over time ( pixelwise , Fig . 1b ) , and a dimer with both units ﬂuores - cently labelled will provide a brightness that is twice the brightness of a monomer ( see Note 2 , Fig . 1c , d ) . Other than N & B , protein oligomerization can be measured with different techniques . coimmunoprecipitation ( Co - IP ) , for instance , is a biochemical mean that uses protein speciﬁc antibodies to identify particular targets , and the complexes isolated in this way can then be analyzed to identify the binding partners . Co - IP is a population assay and as such does not give access to the full distri - bution of single cell behaviors . N & B on the other side , not only has Fig . 1 ( a ) Representation of the time trace of intensity ﬂuctuations arising from the diffusion of labeled proteins across the observation volume . The average of the signal is directly linked to the protein concentration while a higher oligomerization state produces a higher variance of the signal . ( b ) The data are treated as a time stack of images . Brightness ( ε ) and number ( n ) are calculated for each pixel ( ij ) from the time average ( < k > ) and variance ( σ 2 ) of the intensity . ( c ) Fluorescence image , numbers and brightness map of monomeric and dimeric mutants of the transcription factor p53 . The two samples have similar intensity levels , but in the monomeric case there are more particles with lower brightness compared to the dimeric sample , where there are less oligomers but with higher brightness . ( d ) Brightness distribution of a monomeric and dimeric sample . Each dot represents the brightness of a different cell calculated by averaging the values of the brightness map over ﬁve different rectangles belonging to the region of interest ( the nucleus of the cell in this example ) TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 225 the advantage of being a single cell method but it actually reaches a resolution equal to the pixel dimension in the image , meaning that it is possible to build a brightness map and monitor the aggregation level in the different compartments of the cell ( Fig . 1c ) . Among the microscopy methods used to test proteins interac - tion , Fo¨rster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) and especially its variant homo - FRET can also be used to provide homooligomeriza - tion maps within the cell [ 16 , 17 ] . Homo - FRET detection however requires the use of ad hoc microscopy instrumentation capable of measuring ﬂuorescence anisotropy pixelwise , while N & B data can , in principle , be acquired with any ﬂuorescence microscope . Super - resolution localization microscopy , and ﬁxed - cell step photobleaching analysis can also be used to quantify oligomeriza - tion / clustering of proteins [ 18 , 19 ] , but differently from N & B , these approaches are typically limited to in vitro analyses or ﬁxed samples . In this protocol we will describe how to quantify TF oligomeri - zation using N & B . The workﬂow requires the transfection / infec - tion of the cellular model with a ﬂuorescently tagged version of the TF of interest [ Subheading 3 . 1 ] . Next , we describe the collection of N & B data , using a confocal microscope with suitable detectors and light sources [ Subheading 3 . 2 ] . The N & B data is then corrected for photobleaching and cellular motion and analyzed , to provide quan - titative information about the abundancy and the apparent bright - ness state of the oligomers diffusing in the nuclear environment [ Subheading 3 . 3 ] . Comparison of these brightness values with standards in a known oligomerization state , allows monitoring TF oligomerization and TF nuclear concentration cell by cell . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Sample Preparation N & B experiments can be used to monitor the relative brightness of any ﬂuorescently labelled macromolecule , provided that the mole - cule of interest is free to diffuse in and out of the observation volume ( see Note 1 ) during the time of the whole acquisition [ 14 ] . In biological samples , N & B is typically used to quantify the oligomerization state of proteins . In this case , it is important to have the vast majority of the copies of the protein of interest ﬂuores - cently tagged , in order to avoid having oligomers in which only a fraction of the subunits is labeled . This can be achieved by transfect - ing the labelled protein of interest in cell lines where the endoge - nous protein is knocked out / silenced . An emerging alternative is the application of CRISPR - Cas9 technology [ 20 ] to generate knockin cell lines where the sequence encoding for the ﬂuorescent tag is appended at the C - terminus of the protein of interest . This last method has also the advantage of having the tagged protein of interest expressed at physiological levels ( see Note 3 ) . 226 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza Regarding the choice of the ﬂuorescent tag , N & B has been typically performed on eGFP ( or other ﬂuorescent proteins , FPs ) - labeled macromolecules . While being the most common choice , FPs have some caveats : GFPs can form weak dimers : therefore , it is advisable to use mutated versions of GFP that show reduced homo - oligomerization , such as the mGFP mutant [ 21 ] . Also , chromo - phore maturation for FPs can be slow ( in the range of hours ) . If the turnover of the protein of interest is expected to be rapid , it is advisable to use FPs with rapid maturation times ( e . g . , mVenus ) . Finally , the photostability of the FPs chromophore is limited , and acquisition settings need to be carefully optimized in order to minimize photobleaching during the N & B acquisition . An alternative to FPs , is represented by posttranslational label - ing systems such as the HaloTag [ 22 ] , where the protein of interest is fused to a nonﬂuorescent receptor , and the labeling is performed by the addition of a cell - permeable ﬂuorescent ligand . As ﬂuores - cent ligands for HaloTag are essentially functionalized organic ﬂuorophores , their brightness and photostability can be much higher than what observed for FPs [ 22 , 23 ] . Further , the HaloTag receptor does not show any detectable homodimerization and folds rapidly following synthesis , overcoming the main problems asso - ciated to FPs . Finally , posttranslational systems are the labeling method of choice for intranuclear SMT , which might be advanta - geous for multiplexed experiments combining this approach with N & B . In the following we will describe the transfection of HaloTag - fused proteins into cell lines that are KO for the endogenous protein . The tagged protein has to be labeled with saturating con - centrations of the ﬂuorescent ligand ( see Note 4 ) in order to ensure that all the fusion proteins will be ﬂuorescently labeled . The mate - rials needed for HaloTag transfection and following labeling are ( for a 500 μ L chamber ) : 1 . Plasmid of the protein of interest expressing protein fused with HaloTag ( 500 ng ) . 2 . HaloTag - JF549 ﬂuorescent ligand ( JFS 549 1 μ M ) . 3 . Lipofectamine 2000 . 4 . Opti - MEM medium . 5 . PBS . 6 . DMEM cell culture medium . 7 . Lab - Tek glass bottom chambered cover glass . 2 . 2 Imaging Instrumentation N & B data acquisition can be performed , in principle , on any ﬂuo - rescence microscope , laser scanning or camera based , provided that some requirement on the light sources and on the detector are satisﬁed . First , the intensity of the light source used for stimulating TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 227 ﬂuorescence needs to be stable over time . Second , the detector needs to behave as a photon - counting detector , otherwise the data collected needs to be corrected for the ampliﬁcation noise and offset signal of the detector . Also , nonlinear effects in non - photon - counting detectors can arise [ 24 – 26 ] . Often , modern con - focal microscopes often use photon - counting detectors or hybrid detectors that can be operated in photon counting mode . We describe in Note 5 the controls allowing to verify that the intensity light source is constant , and that the detector responds as a photon - counter . Also having a microscope with optical sectioning capabilities ( e . g . , a confocal , a two - photon excitation , or a total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence microscope ) is beneﬁcial , since a high background intensity would introduce a bias in the measurement , decreasing the measured brightness . The key microscope components used for our NB data acquisition are : 1 . A white light laser with tunable excitation wavelength . 2 . A commercial confocal microscope . 3 . Software for automatic hardware control and data acquisition . 4 . A hybrid photon counting detector . 5 . A second detector for bright ﬁeld reference image acquisition . 6 . A high numerical aperture objective ( e . g . , (cid:1) 63 oil immersion NA 1 . 4 ) . 7 . An environmental chamber for live sample imaging with tem - perature and CO 2 concentration control ( 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 ) . 2 . 3 Software for the Analysis of N & B Data The necessary software to analyze N & B data calculates pixel - wise the variance and the mean of the acquired time - lapse movies . It also includes detrending algorithms to correct for cell movement and ﬂuorescence bleaching . It is quite common for research groups to use their own home built N & B analysis routine . Some of these groups have shared their software online and they can be down - loaded free of charge . Some of these are : ImFCS ( http : / / www . dbs . nus . edu . sg / lab / BFL / imfcs _ image _ j _ plugin . html ) , SimFCS ( https : / / www . lfd . uci . edu / globals / ) , and Nandb ( https : / / rorynolan . github . io / nandb / ) . We wrote a Matlab routine to correct for rigid cell movement , photobleaching , and to perform the N & B analysis . The hardware necessary to run a N & B data analysis with our software consists of : ( a ) A computer with more than 2 GB of RAM . ( b ) Licensed Matlab software ( Requires Image Processing Toolbox ) . ( c ) Our NB analysis routine that can be found here : https : / / github . com / Eugenia00 / NB - analyzer . 228 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza 3 Methods 3 . 1 Sample Preparation 3 . 1 . 1 Cell Transfection 1 . Plate cells in a Lab - Tek chamber and let them adhere to the glass surface . Cells should be at 80 % conﬂuency at the moment of transfection . 2 . For a 1 . 8 cm 2 well dilute 500 ng of plasmid in Opti - MEM to have a ﬁnal volume of 25 μ L . Mix with the pipette and incubate for 5 min at room temperature . 3 . In the meantime , mix 1 μ L of Lipofectamine in 24 μ L Opti - MEM . Mix with the pipette and incubate for 5 min at room temperature . 4 . Add the solution with the plasmid to the Lipofectamine solu - tion , mix with the pipette and wait 20 min at room temperature . 5 . Change the cell medium with 450 μ L Opti - MEM and add the solution of plasmid and Lipofectamine . Mix and incubate the cells for 8 – 15 h at 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 . Change the cell medium with phenol red - free DMEM . 3 . 1 . 2 Labeling of the HaloTag Construct 1 . Mix the HaloTag ligand in phenol red - free cell medium to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 μ M . 2 . Change the medium of the cell - containing Lab - Tek with ligand solution and incubate for 30 min 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 . During this time the ligand permeates through the cell membrane and conjugates to the fusion protein . 3 . Wash ﬁve times with PBS and add phenol red free cell medium . Incubate for 15 min at 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 . 4 . Again , wash ﬁve times with PBS and add cell medium . Incubate for 15 min at 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 . 5 . Change the cell medium one last time and bring the cells to the microscope . 3 . 2 Data Acquisition 3 . 2 . 1 Testing Before starting the data acquisition from the sample it is advisable to run some tests . The ﬁrst test to run is on the detector to check the real response to a set of different light intensities as described in Note 5 . The outcome of this check will have to be taken in consideration during the data analysis . Once the samples are ready , we proceed with the acquisition of the time - lapse movies . 1 . Mount the environmental chamber for live cell imaging on the microscope stage . 2 . Turn on the microscope , the laser and open the software for the microscope and data control . 3 . Put a drop of oil on the (cid:1) 60 oil immersion objective . 4 . Place the sample chamber on the microscope stage . TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 229 3 . 2 . 2 Acquiring the Data To have enough statistics , the time series of images need to contain at least 250 – 300 frames . To avoid extra variance terms caused by the cell movement the acquisition has to be as fast as possible , but it also has to satisfy other time constraints : the pixel dwell time has to be short enough so that the intensity ﬂuctuations are not averaged out , in other words it has to be shorter than the time particles take to diffuse over the length scale of a pixel . Another constraint is that the time between consecutive frames has to be long enough , so the intensity is not correlated over time . The diffusion coefﬁcients of transcription factors in the cytosol and in the nucleus have been reported to be on the order of 1 – 10 μ m 2 / s . The following settings on a Leica SP8 confocal scanning microscope are compatible with both cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins . 1 . Image size 512 (cid:1) 512 pixels . 2 . Scanning speed 200 Hz ( 200 lines / s ) in bidirectional mode . 3 . On our microscope these settings provide a pixel size equal to 180 μ m , and a pixel dwell time equal to 2 . 43 μ s . 4 . Pinhole aperture 1 AU . 5 . Number of frames 300 minimizing frame interval for a total of 3 min 15 s . 6 . The white light laser is used with current set at 70 % and intensity set at 5 % ( corresponding to a power of 16 μ W , measured at the back aperture of the objective ) . The wave - length of the laser is set to 561 nm . 7 . The ﬂuorescent channel is acquired with hybrid photon count - ing detector . 8 . Turning on the gating ( 3 . 5 ns ) can be useful to cut out the laser reﬂection on the coverslip . 9 . The bright ﬁeld reference channel is acquired with a photomultiplier . 10 . The window of wavelength acquisition needs to be adjusted depending on the dye . After the ﬁrst two or three acquisitions always check that the bleaching does not exceed 20 % over the time course of the experi - ment . Higher bleaching rates are difﬁcult to correct and introduce an extra variance term . This settings with the HaloTag ligand JF549 typically results in less than 10 % bleaching over the whole time - course . 3 . 3 Data Analysis Once the data acquisition is complete we move the acquired ﬁles to the workstation for the analysis . Create a new folder which will contain all the Matlab scripts . Copy into it the functions down - loaded from here ( https : / / github . com / Eugenia00 / NB - analyzer ) and add the function to upload the . lif ﬁles directly to Matlab 230 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza ( https : / / www . openmicroscopy . org / bio - formats / downloads / ) . Add the newly created folder to the Matlab path with the “addpath” function or make it your Matlab current folder with the navigation tools . Open the routine Matlab NB _ analyzer . m in the Matlab editor . Our Matlab routine is divided into sections . To run each sec - tion , click on it and use the “Run Section” tool , doing so all the commands within that section will be executed . After loading the images and selecting the region of interest it is possible to correct for cell movement , and to use the boxcar method [ 27 ] to correct the data for bleaching . 1 . Load . lif ﬁle : Change the ﬁrst line with the full path of the . lif ﬁle to be opened and click the “Run Section” button . The name of the series will be displayed . 2 . Select series : change the value of the series number and run the section . The ﬂuorescent and bright ﬁeld channels are loaded and shown to the user . 3 . Region of interest : with the mouse make a squared selection around the region of interest ( e . g . , the nucleus of a cell ) . 4 . Correct for cell movement ( Fig . 2 ) . Running this section , it is possible to correct for cell movement . The movement correc - tion routine runs with different starting parameters . Depend - ing on how much the cell moves , a set of parameters may be more appropriate than others ( see Note 6 ) . At the end of the execution , a new window opens with a set of brightness maps , each one corresponding to the correction performed with a different set of parameters . The user can then select the better performing correction , which can be identiﬁed as the one with less border effects ( see Note 7 ) . If the movement correction fails ( such as in the case of nonrigid movements of the nucleus ) the user can decide to skip the movement correction step or to discard that particular dataset . 5 . Correct for photobleaching : change the size of the boxcar ﬁlter [ 27 ] ( see Note 8 ) to correct for photobleaching . If you do not want to use this tool , specify the boxcar dimension as the total number of frames in the movie . 6 . Calculate N & B parameters in sub regions of the nucleus : when running this section , a window with the bright ﬁeld image of the region of interest appears and the user has to select with the mouse 5 rectangular regions within the region of interest pos - sibly far apart between them and away from evident inhomo - geneities and from the nuclear periphery . The brightness and number values are calculated averaging the relative values rela - tive to the pixels within the ﬁve selections . Other than giving brightness and number estimates , more details of the analysis are saved in the output variable “ res ” This variable contains the TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 231 values of number and brightness with and without the boxcar ﬁlter correction , their errors , the boxcar size , the fraction of ﬂuorescence intensity lost due to photobleaching , the position of the region of interest and of the ﬁve selections , the para - meters used for the movement correction and the average bright ﬁeld and ﬂuorescent intensity over time . Every time this section runs it adds a line containing all these outputs to the res variable . To run a different series from the same ﬁle , repeat steps 2 – 5 . To analyze a different region of the same series , repeat steps 3 – 5 . If the cell or the ﬁeld of view does not move at all , step 4 can be skipped . After the analysis of a statistical sample of cells you can use Matlab to plot the results or double click on the variable in the workspace section and copy and paste the content in Excel . It is the case to mention here that brightness values are not usually used as absolute measures , but they need to be compared with other measures on a sample where the protein of interest is in monomeric or in another known oligomeric form . Fig . 2 ( a ) To avoid extra - variance contributions to the intensity ﬂuctuation caused by the cell movement , the cell movement is corrected readjusting , through rigid transformation ( rotations and translations ) , the position of the cell at t > 0 to ﬁt the position of the ﬁrst frame ( t ¼ 0 ) . The best ﬁt is found maximizing the correlation over a full set of transformations . ( b ) Nonrigid movements and bleaching can be further corrected with the boxcar method where number and brightness are calculated within a moving window and then averaged altogether . The variance of signals with an overall modulation of intensity ( such as those caused by cell movement or photobleaching , red curve ) is much higher compared to the same signal without modulation ( black curve ) . The variance can be reduced ( σ 2window ) looking at the data within smaller windows . ( c ) Effect of cell movement on the brightness map on the original data . The extra brightness at the borders ( caused by the nucleus moving during the time - lapse is canceled thanks to the movement correction and the boxcar method 232 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza 4 Notes 1 . In a laser scanning microscope , the observation volume corre - sponds to the volume within the sample which is illuminated step by step during the scan . Its exact shape is given by the optics of the setup and by the aperture of the confocal pinhole and it is called the point spread function ( PSF ) . For a wideﬁeld microscope , the ﬂuorescence emitted from the sample is pro - jected by the microscope lenses onto the sensor . Each pixel on the ﬁnal image will correspond to different positions . In this case , the observation volume is deﬁned in x - y by the convolu - tion of the microscope PSF for the physical size of the pixel in the sample plane , while the dimension of the observation vol - ume in z are given by the PSF . The intensity emitted by all the particles in the observation volume is recorded on the corresponding pixel of the image . For N & B data acquisition , we require that the particles move enough to diffuse out of the observation volume between consecutive frames in order to generate ﬂuctuations in the recorded intensity . 2 . Numbers and brightness of the tagged oligomers can be measured by estimating the average and the variance of the ﬂuorescence signal over time . The variance of the signal σ 2 is expressed by the sum of two terms . The ﬁrst is related to the movement of the particles σ 2n ( occupation noise ) while the other takes in account the detector noise σ 2d : σ 2 ¼ σ 2n þ σ 2d . In case the detector used is a photon counting one , both terms follow the statistics of Poisson and can be written as function of just the number and brightness of the ﬂuorescent motile units : σ 2n ¼ ε 2 n and σ 2n ¼ ε n . Rearranging these expressions , number ( n ) and brightness ( ε ) can be expressed as [ 14 ] : n ¼ k h i 2 σ 2 (cid:4) k h i , ε ¼ σ 2 (cid:4) k h i k h i : 3 . CRISPR - Cas9 based strategies allow labeled proteins to be expressed at endogenous levels . Although the generation of knock - in cell lines could be challenging , it brings several advan - tages : a complete substitution of the endogenous protein with its tagged version , a homogeneous expression among the cell population , and expression levels close to the endogenous ones , all desirable characteristics for performing NB analysis . It is the case to highlight here the importance of having endogenous expression levels , when measuring TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 233 homooligomerization . For example , it is easy to show that the increase in expression levels of a TF shifts the equilibrium of the oligomerization process : given the reversible processes M ½ (cid:5) þ M ½ (cid:5) ! k þ D ½ (cid:5) , M ½ (cid:5) þ M ½ (cid:5) k (cid:4) D ½ (cid:5) ( with [ M ] and [ D ] concentration of monomers and dimers , and k + and k (cid:4) rates of association and dissociation ) the monomer concentration is described by the equation d M ½ (cid:5) dt ¼ (cid:4) k þ M ½ (cid:5) 2 þ 2 k (cid:4) D ½ (cid:5) . At the equilibrium we get D ½ (cid:5) ¼ k þ 2 k (cid:4) M ½ (cid:5) 2 , indicating that the number of dimers increases as the square of the concentration of monomers : therefore , at higher expression levels , the equilibrium will be shifted toward dimers ( Fig . 3a ) . 4 . Halo - Tag technology allows the control of protein labeling fraction enabling different kinds of experiments on the same cellular system . N & B experiments require a fully labeled pro - tein population to avoid an apparent mixed brightness of monomers and oligomers . To decide on the right ligand con - centration , we prepared different samples at different concen - trations and then measured the average ﬂuorescent intensity over about 30 cells per sample , and then plotted the average intensity vs . ligand concentration . The concentration for which the intensity has reached a plateau corresponds to the satura - tion of the tagged proteins ( Fig . 3b ) . 5 . Depending on the kind of detector used , one may need to correct the signal for offset and gain and therefore use different equations to calculate the numbers and brightness estimates . If the detector can operate in photon - counting mode , the signal Fig . 3 ( a ) The fraction of the different monomer vs . dimeric species changes as function of the total protein concentration , calculated for a reversible dimerization reaction . High expression levels are enough to change the balance in favor of oligomers . ( b ) Amount of labeled protein as a function of the ligand concentration . The optimal ligand concentration for N & B experiments corresponds to the saturation of the available sites . ( c ) The characteristic Poisson distribution of a signal acquired with a photon counting detector can be veriﬁed plotting time variance vs . average . The data plotted are acquired from a ﬁxed sample and averaged over pixels with similar intensity . Photon - counting detectors should provide a linear relationship with slope equal to one and intercept equal to zero 234 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza recorded does not need additional corrections and N & B esti - mates can be calculated as described in Note 2 . A photon counting detector is a high sensitive device able to detect and count signals as low as a single photon , Thanks to this “count - ing” property , such detectors preserve the Poisson nature of the process of counting the number of photons hitting the sensor in a given time interval ( pixel dwell time ) . To characterize the response of the detector we acquire movies of an immobile sample at different intensities ( also a scratch on the bottom of a Petri dish or a reﬂection can serve for the purpose ) . For each pixel we then calculate the mean and variance of the signal over time and build a plot of the mean vs . the variance of the signal . A photon - counting detec - tor should provide a linear relationship between the two vari - ables , with zero offset and slope equal to 1 ( Fig . 3c ) . A second test that has to be run is about the stability of the illumination power . It is critical that the laser source has con - stant emission over time . Indeed , additional intensity ﬂuctua - tions as well as a steady increase or decrease would result in an overestimation of the brightness . An overall drop or increase of power over much longer times would also compromise the reproducibility of the experiment . To check the stability of the laser source we acquired a time series , about 100 images over 5 min , of a ﬁxed sample . To not have bleaching issues we used a scratch on a plastic dish , we illuminated it with the same source used for the N & B experiments and acquired a very large wavelength spectrum . We then calculate for every image the average overall intensity . The illumination can be considered sufﬁciently stable if the ﬂuctuations are smaller than 5 % . The test can also be repeated on different days or at different times after the illumination source was turned on to compare the overall light source stability over longer times . 6 . The movement correction is achieved by correlating the image at time zero with the images at later times , upon a full set of rigid transformations combining rotations and translations ( Fig . 2a ) . The transformation chosen is the one providing the highest correlation value . As individual images in the time series might have low signal - to - background ratio , a more reli - able result is obtained if we divide the sequence in sections composed by a number of frames n frames , average the images in each section and then correlate pairs of images that are a number of sections apart ( Δ t section ) : The software will perform the transformation for a number of different values for the parameters ( n frames , Δ t section ) and the user is given the possibil - ity to choose the set of parameters that provide the better correction for cell movement , as described in Note 7 . TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 235 7 . Neighboring pixels at the cell edge and at the nucleus – cyto - plasm boundary can display high difference in intensity ( e . g . , the pixels mapping the cell nucleus can be much brighter than those mapping the cytoplasm ) . Therefore , if the cell and / or the nucleus move , the pixels relative to these edge regions will record large intensity ﬂuctuations over time ( Fig . 2c ) . Conse - quently , the extra variance term due to the movement will increase the local brightness and will result in artiﬁcially high values around these edge regions , along the direction of the movement . The right parameters for the correction of the cell movement can therefore be chosen as the ones that minimize these edge effects . 8 . The boxcar [ 27 ] is a method to correct the measured bright - ness for the photobleaching effect . It consists of calculating the moving average and moving variance , calculating the bright - ness in every window and then averaging them together . The boxcar dimension corresponds to the size of the moving win - dow . Compared to other detrending algorithms it has the advantage to be model free , but on the other hand the result depends on the boxcar dimension . A too small window may cut out good intensity oscillations and on the other hand a too big one may preserve spurious ones . Nolan et al . [ 28 ] have recently published a method to correctly decide the boxcar size . Acknowledgments We are grateful to Dr . Valeria Caiolfa and Dr . Moreno Zamai for their support on N & B analysis . Confocal imaging was carried out in ALEMBIC , an advanced microscopy laboratory established by IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele and Universita ` Vita - Salute San Raf - faele . This work was supported by Fondazione Cariplo ( E . C . and D . M . : 2014 - 1157 ) . References 1 . Hager GL , McNally JG , Misteli T ( 2009 ) Transcription dynamics . Mol Cell 35 : 741 – 753 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 09 . 005 2 . Perkins ND ( 2007 ) Integrating cell - signalling pathways with NF - κ B and IKK function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 49 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2083 3 . Purvis JE , Karhohs KW , Mock C et al ( 2012 ) p53 dynamics control cell fate . Science 336 : 1440 – 1444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1218351 4 . Funnell APW , Crossley M ( 2012 ) Homo - and heterodimerization in transcriptional regula - tion . Adv Exp Med Biol 747 : 105 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4614 - 3229 - 6 _ 7 5 . Kitayner M , Rozenberg H , Kessler N et al ( 2006 ) Structural basis of DNA recognition by p53 tetramers . Mol Cell 22 : 741 – 753 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 05 . 015 6 . Gaglia G , Guan Y , Shah JV , Lahav G ( 2013 ) Activation and control of p53 tetramerization in individual living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci 110 : 15497 – 15501 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1311126110 7 . Filtz TM , Vogel WK , Leid M ( 2014 ) Regula - tion of transcription factor activity by interconnected post - translational 236 Eugenia Cammarota and Davide Mazza modiﬁcations . Trends Pharmacol Sci 35 : 76 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tips . 2013 . 11 . 005 8 . Loffreda A , Jacchetti E , Antunes S et al ( 2017 ) Live - cell p53 single - molecule binding is modu - lated by C - terminal acetylation and correlates with transcriptional activity . Nat Commun 8 : 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 00398 - 7 9 . Liu Z , Tjian R ( 2018 ) Visualizing transcription factor dynamics in living cells . J Cell Biol 217 : 1181 – 1191 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201710038 10 . Mueller F , Karpova TS , Mazza D , McNally JG ( 2012 ) Monitoring dynamic binding of chro - matin proteins in vivo by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching . Methods Mol Biol 833 : 153 – 176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 61779 - 477 - 3 _ 11 11 . Digman MA , Brown CM , Horwitz AR et al ( 2008 ) Paxillin dynamics measured during adhesion assembly and disassembly by correla - tion spectroscopy . Biophys J 94 : 2819 – 2831 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 104984 12 . Mazza D , Stasevich TJ , Karpova TS , McNally JG ( 2012 ) Monitoring dynamic binding of chromatin proteins in vivo by ﬂuorescence cor - relation spectroscopy . Methods Mol Biol 833 : 177 – 200 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 61779 - 477 - 3 _ 12 13 . Mazza D , Ganguly S , McNally JG ( 2013 ) Mon - itoring dynamic binding of chromatin proteins in vivo by single - molecule tracking . Methods Mol Biol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 526 - 2 _ 9 14 . Digman MA , Dalal R , Horwitz AF , Gratton E ( 2008 ) Mapping the number of molecules and brightness in the laser scanning microscope . Biophys J 94 : 2320 – 2332 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 114645 15 . Presman DM , Ganguly S , Schiltz RL et al ( 2016 ) DNA binding triggers tetramerization of the glucocorticoid receptor in live cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci 113 : 8236 – 8241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1606774113 16 . Day RN ( 2014 ) Measuring protein interactions using Fo¨rster resonance energy transfer and ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Methods 66 : 200 – 207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2013 . 06 . 017 17 . Bader AN , Hofman EG , Voortman J et al ( 2009 ) Homo - FRET imaging enables quanti - ﬁcation of protein cluster sizes with subcellular resolution . Biophys J 97 : 2613 – 2622 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2009 . 07 . 059 18 . Liu Z , Xing D , Su QP et al ( 2014 ) Super - resolution imaging and tracking of protein – protein interactions in sub - diffraction cellular space . Nat Commun 5 : 4443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms5443 19 . Liesche C , Grußmayer KS , Ludwig M et al ( 2015 ) Automated analysis of single - molecule photobleaching data by statistical modeling of spot populations . Biophys J 109 : 2352 – 2362 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 10 . 035 20 . Chen B , Gilbert LA , Cimini BA et al ( 2013 ) Dynamic imaging of genomic loci in living human cells by an optimized CRISPR / Cas sys - tem . Cell 155 : 1479 – 1491 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 12 . 001 21 . Zacharias DA , Violin JD , Newton AC , Tsien RY ( 2002 ) Partitioning of lipid - modiﬁed monomeric GFPs into membrane microdo - mains of live cells . Science 296 : 913 – 916 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1068539 22 . Los GV , Encell LP , McDougall MG et al ( 2008 ) HaloTag : a novel protein labeling tech - nology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem Biol 3 : 373 – 382 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / cb800025k 23 . Grimm JB , English BP , Chen J et al ( 2015 ) A general method to improve ﬂuorophores for live - cell and single - molecule microscopy . Nat Methods 12 : 244 – 250 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3256 24 . Dalal RB , Digman MA , Horwitz AF et al ( 2008 ) Determination of particle number and brightness using a laser scanning confocal microscope operating in the analog mode . Microsc Res Tech 71 : 69 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jemt . 20526 25 . Unruh JR , Gratton E ( 2008 ) Analysis of molecular concentration and brightness from ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation data with an electron multiplied CCD camera . Biophys J 95 : 5385 – 5398 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 108 . 130310 26 . Nolan R , Iliopoulou M , Alvarez L , Padilla - Parra S ( 2018 ) Detecting protein aggregation and interaction in live cells : a guide to number and brightness . Methods 140 – 141 : 172 – 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2017 . 12 . 001 27 . Hellriegel C , Caiolfa VR , Corti V et al ( 2011 ) Number and brightness image analysis reveals ATF - induced dimerization kinetics of uPAR in the cell membrane . FASEB J 25 : 2883 – 2897 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1096 / fj . 11 - 181537 28 . Nolan R , Alvarez LAJ , Elegheert J et al ( 2017 ) nandb—number and brightness in R with a novel automatic detrending algorithm . Bioin - formatics 33 : 3508 – 3510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btx434 TF Oligomerization in Live Cells by N & B Analysis 237 Chapter 16 Visualizing Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes Using Single - Molecule Live - Cell Imaging James Z . J . Kwan , Thomas F . Nguyen , and Sheila S . Teves Abstract For over two decades , scientists have observed that most transcription factors ( TFs ) become excluded from mitotic chromosomes of mammalian cells undergoing cell division . The few TFs that were observed to remain bound to chromosomes have been termed mitotic bookmarkers and were predicted to play important roles in reestablishing transcription after mitosis . Using live - cell imaging of endogenous TFs in mouse embryonic stem cells , we discovered that the observed exclusion from mitotic chromosomes is largely a result of formaldehyde cross - linking and that in fact , most TFs bind to mitotic chromosomes throughout mitosis . Here , we describe the single - molecule live - cell imaging and analytical tools we used to characterize and quantify TF diffusion and binding as mouse embryonic stem cells proceed through mitosis . Key words Transcription factors , Mouse embryonic stem cells , Mitotic chromosomes , Single - mole - cule live - cell imaging , Dynamics , Residence time , Diffusion 1 Introduction Maintenance of transcription programs is important for cell iden - tity , but this process is challenged during mitosis . As cells divide , the transcriptional machinery is largely inactivated [ 1 – 3 ] and chro - matin becomes highly condensed [ 4 ] . Mammalian cells also disas - semble the nuclear membrane during mitosis , leading to the dispersal of nuclear factors [ 5 – 8 ] . After mitosis , how do daughter cells restart their transcriptional program faithfully ? A proposed mechanism has been termed mitotic bookmarking [ 9 ] , stemming from the observation that transcription factor ( TF ) binding sites in promoters and enhancers remain accessible during mitosis [ 7 ] . However , decades of research have shown that most TFs become evicted from chromosomes during mitosis , leading to the mystery of how these “bookmarked” sites are maintained . Using single - molecule live - cell imaging , we and others recently showed that , contrary to previous literature , many TFs in mouse embryonic Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 16 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 239 stem cells ( mESCs ) remain associated with mitotic chromosomes in live conditions and that the exclusion of these TFs was largely due to formaldehyde cross - linking ( Fig . 1 ) [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] . Here , we describe the single - molecule imaging tools and analyses that were crucial in making this discovery and in further understanding TF behavior in mESCs at different stages of the cell cycle . A key requirement for single - molecule imaging of TFs at dif - ferent cell cycle stages is generating mESCs containing two tagged proteins . First , we stably integrated an H2B - GFP construct into mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) , which allowed for efﬁcient identiﬁcation of mitotic cells ( Fig . 1 ) . Second , in the H2B - GFP expressing mESCs , we generated an endogenous knockin of the HaloTag [ 13 ] into our TF of interest using established CRISPR / Cas9 technology [ 14 ] . HaloTag is a modiﬁed bacterial protein capable of covalently binding to a synthetic ﬂuorophore for better and longer single - molecule live - cell imaging [ 13 , 15 ] . Endogenous tagging also ensures that the tagged protein is both functional and present in physiological levels to avoid overexpression biases [ 10 , 16 ] . However , if endogenous - tagging is not feasible , low overexpression of the HaloTag - TF fusion is also possible , providing that control experiments are performed to validate that the over - expressed factor functions similarly as the endogenous protein . Fig . 1 Cellular ﬁxation leads to exclusion of TFs from mitotic chromosomes . Top panel shows cells with the overexpressed Halo - Sox2 transcription factor and the bottom panel shows endogenously tagged Halo - Sox2 both labeled with JF549 dye . Cells were ﬁxed using 4 % paraformaldehyde followed by standard immunoﬂuorescence using α - Sox2 . Halo - Sox2 signal was visualized using both the JF - 549 dye ( middle panel ) and the anti - Sox2 signal ( right panel ) , with mitotic chromosomes marked with H2B - GFP shown on the left . Image recreated from [ 10 ] 240 James Z . J . Kwan et al . Once the mESCs of interest are generated , cells can be prepared for different single - molecule imaging modalities . For controls , a cell line stably expressing the HaloTag is needed to approximate full diffusion , and a cell line stably expressing a HaloTag fused to the histone H2B ( H2B - Halo ) is needed to approximate long - lived chromatin binding . The second requirement for single - molecule imaging of TFs is a specialized total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) micro - scope , with capabilities for live - cell imaging . For our purposes of visualizing TF – chromatin interactions , we used this TIRF micro - scope in two ways , fast - and slow - tracking modes . The fast - tracking mode allows us to answer questions such as : ( 1 ) what percent of TF molecules are bound on mitotic chromosomes versus freely diffus - ing ? And ( 2 ) what are the diffusion coefﬁcients of the bound and diffusing populations ? To perform fast - tracking experiments , we labeled our mESCs with saturating concentrations of a photoacti - vatable Halo - ligand ( PA - JF646 ) so that the vast majority of Halo - TF is conjugated with the ﬂuorescent dye . We then used the Acousto - Optic Tunable Filters ( AOTF ) to deliver short ( 1 ms ) stroboscopic pulses of the 633 nm laser at maximal laser intensity to minimize motion blur , and acquired images every 7 ms for a total of 20 , 000 – 30 , 000 frames ( Fig . 2 ) . In between acquisition stages , a short burst of 405 nm laser ( 0 . 45 ms ) at low laser intensity was used to photoactivate molecules . The fast acquisition rates combined with low photoactivation means that , on average , less than 1 mole - cule is visible per frame , allowing for unambiguous tracking of the same molecule as it moves and binds DNA over time . After acqui - sition , we used SLIMfast [ 10 , 17 – 19 ] , an established computa - tional tool for localization and tracking of individual particles , to Fig . 2 Schematic of stroboscopic illumination and photoactivation during fast - tracking mode used to localize and identify molecules via SLIMfast and to determine their jump lengths via Spot - On . Using AOTF , short stroboscopic pulses of the 633 nm laser were delivered and images were acquired every 4 – 7 ms for 20 , 000 – 30 , 000 frames . In between the burst of 633 nm lasers , 405 nm laser was used at low intensity to photoactivate individual molecules . The molecules are then localized and tracked using SLIMfast and jump lengths were determined using Spot - On . Image recreated from [ 20 ] Imaging Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes 241 output trajectories of each particle over time . We then used a newly developed computational tool called Spot - on [ 20 ] to calculate the distance between locations across different frames , plot the distri - bution of measured distances after a speciﬁed number of frames , and ﬁt a dynamic displacement model that would provide estimates on the fraction of bound verses freely diffusing molecules and the associated diffusion coefﬁcients . For example , in our analysis of TF binding during mitosis , we quantiﬁed that about 30 % of the TF TBP binds chromatin during interphase , and that this bound pop - ulation decreases to about 15 % during mitosis ( Fig . 3 ) . We also performed single - molecule imaging in the slow - tracking mode , which allows us to focus on the bound population and answer questions such as : ( 1 ) how many TFs are binding nonspeciﬁcally ( transient events that are largely sequence - independent ) versus in a speciﬁc manner ( longer events that are mainly sequence - speciﬁc interactions ) ? And ( 2 ) for how long do TFs bind on mitotic chromosomes ? To perform slow - tracking experiments , we labeled our mESCs with low concentrations of standard ﬂuorescent Halo - ligand ( JF - 549 ) and acquired images every 500 ms for a total of 2400 – 3000 frames ( ~ 20 min ) . During this much slower acquisition rate , we maintain constant but low laser excitation power . The result of this imaging technique is that bound molecules remain as diffraction - limited spots whereas Fig . 3 Scatter plot representing fraction of bound TBP molecules in interphase compared to mitosis . A three state kinetic model was ﬁtted to the data which represents three distinct population : a fast - diffusing TBP population ( “fast” ) , a slower - diffusing population where TBP may be in a complex with TFIID ( “slow” ) , and a stably bound population where TBP is bound on to DNA . mESC cells expressing just the HaloTag ( Halo ) was used as a control . We estimate that 27 . 1 % of TBP molecules are bound in interphase and this decreases to 13 . 3 % in mitosis . Each point represents a single cell ( n ¼ 32 ) over four biological replicates and ∗∗∗∗ p - value < 0 . 0001 . Image recreated from [ 17 ] 242 James Z . J . Kwan et al . diffusing molecules blur out . As with the fast - tracking mode , we localized and tracked each diffraction - limited “bound” TF using SLIMfast . We then used custom MATLAB codes to perform resi - dence time analysis as previously described [ 10 , 17 , 21 ] . In this analysis , we calculate the number of frames , and hence the length of time , we can detect a “bound” TF in the same location . We then plot a survival curve of the percent of molecules that are detectable as a function of time ( Fig . 4 ) and ﬁt a two - component exponential decay model to extract the empirical off - rates of speciﬁc and non - speciﬁc binding . The empirical off rate is the sum of the photo - bleaching rate and the actual off - rate . To estimate the photobleaching rate , and therefore calculate the actual off - rate , we used the empirical off - rate of H2B - Halo because , as a histone protein , H2B displays very little unbinding [ 10 ] . We can then calculate the average residence time of the bound population , which is the inverse of the photobleaching - corrected off - rate . For theoretical details on residence time analysis of tracked particles , see [ 10 , 21 ] . For Matlab codes to implement SLIMfast and residence time analysis , see [ 10 ] . Below , we provide a detailed procedure for performing both fast - and slow - tracking modes of single - molecule live - cell imaging , and the corresponding analyses . These experi - mental tools provide an unprecedented view of the diffusion and DNA - binding dynamics of transcription factors in live cells . Fig . 4 Survival curve for endogenously tagged Halo - Sox2 in interphase ( gray ) versus mitosis ( red ) with representative images shown . A two - component exponential decay model representing speciﬁc vs . nonspeciﬁc binding was used to ﬁt the survival curve to obtain the relative residence time on the DNA ( inset ) . Quantiﬁcation of the residence time in mitosis as a percentage of interphase cells showed that on average , the dwell time of Sox2 is 54 % relative to interphase . Image recreated from [ 10 ] Imaging Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes 243 2 Materials 1 . mESCs stably expressing H2B - GFP , and Halo - TF fusion , either overexpressed or endogenously tagged ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . mESCs stably expressing H2B - GFP and low overexpression of HaloTag only construct . 3 . mESCs stably expressing H2B - Halo fusion construct . 4 . Knockout DMEM . 5 . DMEM , no phenol red . 6 . FBS . 7 . MEM nonessential amino acids . 8 . GlutaMAX (cid:2) 100 . 9 . 2 - Mercaptoethanol . 10 . ESGRO Leukemia Inhibitory Factor . 11 . Penicillin + Streptomycin . 12 . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) : 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 2 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl . 13 . 0 . 25 % trypsin . 14 . 0 . 1 % gelatin solution . 15 . Glass bottom 35 (cid:2) 14 mm microwell dishes . 16 . Halo - ligand JF646 ( Tocris , cat . no . 6147 ) , resuspended fol - lowing the manufacturer’s conditions . 17 . Photoactivatable Halo - ligand PA - JF646 ( Tocris , cat . no . 6150 ) , resuspended following the manufacturer’s conditions . 18 . mESC Growth medium : 15 % ( v / v ) FBS , 0 . 1 mM MEM non - essential amino acids , 2 mM GlutaMAX , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , 1000 U / mL ESGRO LIF , 100 U / mL penicillin , and 100 μ g / mL streptomycin . 19 . mESC Labeling medium : Growth media + JF646 / PA - JF646 in speciﬁed concentrations ( see Note 2 ) . 20 . mESC Imaging medium : DMEM , no phenol red , 15 % ( v / v ) FBS , 0 . 1 mM MEM nonessential amino acids , 2 mM Gluta - MAX , 0 . 1 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , 1000 U / mL ESGRO LIF , 100 U / mL penicillin , and 100 μ g / mL streptomycin . 21 . TIRF microscope : should include a temperature - and CO 2 - controlled chamber , a stage that corrects for drift and main - tains accurate focus ( e . g . , Perfect Focus System from Nikon ) , powerful laser lines for 405 , 488 , 561 , and 639 nm wave - lengths ( e . g . , Genesis MX series 1 W ) , software - controlled Acousto - Optic Tunable Filter ( AOTF ) for precisely timed 244 James Z . J . Kwan et al . delivery of a speciﬁed amount of laser power to samples , and fast cameras designed for low light imaging ( e . g . , EMCCD ) . For detailed specs of our TIRF microscope , see [ 10 , 17 ] . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Culturing mESCs 1 . Prepare mESC Growth medium ( see Note 3 ) . 2 . Coat a 6 - well plate with 2 mL of 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) gelatin per well . Allow gelatin to settle for at least 30 min at room temperature . 3 . If starting from frozen cells , thaw mESCs with Halo - Tag fusion protein and control mESCs in a 37 (cid:3) C water bath . Transfer the contents of the vial into a 15 mL conical tube . Add 5 mL of warm fresh medium to dilute freezing medium conditions . If cells are growing in culture , proceed with passaging conditions described below . 4 . Spin at 1000 g for 4 min to pellet the cells . 5 . Aspirate the supernatant . Resuspend cells in 1 mL of fresh Growth medium . 6 . Aspirate the gelatin from the 6 - well plate . Plate the resus - pended cells onto the gelatinized plate . Add another 1 mL of Growth medium to the well , for a total volume of 2 mL medium . 7 . Grow cells for 1 – 2 days , changing Growth medium daily , until they are about 80 % conﬂuent . 3 . 2 Preparing mESCs for Single - Molecule Live - Cell Imaging 1 . Coat glass bottom 35 (cid:2) 14 mm dish with 2 mL of 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) gelatin . Allow gelatin to settle for 30 min at room temperature . 2 . From cultured mESCs , aspirate medium from the 6 - well plate . Add 2 mL of 1 (cid:2) PBS to wash cells followed by aspiration to completely remove medium . 3 . Add 1 mL of 0 . 25 % trypsin to each well to dissociate the cells . Swirl the contents to ensure the well surface is completely covered with the trypsin solution . Incubate at 37 (cid:3) C for 2 min . Observe under a microscope to ensure cells are detached from the bottom of the well . 4 . Add 2 mL of Growth medium to the detached cells to inacti - vate the trypsin . Pipette media over the well surface several times to ensure maximum recovery of cells . 5 . Transfer the cell suspension into a 15 mL conical tube . 6 . Spin at 1000 g for 4 min to pellet the cells . 7 . Aspirate the supernatant . Resuspend cells in 1 mL of Growth medium . Imaging Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes 245 8 . Aspirate the gelatin from the glass bottom 35 (cid:2) 14 mm dish . Plate 200 μ L of the resuspended cells onto the gelatinized plate . Add another 1 . 8 mL of Growth medium to the well . 9 . Grow cells overnight until they are about 50 % conﬂuent for single - molecule imaging ( same for fast - or slow - tracking mode ) . 3 . 3 Labeling mESCs for Imaging 1 . Prepare mouse ES cell Imaging medium . 2 . Prepare Labeling medium . For fast - tracking experiments , use photoactivatable PA - JF646 dye ( ﬁnal concentration of 25 nM— see Note 3 ) . For slow - tracking experiments , use stan - dard JF646 dye ( ﬁnal concentration 0 . 1 nM— see Note 4 ) . 3 . Aspirate Growth medium from the glass bottom 35 (cid:2) 14 mm dish . Add 2 mL of Labeling medium to conjugate the dye to the HaloTag . Incubate for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C . 4 . Aspirate Labeling medium . To wash cells and remove unbound ligand , add 2 mL of fresh Growth medium and incubate for 5 min at 37 (cid:3) C , followed by aspiration . Repeat for a total of three washes . On the ﬁnal wash , replace media with 1 mL of Imaging medium . 3 . 4 Single - Molecule Imaging Conditions 1 . Prepare the TIRF microscope for live - cell imaging by initializ - ing the imaging chamber and allowing for the temperature and CO 2 levels to normalize . 2 . Using epiﬂuorescence , visualize the H2B - GFP in mESCs and choose cells at the speciﬁc stages of mitosis based on chromo - some morphology . 3 . Use the crop function to isolate a region of interest ( ROI ) of about 90 (cid:2) 90 pixels ( see Note 5 ) . 4 . Turn off epiﬂuorescence and turn on the 633 nm laser at 10 % AOTF and use 100 ms exposure time . These conditions are sufﬁcient to visualize individual molecules , adjust the TIRF angle , and maximize focus . Adjusting and optimizing the TIRF angle for each cell is crucial for obtaining high - quality single - molecule images ( see Note 6 ) . 3 . 5 Fast - Tracking Acquisition and Imaging Analysis 1 . Once the TIRF angle is optimized for the ROI , program the TIRF microscope acquisition software to obtain stroboscopic excitation with the 633 nm laser ( 100 % AOTF ) at 1 ms pulses and set the exposure time to 7 ms , with 405 nm pulsing in between frames , and set the maximum number of frames to 20 , 000 – 30 , 000 ( Fig . 2 ) . The camera settings to obtain 7 ms exposure times may be manufacturer - speciﬁc . See camera man - ual for speciﬁc settings ( see Note 7 ) . 246 James Z . J . Kwan et al . 2 . After programing acquisition settings , use 100 % AOTF 633 nm laser to photobleach all spontaneously activated mole - cules . This photobleaching step will ensure that all molecules are in the dark state at the beginning of acquisition . Start acquisition . Each cell will take roughly 3 – 5 min each . 3 . For each condition ( e . g . , Mitotic vs . interphase cells ) , collect 8 – 10 cells as technical replicates for imaging . For each cell , identify cells using H2B - GFP , optimize TIRF angle and photo - bleach all activated molecules as described above . 4 . Perform the same steps for mESCs stably expressing HaloTag - only constructs to estimate fully diffusing molecules . 5 . For each imaged cell , localize and track single molecules using SLIMfast with the following parameter settings : localization error : 10 – 6 . 25 ; deﬂation loops : 0 ; Blinking ( frames ) : 1 ; maxi - mum number of competitors : 3 ; maximal expected diffusion constant ( μ m 2 / s ) : 20 ( see Note 8 ) . 6 . Determine the fraction of HaloTag - fused proteins bound using Spot - On as described in [ 20 ] with the following ﬁt parameters : TimeGap : 7 . 477 ; Gaps Allowed : 1 ; Jumps to consider : 4 ; Model ﬁt type : CDF ; Localization error : 0 . 045 . For more detailed explanation of Spot - On analysis , see [ 20 ] . 7 . For biological replicates , repeat the entire process , starting with freshly prepared cells , at least 3 (cid:2) total , acquiring 24 – 30 cells per condition . Fraction of bound molecules can be reported on a single cell basis , or as an average of biological replicates . 3 . 6 Slow - Tracking Acquisition and Imaging Analysis 1 . Once TIRF angle is optimized for the ROI , program the TIRF microscope acquisition software to acquire at 500 ms exposure time with the 633 nm laser at 10 % AOTF . The laser setting will need some optimization prior to acquiring for full experiment . To optimize , acquire 1000 frames at different laser power and use SLIMfast to localize and track molecules . Ideal laser power is the lowest amount that will result in 10 – 20 individual spots that remain distinct throughout acquisition time while also minimizing photobleaching . 2 . Depending on the expression levels of the Halo - TF protein and the labeling conditions with the dye - conjugated ligand , it may be necessary to photobleach cells to visualize individual mole - cules . This can be performed with 100 % AOTF 633 nm laser power . 3 . Once optimization of laser power as described above is com - plete , acquire 2400 – 3000 frames per cell ( 25 – 30 min per cell ) , and 8 – 10 cells per condition . Identify mitotic cells using H2B - GFP , optimize TIRF angle and photobleach all activated molecules as described above . Imaging Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes 247 4 . Perform the same steps for mESCs stably expressing H2B - Halo constructs to estimate long - lived chromatin bind - ing events , which will be used as a measure of photobleaching rate . 5 . For each imaged cell , localize and track single molecules using SLIMfast with the following parameter settings : localization error : 10 (cid:4) 6 ; deﬂation loops : 1 ; Blinking ( frames ) : 1 ; maximum number of competitors : 3 ; maximal expected diffusion con - stant ( μ m 2 / s ) : 0 . 1 ( see Note 9 ) . 6 . From the output of SLIMfast , plot the survival curve ( Fig . 4 ) , which is the percent of molecules that are detectable as a function of time . Use model ﬁtting as described previously to extract empirical off - rates . 7 . Perform slow - tracking on control H2B - Halo expressing mESCs , and empirical off - rate to be used as an estimate for photobleaching rate . 8 . Subtract the empirical off - rate of the TF of interest from the estimated photobleaching rate to achieve the actual off - rate . Calculate residence time as the inverse of the actual off - rate . 9 . For biological replicates , repeat the entire process , starting with freshly prepared cells , at least 3 (cid:2) total , acquiring 24 – 30 cells per condition . Residence time can be reported on a single cell basis , or as an average of biological replicates . 4 Notes 1 . We recommend performing endogenous knockin of the Halo - Tag to a TF of interest . Whether overexpressed factors behave similarly as the endogenous proteins or not is a major concern for analyzing single - molecule imaging data . For control cell lines ( HaloTag only , and H2B - Halo expressing cells ) stable integration of constructs is also recommended . Transient trans - fections result in highly variable transfection efﬁciency and expression levels . 2 . If using other mammalian cells , follow speciﬁc growing condi - tions for that cell type . 3 . The ﬁnal concentration of PA - JF646 in the labeling medium for fast - tracking should be saturating and will depend on the expression levels of the Halo - TF fusion protein . The suggested 25 nM ﬁnal concentration will likely work for the majority of proteins , but for very highly expressed proteins , this concen - tration should be adjusted . 4 . The ﬁnal concentration of JF646 in the labeling media for slow - tracking is very sensitive to the expression levels of the 248 James Z . J . Kwan et al . Halo - TF fusion protein and should be optimized . Too high a concentration will result in an inability to detect single mole - cules even after photobleaching . 5 . For fast - tracking mode , the size of the ROI will determine the maximum frame rate possible for acquisition . Consult the manufacturer’s manual for optimal ROI size . For slow - tracking mode , the ROI size matters less . Keep in mind also that ROI size will determine ﬁnal size of data ﬁles . 6 . TIRF microscopy works best with cells growing as monolayer on the glass coverslip . However , mESCs grow in clumps . To image cells farther away from the coverslip , the TIRF angle needs to be adjusted to achieve a highly inclined laminated optical ( HiLo ) sheet . 7 . For EMCCD cameras , the mechanism for ﬁle transfer from the camera to the computer can make a difference on how fast the acquisition settings can be programmed . 8 . The above settings for SLIMfast may need to be optimized for the TIRF microscope . For instance , localization errors can be empirically measured for the speciﬁc microscope in use . Deﬂa - tion loop ( described in [ 18 , 19 ] ) can be increased to detect more particles if signal - to - noise ratio of images is an issue . Blinking parameter can also be changed to allow for “skipped” frames if signal - to - noise ratio is nonideal . The maximal expected diffusion constant is set high to allow for longer distance trajectories between frames of diffusing molecules . 9 . Many of the parameters of SLIMfast described for fast - tracking can also be used for slow - tracking , with the exception of the parameter called maximal expected diffusion constant . This parameter is set low in order to limit tracking to only bound molecules . References 1 . Rhind N , Russell P ( 2012 ) Signaling pathways that regulate cell division . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4 : a005942 – a005942 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005942 2 . Prescott DM , Bender MA ( 1962 ) Synthesis of RNA and protein during mitosis in mammalian tissue culture cells . Exp Cell Res 26 : 260 – 268 3 . Taylor JH ( 1960 ) Nucleic acid synthesis in relation to the cell division cycle . Ann N Y Acad Sci 90 : 409 – 421 4 . Koshland D , Strunnikov A ( 1995 ) Mitotic chromosome condensation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 12 : 305 – 333 5 . Gottesfeld J , Forbes DJ ( 1997 ) Mitotic repres - sion of the transcriptional machinery . Trends Biochem Sci 22 : 197 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0968 - 0004 ( 97 ) 01045 - 1 6 . John S , Workman JL ( 1998 ) Bookmarking genes for activation in condensed mitotic chro - mosomes . BioEssays : news and reviews in molecular , cellular and developmental biology 20 : 275 – 279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1521 - 1878 ( 199804 ) 20 : 4 < 275 : : AID - BIES1 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - P 7 . Martı´nez - Balba´s MA , Dey A , Rabindran SK et al ( 1995 ) Displacement of sequence - speciﬁc transcription factors from mitotic chromatin . Cell 83 : 29 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 95 ) 90231 - 7 8 . Rizkallah R , Hurt MM ( 2009 ) Regulation of the transcription factor YY1 in mitosis through Imaging Transcription Factor Binding on Mitotic Chromosomes 249 phosphorylation of its DNA - binding domain . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 4766 – 4776 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 04 - 0264 9 . Lodhi N , Ji Y , Tulin A ( 2016 ) Mitotic book - marking : maintaining post - mitotic reprogram - ming of transcription reactivation . Current molecular biology reports 2 : 10 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40610 - 016 - 0029 - 3 10 . Jonathan Lerner , Alessia Bagattin , Francisco Verdeguer , Munevver P . Makinistoglu , Serge Garbay , Tristan Felix , Laurence Heidet , Marco Pontoglio , ( 2016 ) Human mutations affect the epigenetic / bookmarking function of HNF1B . Nucleic Acids Research 44 ( 17 ) : 8097 - 8111 11 . Coralie Pallier , Paola Scafﬁdi , Ste´phanie Chopineau - Proust , Alessandra Agresti , Patrice Nordmann , Marco E . Bianchi , Vincent Mare - chal , ( 2003 ) Association of Chromatin Pro - teins High Mobility Group Box ( HMGB ) 1 and HMGB2 with Mitotic Chromosomes . Molecular Biology of the Cell 14 ( 8 ) : 3414 - 3426 12 . Teves SS , An L , Hansen AS et al ( 2016 ) A dynamic mode of mitotic bookmarking by transcription factors . Elife 5 : 421 – 423 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 22280 13 . Los GV , Wood K ( 2007 ) The HaloTag : a novel technology for cell imaging and protein analy - sis . Methods Mol Biol ( Clifton , NJ ) 356 : 195 – 208 14 . Ran FA , Hsu PD , Wright J et al ( 2013 ) Genome engineering using the CRISPR - Cas9 system . Nat Protoc 8 : 2281 – 2308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2013 . 143 15 . Grimm JB , Brown TA , English BP et al ( 2017 ) Synthesis of Janelia Fluor HaloTag and SNAP - Tag ligands and their use in cellular imaging experiments . Methods Mol Biol ( Clifton , NJ ) 1663 : 179 – 188 16 . Um M , Yamauchi J , Kato S , Manley JL ( 2001 ) Heterozygous disruption of the TATA - binding protein gene in DT40 cells causes reduced cdc25B phosphatase expression and delayed mitosis . Mol Cell Biol 21 : 2435 – 2448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 21 . 7 . 2435 - 2448 . 2001 17 . Teves SS , An L , Bhargava - Shah A , et al ( 2018 ) A stable mode of bookmarking by TBP recruits RNA polymerase II to mitotic chromosomes . eLife . https : / / elifesciences . org / articles / 35621 . Accessed 30 Aug 2018 18 . Serge ´ A , Bertaux N , Rigneault H , Marguet D ( 2008 ) Dynamic multiple - target tracing to probe spatiotemporal cartography of cell mem - branes . Nat Methods 5 : 687 – 694 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1233 19 . Normanno D , Boudare ` ne L , Dugast - Darzacq C et al ( 2015 ) Probing the target search of DNA - binding proteins in mammalian cells using TetR as model searcher . Nat Commun 6 : 7357 – 7357 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms8357 20 . Hansen AS , Woringer M , Grimm JB et al ( 2018 ) Robust model - based analysis of single - particle tracking experiments with Spot - On . eLife 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / elife . 33125 21 . Chen J , Zhang Z , Li L et al ( 2014 ) Single - molecule dynamics of enhanceosome assembly in embryonic stem cells . Cell 156 : 1274 – 1285 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 01 . 062 250 James Z . J . Kwan et al . Chapter 17 Light - Induced Transcription Activation for Time - Lapse Microscopy Experiments in Living Cells Jorge Trojanowski , Anne Rademacher , Fabian Erdel , and Karsten Rippe Abstract Gene expression can be monitored in living cells via the binding of ﬂuorescently tagged proteins to RNA repeats engineered into a reporter transcript . This approach makes it possible to trace temporal changes of RNA production in real time in living cells to dissect transcription regulation . For a mechanistic analysis of the underlying activation process , it is essential to induce gene expression with high accuracy . Here , we describe how this can be accomplished with an optogenetic approach termed blue light - induced chromatin recruitment ( BLInCR ) . It employs the recruitment of an activator protein to a target promoter via the interaction between the PHR and CIBN plant protein domains . This process occurs within seconds after setting the light trigger and is reversible . Protocols for continuous activation as well as pulsed activation and reactivation with imaging either by laser scanning confocal microscopy or automated wideﬁeld microscopy are provided . For the semiautomated quantiﬁcation of the resulting image series , an approach has been implemented in a set of scripts in the R programming language . Thus , the complete workﬂow of the BLInCR method is described for mechanistic studies of the transcription activation process as well as the persistence and memory of the activated state . Key words Optogenetics , Transcription dynamics , Automated microscopy , Image quantiﬁcation 1 Introduction Following reporter RNAs in living cells over time by ﬂuorescence light microscopy imaging has provided valuable information on gene regulation and RNA processing [ 1 – 5 ] . In these experiments RNA is visualized by ﬂuorescently tagged RNA binding proteins that recognize speciﬁc secondary structures engineered into the transcript like MS2 or PP7 motifs [ 6 , 7 ] . Transcription is frequently induced via the doxycycline ( dox ) - dependent binding of activator protein fusions with bacterial tetracycline repressor ( TetR ) to its high - afﬁnity operator ( tet O ) sites integrated at the promoter Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 17 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 Electronic supplementary material : The online version of this chapter ( https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 _ 17 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . 251 [ 8 , 9 ] . However , the start point of this reaction depends on the permeation times of dox and the association kinetics of TetR . This process occurs over a time interval of at least several minutes , which confounds the analysis of early transcription kinetics . To circum - vent this problem light - induced uncaging of an inducer molecule has been reported [ 4 ] . Yet it does not overcome the limitation that this type of chemical induction cannot be reversed quickly . While the inducer can be removed by repeated washing steps , the result - ing dissociation times are well above the minute timescale , which makes it difﬁcult to analyze the effect of a temporally limited activation stimulus . The above - described issues can be addressed by taking advantage of optogenetic approaches as for example the light - induced heterodimerization of the plant PHR and CIBN protein domains [ 10 ] . We recently developed a PHR - CIBN based optogenetic system termed blue light - induced chromatin recruit - ment ( BLInCR ) that combines rapid and reversible light - dependent recruitment of effector proteins with a real - time readout for transcription [ 11 ] ( Fig . 1a ) . The human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 used in these experiments has been developed previ - ously in the Spector lab [ 9 ] . It consists of a tandem array of ~ 200 copies of a reporter gene . This reporter has lac O and tet O repeats in proximity to a minimal CMV promoter . Activator binding to the tet O sites induces transcription of a reporter RNA , which contains binding sequences for the MS2 coat protein ( MCP ) and encodes for peroxisome - targeted cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) ( Fig . 1b ) . In this model system , transcription factor binding to the tet O sites via PHR - CIBN interactions can be controlled with high temporal precision in living cells , while RNA production is traced via tagging the MS2 reporter RNA with ﬂuorescently labeled MCP [ 11 ] . Due to the presence of multiple integration sites , transcription factor binding and dissociation as well as RNA production can be visua - lized by ﬂuorescence microscopy in single cells using conventional confocal or wideﬁeld systems ( Fig . 1c , d ) . Related approaches have been introduced by other groups and include targeting of endoge - nous genes by light - induced TALEs [ 12 ] , bacterial light - induced transcription factors [ 13 , 14 ] and targeting light - recruited activa - tors to dCas9 [ 15 ] . Here , we provide protocols for conducting experiments with the BLInCR system and for a semiautomated quantiﬁcation of the resultant image series with a set of scripts written in the R program - ming language [ 16 ] . In one type of experiments continuous blue light illumination and persistent activation is employed . The other approach described here uses pulsed activation and reactivation after an intermittent period without a light trigger during which the activator dissociates . Furthermore , image acquisition protocols for either wideﬁeld or confocal microscopy are presented . The higher spatial resolution of the confocal imaging mode allows to resolve heterogeneities inside the transcription locus ( Fig . 1c ) . In 252 Jorge Trojanowski et al . lac O tet O rTetR CIBN CFP - SKL MS2 loops Promoter tdMCP tdMCP PHR VP16 LacI b x 256 x 96 x 24 x ~ 200 LacI PHR - VP16 MCP tet O rTetR CIBN PHR VP16 a tet O rTetR CIBN PHR VP16 tet O rTetR CIBN PHR VP16 1 / 2 t = 15 s t 1 / 2 = 5 min d 0 min 3 . 5 min 14 min PHR - GFP - VP16 tdMCP - tdTomato A c t i v a t o r RN A RN A Time ( min ) c e 0 50 5 µm LacI PHR - VP16 MCP Fig . 1 Application of BLInCR for light - induced transcription activation . ( a ) Upon blue light illumination the PHR domain switches its conformation in the PHR - GFP - VP16 construct and binds to CIBN fused to rTetR ( CIBN - rTetR ) . In the presence of dox , rTetR is bound to DNA via the tet O sequence . This leads to the fast recruitment of the VP16 transcription activator with t 1 / 2 ¼ 15 s [ 11 ] . If the blue light is switched off , dissociation occurs ( t 1 / 2 ¼ 5 min ) . ( b ) Transfecting the U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 cell line with CIBN - rTetR and PHR - GFP - VP16 allows direct Light - Induced Transcription Activation 253 addition , illumination and activation are restricted to the imaged area . For imaging larger cell numbers ( e . g . , for resolving the cell - to - cell heterogeneity of transcription activation kinetics ) , the applica - tion of wideﬁeld microscopy can be advantageous ( Fig . 1d ) . Quan - tiﬁcation of the time - lapse image series obtained in these experiments with the set of R - scripts provided yields RNA produc - tion kinetics ( Fig . 1e ) , from which information on the underlying mechanism is obtained [ 11 ] . The protocols can be easily applied to study the effects of transcriptional inhibitors or to evaluate via repeated activation cycles if the activated promoter state is “mem - orized” and how long it persists in the absence of the activator . Furthermore , we envision that our experimental approach will prove to be useful for a variety of other applications that require temporal precision and / or reversibility , for example , inducing DNA damage response by increasing the local concentration of damage factors [ 17 ] or perturbing the epigenetic landscape by recruiting modiﬁers [ 18 ] . 2 Materials 2 . 1 Cell Culture 1 . Reporter cell line , for example U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 [ 9 ] ( see Note 1 ) . 2 . Cell culture slide suited for ﬂuorescence microscopy ( e . g . , 8 - well chambered cover glass No . 1 borosilicate , Nunc Labtek ) . 3 . Complete medium : DMEM medium ( 1 g / L glucose ) without phenol - red supplemented with 10 % tetracycline - free fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , penicillin / streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine . 4 . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . 5 . 0 . 05 % trypsin – 0 . 02 % EDTA in PBS . 6 . Doxycycline , 1 mg / mL in water . (cid:1) Fig . 1 ( continued ) measurements of light - induced promoter activity . The cell line contains approximately 200 copies of a stably integrated reporter construct with a minimal CMV promoter under the control of 256 lac O and 96 tet O repeats [ 9 ] . The nascent RNA contains MS2 - stem loops that are bound by ﬂuorescently tagged MCP ( tdMCP - tdTomato ) and additionally encodes CFP - SKL as a ﬂuores - cent protein reporter localized to peroxisomes . The locus can additionally be labeled by ﬂuorescently tagged LacI . ( c ) Confocal microscopy allows to assess the structure of the transcription site in addition to its intensity . The array was labeled by CFP - LacI . The PHR - YFP - VP16 fusion protein was recruited to CIBN - TetR upon blue light illumination and nascent RNA was labeled via binding of MCP - mKate2 . ( d ) Wideﬁeld image series of activator recruitment and onset of transcription . ( e ) Kinetics of RNA production at the reporter array obtained from quantiﬁcation of a time - lapse image series 254 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 7 . Opti - MEM medium . 8 . Transfection reagent ( e . g . , Xtreme Gene 9 , Roche ) . 9 . Colored , nontransparent polystyrene foam box ( see Note 2 ) . 2 . 2 Plasmids ( See Note 3 ) Plasmid selection with respect to the ﬂuorescent protein ( FP ) that is used to visualize the respective constructs is critical for the experi - ment and depends on the type of activation pattern that is desired . Examples of ﬂuorophore combinations for continuous activation and pulsed activation and reactivation are summarized in Table 1 . 1 . A ﬂuorescently tagged transcription activator fused to PHR ( pPHR - GFP - NLS - VP16 , pPHR - YFP - NLS - VP16 ( Addgene # 103821 ) or for reversibility studies pPHR - iRFP713 - NLS - VP16 ( Addgene # 103823 ) , which has a far - red label and can be monitored without triggering recruitment ) . 2 . A ﬂuorescently tagged negative control effector ( pPHR - GFP - NLS or pPHR - YFP - NLS , Addgene # 103817 ) . 3 . A tet O - directed localizer ( pCIBN - rTetR : reverse TetR , which binds in the presence of dox ; or pCIBN - TetR ( Addgene # 103813 ) : TetR , which binds in the absence of dox , see Note 4 ) . 4 . Fluorescently tagged MS2 RNA reader ( pCMV Δ TATA - tdMCP - tdTomato , see Note 5 or mKate2 - MS2 , Addgene # 103833 ) . Table 1 Exemplary fluorophore combinations for continuous and pulsed activation patterns Experiment Protein domain ( s ) Coupled FP Excitation ( nm ) Emission ( nm ) Continuous activation Activator ( PHR - VP16 ) GFP / YFP 488 500 – 550 Localizer ( CIBN - rTetR , ﬂuorescent label optional ) tagBFP / CFP a 405 415 – 475 RNA reader ( MCP ) mKate2 or tdTomato 561 / 594 b 605 – 750 Array marker ( LacI , optional ) tagBFP / CFP a 405 415 – 475 Pulsed activation with dissociation of activator Activator ( PHR - VP16 ) iRFP713 633 645 – 780 Localizer ( CIBN - rTetR ) c GFP / YFP 488 500 – 550 RNA reader ( MCP ) tdTomato 561 570 – 615 Array marker ( LacI , optional ) c GFP / YFP 488 500 – 550 The above ﬂuorophore combinations worked well in terms of spectral separation of the different FPs and recruitment of light - dependent constructs while imaging . Excitation with 405 nm or 488 nm induces the PHR - CIBN interaction a Fluorescent labeling the TetR localizer or LacI binding to the lac O sites in the U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 cell line as an additional array marker is optional . One of the two proteins can be tagged with a blue ﬂuorophore as indicated in the table . However , the choice of color will depend on the speciﬁc application . A red color needs to be chosen if it is necessary to decouple visualization of bound TetR or LacI from the light - induced PHR - CIBN interaction b Excitation worked better at 561 nm , but less bleaching was observed at 594 nm c To reliably localize the reporter array either a ﬂuorescently labeled CIBN - rTetR or LacI construct can be used Light - Induced Transcription Activation 255 5 . Optional : an additional reporter array marker ( e . g . , tagBFP - LacI , Addgene # 103839 ) . 2 . 3 Microscope For recording high resolution images and time series of single cells , a laser scanning confocal ﬂuorescence microscope with appropriate image acquisition software is recommended . We have used a Leica SP5 with the Leica application suite advanced ﬂuorescence ( LAS AF ) software that was equipped with the following parts : 1 . A 63 (cid:2) oil objective ( e . g . , HCX PL APO lambda blue 63 (cid:2) / 1 . 40 oil UV objective ) . 2 . A 488 nm laser to trigger recruitment and to image YFP - or GFP - tagged effector constructs . 3 . A 561 or 594 nm laser to image red ﬂuorescent constructs ( e . g . , tdTomato , mKate2 ) without triggering recruitment . 4 . Optional : a 633 nm laser to image iRFP713 - tagged effectors without triggering recruitment . 5 . Optional : a UV laser diode to record additional constructs in the blue channel ( e . g . , tagBFP - LacI as an additional array marker ) . 6 . A live cell incubation chamber that can be protected from light . 7 . A red ﬂashlight or LED to mount samples on the microscope without triggering recruitment . A removable bike tail light works well for this purpose . For automated image acquisition of a larger number of cells , a ﬂuorescence wideﬁeld microscope can be advantageous . For this purpose , we used a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 with the ZEN 2012 pro software with modules for z - stack , time - lapse , multiposition , and heterogeneous acquisition and the following features : 1 . Live cell incubation chamber ( preferentially with black walls and a curtain for the front side ) . 2 . Motorized stage . 3 . Motorized z - drive . 4 . Hardware or software autofocus . 5 . Red ﬁlter for transmitted light . 6 . Software with automation capabilities including time course and tile pattern ( or grid ) acquisition . 7 . 20 (cid:2) air objective ( e . g . , Zeiss Plan - Apochromat 20x / 0 . 8 M27 ) . 8 . Fluorescence lamp ( e . g . , mercury short arc reﬂector lamp HXP 120 V ) . 256 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 9 . Filter sets ( wavelength windows in nm for excitation , dichroic , emission ) : modiﬁed Cy3 ﬁlter ( 535 / 30 , 570 , 572 / 25 ) for tdTomato , GFP ﬁlter ( 470 / 40 , 495 , 525 / 40 ) . 2 . 4 Software 1 . R ( version 3 . 2 . 3 ) [ 16 ] . 2 . RStudio ( version 1 . 0 . 136 ) [ 19 ] . 3 . R packages : EBImage ( version 4 . 12 . 2 ) [ 20 ] , plyr ( version 1 . 8 . 4 ) [ 21 ] and ggplot2 ( version 3 . 1 . 0 ) [ 22 ] . 4 . R - package NSSQ “Nuclear Spot Segmentation and Quantiﬁ - cation” available in the Supplementary Materials on the book webpage . 5 . The Fiji distribution [ 23 ] of ImageJ [ 24 ] for general purpose image analysis . 3 Methods 3 . 1 Cell Culture ( Days 0 and 1 ) U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 cells [ 9 ] are maintained at standard cell culture con - ditions ( 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 ) and split ( 1 : 6 to 1 : 10 ) every 2 – 3 days . They can be frozen in DMEM supplemented with 10 % DMSO and 40 % FCS . 1 . On day 0 , seed cells in the 8 - well slide in 400 μ L medium at a density of 2 · 10 4 per well . After adding the cell suspension to wells , let the slide stand for 5 – 10 min to obtain a homogeneous attachment of cells before transferring it to the incubator . 2 . On day 1 , replace growth medium with a reduced volume ( 300 μ L ) and prepare transfection mix according to the man - ufacturer’s guidelines in a low binding tube . For a transcription activation experiment as depicted in Fig . 1 , cotransfect cells with , for example , pPHR - GFP - VP16 ( effector ) , pCIBN - rTetR ( localizer ) , and pCMV Δ TATA - tdMCP - tdTomato ( RNA reader ) . As a negative control , use the mock effector plasmid pPHR - GFP - NLS instead of pPHR - GFP - VP16 . When using Xtreme Gene 9 ( Roche ) , use 20 μ L Opti - MEM , 200 ng plas - mid mixture ( 67 ng of each ) , and 0 . 6 μ L reagent . Place the slide in a lightproof polystyrene foam box for later transport before returning it to the incubator . The lid should be placed on the box lightly to allow air exchange . 3 . 2 Time - Lapse Microscopy for Continuous Induction ( Day 2 ) In continuous induction experiments , cells are exposed to blue light during the whole acquisition time resulting in a constant high concentration of activator at the promoter . In the following section , two imaging modes are described . If a high spatial resolu - tion is needed , confocal microscopy ( Subheading 3 . 2 . 1 ) is advanta - geous . If large cell numbers are to be acquired , automated wideﬁeld microscopy is recommended ( Subheading 3 . 2 . 2 ) . Avoid blue / Light - Induced Transcription Activation 257 white light exposure of the samples and use only red light during handling of the samples before induction . 1 . Heat the microscope incubation chamber to 37 (cid:3) C and wait for the temperature to stabilize ( 1 – 2 h ) . 2 . When using the rTetR system , add dox to the well to be imaged at a ﬁnal concentration of 5 μ g / mL before each time - lapse acquisition . Wait at least 10 min to allow for CIBN - rTetR binding to the tet O array ( see Notes 4 and 6 ) . 3 . Transfer the slide onto the microscope . Cover transparent walls of the incubation chamber with a dark cloth or aluminum foil . 3 . 2 . 1 Imaging by Confocal Microscopy By confocal microscopy the spatial distribution of RNA at the array can be assessed , which is generally not homogeneous ( Fig . 1c ) . In addition , the confocal microscopy setup can be extended to an analysis in three dimensions for data acquisition and quantiﬁcation ( e . g . , as in [ 25 ] ) to detect subtle intensity or shape changes over time . To reduce photobleaching by continuous laser exposure , cells can be exposed to blue light at regular intervals ( 2 – 3 min ) that are shorter than the reversibility half - life time of the PHR - CIBN inter - action ( 4 . 9 (cid:4) 0 . 8 min [ 11 ] ) ( see Note 7 ) . 1 . Locate cells in the red channel . 2 . Record a prerecruitment stack of the RNA reader signal ( exci - tation at 561 / 594 nm ) to ensure that no premature activation has occurred . The latter can happen due to premature light exposure during cell preparation or transport . Select a laser intensity that yields a satisfactory signal - to - noise ratio for the time course recording . Typical imaging parameters are 512 (cid:2) 512 pixel image size , zoom factor 9 corresponding to 53 nm / pixel , 400 Hz scan speed , 4 (cid:2) line average , and 5 – 8 z - slices spaced 0 . 5 μ m apart . Reducing the line average and minimizing the laser intensities can help to reduce photobleaching . 3 . Record a stack of the effector ( excitation at 488 nm ) , which will induce recruitment to the tet O - tethered localizer . For Steps 2 and 3 a single multichannel stack can be recorded by choos - ing the option to switch between stacks with the stack in the red channel being recorded ﬁrst . 4 . Record two - channel stacks of the RNA reader and the effector every 2 – 3 min for about 45 – 60 min ( see Note 8 ) . Switching the channels between lines ( as opposed to between slices or stacks ) ensures that the images of the different channels are not shifted with respect to one another . 5 . Optional : include a third channel for an additional array marker ( e . g . , tagBFP - LacI ) or a second chromatin feature probe ( e . g . , a histone acetylation reader domain ) . 258 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 3 . 2 . 2 Automated Imaging by Wideﬁeld Microscopy Wideﬁeld microscopy to monitor the onset of transcription is advantageous when assessing cell - to - cell heterogeneity of activa - tion kinetics from the analysis of tens to hundreds of cells . In addition , photobleaching is reduced due to reduced light exposure , which is particularly relevant for longer time course experiments . 1 . In a well that will not be used for data acquisition , deﬁne and test the acquisition pattern . Recommended starting values for acquisition parameters can be found in Table 2 . Locate the cells in the transmission channel with a red ﬁlter at a central position in the well with a high density of cells ( see Note 9 ) . 2 . Exposure times of the ﬂuorescence channels for each channel should be chosen between 70 and 500 ms so that there are no saturated pixels while detecting most transfected cells . Table 2 Recommended imaging parameters for widefield microscopy Parameter Range Start value Lower limit Upper limit Exposure time 70 – 500 ms 150 ms ROI detection , maximum camera frame rate Photodamage , detector saturation , throughput Filterbandwidth tdTomato : 535 / 30 , 570 , 572 / 25 ; GFP : 470 / 40 , 495 , 525 / 40 n . a . n . a . Intensity Power 2 – 3 mm above objective : GFP : 1 – 2 mW , 488 nm tdTomato : 4 – 5 mW , 561 nm ROI detection Photodamage , formation of PHR aggregates Samplinginterval 1 – 7 min 3 . 5 min Photodamage , throughput Time resolution Number of z - slices 3 – 5 3 Object size , z - drift , cell movements Photodamage , acquisition time z - Slice distance 0 . 3 – 2 . 0 μ m 1 . 0 μ m ( (cid:2) 20 objective ) Height of z - stack and number of slices z - extension of transcription spot Number of positions 15 – 30 25 Throughput Sampling frequency Camerabinning 1 (cid:2) 1 to 2 (cid:2) 2 2 (cid:2) 2 Signal intensity and noise Spatial resolution of ROI Objective magniﬁcation (cid:2) 20 – (cid:2) 60 (cid:2) 20 Spatial resolution of ROI Field of view , throughput Imaging parameters and their recommended values refer to the microscope used here ( Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 ) . These need to be adjusted to account for the speciﬁc features of a given microscopy systems with respect to ﬁlters , ﬂuorescence excitation source and camera . In addition to premature activation of PHR as described above , cross - talk between the different channels needs to be avoided Light - Induced Transcription Activation 259 The z - stacks should have three slices and a distance between 0 . 8 and 1 . 5 μ m depending on the axial resolution . Switch on the hardwarefocus , if available , ordeﬁne a softwareautofocusroutine for each position in the Cy3 channel ( e . g . , 25 μ s exposure , 2 (cid:2) 2 binning , 0 . 8 μ m distance over 8 . 0 μ m ) . Deﬁne a grid pattern of subpositions around the selected position . The number of sub - positions in this pattern and the time required to image one position determine the sampling frequency . If acquisition of one position requires 8 s , 25 positions can be imaged once every 3 . 5 min . In the time course menu set the cycle interval to its minimal value and the experiment duration to 90 min . The order of acquisition should be ﬁrst z - stacks , then channels , positions and time points . Acquiring the z - stack before switching channels increases acquisition speed . Activate autosaving of images in the tif ﬁle format . 3 . If the ﬁrst cycles of the test run yield focused images with a sufﬁcient signal - to - noise ratio , move to a new well , wait 15 min , add dox , wait 15 min ( see Note 6 ) , select a good location as above , set the z - position and start the experiment . 3 . 3 Time - Lapse Microscopy for Pulsed Induction Light - dependent transcription activation is particularly useful to assess the persistence of the activated state after dissociation of the activator from the promoter and the response of the promoter to subsequent reactivation . For this type of experiments , the activator ( VP16 ) and the RNA reader ( MCP ) need to be visualized without triggering recruitment . Therefore , they can be tagged with two spectrally distinct red ﬂuorophores such as iRFP713 and tdTomato . To locate the array , an array marker such as GFP - LacI or a ﬂuores - cent localizer ( e . g . , CIBN - YFP - TetR , Addgene # 103798 ) should be used . These combinations of ﬂuorescent proteins can be imaged on a confocal microscope with the appropriate laser lines ( Subhead - ing 3 . 3 . 1 ) . For acquiring larger numbers of cells on a wideﬁeld microscope , we describe a simpliﬁed version of the reactivation protocol without imaging in the intermittent dark phase ( Subhead - ing 3 . 3 . 2 ) . 3 . 3 . 1 Imaging by Confocal Microscopy The imaging workﬂow described in Subheading 3 . 2 . 1 is adjusted as follows : 1 . Record a two - channel ( excitation at 561 and 633 nm ) prere - cruitment stack with the same typical imaging parameters as described above . 2 . Record the desired pattern of three - channel stacks ( excitation at 488 , 561 and 633 nm ) and two - channel stacks ( 561 and 633 nm ) to cause activator association and dissociation , respec - tively . Exemplary illumination pattern ( as in [ 11 ] , stack record - ings approximately 3 min apart ) : 1 (cid:2) prerecruitment , 2 (cid:2) recruitment , 12 (cid:2) without recruitment ( i . e . , approximately 40 min without blue light illumination ) , 5 (cid:2) rerecruitment . 260 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 3 . 3 . 2 Automated Imaging by Wideﬁeld Microscopy With the combinations of ﬂuorescent proteins and ﬁlter sets used here for wideﬁeld microscopy , image acquisition will lead to blue light exposure and activation . Accordingly , it is recommended to conduct two consecutive activation time courses with an intermit - tent delay for a dark phase without imaging . The continuous acti - vation workﬂow described in Subheading 3 . 2 . 2 is modiﬁed , as follows : 1 . Transfer cells to the microscope and test imaging settings in one well as described in Subheading 3 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Activate an irregular protocol setup ( e . g . , multiblock execution in the Zeiss Zen software ) . 3 . Deﬁne two consecutive time course jobs of 60 min with 3 . 5 min intervals . Add a delay for the execution of the second job of the desired duration for the dark period . 4 . Move to a new well , wait 15 min , add dox , ﬁnd and set focus , wait 15 min for rTetR - binding and start the experiment ( see Note 6 ) . 3 . 4 Image Analysis The experiments described above result in time series of multichan - nel , multislice image stacks ( Leica SP5 confocal microscope ) or image ﬁles in the tif ﬁle format ( Zeiss wideﬁeld microscope ) . The Fiji distribution of ImageJ can be used for a general assessment of the images . In the following subsections , an approach for the intensity - based quantiﬁcation of RNA levels is summarized accord - ing to the general workﬂow depicted in Fig . 2 . 3 . 4 . 1 Low Throughput Analysis of Confocal Images A typical transcription activation experiment recorded with a con - focal microscope contains 15 – 25 multichannel , multislice image stacks . The analysis described below is a manual analysis using the Fiji distribution of ImageJ . It can be automated to some extent by using ImageJ macros , which is not discussed here . 1 . Optional : If necessary , transform each multichannel z - stack to an RGB stack and register the slices using the TurboReg plugin for ImageJ [ 26 ] ( see Note 10 ) . The registration should be based on the effector or an array marker channel and use one of the central slices as a reference . 2 . Create maximum intensity projections ( Image ! Stacks ! Z Project . . . ) resulting in multichannel images for each time point . 3 . Select a sufﬁciently large circular region of interest ( 20 – 40 px ) around the array and measure the mean ﬂuorescence intensities ( Analyze ! Measure ) in that ROI for all channels ( effector , reader , and possibly array marker ) . 4 . Select a reference region within the nucleus and measure its mean ﬂuorescence intensity . Light - Induced Transcription Activation 261 5 . Select a background region outside of the cell and measure its mean ﬂuorescence intensity . 6 . Repeat steps 3 – 5 for each time point . Note that the array ROI should have the same size for the analysis of one cell . Fig . 2 Workﬂow for semiautomated transcription spot tracking and quantiﬁcation . The analysis of an image series comprises a sequence of manual and automated steps . A typical experiment with image acquisition using a wideﬁeld microscope results in images for two channels , three z - planes , 16 time points , and 25 grid positions . For each grid position one image out of several z - positions , channels , and time frames is displayed to manually select nuclei . Selected nuclei are segmented and tracked and for each time point the optimal z - position is selected . The array spot is segmented , tracked , and used for intensity and area measurements . After manual quality control of the segmentation and tracking in the RNA channel , the single cell time course data can be visualized and used for further analysis or interpretation 262 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 7 . Extract the time information for each multichannel , multislice stack from the metadata and calculate time points with respect to the ﬁrst blue light exposure . 8 . Account for bleaching by ﬁtting the mean intensity difference between the nuclear reference region and the background region ( I ref ( t ) – I back ( t ) ) to an exponential decay ( I ref ( t ) (cid:5) I back ( t ) ¼ a · e (cid:5) k · t ) . 9 . Calculate the bleach - corrected RNA enrichment as E ( t ) ¼ ( I array ( t ) – I ref ( t ) ) / e (cid:5) k · t . 10 . Optional : For averaging RNA enrichment time courses of different cells , interpolate enrichment values at regular time points for each cell ( E ( 0 min ) , E ( 3 min ) , E ( 6 min ) , etc . ) . 3 . 4 . 2 Semiautomated Image Analysis of Wideﬁeld Images The semiautomated image analysis consists of four steps separated into four scripts : ( 1 ) manual selection of nuclei that show recruit - ment , ( 2 ) automated segmentation , tracking , and intensity quanti - ﬁcation of nuclei and spots at the selected positions , ( 3 ) manual quality control of segmentation and tracking , and ( 4 ) summary and visualization of results . Example scripts are provided in the supple - mentary materials . The analysis workﬂow is summarized in Fig . 2 . The image analysis is performed in R [ 16 ] and RStudio [ 19 ] and is based on the EBImage package [ 20 ] . We provide additional func - tions for segmentation and tracking of nuclei and spots with the NSSQ “Nuclear Spot Segmentation and Quantiﬁcation” package . Details of the analysis workﬂow are included with the example scripts and can be found in the help pages of the NSSQ package . Parameters for segmentation and tracking are speciﬁed in the head section of the second script and may need adjustment for images acquired with different microscope settings . 1 . Download the NSSQ package from the supplementary material on the book webpage . Install the package in R : install . packages ( ‘ . / DownloadFolder / NSSQ _ 1 . 0 . tar . gz’ , repos ¼ NULL , type ¼ “source” ) . 2 . Run the manual selection function in the ﬁrst script using images of all grid positions in the central z - slice at frame 3 ( t ¼ 7 min , where spots of recruited PHR - effector should have appeared ) in the PHR - FP - effector channel ( NSSQ : select - Positions ) . Images of the grid positions are displayed in the plot panel of RStudio . In each image , select nuclei with normal morphology showing recruitment of PHR - FP - effector and conﬁrm the selection in the console . “s” : save selection and stay in this image to select more , “f” : save selection and move on to the next image , “n” : delete the selection and move on to the next image , “d” : delete selection , but stay in image . Save the position list . Light - Induced Transcription Activation 263 3 . In the second script , load the position list . Cycle over the entries of the position list and process each image region as follows . 4 . Load the cropped image region in all channels for the central z - slice ( NSSQ : readImageRegion ) . Cropping around the selected coordinates reduces the amount of data loaded into the work - ing memory . 5 . Segment nuclei using local thresholding and indicating the range of expected nuclei radii in pixel units ( NSSQ : thres _ rad _ - border ) . Then ﬁlter out nuclei outside the expected radius range ( NSSQ : ﬁlterObjects ) . 6 . For the tracking of the selected nucleus , determine the xy - coordinates of nuclei ( EBImage : computeFeatures . moment ) ﬁrst and then track forward and backward in time starting from frame 3 , in which the nucleus has been manually selected ( NSSQ : twoWayTrack ) . Use the tracking information and the xy - information for cropping of the nucleus in all channels ( NSSQ : cropMovingObjects ) and in the mask image . 7 . For each frame , select the best z - position : Load the additional z - slices in all channels and crop according to the tracking information obtained above . Determine the best focus position ( NSSQ : selectInFocus ) and recompose the image series in all channels using the best - focus slice for each time point . Save the resulting image series and the nucleus mask . 8 . Segment the reporter array spot inside the nuclear area in the PHR - FP - effector channel using the 99 . 5 % intensity quantile for thresholding ( NSSQ : spot _ segment ) . Filter spots by their expected size indicating the minimum and maximum expected area in square - pixels . 9 . Track the brightest spot . In order to reduce the computation time , ﬁrst reduce the number of spots in each frame by exclud - ing spots outside the time - projected main spot object ( NSSQ : projectionTracking ) . Then track the main spot by minimizing the Euclidean distance of position and shape features between consecutive frames ( NSSQ : selectMainSpot ) . 10 . Repeat steps 8 and 9 with decreasing thresholding quantiles until segmentation and tracking over a maximum number of time frames is achieved . 11 . Create a ring - shaped mask around the spot for measuring the local background intensity by subtracting the spot mask from a dilated version of the spot mask . 12 . Measure mean intensities in the spot , the local background and the whole nucleus area in all channels and for all time frames . Additionally , measure the spot area ( EBImage : computeFea - tures . shape ) . 264 Jorge Trojanowski et al . 13 . Calculate the amounts of recruited ﬂuorescent proteins in arbitrary units by multiplying the local - background - subtracted spot intensity by the spot area : E ( t ) ¼ ( I spot – I background ) · A spot ( see Notes 11 and 12 ) . 14 . Extract the individual times of acquisition t for each nucleus relative to the start of blue light illumination using the cycle number c , the grid position p , the total number of grid positions g , and the time it takes to once cycle over all grid positions d : t ¼ ( c – 1 ) · d + ( p – 1 ) / g · d ( see Note 13 ) . 15 . Save a table containing time , spot and background intensities and areas , as well as the spot mask . The result folder of the analysis at this point will contain a set of image series cropped around the tracked nucleus , the segmentation masks and a table with intensities and areas of the segmented regions for each cell . 16 . Since cells have been selected only at one time point in the effector channel ( GFP ) , a further selection step is necessary to sort out cells without tdMCP - tdTomato expression or incor - rect segmentation or tracking . This is accomplished by anno - tating the image series of segmented cells in the RNA channel with the NSSQ : annotateCells script . Classify the cells as “g” ( good ; tdMCP - tdTomato expression , correct segmentation , tracking , and induction of transcription ) , “b” ( bad ; e . g . , due to abnormal morphology , incorrect segmentation or tracking , or no tdMCP - tdTomato expression ) , “p” ( prerecruitment ; RNA production before TF recruitment ) , or “n” ( good , but no visible induction of transcription over whole time course ) . 17 . For averaging time courses of different cells ( annotated as “good” ) with the script provided , interpolate the integrated effector or RNA intensities at time points in the center of each cycle interval for each individual cell . Then average over all cells for each interpolated time point ( see Note 14 ) . 4 Notes 1 . BLInCR is compatible with targeting a CIBN - fused localizer protein to a variety of nuclear binding sites [ 11 ] . For transcrip - tion induction both the tet O and the lac O repeats at the promoter in the U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 cell line can be used to recruit an activator protein . However , activation from the tet O sites is more efﬁcient . 2 . Regular white polystyrene foam boxes can be partly light per - meable . To prevent premature activation , the denser black polystyrene foam boxes used for food delivery are Light - Induced Transcription Activation 265 recommended . Furthermore , any light source of wavelengths below ~ 550 nm , for example , nearby computer screens , can trigger activation of the optogenetic system and should be switched off while the cells are not fully protected from light . 3 . A variety of localizer , effector , and reader plasmids constructed in ref . 11 are available from Addgene ( IDs # 103797 to # 103840 ) . 4 . To prevent premature activation by accidental light exposure as well as DNA replication problems , cells should be kept at conditions where the CIBN - TetR / rTetR constructs are pres - ent in the unbound state prior to the transcription activation experiments . Thus , during cell culturing , dox should be absent for reverse rTetR ( DNA binding with dox ) and present for TetR ( DNA binding without dox ) . 5 . Deletion of the TATA - box in the CMV promoter of tdMCP - tdTomato leads to lower expression levels , which results in a reduced nuclear background of unbound tdMCP molecules . Due to the high afﬁnity of tdMCP , typical expression levels of around 0 . 1 – 1 μ M as measured by ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy are reached that are sufﬁcient for saturating MS2 bindings sites on the reporter RNA [ 27 ] . 6 . The association and dissociation times of the PHR / CIBN and rTetR / tet O interactions must be considered when planning experiments . For rTetR the time for half - saturation of operator sites has been determined to be around 2 min for typical expression levels [ 8 ] . Thus , dox addition 10 min before the experiment start should be sufﬁcient for saturated binding of rTetR . Previously , we have determined the time for half of the PHR molecules to dissociate from the tet O array to be 4 . 9 (cid:4) 0 . 8 min [ 11 ] . Thus , we recommend waiting for at least 15 min after imaging before adding dox to another well of the same slide since it may have been exposed to stray light . In this manner , no PHR fusion with the activator should be recruited to the promoter along with CIBN - rTetR before the actual start of the experiment . Alternatively , two slides can be used with one slide being stored in the dark while the other is imaged . 7 . Light - induced recruitment can be heterogeneous between cells with different expression levels . Even though recruitment of PHR to CIBN is fast , expression levels of both PHR - activator and CIBN - rTetR need to be sufﬁcient to saturate the tet O binding sites . Additionally , low blue light intensities during imaging can lead to slow recruitment kinetics in the minute range . In this case the experiment can be modiﬁed to include an initial light ﬂash at higher intensity before the start of imaging to ensure complete conversion of PHR to its CIBN - interacting state . However , it should be noted that at high expression levels 266 Jorge Trojanowski et al . and high blue light exposure PHR can undergo self - association into large assemblies of μ m size [ 28 ] . 8 . Living cells typically move during an imaging period of 45 – 60 min . Thus , for the confocal microscopy experiments it might be necessary to adjust the ﬁeld of view and the focus during the experiment . 9 . To ﬁnd and set the correct z - plane without inducing transcrip - tion , red transmission light illumination or use of appropriate ﬁlters is recommended . A red LED held above the slide can be used if red light illumination is not available at the microscope . In our experience , the reporter array is often located in the upper part of the nucleus ( more distant from the bottom of the well ) . The nucleoli can be used to judge if a good focal plane has been selected . 10 . The TurboReg plugin [ 26 ] applied for the analysis of confocal images uses intensity transformations prior to registering the images , leading to differences from the raw images . Since all images are recorded with the same laser intensities , the trans - formations should be similar for each time point . An alternative R - package for registration without intensity transformations is RNiftyReg from John Clayden ( https : / / github . com / jonclayden / RNiftyReg ) , which is based on a previously described algorithm [ 29 ] . 11 . The background - subtracted integrated intensities in the spot are used as a quantitative readout for activator and reporter RNA accumulation . Different sizes of the segmented spot area do not affect this quantity as long as out - of - spot regions have the same intensity as the local background and will thus not contribute to the signal . For confocal imaging , photobleaching needs to be accounted for as described in Subheading 3 . 4 . 1 . For wideﬁeld image series , normalization to the nuclear back - ground intensity is not recommended . Background autoﬂuor - escence is much higher in wideﬁeld mode and will bleach with a different rate than the ﬂuorescent protein . Furthermore , photobleaching is much less pronounced than for confocal images . The contribution of bleaching can be determined in time series of cells transfected with GFP - LacI for which a constant enrichment at the array is expected . 12 . The nuclear background intensity is not uniform in a ﬂuores - cence wideﬁeld image due to the different z - extensions of the nucleus at its center and its edges . Therefore , the local back - ground in a ring - shaped area around the spot is subtracted . Alternatively , a background intensity gradient can be sub - tracted as proposed by Ferguson and Larson [ 30 ] . Calculation of a background gradient image is implemented into the NSSQ package in the tiltedPlane function . Light - Induced Transcription Activation 267 13 . The time points of images are calculated from the number of imaged positions and the time it takes to cycle once over all positions . All positions will be exposed to light once the ﬁrst position is imaged so that all positions share a common time point zero . The maximum time lag between the acquisition of two positions is determined by the cycle time . Care must be taken to interpolate intensity values at common time points , when averaging the recruitment time courses of cells at differ - ent positions . Time - lags should not exceed 3 . 5 min for sufﬁ - cient time resolution of the dynamics and comparability of cells at different positions . 14 . The single cell time traces of RNA production exhibit signiﬁ - cant variations in the intensity of the signal . To some extent these can reﬂect differences in the size of reporter arrays integrated in the U2OS 2 - 6 - 3 cell line that arise from an inherent instability of these repeats . The latter is apparent from transfecting the cells with GFP - LacI , which reveals sig - niﬁcant differences in spot size and intensity , and this signal can be used to quantitate the number of reporter genes in a given cell . Furthermore , the GFP - LacI signal can be exploited to quantify the noise in the spot intensity quantiﬁcation that arises due to movements in z - direction or variations in spot segmentation . Acknowledgments We thank Pranas Grigaitis for help and the DKFZ light microscopy core facility for technical support . This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG grant RI 1283 / 14 - 1 to K . R . ) and the project ENHANCE within the NCT 3 . 0 program of the National Center for Tumor Diseases ( NCT ) , Heidelberg . References 1 . Darzacq X , Yao J , Larson DR , Causse SZ , Bosanac L , de Turris V , Ruda VM , Lionnet T , Zenklusen D , Guglielmi B , Tjian R , Singer RH ( 2009 ) Imaging transcription in living cells . Annu Rev Biophys 38 : 173 – 196 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 050708 . 133728 2 . Martin RM , Rino J , Carvalho C , Kirchhausen T , Carmo - Fonseca M ( 2013 ) Live - cell visualization of pre - mRNA splicing with single - molecule sensitivity . Cell Rep 4 ( 6 ) : 1144 – 1155 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2013 . 08 . 013 3 . Cho WK , Jayanth N , English BP , Inoue T , Andrews JO , Conway W , Grimm JB , Spille JH , Lavis LD , Lionnet T , Cisse II ( 2016 ) RNA Polymerase II cluster dynamics predict mRNA output in living cells . elife 5 : e13617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 13617 4 . Larson DR , Fritzsch C , Sun L , Meng X , Lawr - ence DS , Singer RH ( 2013 ) Direct observation of frequency modulated transcription in single cells using light activation . elife 2 : e00750 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 00750 5 . Chubb J , Trcek T , Shenoy S , Singer R ( 2006 ) Transcriptional pulsing of a developmental 268 Jorge Trojanowski et al . gene . Curr Biol 16 ( 10 ) : 1018 – 1025 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 03 . 092 6 . Bertrand E , Chartrand P , Schaefer M , Shenoy SM , Singer RH , Long RM ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol Cell 2 ( 4 ) : 437 – 445 7 . Darzacq X , Shav - Tal Y , de Turris V , Brody Y , Shenoy SM , Phair RD , Singer RH ( 2007 ) In vivo dynamics of RNA polymerase II transcrip - tion . Nat Struct Mol Biol 14 ( 9 ) : 796 – 806 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb1280 8 . Normanno D , Boudarene L , Dugast - Darzacq - C , Chen J , Richter C , Proux F , Benichou O , Voituriez R , Darzacq X , Dahan M ( 2015 ) Probing the target search of DNA - binding proteins in mammalian cells using TetR as model searcher . Nat Commun 6 : 7357 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms8357 9 . Janicki SM , Tsukamoto T , Salghetti SE , Tansey WP , Sachidanandam R , Prasanth KV , Ried T , Shav - Tal Y , Bertrand E , Singer RH , Spector DL ( 2004 ) From silencing to gene expression : real - time analysis in single cells . Cell 116 ( 5 ) : 683 – 698 10 . Kennedy MJ , Hughes RM , Peteya LA , Schwartz JW , Ehlers MD , Tucker CL ( 2010 ) Rapid blue - light - mediated induction of pro - tein interactions in living cells . Nat Methods 7 ( 12 ) : 973 – 975 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1524 11 . Rademacher A , Erdel F , Trojanowski J , Schumacher S , Rippe K ( 2017 ) Real - time observation of light - controlled transcription in living cells . J Cell Sci 130 ( 24 ) : 4213 – 4224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205534 12 . Konermann S , Brigham MD , Trevino AE , Hsu PD , Heidenreich M , Cong L , Platt RJ , Scott DA , Church GM , Zhang F ( 2013 ) Optical control of mammalian endogenous transcrip - tion and epigenetic states . Nature 500 ( 7463 ) : 472 – 476 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature12466 13 . Motta - Mena LB , Reade A , Mallory MJ , Glantz S , Weiner OD , Lynch KW , Gardner KH ( 2014 ) An optogenetic gene expression system with rapid activation and deactivation kinetics . Nat Chem Biol 10 ( 3 ) : 196 – 202 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nchembio . 1430 14 . Rullan M , Benzinger D , Schmidt GW , Milias - Argeitis A , Khammash M ( 2018 ) An Optoge - netic platform for real - time , single - cell interro - gation of stochastic transcriptional regulation . Mol Cell 70 ( 4 ) : 745 – 756 e746 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2018 . 04 . 012 15 . Polstein LR , Gersbach CA ( 2015 ) A light - inducible CRISPR - Cas9 system for control of endogenous gene activation . Nat Chem Biol 11 ( 3 ) : 198 – 200 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nchembio . 1753 16 . R Core Team ( 2013 ) R : a language and envi - ronment for statistical computing . R Founda - tion for Statistical Computing , Vienna 17 . Soutoglou E , Misteli T ( 2008 ) Activation of the cellular DNA damage response in the absence of DNA lesions . Science 320 ( 5882 ) : 1507 – 1510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1159051 18 . Bintu L , Yong J , Antebi YE , McCue K , Kazuki Y , Uno N , Oshimura M , Elowitz MB ( 2016 ) Dynamics of epigenetic regulation at the single - cell level . Science 351 ( 6274 ) : 720 – 724 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aab2956 19 . RStudio Team ( 2015 ) RStudio : integrated development for R . RStudio , Inc , Boston , MA 20 . Pau G , Fuchs F , Sklyar O , Boutros M , Huber W ( 2010 ) EBImage—an R package for image processing with applications to cellular pheno - types . Bioinformatics 26 ( 7 ) : 979 – 981 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btq046 21 . Wickham H ( 2011 ) The split - apply - combine strategy for data analysis . J Stat Softw 40 ( 1 ) : 1 – 29 22 . Wickham H ( 2016 ) ggplot2 : elegant graphics for data analysis . Springer , New York 23 . Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , Preibisch S , Rueden C , Saalfeld S , Schmid B , Tinevez JY , White DJ , Hartenstein V , Eliceiri K , Tomancak P , Cardona A ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 676 – 682 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 24 . Schneider CA , Rasband WS , Eliceiri KW ( 2012 ) NIH image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat Methods 9 ( 7 ) : 671 – 675 25 . Eck S , Worz S , Muller - Ott K , Hahn M , Biesdorf A , Schotta G , Rippe K , Rohr K ( 2016 ) A spherical harmonics intensity model for 3D segmentation and 3D shape analysis of heterochromatin foci . Med Image Anal 32 : 18 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . media . 2016 . 03 . 001 26 . Thevenaz P , Ruttimann UE , Unser M ( 1998 ) A pyramid approach to subpixel registration based on intensity . IEEE Trans Image Process 7 ( 1 ) : 27 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / 83 . 650848 27 . Wu B , Chao JA , Singer RH ( 2012 ) Fluores - cence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy enables quanti - tative imaging of single mRNAs in living cells . Biophys J 102 ( 12 ) : 2936 – 2944 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 05 . 017 28 . Shin Y , Berry J , Pannucci N , Haataja MP , Toettcher JE , Brangwynne CP ( 2017 ) Spatio - temporal control of intracellular phase transi - tions using light - activated optodroplets . Cell Light - Induced Transcription Activation 269 168 ( 1 – 2 ) : 159 – 171 e114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 11 . 054 29 . Modat M , Cash DM , Daga P , Winston GP , Duncan JS , Ourselin S ( 2014 ) Global image registration using a symmetric block - matching approach . J Med Imaging ( Bellingham ) 1 ( 2 ) : 024003 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1117 / 1 . JMI . 1 . 2 . 024003 30 . Ferguson ML , Larson DR ( 2013 ) Measuring transcription dynamics in living cells using ﬂuc - tuation analysis . In : Shav - Tal Y ( ed ) imaging gene expression : methods and protocols . Humana Press , New York , pp 47 – 60 270 Jorge Trojanowski et al . I NDEX A Antibiotic resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 Antibodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172 , 200 , 205 , 209 – 220 , 225 Antibody delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210 Arc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 , 256 Automated image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262 Automated microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 , 256 , 257 , 259 – 261 B β - actin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 , 58 , 110 , 111 , 126 , 127 Budding yeast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 – 148 C Chromosome painting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167 – 178 , 181 Chromosome territories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168 , 181 – 193 Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ( CRISPR ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 , 18 , 37 , 39 , 63 , 64 , 226 , 233 , 240 D Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 , 32 , 118 , 152 , 225 , 230 , 241 – 243 , 247 – 249 DNA probes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 , 91 , 188 Drosophila . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 , 68 , 70 , 168 , 172 Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 , 22 , 28 , 30 , 36 , 38 , 42 , 47 , 64 , 71 , 75 , 77 , 79 , 99 , 132 , 139 , 145 , 152 , 224 , 242 , 243 , 268 E Embryo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 , 68 , 70 Endogenous mRNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 , 18 , 125 , 126 Endogenous protein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209 , 210 , 226 , 227 , 233 , 240 , 248 Epitranscriptomic modiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 Extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 , 118 , 127 F Factor distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215 Fluorescence imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 , 57 , 90 Fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 , 24 , 27 , 36 , 47 , 92 , 95 , 97 , 110 , 112 , 113 , 115 , 121 – 124 , 126 , 127 , 167 , 168 , 177 , 191 , 207 Fluorescence microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 , 18 , 24 , 39 , 42 , 58 , 90 , 91 , 94 , 99 , 138 , 153 , 155 , 224 , 226 – 228 , 252 , 254 , 256 G Gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 , 21 , 36 , 47 , 63 , 132 , 151 , 182 Gene locus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 , 44 , 181 – 193 , 196 GFP - binding nanobody . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200 Glutaraldehyde ( GA ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 , 123 – 126 , 183 , 186 Green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 – 6 , 11 , 13 , 17 , 37 , 39 , 42 , 48 , 51 , 68 , 77 , 81 , 110 , 145 , 152 , 199 – 204 , 206 , 210 I Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 , 13 , 24 , 94 , 95 , 99 – 102 , 122 , 124 , 153 , 215 , 217 , 261 Image processing and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 , 77 , 142 , 153 Image quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217 , 252 , 254 , 261 Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 21 , 36 , 47 , 63 , 77 , 90 , 110 , 132 , 152 , 182 , 204 , 209 , 224 , 239 , 251 In situ hybridization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 , 92 – 94 , 98 , 103 L Live - cell imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 , 9 , 12 , 15 , 18 , 21 – 32 , 51 , 77 – 79 , 81 , 131 – 148 , 205 , 206 , 219 , 229 , 239 – 249 Live - cell microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203 Live imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 – 14 , 18 , 35 – 44 , 68 , 70 , 73 , 154 Long non - coding RNAs ( LncRNAs ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 – 32 M Membrane nanotubes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 , 124 Messenger ribonucleic acids ( mRNAs ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 , 44 , 48 , 63 , 75 , 109 , 131 , 151 – 161 Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 , 8 , 12 , 18 , 42 , 43 , 51 , 58 , 63 , 68 , 72 , 94 , 132 , 134 , 148 , 152 , 176 , 203 , 204 , 209 , 210 , 212 , 214 , 216 , 217 , 226 , 251 – 268 Mitotic chromosomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239 – 249 Molecular beacons ( MBs ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 – 32 , 90 , 91 , 95 – 98 , 100 , 132 Yaron Shav - Tal ( ed . ) , Imaging Gene Expression : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 2038 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 9674 - 2 , © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 271 Mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 – 41 , 206 , 239 – 242 , 244 – 249 mRNA turnover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 , 76 mRNP export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132 , 133 , 138 , 141 , 143 MS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 , 36 , 48 , 63 , 77 , 111 , 132 , 152 , 251 MS2 - GFP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 MS2 / MCP system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 – 19 MS2 / PP7 stem - loops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 , 67 MS2 system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 , 11 , 17 , 18 , 58 MS2V6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 12 , 17 , 18 MS2V7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 – 6 , 8 , 13 – 18 N Neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 , 47 – 59 Nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 – 148 , 151 – 154 , 157 , 159 Nucleus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 6 , 13 , 16 , 19 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 43 , 66 , 71 , 76 , 77 , 82 , 112 , 122 , 127 , 131 , 142 , 146 , 151 , 153 , 155 – 159 , 167 , 168 , 181 , 182 , 188 , 190 , 191 , 202 , 210 , 215 – 217 , 219 , 220 , 223 , 225 , 230 – 232 , 236 , 261 , 264 , 265 , 267 Numbers and brightness ( N & B ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223 – 236 O Oligomerization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223 – 236 Oligonucleotide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 , 26 , 44 , 91 , 97 , 109 , 112 – 113 Oligopaints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167 – 178 Optogenetic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 252 , 266 P Polyacrylamide matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182 – 188 , 191 PP7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 , 48 , 64 , 65 , 67 , 72 , 76 , 77 , 132 – 134 , 137 , 138 , 146 , 251 PP7 - GFP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 Protein – protein interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 R Residence time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243 , 248 Ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 – 106 RNA methylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 – 106 RNA modiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90 , 95 RNA polymerase II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210 S Saccharomyces cerevisiae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 132 , 133 Single cell methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226 Single cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 , 18 , 35 , 36 , 40 , 41 , 47 , 90 , 91 , 104 , 109 , 125 , 167 , 206 , 207 , 209 – 220 , 242 , 252 , 256 , 262 , 268 Single - molecule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 , 8 , 9 , 13 – 15 , 17 – 19 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 72 , 80 , 109 – 127 , 132 , 148 , 239 – 249 Single - molecule ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization ( smFISH ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 , 6 , 9 , 14 – 19 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 31 , 72 , 109 – 127 , 147 Single - molecule imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240 – 242 , 246 , 248 Single - molecule live - cell imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239 – 249 Single particle tracking ( SPT ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 , 28 – 30 , 77 , 80 – 82 , 84 – 86 , 152 , 160 Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182 , 183 , 188 , 191 Superregistration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 , 142 – 144 , 148 T Tandem repeats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 , 23 , 29 Targeted manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 – 207 Targeted repositioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 – 207 Three - dimensional ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( 3D - FISH ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182 – 196 3D structured illumination microscopy ( 3D - SIM ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210 , 214 , 216 , 217 , 219 Three ( 3 0 ) - RNA End Accumulation during Turnover ( TREAT ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 , 76 Transcription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 , 21 , 35 , 47 , 63 , 89 , 112 , 152 , 167 , 181 , 203 , 210 , 223 , 239 , 251 Transcriptional dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 , 71 Transcription factor ( TF ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 , 203 , 209 – 220 , 223 – 236 , 239 – 249 , 252 272 I MAGING G ENE E XPRESSION : M ETHODS AND P ROTOCOLS Index