www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 313 29 SEPTEMBER 2006 1893 EDUCATION FORUM M ontessori education is a 100 - year - old method of schooling that was first used with impoverished pre - school children in Rome . The program con - tinues to grow in popularity . Estimates indi - cate that more than 5000 schools in the United States—including 300 public schools and some high schools—use the Montessori program . Montessori education is character - ized by multi - age classrooms , a special set of educational materials , student - chosen work in long time blocks , collaboration , the absence of grades and tests , and individual and small group instruction in both academic and social skills ( 1 ) . The effectiveness of some of these elements is supported by research on human learning ( 2 ) . We evaluated the social and academic impact of Montessori education . Children were studied near the end of the two most widely implemented levels of Montessori education : primary ( 3 - to 6 - year - olds ) and elementary ( 6 - to 12 - year - olds ) . The Mon - tessori school we studied [ located in Mil - waukee , Wisconsin ( 3 ) ] , which served mainly urban minority children , was in its ninth year of operation and was recognized by the U . S . branch of the Association Montessori Internationale ( AMI / USA ) for its good implementation of Montessori principles ( 4 ) . Because it was not feasible to randomly assign children to experimental and control educational groups , we designed our study around the school lottery already in place . Both the experimental and the control group had entered the Montessori school lottery ; those who were accepted were assigned to the experimental ( Montessori ) group , and those who were not accepted were assigned to the control ( other education systems ) group . This strategy addressed the concern that parents who seek to enroll their child in a Montessori school are different from par - ents who do not . It is crucial to control for this potential source of bias , because parents are the dominant influence on child out - comes ( 5 ) . Recruitment We contacted parents of children who had entered the Montessori school lottery in 1997 and 2003 and invited them to be in the study . All families were offered $ 100 for participation . Because the lottery , which was con - ducted by the school district , was random , the Montessori and control groups should contain similar children . Ninety percent of consenting parents filled out a demographic survey . Parents from the Montessori and control groups had similar average incomes ( $ 20 , 000 to $ 50 , 000 per year ) at each stu - dent age level . This addressed a concern with a retrospective lottery loser design that the final samples might be different for rea - sons other than the treatment . Another vari - able , ethnicity , was not surveyed because parent income contributes more to child out - comes than does ethnicity ( 6 ) . We were also concerned that requesting ethnicity data would reduce participation in this racially divided city . Overall , 53 control and 59 Montessori stu - dents were studied ( table S1 ) . The 5 - year - old group included 25 control and 30 Montessori children , and the 12 - year - old group included 28 control and 29 Montessori children . Gender balance was imperfect , but gender did not contribute significantly to any of the differences reported here . Children at the Montessori school were drawn from all six classrooms at the primary level and all four at the upper elementary level . The control chil - dren were at non - Montessori schools : 27 pub - lic inner city schools ( 40 children ) and 12 suburban public , private / voucher , or charter schools ( 13 children ) . Many of the public schools had enacted special programs , such as gifted and talented curricula , language immersion , arts , and discovery learning . Children in both groups were tested for cognitive / academic and social / behavioral skills that were selected for importance in life , not to examine specific expected effects of Montessori education . Our results re - vealed significant advantages for the Mon - tessori group over the control group for both age groups . Results : 5 - Year - Olds Cognitive / Academic Measures . Seven scales were administered from the Woodcock - John - son ( WJ III ) Test Battery ( 7 ) . Significant dif - ferences favoring Montessori 5 - year - olds were found on three WJ tests measuring academic skills related to school readiness : Letter - Word Identification , Word Attack ( phonological de - coding ability ) , and Applied Problems ( math skills ) ( see chart , left ) . No difference was expected or found on the Picture Vocabulary test ( basic vocabulary ) because vocabulary is highly related to family background variables ( 8 ) . Two WJ tests of basic thinking skills— Spatial Reasoning and Concept Formation— also showed no difference . Five - year - olds were also tested on execu - tive function , thought to be important to suc - cess in school . On one such test , children were asked to sort cards by one rule , switch to a new rule , and ( if they did well ) then switch to a compound rule . Montessori chil - dren performed significantly better on this test . A test of children’s ability to delay grat - ification ( a treat ) did not indicate statisti - cally significant differences . Social / Behavioral Measures . Children were given five stories about social problems , such as another child hoarding a swing , and were asked how they would solve each problem ( 9 ) . An analysis of students’ academic and social scores compares a Montessori school with other elementary school education programs . Evaluating Montessori Education Angeline Lillard 1 * and Nicole Else - Quest 2 THE EARLY YEARS 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 – 0 . 2 – 0 . 4 Montessori M e a n z s c o r e Control WJ letter - word WJ word attack WJ applied math Card sort ( executive function ) False belief ( social cognition ) Refers to justice Positive shared play Ambiguous rough play Results for 5 - year - olds . Montessori students ach - ieved higher scores [ converted to average z scores ( 18 ) ] for both academic and behavioral tests . 1 Department of Psychology , University of Virginia P . O . Box 400400 , Charlottesville , VA22904 , USA . 2 Department of Psychology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI 53202 , USA . * Author for correspondence . E - mail : lillard @ virginia . edu Published by AAAS 29 SEPTEMBER 2006 VOL 313 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1894 EDUCATION FORUM Montessori children were significantly more likely ( 43 % versus 18 % of responses ) to use a higher level of reasoning by referring to justice or fairness to convince the other child to relin - quish the object . Observations at the play - ground during recess indicated Montessori children were significantly more likely to be involved in positive shared peer play and sig - nificantly less likely to be involved in rough play that was ambiguous in intent ( such as wrestling without smiling ) . The False Belief task was administered to examine children’s understanding of the mind ( 10 ) . Recognition that people repre - sent the world in subjective as well as objec - tive ways is a landmark achievement in social cognition ( 11 ) . Social negotiation and discussion about mental states leads to this advance in children ( 12 ) . Whereas 80 % ( significantly more than chance ) of the Montessori 5 - year - olds passed , the control children were at chance , with 50 % passing . Results : 12 - Year - Olds Cognitive / Academic Measures . Twelve - year - olds were given 5 minutes to complete a story beginning “ _ _ _ _ had the best / worst day at school . ” The Montessori students’essays were rated as significantly more creative and as using significantly more sophisticated sentence structures ( see chart , below ) . Control and Montessori essays were similar in spelling , punctuation , and grammar . Unlike the 5 - year - olds , the 12 - year - olds did not perform differ - ently on the WJ tests . This is surprising , because early reading skills normally predict later reading ( 13 ) . Either the control group had “caught up” by age 12 to the Montessori children , or the 12 - year - old Montessori children were not more advanced in these early reading skills when they were 5 . If the latter , one possible explanation is that the 12 - year - olds started at the school when it was in its third year . The Montessori method relies on peer teaching and modeling , so those who are in the early classes of a new school lack some advantages relative to those who begin later . Social / Behavioral Measures . As a social skills test , 12 - year - olds read six stories about social problems ( such as not being asked to a party ) and were asked to choose among four responses . Montessori 12 - year - olds were significantly more likely to choose the posi - tive assertive response ( for example , ver - bally expressing one’s hurt feelings to the host ) . On a questionnaire regarding their feelings about school , Montessori children indicated having a greater sense of commu - nity , responding more positively to items such as , “Students in my class really care about each other” and “Students in this class treat each other with respect . ” Benefits of Montessori Education On several dimensions , children at a public inner city Montessori school had superior outcomes relative to a sample of Montessori applicants who , because of a random lottery , attended other schools . By the end of kinder - garten , the Montessori children performed better on standardized tests of reading and math , engaged in more positive interaction on the playground , and showed more advanced social cognition and executive control . They also showed more concern for fairness and justice . At the end of elementary school , Montessori children wrote more creative essays with more complex sentence struc - tures , selected more positive responses to social dilemmas , and reported feeling more of a sense of community at their school . These findings were obtained with a lottery loser design that provides control for parental influence . Normally parental influence ( both genetic and environmental ) dominates over influences such as current or past school and day - care environments . For example , in the large National Institute of Child Health and Human Development ( NICHD ) study of early child care , correlations between parenting quality and WJ early academic tests had effect sizes compara - ble to those seen here , whereas school effects were much smaller ( 5 ) . An evaluation of Success for All , considered a highly suc - cessful reading intervention , reported a quarter of a standard deviation as its largest effect size ( for Word Attack ) in a randomized field trial , and stated that it was equal to a 4 . 69 - month advance in reading skills ( 14 ) . Stronger effects are often found in the first years of pilot programs when re - searchers are involved in implementation of their own programs ( 15 ) , termed the “super - realization effect” ( 16 ) . In our study , the school did not antici - pate an evaluation . Especially remarkable outcomes of the Montessori education are the social effects , which are generally dominated by the home environment ( 17 ) . Future research could improve on the research design here by following lottery par - ticipants prospectively and by tracking those who drop out and examining their reasons . It would be useful to replicate these findings in different Montessori schools , which can vary widely . The school involved here was affili - ated with AMI / USA , which has a traditional and relatively strict implementation . It would also be useful to know whether certain com - ponents of Montessori ( e . g . , the materials or the opportunities for collaborative work ) are associated with particular outcomes . Montessori education has a fundamen - tally different structure from traditional edu - cation . At least when strictly implemented , Montessori education fosters social and aca - demic skills that are equal or superior to those fostered by a pool of other types of schools . References and Notes 1 . M . Montessori , The Montessori Method ( Schocken , New York , 1964 ) . 2 . A . S . Lillard , Montessori : The Science Behind the Genius ( Oxford Univ . Press , New York , 2005 ) . 3 . Milwaukee Public Schools ( http : / / mpsportal . milwaukee . k12 . wi . us / portal / server . pt ) . 4 . Association Montessori Internationale ( www . montessori - ami . org / ) . 5 . NICHD Early Child - Care Research Network , Harvard Ed . Rev . 74 , 1 ( 2004 ) . 6 . G . J . Duncan , W . J . Yeung , J . Brooks - Gunn , J . R . Smith , Am . Soc . Rev . 63 , 406 ( 1998 ) . 7 . K . S . McGrew , R . W . Woodcock , Woodcock - Johnson III Technical Manual ( Riverside Publishing , Itasca , IL , 2001 ) . 8 . B . Hart , T . Risley , Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children ( P . H . Brookes , Baltimore , MD , 1995 ) . 9 . K . H . Rubin , The Social Problem Solving Test – Revised ( Univ . of Waterloo , Waterloo , MI , 1988 ) . 10 . H . Wimmer , J . Perner , Cognition 13 , 103 ( 1983 ) . 11 . C . Zimmer , Science 300 , 1079 ( 2003 ) . 12 . J . Amsterlaw , H . Wellman , J . Cogn . Dev . 7 , 139 ( 2006 ) . 13 . A . E . Cunningham , K . E . Stanovich , Dev . Psych . 33 , 934 ( 1997 ) . 14 . G . D . Borman et al . , Am . Ed . Res . J . 42 , 673 ( 2005 ) . 15 . M . W . Lipsey , Ann . Am . Acad . Polit . Soc . Sci . 587 , 69 ( 2003 ) . 16 . L . J . Cronbach et al . , Toward Reform of Program Evaluation : Aims , Methods , and Institutional Arrangments ( Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , 1980 ) . 17 . NICHD Early Child - Care Research Network , Am . Ed . Res . J . 42 , 537 ( 2005 ) . 18 . The z - score conversion was used for the graph to give all tests the same metric . A z score sets the mean ( in this case of the entire sample ) at 0 , one standard deviation above the mean at 1 . 68 , and one standard deviation below the mean at – 1 . 68 . 19 . Funding was provided by the Jacobs and Cantus Foundations and sabbatical fellowships from the Cattell Foundation and the University of Virginia to A . L . J . DeLoache , B . Detmer , L . Ma , A . Pinkham , R . Tai , and J . van Reet provided helpful comments , and E . Turkheimer provided valuable statistical advice . We thank the Milwaukee schools that participated ; the children and their families ; and A . Hart , T . Nishida , A . Pinkham , J . van Reet , and B . Rosen . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 313 / 5795 / 1893 / DC1 10 . 1126 / science . 1132362 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 – 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 Montessori M e a n z s c o r e Control Sophisticated sentence structures Creative story Positive social strategies Sense of school as community Results for 12 - year - olds . Students in the Montessori pro - gram wrote more sophisticated and creative stories and showed a more developed sense of com - munity and social skills . Scores were converted to average z scores ( 18 ) . Published by AAAS