Care Workers Making Use of Robots : Results of a Three - Month Study on Human - Robot Interaction within a Care Home Felix Carros University of Siegen Siegen , Germany felix . carros @ uni - siegen . de Isabel Schwaninger TU Wien Wien , Austria isabel . schwaninger @ tuwien . ac . at Adrian Preussner University of Siegen Siegen , Germany adrian . preussner @ student . uni - siegen . de Dave Randall University of Siegen Siegen , Germany dave . randall @ uni - siegen . de Rainer Wieching University of Siegen Siegen , Germany rainer . wieching @ uni - siegen . de Geraldine Fitzpatrick TU Wien Wien , Austria geraldine . ftzpatrick @ tuwien . ac . at Volker Wulf University of Siegen Siegen , Germany volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de Figure 1 : Care worker and resident sitting together for cofee with robot . ABSTRACT Research on social robots in care has often focused on either the care recipients or the technology itself , neglecting the care workers who , in and through their collaborative and coordinative practices , will need to work with the robots . To better understand these in - teractions with a social robot ( Pepper ) , we undertook a 3 month long - term study within a care home to gain empirical insights into the way the robot was used . We observed how care workers learned to use the device , applied it to their daily work life , and encountered Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517435 obstacles . Our fndings show that the care workers used the robot regularly ( 1 : 07 hours / day ) mostly in one - to - one interactions with residents . While the robot had a limited efect on reducing the work - load of care workers , it had other positive efects , demonstrating the potential to enhance the quality of care . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Collaborative and social computing devices ; Empirical studies in HCI ; • General and reference → Empirical studies . KEYWORDS Empirical Study , HRI , Long - term , Humanoid , Empowerment , Practice - based , Care Work , HCI , Social Service , Social Robot , Nurse , Resi - dential Care , Care Robot , Participatory Design , Robotic Support , Sustainable Technology Integration , Usage Patterns , Work Prac - tices , CSCW , Appropriation , Pandemic , Covid - 19 CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . ACM Reference Format : Felix Carros , Isabel Schwaninger , Adrian Preussner , Dave Randall , Rainer Wieching , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , and Volker Wulf . 2022 . Care Workers Mak - ing Use of Robots : Results of a Three - Month Study on Human - Robot Interac - tion within a Care Home . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New Orleans , LA , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517435 1 INTRODUCTION Research into the potential of social robots in care settings is by now commonplace . It has been argued that the importance of robots in the future can only increase because of the increasing pressure on resources in care settings . At the same time , and despite this , there are very few examples of such robots becoming part of the ordinary , everyday , work practices in care homes and related institutions . The pressure on care settings is marked by a situation with a constantly increasing number of people in need of care and a non - linear growth of people willing to work in this sector , resulting in a shortage of workers in this sector [ 11 , 18 ] . They are the main subject of our study . The three month study we report on below addresses the ques - tion : " How can social care workers make use of social robots in their daily work " , by placing a social robot in a care home for an extended period of time . The question specifcally arose during the COVID - 19 pandemic as it was thought that robots could be useful in slowing down the spread of the virus [ 27 , 63 ] , because of their potential to reduce human to human contacts . We worked with social care workers , as their work practices consists mainly of verbal and non - verbal interaction with care home residents , which were perturbed through contact restrictions and hygiene protocols . Our study focused specifcally on how social care workers use such a robotic system and how they appropriate it into their work practices . We wanted so see how often the robot was used and what for , and what benefts , burdens and obstacles the usage of the robot presented in their daily work routines . Our initial research ques - tions , broadly , had to do with the degree to which robotic systems might or might not be integrated into the day and what conse - quences their routine use might have for the social care workers and the residents . In order to do so , we established the robot in a care home with no specifc instructions as to how it should be used , but with a range of applications available which users could deploy as and when they chose . The clear focus on everyday practice , we suggest , carries with it implications for future research . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Social Robots in Care Settings Existing research on social robots in care settings has ranged over a number of issues , including the attitudes of care workers towards robots and criteria for their acceptance [ 37 ] , and indeed of older adults themselves to robots [ 2 , 25 , 43 ] ; the ethics of robot use in such settings [ 60 ] and legal aspects which pertain [ 56 ] . Research has further concerned itself with specifc contexts such as dementia care ( see e . g . [ 22 , 24 , 38 ] ) and disabilities [ 12 , 64 ] . Others have reviewed the status of robots as assistive technologies in relation to what they might achieve , and what the limitations might be [ 6 , 40 ] . Although such studies report some benefcial results , as Bemelmans et al . [ 6 ] point out , conclusions are seldom robust due to limited methodological reliability , although in recent years the number of studies has grown . Furthermore , in only a limited number of cases has research extended beyond attitudinal studies or short term observations to actually studying the adoption of robots into care over a longer period of time . Exceptions include Wu et al . and Fiorini et al . [ 20 , 65 ] , both of which entail studies in a living lab context . Further , a limited amount of ethnographic research has taken place involving social robots in residential care settings . The existing studies place more emphasis on the sociality of robots ( see e . g . [ 28 , 45 , 46 ] ) , in one case assessing only conversational elements , with input from an operator , and including care workers in the analysis [ 46 ] . The sociality of robots has been more thoroughly investigated in other research areas ( i . e . , HRI ) . By way of example , social bonding and intimacy between a person and a social robot have been evaluated by manipulating a robot’s afective and other facial expressions in an experiment [ 28 ] . Such work , though potentially relevant to the care context , has not specifcally involved people from that context . Other work on supporting informal care workers with robots exists , involving long - term co - design activities [ 38 ] . Some work has aimed at designing trustworthy care robots [ 54 ] , but such work has emphasised the direct role of robots as care workers rather than their potential for supporting the work practices of human care workers . Hornecker et al . worked on the triadic interaction between the robot , the care worker and the resident and hence their work constitutes one of the very few multi - actor approaches . They argue that such interaction only works when all parties are taken into account [ 23 ] . The need for more practice - based research in relation to robot use has been identifed [ 14 , 48 ] , as has the concomitant need for longitudinal studies that focus on the inclusion of social care workers in day - to - day practices as an essential part of human - robot - interactions in care settings . More or less by defnition such studies require a qualitative approach . Studies with a long - term approach either focus on the residents of care homes [ 14 , 21 ] or focus on older adults living in private homes [ 3 , 15 , 16 ] , measuring attitudes and relationship - building with robots . The relatively small number of studies that have ac - tually taken place in care homes ( i . e . , not in private homes or lab environments ) have suggested that social robots have a positive impact on the residents [ 14 ] but did not focus on the efects that robots had on the daily work practices of social care workers , even though they demonstrated how social care workers enabled inter - actions between robots and residents [ 26 ] ( short term ) or how a moderating person is needed [ 14 ] the need in principle to integrate with their work practices was not addressed . The study [ 14 ] showed that residents enjoy the interaction with the robot and that some intervention in activity was needed . In that instance , however , the interventions were made by a researcher . No attempt was made at that time to identify or analyse how social care workers might inter - vene the process of using the robot as part of their daily practices . In care settings as such , there is , to our knowledge , limited existing work that primarily focuses on the efects of social robots on the social care workers’ workload and in support of their activities in the long - term . One study evaluated efects on social care workers with a NAO robot [ 35 ] but did not focus on daily work practices . Another longitudinal study has involved deploying a robot in a care Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA home as an information system to adapt the robot to the informa - tion needs of the users , mainly taking a robot - centered perspective [ 21 ] . The potential long - term value of social robots has been further discussed by expert users , pointing to the importance of personal value of afection , robot functionality , and social communities forming around robots [ 17 ] . There is , then , we suggest , a clear research gap . There is little or no long - term research of a qualitative nature into the way in which robots in practice can support the daily work of social care workers and the obstacles and challenges that social care workers face when making use of a robot in their daily work . Equally , the limited amount of research we detail above suggests that we know too little about issues such as the role of interactional features , of functionality , and of multi - role interactions with a robot within care homes . 2 . 2 Care Workers Attitudes towards Technology and Robot Usage Many of the HCI studies that have examined technology use within care settings have focused on technology acceptance [ 10 , 19 , 37 , 58 ] . In contrast , Burstein et al . focused less on acceptance and more on awareness of diferent technologies [ 10 ] . They found that awareness about diferent technologies by care workers is limited , while at the same time there is an interest in using them . Kramer argues that there is an information gap [ 29 ] , such that care workers are open towards technology and assistive robots [ 37 ] and think of them as something useful but mostly know little about them and their possible uses . Accordingly , better communication with care workers about technology opportunities is needed , so that appropriate preparatory measures can be taken for low - threshold appropriation [ 10 ] . One of the main arguments against the use of robot technology in care is that care work is complex . Particularly in the area of social robotics , there are concerns that the systems are not robust enough and thus not secure in various respects [ 6 ] . Fears regarding loss of employment for care workers are often mentioned , along with ethical and security concerns , [ 5 , 13 ] According to a survey by Zöl - lick et al . , assistance systems that provide physical support to care workers are generally well received [ 69 ] . If the care technology sys - tems are available and provided , they are also used [ 53 , 69 ] , though why that might be is not entirely clear . Other studies have also shown that if technology is developed within the ecosystem of care and developed with participatory design approaches to the specifc needs , the technology can be well received and used [ 39 , 62 ] . We therefore see a need for more research on the practical use of social robots by social care workers aiming at a better understanding of the realities of social interaction with robots . We contribute to the HCI community by doing qualitative long - term feld work and providing insights into the actual interactions between social care workers and social robots , exploring how they make use of a robot in their daily work with residents and how they appropriate it . 3 METHODS 3 . 1 Study Design To explore how social care workers use a robot to assist their daily work , we gave them a previously developed robotic system with a view to gaining holistic insights into the interactional quality resulting from robot deployment in the daily work of social care workers with residents . The study was conducted in three stages . First , we conducted a pre - study that included interviews , the diaries of residents and site visits to explore the use to which the robot was to be put . Second , we embarked on the main study , giving social care workers the robot for a period of 14 weeks . Six weeks were planned at the beginning but the care homes asked us to prolong the deployment . This phase included semi - structured interviews , log - fles of the robot , structured note - taking and workshops assessing degree and manner of appropriation ( see 3 . 4 ) . Third , applications were tailored to the needs of the care home based on ideas that were expressed by the care workers ( see 4 . 2 . 2 ) . The methods are described in greater detail in section 3 . 5 . The researchers came twice per week , usually for half a day , to observe the interaction . These meetings were arranged in advance with the care home . Only one researcher at a time was allowed , due to COVID - 19 regulations . The data was collected between October 12th , 2020 and January 12th , 2021 . Because this was during COVID - 19 , we followed strict hygiene rules and created a hygiene concept to disinfect the robot . 3 . 2 Participants and Setting The study was conducted in a care home within a medium sized city in a European country . The facility was a former monastery and has been converted into a modern care home for 49 care residents . The study participants are a group of social care workers , social service management and nursing management . We worked closely with nine participants , listed in table 1 . Despite their diferent formal work roles , they work together and share tasks . We also consider the residents as participants of this study , as they were an integral part of the interaction and were important contributors to our work . The residents are a heterogeneous group that are probably representative of other care homes as well , though one specifcity is that some ( approx . 10 - 15 % ) of the residents are under 50 years old . The social care workers provided is an integral part of work within care homes in the German health system 1 and difers from the job role of caregivers . They assist and support the residents in organizing their daily lives in the community and in dealing with personal matters . The aim is to prevent loneliness , depression , and to mitigate loss of health and the increasing need for care . They or - ganize and coordinate individual and group activities , for example in the form of sports , creative or cultural activities . The mainte - nance of the well - being of the residents is promoted through active support and a wide range of activities . The social service workers were not the only ones using the robot , since usage was open to everyone . Nevertheless , the study showed us that the robot was 1 In the local context , this group of workers are also referred to as sozialer Dienst , which could be also translated as social service . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . Table 1 : The participants’ codes as referred to in this paper , their age , sex , and position in the care home . Participant Code Age Sex Position Education SC1 19 F Social Care Workers A - Level School SCM2 54 F Social Care Worker ( Management ) 3 Years Apprenticeship SC3 36 F Social Care Worker 1 Year Training GMCH4 52 M General Manager Care Home University Degree CSM5 38 F Nursing Service Manager 3 Years Apprenticeship SC6 45 F Social Care Worker 3 Years Apprenticeship SC7 74 F Social Care Worker 1 Year Training SC8 57 F Social Care Worker 1 Year Training SC9 19 F Social Care Worker A - Level School mostly used by the social service workers as the nursing caregivers are involved in other work tasks . Throughout the paper , we refer to the people working in the care home as social care workers and make the quotes identifable through the participant code that can be seen in table 1 . 3 . 3 Robotic System and Software For this study , the humanoid robot Pepper 2 was used . Addition - ally , the social care workers received a smartphone with an appli - cation , which we developed , and which enabled the participants to remotely control the movements of the robot and had a voice interface . The voice interface made it possible to type words or sentences in the smartphone that were repeated by the robot via voice . Further , we equipped the robot with a mobile router , in order to connect the smartphone to the robot and to receive the exact timestamps for the log - fles . Besides the hardware described , we also provided the participants with printed instruction manuals . The manual was a modifed version of the Softbank manual , with fewer pages and a reduced amount of information . The equipment given to the participants is shown in Figure 2 . Most of the applications used ( 34 ) have been the subject of previ - ous studies [ 14 , 59 ] and were reused for the work we present , with the exception of the newly ( 4 ) developed robot applications ( see 4 . 2 . 2 ) . The applications on the robot address three main types of activation : ( 1 ) physical activation , ( 2 ) cognitive activation and ( 3 ) psycho - social activation . In this study , 38 apps ( 34 old + 4 new ) were available to the participants , briefy categorized in Table 2 . During the study presented here , additional applications were developed and integrated in collaboration with the participants . More details on the newly developed applications is described in 4 . 2 . 2 . For the period of the study , the robot was stored in a supply room on the 1st foor of the care home , to which social care workers had unrestricted access . The room itself was near the public areas . 3 . 4 Appropriation In order to familiarize the social care workers of the study with the robot , we combined three elements : ( 1 ) a manual , ( 2 ) workshops , and ( 3 ) support during the usage period . ( 1 ) The manual included a description of the functionalities of the robot and explained all technical details , like how to charge the robot or how to turn of the robot . It was there to help the participants in times of uncertainty 2 https : / / www . softbankrobotics . com / emea / en / pepper about the technology and was seen as an instrument of appropri - ation that did not need additional assistance . ( 2 ) The workshop served to explain the robot to the social care workers and marked the beginning of the study . It comprised the presentation of the robot and its basic functionality ( e . g . , how to move the robot or how to use the touch sensors ) and safety measures . Further , the individ - ual applications of the robot were explained and demonstrated . The social care workers had the opportunity to familiarize themselves with the robot and at the same time clarify any ambiguities directly with the researchers . ( 3 ) Support during the period of usage was regular and was combined with the data collection such as dur - ing periods of observation , which took place on average twice a week . In the beginning of the study , the support was characterized by answers to many questions by the participants . As the study progressed , the researchers took more of a backseat and their role became more observational . 3 . 5 Data Collection , Analysis and Ethical Evaluation The data collection methods included semi - structured observation protocols , log - fles of usage time and usage patterns on the robot , audio fles of semi - structured interviews with social care workers and photos . The interviews were conducted either with one participant or in groups , depending on individual preferences . The interviews took place at the care home and were audio recorded and later transcribed . Observation protocols were prepared in advance and were semi - structured around the topics of : context of use , role of social care workers , difculties , appropriation and interaction . The data was analysed with a refexive thematic analysis approach [ 9 ] with the MaxQDA software by inductively clustering diferent topics from the interviews and the notes of the observations in order to identify the patterns that we present below . In addition to the qualitative data , quantitative data was collected on the integration of the robot into work processes . The robotic system was programmed to create log - fles with time stamps to gather insights about usage times . As soon as an app was being used on the robot , the app’s name , date and time stamp was recorded . To have the correct time stamp the robot was connected to a mobile router that was connected to the internet . Whenever the robot was not connected to the router , a fll date ( 01 . 01 . 2014 ) was saved in the log - fles , this happened on three occasions , to correct it we Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 2 : Set up provided for the participants - Pepper Robot , Smartphone with App for remote control , portable router and printed instruction manuals . Source of pictures , from left to right : ( 1 ) softbankrobotics . com ( 2 ) tp - link . com ( 3 ) own ( 4 ) modifed , based on softbankrobotics . com Table 2 : Overview of applications provided for the study Activation type Description Example Total Physical Activation Exercises and dances that encourage movement , relaxation and strength training . Mobility dance 10 Cognitive Activation Exercises and games that activate thinking and learning processes . Memory 11 Psycho - social Activa - tion Applications that evoke meaningful memories or promote social interactions so that mood and well - being are enhanced . Songs 17 compared the log - fles to the observation protocol and reconstruct the dates and the usage time . Ethical approval for the study and its data collection methods was given by the ethical committee of the university ( name concealed for review ) with the reference number : ER06 / 2020 . 4 FINDINGS Overall the robot was well received and we observed that the social care workers used it regularly in their daily tasks . The fndings we report on concern the usage of the robot , the appropriation of it , the attitudes of the social care workers towards the robot and both the perceived burdens and benefts that resulted . 4 . 1 Usage Time and Usage Distribution of the Robot The recorded usage of the log - fle was between October 12th and Dec 4th 2020 . Because the study started mid October , the 42 . 1 % of usage time in October is the usage time out of 19 potential usage days . There were 29 potential usage days in November instead of 30 , as the robot was being programmed on one day by the researchers . In November , the participants used the robots on 48 . 3 % of the days , the highest usage rate in the study period . Even though the care workers asked for a prolongation of the study until January , there were only four usage days in December . Care workers were in - creasingly busy with Christmas activities ( such as organizing and carrying out an outdoor Christmas market ) , and there were also times where social care workers were isolated due to COVID - 19 . Researchers were also increasingly unavailable to enter care homes in December because of a two - week isolation after being in contact with another researcher who was tested positive and because of increasing COVID - 19 restrictions ( see also discussion in 5 . 5 ) . The median values of the usage over time indicate that the robot was used for about 1 hour and 11 minutes per usage day . This time was calculated by using the frst and the last time of the logger , during one day . In this time , on average , one social care worker used the ro - bot to visit four to six residents in their rooms , but group activities also took place as can be seen in Figure 4 . From the observations , it is clear that the additional time for starting up , possible delays due to error messages and clearing away the robot is estimated at 15 to 20 minutes , so that a standard gross time of 1 : 30h can be assumed . In terms of distribution of applications , 67 % of the apps used belong to the psycho - social category , 26 % to the cognitive category , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . Table 3 : Usage Time of the Robot per Month and in Total . October November December Total Possible Usage Days 19 29 4 52 Actual Usage Days 8 14 2 24 Usage % 42 . 1 48 . 3 50 . 0 46 . 2 Median 01 : 10 : 12 01 : 11 : 05 03 : 44 : 27 01 : 11 : 05 Figure 3 : Total usage distribution of the Application of the Robot and only 7 % apps to the physical category . With regard to the overall course of the study in Figure 3 , it is noticeable that it was primarily the newly developed apps ( see 4 . 2 . 2 ) for the facility that have been best received and thus most intensively used , including christmas music and national soccer ( both psycho - social ) . In contrast , it is noticeable that some apps were hardly used , such as stretching ( physical ) or tictactoe ( cognitive ) . The age guessing app was used the most , especially from care workers to introduce other care workers and residents to the robot ( and to introduce the robot to them ) . It was perceived as socially stimulating and funny , and also serving as an ice breaker . 4 . 2 Appropriation of Robot Usage 4 . 2 . 1 Integration of the Robot into Work Processes . The robot was available to the social care workers throughout the course of the study . It was used rather experimentally in the frst two weeks ( October ) . During this time , the social service management ( SSM2 ) made sure that each social care worker had the chance to try out the the robot . However , there was no clear pattern to this , the social care workers used the robot whenever they wanted but did not integrate it in the fxed structure of activities that was planned by the care home . This opportunistic usage of the robot began to change in the following month ( November ) and became considerably more struc - tured . The social service management ( SSM2 ) created a monthly plan to schedule events at the care home ( two events per day ) , and the robot became integrated into this plan as can be seen in Figure 4 . The work plan was initiated and carried out by the care home in order to integrate the robot into the daily work : " [ . . . ] in the weekly schedule we always propose two events per day : in the morning and in the afternoon , so at least two events . And I would say that he has to be included there . So you know Tuesday morning is Pepper time [ . . . ] " ( SSM2 ) . While the management encouraged the social care workers to use the robot during the study , the social care workers could never - theless decide for themselves . There was no usage obligation . The robot was not only used during the sessions that were announced on the event board but also on occasions when the social care work - ers visited the residents in their rooms to do the daily check - ins , to talk and provide stimulation for the residents . The interviews and observation helped us to understand this usage patterns and showed that some social care workers became power users and used the robot more frequently ( SC9 , SC3 , SCM2 ) while others were reluctant to use it and did not use it often . The power users proceeded to help other social care workers , if there were technical problems or questions about how to use it . 4 . 2 . 2 Robot Application Adaptation . During the course of the study , there was an increased desire for additional applications for the robot . The social care workers had specifc ideas on what the robot should be able to do and asked us to develop these applications . We discussed with the social care workers which of the ideas were important to them to support daily tasks and possibilities were Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 4 : Two pictures illustrating the activities with the robots . The left picture shows an activity plan for the month of November . One activity is listed per day . Among other activities ( e . g . , movement with music or worship services ) , Pepper is is listed , including “Pepper visits living areas & the rooms” , “dancing and sitting with Pepper” , and “puzzle fun with Pepper” . The right picture shows two daily schedules with planned activities on one paper each , pinned on a wooden board in the hallway visible for residents , visitors and employees . The schedules include “Pepper visits living areas” on Monday , 9 November 2021 in the morning ; and “games and fun with Pepper” on Tuesday , 10 November 2020 in the afternoon . discussed in relation to the capabilities of of the robot and our own ability to deliver such applications within a short time frame . In the end we developed four additional applications , which are shown in table 4 . The applications were well received as one social care worker points out : [ . . . ] I still remember the soccer songs , the club anthems [ . . . ] I have specifcally one person in mind - absolute Bayern [ FC Bayern München ] fan . The following day , the man was still happy . ( SC8 ) . The applications were used frequently as can be seen in Table 3 and discussed in section 4 . 1 . 4 . 2 . 3 Atitudes towards Interaction with the Robot . As a social care worker said , the employees’ attitudes can be classifed as " positive throughout the study " ( SC8 ) . Because the robot had not been used regularly in the facility before , Pepper was seen as something new : " We found it exciting to deal with it . We were pleased because we were allowed to work more with it , because it was something diferent than just reading something out , [ . . . ] you could try something new yourself . " ( SC9 ) In addition to the efects on the people working directly with the robot , there were also efects on the social care workers who did not work directly with it : " They [ other social care workers ] pet Pepper on the head , talk to it or want to take pictures . So that’s like a little celebrity driving through the hallways . I think they just kind of get excited then . [ . . . ] . Then they talk about it for a short while . It just lightens the mood . " ( SC9 ) . Despite the generally positive response , there were also a few cases among colleagues in which the robot use was viewed critically . " [ . . . ] they just said it directly , that robots don’t belong in here . That the robot could not replace human relationships . [ . . . ] He simply could not imagine that the robot would interact with him , because he simply said that a robot cannot replace a human . [ . . . ] That was his purely ethical opinion . " ( SC6 ) . It was noticeable that the people with the critical voices seldom involved themselves in interactions with the robot . At the same time , we did see that sceptical social care workers who briefy got involved in the interaction with the robot tended to change their opinion . They would meet the robot on the hallway and try out applications such " age guessing " or they would observe residents’ reactions . The general manager of the care home saw efects on the team . He believed that the social care workers had begun to see the robot not only as an animation tool but partly as a team member : " Ultimately , I can also confrm that somehow he [ the robot ] is part of it [ the team ] now . He is somehow humanoid , [ so that ] it has something of a team member . [ . . . ] We will miss something . " ( GMCH4 ) . The CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . Table 4 : Overview of developed applications for care home Name Application Description Application National Soccer Songs Robot sings the national soccer club anthem and dances Christmas Songs Robot sings and dances diferent Christmas songs City Quiz Robots guides through a 10 questions quiz , asking questions about the city where the care home is located Christmas Quiz Robot guides through a 10 question quiz , asking questions in regard of Christmas manager looked back positively over the course of the study and the impressions gained . Through the study , " negative fantasies " and " fear of contact with the topic of robotics could be reduced for the time being " in the entire facility , so that Pepper " created much more openness " among the employees ( GMCH4 ) . 4 . 3 Burden of Using a Robot Although relieving the burden of work is often a main argument for promoting robots in care homes , difculties arose during the study that could not be overcome by the social care workers and were thus perceived as a burden to them . Because the social care workers focused on one - on - one care , the robot was primarily used in the residents’ rooms . These were not always located next to each other , which resulted in relatively long walking distances for the workers . Here , the robot was mainly pushed by hand and only rarely controlled remotely with the smartphone app , as the control with the smartphone was slower than pushing the robot by hand . The pushing was perceived as physically demanding : " The transport , I fnd it actually very difcult . Because you get the feeling that it [ i . e . , the robot ] is a bit unstable . [ . . . ] I have a small doorstep and [ . . . ] I couldn’t push it over there . It was really difcult [ . . . ] for him to get over this threshold , and I mean , he’s not light either " ( CSM5 ) . In addition to the physical burdens , the social care workers de - scribed some mental stress . They were often afraid of breaking something , as the robot was seen as an expensive piece of kit . Some social care workers were also concerned about possible accidents and what to prioritise in case of accident : " What if the resident chokes on something while the robot is heading into something . Where should I act frst ? " ( SC1 ) . They also described other kinds of mental stress . For example during the regular delays that occurred when starting up the robot : " [ . . . ] if I know there is a technical problem and I can’t get it solved , I don’t have a solution . That makes me feel anxious . " ( SSM2 ) . This indicates the need for more transparent communication of errors in terms of why and how long these occur , and how to fx them . As the robot became part of fxed scheduled activities in the weekly plan , the error - proneness and lack of transparency also led to organizational stress : " As I said , when it doesn’t work , it’s a bit of a burden , because you’re so internally prepared to use it now or want to use it . And when it doesn’t work , you frst have the technical problem . [ . . . ] And at that moment you also have the problem that you can’t implement the plan you have for today " ( SSM2 ) . Besides these obstacles , there were also minor difculties in the operating process itself . The social care workers tended to focus on individual care , so that many bedridden residents were in contact with the robot . Due to the height of the beds and the height of the robot , social care workers found it difcult to position the robot well . It was necessary to position the robot close to the bed during games so that residents could interact via a touch - pad , but at the same time it was important to ensure that the robot had enough space during dance performances . Due to the lack of sensors on the center of the robot , where the " hips " are , the robot often did not recognize the bed , so the robot arms became caught on the bed . According to a social care worker , it would be desirable that when the robot " gets closer to the bed , maybe the motor system can then turn of " ( SC6 ) . 4 . 4 Work Relief through Usage of Robotic System Despite the obstacles to usage described , it is clear from the data that the robot was perceived overall as a support to social care workers in their everyday work . Sometimes , the presence of the robot itself was enough to positively stimulate the residents’ well - being : " So just the fact that Pepper was present . That’s a highlight for the residents . Yeah , it was something diferent . My face , they see that every day . And there was something coming , [ . . . ] something out of this everyday austerity . So I personally found that a relief . I come in with Pepper and the resident is already happy . Goal achieved " ( SC8 ) . In addition , the social care workers argued that they were able to take on a more passive role , since the robot itself became the main actor : " [ . . . ] that you are not the main actor , but you can take a very small step back and just accompany the whole thing . [ . . . ] the main idea comes from Pepper " ( SSM2 ) . This could mainly be observed in longer interactions but sometimes the robot was also used for shorter periods , for example we could observe that the robot was sometimes placed in the residents’ rooms to wake them up from their nap , by playing music . One particular scenario stands out from the observations , which exemplifes the potential relief provided by a robot . A resident regularly complained to the social care workers that she wanted to go home . The resident has dementia and had an episode in which she was convinced that she was 40 years old with a family waiting for her at home . Two social care workers used the robot to distract the resident : They introduced the resident to the robot and tried to fnd commonalities between the her and the robot : " Well , frst of all , we found an introduction to say that he’s almost a bit like E . T . : She knew him now , too . And the attention was immediately bound by this frst sentence and her memory of this flm . And then we played Dalli Dalli [ famous game show from the 70s and 80s ] and the music alone from this Dalli Dalli , which has accompanied people for years , sometimes decades , was a real door opener . [ . . . ] She was able to get completely involved with the robot during that time and Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA she was suddenly clear of this great distress , at least for the time that this was going on " ( SSM2 ) . While the social care workers cared for the resident with the robot , there was an emotional relief for all involved . The robot was a vehicle for the social care workers to steer the conversation in a diferent direction and there was an uplift in the resident’s well - being for this short period of time . This scenario shows that in some situations it is not enough to just place a robot in front of a resident . It needs moderation by an experienced social care worker in such cases to encourage interaction between the resident and the robot . In addition , this scenario shows that social care workers need to know the life history of the residents in order to create a suitable connection between the robot and the resident . Even if , contrary to what was originally intended , the social care workers did not see any new time resources devolving from the use of the robot , this activity was perceived as having an afective beneft , since the robot as the main actor positively infuenced the situation . 5 DISCUSSION The fndings revealed that in accordance with our research ques - tions , social care workers readily incorporated the robot as tool to cope with daily - work practices . In the following we will discuss what that means for sustainable integration and the appropriation of the robot . Our contribution demonstrates the way in which positive outcomes of robot use are closely tied to practical organizational matters . 5 . 1 Sustainable Work Process Integration Sustainable integration requires us to take into account internal and external actions . By ’internal’ , we mean the adjustments that social care workers and residents need to make at various times . By ’external’ , we mean those factors which support those adjustments , such as training , technical support , and so on . Our fndings suggest both factors to be important . A robot can be especially intrusive both at a physical and a symbolic level , as other work has suggested [ 49 , 52 , 55 ] . Therefore , sustainable integration requires a holistic approach to tackling the needs of residents along with those of diferent kinds of social care workers . In the latter case , it is particularly important to recognise the varied roles that social care workers might have . Because social care workers have diferent roles and responsibilities , it is crucial to work out a clear strategy with regards to the robot , who might be deploying it at any given moment , and what uses it is to be put to . As multiple social care workers may be working with the same residents , there is an evident need for a holistic coordination . The social care workers defned three components as part of their appropriation of the robot’s functionalities . ( 1 ) This included getting to know the robot . At this point , willingness was crucial . Most social care workers were proactively interested in using the robot , even those who were not ofcially participating in the study . ( 2 ) At the same time , the management also encouraged the social care workers to use the robot , which might have added to their curiosity and their motivation to engage . ( 3 ) However , not all social care workers felt comfortable incorporating the robot in their work practices . The value of the robot and its functionalities , failing full automation , relies entirely on the attitudes of workers to it and , more importantly , their ability to integrate it into their care routines . The delivery of good care in and through robotic applications , then , depends on the practices of social care workers , in accordance with Schmidt’s argument , that practice entails both routine and normative alignment [ 47 ] . Once past this initial familiarisation stage , social care workers began asking for new apps , encountering some technical problems and progressively widening their focus over time as other needs took priority . This was , for instance , the explanation for the fatten - ing of usage over the Christmas period . For sustainable usage , we would argue , it is important to recognize the need for systematic and proactive planning . Diferent social care workers may have diferent needs and desires for the robot usage and it is important to recognise them and to fnd ways to best integrate them . In our study , a work plan and an outline of tasks for which the robot might be used was created by the workers themselves . This was a dynamic process , however , as social care workers , having got to know the robot and intuiting what kinds of things it would be capable of doing , expressed wishes in terms of the apps that might be developed , and , as we saw above , these apps turned out - perhaps unsurprisingly , as other research had similar experiences [ 8 , 33 ] - to be those most used . 5 . 2 Overcoming Uncertainties As matters progressed , the social care workers reported on their fears and the mental stress experienced when using the robot . These were exacerbated when technical issues arose . Reducing these fears requires supportive measures [ 57 ] . On the part of the researchers or providers of the robot , it is necessary to provide low - threshold technical support to reduce these obstacles . While social care work - ers used the opportunity to ask researchers for technical support whenever they were present to collect data , they were much less likely to do so via email or by calling the researchers . It is difcult to know exactly why , but we feel that a more immediate response facility , perhaps embedded in the robot itself , including a support phone number on the back of the robot , might prompt more re - sponse . Whether or not it prompts increased use of help facilities , it would at least increase the workers’ sense that reliable intervention is at hand . When support was asked for , the request mainly came from " power users " in the institution . These were also the providers of help to other less knowledgeable social care workers , a phenomenon well - attested in a number of domains [ 41 , 67 , 68 ] . For these users , additional training seems helpful as it would enable them to provide internal support and become experts themselves . Certain people are inevitably more motivated or better at certain skills than others . There is a ’social distribution of expertise’ [ 44 ] that necessitates a careful approach to training and dissemination but also to identify such users quickly in order to give them the needed support . Given the generally positive view of management towards the robot - even suggesting that it had become a " team member " - there is then a need to carefully allocate roles and responsibilities . There was a need for clear communication and support structures when things went wrong as it was difcult for some social care workers to understand why the robot had technical problems . Workers were also concerned about breaking the robot , again largely a matter CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . of inexperience and something previously encountered [ 4 , 7 ] . To overcome this , the social care workers were told that the robot was insured . 5 . 3 Interaction Design of Usage The usage data shows that the robot was used regularly in the frst two months . The applications show a clear trend towards use of the entertainment of care home residents , more than use of applications that are more health oriented like cognitive games or physical activation . In regard to interaction design the robot was evidently seen as more useful when performing functions that can best be thought of as socially interactive and stimulating . This involved two levels of social interaction : either shared activities between a resident and a robot via music or games , or stimulating interactions between one or more residents and a social care worker . ( 1 ) : The most popular apps involved music , dance , and other playful activities ( see section 4 . 1 ) . These apps ofered social interaction between a person and a robot and they were used as such ( i . e . , by singing or dancing together , or by playing a game ) . As also found in previous research in the care context [ 14 ] , a social care worker typically acted as a moderator between a resident and the robot in such scenarios , even if the robot was primarily used in group settings , with one robot and several residents interacting . In the study presented here , we observed that there was a preference on the part of social care workers to use the robot with single residents , mainly in their rooms . Typically the social care workers would bring the robot to the room , start the robot and help the resident to interact with it . It may be that the COVID - 19 pandemic was a partial explanation for this , in that there may have been a desire for reduced group activity , but we believe that this was not the only reason as some group activities still took place . ( 2 ) : We could also observe that the robot was used as a social facilitator , fostering communication and interaction between residents ( sometimes several ) and a social care worker . This supports conclusions from previous work which emphasizes the role of social robots in fostering and even generating interaction [ 17 ] . In the care home , both residents and social care workers were speaking with each other about the robot and they were using it together . We believe that this ( along with the moderator role of the social care workers ) is also related to the specifc role of social care workers who were using the robot , and who would not leave a resident alone with any manipulable tool . This also resonates with the results of Kidd who observed that care workers typically enabled the interaction of residents with social robots [ 26 ] . Earlier work had already shown that , in the context of a care home , interaction between residents and the robot was only possible with the active involvement of a social care worker [ 14 , 35 ] . The main diference in this study was the way in which social care workers were attentive to the demands of their daily work and assessed the value of the robot in relation to the degree to which the quality of their work was improved , rather than it simply being made easier . We had assumed in the beginning that they would use it to occupy some residents with the robot , without their involvement , so they could complete other tasks in parallel . This turned out not to be the case . Analysing our data , we see a variety of reasons for this : ( 1 ) The robot usage was seen as a positively enjoyable thing and therefore they preferred to be part of it . ( 2 ) As the development of the robot software was made together with social care workers , they felt themselves to be integral to successful implementation . ( 3 ) Social care workers knew they were observed , and may possibly have been subject to a certain ’observer efect’ , though we have no reason to believe such an efect persisted beyond the initial period . Social care workers , while appreciating the fact that the robot occupied the residents , also felt that these socially interactive ap - plications had a positive efect on their well - being ( e . g . " I come in with Pepper and the resident is already happy . Goal achieved " - SC8 ) . 5 . 4 Usage Preferences When we take a closer look at the usage of applications two things become apparent . First , the ’age guessing’ application ( older devel - opment ) in particular was well received and second , the applica - tions that had been specifcally produced for the care home ranked amongst the most successful ones . The ’age guessing’ application , as the name suggests , guesses the age of the person standing in front of it , based on an algorithm that measures features of the person’s face . It was frequently used by the social care workers to introduce the robot to other coworkers and residents and has proven to be something of a ’warm up’ application to get people to further engage with the robot , something that has also been seen in other studies [ 50 ] . The frequent usage of the newly developed applications was , we believe , for three interconnected reasons . For one , the care workers have told us that they felt that , if the robot was to be used , it was to be used ’properly’ ( Management of Social Service said to social care workers : " remember that Pepper is not going to stay forever , if you want to use it , do it now " - SSM2 ) . Second , the apps were used as a way of managing the risk of spread of the virus . Specifcally , two of the three requested application were singing applications ( soccer songs ; christmas music ) , requiring active involvement on the part of residents ( but sometimes were also used to wake up residents from their nap ) . During the pandemic , however , singing was discouraged as it was seen as a potential vector for the spread of the virus [ 1 ] . Since that was not recommended , they let the robot sing and tried to animate the residents to sing with the robot . That had the result that the social care workers did not have to sing themselves , since they were seen as potential vectors for introducing the virus . Third , the applications were asked for by the social care workers based on their perceptions of how much activity on the part of residents might be generated . From our observations , we know that the residents enjoyed interacting with the new applications . A fattening of usage occurred in the third month of our study , despite the fact that social care workers wanted to prolong the study ( including the availability of the robot ) . A fattening of usage would in the frst instance point to a possible novelty efect wearing of [ 31 ] . However , we found that several other issues around Christmas and COVID - 19 played a role in using the robot less than in Novem - ber ( see presentation of the results in Section 4 . 1 ) : ( 1 ) In December , major Christmas activities were conducted , such as a setting up and holding of an outdoor Christmas market ( this normally takes place within the city but was cancelled due to COVID - 19 regulations ) . With rain and snow , the conditions were not ideal for using a robot . The Christmas activities required signifcant resources , especially Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA from the social care workers . As shown in our results , the robot was not used as a stand - alone artefact , but always with a social care worker . At this time , social care workers were involved in seasonal Christmas activities and therefore had less time for the robot . ( 2 ) The work plan that had involved activities with the robot was designed for the month of November , and given the changing schedule around Christmas and the resources needed ( in partic - ular social care workers ) , no activities were planned in the work plan . The robot was free to use for all social care workers but not scheduled upfront . Bringing us to the conclusion that the planing of the management to use the robot and to include the usage in the timetables of the social care worker had substantial efect on the usage time . ( 3 ) Additionally , COVID - restrictions were becoming increasingly strict around Christmas . It became difcult to enter the care home for the researchers , reducing the possibility to help with technical problems if these occurred . Based on the three listed conditions we believe that the decrease of usage was not because the novelty of the robot wore of , but because the robot , in quite specifc circumstances , was no longer a good ’ft’ for the routine work of the season . 5 . 5 Refections on Appropriation in regard to Daily - Work Habits Our intention was to establish how and whether the robot could become a tool that was perceived as useful in the daily work of social care workers in the care home . To do that we observed how the care workers appropriated [ 51 ] the device for their work . This implies that the robot needed to be adapted to the work practices of the social care workers and some consideration of whether adaptation to the robot implied some changes in their work was necessary . This study mixed two concepts of appropriation that are de - scribed by Stevens and Pipek [ 51 ] as ’End - User Development’ [ 32 ] and ’Tailorability’ [ 66 ] . The End - User Development aspect , giving the users the ability to modify the software without coding , came through the smartphone application that was given to the social care workers . The smartphone gave the social care workers the ability to control the robot and to build small programs ( sequences of diferent applications and making the robot speak ) . The tailorabil - ity aspect , adapting the software to local needs , was introduced through the participatory design [ 61 ] of additional applications that were specifcally adapted to the needs of the care home . While the smartphone application ( to control the robot with the smartphone ) was not often used and described as " buggy " and complicated , the tailored software was more successful , the workers were proud of the applications they came up with and the software solved a problem for them ( singing in times of COVID - 19 ) . This example aligns with prior participatory design studies for robots [ 30 , 49 ] and shows that even if the tailoring of software on the robot with participatory design methods creates additional work , it results in a meaningful usage and identifcation with the development . What became quite apparent even at the outset , and consistent with previous research [ 14 , 35 ] , is that the interaction with the robot needs assistance , with individuals playing discrete roles . It is not possible to leave residents alone with the robot , social care workers are needed to guide the interaction and therefore have to adapt their work practices to the robot , if the robot is to play a consistent role in the care home . 5 . 6 Work Relief Efects The care sector , and social care workers in particular , are under an increasing pressure to meet work requirements [ 18 ] . Technology in general [ 36 ] and robots [ 42 ] more specifcally are sometimes seen as having the potential to relieve work pressure . Our study showed , in contrast , that the new tool ( robot ) increased choices with regard to the kind of care that could be provided but it also added to workload rather than subtracted from it . The robot augmented quality of life for residents in various ways but there was almost inevitably an overhead for social care workers . The potential of the robot lay primarily in its contribution to an increased job satisfaction or a change of job roles as more technical competences are needed and therefore a wider spectrum of abilities are needed by the social care workers . Even so , one might consider the ’relieving’ efects of the robot less in terms of time or task burden , and more in terms of alternative , and positive , possibilities , as was for example demonstrated by the case of the person with dementia who got distracted by the robot because she connected it to E . T . Another aspect of work relief is the one of preparation . Social care workers usually prepare the interactions they have with resi - dents and think of activities they will engage in with the residents . The robot , because it was pre - programmed with various activities , meant that they were able to spend less time on the detailed plan - ning of activity . Robots , in this context , are not proven time - savers but , on our evidence , do enhance possibilities . 6 LESSONS LEARNED Our fndings suggest a number of relevant factors that can be in - structive for future development . They make it clear that , as an HCI audience should recognise , successful integration will require a great deal more than technical functionalities geared to deliver - ing services to residents . The lessons learned are presented in the following list . ( 1 ) Development with Local Workers : The most used applica - tions were those which had been requested by care workers which , while not surprising , nevertheless testifes to the prin - ciple that it is naive to assume that the needs and desires of both patients and care workers are self - evident . Care work - ers know the needs of residents better than outsiders . More importantly , they are much better able to judge feasibility . Rationale : The results in section 4 . 2 . 2 showed us that lo - cal workers have contextual , or situated , knowledge that relates specifcally to individual resident needs and of the constraints embedded in the facility’s routines . An example which illustrates this was the development of an application which refected an interest in football , and which seemed to have a direct impact on the wellbeing of one resident . The request for such an application came from SC9 , who recognised its potential value . ( 2 ) Integration with Ongoing Activities : Feasibility is largely a function of recognising existing structures , roles and re - sponsibilities , timelines and routines . In our case , the robot CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . was integrated into the weekly schedule so that the resi - dents and care workers were jointly aware of when it would be used , and what for . The process of integration , we argue , should not be enforced hierarchically , but should be designed by the facility itself . Rationale : As can be seen in 4 . 2 . 1 the social care worker typically has a work plan of activities that is ofered to the residents . SSM2 , for instance , included the robot as integral to scheduled activities , with specifc social care workers using the robot almost daily . ( 3 ) Involvement of Stakeholders : As care is complex and multiple professions are working with the same residents it is important to involve them in the process of bringing in the robot . There is an evident need for all parties to be heard and informed about the process . Rationale : As discussed in section 5 . 1 the robot can be intru - sive at a physical and a symbolic level . The observations of the human - robot interaction showed us that the robot needs a holistic approach to be sustainable integrated into the dif - ferent facets of the work in a care home which is flled with people from diferent professions and diferent backgrounds . ( 4 ) Voluntariness : With regard to the use of the robot , the prin - ciple of voluntariness seems to be important . The value of the robot in practical operation depended substantially on it being recognized as useful and meaningful by the individual worker , and on the enthusiasm , willingness and commit - ment to use the technology on the part of the individual was critical to its appropriation . Rationale : Section 4 . 2 . 1 and 4 . 2 . 3 showed us that not all social care workers equally enjoyed working with the robot . Some become power users ( SC3 , SC9 and SCM2 ) and others just used it occasionally . In turn , it would appear that the degree of enthusiasm demonstrated by some workers testifes to the need for voluntary commitment . ( 5 ) Technical Support : While technical support will always be necessary , the degree to which it is , the degree to which it is needed depends on the willingness of care workers to manage problems , to recognise that technical errors can happen and they are not normally at fault and should not be made accountable . Such matters are as much organisational as individual . They rely on a health recognition by all parties that problems can arise . Rationale : As the social care worker ( SSM2 ) reported in sec - tion 4 . 3 the usage of the robot did also result in mental stress as it was unclear how technical issues can be fxed and this would potentially ruin the planned activity . Most technical issues are quick to solve and the help of technical support can ease that process . ( 6 ) Power Users : We saw that some care workers stepped up as power users , pushing the development , helping co - workers and taking responsibility if problems arose . A degree of ’enskilling’ would enhance the social care giver’s role and equally enhance the prospective role of the robot . Rationale : Section 4 . 2 . 1 showed us that some social care workers became power users . At the same time we can see in section 4 . 3 that some are stressed out by the possibility of technical errors . We believe the power users could help with the majority of technical issues , if trained accordingly . ( 7 ) Quality of Care instead of Workload Reduction : Care workers perceived the robot as providing useful adjuncts to their everyday work tasks . Nevertheless , there was little beneft in terms of personnel or time resources . Rather , ben - efts have more to do with new possibilities of delivering an enhanced quality of care . Rationale : As SC8 and SSM2 point out in section 4 . 4 the robot helped them in two ways . For one it helped to ofer new possibilities for interaction . The robot was something new and helped to distract from otherwise repetitive activities , an efect that might wear of with time . SSM2 added to this that the robot has a set of applications , a repertoire that enhances the possibilities , with familiarity , for the social care workers . The lessons learned here are applicable for the system we present ( see 3 . 3 ) . Much may change as robots themselves acquire new func - tions and as software evolves . 7 LIMITATIONS We also point to some limitations around this research . Through the regular visits within a long - term study , the researchers built up a certain relationship and degree of trust with the participants . Some positive fndings could thus have been infuenced by the Hawthorne efect , though we have no reason to believe this was the case [ 34 ] . The residents are highly vulnerable to the COVID - 19 pandemic that occurred during the study , and activities at the facility had been generally reduced . Group settings were largely to be avoided . The pandemic had an infuence on the study and would have included more visits of the researchers , if conditions were diferent . Since the number of participants remained small , the results can only be applied to other care homes with reservations . Consequently , the fndings are valid to the setting described here and are not necessarily representative , though we would argue they provide a starting point for future research on care home work . 8 CONCLUSION A number of themes emerge from our work on the daily work prac - tices of social care workers with a social robot . Firstly , we could show that social care workers do make use of the robot in their daily work and perceive it as a useful tool . Nevertheless , there is little support in our work for the view that robots ofer signifcant opportunities to save time and reduce workload . However , because the robot was mainly used for social interactional purposes , it gave social care workers new possibilities that broadened the spectrum of options for handling care situations and on occasion reduced the amount of preparation required to provide residents with meaning - ful interactional experiences . This resulted in an enhancement of care quality as the primary driver of use . Secondly , our work indicates the need for a careful consideration of the ’social distribution of expertise’ ( see e . g . [ 44 ] ) . Some social care workers are more skilled , or more motivated , than others . It was clear from the outset that a degree of initial acceptance was critical for the integration of the robot . That general willingness translated into a number of suggestions concerning what kinds of application might best serve their work practices . It is perhaps Care Workers Making Use of Robots CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA not surprising that those applications , when implemented , turned out to be the most often used and it does testify to the importance of recognising the local knowledge and skills that go into doing social care work . Tailoring the software through participatory de - sign methods made the integration of the robot into routine care practices much more straightforward , since it established not only what kind of applications might prove interesting and useful but also information about when , where and how such applications might be deployed . In our view , much of the hype around the role of the robot in care settings is a product of some techno - centric assumptions and of very limited research into the settings into which robots will be placed . Put simply , the vision that robots will signifcantly reduce the human workforce , for the moment , remains just a vision . Our research shows that the contingencies which arise in the setting are important . The efectiveness of the robot depends on decisions about what tasks it might perform , when it might be asked to perform them , what human skills might be required in order that it consistently delivers them and , arguably most importantly , what coordinative work will be required . The latter , in particular , requires attention to what skills are needed on the part of social care workers , how they are to be trained , and what kinds of application actually provide support for them in their work . In conclusion we argue that social robots like the one we used are ready to be used within care homes but their successful deployment depends on an understanding of the routine work being done in the care home . Further it is important to adapt the robotic systems to local needs , the robots do not work ’out of the box’ . The work entails a level of cooperation , and coordination of activity , and a level of competence that is not universal . It seems like it is not the readiness of the technology nor the willingness of care homes that constitute the main obstacle to development . Rather , what is needed is a rigorous understanding of the ways in which the use of a social robot can be successfully and sustainably integrated with daily work As much as anything else , that entails a rigorous understanding of what that work actually is . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank all involved parties . This work is a shared result and we are deeply thankful for the given opportunity . We were given the chance to work on this study during a difcult time and are grateful to have been welcome at the care home . The presented work has received funding from the European Union H2020 Programme under grant agreement no . 101016453 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Elizabeth L Anderson , Paul Turnham , John R Grifn , and Chester C Clarke . 2020 . Consideration of the aerosol transmission for COVID - 19 and public health . Risk Analysis 40 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 902 – 907 . [ 2 ] Stefanie Baisch , Thorsten Kolling , Saskia Rühl , Barbara Klein , Johannes Pantel , Frank Oswald , and Monika Knopf . 2018 . [ Emotional robots in a nursing context : Empirical analysis of the present use and the efects of Paro and Pleo ] . Z . Gerontol . Geriatr . 51 , 1 ( Jan 2018 ) , 16 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00391 - 017 - 1346 - 8 arXiv : 29218400 [ 3 ] Markus Bajones , David Fischinger , Astrid Weiss , Daniel Wolf , and Susanne Frennert . 2018 . Hobbit : Providing Fall Detection and Prevention for the El - derly in the Real World . Journal of Robotics 2018 ( Jun 2018 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 1754657 [ 4 ] Kimberly A . Barchard , Leiszle Lapping - Carr , R . Shane Westfall , Andrea Fink - Armold , Santosh Balajee Banisetty , and David Feil - Seifer . 2020 . Measuring the Perceived Social Intelligence of Robots . J . Hum . - Robot Interact . 9 , 4 , Article 24 ( Sept . 2020 ) , 29 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3415139 [ 5 ] Heidrun Becker . 2018 . Robotik in der Gesundheitsversorgung : Hofnungen , Befürchtungen und Akzeptanz aus Sicht der Nutzerinnen und Nutzer . In Pfeger - oboter . Springer Gabler , Wiesbaden , 229 – 248 . [ 6 ] Roger Bemelmans , Gert Jan Gelderblom , Pieter Jonker , and Luc de Witte . 2012 . Socially assistive robots in elderly care : a systematic review into efects and efectiveness . J . Am . Med . Dir . Assoc . 13 , 2 ( Feb 2012 ) , 114 – 1201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jamda . 2010 . 10 . 002 arXiv : 21450215 [ 7 ] Alexis E Block and Katherine J Kuchenbecker . 2019 . Softness , warmth , and responsiveness improve robot hugs . International Journal of Social Robotics 11 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 49 – 64 . [ 8 ] Jeanette L . Blomberg and Austin Henderson . 1990 . Refections on Participatory Design : Lessons from the Trillium Experience . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seattle , Washington , USA ) ( CHI ’90 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 353 – 360 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97307 [ 9 ] Virginia Braun , Victoria Clarke , Nikki Hayfeld , and Gareth Terry . 2018 . Thematic Analysis . Springer Singapore , Singapore , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 10 - 2779 - 6 _ 103 - 1 [ 10 ] AA Burstein , Olivia DaDalt , Birgit Kramer , Lisa A D’Ambrosio , and Joseph F Coughlin . 2015 . Dementia caregivers and technology acceptance : interest out - strips awareness . Gerontechnology 14 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 45 – 56 . [ 11 ] Maurizio Bussolo , Johannes Koettl , and Emily Sinnott . 2015 . Golden aging : Prospects for healthy , active , and prosperous aging in Europe and Central Asia . World Bank Publications . [ 12 ] Antonio Carnevale . 2015 . Robots , Disability , and Good Human Life . Disability Studies Quarterly 35 , 1 ( Feb . 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18061 / dsq . v35i1 . 4604 [ 13 ] Felix Carros . 2019 . Roboter in der Pfege , ein Schreckgespenst ? . In Mensch und Computer 2019 - Workshopband . Gesellschaft für Informatik e . V . , Bonn . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18420 / muc2019 - ws - 588 [ 14 ] Felix Carros , Johanna Meurer , Diana Löfer , David Unbehaun , Sarah Matthies , Inga Koch , Rainer Wieching , Dave Randall , Marc Hassenzahl , and Volker Wulf . 2020 . Exploring human - robot interaction with the elderly : results from a ten - week case study in a care home . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 12 . [ 15 ] Maartje de Graaf , Somaya Ben Allouch , and Jan van Dijk . 2017 . Why Do They Refuse to Use My Robot ? Reasons for Non - Use Derived from a Long - Term Home Study . In HRI ’17 : Proceedings of the 2017 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 224 – 233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909824 . 3020236 [ 16 ] Maartje M . A . de Graaf , Somaya Ben Allouch , and Tineke Klamer . 2015 . Sharing a life with Harvey : Exploring the acceptance of and relationship - building with a social robot . Computers in Human Behavior 43 ( Feb . 2015 ) , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2014 . 10 . 030 [ 17 ] Dmitry Dereshev , David Kirk , Kohei Matsumura , and Toshiyuki Maeda . 2019 . Long - Term Value of Social Robots through the Eyes of Expert Users . In CHI ’19 : Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300896 [ 18 ] Kathleen England and Natasha Azzopardi - Muscat . 2017 . Demographic trends and public health in Europe . European Journal of Public Health 27 , suppl _ 4 ( Oct . 2017 ) , 9 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / eurpub / ckx159 [ 19 ] Connor Esterwood , Kyle Essenmacher , Han Yang , Fanpan Zeng , and Lionel Peter Robert . 2021 . A Meta - Analysis of Human Personality and Robot Acceptance in Human - Robot Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445542 [ 20 ] Laura Fiorini , Kasia Tabeau , Grazia D’Onofrio , Luigi Coviello , Marleen De Mul , Daniele Sancarlo , Isabelle Fabbricotti , and Filippo Cavallo . 2020 . Co - creation of an assistive robot for independent living : lessons learned on robot design . Int . J . Interact . Des . Manuf . 14 , 2 ( Jun 2020 ) , 491 – 502 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12008 - 019 - 00641 - z [ 21 ] Marc Hanheide , Denise Hebesberger , and Tomáš Krajník . 2017 . The When , Where , and How : An Adaptive Robotic Info - Terminal for Care Home Residents . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( Vienna , Austria ) ( HRI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 341 – 349 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909824 . 3020228 [ 22 ] Patrick Hock , Chika Oshima , and Koichi Nakayama . 2018 . CATARO : a robot that tells caregivers a patient’s current non - critical condition indirectly . In GECCO ’18 : Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1841 – 1844 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3205651 . 3208264 [ 23 ] Eva Hornecker , Andreas Bischof , Philipp Graf , Lena Franzkowiak , and Norbert Krüger . 2020 . The Interactive Enactment of Care Technologies and Its Implications for Human - Robot - Interaction in Care . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experiences , Shaping Society ( Tallinn , Estonia ) ( NordiCHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 78 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420103 CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Carros , Schwaninger et al . [ 24 ] Julie Huschilt and Laurie Clune . 2012 . The use of socially assistive robots for dementia care . J . Gerontol . Nurs . 38 , 10 ( Oct 2012 ) , 15 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3928 / 00989134 - 20120911 - 02 arXiv : 22998095 [ 25 ] Hirokazu Ito , M . Miyagawa , Y . Kuwamura , Yuko Yasuhara , T . Tanioka , and R . Locsin . 2015 . Professional Nurses ’ Attitudes towards the Introduction of Humanoid Nursing Robots ( HNRs ) in Health Care Settings . , 73 – 81 pages . [ 26 ] C . D . Kidd , W . Taggart , and S . Turkle . 2006 . A sociable robot to encourage social interaction among the elderly . In Proceedings 2006 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2006 . ICRA 2006 . 3972 – 3976 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ROBOT . 2006 . 1642311 [ 27 ] Seongseop Sam Kim , Jungkeun Kim , Frank Badu - Baiden , Marilyn Giroux , and Youngjoon Choi . 2021 . Preference for robot service or human service in ho - tels ? Impacts of the COVID - 19 pandemic . International Journal of Hospitality Management 93 ( 2021 ) , 102795 . [ 28 ] Naoki Koyama , Kazuaki Tanaka , Kohei Ogawa , and Hiroshi Ishiguro . 2017 . Emotional or Social ? How to Enhance Human - Robot Social Bonding . In HAI ’17 : Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Human Agent Interac - tion . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 203 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3125739 . 3125742 [ 29 ] Birgit Kramer . 2013 . Dementia Caregivers in Germany and Their Acceptance of New Technologies for Care : The Information Gap : Figure 1 . Public Policy & Aging Report 24 , 1 ( Dec . 2013 ) , 32 – 34 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ppar / prt002 [ 30 ] Hee Rin Lee , Selma Šabanović , Wan - Ling Chang , Shinichi Nagata , Jennifer Pi - att , Casey Bennett , and David Hakken . 2017 . Steps Toward Participatory De - sign of Social Robots : Mutual Learning with Older Adults with Depression . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( Vienna , Austria ) ( HRI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 244 – 253 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909824 . 3020237 [ 31 ] Iolanda Leite , Carlos Martinho , and Ana Paiva . 2013 . Social Robots for Long - Term Interaction : A Survey . Int . J . Social Rob . 5 , 2 ( Apr 2013 ) , 291 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 013 - 0178 - y [ 32 ] Henry Lieberman , Fabio Paternò , Markus Klann , and Volker Wulf . 2006 . End - user development : An emerging paradigm . In End user development . Springer , 1 – 8 . [ 33 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schofeld , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Engag - ing Older People Using Participatory Design . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 1199 – 1208 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 [ 34 ] Rob McCarney , James Warner , Steve Ilife , Robbert van Haselen , Mark Grifn , and Peter Fisher . 2007 . The Hawthorne Efect : a randomised , controlled trial . BMC Medical Research Methodology 7 , 1 ( July 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2288 - 7 - 30 [ 35 ] Helinä Melkas , Lea Hennala , Satu Pekkarinen , and Ville Kyrki . 2020 . Impacts of robot implementation on care personnel and clients in elderly - care institutions . International Journal of Medical Informatics 134 ( 2020 ) , 104041 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2019 . 104041 [ 36 ] Marc Mitchell and Lena Kan . 2019 . Digital technology and the future of health systems . Health Systems & Reform 5 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 113 – 120 . [ 37 ] Tracy L . Mitzner , Charles C . Kemp , Wendy Rogers , and Lorenza Tiberio . 2013 . Investigating Healthcare Providers’ Acceptance of Personal Robots for Assisting with Daily Caregiving Tasks . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI EA ’13 ) . Association for Computing Ma - chinery , New York , NY , USA , 499 – 504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468444 [ 38 ] Sanika Moharana , Alejandro E . Panduro , Hee Rin Lee , and Laurel D . Riek . 2019 . Robots for joy , robots for sorrow : community based robot design for dementia caregivers . In HRI ’19 : Proceedings of the 14th ACM / IEEE Interna - tional Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . IEEE Press , 458 – 467 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 3378680 . 3378757 [ 39 ] Claudia Müller , Cornelius Neufeldt , David Randall , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . ICT - development in residential care settings : sensitizing design to the life circum - stances of the residents of a care home . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2639 – 2648 . [ 40 ] Goldie Nejat , Yiyuan Sun , and Mary Nies . 2008 . Assistive Robots in Health Care Settings . Home Health Care Management & Practice 21 , 3 ( Jul 2008 ) , 177 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1084822308325695 [ 41 ] Leysia Ann Palen . 1997 . Groupware Adoption and Adaptation . In CHI ’97 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Atlanta , Georgia ) ( CHI EA ’97 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 67 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1120212 . 1120257 [ 42 ] Joseph Andrew Pepito and Rozzano Locsin . 2019 . Can nurses remain relevant in a technologically advanced future ? International Journal of Nursing Sciences 6 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 106 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijnss . 2018 . 09 . 013 [ 43 ] Maribel Pino , Mélodie Boulay , François Jouen , and Anne - Sophie Rigaud . 2015 . " Are we ready for robots that care for us ? " Attitudes and opinions of older adults toward socially assistive robots . Front . Aging Neurosci . 7 ( Jul 2015 ) , 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fnagi . 2015 . 00141 arXiv : 26257646 [ 44 ] David Randall , Richard Harper , and Mark Rouncefeld . 2007 . Fieldwork for design : theory and practice . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 45 ] Selma Šabanović and Wan - Ling Chang . 2016 . Socializing robots : constructing robotic sociality in the design and use of the assistive robot PARO . AI and Society 31 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 537 – 551 . [ 46 ] Alessandra Maria Sabelli , Takayuki Kanda , and Norihiro Hagita . 2011 . A conversational robot in an elderly care center : an ethnographic study . In HRI ’11 : Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Human - robot in - teraction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 37 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1957656 . 1957669 [ 47 ] Kjeld Schmidt . 2018 . Practice and technology : on the conceptual foundations of practice - centered computing . In Socio - informatics : A Practice - based Perspective on the Design and Use of IT Artifacts . Oxford University Press , 47 – 103 . [ 48 ] Isabel Schwaninger , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , and Astrid Weiss . 2019 . Exploring Trust in Human - Agent Collaboration . European Society for Socially Embedded Technologies ( EUSSET ) ( 2019 ) . https : / / dl . eusset . eu / handle / 20 . 500 . 12015 / 3257 [ 49 ] Isabel Schwaninger , Florian Güldenpfennig , Astrid Weiss , and Geraldine Fitz - patrick . 2021 . What Do You Mean by Trust ? Establishing Shared Meaning in Interdisciplinary Design for Assistive Technology . Int . J . Social Rob . ( Jun 2021 ) , 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 020 - 00742 - w [ 50 ] Roger Andre Søraa , Pernille Søderholm Nyvoll , Karoline Blix Grønvik , and J Artur Serrano . 2021 . Children’s perceptions of social robots : a study of the robots Pepper , AV1 and Tessa at Norwegian research fairs . AI & society 36 ( 2021 ) , 205 – 216 . [ 51 ] Gunnar Stevens and Volkmar Pipek . 2018 . Making Use : Understanding , Studying and supporting appropriation . Oxford University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / oso / 9780198733249 . 003 . 0005 [ 52 ] Tobias Störzinger , Felix Carros , Anne Wierling , Catrin Misselhorn , and Rainer Wieching . 2020 . Categorizing Social Robots with Respect to Dimensions Relevant to Ethical , Social and Legal Implications . i - com 19 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 47 – 57 . [ 53 ] Nicole Strutz , Simone Kuntz , Nils Lahmann , and Anika Steinert . 2020 . Analysis of the technical readiness and usage of nursing innovation technologies by personnel in the nursing process . HeilberufeScience 11 ( 2020 ) , 27 – 34 . [ 54 ] Rachel E . Stuck and Wendy A . Rogers . 2018 . Older Adults’ Perceptions of Sup - porting Factors of Trust in a Robot Care Provider . J . Rob . 2018 ( Apr 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2018 / 6519713 [ 55 ] S . Shyam Sundar , T . Franklin Waddell , and Eun Hwa Jung . 2016 . The Hollywood robot syndrome : Media efects on older adults’ attitudes toward robots and adoption intentions . Penn State ( Apr 2016 ) , 343 – 350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HRI . 2016 . 7451771 [ 56 ] Ryuichi Tanioka , Rozzano Locsin , Yuko Yasuhara , Tetsuya Tanioka , et al . 2018 . Potential legal issues and care implications during care - prevention gymnastic exercises for the elderly using Pepper in long term health care facilities . Intelligent Control and Automation 9 , 03 ( 2018 ) , 85 . [ 57 ] Dominic M Thomas and Robert P Bostrom . 2010 . Team leader strategies for enabling collaboration technology adaptation : team technology knowledge to improve globally distributed systems development work . European Journal of Information Systems 19 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 223 – 237 . [ 58 ] Turja Tuuli and Parviainen Jaana . 2020 . The Use of Afective Care Robots Calls Forth Value - based Consideration . In 2020 29th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) . 950 – 955 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RO - MAN47096 . 2020 . 9223336 [ 59 ] David Unbehaun , Konstantin Aal , Felix Carros , Rainer Wieching , and Volker Wulf . 2019 . Creative and Cognitive Activities in Social Assistive Robots and Older Adults : Results from an Exploratory Field Study with Pepper . In Proceedings of the 17th European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work - Demos and Posters . European Society for Socially Embedded Technologies ( EUSSET ) . [ 60 ] Tijs Vandemeulebroucke , Bernadette Dierckx de Casterlé , and Chris Gastmans . 2018 . The use of care robots in aged care : A systematic review of argument - based ethics literature . Arch . Gerontol . Geriatr . 74 ( Jan 2018 ) , 15 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . archger . 2017 . 08 . 014 arXiv : 28926749 [ 61 ] Ina Wagner . 2018 . Critical refections on participation in design . In Socio - Informatics . Oxford University Press . [ 62 ] Lin Wan , Claudia Müller , Volker Wulf , and David William Randall . 2014 . Ad - dressing the Subtleties in Dementia Care : Pre - Study and Evaluation of a GPS Monitoring System . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Com - puting Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3987 – 3996 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557307 [ 63 ] Xi Vincent Wang and Lihui Wang . 2021 . A literature survey of the robotic technologies during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Journal of Manufacturing Systems ( 2021 ) . [ 64 ] Gregor Wolbring and Sophya Yumakulov . 2014 . Social Robots : Views of Staf of a Disability Service Organization . International Journal of Social Robotics 6 , 3 ( March 2014 ) , 457 – 468 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 014 - 0229 - z [ 65 ] Ya - Huei Wu , Jérémy Wrobel , Mélanie Cornuet , Hélène Kerhervé , Souad Damnée , and Anne - Sophie Rigaud . 2014 . Acceptance of an assistive robot in older adults : a mixed - method study of human - robot interaction over a 1 - month period in the Living Lab setting . Clin . Interv . Aging 9 ( May 2014 ) , 801 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2147 / CIA . S56435 arXiv : 24855349 Care Workers Making Use of Robots [ 66 ] Volker Wulf . 1994 . Anpaßbarbarkeit im Prozeß evolutionärer Systementwick - lung . [ 67 ] Sangseok You , Lionel P . Robert , and Soo Young Rieh . 2015 . The Appropriation Paradox : Benefts and Burdens of Appropriating Collaboration Technologies . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI EA ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1741 – 1746 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732919 CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA [ 68 ] Ye Yuan and Svetlana Yarosh . 2019 . Beyond Tutoring : Opportunities for Intergener - ational Mentorship at a Community Level . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300679 [ 69 ] Jan C . Zöllick , Adelheid Kuhlmey , Ralf Suhr , Simon Eggert , Johanna Nordheim , and Stefan Blüher . 2020 . Akzeptanz von Technikeinsatz in der Pfege . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 211 – 218 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 662 - 58935 - 9 _ 17