PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org 0013 Correspondence January 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 1 | e18 Author Sequence and Credit for Contributions in Multiauthored Publications Teja Tscharntke * , Michael E . Hochberg , Tatyana A . Rand , Vincent H . Resh , Jochen Krauss The increasing tendency across scientiﬁ c disciplines to write multiauthored papers [ 1 , 2 ] makes the issue of the sequence of contributors’ names a major topic both in terms of reﬂ ecting actual contributions and in a posteriori assessments by evaluation committees . Traditionally , the ﬁ rst author contributes most and also receives most of the credit , whereas the position of subsequent authors is usually decided by contribution , alphabetical order , or reverse seniority . Ranking the ﬁ rst or second author in a two - author paper is straightforward , but the meaning of position becomes increasingly arbitrary as the number of authors increases beyond two . Criteria for authorship have been discussed at length , because of the inﬂ ationary increase in the number of authors on papers submitted to biomedical journals and the practice of “gift” authorship [ 3 , 4 ] , but a simple way to determine credit associated with the sequence of authors’ names is still missing [ 4 – 7 ] ( http : / / www . councilscienceeditors . org ) . The situation in our area of research—the ecological and environmental sciences—has changed in recent years . Following informal practices in the biomedical sciences , the last author often gets as much credit as the ﬁ rst author , because he or she is assumed to be the driving force , both intellectually and ﬁ nancially , behind the research . Evaluation committees and funding bodies often take last authorship as a sign of successful group leadership and make this a criterion in hiring , granting , and promotion . This practice is unofﬁ cial , and hence not always followed , meaning that sometimes last authors “mistakenly” beneﬁ t when they actually are not principal investigators . Moreover , there is no accepted yardstick in assessing the actual contribution of a group leader to given scientiﬁ c publications [ 8 , 9 ] , so interpretation of author sequence can be like a lottery . Hence , one really does not know if being last author means that the overall contribution was the most or least important . Although reducing evaluation of authors’ complex contributions to simple metrics is regrettable , in reality it is already in practice in most evaluation committees . Hence , in our opinion , we need a simple and straightforward approach to estimate the credit associated with the sequence of authors’ names that is free from any arbitrary rank valuation . In multiauthored papers , the ﬁ rst author position should clearly be assigned to the individual making the greatest contribution [ 4 – 6 ] , as is common practice . However , authors often adopt different methods of crediting contributions for the following authors , because of very different traditions across countries and research ﬁ elds , resulting in very different criteria that committees adopt to quantify author’s contributions [ 8 , 9 ] . For example , some authors use alphabetical sequence , while others think that the last author position has great importance or that the second author position is the second most important . Still others detail each author’s contribution in a footnote . We suggest that the approach taken should be stated in the acknowledgements section , and evaluation committees are asked to weigh the contribution of each author based on the criteria given by the authors . This would make reviewers aware that there are different cultures to authorship order . The usual and informal practice of giving the whole credit ( impact factor ) to each author of a multiauthored paper is not adequate and overemphasises the minor contributions of many authors ( Table 1 ) . Similarly , evaluation of authors according to citation frequencies means often overrating resulting from high - impact but multiauthored publications . The following approaches may be identiﬁ ed . ( 1 ) The “sequence - determines - credit” approach ( SDC ) . The sequence of authors should reﬂ ect the declining importance of their contribution , as suggested by previous authors [ 4 – 6 ] . Authorship order only reﬂ ects relative contribution , whereas evaluation committees often need quantitative measures . We suggest that the ﬁ rst author should get credit for the whole impact ( impact factor ) , the second author half , the third a third , and so forth , up to rank ten . When papers have more than ten authors , the contribution of each author from the tenth position onwards is then valuated just 5 % . ( 2 ) The “equal contribution” norm ( EC ) . Authors use alphabetical sequence to acknowledge similar contributions or to avoid disharmony in collaborating groups . We suggest that the contribution of each author is valuated as an equal proportion ( impact divided by the number of all authors , but a minimum of 5 % ) . ( 3 ) The “ﬁ rst - last - author - emphasis” norm ( FLAE ) . In many labs , the great importance of last authorship is well established . We suggest that the ﬁ rst author should get credit of the whole impact , the last author half , and the credit of the other authors is the impact divided by the number of all authors [ as in ( 2 ) ] . ( 4 ) The “percent - contribution - indicated” approach ( PCI ) . There is a trend to detail each author’s contribution ( following requests of several journals ) [ 7 ] . This should also be used to establish the quantiﬁ ed credit . The SDC approach ( as a new suggestion ) , the EC norm ( alphabetical order ) , the FLAE norm , and the PCI approach may be combined ( e . g . , FLAE and SDC ) , but need to be explicitly mentioned in the acknowledgements . Our suggestion of explicit indication of the method applied , including the simple method of weighing authors’ Table 1 . Comparison of the Credit for Contributions to This Paper under the Four Different Models Suggested in the Text Author SDC EC FLAE PCI Contribution ( % ) for PCI Traditional Credit TT 14 . 7 2 . 9 14 . 7 8 . 8 60 14 . 7 MEH 7 . 3 2 . 9 2 . 9 2 . 9 20 14 . 7 TAR 4 . 9 2 . 9 2 . 9 1 . 5 10 14 . 7 VHR 3 . 7 2 . 9 2 . 9 0 . 7 5 14 . 7 JK 2 . 9 2 . 9 7 . 4 0 . 7 5 14 . 7 Sum 33 . 5 14 . 5 30 . 8 14 . 6 100 73 . 5 The credit is based on the impact factor , which is 14 . 7 ( 2005 ) for PLoS Biology . The traditional but informal practice of giving the whole credit to all authors may be the most attractive , but often least justiﬁ ed approach . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050018 . t001 PLoS Biology | www . plosbiology . org 0014 rank in publications in a quantitative way , will avoid misinterpretations and arbitrary a posteriori designations of author contributions . Multidisciplinary scientiﬁ c collaboration indeed must be encouraged , but we need to avoid misinterpretations so that current and future scientiﬁ c communities can evaluate author contributions . (cid:2) Acknowledgments We applied the SDC approach for the sequence of authors . We are grateful for the stimulating discussions and comments by Jan Bengtsson , Charles Godfray , Bradford A . Hawkins , Christian Körner , William F . Laurance , Bernhard Schmid , Wim van der Putten , and Louise Vet . Funding . The authors received no speciﬁ c funding for this article . Competing interests . The authors have declared that no competing interests exist . References 1 . Regaldo A ( 1995 ) Multiauthor papers on the rise . Science 268 : 25 . 2 . Johnson S ( 2006 ) Are ecologists becoming more gregarious ? Bull British Ecol Soc 37 : 23 – 24 . 3 . Leash E ( 1997 ) Is it time for a new approach to authorship ? J Dental Res 76 : 724 – 727 . 4 . Hunt R ( 1991 ) Trying an authorship index . Nature 352 : 187 . 5 . Schmidt RH ( 1987 ) A worksheet for authorship of scientiﬁ c articles . Bull Ecol Soc America 68 : 8 – 10 . 6 . Verhagens JV , Wallace KJ , Collins SC , Thomas TR ( 2003 ) QUAD system offers fair shares to all authors . Nature 426 : 602 . 7 . Anderson C ( 1992 ) Writer’s cramp . Nature 355 : 101 . 8 . Laurance WF ( 2006 ) Second thoughts on who goes where in author lists . Nature 442 : 26 . 9 . Weltzien JF , Belote RT , Williams LT , Keller , JF , Engel EC ( 2006 ) Authorship in ecology : Attribution , accountability , and responsibility . Front Ecol Environm 4 : 435 – 441 . Citation : Tscharntke T , Hochberg ME , Rand TA , Resh VH , Krauss J ( 2007 ) Author sequence and credit for contributions in multiauthored publications . PLoS Biol 5 ( 1 ) : e18 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050018 Copyright : © 2007 Tscharntke et al . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original author and source are credited . Teja Tscharntke is Professor and Tatyana A . Rand is Postdoc with the Agroecology Group , University of Göttingen , Göttingen , Germany . Michael E . Hochberg is Research Director at Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁ que , University of Montpellier II , Montpellier , France . Vincent H . Resh is Professor at the Department of Environmental Science , Policy and Management , University of California , Berkeley , California , United States of America . Jochen Krauss is Postdoc with the Institute of Environmental Sciences , University of Zurich , Zurich , Switzerland , and the Department of Animal Ecology , Population Ecology , Bayreuth , Germany . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : ttschar @ gwdg . de January 2007 | Volume 5 | Issue 1 | e18