The Balance in the Delivery of ER Components and the Vacuolar Proton Pump to the Phagosome Depends on Myosin IK in Dictyostelium * □ S Re´gis Dieckmann‡ * * , Aure´lie Gue´ho‡ , Roger Monroy‡ , Thomas Ruppert § , Gareth Bloomfield¶ , and Thierry Soldati‡ (cid:1) In Dictyostelium , the cytoskeletal proteins Actin binding protein 1 ( Abp1 ) and the class I myosin MyoK directly interact and couple actin dynamics to membrane defor - mation during phagocytosis . Together with the kinase PakB , they build a regulatory switch that controls the efficiency of uptake of large particles . As a basis for fur - ther functional dissection , exhaustive phagosome pro - teomics was performed and established that about 1300 proteins participate in phagosome biogenesis . Then , quantitative and comparative proteomic analysis of pha - gosome maturation was performed to investigate the im - pact of the absence of MyoK or Abp1 . Immunoblots and two - dimensional differential gel electrophoresis of pha - gosomes isolated from myoK - null and abp1 - null cells were used to determine the relative abundance of pro - teins during the course of maturation . Immunoblot profil - ing showed that absence of Abp1 alters the maturation profile of its direct binding partners such as actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex , suggesting that Abp1 directly regulates actin dynamics at the phagosome . Comparative two - dimensional differential gel electrophoresis analysis re - sulted in the quantification of mutant - to - wild type abun - dance ratios at all stages of maturation for over one hundred identified proteins . Coordinated temporal changes in these ratio profiles determined the classifica - tion of identified proteins into functional groups . Ratio profiling revealed that the early delivery of ER proteins to the phagosome was affected by the absence of MyoK and was coupled to a reciprocal imbalance in the delivery of the vacuolar proton pump and Rab11 GTPases . As direct functional consequences , a delayed acidification and a reduced intraphagosomal proteolysis were demonstrated in vivo in myoK - null cells . In conclusion , the absence of MyoK alters the balance of the contributions of the ER and an endo - lysosomal compartment , and slows down phago - some acidification as well as the speed and efficiency of particle degradation inside the phagosome . Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 : 10 . 1074 / mcp . M112 . 017608 , 886 – 900 , 2012 . Professional phagocytes , ranging from phagotrophic pro - tozoa to specialized cells of the innate immune system such as macrophages , neutrophils , or dendritic cells , ingest and digest large particles ( (cid:1) 250 nm ) . Indeed , the core machiner - ies acting in phagocytosis have been conserved as its basic purpose evolved from predation and feeding to antigen pres - entation ( 1 ) . Particle recognition by the phagocytes initiate the internalization process and triggers remodeling of the plasma membrane and its underlying cytoskeleton , to project a cir - cular cup - shaped lamella around the particle . The phagocytic cup finally encloses the particle into a de novo membrane - bound vacuole , the phagosome . Endomembrane compart - ments , such as early and late endosomes ( 2 – 4 ) and the en - doplasmic reticulum ( 5 ) , are recruited to provide membrane to form the phagosome . Modifications of the environment within the closed phagosome generates a microbicidal milieu and leads to particle degradation . Maturation of the phagosome is , basically , a linear process driven by a flux of incoming and outgoing vesicular trafficking , and is characterized by a pro - gressive decrease in pH and successive fusions with early endosomes , late endosomes , and lysosomes ( 6 , 7 ) . The traf - ficking events are controlled by small GTPases and the solu - ble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ( SNARE ) machinery ( 6 , 8 ) , and phagosome acidifica - tion is driven by the activity of the vacuolar H (cid:2) - ATPase proton pump ( V - ATPase ) 1 ( 4 ) . From the ‡De´partment de Biochimie , Faculte´ des Sciences , Uni - versity de Gene ` ve , Sciences II , 30 quay Ernest Ansermet , CH - 1211 Gene ` ve - 4 , Switzerland ; § Core Facility for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics , Zentrum fu¨r Molekulare Biologie der Universita¨t Heidel - berg ( ZMBH ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 , D - 69120 Heidelberg , Ger - many ; ¶MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 0QH , UK Received February 2 , 2012 , and in revised form , May 22 , 2012 Published , MCP Papers in Press , June 26 , 2012 , DOI 10 . 1074 / mcp . M112 . 017608 1 The abbreviations used are : V - ATPase , vacuolar H (cid:2) - ATPase pro - ton pump ; Abp1 , Actin binding protein 1 ; MyoK , myosin IK ; 2D - DIGE , two - dimensional fluorescent differential gel electrophoresis ; ER , en - doplasmic reticulum ; ERAD , ER - associated degradation machinery ; ERGIC , ER - Golgi intermediate compartments . Research © 2012 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Inc . This paper is available on line at http : / / www . mcponline . org 886 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 In Dictyostelium , a synchronized pulse / chase protocol for the isolation of latex bead - containing phagosomes was de - veloped that covers the entire maturation process ( 8 , 9 ) . Tem - poral quantitative profiling by immunoblot and two - dimen - sional electrophoresis ( 2 - DE ) was used to characterize the protein content of the phagosome and follow the time - de - pendent variations driving maturation ( 8 , 10 ) . Five successive phases in the maturation program were clearly identified i . e . uptake , metabolism / ion exchange , late endosomal , digestive , and exocytic stages . The uptake phase was the more com - plex . Abundant proteins characteristic of this phase were involved in signaling , actin cytoskeleton , membrane dynamics and the emergence of a degradative phase . Although a clear sequence of maturation events could be established , the discontinuity of individual profiles revealed that a protein , required at different steps of maturation , can be retrieved in - between ( 10 ) . A similar plasticity was observed in macro - phages by temporal profiling of isolated phagosomes after stable isotope labeling ( 11 ) . Having precisely characterized the maturation process in wild type Dictyostelium , we used proteomic profiling to inves - tigate the impact on phagocytosis of an ablation of either Actin binding protein 1 ( Abp1 ) or the class I myosin , MyoK . Together with the kinase PakB , MyoK and Abp1 build a reg - ulatory switch that regulates the efficiency of uptake of large particles . These two proteins interact and couple actin dy - namics to membrane deformation but exert opposite regula - tory roles on phagocytic uptake ( 12 , 13 ) . Compared with wild type cells , myoK - null mutants display 20 % decrease whereas abp1 - null display 35 % increase in the rate and extent of uptake of large particles . Despite their direct interaction , MyoK and Abp1 localize independently at the phagocytic cup and on early phagosomes ( 12 ) . Like other class I myosins , MyoK is essential for the maintenance of resting cortical ten - sion and provides a force to push on negatively curved mem - branes ( 12 , 13 ) . Although there is no evidence yet that MyoK might share these functions with other class I myosins , MyoB in Dictyostelium ( 14 ) , and Myosin IB in human ( 15 ) , for exam - ple , are involved in membrane trafficking in the pinocytic pathway , potentially contributing to membrane deformation both at the endosomal level and at the plasma membrane ( 16 ) . The function of Abp1 itself is not well characterized al - though its interaction network is well described . It contributes to vesicle uptake , interacting notably with 1 ) the membrane bind - ing and force generating class I myosins motors such as MyoK in Dictyostelium and Myo5p in yeast , 2 ) the Arp2 / 3 actin nucle - ation complex in yeast , and 3 ) dynamin , a protein involved in membrane constriction , in Dictyostelium and mammals ( 12 , 17 ) . Although the role of Abp1 in vesicle formation has been mainly studied during uptake at the plasma membrane , it might per - form similar tasks on endomembranes . Indeed , Abp1 is the main phagosomal F - actin binding protein ( 18 ) . The initial goal of the study was to understand how the removal of one member of a regulatory complex of the actin cytoskeleton remodeling can decrease or increase uptake , and what the downstream consequences are on phagosome maturation . On one hand , the uptake rate and extent are strictly regulated and can be significantly decreased or in - creased . The Abp1 - MyoK - PakB regulatory loop is not the only illustration of this concept . Mutation of the interacting part - ners CH - Lim or LimF induce respectively an increase or a decrease in phagocytosis and the balance is regulated by the small GTPase Rab21 ( 19 ) . Increased uptake as a result of a gene knockout might appear counter - intuitive , however , knockout mutants for dynamin A , the actin cross - linking pro - tein , Abp34 , and both profilins I and II show increased phago - cytosis ( 20 , 21 ) . On the other hand , actin polymerization and Abp1 play an active role in phagosome maturation . Indeed , the formation of a transient actin coat prevents phagosome - lysosome fusion and delays phagocytosis ( 22 ) and the pres - ence of Abp1 regulates phagosome binding to actin in vitro ( 18 ) . Nevertheless , the impact of a regulatory switch of actin polymerization on the downstream maturation process has not been investigated . As a targeted approach , the maturation profiles of Abp1 , MyoK and their direct binding partners were first determined by quantitative immunoblots to delineate the impact of myoK - or abp1 - knockouts . Quantitative profiling of maturation by 2D - DIGE was then used to measure mutant to wild type protein abundance ratios of more than one hundred identified phagosomal proteins over the entire maturation process in both myoK - null and abp1 - null mutants . Coordinated changes were observed in the temporal profiles of functionally related proteins predicting a delay in phagosome acidification result - ing from compensatory trafficking defect in the myoK - null mutant and an alteration of the phagosomal protease com - position in abp1 - null cells . Alterations in phagosome acidifi - cation and proteolysis were observed in vivo as these predic - tions were verified at a functional level . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture—Dictyostelium cells of the parent wild type strain AX - 2 were grown at 22 °C in HL - 5c medium ( Formedium ) supplemented with 100 units / ml penicillin and 100 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) . myoK null cells ( 13 ) and abp1 null mutants were maintained with additional 5 (cid:1) g / ml blasticidin ( 12 ) . Electron Microscopy— Phagosomes directly collected from the gradient were diluted and normalized for concentration in HESES ( 0 . 25 M sucrose , 20 m M HEPES - KOH , pH 7 . 2 ) . Phagosomes in equiv - alent number for each fraction were mixed 1 : 1 ( v / v ) in freshly prepared fixative solution ( 0 . 4 M sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 2 , 4 % glutaralde - hyde , 0 . 6 % OsO 4 ) . Samples were fixed for 1h on a rotating wheel . Phagosomes were pelleted 15 min , 14 (cid:3) 000 rpm on a mini - centrifuge and washed in PBS until the supernatant was clear . Phagosome pellets were then contrasted and embedded ( 23 , 24 ) . Flow Cytometry - based Uptake Assay— Uptake was measured as described ( 10 ) with the following modifications . Fluorescent beads of 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 and 4 . 5 (cid:1) m in diameter ( Fluorescent YG carboxylated beads , Polyscience ) were added to the cell at 800 : 1 , 200 : 1 and 10 : 1 ratios , respectively . Flow cytometry was performed with a FACScalibur ( Beck - ton Dickinson ) . Data were analyzed with the FlowJo software ( TreeStar ) . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 887 Phagosome Isolation— Latex bead - containing phagosomes were isolated via flotation on sucrose step gradients and processed as described ( 9 , 10 ) . Relative Abundance Profiling by Immunoblotting— Quantitative im - munoblots were performed as described ( 10 ) with following modifi - cations . The chemiluminescent signal was detected in a UVP EpiChem II Darkroom equipped with a digital camera . Signals were quantified with Labworks 4 . 0 software . Bands were defined as boxes inside lanes and total box volume was quantified after “filtered profile” background subtraction . Signal intensities were then normalized , set - ting the maximum signal intensity to 100 % , resulting in a relative abundance profile during phagosome maturation time . To measure mutant - to - wild type ratios , phagosomes were isolated in parallel in the mutant and wild type cells at early time - points ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 , 15 (cid:3) / 0 ) . Immunoblot signal intensities were measured and averaged ( n (cid:4) 3 ) . The signal at 5 (cid:3) / 0 in wild type phagosomes was set as 100 % and signal intensity values in the mutant were normalized accordingly . Mutant - to - wild type ratios were consistent over the 5 (cid:3) / 0 and 15 (cid:3) / 0 time - points . Thus , the whole mutant profile was normalized accordingly . Antibodies— Antibodies raised against the following Dictyostelium antigens were obtained from : ( 1 ) actin ( mAb , 224 - 236 - 1 ) , calreticulin ( mAb , 251 - 67 - 1 ) ( gift of Dr . G . Gerisch , MPI for Biochemistry , Martin - sried ) ; ( 2 ) profilin II ( mAb , 174 - 380 - 3 ) ( gift of Dr . M . Schleicher , Adolf - Butenandt - Institute , Munich ) ; ( 3 ) Arp3 ( pAb ; gift of Dr . R . H . Insall , CR - UK Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , Glasgow ) , ( 4 ) dynamin A ( gift of Dr . D . J . Manstein , Hannover Medical School ) . The anti - MyoK and anti - Abp1 antibodies were described in ( 12 ) . For immuno - blots , goat - anti - rabbit IgGs or goat - anti - mouse IgGs conjugated to HRP ( BioRad ) were used at dilutions between 1 : 2 , 000 and 1 : 10 , 000 . Two - dimensional Gel Electrophoresis ( 2D - DIGE ) — Cell were syn - chronized for growth in suspension over a 3 days period , harvested by centrifugation ( 5 min , 1200 rpm , GH3 . 8A ) and washed twice in Sørensen buffer . Cell pellets were resuspended in 10 (cid:1) l of 14x com - plete protease inhibitors ( Roche ) water solution , flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at (cid:5) 80 °C . Cells were then lysed in DIGE sample buffer and samples were labeled directly after determination of the protein concentration [ (cid:6) 5 (cid:1) g / (cid:1) l , 2D - Quant kit ( Amersham Biosci - ences ) ] . Phagosome pellets were resuspended in a minimal volume of DIGE sample buffer ( 7 M urea ( Amersham Biosciences ) , 2 M thiourea ( Amersham Biosciences ) , 4 % 3 - ( ( 3 - Cholamidopropyl ) dimethylammo - nio ) - 1 - propanesulfonate ( CHAPS ) , 15 m M 1 , 2 - diheptanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphatdiyl choline ( DHPC ) ( Avanti Lipids ) , 30 m M Tris ( Sigma Aldrich ) , pH 8 . 5 ) . Protein samples ( 50 (cid:1) g ) were adjusted to the same concentration ( (cid:2) 2 . 5 (cid:1) g / (cid:1) l ) and labeled in parallel in the DIGE sample buffer with the respective minimal fluorescent CyDye - NHS ( Cy5 , Cy3 , Cy2 ) , according to manufacturer’s instructions ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Labeled samples were mixed and co - migrated with additional 200 – 300 (cid:1) g of corresponding unlabeled sample . Total protein sample was adjusted to 450 (cid:1) l in two - dimensional sample buffer ( 7 M urea , 2 M thiourea , 65 m M DTE 1 , 4 - Dithioerythritol ( DTE ) , 4 % CHAPS , 15 m M DHPC , 2 % Resolyte ampholytes , Tris 30 m M , pH 8 . 5 ) . Samples were separated as described ( 10 , 25 ) with the following modifications . First dimension was performed in NL 3 – 10 , 24 cm strips ( Amersham Biosciences ) at 15 °C with a current of 75 (cid:1) A / strip and up to 45 kVh . Second dimension was run on polyacrylamide gel of 12 . 5 % T , 2 . 6 % C ( National Diagnostics ) at 15 °C , 15 mA / gel , O / N in an Ettan Dalt Twelve chamber ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Gels were poured in a six - gel chamber between low - fluorescence plates ac - cording to manufacturer’s instructions ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Gels were scanned in an Ettan DIGE imager ( Amersham Biosciences ) . Scan times were kept identical in a comparative gel run and adjusted for each dye to result in the best signal to noise ratio and the most extensive range of signal intensity . Gel Analysis and Mutant / Wild Type Ratio Profiling— Gels were an - alyzed with Melanie Image Master 2D Platinum version 6 for DIGE . The initial number of detected spots was set to 2 (cid:3) 500 and then spots were filtered according to spot area , percentage volume and saliency depending on gel signal - to noise ratio and manually curated . For phagosome samples , gels corresponding to the same time point were matched pair - wise . Gels were then matched within the pulse / chase series , setting the 5 (cid:3) / 0 time point as a reference . To match spot absent from the 5 (cid:3) / 0 time point , matched spots were withdrawn from analysis and remaining spots were then matched to the 15 (cid:3) / 105 (cid:3) time point as a reference . Merging of matched pairs and time - series were performed in Excel using the SuperCombine add - in ( gift from Mari - anne Tardif and Je´roˆme Garin , Institute of Life Sciences Research and Technologies , Grenoble ) and resulted in a list containing all matched spots and their respective mutant / WT ratios during maturation i . e . all the spot ratio profiles . In case of conflict , matches associated with a known mutant / WT ratio value and / or the most complete time - series were favored on the final matching table . Differential spots fulfilled three criteria : 1 ) their differential ratio was higher than (cid:7) 1 . 6 , 2 ) stan - dard deviation of the mean should not overlap , 3 ) spot detection should not introduce any potential bias . For analysis of cell lysates , a ratio of 1 . 3 ( 30 % difference ) was experimentally determined as being a reasonable cut off to consider bona fide differential spots . As the spot ratio variability was slightly higher in phagosome samples com - pared with cell lysates , the cut off was set twice as high ( 1 . 6 , 60 % difference ) . Ratio profiles of proteins identified in multiple neighboring spots ( i . e . spot groups or spot trains ) are very similar ( see supple - mentary Data ) . Thus , only an averaged profile of all isoforms is shown here ( i . e . VatB , VatA , CrtA , PDI1 , PDI2 , … ) . Protein Identification by Mass Spectrometry and Data Analysis— Protein identification was performed essentially as described ( 10 , 26 ) . In brief , proteins were in - gel digested with trypsin and extracted from Coomassie stained one - dimensional or two - dimensional gel pieces in a liquid handling robot ( DigestPro MS , Intavis AG ) according to stan - dard procedures . For peptide fingerprinting ( PMF ) by MALDI - TOF mass spectrome - try ( Ultraflex , Bruker ) , samples were analyzed as described ( 10 ) . Pro - tein sequencing was performed either on an ESI - Q - TOF ( QSTAR Pulsar , PE Sciex ) ( 10 ) or an Orbitrap ( LTQ Orbitrap , Thermo Scientific ) as described ( 26 ) . From the MS and MS / MS spectra , peak lists were generated without peak removal after centroiding and deisotoping ( analyst QS 1 . 1 ; Applied Biosystems ; combined with Mascot script version 1 . 6b13 ; Matrix Science ) . The peak list was then applied to a database search against Dictybase , the Dictyostelium protein data - base ( 27 ) ( dicty _ primary _ decoy downloaded on 22 . 02 . 2010 , 54294 entries ) , using the Mascot software , version 2 . 2 . 4 ( Matrix Science ) . The Scaffold software ( Proteome Software Inc . ) , version 3 . 0 . 8 , was used for editing of MS / MS identifications . The algorithm was set to use trypsin as enzyme , allowing at maximum for one missed cleavage site . Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification . Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifi - cations . For PMF identifications , mass tolerance was set to 100 ppm using already described parameters and threshold for peak - picking ( 10 ) . Protein hits were considered identified if the Mascot score ex - ceeded the significance level ( p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ) . For MS / MS protein identifi - cations from two - dimensional spots , mass tolerance was set to 0 . 1 Da for precursor and fragment ions . Protein identifications were ac - cepted if they could be established at greater than 99 . 0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides with a peptide identifica - tion probability greater than 20 % . The threshold was set to maximize sensitivity and minimize the overlap between correct and incorrect identity score distribution in the Scaffold software . The relative abun - dance of each protein in the spot was evaluated . The total number of MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 888 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 spectra ( NSn ) of each protein was normalized to the total number of spectra of the most abundant protein in the spot ( NS1 ) . Proteins with a relative abundance over 20 % of the most abundant protein in the sample ( NSn / NS1 (cid:1) 0 . 2 ) were excluded from further analysis because their contribution to the differential fluorescent signal in - gel is minor . For MS / MS protein identifications from one - dimensional bands , mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0 . 5 Da for fragment ions . Protein identifications were accepted if their protein identification probability was over 99 % , their peptide identification probability was greater than 95 . 0 % and they were identified by at least two unique peptides . The protein false discovery rate was 0 . 1 % and the peptide false discovery rate was 5 . 3 % as calculated with a probabilistic method . Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS / MS analysis alone were listed without further filtering , except redundant entries for actin ( 31 entries ) , which were grouped into one common entry ( act15 , DDB _ G0272520 ) . All protein identifications and the corresponding assigned peptide sequences are listed in supplemental Tables 3 and 4 , respectively . The list of phagosomal protein ( supplemental List S1 ) is compiled from published data ( 1 , 10 ) , 2D - DIGE spot identifications ( 2D MSMS and 2D PMF , this study ) and all proteins identified in the major bands of a phagosomal sample separated on a 10 % one - dimensional SDS - PAGE ( one - dimensional MSMS ) ( 9 ) . Phagosomal proteins were asso - ciated to GO terms and matched in KEGG pathways ( http : / / www . genome . jp / kegg / ) ( 28 , 29 ) using the Orange freeware ( http : / / orange . biolab . si / ( 30 ) ) . A stringent p value was applied to select only significantly represented GO terms ( p (cid:8) 10 (cid:5) 5 ) and KEGG pathways ( p (cid:8) 10 (cid:5) 4 ) . Only functionally non - redundant GO terms are repre - sented . Transmembrane domains and signal peptides in phagosomal protein sequences were predicted using different prediction pro - grams including TMHMM ( 31 ) and SignalP ( 32 ) . Microarray Analysis— Cells were synchronized for growth as for proteomics . 15 – 20 (cid:9) 107 cells were lysed by eight passages i n a 5 ml Dounce homogenizer with a small void clearance ( S , 10 – 30 (cid:1) m ) pestle and processed with the Qiagen RNA isolation Midi kit following manufacturer’s instructions . Three biological replicates of total cell RNA were isolated for each strain . Each mutant strain was compared with its respective wild type in two technical duplicates , yielding six direct wild type - to - mutant comparisons for each strain analyzed . Mutants were compared in two genetic backgrounds ( DH1 – 10 and AX - 2 ) and data were cross - correlated . Samples and data were pro - cessed as described ( 33 ) . Analysis was performed on a total of 9247 probes , representing 8579 D . discoideum specific genes . Measure of pH and Proteolytic Digestion in Phagosomes— The kinetics of intraphagosomal acidification and proteolytic activity were monitored using a fluorescence plate reader ( Synergy Mx , Biotek ) over a period of 120 min at intervals of 1 measurement / 1 . 5 min . The indicator beads for the pH measurement were prepared as described ( 57 ) . Briefly , 3 (cid:1) m carboxylated silica beads ( Kisker Biotech , Steinfurt , Germany ) were coupled with BSA and labeled with the pH - sensitive fluorochrome carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester ( S . E . ) and the pH - insensitive internal reference fluorochrome Alexa Fluor 594 - S . E . ( Molecular Probes ) . The measurement of proteolytic activity is based on the principle of dye dequenching induced by proteolysis of the carrier protein . The indicator beads were prepared as described ( 58 ) , In brief , the proteolytic reporter Self - Quenched BODIPY ® Dye Con - jugates of Bovine Serum Albumin ( DQ TM Green BSA , Molecular Probes ) and the reference dye Alexa Fluor 594 - S . E . were coupled to 3 (cid:1) m carboxylate - modified silica particles . Dictyostelium cells were plated as a monolayer in clear bottom black wall 96 - well dishes ( Costar ) and allowed to adhere in LoFlo medium ( Formedium ) . The fluorescent indicator beads were added to the cells at a ratio of 1 : 2 and the plate was centrifuged for 30 s . Non - ingested beads were removed immediately by washing twice with Soerensen - buffer . For pH monitoring , the fluorescent emission of carboxyfluorescein at 520 nm when excited with 490 nm is pH - sensitive , whereas emission at 520 nm , when excited at 450 nm , is largely unaffected by changes in pH . Conversion from the excitation ratio to pH was achieved through polynomial regression of a standard curve generated by calculation of the excitation ratio of the fluorochrome in environments of known pH . For proteolysis monitoring , the emission fluorescence was measured in these buffers at 490 nm and 450 nm excitation . The ratio 490 / 450 nm reflects the bulk proteolytic activity within the bead - containing phagosomes . RESULTS Relative Contribution of Protein Classes to the Composition of Pure and Intact Isolated Phagosomes— Molecular charac - terization of the phagosome maturation process in wild type Dictyostelium cells is based on a powerful phagosome puri - fication strategy associated with a synchronized pulse / chase particle feeding protocol ( Fig . 1 A , scheme ) ( 8 , 10 ) . Pre - ad - sorption of latex beads on the cells in the cold , followed by rapid re - warming , generates a strong and synchronous wave of uptake ( 9 ) . Phagosomes isolated at 5 min contained single particles surrounded by an intact membrane as shown by electron microscopy and FM4 – 64 lipid dye staining ( supple - mental Fig . S1 ) . Phagosome maturation can be followed not only molecularly but also morphologically in isolated phago - somes ( Fig . 1 A , images ) . Internal phagosomal vesicles were observed with the successive appearance of electron - lucent vesicles , multi - vesicular bodies and electron - dense vesicles , reminiscent of early endosomes , late endosomes and lyso - somes , respectively . Then , morphological complexity dimin - ished so that only electron - lucent internal vesicles were ob - served at pre - exocytosis time points . Large multi - bead phagosomes , indicative of intense phagosome - phagosome fusion , were also visible , but only at late time - points . An exhaustive list of proteins identified in phagosomes iso - lated from wild type cells was built by compiling all our data acquired in this study and others ( 1 , 10 ) . It comprises 1291 proteins identified from two - dimensional and one - dimensional gels ( Fig . 1 B , supplemental List S1 ) . Its content in predicted transmembrane proteins ( 18 % ) and secreted proteins ( 11 % with a signal peptide ) as well as in proteins of unknown function ( 20 % ) are similar to what is found in the whole Dictyostelium proteome ( 22 % of transmembrane proteins , 12 % of proteins with signal peptides , (cid:1) 30 % of proteins of unknown function ) . Therefore , this list offers the most representative picture to date of the diverse biological processes participating in phagosome biogenesis and maturation in Dictyostelium . Protein classifica - tion illustrates the central but uncharacterized role of metabolic enzymes in nutrient assimilation ( (cid:1) 10 % ) , the importance of signaling cascades ( (cid:6) 10 % ) downstream of a small set of potential receptors ( (cid:6) 2 % ) , and the complexity of membrane trafficking , targeting and remodeling factors such as Rab GTPases , SNAREs and cytoskeletal proteins , respectively ( (cid:6) 20 % in total ) . Novel categories emerged from the present anal - ysis : 1 ) lipid metabolism ( 4 . 1 % ) , indicative of the intense remod - MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 889 eling of phagosomal membrane lipid composition and the deg - radation of the prey by lipases , 2 ) cell defense , including proteins involved in immunity - related functions and particle degradation , possibly representing proteins involved in specific bacteria - sensing and killing machineries ( 34 , 35 ) . A majority of the identified proteins have a known GO term annotation ( 1124 / 1291 , 87 . 1 % ) or can be matched in the KEGG pathways ( 1288 / 1291 , 99 . 8 % ) . Significant GO terms encompass the basic functions of the phagosome i . e . vesicle trafficking , reorganization of the cytoskeleton , energy - depen - F IG . 1 . Analysis of phagosome maturation in wild type cells and the regulatory roles of Abp1 and MyoK . A , The major steps of phagosome maturation in Dictyostelium are depicted along a time axis that indicate the six time points used to isolate phagosomes following a pulse / chase protocol . In brief , beads are first adsorbed on cells 15 (cid:3) in the cold , followed by an uptake pulse of 15 (cid:3) and a chase of up to 165 (cid:3) for a total of 3 h . Ultrastructural changes were visualized by electron microscopy at the indicated pulse / chase times . The successive formation of electron - lucent internal phagosomal vesicles ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 ) , multi - vesicular bodies ( 15 (cid:3) / 0 ) , and electron - dense vesicles ( 15 (cid:3) / 15 (cid:3) ) was observed . At ( 15 (cid:3) / 15 (cid:3) ) and ( 15 (cid:3) / 45 (cid:3) ) , phagosomes contain a complex mix of dense vesicles and multivesicular bodies . Complexity of internal vesicles then decreased . Only electron - lucent vesicles were observed in the last stage of maturation ( 15 (cid:3) / 165 (cid:3) ) . Large multi - bead phagosomes were observed from ( 15 (cid:3) / 45 (cid:3) ) onward . Each panel shows a representative picture of a mixed population . Scale bar , 0 . 5 (cid:1) m . B , Functional classification of an exhaustive wild - type phagosome proteome of 1291 proteins identified by a combination of 1D and 2D PAGE separation and MS sequencing ( supplemental List S1 ) . The number of identified proteins belonging to each class and its percentage to the total are indicated . The same protein classification terms were used as in our initial study ( 10 ) . C , Phagocytic uptake of 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 , and 4 . 5 (cid:1) m fluorescent latex beads by myoK null ( green ) and abp1 null ( red ) cells relative to wild type . Data are expressed as a percentage of beads ingested by wild - type cells at 90 min . D , MyoK and Abp1 have differential temporal profiles during phagosome maturation as shown by immunoblots of phagosomes purified at the indicated times . Immunoblot signals were quantified and normalized to 100 % according to the maximum value in wild type . Mutant profiles are normalized according to mutant - to - wild type ratios at early time - points ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 , 15 (cid:3) / 0 ) as described in details in the Material and Methods section . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 890 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 dent proton pumping , mainly because of phagosome acidifi - cation by the V - ATPase complex , and killing of the engulfed bacteria ( Table I ) . KEGG pathways stress that phagocytosis is an endocytic process and plays a central role in nutrition and cell metabolism . Unexpected is the significant enrichment of ER - associated protein processing , protein export machiner - ies and the proteasome in the phagosome ( Table I ) . Indeed , the ER - associated degradation ( ERAD ) machinery ( sec61 , p97 , Ufd1 , Dsk2 ) and ER - Golgi intermediate compartments ( ERGIC ; ERGIC53 , COPII ) represent a majority of the proteins contributing to the “protein processing in the ER” pathway ( supplemental Fig . S2 ) . In addition , ubiquitin mediated prote - olysis , a pathway closely associated with the proteasome , is also highly represented on the phagosome ( p (cid:4) 0 . 58 ) . The comparison of our phagosome proteome with the re - cently published Dictyostelium macropinosome proteome ( 36 ) allowed us to identify pathways and proteins unique to the phagosome . Both proteomes share 62 % of identified proteins ( supplemental List S1 ) ( 36 ) . General metabolism ( 81 % ) , lipid metabolism ( 75 % ) , protein degradation ( 75 % ) and biosynthesis ( 85 % ) and membrane trafficking ( 68 % ) are mostly shared between the two organelles whereas receptors ( 47 % ) and signaling ( 47 % ) are less shared than the average . Indeed , both macropinosome and phagosome are used to assimilate endocytosed nutrients but phagosome formation is receptor - mediated , confirming our classification . Interest - ingly , the KEGG pathways “ER - associated protein process - ing , protein export machineries” and “proteasome” are also significantly enriched on the macropinosome ( p value (cid:8) 10 (cid:5) 5 , data not shown ) . MyoK and Abp1 have Distinct Roles in Phagosome Matura - tion— The characterization of the phagosome proteome in wild type Dictyostelium was a prerequisite to analyze phago - cytosis mutants at the molecular level . The phagocytic phe - notypes of myoK - and abp1 - null mutants have been charac - terized previously using rather big particles ( yeasts or 4 . 5 (cid:1) m beads ) compared with the size of Dictyostelium ( 10 (cid:1) m diam - eter in suspension ) ( 12 , 13 ) , but usually , smaller beads have to be used to isolate phagosomes in sufficient quantities for extensive immunoblot and 2D - DIGE analyses . Thus , the abil - ity of both mutants to ingest beads of different sizes was tested ( Fig . 1 C ) . In abp1 - null cells , uptake of fluorescent latex beads was increased , independently of bead size . In myoK - null cells , uptake was generally decreased for all bead sizes , but only significantly for the 4 . 5 (cid:1) m beads . Therefore , it con - firms that Abp1 is a negative regulator of phagocytosis whereas MyoK is a positive regulator essential for efficient phagocytosis of large particles ( 12 ) . Although the absence of MyoK is not limiting for the uptake of smaller beads , our experimental set up might still allow us to observe the signa - ture of a defect in mutant cells . Indeed , the slow uptake of single large particles is likely mimicked by the simultaneous ingestion of a large number of medium - sized beads as is the case during the initial pulse of our phagosome isolation procedure ( 9 ) . To delineate the time frame of action of MyoK and its binding partner Abp1 during maturation , their presence was monitored by quantitative immunoblotting of phagosomes isolated from wild type cells following our pulse / chase feeding protocol . To further assess their functional inter - relationships , their relative abundance was measured in phagosomes from myoK - null and abp1 - null mutants ( Fig . 1 D ) . The maturation profiles of MyoK and Abp1 in phagosomes isolated from wild type cells were similar but distinct . Both proteins were more T ABLE I Number and percentage of identified phagosomal proteins matching Gene Ontology ( GO ) terms and KEGG pathways GO term : Phagosome Whole cell Enrichment GO : 0015986 : ATP synthesis coupled proton transport 14 ( 1 . 25 % ) 16 ( 0 . 21 % ) 5 . 82 GO : 0009617 : response to bacterium 40 ( 3 . 56 % ) 53 ( 0 . 71 % ) 5 . 02 GO : 0009144 : purine nucleoside triphosphate metabolic process 29 ( 2 . 58 % ) 47 ( 0 . 63 % ) 4 . 11 GO : 0030036 : actin cytoskeleton organization 42 ( 3 . 74 % ) 107 ( 1 . 43 % ) 2 . 61 GO : 0006886 : intracellular protein transport 41 ( 3 . 65 % ) 109 ( 1 . 46 % ) 2 . 5 GO : 0016192 : vesicle - mediated transport 56 ( 4 . 98 % ) 157 ( 2 . 10 % ) 2 . 37 KEGG pathways : Phagosome Whole cell Enrichment p value Ribosome 42 ( 3 . 26 % ) 86 ( 0 . 65 % ) 5 . 05 (cid:8) 10 5 Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum 22 ( 1 . 71 % ) 66 ( 0 . 50 % ) 3 . 44 (cid:8) 10 5 Protein export 11 ( 0 . 85 % ) 17 ( 0 . 13 % ) 6 . 69 (cid:8) 10 5 Phagosome 18 ( 1 . 40 % ) 40 ( 0 . 30 % ) 4 . 65 (cid:8) 10 5 Oxidative phosphorylation 30 ( 2 . 33 % ) 66 ( 0 . 50 % ) 4 . 70 (cid:8) 10 5 Metabolic pathways 114 ( 8 . 85 % ) 499 ( 3 . 75 % ) 2 . 36 (cid:8) 10 5 Endocytosis 19 ( 1 . 48 % ) 39 ( 0 . 29 % ) 5 . 03 (cid:8) 10 5 Citrate cycle ( TCA cycle ) 15 ( 1 . 16 % ) 30 ( 0 . 23 % ) 5 . 17 (cid:8) 10 5 Biosynthesis of secondary metabolites 40 ( 3 . 11 % ) 174 ( 1 . 31 % ) 2 . 38 (cid:8) 10 5 Alanine , aspartate and glutamate metabolism 11 ( 0 . 85 % ) 20 ( 0 . 15 % ) 5 . 68 1 (cid:9) 10 5 Proteasome 14 ( 1 . 09 % ) 38 ( 0 . 29 % ) 3 . 81 3 (cid:9) 10 5 Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis 12 ( 0 . 93 % ) 28 ( 0 . 21 % ) 4 . 43 3 (cid:9) 10 5 MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 891 abundant on early than on later phagosomes but Abp1 re - mained associated longer with phagosomes . MyoK was sig - nificantly more abundant on early phagosomes from abp1 - null cells although its overall maturation profile was not drastically altered . Abp1 showed both an increased abun - dance on early phagosomes from myoK - null cells and a de - creased relative abundance at later time points . In conclusion , Abp1 and MyoK are not necessary for their mutual recruit - ment on the phagosome , but the absence of one increases the relative abundance of the other at early time points , con - firming their distinct but mutually dependent roles in phago - some maturation . Absence of Abp1 Alters the Maturation Profile of its Direct Binding Partners— To delineate the impact of myoK - or abp1 - null mutations on maturation , the relative abundance profiles in wild type and mutants of the direct binding partners of MyoK and Abp1 ( schematically presented in Fig . 2 A ) were compared by quantitative immunoblotting . Absence of Abp1 but not MyoK markedly altered the maturation profile of its direct binding partners . Wild type phagosomes were highly enriched in actin at early stages only . In contrast , the relative abundance of actin did not vary significantly during matura - tion in abp1 - null cells ( Fig . 2 B ) . However , it is not clear if this signal corresponds to actin monomers or polymers , because the signal was under the detection threshold for staining with the fluorescent probes DNase I and phalloidin , binding re - spectively G - and F - actin , or indirect immunofluorescence against the G - actin binding protein , profilin II . Furthermore , abp1 mutation markedly delayed the maximum peak of rela - tive abundance of profilin II ( Fig . 2 C ) or Arp3 ( Fig . 2 D ) . Dy - namin A also remained associated longer with abp1 - null pha - gosomes ( Fig . 2 E ) . Therefore , the absence of Abp1 directly impacts on the abundance of actin and proteins involved in actin dynamics on the phagosome whereas this is not the case in absence of MyoK . 2D - DIGE Reveals An Early Maturation Defect in myoK Null Cells and an Overall Maturation Defect in abp1 - null Cells— Defects in the maturation profiles of individual proteins were readily apparent using targeted immunoblot profiling . To ex - pand the analysis , in depth characterization of the phagocytic phenotypes of myoK - and abp1 - null mutants was carried out with an unbiased 2D - DIGE cross - comparison . Differences in the relative abundance of proteins were visible between pha - gosomes of wild type and mutant cells . These differences were not only seen early in maturation but were also consis - tent throughout maturation as , for example , for the individual subunits ( VatA , VatG and VatB ) of the V - ATPase complex ( Figs . 3 A , 3 B ) . Phagosomes from each maturation stage were isolated in quadruplicate from wild type cells and in duplicate from each mutant cell line . Thus , each of the six time - points in the wild type was compared in duplicate to its corresponding time point in the mutant , with dye inversion , corresponding to 24 gels in total ( Fig . 3 C and supplemental Fig . S3 ) . Gels were first matched between biological replicates of identical time - points to obtain a reliable quantitative mutant - to - wild type ( wt ) spot ratio . Such ratios were determined for about 200 to 600 spots pairs per time point ( Fig . 3 D ) . The analysis of myoK - null phagosomes revealed a higher proportion ( 17 % ) of differential F IG . 2 . Absence of Abp1 alters the maturation profile of its direct binding partners . A , The MyoK - Abp1 interaction network as characterized in ( 12 ) B – E , Maturation profiles of the indicated direct Abp1 binding - partners are affected in the abp1 null ( red ) cells but not in myoK null ( green ) cells compared with wild type ( black ) . Phagosomes were purified from the respective genetic background at the indicated times . Immunoblotting signals were quantified and normalized to 100 % according to the peak value in wild type . Curves are the average of at least triplicate experiments . Error bars represent (cid:7) S . E . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 892 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 F IG . 3 . Characterization of the phagocytosis defect of Dictyostelium myoK null and abp1 null mutants by quantitative 2D - DIGE analysis of isolated phagosomes . A , Differences were visible in phagosomes isolated at early times ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 ) from wild - type compared with myoK null cells . Differential spots with increased or decreased intensity in the mutant are highlighted in green ( increased ) or blue ( decreased ) . The spots containing the VatA , VatB , and VatG subunits of the V - ATPase are circled in red . B , A representative gallery of these spots highlights variations in spot intensity during maturation in wild type compared with myoK null . C , Workflow of the approach used to quantify MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 893 spot pairs early ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 ) and fewer differences later during mat - uration ( 4 – 12 % , average (cid:10) 7 % ) ( Figs . 3 B – 3 D ) . In contrast , the number of differential spots in abp1 - null phagosomes was higher and rather constant ( 11 – 18 % , average (cid:10) 13 % ) ( Fig . 3 E ) . Therefore , 2D - DIGE analyses identify an early maturation defect in myoK - null cells but an overall perturbation of matu - ration in abp1 - null cells . In order to identify general cellular defects caused by gene knockout and evaluate their impact on phagosome matura - tion , total cell lysates of both mutants were compared with wild type by 2D - DIGE . Two spots were differential in the myoK - null mutant , representing less than 0 . 5 % of all spots , and contained two proteins of unknown function ( supplemen - tal Table S1 ) . Eight spots were differential in the lysate of abp1 - null cells , representing 1 % of all spots , and spanned various functions at all levels of cell metabolism ( supplemental Table S2 ) . The impact of the mutations on the whole cell is very limited ( (cid:3) 1 % differential spots ) in comparison to the impact on phagosome maturation ( 4 – 18 % differential spots ) . Nevertheless , the mutation of abp1 affects more profoundly cell metabolism than does the mutation of myoK , confirming the phagosome analysis . To monitor the variation of the mutant - to - wt ratio during maturation , spots pairs were then matched across the whole time - course resulting in time - resolved ratio profiles ( Fig . 3 C ) . 70 % of all spot pairs ( (cid:2) 1000 ) matched between biological replicates were matched to at least another pair across the time - course . The 150 spot pairs were matched to at least five time - points resulting in a complete ratio profile . Between 200 ( myoK - null ) and 300 additional ( abp1 - null ) pairs were matched across at least three time - points . Gel references were chosen in the early time - points ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 ) to match myoK - null to abp1 - null gel series so that mutant - to - wt ratio profiles could be com - pared across mutants . Abundant spots and most differential spots were picked from the gel and identified by mass spec - trometry - based protein sequencing . The 104 proteins were identified , representing an average of 220 spot pairs with known ratio profiles over the two mutant - to - wt series . myoK - null Phagosomes Display an Early Imbalance in the Abundance of ER Components and the V - ATPase Complex— 2D - DIGE intensity profiles were first confirmed by immunoblot profiling . Using both detection techniques , the wild type pro - files of the ER proteins , calreticulin and protein disulfide isomerase , showed a maximum enrichment in early phago - somes and then a progressive decrease during maturation ( Figs . 4 A , 4 B ) . These profiles implied that ER - derived mem - branes fuse with the phagosome just after cup closure and ER - associated proteins are then removed later during maturation . When comparing phagosomes from wild type and myoK - null cells , prominent differences were seen in the abundance profiles of both ER proteins and subunits of the V - ATPase complex ( Figs . 3 B and 4 B ) . Measured ratios of the quantified spot intensities confirmed these observations . Mutant - to - wt ratio profiles of all identified ER proteins ( Fig . 4 C ) were suffi - ciently homogenous to unequivocally group together . Similar grouping was also obvious for the ratio profiles of the soluble subunits of the V - ATPase complex ( Fig . 4 D ) . Ratio profiles of individual proteins fitted so well that a representative average ratio profile could be drawn for both functional groups ( black line ) . A significant increase ( 1 . 6 - fold , log2 (cid:1) 0 . 68 ) in the abun - dance of ER proteins and a significant decrease ( 1 . 6 - fold , log2 (cid:8) 0 . 68 ) in the abundance of the V - ATPase subunits were observed in early phagosomes ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 min . ) from myoK - null cells . Strengthening this early deviation from the wild type maturation profile , the ratio profile of both groups showed reciprocal variations during maturation . This revealed that early imbalance of ER versus V - ATPase proteins was then progressively compensated during maturation . Other proteins were also functionally grouped according to their ratio profile , like the phagosomal chaperones and the different actin iso - forms ( Figs . 5 A , 5 B , details in supplemental Fig . S4 ) . Unlike the ER and V - ATPase functional groups , the actin and chap - erones groups were not significantly differential in early pha - gosomes and their profile was not linked either to the ER or V - ATPase group in the myoK - null background ( Fig . 5 A ) . Nei - ther ER nor V - ATPase proteins were differential in abp1 - null phagosomes . Therefore , significant differences in early abun - dance of ER and V - ATPase proteins on the phagosome and their reciprocal ratio profile variation were specific to the myoK - null to wild type comparison . Strikingly , changes in the myoK - null to wild type ratio profile of the small GTPases Rab11A and Rab11C anticipate changes in the profile of the V - ATPase complex , in both time and amplitude changes ( Fig . 5 ) . Furthermore , the regulation or the kinetics of these small GTPases on myoK - null phago - somes might depend on their post - translational modifications ( supplemental Fig . S5 ) . The Relative Abundance of Lysosomal Enzymes is Altered in Early abp1 - null Phagosomes— Relative abundance of lyso - somal enzymes was specifically increased in early ( 15 (cid:3) / 0 ) abp1 - null phagosomes ( 2 . 5 – 3 . 9 - fold , Fig . 6 ) . This increase was transient as minimal difference was observed at later time - points . Chaperones of the hsp70 family ( HspE ) and mutant - to - wild type spot intensity ratios during the maturation process . D , The relatedness of the phagosome maturation program in wild type and mutants is represented by the number of differential versus nondifferential phagosomal spots at each time point in myoK null ( left ) and abp1 null mutants ( right ) . Differential spots are in color ( detailed view in Fig . 3 E ) whereas non - differential spots are in gray ( myoK null ) and black ( abp1 null ) . E , The variation of spots differential during maturation in mutants is expressed as a percentage of total matched spots . The left panel shows spots decreased ( green ) or increased ( orange ) in myoK null phagosomes . The right panel shows spots decreased ( red ) or increased ( violet ) in abp1 null phagosomes . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 894 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 hsp40 family ( ddj1 , DnaJC7 ) were also clearly differential ( 1 . 7 – 3 . 1 - fold ) from the 15 (cid:3) / 15 (cid:3) time point across the whole phago - somes maturation process in abp1 - null cells ( Fig . 5 B , details in supplemental Fig . S4 ) . Functional Impact of the Trafficking Defects Detected by 2D - DIGE on Phagosomal pH and Proteolytic Activity— In order to monitor in vivo the functional impact of the severe traffick - ing defects revealed by ratio profiling , we adapted to Dictyo - stelium the use of intra - phagosomal biosensors developed by Russell and colleagues ( 57 , 58 ) . Such approaches based on dual wavelength fluorescence intensity ratio measurements allow to quantitatively measuring environmental parameters such as pH and proteolysis . Compared with the acidification profile obtained in wild type cells , in which the pH minimum of (cid:10) 4 . 5 was reached after about 40 min and the re - neutralization plateau reached after about 70 min , the acidification of pha - gosomes in myoK - null cells was significantly delayed . ( Fig . 7 A , 7 D ) . It also reached a pH of (cid:10) 4 . 5 , but after about 50 min and the neutralization plateau not before about 100 min . As a likely consequence , the onset of proteolytic activity was slightly delayed but it also progressed at a severely reduced but almost linear rate ( Figs . 7 B , 7 D ) . Note that the proteolytic activity in wild type phagosomes was also subjected to a decrease of rate after about 70 min , corresponding to the time taken to reach the neutralization plateau ( Fig . 7 C ) . Strikingly , in abp1 - null cells , phagosomes reached a more acidic value of 4 . 0 earlier , at about 30 min , the re - neutralization phase started earlier but led to a plateau at a time ( 70 min ) similar as in wild type cells ( Figs . 7 A , 7 C ) . The proteolytic activity mon - itored in abp1 - null cells was strongly affected ( Figs . 7 B , 7 E ) . The onset of activity occurred slightly earlier than in the two other cell lines , and initially progressed at a higher rate , but after about 30 min , this rate decreased significantly , corre - sponding to the start of the neutralization phase . Overall , these functional results are in agreement with the 2D - DIGE ratio profiling data documenting the transient initial deficit in V - ATPase delivery in myoK - null cells and the tran - sient initial overabundance of lysosomal enzymes in abp1 - null cells . DISCUSSION Before engaging on an exhaustive comparative and quan - titative analysis of phagosome maturation in Dictyostelium myoK - null and abp1 - null mutants , we characterized the pu - F IG . 4 . The ratio profiles of ER components and V - ATPase subunits are inversely correlated when comparing phagosomes from myoK null and wild type cells . A , Curves from both quantitative immunoblotting and 2D - DIGE intensity profiling of calreticulin ( crtA ) and protein disulfide isomerase ( pdi ) isoforms in phagosomes from wild - type cells were highly similar , with a maximum early in maturation ( 5 (cid:3) / 0 ) . For immunoblot and 2D - DIGE , the peak intensity value of the profile was set to 100 % and the rest of the curve was normalized accordingly . In immunoblots , curves are based on triplicates and error bars represent (cid:7) S . E . 2D - DIGE profiles represent duplicates . B , Immunoblot profiles and 2D - DIGE spot images of the maturation sequence of calreticulin in phagosomes from wild - type and myoK null cells . C , D , myoK null / wild - type ratio profiles in log 2 scale of normalized spot intensities of identified ER proteins ( C ) and of subunits of the v - ATPase complex ( D ) . The profiles of all ER proteins and V - ATPase subunits identified in myoK - null phagosomes are shown here . The profiles were so similar that an averaged profile of the corresponding functional groups was computed and drawn in black . Only gene names ( www . dictybase . org ) are indicated in the legend . ER proteins : crtA , calreticulin A ; cnxA , calnexin A ; grp78 and grp94 , glucose regulated protein of 78 kDa and 94 kDa ; pdi1 and 2 , protein disulfide isomerase isoform 1 and 2 ; soluble v - ATPase complex subunits vatA , B , E , G , H . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 895 rity , the morphology and the composition of phagosomes isolated from wild type cells ( Fig . 1 ) . Observation of intrapha - gosomal vesicles and formation of large multi - bead phago - somes during maturation highlight that phagosome plasticity is achieved not only through classical vesicle fission from and fusion to the phagosome , but also via the formation of intralu - menal vesicles and phagosome - phagosome fusions . Phago - somes not only shares 62 % of their protein composition with macropinosomes ( 36 ) but also morphological features with the pinocytic endosomal pathway as changes of intraphago - somal vesicles during maturation are similar to those ob - served in fluid - phase endosomes ( 37 ) . Intralumenal vesicles have already been observed in macrophage phagosomes containing latex beads or red blood cells ( 38 ) . These vesicles might result from the action of the ESCRT pathways ( 39 ) or from fusion with autophagosomes containing cytoplasmic material ( 40 ) . The analysis of phagosome composition revealed several proteins involved in lipid metabolism , indicating that the pha - gosome lipid composition might be dynamically modified to participate in membrane remodeling and vesicle trafficking ( Fig . 1 B ) . Comparison with the macropinosome proteome ( 36 ) emphasized the fact that the pathways for ER - associated protein processing , protein export machineries and the pro - teasome are significantly enriched in both proteomes ( Table I ) . Given the differences in the purification procedures of both organelles and their significant enrichment , it strongly sug - gests that ER components and the proteasome are not mere contaminants in the biogenesis of both phagosome and macropinosome . Detailed analysis of the phagocytic phenotypes of myoK - and abp1 - null cells confirmed that Abp1 is a negative regula - tor of phagocytosis whereas MyoK is a positive regulator determinant for phagocytosis efficiency of large particles only ( Fig . 1 C ) . The analysis of maturation profiles shows that Abp1 and MyoK are not necessary for their mutual recruitment on the phagosome and , in addition , that the absence of one increases the relative abundance of the other ( Fig . 1 D ) . These observations confirm that MyoK and Abp1 have opposite regulatory roles in phagocytosis ( 12 ) . 2D - DIGE analysis of phagosomes showed that myoK - null cells display an early maturation defect whereas an overall perturbation of maturation is observed in abp1 - null cells . The amplitude of the defects correlates well with their respective abundance during phagosome maturation in wild type cells ( Figs . 3 D , 3 E ) . These defects also correlated with differences in the cellular transcriptome ( data not shown ) and proteome ( supplemental Tables S1 , S2 ) . The impact of the mutations is on average ten times bigger on phagosome maturation than on general cell metabolism , as judged by the number of differential spots in phagosomes compared with whole cell lysates . We had previously shown that quantitative analysis of matu - ration profiles , by Western blotting and two - dimensional gels , allowed hierarchical clustering of functional groups based on profile similarities ( 10 ) . Here , we show that comparative 2D - DIGE analysis of phagosome maturation in mutant cells resulted in the quantitative monitoring of the mutant to wild type ratio profiles of more than one hundred identified proteins . Strikingly , ratio profiles of functionally related proteins showed coordi - nated changes during maturation . These changes were specific for each of the two mutants examined , thus validating the func - tional classification of phagosomal proteins . F IG . 5 . The early trafficking imbalance of ER components ver - sus V - ATPase subunits is specific to myoK - null phagosomes and might be regulated by Rab11 small GTPases . A , B , myoK null / wild type ( A ) or abp1 null / wild type ( B ) averaged ratio profiles in log 2 scale for ER proteins , V - ATPase , actin and hsp40 / hsp70 chaperones show that the profiles of ER versus V - ATPase are only inversely correlated when comparing myoK null to wild type phagosomes . Proteins in - cluded in the ER and V - ATPase groups are listed in Figs . 4 C and 4 D , respectively . The chaperone group includes all hsp40 / hsp70 chaper - ones identified by 2D DIGE ( hsp40 - like chaperones , ddj1 & dnaJC7 ; hsc70 - like chaperone , hspE ) . The actin group includes all the spots where actin isoforms were identified , excluding degradation prod - ucts . C , Averaged ratio profiles for Rab11A and Rab11C small GTPases isoforms anticipate changes in the averaged profile of the V - ATPase complex , in both time and amplitude on myoK null phago - somes . The profiles of all Rab11A and Rab11C isoforms have been averaged ( details in supplemental Fig . S5 ) . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 896 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 Our study shows that Abp1 has pleiotropic effects on pha - gosome maturation . Its absence transiently increases phago - somal proteolytic activity paralleling an early decrease in pH ( Fig . 7 E ) and the transient early accumulation of lysosomal enzymes ( Fig . 6 B ) . This increased abundance of lysosomal enzymes in the phagosome is either due to increased delivery or to impaired retrieval . The causes for this early defect in trafficking efficiency could originate from an accumulation of actin and other direct binding partner of Abp1 on the phago - some as shown by immunoblot profiling ( Fig . 2 ) . Other data support this hypothesis . Abp1 is the major F - actin binding player on phagosomes isolated from Dictyostelium in vitro and its absence might disorganize the dynamics of the actin network on the phagosome ( 18 ) . Indeed , an increase in phago - cytosis rates in knockdown of human Rab27a correlates with a quicker turnover of F - actin coating and degradation at the phagocytic cup ( 41 ) . Furthermore , persistence of transient actin flashes on the phagosome prevents fusion with lyso - somes ( 22 ) . Unexpectedly , the early trafficking defect of lyso - somal enzymes in abp1 - null phagosomes is followed by a decrease in proteolytic activity . Therefore , not only a decrease in pH but also a precisely coordinated trafficking of lysosomal enzymes regulates phagosomal proteolysis . In the myoK - null mutant , 2D - DIGE temporal ratio profiling clearly shows an early imbalance of ER components versus V - ATPase subunits ( Figs . 4 C , 4 D , Fig . 5 A ) . In addition , ratio profiles of ER proteins and the V - ATPase complex are recipro - cal . According to wild type intensity profiles , ER proteins are delivered early to the phagosome to be recycled later suggest - ing that ER fusion occurs just after phagosome closure ( Figs . 4 A , 4 B ) . ER proteins and the V - ATPase complex are not deliv - ered from the same organelle , because the largest amount of V - ATPase complexes is localized on the contractile vacuole and V - ATPase complexes are delivered from endosomes and un - characterized vesicles in Dictyostelium ( 4 ) . Thus , we interpret this imbalance in protein abundance as an early trafficking imbalance to the phagosome in myoK - null cells . Our data raise the following essential questions . Which proteins regulate the delivery of the V - ATPase complex to the phagosome ? Why are ER proteins delivered early to the phagosome in Dictyostelium and do our data correlate with existing hypotheses ? Is an imbalance in the delivery of ER and V - ATPase to the phagosome a conserved phenomenon and how is MyoK implicated in this trafficking event ? Potential candidates regulating the trafficking of the V - ATPase complex are the canonical endosomal GTPases F IG . 6 . Ratio profiles of the lysosomal enzymes in abp1 - null phagosomes highlight a trafficking defect in early maturation . Ratio profiles of the lysosomal enzymes ( A , B ) from phagosomes of myoK - null cells ( A ) or abp1 - null cells ( B ) . Lysosomal enzymes : cathepsin D ( ctsD , DDB _ G0279411 ) , cysteine protease 1 - like ( CP1 - like , DDB _ G0291191 ) , lytic enzyme ( DDB _ G0293566 ) , a / b hydrolase ( DDB _ G0287609 ) , mix of putative physaropepsin , acyloxyacyl hydrolase , peptidase V4 – 7 ( DDB _ G0290333 , DDB _ G0272785 , DDB _ G0281823 ) . Cathepsin D is not present in the gels of one of the time - series of abp1 - null phagosomes . Therefore , it does not fulfill our criteria of significance and is not represented in the left panel . CinB is an esterase / lipase with its closest mammalian homolog ( UniProt ID : NCEH1 _ MOUSE ) being a cholesterol esterase present in the ER . It is represented here as a counterexample . F IG . 7 . myoK - null cells are defective in phagosomal acidifica - tion and proteolytic digestion whereas abp1 - null cells display a sudden decrease in phagosomal proteolytic digestion during maturation . Measure of pH variation ( A ) and proteolytic digestion ( B ) during maturation in phagosomes in vivo in AX - 2 ( black ) , myoK - null cells ( green ) , and abp1 - null cells ( red ) . Curves are averaged from at least three experiments in duplicates and error bars represent (cid:7) S . E . MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 897 Rab7A and Rab5A . Both proteins have been identified in phagosomal samples ( this study ) and could participate in the delivery of the V - ATPase from endolysosomes . On the other hand , our 2D - DIGE ratio profiling study suggests that the small GTPases Rab11A , Rab11C and RabC could participate in the delivery of the V - ATPase from an uncharacterized ves - icle pool . Changes in the myoK - null to wild type ratio profiles of the Rab11A , Rab11C and RabC small GTPases as well as calmodulin precede , in time and amplitude , the changes in the ratio profile of the V - ATPase complex ( supplemental Fig . S5 ) . Like the V - ATPase complex and calmodulin , Rab11A and Rab11C are mainly localized to the contractile vacuole ( 4 , 42 – 44 ) , and Rab11A is important for the maintenance of the contractile vacuole function and morphology ( 43 ) . Rab11C and RabC have not been functionally characterized and RabC has no close homolog in any other organism ( 45 ) . The small GTPase Rab14 was also identified on phagosomes ( this study ) and might be additionally involved in this process . Indeed , Rab14 localizes both to the contractile vacuole and the endosomal system , where it controls lysosome and pha - gosomes homotypic fusion ( 46 ) . The fusion with ER - derived membranes is an early event of phagosome maturation , and these components are then ei - ther recycled or degraded during maturation ( Fig . 4 , ( 47 , 48 ) ) . However , the contribution of ER - derived proteins to phago - some function and the mechanisms driving their delivery are still unclear both in Dictyostelium and animal phagocytes ( 5 , 49 ) . Three working hypotheses might be invoked . First , focal exocytosis of endomembranes including the ER might be crucial to compensate for the loss of cell surface area during particle uptake ( 7 , 50 ) . Our data do not fit with a contribution of ER membranes to enhance efficiency of uptake , because the myoK - null mutant which displays an increase in the de - livery of ER components does not exhibit increased uptake of any big - sized particles ( Fig . 1 C ) ( 13 ) . Second , cortical or pha - gosomal ER patches could trigger a periphagosomal increase in free calcium concentration , regulating focal exocytosis or local signaling cascades ( 6 , 51 , 52 ) . The decreased phago - cytic uptake of calnexin / calreticulin double knock out mutants was interpreted as the involvement of calcium signaling in efficient uptake ( 53 ) . Nevertheless , enhancing contact of the ER with the phagosome does not enhance uptake in myoK - null mutants . Therefore , the extent and duration of the contact between the ER and the phagosome and how long this con - tact takes place has to be tightly regulated to optimize the efficiency of uptake . Finally , recruitment of ER proteins to the phagosome in macrophages and dendritic cells parallels an increase in cross - presentation of exogenous antigens , a pro - cess controlled by Sec22b , a SNARE present on ERGICs ( 5 , 48 , 54 ) . This increase in cross - presentation is linked to a slow initial decrease in pH in dendritic cells ( 55 ) . Although amoebae use phagocytosis to feed and do not express antigen - pre - senting molecules , molecular machines essential for cross - presentation like ER chaperones , ERGIC and ERAD compo - nents are enriched in the phagosome of Dictyostelium ( Table I ) and have been identified in a recent comparative proteomic analysis of the phagosome in mouse , Drosophila and Dictyo - stelium , showing that these components have been con - served throughout evolution as parts of the phagosome pro - teome core ( 1 ) . It was recently proposed that , during evolution from prokaryotes to eukaryotes , the ER , the ERAD and the proteasome machineries primarily served a function linked to feeding , i . e . import and cleavage of polypeptides resulting from extracellular digestion ( 56 ) . Thus , ER components could have been first used to assist feeding and then co - opted to maximize efficiency of antigen cross - presentation . The balance in the delivery of ER components and of the V - ATPase complex to the phagosome can be genetically altered in Dictyostelium by knocking out myoK . This balance can be also altered pharmacologically in macrophages . Spe - cific inhibition of the V - ATPase complex by bafilomycin or inhibition of early membrane trafficking by 3 - methyladenine and wortmannin increases interaction of the ER with the pha - gosome ( 5 ) . Thus , reducing V - ATPase activity or blocking early membrane delivery might increase ER fusion . In den - dritic cells , the balance between ER fusion and lysosome delivery can be altered genetically . Absence of Sec22b delays fusion of lysosomes to latex bead containing phagosomes and reduces phagosomal proteolysis ( 48 ) . In the myoK - null mutant , the imbalance is likely because of a slowed delivery of V - ATPase versus ER membranes as the abundance of the V - ATPase in the mutant reaches wild type levels at 15 (cid:3) / 15 (cid:3) and even exceeds it beyond this time point ( Fig . 4 D ) . Because MyoK has been localized at the phagocytic cup and on early phagosomes [ ( 12 ) and Fig . 1 D ] , we suggest that it might directly control retrieval of ER components rather than V - ATPase delivery . In analogy , another Dictyostelium class I myosin , MyoB , controls the retrieval of plasma membrane components from the endosomes ( 14 ) . Alternatively , MyoK could indirectly alter membrane trafficking . MyoK is enriched at sites of cup closure and its absence lowers phagocytic rates ( 12 ) ( Fig . 1 C ) . Therefore , its absence potentially slows down cup closure , which would increase contact of ER mem - branes with the phagocytic cup . This might in turn hinder contact and delay fusion with a Rab11 - positive endosomal compartment delivering the V - ATPase . In the myoK - null mu - tant , the reduced delivery of V - ATPase correlates with a re - duced phagosomal acidification in vivo ( Fig . 7 A ) . As a likely consequence , the intra - phagosomal proteolytic activity is se - verely decreased ( Fig . 7 B ) . Thus , we propose that the effi - ciency of particle digestion and killing reflects this balance between fusion with the ER and delivery of the V - ATPase complex . In conclusion , quantitative ratio profiling by immunoblots and 2D - DIGE is a powerful tool to measure mutant to wild type protein abundance ratios over the complete course of the maturation process . Targeted immunoblot profiling pin - pointed the central role of Abp1 in organizing actin dynamics MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 898 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 on the phagosome . Quantitative and comparative 2D - DIGE profiling was a reliable discovery tool to highlight the proteins that deviate from the wild type maturation profiles induced by genetic ablations . Clustering of such deviant profiles revealed concerted alterations in the abundance of functional protein groups . As a proof of concept , this approach exposed for the first time that the participation of ER components is part of the primordial process of maturation and that a reciprocal imbal - ance in the delivery of ER and V - ATPase components is induced genetically by knocking out the myosin IK and , con - sequently , impacts on the kinetic of acidification and proteol - ysis . Our study brings a genetic and proteomic demonstration that the ER participation in phagocytosis is an evolutionary conserved process regulated by proteins at the interface be - tween cytoskeleton and membrane traffic . Acknowledgments— We thank A . Bosserhof and M . Ellis for help with mass spectrometry , N . Gopaldass and N . Sattler with the pH and proteolysis measurement assays , and M . Hagedorn with electron microscopy . A special thank you goes to P . Gaudet , M . - C . Blatter , and E . de Castro from the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics for their help with bioinformatic analyses . We are also grateful to the whole team of DictyBase for their support . We thank Matthias Trost , Jonathan Boulais , and Florence Niedergang for careful reading of the manuscript and thoughtful suggestions . * This work was supported by the Max - Planck Society , the Deut - sche Forschungsgemeinschaft , the UK BBSRC , and the Swiss Na - tional Science Foundation . □ S This article contains supplemental Figs . S1 to S5 and Tables S1 to S4 . (cid:1) To whom correspondence should be addressed : De´partment de Biochimie , Faculte´ des Sciences , University de Gene ` ve , Sciences II , 30 quay Ernest Ansermet , CH - 1211 Gene ` ve - 4 , Switzerland . Tel . : (cid:2) 41 - 22 - 379 - 6496 ; Fax : (cid:2) 41 - 22 - 379 - 3499 ; E - mail : thierry . soldati @ unige . ch . * * Present address : Klinisches Institut fu¨r Pathologie , 1090 Wien , Austria . REFERENCES 1 . Boulais , J . , Trost , M . , Landry , C . R . , Dieckmann , R . , Levy , E . D . , Soldati , T . , Michnick , S . W . , Thibault , P . , and Desjardins , M . ( 2010 ) Molecular char - acterization of the evolution of phagosomes . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 423 2 . Bajno , L . , Peng , X . R . , Schreiber , A . D . , Moore , H . P . , Trimble , W . S . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2000 ) Focal exocytosis of VAMP3 - containing vesicles at sites of phagosome formation . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 697 – 706 3 . Braun , V . , Fraisier , V . , Raposo , G . , Hurbain , I . , Sibarita , J . B . , Chavrier , P . , Galli , T . , and Niedergang , F . ( 2004 ) TI - VAMP / VAMP7 is required for optimal phagocytosis of opsonised particles in macrophages . EMBO J . 23 , 4166 – 4176 4 . Clarke , M . , Ko¨hler , J . , Arana , Q . , Liu , T . , Heuser , J . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2002 ) Dynamics of the vacuolar H ( (cid:2) ) - ATPase in the contractile vacuole com - plex and the endosomal pathway of Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2893 – 2905 5 . Gagnon , E . , Duclos , S . , Rondeau , C . , Chevet , E . , Cameron , P . H . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Paiement , J . , Bergeron , J . J . , and Desjardins , M . ( 2002 ) Endoplasmic reticulum - mediated phagocytosis is a mechanism of entry into macrophages . Cell 110 , 119 – 131 6 . Bozzaro , S . , Bucci , C . , and Steinert , M . ( 2008 ) Phagocytosis and host - pathogen interactions in Dictyostelium with a look at macrophages . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 271 , 253 – 300 7 . Flannagan , R . S . , Cosío , G . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2009 ) Antimicrobial mecha - nisms of phagocytes and bacterial evasion strategies . Nat . Rev . Micro - biol . 7 , 355 – 366 8 . Gotthardt , D . , Warnatz , H . J . , Henschel , O . , Bru¨ckert , F . , Schleicher , M . , and Soldati , T . ( 2002 ) High - resolution dissection of phagosome matura - tion reveals distinct membrane trafficking phases . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 3508 – 3520 9 . Dieckmann , R . , Gopaldass , N . , Escalera , C . , and Soldati , T . ( 2008 ) Moni - toring time - dependent maturation changes in purified phagosomes from Dictyostelium discoideum . Methods Mol . Biol . 445 , 327 – 337 10 . Gotthardt , D . , Blancheteau , V . , Bosserhoff , A . , Ruppert , T . , Delorenzi , M . , and Soldati , T . ( 2006 ) Proteomics fingerprinting of phagosome matura - tion and evidence for the role of a Galpha during uptake . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 5 , 2228 – 2243 11 . Rogers , L . D . , and Foster , L . J . ( 2007 ) The dynamic phagosomal proteome and the contribution of the endoplasmic reticulum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 18520 – 18525 12 . Dieckmann , R . , von Heyden , Y . , Kistler , C . , Gopaldass , N . , Hausherr , S . , Crawley , S . W . , Schwarz , E . C . , Diensthuber , R . P . , Coˆte´ , G . P . , Tsiaval - iaris , G . , and Soldati , T . ( 2010 ) A myosin IK - Abp1 - PakB circuit acts as a switch to regulate phagocytosis efficiency . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 1505 – 1518 13 . Schwarz , E . C . , Neuhaus , E . M . , Kistler , C . , Henkel , A . W . , and Soldati , T . ( 2000 ) Dictyostelium myosin IK is involved in the maintenance of cortical tension and affects motility and phagocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 621 – 633 14 . Neuhaus , E . M . , and Soldati , T . ( 2000 ) A myosin I is involved in membrane recycling from early endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1013 – 1026 15 . Salas - Cortes , L . , Ye , F . , Tenza , D . , Wilhelm , C . , Theos , A . , Louvard , D . , Raposo , G . , and Coudrier , E . ( 2005 ) Myosin Ib modulates the morphol - ogy and the protein transport within multi - vesicular sorting endosomes . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4823 – 4832 16 . Soldati , T . , and Schliwa , M . ( 2006 ) Powering membrane traffic in endocy - tosis and recycling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 897 – 908 17 . Robertson , A . S . , Smythe , E . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2009 ) Functions of actin in endocytosis . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 66 , 2049 – 2065 18 . Gopaldass , N . , Patel , D . , Kratzke , R . , Dieckmann , R . , Hausherr , S . , Hage - dorn , M . , Neuhaus , E . , Hofmann , E . , Hille , K . , Kuznetsov , S . , and Soldati , T . ( 2011 ) Dynamin A , Myosin IB and Abp1 couple phagosome maturation to F - actin binding . Traffic 13 , 120 – 130 19 . Khurana , T . , Brzostowski , J . A . , and Kimmel , A . R . ( 2005 ) A Rab21 / LIM - only / CH - LIM complex regulates phagocytosis via both activating and inhibitory mechanisms . EMBO J . 24 , 2254 – 2264 20 . Rivero , F . ( 2008 ) Endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium discoideum . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 267 , 343 – 397 21 . Wienke , D . C . , Knetsch , M . L . , Neuhaus , E . M . , Reedy , M . C . , and Manstein , D . J . ( 1999 ) Disruption of a dynamin homologue affects endocytosis , organelle morphology , and cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 225 – 243 22 . Liebl , D . , and Griffiths , G . ( 2009 ) Transient assembly of F - actin by phago - somes delays phagosome fusion with lysosomes in cargo - overloaded macrophages . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 2935 – 2945 23 . Hagedorn , M . , Rohde , K . H . , Russell , D . G . , and Soldati , T . ( 2009 ) Infection by tubercular mycobacteria is spread by nonlytic ejection from their amoeba hosts . Science 323 , 1729 – 1733 24 . Orci , L . , Like , A . A . , Amherdt , M . , Blondel , B . , Kanazawa , Y . , Marliss , E . B . , Lambert , A . E . , Wollheim , C . B . , and Renold , A . E . ( 1973 ) Monolayer cell culture of neonatal rat pancreas : an ultrastructural and biochemical study of functioning endocrine cells . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 43 , 270 – 297 25 . Carrette , O . , Burkhard , P . R . , Sanchez , J . C . , and Hochstrasser , D . F . ( 2006 ) State - of - the - art two - dimensional gel electrophoresis : a key tool of pro - teomics research . Nat . Protoc . 1 , 812 – 823 26 . Yusenko , M . V . , Ruppert , T . , and Kovacs , G . ( 2010 ) Analysis of differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins in chromophobe renal cell carcinomas and renal oncocytomas by 2 - D gel electrophoresis . Int . J . Biol . Sci . 6 , 213 – 224 27 . Fey , P . , Gaudet , P . , Curk , T . , Zupan , B . , Just , E . M . , Basu , S . , Merchant , S . N . , Bushmanova , Y . A . , Shaulsky , G . , Kibbe , W . A . , and Chisholm , R . L . ( 2009 ) dictyBase – a Dictyostelium bioinformatics resource update . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , D515 – D519 28 . Kanehisa , M . , Goto , S . , Sato , Y . , Furumichi , M . , and Tanabe , M . ( 2012 ) KEGG for integration and interpretation of large - scale molecular data sets . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , D109 – 114 29 . Ogata , H . , Goto , S . , Sato , K . , Fujibuchi , W . , Bono , H . , and Kanehisa , M . ( 1999 ) KEGG : Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes . Nucleic MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10 899 Acids Res . 27 , 29 – 34 30 . Curk , T . , Demsar , J . , Xu , Q . , Leban , G . , Petrovic , U . , Bratko , I . , Shaulsky , G . , and Zupan , B . ( 2005 ) Microarray data mining with visual programming . Bioinformatics 21 , 396 – 398 31 . Sonnhammer , E . L . , von Heijne , G . , and Krogh , A . ( 1998 ) A hidden Markov model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences . Proc . Int . Conf . Intell . Syst . Mol . Biol . 6 , 175 – 182 32 . Petersen , T . N . , Brunak , S . , von Heijne , G . , and Nielsen , H . ( 2011 ) SignalP 4 . 0 : discriminating signal peptides from transmembrane regions . Nat . Methods 8 , 785 – 786 33 . Bloomfield , G . , Tanaka , Y . , Skelton , J . , Ivens , A . , and Kay , R . R . ( 2008 ) Widespread duplications in the genomes of laboratory stocks of Dictyo - stelium discoideum . Genome Biol . 9 , R75 34 . Cosson , P . , and Soldati , T . ( 2008 ) Eat , kill or die : when amoeba meets bacteria . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 11 , 271 – 276 35 . Sillo , A . , Bloomfield , G . , Balest , A . , Balbo , A . , Pergolizzi , B . , Peracino , B . , Skelton , J . , Ivens , A . , and Bozzaro , S . ( 2008 ) Genome - wide transcrip - tional changes induced by phagocytosis or growth on bacteria in Dic - tyostelium . BMC Genomics 9 , 291 36 . Journet , A . , Klein , G . , Brugie ` re , S . , Vandenbrouck , Y . , Chapel , A . , Kieffer , S . , Bruley , C . , Masselon , C . , and Aubry , L . ( 2012 ) Investigating the macropinocytic proteome of Dictyostelium amoebae by high - resolution mass spectrometry . Proteomics 12 , 241 – 245 37 . Neuhaus , E . M . , Almers , W . , and Soldati , T . ( 2002 ) Morphology and dy - namics of the endocytic pathway in Dictyostelium discoideum . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 , 1390 – 1407 38 . Lee , W . L . , Kim , M . K . , Schreiber , A . D . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2005 ) Role of ubiquitin and proteasomes in phagosome maturation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 , 2077 – 2090 39 . Vieira , O . V . , Harrison , R . E . , Scott , C . C . , Stenmark , H . , Alexander , D . , Liu , J . , Gruenberg , J . , Schreiber , A . D . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2004 ) Acquisition of Hrs , an essential component of phagosomal maturation , is impaired by mycobacteria . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 4593 – 4604 40 . Shui , W . , Sheu , L . , Liu , J . , Smart , B . , Petzold , C . J . , Hsieh , T . Y . , Pitcher , A . , Keasling , J . D . , and Bertozzi , C . R . ( 2008 ) Membrane proteomics of phagosomes suggests a connection to autophagy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 16952 – 16957 41 . Yokoyama , K . , Kaji , H . , He , J . , Tanaka , C . , Hazama , R . , Kamigaki , T . , Ku , Y . , Tohyama , K . , andTohyama , Y . ( 2011 ) Rab27anegativelyregulatesphago - cytosis by prolongation of the actin - coating stage around phagosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 5375 – 5382 42 . Du , F . , Edwards , K . , Shen , Z . , Sun , B . , De Lozanne , A . , Briggs , S . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2008 ) Regulation of contractile vacuole formation and activity in Dictyostelium . EMBO J . 27 , 2064 – 2076 43 . Harris , E . , Yoshida , K . , Cardelli , J . , and Bush , J . ( 2001 ) Rab11 - like GTPase associates with and regulates the structure and function of the contract - ile vacuole system in dictyostelium . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3035 – 3045 44 . Zhu , Q . , and Clarke , M . ( 1992 ) Association of calmodulin and an uncon - ventional myosin with the contractile vacuole complex of Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 347 – 358 45 . Bush , J . , Franek , K . , Daniel , J . , Spiegelman , G . B . , Weeks , G . , and Cardelli , J . ( 1993 ) Cloning and characterization of five novel Dictyostelium discoi - deum rab - related genes . Gene 136 , 55 – 60 46 . Harris , E . , and Cardelli , J . ( 2002 ) RabD , a Dictyostelium Rab14 - related GTPase , regulates phagocytosis and homotypic phagosome and lyso - some fusion . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 3703 – 3713 47 . Campbell - Valois , F . X . , Trost , M . , Chemali , M . , Dill , B . D . , Laplante , A . , Duclos , S . , Sadeghi , S . , Rondeau , C . , Morrow , I . C . , Bell , C . , Hatsuzawa , K . , Thibault , P . , and Desjardins , M . ( 2012 ) Quantitative proteomics re - veals that only a subset of the endoplasmic reticulum contributes to the phagosome . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 10 . 1074 / mcp . M111 . 016378 . 48 . Cebrian , I . , Visentin , G . , Blanchard , N . , Jouve , M . , Bobard , A . , Moita , C . , Enninga , J . , Moita , L . F . , Amigorena , S . , and Savina , A . ( 2011 ) Sec22b regulates phagosomal maturation and antigen crosspresentation by den - dritic cells . Cell 147 , 1355 – 1368 49 . Touret , N . , Paroutis , P . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2005 ) The nature of the phago - somal membrane : endoplasmic reticulum versus plasmalemma . J . Leu - koc . Biol . 77 , 878 – 885 50 . Becker , T . , Volchuk , A . , and Rothman , J . E . ( 2005 ) Differential use of endoplasmic reticulum membrane for phagocytosis in J774 macro - phages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 4022 – 4026 51 . Orci , L . , Ravazzola , M . , Le Coadic , M . , Shen , W . W . , Demaurex , N . , and Cosson , P . ( 2009 ) STIM1 - induced precortical and cortical subdomains of the endoplasmic reticulum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 19358 - 19362 52 . Vieira , O . V . , Botelho , R . J . , and Grinstein , S . ( 2002 ) Phagosome maturation : aging gracefully . Biochem . J . 366 , 689 – 704 53 . Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . , Lupas , A . N . , Li , H . , Ecke , M . , Simmeth , E . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2001 ) Calreticulin and calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum are important for phagocytosis . EMBO J . 20 , 6772 – 6782 54 . Guermonprez , P . , Saveanu , L . , Kleijmeer , M . , Davoust , J . , Van Endert , P . , and Amigorena , S . ( 2003 ) ER - phagosome fusion defines an MHC class I cross - presentation compartment in dendritic cells . Nature 425 , 397 – 402 55 . Amigorena , S . , and Savina , A . ( 2010 ) Intracellular mechanisms of antigen cross presentation in dendritic cells . Cur . Opin . Immunol . 22 , 109 – 117 56 . Cavalier - Smith , T . ( 2009 ) Predation and eukaryote cell origins : a coevolu - tionary perspective . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 41 , 307 – 322 57 . Yates , R . M . , Hermetter , A . , and Russel , D . G . ( 2005 ) The kinetics of phagosome maturation as a function of phagosome / lysosome fusion and acquisition of hydrolytic activity . Traffic 6 , 413 – 420 58 . Yates , R . M . , Hermetter , A . , and Russell , D . G . ( 2009 ) Recording phago - some maturation through the real - time spectroflucrometric measure - ment of hydrolytic activities . Methods . Mol . Biol . 531 , 157 – 171 MyoK Modulates the Early Delivery of ER to the Phagosome 900 Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 11 . 10