Trafﬁc2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 © 2009 The Authors Journal Compilation © 2009 John Wiley & Sons A / S doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 00943 . x Differential Effects of EGFR Ligands on Endocytic Sorting of the Receptor Kirstine Roepstorff 1 , † , Michael Vibo Grandal 1 , † , Lasse Henriksen 1 , Stine Louise Jeppe Knudsen 1 , Mads Lerdrup 1 , Lene Grøvdal 1 , Berthe Marie Willumsen 2 and Bo van Deurs 1 , * 1 DepartmentofCellularandMolecularMedicine , The PanumBuilding , FacultyofHealthSciences , Universityof Copenhagen , Blegdamsvej3 , DK - 2200Copenhagen , Denmark 2 DepartmentofBiology , UniversityofCopenhagen , Ole MaaløesVej5 , DK - 2200Copenhagen , Denmark ∗ Correspondingauthor : BovanDeurs , bvd @ sund . ku . dk †Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork . Endocytic downregulation is a pivotal mechanism turning off signalling from the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) . It is well established that whereas EGF binding leads to lysosomal degradation of EGFR , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - α causes receptor recycling . TGF - α therefore leads to continuous signalling and is a more potent mitogen than EGF . In addition to EGF and TGF - α , ﬁve EGFR ligands have been identiﬁed . Although many of these ligands are upregulated in cancers , very little is known about their effect on EGFR trafﬁcking . We have compared the effect of six different ligands on endocytic trafﬁcking of EGFR . We ﬁnd that , whereas they all stimulate receptor internalization , they have very diverse effects on endocytic sorting . Heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor and Betacellulin target all EGFRs for lysosomal degradation . In contrast , TGF - α and epiregulin lead to complete receptor recycling . EGF leads to lysosomal degradation of the majority but not all EGFRs . Amphiregulin does not target EGFR for lysosomal degradation but causes fast as well as slow EGFR recycling . The Cbl ubiquitin ligases , especially c - Cbl , are responsible for EGFR ubiquitination after stimulation with all ligands , and persistent EGFR phosphorylation and ubiquitination largely correlate with receptor degradation . Key words : amphiregulin , betacellulin , endocytic trafﬁck - ing , epidermal growth factor , epidermal growth factor receptor , epiregulin , heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor , transforming growth factor - α Received 23 January 2009 , revised and accepted for pub - lication 11 May 2009 , uncorrected manuscript published online 19 May 2009 , published online 17 June 2009 Re - use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Terms and Conditions set out at http : / / www3 . interscience . wiley . com / authorresources / onlineopen . html The epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in normal cellular growth and differentiation as well as in the pathogenesis of cancer . Seven different EGFR ligands have been identiﬁed : EGF , transforming growth factor - α ( TGF - α ) , heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor ( HB - EGF ) , betacellulin ( BTC ) , amphiregulin ( AR ) , epiregulin ( EPI ) , and epigen ( 1 ) . Several of the ligands are found in increased concentrations in human cancers , where they engage in auto - and paracrine signalling stimulating tumour progression ( 2 – 4 ) . Endocytic sorting is an important mechanism regulating EGFR signalling . Upon ligand - binding , EGFR is internalized and trafﬁcked to endosomes . From endosomes , the receptor is either recycled to the cell surface , or it is transported to lysosomes for degradation ( recently reviewed in ( 5 ) ) . The sorting to lysosomes is regulated by ubiquitination of the receptor , which in turn is dependent on the pH sensitivity of the ligand - binding . The EGF binding to EGFR is relatively stable at the pH of endosomes , so upon EGF binding EGFR is continuously ubiquitinated by the Cbl ubiquitin ligases ( 6 ) and transported to lysosomes ( 7 , 8 ) . In contrast , TGF - α rapidly dissociates from the receptor when exposed to the low pH of endosomes ( 9 ) , and the receptor becomes de - ubiquitinated and is therefore recycled back to the plasma membrane ( 7 , 10 ) . Whether EGFR is degraded in lysosomes or recycled to the plasma membrane is vital for the duration of the EGFR signal . Following receptor degradation , the EGFR signal will be diminished until the number of EGFRs at the plasma membrane has been reestablished by protein synthesis . In contrast , following receptor recycling , the cell is immediately able to undergo an additional round of full EGFR activation . In accordance with this , TGF - α is a more potent mitogen than EGF ( 11 ) . At present , very little is known about how the remaining EGFR ligands affect endocytic sorting and degradation of EGFR , although several studies have shown that they differ substantially in their oncogenic potential ( 3 , 4 , 12 , 13 ) . In this study we have compared the effects of six different EGFR ligands on EGFR endocytosis , phosphorylation , ubiquitination , degradation , and recycling . All of the ligands stimulate EGFR endocytosis . However , their effects on intracellular trafﬁcking of EGFR vary signiﬁcantly , from complete recycling to complete lysosomal degradation . Whether EGFR is recycled or degraded after stimulation with the various ligands correlates well with persistent receptor phosphorylation and also with persistent Cbl ubiquitin ligase - dependent receptor ubiquitination and pH sensitivity of ligand - binding . www . trafﬁc . dk 1115 Roepstorff et al . Based on our results and the current knowledge about the role of EGFR ligands in the pathogenesis of cancer , we propose that the oncogenic potential of the various EGFR ligands in part depends on their ability to induce receptor recycling rather than degradation . Results EGFRligandsdifferentiallyinducereceptor internalizationandrecycling To compare the ability of the different EGFR ligands to induce internalization of EGFR , we used the common approach of pre - binding ligand on ice , thereby looking at a synchronized wave of receptor internalization ( 7 , 14 , 15 ) . We initially determined the incubation time necessary to obtain maximal ligand - binding . First , 125 I - EGF binding to HEp2 cells as a function of time was tested , and in Figure S1A it is seen that the equilibrium is reached after only 15 min . To investigate the binding kinetics of the other ligands to EGFR , cells were incubated with unlabelled ligand on ice for up to 2 h . Thereafter , cells were brieﬂy washed followed by binding of 125 I - EGF for 30 min . The level of 125 I - EGF binding reﬂects unbound EGFRs . In Figure S1B it is seen that all ligands have reached maximal binding well before 1 h . Thus , to investigate EGFR internalization , HEp2 cells were incubated with increasing ligand concentrations on ice for 1 h followed by washing and 15 min chase at 37 ◦ C . Subsequently , the amount of EGFR present at the cell surface was determined by ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) analysis . As seen in Figure 1A , all six ligands induced EGFR internalization . However , the degree of internalization varied between the ligands . HB - EGF and BTC were very efﬁcient at inducing EGFR internalization . At saturating concentrations of ligand , 70 – 80 % of cell surface EGFR was internalized upon the 15 min chase . EGF and TGF - α both induced internalization of approximately 50 % of the receptors at saturating concentrations of ligand . In case of EPI and AR , the internalization did not reach saturation with the ligand concentrations used . This is in accordance with the fact that these two ligands have a lower afﬁnity for EGFR compared with the other ligands ( 16 , 17 ) . The varying capability of the ligands to clear EGFR from the cell surface during a 15 min chase could be because of different trafﬁcking properties . If a ligand induces a substantial amount of EGFR recycling to the cell surface , Figure 1 : EGFR ligands differentially affect EGFR endocytosis and recycling . A ) EGFR internalization following stimulation with increasing concentrations of various EGFR ligands . HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with increasing concentrations of ligand for 1 h , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . Subsequently , the amount of EGFR at the cell surface was determined by FACS analysis . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for three independent experiments . B ) Time – course of EGFR internalization and recycling following stimulation with different EGFR ligands . Cells were incubated on ice with 10 or 100 nM of ligands as indicated , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods . The amount of EGFR present at the cell surface was determined by FACS analysis . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for four independent experiments . 1116 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands it will clear the cell surface for EGFR less efﬁciently than a ligand that does not induce receptor recycling . Such recycling can best be detected with pulse - chase experiments , because continuous incubation with ligand will cause recycled receptors to repeatedly undergo endocytosis ( Figure S2 ) . Thus , to investigate recycling , HEp2 cells were incubated with a ﬁxed concentration of ligand on ice for 1 h , washed , and subsequently chased for the indicated period of time ( Figure 1B ) . At the end of the chase , the amount of cell surface EGFR was quantiﬁed by FACS analysis . In case of EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC , 10 nM of ligand was used because this concentration induced a close to maximal EGFR internalization in the experiment shown in Figure 1A . For the lower afﬁnity ligands EPI and AR , a concentration of 100 nM was used . Although the in vivo ligand concentrations have not been determined for all of the investigated ligands , it is conceivable that the concentrations used here are physiologically and pathophysiologically relevant ( see discussion ) . As can be seen from Figure 1B , very little EGFR is recycled to the cell surface following stimulation with HB - EGF or BTC . In contrast , close to 100 % of the receptors is recycled following stimulation with either TGF - α or EPI . EGF and AR give intermediary responses , and induce recycling of approximately 50 % of the internalized receptors . Thus , the six EGFR ligands have very different effects on EGFR trafﬁcking . AllligandsinduceEGFRtransporttoEEA1 - positive endosomes It is known that EGFR is transported through EEA1 positive endosomes after stimulation with EGF ( 18 ) . To further test trafﬁcking and intracellular localization of EGFR after stimulation with the other ligands , we investigated the association of EGFR with EEA1 positive endosomes . Cells were incubated with ligand on ice for 1 h , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods . They were subsequently ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR and EEA1 . Figure 2A shows images of EGFR and EEA1 following 15 min of internalization . As can be seen , all six EGFR ligands target EGFR to early EEA1 - positive endosomes . Figure 2B shows image quantiﬁcation of the amount of cellular EGFR associated with EEA1 positive endosomes at different time - points . All of the tested EGFR ligands induce colocalization of EGFR with EEA1 , peaking after 15 – 30 min of internalization . However , AR is slightly less efﬁcient at targeting EGFR to EEA1 - positive endosomes than the other ligands . EGFRligandsvaryintheirpotentialtostimulate EGFRdegradation To test how the various EGFR ligands affect receptor degradation , two different methods were applied . Cells were stimulated with ligand for 1 h on ice , washed , and chased for 0 – 8 h in the presence of cycloheximide to inhibit de novo EGFR synthesis . The cells were subse - quently lysed , and the amount of EGFR determined by ELISA ( Figure S3 ) . Alternatively , to avoid the use of cyclo - heximide , cells were pulse - labelled with 35 S - methionine , stimulated with ligand for 1 h on ice , washed , and incu - bated for 2 or 6 h at 37 ◦ C . EGFR was subsequently immunoprecipitated and the amount of 35 S - labelled EGFR quantiﬁed by PhosphorImaging of an SDS - PAGE gel ( Figure 3 ) . As can be seen , stimulation with TGF - α , EPI , or AR does not lead to signiﬁcant degradation of EGFR . Stimulation with either EGF or HB - EGF leads to degrada - tion of 40 – 60 % of the cellular EGFR , whereas stimulation with BTC leads to degradation of approximately 70 % of the cellular EGFR . The degradation data following stimulation with EPI , TGF - α , EGF , and BTC all correlate well with the degree of EGFR recycling induced by the ligands ( compare Figure 1B and Figure 3 ) . Interestingly , stimulation with AR does not lead to signiﬁcant degradation for up to 6 h of EGFR in spite of the fact that only half of the internalized receptors are recycled within the time of the recycling experiment . One possible explanation for this is that EGFR is recycled more slowly after stimulation with AR compared with other ligands . To investigate this , we incubated cells with either EGF or AR for 1 h on ice , washed , and chased for 6 h at 37 ◦ C , 3 h longer than the recycling experiments shown in Figure 1B . We subsequently measured the amount of EGFR present at the cell surface by FACS analysis . Six hours after EGF stimulation , 60 % of the initial amount of EGFR was present at the cell surface whereas 6 h after AR stimulation , the amount of EGFR on the cell surface was 80 % of the initial level . This indicates that there may be some additional , slow recycling after stimulation with AR compared with EGF . EGFRligandsdifferentiallyinducetransportofEGFR toLamp1 - positiveendosomes We next investigated which ligands that target EGFR to lysosomes . Cells were incubated with ligand on ice for 1 h , washed , and further incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods . They were subsequently ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR and Lamp1 , and imaged by confocal microscopy . As can be seen from Figure 4A , after 60 min of stimulation with TGF - α or EPI a substantial amount of EGFR is present at the cell surface , which correlates well with the lack of degradation and complete recycling seen after stimulation with these ligands . Stimulation with HB - EGF , BTC , or EGF for 60 min results in some colocalization of EGFR with lysosomes . However , because the receptor is rapidly degraded once it has reached lysosomes , it is difﬁcult to quantify the amount of EGFR trafﬁcked to lysosomes . Indeed , when lysosomal function was inhibited by baﬁlomycin , most EGFR could be found in lysosomes after 120 min of stimulation with HB - EGF or BTC ( not shown and Figure 4B ) . Following 60 min of AR stimulation , a substantial amount of EGFR appears to be located to non - lysosomal vesicles ( Figure 4A ) . Taking into account the relatively lower colocalization with EEA1 - positive compartments ( Figure 2B ) and the slow recycling of Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1117 Roepstorff et al . Figure 2 : EGFR localization to early endosomes following ligand stimulation . HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) of ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods . Cells were ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR and the early endosome marker EEA1 . ( A ) shows confocal microscopy images of representative cells after 15 min of EGFR internalization . The lower right panel shows a magniﬁed ﬁeld of the area boxed in the panel to the left . Bars , 10 μ m . ( B ) shows a quantiﬁcation of the amount of EGFR colocalizing with EEA1 in an average of 50 – 58 cells for each time - point + / − SEM . EGFR after AR stimulation ( see above ) , these data indicate that AR leads to sorting of a small fraction of EGFR to an intracellular compartment which is distinct from EEA1 - and Lamp - 1 - positive compartments and from which EGFR slowly recycles . To further characterize this compartment , we investigated colocalization of EGFR with Rab - 4 and Rab - 11 , which are markers of recycling endosomes ( 19 ) . Following 60 min of AR stimulation , EGFR partially colocalizes with both Rab - 4 and Rab - 11 ( Figure S4 ) . This is in agreement with a recent paper showing colocalization between EGFR and Rab - 11 after AR stimulation ( 20 ) . Based on the above results , it is clear that the different EGFR ligands lead to very different trafﬁcking and down - regulation of EGFR . We therefore further investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying these differences . AR , HB - EGF , andBTCbindtoEGFRevenatvery lowpH It is generally accepted that TGF - α leads to EGFR recycling because the ligand dissociates from the receptor in the acidic environment in endosomes . In contrast , EGF bind - ing to EGFR is more resistant to low pH and thus EGF leads to degradation of the receptor ( 9 ) . To investigate whether 1118 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands Figure 3 : EGFR ligands differentially stimulate EGFR degradation . Cells were incubated with 35 S - methionine / cysteine for 1 – 2 h followed by unlabelled medium for 3 h . The cells were subsequently incubated on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or100 nM ( AR and EPI ) of ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 2 or 6 h . Cells were lysed , immunoprecipitated EGFR was separated by gel electrophoresis ( upper image ) , and the amount of radioactive EGFR was quantiﬁed by PhosphorImager . The column bar graph shows mean + / − SEM for quantiﬁcation of four independent experiments . Statistical difference from the 0 h control as determined by Student’s t - test is indicated by stars ( * : p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ) . there is a general correlation between receptor recy - cling / degradation and pH dependence of ligand - binding , cells were incubated with ligand on ice for 4 h and then brieﬂy washed with buffers of varying pH followed by binding of 125 I - EGF . The amount of 125 I - EGF bound to the cells reﬂects the number of EGFRs from which ligand has been removed during the acid wash ( Figure 5 ) . As expected , TGF - α dissociates from the receptor at pH 6 . 5 , whereas EGF dissociates at a slightly lower pH 5 . 5 ( 9 ) . AR , BTC , and HB - EGF are highly acid - resistant and remain bound to the receptor at physiologically relevant pH val - ues . It was not possible to measure the pH dependence of EPI because of the low afﬁnity of the ligand . The data show that for EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC the pH sen - sitivity of ligand - binding correlates well with the level of receptor recycling / degradation . Surprisingly , AR binding showed high acid resistance despite the fact that this lig - and induces recycling and negligible degradation of EGFR . EGFRubiquitinationlargelycorrelateswithreceptor degradation Ubiquitination of the EGFR has been shown to target the receptor for lysosomal degradation ( 7 ) . We therefore investigated to what degree the different EGFR ligands induce EGFR ubiquitination . Cells were incubated with ligand on ice for 1 h , washed , and chased for 5 min at 37 ◦ C . Subsequently , EGFR was immunoprecipitated and ubiquitination detected by western blotting . As can be seen in Figure 6A , all ligands induce ubiquitination of EGFR , albeit to a varying extent . To investigate the kinetics of EGFR ubiquitination , cells were chased for 0 to 20 min at 37 ◦ C . In Figure S5 it is seen that all ligands induce 85 – 100 % of maximal ubiquitination after 5 min . After this time - point , ubiquitination persists to different degrees depending on the ligand . HB - EGF and in particular BTC give strong and / or persistent EGFR ubiquitination . In contrast , TGF α and EPI give low ubiquitination that is quickly lost . AR gives a strong initial EGFR ubiquitination which , however , is quickly lost . Compared with the ubiquitination seen after HB - EGF and BTC , the level of EGF - stimulated EGFR ubiquitination is low , but it is more persistent than seen after TGF α , AR and EPI ( Figure 6A and Figure S5 ) . After 60 min , the level of EGFR ubiquitination was back to background levels for all ligands ( data not shown ) . When correlating the level and kinetics of EGFR ubiquitination ( Figures 6A and S5 ) with that of receptor degradation , it is seen that the overall pattern of ubiquitination correlates well with the ability of the various ligands to target EGFR to lysosomal degradation . ARdoesnotstimulatepersistentrecruitmentofc - Cbl toEGFR c - Cbl is an important ubiquitin ligase responsible for ubiquitination of EGFR ( 21 ) . It can bind to EGFR either directly via phosphorylated Tyr1045 or indirectly via Grb2 ( 22 – 24 ) . To investigate how the different EGFR ligands affect recruitment of c - Cbl to activated EGFR , cells were incubated with ligand on ice for 1 h , washed , and chased at 37 ◦ C for 0 – 15 min . Cells were lysed in co - immunoprecipitation ( IP ) buffer , EGFR immunoprecipitated , and the immunoprecipitate analysed by western blotting for EGFR , c - Cbl , and Grb2 . As can be seen from Figure 6B , C , all ligands stimulate c - Cbl binding to EGFR , but the association is more prolonged after EGF and BTC stimulation than the remaining ligands . In particular , AR stimulates a transient c - Cbl binding to EGFR ( Figure 6B ) . Based on the high ubiquitination level seen after HB - EGF , it is surprising that we found a low c - Cbl binding to EGFR after this ligand ( see discussion ) . Like c - Cbl , Grb2 bound EGFR more efﬁciently following EGF or BTC stimulation for 15 min compared with the other EGFR ligands ( Figure 6C ) . This ﬁts well with the reports that c - Cbl primarily binds EGFR via Grb2 ( 25 ) . Recruitment of c - Cbl to the EGFR and ubiquitination of the receptor does not correlate after stimulation with AR and HB - EGF , and this could indicate that c - Cbl is not decisive for the ubiquitination of EGFR after stimulation with all ligands . CblubiquitinligasesareimportantforEGFR ubiquitinationafterstimulationwithallligands tested To further investigate the role of Cbl ubiquitin ligases in EGFR ubiquitination , we transfected cells with small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) against c - Cbl and / or Cbl - b , another ubiquitin ligase reported to ubiquitinate EGFR after EGF stimulation ( 26 ) , and tested how this affected Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1119 Roepstorff et al . Figure 4 : EGFR localization to lysosomes following ligand stimulation . A ) HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) of ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 60 min . Cells were ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR and the lysosomal marker Lamp1 . Representative confocal microscopy images are shown . Note that in the case of TGF - α and EPI , relatively little EGFR is found inside the cell , whereas EGFR is distinct at the plasma membrane ( arrow heads ) . The lower panel shows a magniﬁed ﬁeld of the areas boxed in the panels above . Arrows show colocalization . Bars , 10 μ m . B ) HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 10 nM BTC , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C in the presence of 500 nM baﬁlomycin A1 for 120 min . Cells were ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR and Lamp1 . Note that baﬁlomycin A1 induces an up - concentration of EGFR in lysosomes following BTC stimulation . ubiquitination of EGFR after stimulation with the various ligands . As seen in Figure 7 , EGFR ubiquitination is partly dependent upon c - Cbl for all the investigated ligands . Knock down of Cbl - b alone does not diminish EGFR ubiquitination , but double knock down of both ubiquitin ligases does in some cases inhibit ubiquitination slightly more efﬁciently than c - Cbl knock down alone . This shows that Cbl ubiquitin ligases , in particular c - Cbl , are involved in EGFR ubiquitination after stimulation with all ligands . EGFRphosphorylationcorrelateswithreceptor degradation We next investigated phosphorylation of EGFR following ligand stimulation . Whole - cell lysates from cells incubated with ligand on ice for 1 h and subsequently chased at 37 ◦ C for 0 – 20 min were analysed by western blotting using antibodies recognizing the major phospho - tyrosine residue Tyr1173 . As seen from Figure 8 all ligands stimulate EGFR phosphorylation , but EGF , BTC , and HB - EGF are more efﬁcient at stimulating persistent EGFR phosphorylation . A similar pattern of Tyr1045 , Tyr1068 and Tyr1173 phosphorylation was seen when cells were stimulated with ligand for 5 or 15 min ( data not shown and Figure S6A ) . The low phosphorylation levels seen after TGF α , AR , and EPI stimulation are not because of limiting ligand concentration , since 10 times higher ligand concentrations do not increase the Tyr1173 phosphorylation ( data not shown and Figure S6B ) . 1120 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands Figure 5 : EGFR binding of HB - EGF , BTC , and AR is acid - resistant . HEp2 cells were incubated with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR ) of unlabelled ligand on ice for 6 h followed by a brief wash with buffers of various pH . The number of ligand - free EGFRs was subsequently determined by incubation with 125 I - EGF for 1 h on ice . The graph shows the relative increase in number of free binding sites following acid wash at different pH . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for three to six independent experiments . To compare the site - speciﬁc phosphorylation pattern to total phosphorylation of EGFR we incubated cells with ligand on ice for 1 h followed by incubation at 37 ◦ C for 5 or 15 min ( data not shown and Figure S6C ) , and cell lysates were subjected to IP of EGFR . The immunoprecipitates were analysed by western blotting using EGFR antibodies and antibodies recognizing general tyrosine phosphorylation . The pattern of site - speciﬁc phosphorylation on EGFR is similar to that of total phosphorylation , thus reﬂecting general activation . Our data suggest that the levels of general tyrosine phosphorylation and site - speciﬁc phosphorylation of EGFR after 5 – 20 min correlate well with the degree of EGFR degradation following stimulation with the various ligands . Discussion Endocytic downregulation of EGFR is an important process regulating EGFR signalling . In spite of this , very little is known about how ligands other than EGF and TGF - α affect EGFR internalization , recycling , and degradation . We show here that six different EGFR ligands differ substantially in their effects on EGFR trafﬁcking and degradation ( Figure 9 ) . An interesting question is whether EGFR trafﬁcking following stimulation with the six different ligands occurs as predicted by the current model of how this is regulated , a model based solely on results of experiments with EGF and TGF - α ( 5 ) . Our data show that the behaviour of EPI and BTC ﬁts well with the model for endocytic sorting of EGFR . Accordingly , EPI stimulates endocytosis of EGFR followed by complete recycling to the cell surface , and all Figure 6 : Differential effects of EGFR lig - ands on EGFR ubiquitination and inter - action with c - Cbl . A ) HEp2 cells were incubated 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 5 min . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer , EGFR was immunoprecipitated and the amount of EGFR ubiquitination deter - mined by western blotting for ubiquitin . The column bar graph shows the average inten - sity of ubiquitin signal quantiﬁed from six to seven independent experiments + / − SEM . B – C ) : HEp2 cells were incubated 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 0 – 10 or 15 min ( B and C , respectively ) . Cells were lysed in co - IP buffer ; EGFR was immunoprecipitated ; and co - precipitation of c - Cbl or Grb2 was determined by western blotting . The west - ern blots shown are representative of three to four independent experiments . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1121 Roepstorff et al . Figure 7 : Ubiquitination of EGFR is Cbl ubiquitin ligase - dependent for all ligands . HEp2 cells were transfected with scrambled siRNA or c - Cbl and / or Cbl - b siRNA twice with 48 h interval . S = scrambled siRNA , C = c - Cbl siRNA , B = Cbl - b siRNA , and C + B = c - Cbl and Cbl - b siRNA . A ) : 48 h after the last siRNA transfection , HEp2 cells were incubated for 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR ) ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer , EGFR was immunoprecipitated , and the amount of EGFR ubiquitination determined by western blotting for ubiquitin . The column bar graph shows the average intensity of ubiquitin signal quantiﬁed from three independent experiments + / − SEM . B ) : 48 h after last siRNA transfection , HEp2 cells were lysed and the amounts of c - Cbl , Cbl - b , and transferrin receptor ( TfR ) were determined by western blotting . It is seen that c - Cbl is knocked down after treatment with c - Cbl siRNA , but c - Cbl siRNA also has an effect on Cbl - b . Cbl - b siRNA is speciﬁc for Cbl - b . TfR is used as a marker of protein levels . of the parameters measured are in accordance with this including low levels of EGFR Tyr1045 phosphorylation and low levels of EGFR ubiquitination . BTC stimulates EGFR degradation and in accordance with this , BTC leads to EGFR Tyr1045 phosphorylation , persistent c - Cbl recruit - ment , and EGFR ubiquitination . In contrast , the behaviour of EGFR after stimulation with HB - EGF or AR cannot be fully explained by the current model of EGFR sorting . HB - EGF causes very efﬁcient EGFR Tyr1045 phosphory - lation , abundant EGFR ubiquitination , and EGFR degra - dation . However , there is only low and transitent c - Cbl recruitment to EGFR following HB - EGF stimulation in spite 1122 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands Figure 8 : Differential effects of EGFR ligands onTyr 1173EGFR phosphoryla - tion kinetics . HEp2 cells were incubated 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 0 , 1 . 5 , 5 , 10 or 20 min . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer , and the amount of EGFR phosphorylation determined by western blotting for phosphorylation on Tyr1173 . TfR is used as a marker of protein levels . The western blots shown are representa - tive of three independent experiments . of the heavy Tyr1045 phosphorylation . This is surprising , since it is believed that phosphorylated Tyr1045 is an important binding site for c - Cbl ( 27 ) . Interestingly , c - Cbl is recruited to EGFR in the early phases following HB - EGF stimulation , and our c - Cbl knock down experiments show that this ubiquitin ligase is necessary for full HB - EGF induced EGFR ubiquitination . This shows the necessity of testing receptor ubiquitination at a range of time - points , including very early time - points . AR stimulation for 5 min leads to profound EGFR ubiquitination , but no receptor degradation . The lack of degradation is most likely because of the fact that the ubiquitination is rapidly lost , and therefore the receptor is not targeted to lysosomal degradation , as has previously been shown for TGF - α ( 7 , 28 ) . In case of TGF - α , the quick loss of ubiquitination is believed to be because of the high pH sensitivity of this ligand ( 7 , 28 ) . This is not the case for AR , which is a highly acid - resistant ligand . However , AR has a much lower afﬁnity for EGFR than EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC . We therefore hypothesize that the ligand is released from EGFR in endosomes not because of pH sensitivity , but rather because of a high off - rate causing the ligand to rapidly dissociate from the receptor irrespective of the pH changes encountered during trafﬁcking of EGFR . Although the in vivo ligand concentrations have not been determined for all of the investigated ligands , it is conceivable that the concentrations used here are physiologically and pathophysiologically relevant . In case of EGF , concentrations vary strongly between different body ﬂuids , reaching up to 8 – 80 nM in bile , urine , milk and prostate ﬂuid ( 15 , 29 – 32 ) . Normally , epithelia prevent these ﬂuids from reaching EGFRs which are expressed basolaterally , but when the tight junctions of the epithelia become leaky , e . g . as a result of premalignant Figure 9 : Model for EGFR trafﬁcking after stimulation with the six ligands . The model shows how EGFR is either recycled or transported to lysosomes after stimulation with the different ligands . See discussion for further details . PM , plasma membrane . neoplasia , high concentrations of EGF will reach and activate EGFRs ( 33 ) . Furthermore , elevated levels of EGFR ligand have been found in several cancer types ( 3 , 4 , 34 ) . Although an exact ligand concentration has not been Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1123 Roepstorff et al . measured in tumours , due to the auto - and paracrine nature of the system , local EGFR ligand concentrations in the tumour microenvironment may reach very high levels as well . The clinical signiﬁcance of over - expression of EGFR in a multitude of cancers has been heavily investigated , and many studies have reported that high expression of EGFR in tumours is a marker of poor clinical outcome ( 2 ) . Until now , the expression levels of the EGFR ligands have not been investigated to the same extent . Considering their very diverse effects on the behaviour of EGFR , it is of great importance to investigate which combinations of EGFR ligands are expressed by a tumour ( 3 ) . In bladder cancer , HB - EGF , EPI , AR , and TGF - α have been associated with a lower overall survival than has BTC and EGF ( 4 ) . Interestingly , apart from HB - EGF , the EGFR ligands associated with poor survival are the ligands which do not stimulate EGFR degradation and therefore allow repeated activation of EGFR . EGFR is a well - established drug target , with several EGFR - targeting drugs on the market as well as in clinical development . However , several studies have shown that these drugs are effective on only a subset of cancer patients . One of the most important challenges is to identify the patients who will beneﬁt from EGFR - targeting drugs prior to initiation of therapy . EGFR levels in the tumour do not appear to correlate well with clinical efﬁcacy ( 35 , 36 ) . In this context , it will be of great interest to investigate whether there is a correlation between EGFR ligand expression proﬁle and sensitivity towards EGFR - targeting drugs , and whether the potential of the ligands to induce EGFR degradation correlates with clinical efﬁcacy of EGFR - targeting drugs . In support of this hypothesis , two recent studies showed that cancer patients with tumours expressing either AR or EPI have a better response to treatment with EGFR - targeting drugs compared with patients with tumours not expressing AR or EPI ( 37 , 38 ) . Indeed , one may envision that tumours relying heavily on EGFR signalling will tend to express ligands that do not induce EGFR degradation , and that these tumours therefore will be more sensitive to EGFR - targeted treatment . This highlights the role of ligand - induced EGFR degradation in limiting EGFR signalling , and emphasizes the importance of expanding our knowledge of how these processes are regulated . Materials and Methods Unless otherwise stated , reagents were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . Cellculture HEp2 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS ( Biosera ) , 2 mM glutamax ( Invitrogen ) , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 200 U / mL penicillin , and 50 ng / mL streptomycin . Cells were serum - starved in starvation medium ( DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamax ( Invitrogen ) , 200 U / mL penicillin , and 50 ng / mL streptomycin ) 4 – 18 h prior to experiments . EGFRinternalizationanalysis HEp2 cells were incubated on ice 1 h with the indicated concentration of ligand ( RnD Systems ) in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Cells were washed and incubated at 37 ◦ C for the indicated period of time with or without ligand in HEPES - buffered DMEM to allow receptor internalization . Cells were subsequently placed on ice , washed 5 min with an ice - cold acidic buffer ( 100 mM NaCl , 50 mM glycine , pH 2 . 5 ) to remove any remaining bound ligand , neutralized with ice - cold PBS , and trypsinized on ice until detachment of cells . Trypsin was neutralized by addition of soy bean trypsin inhibitor , and the detached cells were ﬁxed 20 min in ice - cold 2 % paraformaldehyde . The amount of EGFR present at the cell surface was determinedbylabellingof the unpermeabilizedﬁxed cellswithan anti - EGFR antibody ( clone 199 . 12 , ThermoFisherScientiﬁc ) directlyconjugated to Alexa 488 ( monoclonal antibody labelling kit , Invitrogen ) followed by FACS analysis to quantify EGFR surface labelling . Determinationof 125 I - EGFbindingkineticsonice HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 125 I - EGF ( Perkin Elmer ) for 0 – 60 min in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . 125 I - EGF was removed and the cells were washed in ice - cold medium , hydrolysed in 0 . 5 M KOH , and the samples counted in a gamma - counter . Determinationofligand - bindingkineticsonice HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with unlabelled ligands for 0 – 120 min in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Ligand was removed and the cells were washed in ice - cold medium . To determine the number of unoccupied EGFRs following ligand - binding , cells were subsequently incubated with 125 I - EGF for 30 min , washed , hydrolysed in 0 . 5 M KOH , and the samples counted in a gamma - counter . Maximal 125 I - EGF binding was set to 0 % and no 125 I - EGF binding to 100 % . Immunoﬂuorescencestainingandmicroscopy HEp2 cells seeded in CC2 - coated chamber slides were transfected with peGFP - C3 - Rab4a or peGFP - C2 - Rab11a using FuGene6 ( Roche ) or left untransfected . peGFP - C3 - Rab4a and peGFP - C2 - Rab11a were provided by Marino Zerial ( Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biologyand Genetics , Dresden , Germany ) and James R . Goldenring ( Vanderbilt University , Nashville , Tennessee ) , respectively . Two to three days after seeding , cells were incubated with ligands in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA for 1 h on ice , rinsed in cold medium , and incubated for 0 – 120 min at 37 ◦ C in warm medium with or without 500 nM baﬁlomycin A1 . Cells were rinsed in cold PBS and ﬁxed in 2 % paraformaldehyde . After ﬁxation , cellswerepermeabilizedandblockedinPBScontaining5 % normal goat serum ( In Vitro ) and 0 . 2 % saponin . Immunoﬂuorescence labelling was performed using the indicated combinations of primary antibodies [ mouse monoclonal anti - EGFR IgG 2A antibody ( clone 199 . 12 , Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , mouse monoclonal anti - EEA1 IgG 1 antibody ( clone 14 , BD Biosciences ) , mouse monoclonal anti - LAMP1 IgG 1 antibody ( clone H4A3 , Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) ] and isotype speciﬁc secondary antibodies ( goat anti - mouse IgG , goat anti - mouse IgG 1 , and goat anti - mouse IgG 2A antibodies ) conjugated to Alexa 488 or Alexa 568 ( Invitrogen ) . Microscopy was done using a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope , equipped with 488 and 543 nm excitation lasers , using a 63 × 1 . 4 NA oil immersion apochromat objective . The pinhole was set to allow acquisition of 1 . 0 or 1 . 4 μ m thick confocal sections . For each condition , images of a total number of approximately 50 cells were acquired . Imageprocessingandquantitativeanalysis Images were sectioned into smaller images containing a single cell each using ImageJ with the MBF plug - in compilation . A binary mask deﬁning the endosomes of the cells was made using Gaussian blur ﬁltering ( sigma = 1 . 0 ) of the EEA1 channel , and then 8 - bit Otsu thresholding . The density of the EGFR signal was then integrated for the endocytic mask as well as for the entire cell . The relative amount of EGFR signal contained within the endocytic mask was calculated by dividing the signal from the mask with the total EGFR signal . 1124 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands EGFRdegradationanalysisusingELISAdetection HEp2 cells were incubated with ligands for 1 h on ice . After the pulse - period , cells were rinsed in cold starvation medium and then incubated in warm starvation medium containing 10 μ g / mL cycloheximide at 37 ◦ C for 0 – 8 h . Cells were rinsed in cold PBS and scraped off in RIPA lysis buffer ( 1 % NP40 , 20 mM MOPS , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Na - deoxycholate , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set III ( Calbiochem ) . Cell debris was removed by spinning . EGFR content was then measured using an EGFR ELISA kit ( RnD Systems ) . EGFRdegradationanalysisusing 35 S methionine / cysteinelabelling Serum - starved cells were pre - incubated in methionine - / cysteine - free DMEM supplemented with 1 mM sodium pyruvate , 2 mM glutamax , 200 U / mL penicillin , and 50 ng / mL streptomycin for 1 h . After preincubation , cells were labelled with 0 . 25 mCi / mL L - [ 35 S ] - methionine / cysteine ( Mpbiomedicals ) for 1 – 2 h . Cells were changed to starvation medium and allowed to synthesize protein for 3 h . After 3 h cells were incubated with ligands for 1 h on ice , then washed in starvation medium , and incubated in starvation medium at 37 ◦ C for 0 – 6 h . At the indicated times , cells were rinsed in cold PBS and then scraped off in RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set III . Cell debris was removed by spinning at 13 , 000 × g ; the lysates were pre - cleared with protein G Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) , and EGFR immunoprecipitated with mouse monoclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( clone 199 . 12 ) and protein G Dynabeads . The immunoprecipitates were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and EGFR bands visualized by PhosphorImaging . The bands were quantiﬁed using LabVision software ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , and normalized to the sum of signal detected in all EGFR - corresponding bands . The amount of EGFR present right after removal of excess ligand , the 0 h control point , was set to 100 % . Whether the degradation after ligand stimulation is statistically different from the 0 h control point was tested using Student’s t - test . pHsensitivityofligand - binding HEp2 cells were incubated on ice 4 h , with the indicated concentration of ligand in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Ligand was removed and the cells were washed in ice - cold medium followed by a 5 - min wash with ice - cold buffers of varying pH ( 50 mM acetic acid , 50 mM HEPES , 50 mM NaCl , pH 2 . 5 – 7 . 5 ) followed by neutralization with HEPES - buffered DMEM . To determine the number on unoccupied EGFRs following the acid wash , cells were subsequently incubated with 125 I - EGF on ice for 1 h , washed , hydrolysedin 0 . 5 M KOH , and the samplescounted in a gamma - counter . Cblubiquitinligasesknockdown HEp2cellsweretransfectedtwicewithc - Cbl and / orCbl - bsiRNA ( sc - 29949 and sc - 29950 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) or scrambled siRNA ( AM4635 , Ambion ) using Lipofectamine2000 ( Invitrogen ) . Transfections were done with 48 h interval and evaluation of EGFR ubiquitination and Cbl ubiquitin ligases knock down was done 48 h after the second transfection . c - Cbl and Cbl - b knock downs were evaluated with western blotting using a rabbit polyclonal anti - c - Cbl antibody ( sc - 170 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , a mouse monoclonal anti - Cbl - b antibody ( G - 1 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , or a mouse monoclonal anti - transferrin antibody ( H68 . 4 , Zymed ) and horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated secondary antibodies . UbiquitinationandtotalphosphorylationofEGFR HEp2 cells were incubated on ice 1 h with the indicated concentration of ligand in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Cells were washed and incubated at 37 ◦ C in HEPES - bufferedDMEM for the indicated periods of time , placed on ice and washed with ice - cold PBS before lysis in RIPA buffer containing 10 nM n - ethylmaleimide , Benzonase ( Novagen , Merck Chemicals Ltd . ) , Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II , and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set III . Cell debris was removed by spinning , and EGFR was immunoprecipitated from the lysate using a mouse monoclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( clone 199 . 12 ) and protein G sepharose beads or protein G Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) . The precipitate was subject to western blotting using a mouse monoclonal anti - ubiquitin antibody ( clone P4D1 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , a mouse monoclonal anti - tyrosine phosphorylation antibody [ clone 4G10 , Upstate ( Millipore ) ] or a sheep polyclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( Fitzgerald Antibodies ) and HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( DAKO ) . Imaging and quantiﬁcation of bands were done using ECL ( Amersham Biosciences ) and an AutoChemi system darkroom ( UVP ) equipped with LabVision software ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) . Co - immunopreciptationofEGFRandc - CblandGrb2 HEp2 cells were incubated on ice 1 h with the indicated concentration of ligand in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Cells were washed and incubatedat 37 ◦ C in HEPES - buffered DMEM for the indicated periods of time , placed on ice and washed with ice - cold PBS before lysis in co - IP buffer ( 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 50 mM KCl , 50 mM NaCl , 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , ) containing 10 nM n - ethylmaleimide , Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II , and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set III . Cell debris was removed by spinning at 13 , 000 × g , and EGFR was immunoprecipitated from the lysate using a mouse monoclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( clone 199 . 12 , Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) and protein G dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) . The precipitate was subject to western blotting using a mouse monoclonal anti - c - Cbl antibody ( clone C - 15 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , a rabbit anti - Grb2 antibody ( Cell Signaling Technology ) or a sheep polyclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( FitzgeraldAntibodies ) andHRP - conjugatedsecondaryantibodies . DetectionofTyr1045 , Tyr1068 , Tyr1173 phosphorylationofEGFR HEp2 cells were incubated on ice 1 h with the indicated concentration of ligand in HEPES - buffered DMEM containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Cells were washed and incubatedat 37 ◦ C in HEPES - buffered DMEM for the indicated periods of time , placed on ice and washed with ice - cold PBS before lysis in RIPA buffer containing Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II and Phosphatase InhibitorCocktailSetIII . Celldebriswasremovedbyspinningat 13 , 000 × g and lysatesweresubjecttowesternblottingusingmousemonoclonalanti - transferrin antibody ( H68 . 4 , Zymed ) , mouse monoclonal phosphospeciﬁc anti - EGFRpTyr1045 antibody ( clone 11C2 , NanoTools ) , mouse monoclonal phosphospeciﬁc anti - EGFRpTyr1068 antibody ( clone 15A2 , NanoTools ) , mouse monoclonal phosphospeciﬁc anti - EGFRpTyr1173 antibody [ clone 9H2 , Upstate ( Millipore ) ] or a sheep polyclonal anti - EGFR antibody ( Fitzgerald Antibodies ) and HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies . Acknowledgments We thank Mette Ohlsen and Ulla Hjortenberg for their excellent technical assistance . eGFP - Rab4a and eGFP - Rab11a are gifts from Marino Zerial and James R . Goldenring , respectively . The mouse monoclonal anti - LAMP1 antibody developed by J . Thomas August and James E . K . Hildreth was obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank developed under the auspices of the HICHD and maintained by The University of Iowa , Department of Biological Sciences , Iowa City , IA 52242 . This study was supportedbygrantsfromtheDanishMedicalResearchCouncil , theDanish Cancer Society , the Danish Cancer Research Foundation , the Novo Nordic Foundation , and the John and Birthe Meyer Foundation . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1125 Roepstorff et al . FigureS1 : LigandshavereachedmaximalbindingtoEGFRwellbefore 1 h . A ) : HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 10 nM of EGF ( 1 nM 125 I - EGF and 9 nM unlabelled EGF ) for 0 – 60 min and washed . Lysates were counted in a gamma - counter . The graph shows the increase in bound 125 I - EGF . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for ﬁve independent experiments . B ) : HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with unlabelled ligands for 0 – 120 min and washed . The number of unoccupied EGFRs following the unlabelled ligand incubation was determined by incubation with 125 I - EGF . The graph shows the increase in unlabelled ligands bound . This indirect method of measuring ligand - binding was used because some of the EGFR ligands also bind to ErbB4 , and it is therefore not possible to separatelyanalyse bindingto EGFR usingdirectlylabelledligands . Maximal 125 I - EGF binding was set to 0 % and no 125 I - EGF binding to 100 % . Figure S2 : EGFR trafﬁcking after ligand stimulation is best monitored by pulse - chase experiments . Time – course of EGFR internalization and recycling following stimulation with EGF or TGF - α either as a pulse or continuously . Cells were incubated on ice with 10 nM of ligands as indicated , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods with or without ligand in the medium . The amount of EGFR present at the cell surface was determined by FACS analysis . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for three independent experiments . Figure S3 : EGFR ligands differentially affect EGFR degradation . HEp2 cells were incubated on ice with 10 or 100 nM of ligands as indicated , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for different time periods in the presence of 10 μ M cycloheximide to block protein synthesis . Cells were lysed , and the amount of EGFR was determined by ELISA . Data points represent mean + / − SEM for three to seven independent experiments . Figure S4 : EGFR localization to Rab - 4 and Rab - 11 positive endosomes following AR stimulation . HEp2 cells were transfected with GFP - Rab - 4 or GFP - Rab - 11 , and incubated on ice with 100 nM AR , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 60 min . Cells were ﬁxed and labelled for EGFR . Representative confocal microscopy images are shown . Bars , 10 μ m . Figure S5 : Differential effects of EGFR ligands on EGFR ubiquitination kinetics . HEp2 cells were incubated 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubatedat 37 ◦ Cfor0 – 20 min . CellswerelysedinRIPAbuffer , EGFRwas immunoprecipitated , and the amount of EGFR ubiquitination determined by western blotting for ubiquitin . Note that the overall intensity of the different western blots should not be compared . To compare the effect on ubiquitination levels between the different ligands , see Figure 6A . The graphs show the average intensity of ubiquitin signal quantiﬁed from three independent experiments + / − SEM . Figure S6 : Differential effects of EGFR ligands on EGFR phosphoryla - tion . A ) HEp2 cells were incubated for 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and the amount of EGFR phosphorylation on Tyr1045 , Tyr1068 , and Tyr1173 was determined by western blotting . The western blots shown are representative of four independent experiments . B ) HEp2 cells were incubated for 1 h on ice with ligands in the following concentrations : 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) , 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) , or the 10 times higher concentrations for TGF α , AR , and EPI ( 100 nM TGF α , 1 μ M AR and 1 μ M EPI ) , Then cells were washed , and incubated at 37 ◦ C for 15 min . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and the amount of EGFR phosphorylation on Tyr1173 was deter - mined by western blotting . The western blots shown are representative of three independent experiments . The column bar graph shows the aver - age intensity of phosphorylation signal quantiﬁed from three independent experiments + / − SEM . C ) : HEp2 cells were incubated for 1 h on ice with 10 nM ( EGF , TGF - α , HB - EGF , and BTC ) or 100 nM ( AR and EPI ) ligand , washed , and incubatedat 37 ◦ C for 15 min . Cellswere lysed in RIPA buffer , EGFR was immunoprecipitated , and the amount of EGFR ubiquitination determined by western blotting for phosphorylated tyrosine . The column bar graph shows the average intensity of phosphorylation signal quantiﬁed from four independent experiments + / − SEM . Please note : Wiley - Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . References 1 . Harris RC , Chung E , Coffey RJ . EGF receptor ligands . Exp . Cell Res 2003 ; 284 : 2 – 13 . 2 . Normanno N , Bianco C , Strizzi L , Mancino M , Maiello MR , De LA , Caponigro F , Salomon DS . The ErbB receptors and their ligands in cancer : an overview . Curr . Drug Targets 2005 ; 6 : 243 – 257 . 3 . Revillion F , Lhotellier V , Hornez L , Bonneterre J , Peyrat JP . ErbB / HER ligands in human breast cancer , and relationships with their receptors , the bio - pathological features and prognosis . Ann Oncol 2008 ; 19 : 73 – 80 . 4 . Thogersen VB , Sorensen BS , Poulsen SS , Orntoft TF , Wolf H , Nexo E . A subclass of HER1 ligands are prognostic markers for survival in bladder cancer patients . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 6227 – 6233 . 5 . Roepstorff K , Grøvdal LM , Grandal M , Lerdrup M , van Deurs B . Endocytic downregulation of ErbB receptors : mechanisms and relevance in cancer . Histochem . Cell Biol 2008 ; 129 : 563 – 578 . 6 . Duan L , Miura Y , Dimri M , Majumder B , Dodge IL , Reddi AL , Ghosh A , Fernandes N , Zhou P , Mullane - Robinson K , Rao N , Donoghue S , Rogers RA , Bowtell D , Naramura M et al . Cbl - mediated ubiquitylation is required for lysosomal sorting of epidermal growth factor receptor but is dispensable for endocytosis . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 28950 – 28960 . 7 . Longva KE , Blystad FD , Stang E , Larsen AM , Johannessen LE , Mad - shus IH . Ubiquitination and proteasomal activity is required for trans - port of the EGF receptorto inner membranesof multivesicular bodies . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 843 – 854 . 8 . Raiborg C , Rusten TE , Stenmark H . Protein sorting into multivesicular endosomes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003 ; 15 : 446 – 455 . 9 . Ebner R , Derynck R . Epidermalgrowthfactorandtransforminggrowth factor - alpha : differential intracellular routing and processing of ligand - receptor complexes . Cell Regul 1991 ; 2 : 599 – 612 . 10 . Decker SJ . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - alpha induce differential processing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990 ; 166 : 615 – 621 . 11 . Waterman H , Sabanai I , Geiger B , Yarden Y . Alternative intracellular routing of ErbB receptors may determine signaling potency . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 13819 – 13827 . 12 . Lafky JM , Wilken JA , Baron AT , Maihle NJ . Clinicalimplicationsof the ErbB / epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor family and its ligands in ovarian cancer . Biochim Biophys Acta 2008 ; 1785 : 232 – 265 . 13 . Torring N , Jorgensen PE , Sorensen BS , Nexo E . Increasedexpression of heparin binding EGF ( HB - EGF ) , amphiregulin , TGF alpha and epiregulin in androgen - independent prostate cancer cell lines . Anticancer Res 2000 ; 20 : 91 – 95 . 14 . Sorkin A , Krolenko S , Kudrjavtceva N , Lazebnik J , Teslenko L , Soderquist AM , Nikolsky N . Recycling of epidermal growth factor - receptor complexes in A431 cells : identiﬁcation of dual pathways . J Cell Biol 1991 ; 112 : 55 – 63 . 15 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev Cell 2008 ; 15 : 209 – 219 . 16 . Jones JT , Akita RW , Sliwkowski MX . Binding speciﬁcities and afﬁni - ties of egf domains for ErbB receptors . FEBS Lett 1999 ; 447 : 227 – 231 . 1126 Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 EGFR Ligands 17 . Shoyab M , Plowman GD , McDonald VL , Bradley JG , Todaro GJ . Structure and function of human amphiregulin : a member of the epidermal growth factor family . Science 1989 ; 243 : 1074 – 1076 . 18 . Oksvold MP , Skarpen E , Lindeman B , Roos N , Huitfeldt HS . Immuno - cytochemical localization of Shc and activated EGF receptor in early endosomes after EGF stimulation of HeLa cells . J Histochem Cytochem 2000 ; 48 : 21 – 33 . 19 . Zerial M , McBride H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 107 – 117 . 20 . Baldys A , Gooz M , Morinelli TA , Lee MH , Raymond JR , Jr . , Luttrell LM , Raymond JR , Sr . Essential role of c - Cbl in amphiregulin - induced recycling and signaling of the endogenous epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochemistry 2009 ; 48 : 1462 – 1473 . 21 . Levkowitz G , Waterman H , Zamir E , Kam Z , Oved S , Langdon WY , Beguinot L , Geiger B , Yarden Y . c - Cbl / Sli - 1regulatesendocyticsorting and ubiquitinationof the epidermalgrowthfactorreceptor . GenesDev 1998 ; 12 : 3663 – 3674 . 22 . Jiang X , Huang F , Marusyk A , Sorkin A . Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 858 – 870 . 23 . Waterman H , Katz M , Rubin C , Shtiegman K , Lavi S , Elson A , Jovin T , Yarden Y . A mutant EGF - receptor defective in ubiquitylation and endocytosis unveils a role for Grb2 in negative signaling . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 303 – 313 . 24 . Levkowitz G , Waterman H , Ettenberg SA , Katz M , Tsygankov AY , Alroy I , Lavi S , Iwai K , Reiss Y , Ciechanover A , Lipkowitz S , Yarden Y . Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c - Cbl / Sli - 1 . Mol Cell 1999 ; 4 : 1029 – 1040 . 25 . Huang F , Sorkin A . Growth factor receptor binding protein 2 - mediated recruitment of the RING domain of Cbl to the epidermal growth factor receptor is essential and sufﬁcient to support receptor endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 1268 – 1281 . 26 . Ettenberg SA , Keane MM , Nau MM , Frankel M , Wang LM , Pierce JH , Lipkowitz S . cbl - b inhibits epidermal growth factor receptor signaling . Oncogene 1999 ; 18 : 1855 – 1866 . 27 . Grøvdal LM , Stang E , Sorkin A , Madshus IH . Direct interaction of Cbl with pTyr 1045 of the EGF receptor ( EGFR ) is required to sort the EGFR to lysosomes for degradation . Exp Cell Res 2004 ; 300 : 388 – 395 . 28 . Alwan HA , vanZoelen EJ , vanLeeuwen JE . Ligand - inducedlysosomal epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) degradation is preceded by proteasome - dependent EGFR de - ubiquitination . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 35781 – 35790 . 29 . Hayashi T , Sakamoto S . Radioimmunoassay of human epidermal growth factor – hEGF levels in human body ﬂuids . J Pharmacobiodyn 1988 ; 11 : 146 – 151 . 30 . Grau M , Rodriguez C , Soley M , Ramirez I . Relationship between epidermal growth factor in mouse submandibular glands , plasma , and bile : effects of catecholamines and fasting . Endocrinology 1994 ; 135 : 1854 – 1862 . 31 . Beardmore JM , Richards RC . Concentrationsofepidermalgrowthfac - torinmousemilkthroughoutlactation . JEndocrinol1983 ; 96 : 287 – 292 . 32 . Gann PH , Chatterton R , Vogelsong K , Grayhack JT , Lee C . Epidermal growth factor - related peptides in human prostatic ﬂuid : sources of variability in assay results . Prostate 1997 ; 32 : 234 – 240 . 33 . Mullin JM . Epithelial barriers , compartmentation , and cancer . Sci . STKE 2004 ; 2004 : e2 . 34 . Normanno N , Bianco C , Strizzi L , Mancino M , Maiello MR , De LA , Caponigro F , Salomon DS . The ErbB receptors and their ligands in cancer : an overview . Curr Drug Targets 2005 ; 6 : 243 – 257 . 35 . Cunningham D , Humblet Y , Siena S , Khayat D , Bleiberg H , Santoro A , Bets D , Mueser M , Harstrick A , Verslype C , Chau I , Van CE . Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan - refractory metastatic colorectal cancer . N Engl J Med 2004 ; 351 : 337 – 345 . 36 . Saltz LB , Meropol NJ , Loehrer PJ , Sr . , Needle MN , Kopit J , Mayer RJ . Phase II trial of cetuximab in patients with refractory colorectal cancer that expresses the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Clin Oncol 2004 ; 22 : 1201 – 1208 . 37 . Khambata - Ford S , Garrett CR , Meropol NJ , Basik M , Harbison CT , Wu S , Wong TW , Huang X , Takimoto CH , Godwin AK , Tan BR , Krish - namurthi SS , Burris HA , III , Poplin EA , Hidalgo M et al . Expression of epiregulin and amphiregulin and K - ras mutation status predict dis - ease control in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with cetuximab . J Clin Oncol 2007 ; 25 : 3230 – 3237 . 38 . Yonesaka K , Zejnullahu K , Lindeman N , Homes AJ , Jackman DM , Zhao F , Rogers AM , Johnson BE , Janne PA . Autocrine production of amphiregulin predicts sensitivity to both geﬁtinib and cetuximab in EGFR wild - type cancers . Clin Cancer Res 2008 ; 14 : 6963 – 6973 . Trafﬁc 2009 ; 10 : 1115 – 1127 1127