Programming by Examples Sumit Gulwani Microsoft Research , Redmond , USA Programming by Examples ( PBE ) has the potential to revolutionize end - user programming by enabling end users , most of whom are non - programmers , to create scripts for automating repetitive tasks . PBE involves synthesizing intended programs in an underlying domain - speciﬁc language from example based speciﬁcations ( Espec ) . We will start out by formalizing the notion of Espec and the principles behind designing appropriate domain - speciﬁc languages . A key technical challenge in PBE is to search for programs that are consistent with the Espec provided by the user . We will study a divide - and - conquer based search paradigm that leverages deductive rules and version space algebras . We will also brieﬂy discuss other search paradigms based on constraint solving and heuristic based enumerative search . Another technical challenge in PBE is to resolve the ambiguity that is inherent in the Espec . We will study how machine learning based ranking techniques can be used to predict an intended program within a set of programs that are consistent with the Espec . We will also discuss some user interaction models including program navigation and active - learning based conversational clariﬁcation that communicate actionable information to the user to help resolve ambiguity in the Espec . The above - mentioned concepts will be illustrated using practical PBE systems for data manipula - tion ( including FlashFill , FlashExtract , FlashRelate ) , some of which have already been deployed in the real world . References [ 1 ] S . Gulwani . Automating String Processing in Spreadsheets using Input - Output Examples , PO - PL 2011 . http : / / research . microsoft . com / en - us / um / people / sumitg / pubs / popl11 - synthesis . pdf [ 2 ] V . Le , S . Gulwani . FlashExtract : A Framework for Data Extraction by Examples . PLDI 2014 . http : / / research . microsoft . com / en - us / um / people / sumitg / pubs / pldi14 - flashextract . pdf 10