© 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing . Created for Harvard Business Review by BullsEye Resources www . bullseyeresources . com . The Innovator ' s DNA Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators October 19 , 2011 KEY LEARNING SUMMARY Brought to you by featuring Clay Christensen and Hal Gregersen secure content sharing and collaboration box . com / cio The Innovator ' s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators October 19 , 2011 © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing . Created for Harvard Business Review by BullsEye Resources www . bullseyeresources . com . 1 www . hbr . org The Innovator ' s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators Clay Christensen , Professor of Business Administration , Harvard Business School Hal Gregersen , Senior Affiliate Professor of Leadership , INSEAD Sarah Cliffe ( Moderator ) , Executive Editor , Harvard Business Review OVERVIEW While the majority of people see creativity as being related to a person’s genetics , this isn’t true . What makes people great innovators is not their genetic makeup , but a set of skills and behaviors . The good news : anyone can learn , practice , and master the skills necessary to become a disruptive innovator . The key skill is developing associative thinking , which is the ability to connect previously unconnected ideas . Actions that can enable new types of connections include questioning , observing , networking , and experimenting . By being more attuned to these behaviors , by allocating time to them , and by practicing them , they can be mastered . Mastery results in the constant production of innovative new ideas . CONTEXT Professors Christensen and Gregersen shared insights from their new book , The Innovator’s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators . They described the research that underpinned the book , explained the five skills , and provided examples of how to use these skills . KEY LEARNINGS Discovering the “Innovator’s DNA” came from research among great innovators . Clay Christensen’s work on innovation has looked at patterns of innovation in industries and companies . But he realized that he wanted to learn more about how individuals come up with innovative ideas and make innovations happen . So , along with Hal Gregersen and Jeff Dyer , Christensen identified the 100 most innovative companies in the world and interviewed their founders and current CEOs . They then conducted surveys among 5 , 500 innovators and managers . The goal : understand the skills that innovators use to produce new products , services , processes , and business . Being able to innovate is not a genetic capability ; it can be learned , practiced , and mastered . About 75 % of people believe that the following is a true statement : “Studies by psychologists show that creativity is largely a genetic endowment . ” By agreeing with this statement , people essentially are saying that they think creativity and innovation are the providence of a select few . But that statement is actually false . Research among identical twins ( who obviously have the same genetics ) who were raised apart in different environments shows that genetics only accounts for 30 % to 35 % of a person’s creativity . About two - thirds of a person’s ability to generate ideas is based on their experiences and the skills developed during their life . The conclusion : People are not “born innovators . ” Innovators have certain skills that are developed . Disruptive innovators have mastered five essential skills . Innovators see problems and transform these problems into solutions . That is what great innovators like Steve Jobs ( Apple ) and Jeff Bezos ( Amazon ) have done . And in turning problems into solutions , they think differently . The questions are , “How do innovators think differently ? And how do they act differently ? ” Through their research , the speakers have identified five skills and behaviors that yield innovative results—and that comprise “the Innovator’s DNA . ” They are : The Innovator ' s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators October 19 , 2011 © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing . Created for Harvard Business Review by BullsEye Resources www . bullseyeresources . com . 2 www . hbr . org Associating Associational thinking means associating or connecting things that were not previously connected . “Creativity is connecting things . " —Hal Gregersen , quoting Steve Jobs Two examples : 1 . The iPod . While working to simplify the design of the iPod , a designer was playing with the spin dial of a combination lock . He saw the spin dial as a way to make the iPod’s interface simple and user friendly . Creativity came by connecting two unrelated things . 2 . Salesforce . com . While on a sabbatical , Oracle executive Marc Benioff thought about how Amazon . com was providing various cloud - based technology services for small businesses . He connected this thought with his expertise in enterprise software to develop Salesforce . com , which is cloud - based enterprise software for small enterprises . While children are naturally good at associative thinking , adults are not . But it is possible for adults to engage in associative thinking by forcing and by feeding . One way is to make associating a discipline , to be conscious of it , and to allocate time for it . For example , there is an idea - generator app that presents three seemingly unrelated words . Ideas are generated by looking for connections . The other four innovation skills all are behavioral , and help individuals make connections of unrelated ideas . Questioning A skill of innovators is to constantly ask questions such as What if ? Why not ? What is keeping us from… ? What are the barriers to… ? When former Procter & Gamble CEO A . G . Lafley visited a country , he went into retail stores asking a barrage of questions , and then went into consumers’ homes asking more questions . He wanted to know how people used P & G’s products and whether they were delighted . Likewise , innovator David Neeleman is known for asking question after question . Neeleman founded JetBlue , which innovated with paperless ticketing and televisions on the backs of seats . In his newest venture , Azul airlines in Brazil , Neeleman learned by asking questions that a barrier to customers flying was the difficultly and expense to get to the airport . So , based on learning from the questions it asked , Azul innovated by starting its own bus service to get people to the airport . Professor Gregersen suggested that groups trying to generate new ideas take just 15 minutes to ask every possible question they can think of about a problem or possible solution . ( He termed this process “Questionstorming . ” ) Just the process of questioning will unlock multiple ideas and opportunities . “The important and difficult job is never to find the right answers ; it is to find the right question . " — Hal Gregersen , quoting Peter Drucker Observing Another way to trigger new type of connections is to get out into the world and observe things . Combining observing and questioning can yield great new ideas . For example , Scott Cook observed his wife’s frustrations as she paid the family’s bills and balanced her checkbook . Cook , who also had been exposed to early generations of Apple software , connected these two unconnected things and concluded that simple dropdown software could be used to help consumers manage their checkbooks and help small business owners do their bookkeeping . From these insights Cook founded Intuit , which makes Quicken software for consumers and QuickBooks for small businesses . Another example : Dollar General Stores observed that many customers came into the store on Tuesday mornings and walked through the store somewhat aimlessly , without specific items on their shopping list . Confused by this The Innovator ' s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators October 19 , 2011 © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing . Created for Harvard Business Review by BullsEye Resources www . bullseyeresources . com . 3 www . hbr . org observation , researchers asked these customers , “What are you doing ? Why are you here ? ” Their answer was that trucks arrived on Mondays with overstocked items . As a result , on Tuesdays , the aisles were filled with an unpredictable selection of items . making the shopping experience like a treasure hunt . Shoppers came on Tuesday mornings because they learned about Dollars General’s arrival schedule and loved the treasure hunt experience , an insight only gleaned through observation and questioning . “If you observe , you can learn ‘what . ’ But if you also ask questions , you can learn ‘why . ’ " — Clay Christensen Networking While some people get ideas from watching others , another way to generate ideas is by networking with other people . This isn’t networking for personal advancement ; it is networking specifically focused on idea generation . For this type of networking , the key criterion is to network with people that are “not like me . ” This can be people from different backgrounds , with experience in different industries , and with very different perspectives . It is from these differences that new connections will arise . Experimenting New connections can be created by all sorts of different experiences . Ideas , products , and processes all can be taken apart . New ideas can be prototyped and piloted . The conclusion : Thinking differently requires associating and connecting previously unconnected ideas . Thinking differently requires acting differently . Behavioral skills that result in acting differently are questioning , observing , experimenting , and networking . Mastering these skills will result in thinking differently , which will result in innovative new ideas . OTHER IMPORTANT POINTS Cultural differences . There is no data indicating that one gender , nationality , or culture is more creative or innovative than another . But there are differences in the innovations that result based on the particular problems faced in a certain country . Innovation inhibitors . Innovation doesn’t take place in organizations when managers delegate it to others . Convincing leaders to innovate . There definitely will be leaders who don’t see value in trying to associate or who are resistant to acting differently by questioning , observing , experimenting , or networking . Don’t try to convince them by encouraging them to act differently . First , teach them how to think differently . Teach them about the theory of disruption . Provide scholarly articles and case studies . This is less threatening and can be more effective in changing how they think . Once they think differently , they will be open to acting differently . The Innovator ' s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators October 19 , 2011 © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing . Created for Harvard Business Review by BullsEye Resources www . bullseyeresources . com . 4 www . hbr . org BIOGRAPHIES Clay Christensen Professor of Business Administration , Harvard Business School Clayton M . Christensen is the Robert and Jane Cizik Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School , with a joint appointment in the Technology & Operations Management and General Management faculty groups . His research and teaching interests center on the management issues related to the development and commercialization of technological and business model innovation . Professor Christensen is the architect of and the world’s foremost authority on disruptive innovation , a framework which describes the process by which a product or service takes root initially in simple applications at the bottom of a market and then relentlessly moves ‘up market , ’ eventually displacing established competitors . Consistently acknowledged in rankings and surveys as one of the world’s leading thinkers on innovation , Christensen is widely sought after as a speaker , advisor , and board member . His research has been applied to national economies , start - up and Fortune 50 companies , as well as to early and late stage investing . His seminal book The Innovator’s Dilemma ( 1997 ) , which first outlined his disruptive innovation frameworks , received the Global Business Book Award for the Best Business Book of the Year in 1997 , was a New York Times bestseller , has been translated into over 10 languages , and is sold in over 25 countries . He is also a four - time recipient of the McKinsey Award for the Harvard Business Review’s best article and received a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Tribeca Film Festival in 2010 . Professor Christensen holds a B . A . with highest honors in economics from Brigham Young University ( 1975 ) , and an M . Phil . in applied econometrics and the economics of less - developed countries from Oxford University ( 1977 ) , where he studied as a Rhodes Scholar . He received an MBA with High Distinction from the Harvard Business School in 1979 , graduating as a George F . Baker Scholar . He was awarded his DBA from the Harvard Business School in 1992 . He holds four honorary doctorates and an honorary chaired professorship at the Tsinghua University in Taiwan . Hal Gregersen Senior Affiliate Professor of Leadership , INSEAD Hal Gregersen is a Senior Affiliate Professor of Leadership at INSEAD where he pursues his vocation of executive teaching , coaching , consulting , and research by exploring how leaders in business , government , and society discover provocative new ideas , develop the human and organizational capacity to realize those ideas , and ultimately deliver positive , powerful results . Gregersen ' s newest book , The Innovator’s DNA : Mastering the Five Skills of Disruptive Innovators ( Harvard Business Review Press ) , flows from a path - breaking international research project conducted with Jeff Dyer ( Wharton / BYU ) and Clayton Christensen ( Harvard Business School ) . The eight - year study explored the fundamental question of where disruptive innovations come from and what roles senior executives , managers , and employees play in the creation of highly innovative teams and organizations . Before joining INSEAD , Gregersen taught at the London Business School , Tuck School – Dartmouth College , Helsinki School of Economics , Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy – Tufts University , Brigham Young University , Thunderbird , and Turku School of Economics as a Fulbright Fellow . In 1983 he completed his masters in organizational change from Brigham Young University and in 1989 a Ph . D . in business administration from the University of California , Irvine . Gregersen has co - authored numerous books , articles , book chapters , and cases on innovation and change in business journals such as Harvard Business Review . Sarah Cliffe ( Moderator ) Executive Editor , Harvard Business Review Sarah Cliffe is the Executive Editor of the Harvard Business Review . Sarah has been an editor at HBR for 12 years and was formerly editor in chief of MIT ' s Sloan Management Review . The information contained in this summary reflects BullsEye Resources , Inc . ’s subjective condensed summarization of the applicable conference session . There may be material errors , omissions , or inaccuracies in the reporting of the substance of the session . In no way does BullsEye Resources or Harvard Business Review assume any responsibility for any information provided or any decisions made based upon the information provided in this document .