A multiscale whole - cell theory for mechano - sensitive migration on viscoelastic substrates Wenya Shu 1 , 2 and C . Nadir Kaplan 1 , 2 ∗ 1 Department of Physics , Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , VA 24061 , USA . 2 Center for Soft Matter and Biological Physics , Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , VA 24061 , USA . ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed : nadirkaplan @ vt . edu Classification . Physical Sciences , Biophysics and Computational Biology . Keywords . Mechanobiology , mesenchymal migration , durotaxis . Increasing experimental evidence validates that both the elastic stiffness and viscosity of the extracellular matrix regulate mesenchymal cell behavior , such as the rational 5 switch between durotaxis ( cell migration to stiffer regions ) , anti - durotaxis ( migration to softer regions ) , and adurotaxis ( stiffness - insensitive migration ) . To reveal the mech - anisms underlying the crossover between these motility regimes , we have developed a multiscale chemo - mechanical whole - cell theory for mesenchymal migration . Our framework couples the sub - cellular focal adhesion dynamics at the cell - substrate in - 10 terface with the cellular cytoskeletal mechanics and the chemical signaling pathways involving Rho GTPase proteins . Upon polarization by the Rho GTPase gradients , our simulated cell migrates by concerted peripheral protrusions and contractions , a hall - mark of the mesenchymal mode . The resulting cell dynamics quantitatively repro - duces the experimental migration speed as a function of the uniform substrate stiffness 15 and explains the influence of viscosity on the migration efficiency . In the presence of stiffness gradients and absence of chemical polarization , our simulated cell can ex - hibit durotaxis , anti - durotaxis , and adurotaxis respectively with increasing substrate stiffness or viscosity . The cell moves toward an optimally stiff region from softer re - gions during durotaxis and from stiffer regions during anti - durotaxis . We show that 20 cell polarization through steep Rho GTPase gradients can reverse the migration direc - tion dictated by the mechanical cues . Overall , our theory demonstrates that opposing durotactic behaviors emerge via the interplay between intracellular signaling and cell - medium mechanical interactions in agreement with experiments , thereby elucidating complex mechano - sensing at the single - cell level . 25 1 Introduction Mesenchymal migration is fundamental to physiological and pathological phenomena such as develop - ment , growth , and tumor invasion . A mesenchymal cell moves by means of the recurring formation and removal of peripheral focal adhesion ( FA ) sites where it senses the mechanical properties of the extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) [ 1 – 5 ] . At each FA site , the cell spreads at a speed set by the competition between 30 actin polymerization , actomyosin contractility due to the pulling of the myosin motors , and mechanical stresses accross the cell - ECM interface . The net migration speed is determined at the whole - cell level by the contributions from all FA sites , highlighting the multiscale nature of the process , and has a non - monotonic dependence on the ECM elastic stiffness [ 6 – 9 ] . This trend was qualitatively explained by a stochastic theory of the “motor - clutch” force transmission on a single FA site at the cell anterior [ 10 , 11 ] . 35 Because biological tissues are viscoelastic , the motor - clutch model was recently extended to investigate the cellular response to viscoelasticity [ 12 – 14 ] . Despite the successes of the single FA theories , the physico - chemical dynamics of motility requires a multi - scale whole - cell description . This is because , first , single FA models inherently overestimate the measured migration speeds since the opposing traction forces across the distant FA sites of a cell are 40 ignored . Second , cells must detect the substrate heterogeneity with a higher resolution across their body than at the single FA scale . For example , vascular smooth muscle cells , glioblastoma cells ( U - 87MG and U - 251MG ) , and MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells can move up the stiffness gradients , termed durotaxis [ 15 – 18 ] . MDA - MB - 231 and U - 251MG can also migrate against stiffness gradients , known as anti - durotaxis , or become adurotactic by being insensitive to the gradients [ 17 – 19 ] . Some theories 45 replicated durotaxis by taking the traction force or migration speed as explicit functions of substrate stiffness [ 20 , 21 ] . However , since durotaxis is a posteriori built into these models , they cannot address the switch between durotaxis and anti - durotaxis . Third , migration is regulated by the cell - level reaction - transport dynamics of an intracellular biopolymer network . This involves the two prominent GTPase proteins , such as Rac1 , which controls actin polymerization and focal complex assembly , and RhoA , 50 which modulates actomyosin contractility [ 22 – 24 ] . A multi - scale approach that considers the biochem - ical signaling dynamics together with the responses of distinct FA sites to the local substrate mechanics could potentially explain the experimental migration speeds and the gradient sensitivity . Here , we present a multiscale chemo - mechanical whole - cell theory for mesenchymal migration on viscoelastic substrates . Our model couples the sub - cellular mechanics of the substrate – FA site inter - 55 faces with the cell - scale mechanics of the nucleus – cytoskeletal network complex and reaction - diffusion dynamics of the Rac1 and RhoA GTPase proteins . Hence , our framework differentiates itself from the existing whole - cell theories that are purely mechanical or do not explicitly incorporate the sub - cellular FA dynamics [ 25 – 30 ] . Our simulated cell can acquire a chemically induced polarization and a dynamic complex morphology during migration , with a speed profile that is biphasic with respect to the sub - 60 strate elasticity about a threshold stiffness , in quantitative agreement with experiments . Moreover , for a Kelvin - Voigt viscoelastic substrate , we analytically determine the traction force at an FA site in terms of the substrate viscosity and stiffness , and explain how the migration speed changes biphasically about a threshold viscosity , beyond which the cell abruptly loses traction . Importantly , the explicit treatment of the cell FA sites allows us to investigate the migration on nonuniform substrates with stiffness gradients . 65 For a chemically apolar cell , we identify the crossover between durotaxis , anti - durotaxis , and adurotaxis as a function of the substrate stiffness and viscosity , and propose a unifying mechanism for the mechano - sensitivity of mesenchymal migration . We further show that switching on the chemical polarity can 2 override the cell mechanical response and reverse the migration direction . Altogether , our results explain how the observed cell motility patterns are governed by the interplay between cell signaling , substrate 70 elasticity and viscosity , which are difficult to independently control in experiments . Multiscale chemo - mechanical theory for mesenchymal migration The biological components included in our multiscale whole - cell theory are illustrated in Fig . 1 A , B . Mesenchymal migration is initiated by an emergent intracellular polarization that drives the formation of leading edges with actin - rich protrusion sites and the actomyosin - induced retraction at the cell rear . 75 Upon polarization , FA sites form at the protruding edges . Each vertex in our model is assigned a FA site ( Fig . 1 C , D ) . The polarization is induced ( i ) by the gradients in the substrate material properties , which require modeling the mechanical cell - substrate interactions , and / or ( ii ) by the distribution of Rho GTPase proteins in inactive or active states across the cell , which necessitate a continuum description in the form of cell - level reaction - diffusion equations [ 22 , 27 , 29 ] . At the sub - cellular level , coupling ( i ) and ( ii ) 80 with a motor - clutch model for the FA sites at each vertex allows us to determine how the Rho GTPases regulate actin polymerization , tensile actomyosin forces , and adhesion dynamics ( Fig . 1 B , C ) . At the cell level , the forces generated at the FA sites , the membrane resistance forces , the cytoskeletal elastic forces , and the cytoplasmic viscous forces are all transferred to the nucleus , which serves as the hub for global force transmission across the cell in our model ( Fig . 1 D , E ) . For the Rho GTPase dynamics , we 85 adopt the reaction - diffusion framework introduced in Ref . [ 29 ] . To model each FA site , we generalize the motor - clutch model for a viscoelastic substrate in Ref . [ 14 ] to include the effect of the Rho GTPases and the substrate heterogeneity . We neglect the inertial forces since cells migrate in low - Reynolds - number environments . In our formulation , all variables are time dependent , the time derivative of a variable f = f ( t ) is denoted by ˙ f , and f i represents the value of f at the vertex i across the model cell . 90 Equations of motion at sub - cellular level . Mesenchymal cell migration is maintained by the periph - eral FA sites where molecular clutches are formed temporarily between the integrin ligands bound to the viscoelastic ECM and the intracellular actomyosin complex ( Fig . 1 B , C ) . At the sub - cellular level of our model , each vertex i comprises an FA site that transmits forces between the ECM and actomyosin , and an elastic membrane section ( Fig . 1 C , D ) . A cytoskeletal “spring” linked to a vertex represents the 95 microtubules and intermediate filaments , which transmit forces between the nucleus , the FA site , and the membrane ( Fig . 1 D , E ) . Denoting x i ( t ) as the position vector of the vertex i , we characterize the edge protrusions and retractions with a local spreading velocity V is ≡ ˙ x i , which is regulated by the Rho GTPase proteins . At vertex i , we consider the two prominent Rho GTPase members Rac1 ( R i ) and RhoA ( ρ i ) ; each can be in 2 membrane - bound states with active concentrations R ia , ρ ia and inactive 100 concentrations R iin , ρ iin . For simplicity , our model assumes that active chemo - mechanical processes de - termine solely the radial spreading speed along the cytoskeletal springs V is , n ≡ V is · n i whereas the polar spreading speed V is , τ ≡ V is · τ i is set by the passive membrane deformations ( n i , τ i defined in Fig . 1 D ) . The radial spreading speed V is , n is dictated by the competition between actin polimerization , myosin motor forces , and the membrane resistance . Actin filaments polymerize against the cell membrane with 105 a polymerization speed V i p at each vertex i ( Fig . 1 B , C ) . In our model , V i p is determined by the active Rac1 concentration R ia and its mean ⟨ R ia ⟩ averaged over all vertices as V ip = R ia ⟨ R ia ⟩ V 0 p , where V 0 p is the reference polymerization speed . The inward pulling forces of the myosin motors and the membrane 3 elastic resistance counteract actin polymerization by inducing an actin retrograde flow with a speed V ir from the edge to the interior of the cell . Then , V is , n is given by 110 V is , n = V ip − V ir . ( 1 ) The retrograde flow speed V ir is governed by the force balance at the FA sites and will be detailed below . Eq . 1 links the spreading dynamics to the local active Rac1 GTPase concentration and its cell - level average , building in a coupling across the two scales . The actin retrograde flow is actively controlled by the myosin motors within the peripheral acto - 115 myosin complex . At the FA site where the cell forms molecular clutches between actomyosin and the ECM , the retrograde flow speed is defined as V ir ≡ ˙ x ir where x ir is displacement of the actomyosin end of the FA site at vertex i ( Fig . 1 C ) . Defining F ic as the elastic restoring force of the bounded clutches and F ip as the net force resisting protrusion , the net local pulling force acting on the actomyosin complex F iam = F ic − F ip ( 2 ) 120 regulates V ir experimentally according to the empirical force - velocity relation [ 10 ] V ir ≡ ˙ x ir = V 0 (cid:18) 1 − F iam N im f m (cid:19) , ( 3 ) where V 0 is the unloaded myosin motor speed at F iam = 0 , N im is the number of active myosin motors , and f m is the force that stalls the activity of one myosin motor . Because active RhoA proteins enhance myosin - induced cell contraction [ 31 , 32 ] , we relate N im to the active RhoA concentration ρ ia as N im = 125 ρ ia ⟨ ρ ia ⟩ N 0 m , where ⟨ ρ ia ⟩ is the mean active RhoA concentration averaged over all vertices and N 0 m is the reference myosin motor number . In Eq . 2 , F ic is set by the cell - medium interactions at equilibrium at the FA site , and F ip is computed from a force balance across the vertex i and the attached cytoskeletal elements ( Fig . 1 D , E ) . We determine these two forces next . At each FA site , the bound clutches between the extracellular integrin ligands and the intracellular 130 actomyosin complex must generate a restoring force between the displacement at the filament end x ir and that at the substrate end x isub ( Fig . 1 C ) . Defining K c as the clutch spring constant , the restoring force on a single clutch is f i c = K c (cid:0) x i r − x i sub (cid:1) . Denoting the number of clutches as N i c ( t ) , and 0 ≤ P i ( t ) ≤ 1 as the fraction of the bound clutches , the total restoring clutch force at vertex i is given by F ic = P i N ic f ic = P i N ic K c (cid:0) x ir − x isub (cid:1) . ( 4 ) 135 Since Rac1 proteins are required for the focal complex assembly [ 33 – 35 ] , we assume that N ic is dynam - ically controlled by the local Rac1 concentration , i . e . , N ic = R ia ⟨ R ia ⟩ N 0 c , where N 0 c denotes the reference clutch number . With an association rate k ion and the dissociation rate k ioff , the time evolution of P i in Eq . 4 is governed by the mean - field rate equation [ 13 , 14 , 36 ] ˙ P i = k ion (cid:0) 1 − P i (cid:1) − k ioff P i . ( 5 ) 140 In Eq . 5 , we assume that the bound clutches dissociate with a catch - bond behavior with the rate k ioff = 4 k r 0 exp (cid:0) f ic / f r 0 (cid:1) + k c 0 exp (cid:0) − f ic / f c 0 (cid:1) . Here , k r 0 and k c 0 denote the unloaded off - rate and the unloaded catch - rate , respectively , f r 0 is the characteristic rupture force , and f c 0 the characteristic catch force . At mechanical equilibrium across the FA site , the elastic force given by Eq . 4 must be balanced by the viscoelastic deformation force of the substrate with a strength F isub . Defining the local elastic stiffness 145 as K isub and uniform substrate viscosity as γ sub , we use the Kelvin - Voigt model F isub = γ sub ˙ x isub + K isub x isub . ( Fig . 1 C ) [ 12 ] . Then , using Eq . 4 and the equality F ic = F isub yield the equation of motion for the displacement x isub ( t ) at the subtrate end of the focal adhesion as γ sub ˙ x isub + K isub x isub = P i N ic K c (cid:0) x ir − x isub (cid:1) . ( 6 ) The dependence of K isub on the vertex label i will allow us to examine the effect of the substrate stiffness 150 gradients on the migration dynamics . The net peripheral force resisting protrusion F ip in Eq . 2 is determined by the balance between the radial forces on the cytoskeletal elements and those at the cell boundary ( Fig . 1 C , D ) . The cytoskeletal elements consisting of microtubules and intermediate filaments link the vertices to the cell nucleus and are represented by a Hookean spring with a stiffness constant K cs in our model ( Fig . 1E ) . Denoting 155 the position vector of the cell nucleus by x nuc ( t ) , the distance between the cell nucleus and the i th vertex of the cell is is given by the radius r 0 in the undeformed ( initial circular ) configuration and by r i ≡ | ( x nuc − x i ) | in the deformed configuration . The radial restoring force is then expressed as F ics = K cs (cid:0) r 0 − r i (cid:1) . ( 7 ) Representing the cell membrane by a Hookean spring with stiffness K m between two adjacent vertices , 160 the tensile membrane forces at the i th vertex are given by F im , ± = K m (cid:0) l i ± − l 0 (cid:1) , where l i + ≡ x i + 1 − x i and l i − ≡ x i − x i − 1 denote the distance vectors between the vertex i and its two neighbors , and l 0 is the equilibrium initial distance vector between two adjacent vertices . Defining the deformed membrane length about the i th vertex as ⟨ l i ⟩ ≡ ( | l i + | + | l i − | ) / 2 , F ip is obtained from the radial force balance F ip + F ics + (cid:0) F im , + + F im , − (cid:1) · n i − η m ⟨ l i ⟩ V is , n = 0 , ( 8 ) 165 where the last term on the left - hand side denotes the viscous drag with the viscosity η m due to interactions between the cell membrane and the surrounding medium . The vertex position can be computed when , in addition to the radial spreading speed , the polar spreading speed V is , τ ≡ V is · τ i in response to the passive membrane deformations is obtained by (cid:0) F im , + + F im , − (cid:1) · τ i − η m ⟨ l i ⟩ V is , τ = 0 . ( 9 ) 170 Eqs . 1 – 9 fully determine the vertex spreading velocity V is , provided that the nucleus position x nuc and the membrane - bound Rho GTPase concentrations R ia , ρ ia , R iin , ρ iin at all vertices are known . We will specify x nuc ( t ) from cell - level force balance and R ia , ρ ia , R iin , ρ iin from a set of reaction - diffusion equations coupled with the dynamics of Rho GTPase proteins dissolved in the cytoplasm . Equations of motion at cellular level . As the largest and stiffest organelle , the nucleus transmits forces 175 between different sets of cytoskeletal microtubule and intermediate filament bundles , where each set is linked to a separate FA site and a membrane section ( Fig . 1 D ) [ 37 ] . The resulting cell - level network 5 maintains the structural integrity of the cell by imposing a global force balance , which governs the nucleus translocation mostly independent of the centrosome position [ 38 ] . That is , the sum of the sub - cellular forces at each cytokeletal spring attached to the vertex i , i . e . , the active force on the actomyosin 180 stress fiber F iam ( Eq . 2 ) and the passive cytoskeletal spring force F ics ( Eq . 7 ) , determines the net nuclear force F nuc ( t ) according to the equilibrium condition ( Fig . 1 D ) ( N : total number of vertices ) , N (cid:88) i = 1 (cid:0) F iam + F ics (cid:1) n i + F nuc = 0 . ( 10 ) The nucleus position x nuc is governed by F nuc noting that the nucleus undergoes passive drag with a velocity ˙ x nuc in the viscous cytoplasm . Approximating the nucleus to a rigid sphere with radius r nuc and 185 denoting the cytoplasm viscosity by η cp , the viscous drag force is expressed by the Stokes’ law as [ 26 ] F nuc = − 6 πη cp r nuc ˙ x nuc . ( 11 ) Eqs . 10 and 11 complement Eqs . 1 – 9 to determine the motion of the nucleus and all vertices simultane - ously , thereby closing the mechanical feedback loop between the sub - cellular - and cell - level dynamics . The distributions of the membrane - bound active Rac1 and RhoA GTPase concentrations G ia ( t ) ≡ 190 { R ia ( t ) , ρ ia ( t ) } at the cell level are set by three main mechanisms : First , they can diffuse between adja - cent vertices ; second , they can transition to / from the membrane - bound inactive concentrations G iin ( t ) ≡ { R iin ( t ) , ρ iin ( t ) } , third , there can be a turnover between G iin and the cytoplasmic concentrations G cp ( t ) ≡ { R cp ( t ) , ρ cp ( t ) } . To combine these three mechanisms , we adopt the biochemical reaction - diffusion model introduced in Ref . [ 29 ] . We further assume that G cp remain spatially uniform in the cytoplasm 195 at all times , and the total Rac1 and RhoA concentrations are constant over the course of migration . As depicted in Fig . 1 D , inactive - to - active conversion rates are A iG , and active - to - inactive conversion rates are I iG where G ≡ { R , ρ } . The exchange between the membrane - bound inactive protein concentrations and the cytoplasmic concentrations takes place with an association rate M + G and disassociation rate M − G . The diffusive fluxes of active and inactive proteins between adjacent vertices are discretized into finite 200 difference terms . The reaction - diffusion equations are then given by ( y ≡ { a , in } ) , J iy ≡ − D (cid:32) G i + 1 y / ⟨ l i + 1 ⟩ − G iy / ⟨ l i ⟩ | l i + | (cid:33) , ˙ G ia = A iG G iin − I iG G ia + (cid:0) J i − 1 a − J ia (cid:1) , ˙ G iin = − A iG G iin + I iG G ia + (cid:0) J i − 1 in − J iin (cid:1) + M + G G cp N − M − G G iin , ˙ G cp = − M + G G cp + N (cid:88) i = 1 M − G G iin . ( 12 ) The local active Rac1 and RhoA GTPase concentrations R ia , ρ ia and their averages over all vertices ⟨ R ia ⟩ , ⟨ ρ ia ⟩ control the cell deformations by regulating the actin polymerization speed V ip ( Eq . 1 ) , the number of active myosin motors N im ( Eq . 3 ) , and the clutch number N ic at an FA site ( Eq . 4 ) . To incorporate 205 reverse coupling from the membrane deformations to the rate terms , the self - reinforcements of R ia , ρ ia and the competition in - between , we assume the functional forms A iR = A iR ( R ia , ρ ia , θ i ) in Eq . S1 and 6 Table 1 : Substrate stiffness and viscosity ranges used in the simulations . Symbol Parameters Dimensional Dimensionless K sub Stiffness 0 . 01 - 100 pN / nm [ 10 , 13 , 14 ] 5 − 5 × 10 4 γ sub Viscosity 0 . 01 − 1 . 0 pN · s / nm [ 14 ] 0 . 006 − 0 . 6 A iρ = A iρ ( R ia , ρ ia , θ i ) in Eq . S2 ( Sec . S1 ) . Here , θ i is the angle between the two membrane sections at each vertex ( Fig . 1 D ) . Eqs . S1 and S2 couple R ia , ρ ia for recurrent polarization and the recovery of cell deformations . Particularly , an excessive increase in θ i at the retracting cell rear builds up R ia to increase 210 actin polymerization and thus reverse the retraction at the end of each migration step . A large decrease in θ i at the protruding cell front boosts ρ a that increases actomyosin contraction to resist further protrusion . Results By numerically solving the two - level whole - cell theory , we investigate the emergent polarity and com - plex morphology of a mesenchymal cell , as well as its migration dynamics as a function of the substrate 215 elasticity , viscosity , and the gradients thereof . Due to the discrete nature of our vertex model , Eqs . 1 – 9 for the vertex spreading velocity V is , Eqs . 10 , 11 for the nucleus position x nuc , and Eqs . 12 , S1 , S2 for the Rho GTPase concentrations in the local active state ( R ia , ρ ia ) , local inactive state ( R iin , ρ iin ) , and global cytoplasmic state ( R cp , ρ in ) constitute a set of nonlinear ordinary differential equations in time t . The equations are non - dimensionalized by the position scale X ≡ 2 πr 0 ≈ 30 µm , speed scale 220 V 0 = 120 nm / s , time scale T ≡ X / V ≈ 260 s , and force scale F 0 ≡ N 0 m f m = 200 pN ( Table S1 ) . To solve this initial value problem , we approximate an initially circular cell by an N - sided polygon with its corners setting the N vertex positions x i at t = 0 . All initial forces , velocities , displacements , and P i ( Eq . 4 ) are set to 0 . Uniform or random initial conditions for R ia , ρ ia , R iin , ρ iin are specified sep - arately for each study and will be given at each section . The total concentrations of Rac1 and RhoA 225 are each conserved , which set R cp , ρ cp at t = 0 ( Eq . S4 ) . Starting from these initial conditions , the time evolution of the model cell is simulated according to the algorithm presented in Fig . S1 . When the cytoplasmic inactive Rac1 concentration R cp reaches steady state , we reinitialize R ia , ρ ia to ensure that migration continues ( see Fig . S1 ) . Each simulation considers Q > 10 such cycles of the Rho GTPase relaxation dynamics . For the fixed experimental parameters listed in Table S2 , we characterize the effect 230 of substrate viscoelasticity on mesenchymal migration for an experimentally relevant range of the ECM stiffness and viscosity ( Table 1 ) . On nonuniform substrates with prescribed stiffness gradients , each ver - tex is assigned a local stiffness K isub depending on its position on the substrate at each time step , whereas on uniform substrates , K isub = K sub for all i = { 1 , . . . , N } at all times . A mesh convergence study that we have performed demonstrates that N = 16 − 24 yield good numerical accuracy ( Sec . S2 ) . There - 235 fore , we choose N = 16 to lower the computational cost of the simulations . Each simulation involves ∼ 10 6 time steps with a time step ∆ t = 0 . 002 s ( ∆ t ≈ 10 − 5 in dimensionless units ) corresponding to a migration dynamics over at least an hour in real units . Chemically induced cell polarity steers migration with complex morphology . Cell polarization fol - lowed by directional locomotion on a uniform substrate can be driven by a nonuniform distribution of 240 the Rho GTPase proteins . To simulate this scenario , we set a random initial distribution of the active 7 and inactive Rac1 and RhoA concentrations on all vertices except that two randomly selected vertices of the rightmost five vertices in Fig . 2 A have a higher active Rac1 concentration R ia at t = 0 ( Section S3 , Fig . S3 ) . Accordingly , at the vertex i = A , a high local R Aa enhances the actin polymerization speed ( V Ap ∝ R Aa ) and also the number of molecular clutches N Ac , in turn producing a strong focal adhesion 245 evidenced by a high substrate traction force F Asub as per Eq . 6 ( Fig . 2 A , B ) . Strong adhesion effectively suppresses the actin retrograde flow speed V Ar and generates a ‘sticking’ state of the actin filaments . This speeds up actin polymerization ( i . e . , high V Ap ; see Eq . 1 ) to protrude the cell membrane at the vertex A ( Fig . 2 A , t / T = 0 . 12 ) . In contrast , low R Ba at the vertex B gives rise to low V Bp and low N Bc . Correspondingly , the focal adhesion at the vertex B allows for a high V Br , sustaining a much lower F Bsub 250 ( Fig . 2 B ) . Such a ‘slipping state’ of the actin filaments coupled with weak actin polymerization retracts the vertex B ( Fig . 2 A , t = 0 . 12 ) . The coexistence of the sticking state with a slow retrograde flow at A and the slipping state with a fast retrograde flow at B breaks the cell symmetry [ 39 ] . Taken together , a polarized distribution of the Rac1 proteins gives rise to cell polarization and subsequent locomotion . Towards the end of a Rho GTPase relaxation cycle , the membrane - bound active concentrations R ia 255 and ρ ia approach a uniform steady state over all vertices , terminating the peripheral gradients in F isub and thus the cell polarity ( Fig . 2 A , B , t / T = 0 . 24 − 0 . 78 ; Fig . S3 ) . The polarity ceases with the aid of increasing vertex angle magnitudes | θ i | at e . g . the vertices A and C as follows : A strong protrusion at vertex A rapidly raises the activation rate A Aρ ( Eq . S2 ) and in turn ρ Aa ( Fig . 2 C ) , which suppresses protrusion by increasing the myosin motor number N Am and thus the retrograde flow speed V Ar ( Fig . 2 A , 260 t / T = 0 . 24 ) . Similarly , a strong contraction at vertex C increases the activation rate A CR ( Eq . S1 ) and surges R Ca ( Fig . 2 D ) , which reverses the contraction ( Fig . 2 A , t / T = 0 . 24 − 0 . 78 ) . Consequently , the two - way chemo - mechanical coupling in our model not only captures successive cell polarization and apolarization events but also replicates the complex cell morphology ( Movies S1 , S2 ) . Whole - cell migration speed is governed by both substrate stiffness and viscosity . At the cell front , 265 the radial spreading speed of a site V is , n must be controlled by the substrate force F sub upon molecular clutch formation with a time scale τ on ≡ 1 / k on . This is because F sub sets the actin retrograde flow speed V ir ( Eq . 3 ) , in turn determining V is , n ( Eq . 1 ) as a function of the stiffness K sub and viscosity γ sub of a uniform substrate , whereas the actin polymerization speed V ip must remain largely unchanged . Then , an increase in F sub increases V is , n , i . e . , enhances traction on the substrate . For single FA dynamics , the role 270 of the protrusion resistance force F p in Eq . 2 , 3 can be ignored since it builds up at a much slower rate than F sub after clutch formation . Defining an elastic deformation time scale τ l ≡ N 0 m f m / K sub V 0 and a retardation time scale τ r ≡ γ sub / K sub , the force generated by the myosin motors on the fully bound clutches ( P i ∼ 1 ) sets the force on a uniform compliant substrate ( K sub ≪ N 0 c K c ) as F sub ( t ) = N 0 m f m (cid:20) 1 − A ( γ sub ) exp (cid:18) − t ( τ l + τ r ) (cid:19)(cid:21) , A ( γ sub ) ≡ τ l ( τ l + τ r ) . ( 13 ) 275 Eq . 13 is a single - motor - clutch relation derived from Eqs . 2 − 4 , 6 for F ip = 0 and holds until the time of force - dependent clutch dissociation τ off , i . e . , at 0 ≤ t ≤ τ off ( Eq . 5 , Sec . S4 ) . Evidently , the time scales τ on , τ off , τ l , τ r predominantly govern the focal adhesion dynamics and thus the migration speed . We utilize our whole - cell model to explore the dependence of the average cell migration speed on the elastic stiffness K sub and viscosity γ sub of a uniform substrate . We interpret the simulation results 280 with the help of Eq . 13 . In our simulations , the nonuniform random initial conditions of the active Rac1 8 and RhoA concentrations R ia , ρ ia are the same as in the previous section ( Sec . S3 ) . Over one simulation with M ≫ 1 time steps , we define the average migration speed V as the nucleus trajectory length L ≡ | x nuc ( M ∆ t ) − x nuc ( 0 ) | divided by the total time t total ≡ M ∆ t , i . e . , V ≡ L / t total . We run n simulations to compute the distribution of V ; we define the sample mean migration speed as V . 285 For a uniform elastic substrate ( γ sub = 0 ) , the speed - stiffness relation has been reported to show a biphasic profile [ 6 , 7 , 25 , 40 ] . Our whole - cell simulations quantitatively reproduce the experimental dependence of V on K sub ( n = 5 ; Fig . 3 A ) [ 7 ] , which we explain by the competition between the two time scales τ l and τ on in Eq . 13 in the elastic limit ( τ r = 0 ) . Importantly , the elastic deformation time scale τ l can be interpreted as the characteristic clutch lifetime until the clutches break at t ≈ τ off 290 at a critical F sub , i . e . , τ l ≈ τ off ( Fig . S5 B , C ) . Because an FA site must generate optimal substrate force while the clutches are bound ( τ on ≲ τ l ) , the equality τ on = τ l defines a threshold stiffness K 0 ≡ N 0 m f m k on / V 0 , which allows us to classify a substrate as “stiff” when K sub > K 0 and “soft” when K sub < K 0 ( Sec . S4 ) . Based on the parameters in Table S2 , K 0 ≈ 8 pN / nm . On the stiff substrate ( K sub > K 0 , equivalently τ on > τ l ) , because the bound clutch fraction is low ( P i ≪ 1 ) , the substrate 295 traction force and thus the migration speed remain low ( Fig . 3 A ) . On the soft substrate ( K sub < K 0 , equivalently τ on < τ l ) , higher bound clutch fraction ( P i ≈ 1 ) induces a higher traction force , and thus a higher migration speed ( Fig . 3 A and B ) . On the very soft substrate ( K sub ≪ K 0 ) , Eq . 13 indicates that the traction force builds up very slowly at a time τ l ≫ τ on , suppressing the migration speed ( Fig . 3 A , B ) . Next , we computed the average migration speed V as a function of K sub and γ sub to resolve their 300 combined effect on migration efficiency ( Fig . 3 C – E ) . For lower viscosities ( γ sub = 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 pN · s / nm ) , the average speed preserves its biphasic profile about K sub ≈ K 0 ( Fig . 3 C , D ) . At higher viscosities ( γ sub = 0 . 9 pN · s / nm ) , however , V decreases monotonically with increasing stiffness ( Fig . 3 C , D ) . Furthermore , V as a function of γ sub is biphasic for a fixed stiffness K sub < K 0 ( Fig . 3 D ) . The negligible change of the threshold stiffness K 0 at lower viscosities and the non - monotonic dependence of V on γ sub 305 for K sub < K 0 can together be understood as follows : With increasing viscosity , whereas the viscoelastic deformation time scale τ l + τ r increases linearly , the force - dependent clutch lifetime τ off changes only marginally from the purely elastic case ( Fig . 3 F , S5 D ) . Therefore , the threshold stiffness K 0 set by τ on = τ l remains nearly constant for sufficiently low viscosities ( Fig . 3 C ) . Noting that the clutches in the fully bound state ( P i ≈ 1 ) dissociate at a critical dimensionless force per clutch ˜ f c ≡ F sub / N 0 m f m N 0 c 310 ( ≈ 7 × 10 − 3 for the parameters in Table S2 ; see Fig . 3 F ) , the viscosity can enhance the substrate traction only up until a threshold viscosity γ 0 where , upon formation , each clutch can sustain a force ˜ f c at most . Above γ 0 , because the substrate force per bond rapidly grows beyond ˜ f c at a time shorter than τ on , the bond formation must be suppressed ( τ off < τ on ) , in turn leading to a significant traction loss ( Fig . S5 D ) . Our numerical computation of the threshold viscosity γ 0 ( K sub ) based on this rationale agrees with the 315 region of maximum migration speed in the contour plot ( Fig . 3 C , full curve ) . Along the stiffness axis , γ 0 ( K sub ) is terminated at K sub = K 0 , beyond which τ off < τ on independent of the viscosity of stiff substrates ( Fig . 3 C , dashed line ) . This vertex - level scaling analysis explains the simulated whole - cell behavior in Fig . 3 C since the nonuniform initial R ia distribution breaks the cell symmetry and thus keeps F isub higher at the cell front than at the rear . Importantly , this difference in F isub across the cell suppresses 320 V to be much lower than the vertex - level speed scale V 0 , enabling our whole - cell model to quantitatively capture the experimentally observed migration dynamics ( see Fig . 3 A ) . Migration direction depends on the local stiffness of nonuniform elastic substrates . Having elu - cidated how the substrate elastic stiffness and viscosity affect the migration speed , we next report cell 9 symmetry breaking and directional migration on an elastic substrate ( γ sub = 0 ) with a stiffness gradi - 325 ent when chemically induced cell polarity is absent ( Fig . 4 A ) . We specify the initial conditions for the membrane - bound Rho GTPase concentrations as follows : The active Rac1 concentration R ia is assigned a random distribution , whereas the active RhoA concentration ρ ia and the inactive Rac1 , RhoA concen - trations R iin , ρ iin are set to be constant ( Fig . S4 ) . We characterize a nonuniform substrate by defining a reference stiffness K sub , 0 at x = 0 where the nucleus is initially positioned ( Fig . 4 A ) . We introduce a 330 constant stiffness gradient ∇ K sub = 16 pN / µm 2 in the + x direction ; non - dimensionalization by the ini - tial cell diameter 2 r 0 and the threshold stiffness K 0 yields the unitless gradient ˜ ∇ ˜ K sub = 2 × 10 − 2 ≪ 1 . For soft ( K sub , 0 < K 0 ) , medium ( K sub , 0 ≈ K 0 ) , stiff ( K sub , 0 > K 0 ) , and very stiff ( K sub , 0 ≫ K 0 ) substrates , we compare the effect of this small gradient on cell migration with that on a uniform substrate ( K sub = K sub , 0 ) . For each substrate configuration , we simulate n = 100 migration events . This allows 335 us to statistically differentiate between durotaxis ( migration up the stiffness gradient ) , anti - durotaxis ( mi - gration down the stiffness gradient ) , or adurotaxis ( random motion irrespective of the stiffness gradient ) by calculating the distributions of the durotactic index DI and the angular displacement φ ( Fig . 4 A ) . We define DI as the net horizontal displacement over Q Rho - GTPase relaxation cycles in the gradient ( + x ) direction divided by the total horizontal displacement [ 15 , 41 ] , that is ( H : Heaviside step function , 340 ∆ x j : displacement in the + x direction in the j th cycle ) , DI ≡ (cid:80) Qj = 1 H ( ∆ x i ) ∆ x j (cid:80) Qj = 1 | ∆ x j | , H ( ∆ x j ) =   1 , if ∆ x j > 0 , 1 / 2 , if ∆ x j = 0 , 0 , ∆ x j < 0 . ( 14 ) Eq . 14 returns DI > 0 . 5 for durotaxis , DI ≈ 0 . 5 for adurotaxis , and DI < 0 . 5 for anti - durotaxis . We compute the DI and φ distributions with n = 100 data points . We define the sample mean durotactic index as DI and the sample mean angular displacement as φ . 345 Our results indicate that DI is inversely proportional to the reference substrate stiffness K sub , 0 in the presence of a gradient . For ∇ K sub = 16 pN / µm 2 , the simulated cells undergo durotaxis on soft substrates , with DI > 0 . 5 and φ ∼ 0 ◦ ( Fig . 4 B , C ) , in agreement with experiments [ 16 ] . Higher gradients ∇ K sub = 32 pN / µm 2 and ∇ K sub = 160 pN / µm 2 ( equivalently , ˜ ∇ ˜ K sub = 4 × 10 − 2 and ˜ ∇ ˜ K sub = 0 . 2 in dimensionless units ) on soft substrates reinforce durotaxis , as evidenced by a 350 robust increase in DI and narrower angular distributions ( Fig . S6 ) . However , cells on medium and stiff substrates undergo anti - durotaxis with DI < 0 . 5 , supported by the corresponding angular distributions ( Fig . 4 B , D , E ) . These results agree well with the stiffness - sensitive migration behaviors of the U - 251MG glioblastoma and talin - low MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells [ 18 ] . On very stiff nonuniform substrates ( K sub , 0 ≫ K 0 ) , the cells undergo adurotaxis ( DI ≈ 0 . 5 , φ : uniform ) , i . e . , follow random migration 355 trajectories ( Fig . 4 B , F ) . Our simulations for substrates with uniform stiffness also yield DI ≈ 0 . 5 ; the absence of cell symmetry - breaking again leads to adurotaxis ( Fig . 4 B ) . The capability of our whole - cell model to produce durotaxis , anti - durotaxis , and adurotaxis as a func - tion of the substrate stiffness and its gradients allows us to propose a unifying mechanism for stiffness - sensitive migration . On one hand , on a soft nonuniform substrate , an FA site attached to a stiffer region 360 generates higher traction force where the cell in turn spreads faster than at another site attached to a softer region . In other words , F Rsub > F Lsub drives V Rs , n > V Ls , n in Fig . 4 G , navigating the cell up the stiffness gradient ( durotaxis ) . On the other hand , on a stiff nonuniform substrate , the cell generates a 10 higher traction force on the softer region ( F Rsub < F Lsub drives V Rs , n < V Ls , n ) , migrating down the stiffness gradient ( anti - durotaxis ) . Adurotaxis occurs when the cell becomes insensitive to the gradients on very 365 stiff substrates or when the traction forces are balanced at the opposing sides of the cell on a substrate with K sub , 0 ≲ K 0 ( Fig . 4 G ) . Therefore , the biphasic dependence of the substrate force on the local stiffness is sufficient for the emergence of different durotactic phenotypes on nonuniform substrates . Migration direction depends on both viscosity and stiffness of viscoelastic substrates . We have reported that the substrate viscosity γ sub alters the non - monotonic dependence of the migration speed 370 on the substrate stiffness K sub . Here , we study how uniform γ sub alters the directional migration of a chemically apolar cell in the presence of a constant stiffness gradient ∇ K sub = 16 pN / µm 2 in the + x direction . The initial conditions are the same as in the preceding section . To plot the contour map in Fig . 5 A , we performed n = 5 simulations to obtain the mean durotactic index DI for each data point { K sub , 0 , γ sub } that specifies a viscoelastic substrate . Fig . 5 A exhibits three distinct migration regimes 375 as a result of the mechanical interactions between the cell and the medium : Regime I pervades soft substrates ( K sub , 0 < K 0 ) with a sufficiently low viscosity where the cell undergoes durotaxis ( DI > 0 . 5 and φ ∼ 0 ; Fig . 5 A – D ) , in accordance with Fig . 4 C . Increasing K sub , 0 or γ sub leads to Regime II in which the cell sustains anti - durotaxis ( DI < 0 . 5 and φ ∼ 180 ◦ ; Fig . 5 A – C , E ) . This is because the magnitude and duration of the substrate traction forces at the FA sites are reduced on stiff and more 380 viscous substrates concurrently with shorter clutch lifetimes , directing the cell towards softer regions ( see Fig . 3 F and Fig . 4 G ) . Because cells are insensitive to a very high stiffness ( K sub , 0 ≫ K 0 ) or viscosity ( γ sub > γ 0 ) , they exhibit adurotaxis in this limit , i . e . , move randomly with small displacements , which we identify as Regime III ( DI ≈ 0 . 5 and φ : uniform ; Fig . 5 A – C , F ) . Overall , Fig . 5 A generalizes our earlier findings in Fig . 3 C for the mesencyhmal migration on uniform viscoelastic substrates . 385 RhoA induced actomyosin contractility alters cell migration direction . As opposed to our analysis of a chemically apolar cell migrating on a nonuniform viscoelastic substrate ( Fig . 5 ) , directional migra - tion in biological environments is regulated by both mechanical and chemical cues [ 42 , 43 ] . To address this complexity , we consider that external chemical fields can trigger a biased active RhoA distribution ρ ia at the cell membrane [ 24 , 42 ] . Taking a nonuniform distribution of ρ ia as an initial condition instanta - 390 neously generates a localized actomyosin contractility due to the high retrograde flow ( Fig . 6 A , B ) . On a soft elastic substrate with K sub , 0 = 1 pN / nm < K 0 and ∇ K sub = 16 pN / µm 2 , the simulated cells therefore exhibit anti - durotaxis ( DI < 0 . 5 and φ ∼ 180 ◦ for n = 50 ) in contrast with the durotactic migration in the absence of RhoA induced contractility ( Fig . 6 C , D ) . Further simulations on viscoelastic substrates demonstrate that the chemical polarity can override the cell - matrix mechanical interactions , 395 making cells migrate against the stiffness gradient regardless of the viscosity magnitudes ( Fig . 6 E – H ver - sus Fig . 5 D – F ) . These results suggest a selection mechanism for the migration direction in the presence of both the mechanical and chemical fields in vivo . Discussion Mesenchymal migration involves a dynamical interplay between physical and chemical processes across 400 the sub - cellular and cellular scales in response to the biological viscoelastic media . To account for this complexity , our whole - cell model couples the dynamics of sub - cellular FA sites , which probe the local 11 mechanical properties of the surrounding medium , with the local membrane mechanics and the cell - level reaction - diffusion dynamics of the two relevant Rho GTPase signals , Rac1 and RhoA . At the cellular scale of our model , the cytoskeleton transmits the forces between the FA sites and the cell nucleus where 405 the global force balance sets the migration direction and speed ( Fig . 1 ) . That way , our whole - cell model exhibits all distinct stages of mesenchymal migration , i . e . , the emergence of Rho GTPase induced cell polarity following FA formation , the associated complex shape changes , and the subsequent migration on uniform substrates via a stick - slip motion evidenced by the oscillating local substrate traction forces ( Fig . 2 ) . For uniform elastic substrates , we analytically determined a threshold stiffness K 0 , which 410 classifies the substrates as soft ( K sub < K 0 ) , medium ( K sub ≈ K 0 ) , stiff ( K sub > K 0 ) , and very stiff ( K sub ≫ K 0 ) . The migration speed is non - monotonic with respect to the substrate stiffness about K 0 , in agreement with experiments . We further found that , for viscoelastic substrates , this biphasic trend is terminated at a threshold viscosity γ 0 where the rapid traction force build - up cannot be sustained by the bound molecular clutches anymore , suppressing their formation in the first place ( Fig . 3 ) . Next , we 415 investigated the effect of the stiffness gradients on migration by switching off the Rho GTPase induced cell polarity . Our results demonstrate that the biphasic dependence of the local spreading speed on the local stiffness gives rise to durotaxis on soft substrates with low viscosity , anti - durotaxis on stiff or viscous substrates , or adurotaxis on very stiff substrates ( Fig . 4 , 5 ) . Finally , we showed that imposing a RhoA - driven strong local contraction , which can be experimentally achieved by external chemical cues , 420 can steer the cell along the Rho GTPase induced polarity irrespective of the stiffness gradients ( Fig . 6 ) . We close with a discussion of the limitations of our whole - cell model . Unlike the classical motor - clutch model that we used here for the FA dynamics , experiments have found an adhesion reinforcement effect due to talin unfolding at the clutches [ 44 ] . An augmented clutch model that considers the adhesion reinforcement has replicated the monotonic relation between the substrate traction force and substrate 425 stiffness as well as that between the cell area and stiffness [ 13 , 26 , 45 ] . However , this theoretical modi - fication cannot preserve the experimentally confirmed biphasic speed versus stiffness profile , which is a natural theoretical question for further investigation . Another limitation is that we only track the activities of two primary chemical signals , Rac1 and RhoA , for simplicity . However , Rac1 and RhoA interact with other proteins such as ROCK and DIA [ 22 ] . 430 Moreover , we manually reinitialize the active Rac1 and RhoA concentrations when they reach a steady state . A self - perpetuating oscillatory state in signal transduction can be obtained by taking into account regulations of other proteins [ 22 ] , inputs from ECM [ 46 ] , and a more comprehensive reverse coupling from the cell mechanics [ 30 ] . Although this simplification does not undermine our results , integrating the dynamics of additional proteins can enhance the chemo - mechanical feedback of our whole - cell model . 435 A third shortcoming is that our whole - cell model simplifies the cell structural mechanics . We rep - resent the cytoskeleton by linear Hookean springs . However , since the cell stiffness depends on the cell area [ 45 ] , large deformations may induce a nonlinear strain - stiffening effect of the cytoskeleton net - work . It is also known that cytoskeletal filaments are inherently dynamic due to their polymerization and crosslinking kinetics [ 47 ] . Furthermore , whereas our model assumes static links between the nucleus 440 and cytoskeleton , the nucleus motion is affected by constant cytoskeletal – nuclear binding and unbind - ing events [ 48 ] . Incorporating the cytoskeletal kinetics and cytoskeletal - nuclear interactions into our whole - cell model may allow us to assess their relevance to the cell migration dynamics . These limitations notwithstanding , our whole - cell model unifies seemingly opposing durotactic be - haviors due to the mechanical cell - medium interactions and the intracellular signaling pathways . It 445 therefore elucidates complex mechano - sensing at the single - cell level and paves the way for the general - 12 ization of cell behavior and migration in three dimensional microenvironments . Author contributions . W . S . : conceptualization , formal analysis , investigation , software , validation , visualization , writing – original draft , review and editing ; C . N . K . : conceptualization , formal analysis , 450 project administration , resources , validation , writing – original draft , review and editing . Competing interests . The authors declare no competing interest . Data availability . The source codes of the simulations can be downloaded at https : / / github . com / nadirkaplan / migration multiscale theory . Acknowledgments . We thank the College of Science at Virginia Tech for financial support . 455 References [ 1 ] Marileen Dogterom and Gijsje H Koenderink . “Actin – microtubule crosstalk in cell biology” . In : Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 20 . 1 ( 2019 ) , pp . 38 – 54 . [ 2 ] Revathi Ananthakrishnan and Allen Ehrlicher . “The forces behind cell movement” . In : Interna - tional Journal of Biological Sciences 3 . 5 ( 2007 ) , p . 303 . 460 [ 3 ] Gaudenz Danuser , Jun Allard , and Alex Mogilner . “Mathematical Modeling of Eukaryotic Cell Migration : Insights Beyond Experiments” . In : Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 29 . 1 ( 2013 ) , pp . 501 – 528 . [ 4 ] Bin Chen , Baohua Ji , and Huajian Gao . “Modeling active mechanosensing in cell – matrix interac - tions” . In : Annual Review of Biophysics 44 ( 2015 ) , pp . 1 – 32 . 465 [ 5 ] Bo Cheng , Min Lin , Guoyou Huang , Yuhui Li , Baohua Ji , Guy M Genin , Vikram S Deshpande , Tian Jian Lu , and Feng Xu . “Cellular mechanosensing of the biophysical microenvironment : a review of mathematical models of biophysical regulation of cell responses” . In : Physics of Life Reviews 22 ( 2017 ) , pp . 88 – 119 . [ 6 ] Shelly R Peyton and Andrew J Putnam . “Extracellular matrix rigidity governs smooth muscle cell 470 motility in a biphasic fashion” . In : Journal of Cellular Physiology 204 . 1 ( 2005 ) , pp . 198 – 209 . [ 7 ] Amit Pathak and Sanjay Kumar . “Independent regulation of tumor cell migration by matrix stiff - ness and confinement” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 . 26 ( 2012 ) , pp . 10334 – 10339 . [ 8 ] Kimberly M Stroka and Helim Aranda - Espinoza . “Neutrophils display biphasic relationship be - 475 tween migration and substrate stiffness” . In : Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 66 . 6 ( 2009 ) , pp . 328 – 341 . [ 9 ] J´erˆome Solon , Ilya Levental , Kheya Sengupta , Penelope C Georges , and Paul A Janmey . “Fibrob - last adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates” . In : Biophysical Journal 93 . 12 ( 2007 ) , pp . 4453 – 4461 . 480 [ 10 ] Clarence E Chan and David J Odde . “Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates” . In : Science 322 . 5908 ( 2008 ) , pp . 1687 – 1691 . 13 [ 11 ] Benjamin L Bangasser , Steven S Rosenfeld , and David J Odde . “Determinants of maximal force transmission in a motor - clutch model of cell traction in a compliant microenvironment” . In : Bio - physical Journal 105 . 3 ( 2013 ) , pp . 581 – 592 . 485 [ 12 ] Danyang Huang , Yong Huang , Yun Xiao , Xiao Yang , Hai Lin , Ganjun Feng , Xiangdong Zhu , and Xingdong Zhang . “Viscoelasticity in natural tissues and engineered scaffolds for tissue recon - struction” . In : Acta Biomaterialia 97 ( 2019 ) , pp . 74 – 92 . [ 13 ] Ze Gong , Spencer E Szczesny , Steven R Caliari , Elisabeth E Charrier , Ovijit Chaudhuri , Xuan Cao , Yuan Lin , Robert L Mauck , Paul A Janmey , Jason A Burdick , and Vivek B Shenoy . “Match - 490 ing material and cellular timescales maximizes cell spreading on viscoelastic substrates” . In : Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 . 12 ( 2018 ) , E2686 – E2695 . [ 14 ] Partho Sakha De and Rumi De . “Stick - slip dynamics of migrating cells on viscoelastic substrates” . In : Physical Review E 100 . 1 ( 2019 ) , p . 012409 . [ 15 ] Christopher D Hartman , Brett C Isenberg , Samantha G Chua , and Joyce Y Wong . “Vascular 495 smooth muscle cell durotaxis depends on extracellular matrix composition” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 . 40 ( 2016 ) , pp . 11190 – 11195 . [ 16 ] Brian J DuChez , Andrew D Doyle , Emilios K Dimitriadis , and Kenneth M Yamada . “Durotaxis by human cancer cells” . In : Biophysical Journal 116 . 4 ( 2019 ) , pp . 670 – 683 . [ 17 ] Benjamin Yeoman , Gabriel Shatkin , Pranjali Beri , Afsheen Banisadr , Parag Katira , and Adam J 500 Engler . “Adhesion strength and contractility enable metastatic cells to become adurotactic” . In : Cell Reports 34 . 10 ( 2021 ) , p . 108816 . [ 18 ] Aleksi Isomursu , Keun - Young Park , Jay Hou , Cheng Bo , Ghaidan Shamsan , Benjamin Fuller , Jesse Kasim , M Mohsen Mahmoodi , Tian Jian Lu , Guy M Genin , Feng Xu , Min Lin , Mark Dis - tefano , Johanna Ivaska , and David J Odde . “Negative durotaxis : cell movement toward softer 505 environments” . In : BioRxiv ( 2020 ) . [ 19 ] Gabriel Shatkin , Benjamin Yeoman , Katherine Birmingham , Parag Katira , and Adam J Engler . “Computational models of migration modes improve our understanding of metastasis” . In : APL Bioengineering 4 . 4 ( 2020 ) , p . 041505 . [ 20 ] Irina V Dokukina and Maria E Gracheva . “A model of fibroblast motility on substrates with dif - 510 ferent rigidities” . In : Biophysical Journal 98 . 12 ( 2010 ) , pp . 2794 – 2803 . [ 21 ] Elizaveta A Novikova , Matthew Raab , Dennis E Discher , and Cornelis Storm . “Persistence - driven durotaxis : Generic , directed motility in rigidity gradients” . In : Physical Review Letters 118 . 7 ( 2017 ) , p . 078103 . [ 22 ] Alfonso Bolado - Carrancio , Oleksii S Rukhlenko , Elena Nikonova , Mikhail A Tsyganov , Anne 515 Wheeler , Amaya Garcia - Munoz , Walter Kolch , Alex von Kriegsheim , and Boris N Kholodenko . “Periodic propagating waves coordinate RhoGTPase network dynamics at the leading and trailing edges during cell migration” . In : eLife 9 ( 2020 ) , e58165 . 14 [ 23 ] Kate M Byrne , Naser Monsefi , John C Dawson , Andrea Degasperi , Jimi - Carlo Bukowski - Wills , Natalia Volinsky , Maciej Dobrzy´nski , Marc R Birtwistle , Mikhail A Tsyganov , Anatoly Kiyatkin , 520 Katarzyna Kida , Andrew J Finch , Neil O Carragher , Walter Kolch , Lan K Nguyen , Alex von Kriegsheim , and Boris N Kholodenko . “Bistability in the Rac1 , PAK , and RhoA signaling network drives actin cytoskeleton dynamics and cell motility switches” . In : Cell systems 2 . 1 ( 2016 ) , pp . 38 – 48 . [ 24 ] Calina Copos and Alex Mogilner . “A hybrid stochastic – deterministic mechanochemical model of 525 cell polarization” . In : Molecular Biology of the Cell 31 . 15 ( 2020 ) , pp . 1637 – 1649 . [ 25 ] Amit Pathak . “Modeling and predictions of biphasic mechanosensitive cell migration altered by cell - intrinsic properties and matrix confinement” . In : Physical Biology 15 . 6 ( 2018 ) , p . 065001 . [ 26 ] Yuan Qin , Yuhui Li , Li - Yuan Zhang , and Guang - Kui Xu . “Stochastic fluctuation - induced cell polarization on elastic substrates : A cytoskeleton - based mechanical model” . In : Journal of the 530 Mechanics and Physics of Solids 137 ( 2020 ) , p . 103872 . [ 27 ] Andreas Buttensch¨on , Yue Liu , and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . “Cell size , mechanical tension , and GTPase signaling in the single cell” . In : Bulletin of Mathematical Bology 82 . 2 ( 2020 ) , pp . 1 – 33 . [ 28 ] Bahador Marzban , Jiming Kang , Ningwei Li , Yubing Sun , and Hongyan Yuan . “A contraction – reaction – diffusion model : Integrating biomechanics and biochemistry in cell migration” . In : Ex - 535 treme Mechanics Letters 32 ( 2019 ) , p . 100566 . [ 29 ] Brian Merchant , Leah Edelstein - Keshet , and James J Feng . “A Rho - GTPase based model explains spontaneous collective migration of neural crest cell clusters” . In : Developmental Biology 444 ( 2018 ) , S262 – S273 . [ 30 ] Cole Zmurchok , Dhananjay Bhaskar , and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . “Coupling mechanical tension 540 and GTPase signaling to generate cell and tissue dynamics” . In : Physical Biology 15 . 4 ( 2018 ) , p . 046004 . [ 31 ] Bharesh K Chauhan , Ming Lou , Yi Zheng , and Richard A Lang . “Balanced Rac1 and RhoA ac - tivities regulate cell shape and drive invagination morphogenesis in epithelia” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 . 45 ( 2011 ) , pp . 18289 – 18294 . 545 [ 32 ] Oula El Atat , Amira Fakih , and Mirvat El - Sibai . “RHOG activates RAC1 through CDC42 leading to tube formation in vascular endothelial cells” . In : Cells 8 . 2 ( 2019 ) , p . 171 . [ 33 ] Matteo Parri and Paola Chiarugi . “Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell motility control” . In : Cell Communication and Signaling 8 . 1 ( 2010 ) , pp . 1 – 14 . [ 34 ] K Rottner , A Hall , and JV Small . “Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate 550 contact dynamics” . In : Current Biology 9 . 12 ( 1999 ) , 640 – S1 . [ 35 ] Catherine D Nobes and Alan Hall . “Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of mul - timolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia” . In : Cell 81 . 1 ( 1995 ) , pp . 53 – 62 . [ 36 ] Benjamin L Bangasser and David J Odde . “Master equation - based analysis of a motor - clutch 555 model for cell traction force” . In : Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering 6 . 4 ( 2013 ) , pp . 449 – 459 . 15 [ 37 ] Naotaka Nakazawa and Mineko Kengaku . “Mechanical regulation of nuclear translocation in mi - gratory neurons” . In : Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 8 ( 2020 ) , p . 150 . [ 38 ] Hiroki Umeshima , Tomoo Hirano , and Mineko Kengaku . “Microtubule - based nuclear movement 560 occurs independently of centrosome positioning in migrating neurons” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 . 41 ( 2007 ) , pp . 16182 – 16187 . [ 39 ] Pierre Sens . “Stick – slip model for actin - driven cell protrusions , cell polarization , and crawling” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 . 40 ( 2020 ) , pp . 24670 – 24678 . [ 40 ] Benjamin L Bangasser , Ghaidan A Shamsan , Clarence E Chan , Kwaku N Opoku , Erkan T¨uzel , 565 Benjamin W Schlichtmann , Jesse A Kasim , Benjamin J Fuller , Brannon R McCullough , Steven S Rosenfeld , and David J Odde . “Shifting the optimal stiffness for cell migration” . In : Nature Communications 8 . 1 ( 2017 ) , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 41 ] Abdel - Rahman Hassan , Thomas Biel , and Taeyoon Kim . “Mechanical Model for Durotactic Cell Migration” . In : ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 5 . 8 ( 2019 ) , pp . 3954 – 3963 . 570 [ 42 ] Adam Shellard and Roberto Mayor . “All roads lead to directional cell migration” . In : Trends in Cell Biology ( 2020 ) . [ 43 ] Jaime A Espina , Cristian L Marchant , and Elias H Barriga . “Durotaxis : the mechanical control of directed cell migration” . In : The FEBS Journal ( 2021 ) . [ 44 ] Alberto Elosegui - Artola , Roger Oria , Yunfeng Chen , Anita Kosmalska , Carlos P´erez - Gonz´alez , 575 Natalia Castro , Cheng Zhu , Xavier Trepat , and Pere Roca - Cusachs . “Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity” . In : Nature Cell Biology 18 . 5 ( 2016 ) , pp . 540 – 548 . [ 45 ] Paul A Janmey , Daniel A Fletcher , and Cynthia A Reinhart - King . “Stiffness sensing by cells” . In : Physiological Reviews 100 . 2 ( 2020 ) , pp . 695 – 724 . 580 [ 46 ] William R Holmes , JinSeok Park , Andre Levchenko , and Leah Edelstein - Keshet . “A mathematical model coupling polarity signaling to cell adhesion explains diverse cell migration patterns” . In : PLOS Computational Biology 13 . 5 ( 2017 ) , e1005524 . [ 47 ] X Wei , C Fang , B Gong , X Shao , Fei Sun , J Qian , and Y Lin . “Time - dependent response of bio - polymer networks regulated by catch and slip bond - like kinetics of cross - linkers” . In : Journal of 585 the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 147 ( 2021 ) , p . 104267 . [ 48 ] Alberto Elosegui - Artola , Xavier Trepat , and Pere Roca - Cusachs . “Control of mechanotransduc - tion by molecular clutch dynamics” . In : Trends in Cell Biology 28 . 5 ( 2018 ) , pp . 356 – 367 . [ 49 ] Utku Horzum , Berrin Ozdil , and Devrim Pesen - Okvur . “Step - by - step quantitative analysis of focal adhesions” . In : MethodsX 1 ( 2014 ) , pp . 56 – 59 . 590 [ 50 ] Sam Walcott and Sean X Sun . “A mechanical model of actin stress fiber formation and substrate elasticity sensing in adherent cells” . In : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 . 17 ( 2010 ) , pp . 7757 – 7762 . [ 51 ] We converted the the experimental substrate modulus E sub ( kP a ) to the stiffness K sub ( pN / nm ) by using the relation K sub ≈ 2 E sub R FA , where 2 R FA ≈ 0 . 25 µm approximates the diameter of 595 the nearly circular FA region [ 49 , 50 ] . 16 Microtubule Actin Actomyosin Nucleus Centrosome Focal adhesion Cytoskeleton networks ECM Actomyosin Ligated Integrin B A Membrane ! " ! " # # $ $ % $ $ & % $ ' & $ ' C ' ( ' ' ) ' ( * + , ' ) * + , ' ( - . ' * ) ' - * * + , ' ) / ' * , 1 ' = ' ( ' - ' ) ' Molecular clutches Membrane - bound inactive form + 233 ' + 21 ' ) / * D E , ' ( ( ' ( / ' ! ! " " # $ ! " 4 # " " # & " 56 # " 7 # - ' , ' " " # % Membrane - bound active form Fig . 1 : Whole - cell model schematics . ( A ) Intracellular organization that drives nucleus movement and mesenchymal migration . ( B ) Close - up view of the cell edge depicts the coupling between the actomyosin complexes with myosin motors , molecular clutches ( blue ) between the cell and the integrin ligands of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) at the focal adhesion site , and polymerizing actin ( red lines ) that drive edge protrusion . The spreading velocity at vertex i is V is ≡ V is , n n i + V is , τ τ i ( n i , τ i : unit radial and polar vectors ) . ( C ) Positions , speeds , forces , and material parameters underlying the sub - cellular level equations . ( D ) The cell - level vertex model . The chemical signaling is mediated by the Rac1 ( R ) and RhoA ( ρ ) GTPase proteins in the membrane - bound active ( yellow dots ) and inactive states ( blue dots ) , and inactive state dissolved in the cytoplasm ( gray dots ) . The conversion rates between the three states are A iG , I iG , M − G , M + G ( G ≡ { R , ρ } ; see Eq . 12 ) . ( E ) The elastic forces on cytoskeletal biopolymers ( microtubules and intermediate filaments ) are modeled by Hookean springs with the stiffness K cs . 17 A C A B D t / T = 0 . 78 B t / T = 0 . 12 t / T = 0 . 24 t / T = 0 . 0 A C C Fig . 2 : Chemically induced cell polarity and migration . ( A ) A migrating cell with polarity induced shape change at four different times . Three vertices with strong protrusion or contraction dynamics are labeled as A , B , C . At time t = 0 , our simulation algorithm randomly assigns a strong active Rac1 signal to one or two vertices from the five rightmost vertices denoted by stars ( see Fig . S3 A ) . ( B ) Over one Rho GTPase relaxation cycle ( Q = 1 ) , time series of the dimensionless substrate force at the leading vertex A ( full line ) and the trailing vertex B ( dashed line ) . The dots and inverse triangles denote the average values over a single period of clutch formation and breakup . Time evolutions of the ( C ) membrane - bound active RhoA concentration ρ ia and ( D ) active Rac1 concentration R ia on A , B , C . 18 A E / ! " # = 0 . 1 & ' / + , / ! " # = 1 . 0 & ' / + , / ! " # = 5 . 0 & ' / + , B D C F ! ! " # = 0 . 6 & ' ( ) / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 3 & ' ( ) / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 1 & ' ( ) / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 8 & ' ( ) / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 8 & ' ( ) / + , Fig . 3 : Cell migration speed on uniform viscoelastic substrates . ( A ) The dimensionless mean mi - gration speed V / V 0 ( full line ) and its standard deviation ( shaded area ) as a function of the substrate elastic stiffness K sub ( the horizontal cross section of panel C at γ sub = 0 ) . For comparison , the dots and error bars are the experimental data from U373 - MG human glioma cells on polyacrylamide hy - drogels [ 7 ] [ 51 ] . ( B ) Analytical versus numerical dimensionless substrate force dynamics on an elastic substrate ( γ sub = 0 ) . ( C ) Contour plot of V / V 0 as a function of K sub and substrate viscosity γ sub . The full curve is the threshold viscosity γ 0 , which is terminated at the threshold stiffness K 0 ≈ 8 pN / nm ( dashed line ) . We ran n = 5 simulations to compute V / V 0 at each of the 180 points in the contour plot . ( D ) V / V 0 and its standard deviation ( shaded areas ) as a function of K sub for finite γ sub . ( E ) V and its standard deviation ( shaded area ) as a function of γ sub for K sub = 1 pN / nm . In panels A , D , E , the stan - dard deviations are calculated over n = 5 simulations at each data point . ( F ) Analytical versus numerical dimensionless substrate force dynamics on a viscoelastic substrate ( K sub = 1 . 0 pN / nm ) . In panels B , F , the numerical profiles are obtained from an isolated sub - cellular motor - clutch model ( Fig . S5 ) . 19 ( * + , : ( * + , : < ( * + , ; ( * + , : ( * + , : > ( * + , ; ( * + , ; ( * + , ; G G / ! " # , , + ∇ / ! " # ( 2 6 P a t h P 7 0 . 5 pN / nm 5 pN / nm 10 pN / nm 50 pN / nm A B C D E F ) * + , , 8 = 0 . 5 : ; / = > Number of cells * ) * + , , 8 ) * + , , 8 = 10 . 0 : ; / = > ) * + , , 8 = 50 . 0 : ; / = > ) * + , , 8 = 5 . 0 : ; / = > Fig . 4 : Migration direction on elastic substrates with stiffness gradients . ( A ) Simulation domain for a chemically apolar cell on a nonuniform substrate with a reference stiffness K sub , 0 at x = 0 and constant stiffness gradient ∇ K sub . The path P represents a migration event with a final distance ⃗D from the origin and angular displacement φ with respect to the x - axis . ( B ) The mean durotactic index DI over n = 100 simulations for each of soft ( K sub , 0 < K 0 ) , medium ( K sub , 0 ≈ K 0 ) , stiff ( K sub , 0 > K 0 ) , and very stiff ( K sub , 0 ≫ K 0 ) substrates . Light and dark bars represent DI on uniform and nonuniform substrates with ∇ K sub = 16 pN / µm 2 , respectively . Error bars show the standard deviations over n = 100 simulations . ( C ) – ( F ) depict the angular displacement ( φ ) distributions for each of the dark bars in B . The magnitude of each sector ( with a 22 . 5 ◦ bin size ) represents the number of simulations in which the cell moved in the corresponding direction . ( G ) The biphasic local stiffness / substrate force relation from a vertex - level single motor - clutch model . The substrate traction forces at the leftmost and rightmost cell ends are defined as F Lsub and F Rsub . On nonuniform substrates , our simulations record three distinct migration behaviors , which we explain by comparing F Lsub with F Lsub ; see the main text . 20 ( ( ( ( ( ( ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( ( D A F E C B ! ! " # = 0 . 1 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 1 . 0 & ' / + , Number of cells 0 . 5 ! ! " # = 0 . 5 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 50 . 0 & ' / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 5 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 1 . 0 & ' / + , Fig . 5 : Migration direction on viscoelastic substrates with stiffness gradients . ( A ) Contour plot of the mean durotactic index DI as a function of the reference substrate stiffness K sub , 0 and uniform substrate viscosity γ sub . The contour plot contains 180 data points with n = 5 at each point . As guides to the eye , the dashed black curves divide the contour plot into three migration regimes : Regime I ( DI > 0 . 5 ; durotaxis ) , Regime II ( DI < 0 . 5 ; anti - durotaxis ) , Regime III ( DI ≈ 0 . 5 ; adurotaxis ) . ( B ) The mean durotactic index DI versus the reference stiffness K sub , 0 with a constant substrate viscosity γ sub = 0 . 3 pN · s / nm . ( C ) The mean durotactic index DI versus the viscosity γ sub when K sub , 0 = 1 . 0 pN / nm . Shaded regions in B and C represent the standard deviations for n = 5 . ( D ) – ( F ) depict the angular displacement ( φ ) distributions at each cross symbol in A . Each sector with a 22 . 5 ◦ bin size represents the number of simulations in which the cell moved in the corresponding direction for n = 50 . 21 S t r ong c on t r ac tilit y Biased D - . Uniform D - . - ! " # , % = 0 . 5 & ' / + , A B D - . H G E F C D ! ! " # = 0 . 1 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 1 . 0 & ' / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 5 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 1 . 0 & ' / + , ! ! " # = 0 . 5 & ' ( ) / + , - ! " # , % = 50 . 0 & ' / + , ( D ) in Fig5A ( E ) in Fig5A ( F ) in Fig5A Number of cells Fig . 6 : Rho GTPase signals can reverse the mechanically favored migration direction . ( A ) Initial condition of the active RhoA concentration ρ ia on the cell vertices . ( B ) The resulting actomyosin in - duced cell contraction . ( C ) The mean durotactic index DI of cells with the uniform RhoA and biased RhoA signals on the nonuniform elastic substrates . Error bars are the standard deviations over n = 50 simulations each . ( D ) The angular displacement ( φ ) distributions with the uniform and biased ρ ia , il - lustrated by black and gray sectors , respectively ( n = 50 simulations each ) . Each sector with a 22 . 5 ◦ bin size represents the number of simulations where the cell moved in the corresponding direction . ( E ) On viscoelastic substrates specified by the cross symbols in Fig . 5 A , DI for n = 50 . Light and dark bars represent DI of uniform and biased RhoA signals ( ρ ia ) , respectively . Error bars show the standard deviations for n = 50 . ( F ) – ( H ) depict the angular displacement ( φ ) distributions for each of the light bars in E . 22