SPECIAL THEME Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives : Can we learn from ERP ? Tim Kuettner & Roland Diehl & Petra Schubert Received : 16 October 2012 / Accepted : 18 August 2013 # Institute of Information Management , University of St . Gallen 2013 Abstract The rise of social software and Enterprise 2 . 0 sees organizations rapidly deploying collaboration technologies . Implementing new technology entails change and challenges , and these aspects of Enterprise 2 . 0 have not been adequately addressed by research . This study investigates change factors specific to Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives to contribute to our un - derstanding of their characteristics and idiosyncrasies . Draw - ing upon grounded theory , we analyze 16 case studies and integrate the results in the context of socio - technical change . To contrast the findings , similarities and distinctions between Enterprise 2 . 0 and ERP projects are discussed . We further explore and evaluate the conclusions by conducting expert interviews with senior professionals in the field of Enterprise 2 . 0 . Our results indicate Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives involve specific change factors , require distinct management strategies and shape new roles in the organization . The findings can enable practitioners in navigating the pitfalls of transferring and applying change management to a new field . For re - searchers , the study constitutes a point of departure to empir - ically examine change in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives . Keywords Enterprise 2 . 0 . Change management . Socio - technical change . ERP . Enterprise collaboration systems . Social software JEL classification O33 Introduction and overview Social software and Enterprise 2 . 0 are increasingly perceived as a major shift in the information technology industry : ana - lyst firm IDC ranks social networks among the top four IT trends responsible for 80 % of growth in IT investment ( IDC 2011 ) . Gartner research reports collaboration technologies have become one of the top five technology priorities of CIOs ( Gartner 2012a ) , and counts social customer relationship man - agement and activity streams among the fast moving , emerg - ing technologies to reach the plateau of productivity within 2 to 5 years ( Gartner 2012b ) . Miles ( 2010 ) observes that 95 % of their survey respondents are familiar with the term Enterprise 2 . 0 , and more than half ( 55 % ) state Enterprise 2 . 0 to be important or very important to business success , an assess - ment shared by 80 % of the youngest demographic segment . In light of this development , Enterprise 2 . 0 is an important field for research to explore . As is usually the case in novel research fields , a plethora of research addresses the field ’ s definition , explicating its terms and boundaries ( e . g . , Koch 2008 ; Levy 2009 ; McAfee 2006 ) and deriving classification criteria ( e . g . , Back and Irmler 2012 ; Kaplan and Haenlein 2010 ; Williams and Schubert 2011 ) . In addition , a multitude of contributions is focused on social media and their impact on enterprises ’ marketing and communication activities ( e . g . , Mangold and Faulds 2009 ; McAfee 2011b ; Owyang et al . 2009 ) . Other studies investigate the business potential Enter - prise 2 . 0 initiatives can unlock ( Miles 2011 ; Miller et al . 2012 ) , and promise a potential 20 – 25 % increase in knowl - edge worker productivity ( McKinsey Global Institute 2012 ) . Finally , a stream of research deals with tools and functionality ( e . g . , Andriole 2010 ; Büchner et al . 2009 ; Williams and Schubert 2011 ) . As Riemer et al . ( 2009 ) and Richter et al . ( 2013 ) point out , research needs to address the organizational Responsible Editor : Ulrike E . Lechner T . Kuettner ( * ) : R . Diehl : P . Schubert University of Koblenz - Landau , Universitaetsstr . 1 , Koblenz 56070 , Germanye - mail : kuettner @ uni - koblenz . de Electron Markets DOI 10 . 1007 / s12525 - 013 - 0141 - 7 aspects of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives , particularly success fac - tors driving the adoption , as well as barriers . This study aims at bridging this gap and investigates the issue of change management in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives by following a grounded theory approach to compare 16 case studies . For our purposes , we adopt McAfee ’ s ( 2006 ) defini - tion of Enterprise 2 . 0 as “ the use of emergent social software platforms within companies , or between companies and their partners or customers , ” a definition stressing that the use of these platforms reaches across supply chains . A preliminary version of this study was presented at the 25th International Bled eConference ( Diehl and Kuettner 2012 ) . In this expanded article , we further explore and ad - vance the results with findings from expert interviews , sum - marizing similarities and distinctions between change factors in ERP and in Enterprise 2 . 0 settings . The remainder of this paper is organized as follows : starting from the research approach , we explain the theoretical lens and present the case study findings , which are then integrated with theory and compared to change in the ERP context . Concluding , we describe socio - technical change fac - tors specific to Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives . Research approach Whilst following grounded theory ( Corbin and Strauss 1990 ; Glaser and Strauss 1967 ; Strauss and Corbin 1998 ) in the research process , we use a traditional structure for presenting our work , as suggested by Suddaby ( 2006 ) . The following sections outline the interpretive research approach of this study in distinct phases for better traceability , describing the theoretical lens , research approach , underlying data and the coding process . It should be emphasized that this structure does not necessarily reflect the course of action as these phases are intertwined closely in the grounded theory ap - proach . On occasion , this will be made apparent to the reader by cross - references . The 8C framework as a theoretical lens This paper discusses the findings of a comparison between 16 case studies of implementation initiatives for collaboration technologies within firms ( Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives ) . All of the case studies are based on the eXperience methodology for writing IS cases ( Schubert and Wölfle 2007 ) . As a theoretical lens , the study draws upon an established framework for clas - sification of Enterprise 2 . 0 technologies , the 8C Framework for Enterprise Information Management ( Williams and Schubert 2011 ) , which has been developed specifically to analyze and evaluate collaboration technologies . The framework has al - ready been applied successfully in Enterprise 2 . 0 studies , par - ticularly to analyze eXperience case studies ( Schubert and Koch 2011 ; Williams 2011 ; Williams and Schubert 2011 ; Diehl and Schubert 2012 ) . Hence , the 8C Framework has served as a point of departure for this study , as it has been used to structure accordingly and thereby guide data analysis . See Fig . 1 for a representation of the framework . The 8C Framework consists of two areas : the inner core , reflecting the functional goals of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives and the outer layer , describing the business context of the inner core goals . The focus of this work is the organizational con - text , rather than the functional goals ( Communication , Coop - eration , Coordination and Content Combination ) of an Enter - prise 2 . 0 initiative ; hence , the discussion will address the outer layer only . A brief characterization of these outer four areas will be given in the following paragraphs . Content management covers the management of digital content across its whole life cycle . Common activities are the collection , storage , classification and access of infor - mation . Special attention needs to be paid to the integra - tion of various information sources and the ability for a company - wide information search . Compliance pertains to information risks and compliance restrictions . This includes risk management and imple - mentation of mechanisms for regulatory compliance . Pri - vacy and data protection issues need to be dealt with . Additionally , clear statements need to address accountabil - ity for specific information , usage policies , long - term stor - age ( archiving ) and documentation in the case of litigation . Change focuses on the management of enterprise trans - formation and business process changes . Specifically , this Fig . 1 The 8C Framework for Enterprise Information Management ( Williams and Schubert 2011 ) T . Kuettner et al . includes changes in corporate culture , anticipating conflicting attitudes and values , as well as concerns of employees . The inherent change within the implementa - tion of a collaboration technology must actively be sup - ported by a variety of different activities . Contribution includes the consideration of costs and benefits that result from introducing a new technology . Whilst costs are frequently easy to measure , benefits are harder to grasp , but can be characterized as the realized ( positive ) change the initiative enables . Resulting benefits can then be measured both at the level of the individual employee , and the entire organization . Emerging research questions Following grounded theory , the research questions emerged and evolved over time rather than presenting a fixed point of departure ( Glaser and Strauss 1967 ) . Initially , we were inter - ested in exploring the contextual factors that influence initia - tives of introducing collaboration technologies in enterprises ( Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives ) . We were prepared to evaluate each area of the 8C Framework ’ s outer layer introduced above , but as we moved on with the research , the preliminary findings ( an emerged coding scheme , literature discussion , peer feedback ) indicated an outstanding relevance referring to the area of change ( Diehl and Schubert 2012 ) that is also reflected in the literature ( e . g . , Miles 2011 ) . This led to the emergence of a research question addressing the area of organizational change : RQ1 : What factors of change can be identified during the implementation of collaboration technologies within a business ? As is often the case in grounded theory research , additional research questions emerged during later stages of the research ( Corbin and Strauss 1990 ) , and these are presented further below in the context they arose ( the section on Theoretical integration ) . Our understanding of change draws upon Wilson ( 1992 ) , who stresses its multi - faceted nature and conceptualizes a change matrix , which characterizes change as either planned or emergent , and distinguishes between change as a process , and change as part of a strategy of implementation . Research process The research process we followed to investigate the Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives consists of three phases , as depicted in Fig . 2 . In the initialization phase , the research interest took shape , and we identified the theoretical lens and selected case studies . The data collection and analysis phase consisted of intertwined coding activities , resulting in a thematic coding scheme . The coding process is described further below . In the evaluation and interpretation phase , we reviewed preliminary findings . Consistent with the study ’ s grounded theory approach , re - search questions emerged and evolved over time ( Corbin and Strauss 1990 ) . In light of the emergent concepts , data was again analyzed , evaluated and further discussed in context of the field of ERP to find similarities and differences between both fields . In order to achieve in - depth understanding , we conducted interviews with experts from the IT industry to test our assumptions and discuss our findings as suggested by Corbin and Strauss ( 1990 ) . The expert interviews represent an important complementary element in our research process , as they provided additional contextual insight , as well as a critical review of our conclusions . Overview of case studies For analyzing the business context of Enterprise 2 . 0 initia - tives , 16 case studies were selected from research case study databases . A qualitative sampling was carried out to select the case studies ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ; Kelle and Kluge 2010 ) . The main selection criterion was the usage of a collab - oration technology within the implementation initiative . The cases had been written by independent authors as suggested by Fereday and Muir - Cochrane ( 2006 ) , all of them using the eXperience methodology for writing research cases ( Schubert and Wölfle 2007 ) . The eXperience methodology is based upon principles of case study research ( e . g . , Yin 2003 ; Eisenhardt 1989 ) and provides a common template that allows for cross - case comparisons . Nine of the case studies were Fig . 2 Research process Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives retrieved from the eXperience database ( www . experience - online . ch ) and the seven remaining cases from the Enterprise 2 . 0 cases database ( www . e20cases . org ) . On occasion , cases from the online database have been used in other publications ( e . g . , Williams and Schubert 2011 , use seven of the cases analyzed here in a different context ) . The case studies are presented in Table 1 . Coding process The interpretive research approach of this study ( encoding ) is based upon the principles of grounded theory ( Charmaz 2006 ; Strauss and Corbin 1998 ) . To avoid drifting introspection on the data , we followed Fereday and Muir - Cochrane ( 2006 ) , and utilized the 8C framework for classification , as its areas are sufficiently abstract to allow concepts and explanations to emerge . The selected case studies were analyzed using established coding techniques and tools . The coding was car - ried out with ATLAS . ti ( e . g . , Mayring 2000 ; Saldaña 2012 ) . In developing the initial coding scheme , we followed Miles and Huberman ( 1994 ) and the “ grounded ” or “ open coding ” approach of Strauss and Corbin ( 1998 ) . Two researchers independently coded three of the studies before they performed the first check - coding to achieve an agreement of the emerged codes and their meaning . The studies were recoded based on the codes agreed upon . Frequent meetings were held during the coding of the remaining case studies to assure constant high inter - coder - reliability . Hereby conflicts were resolved early and complete agreement was achieved . The result of this coding process was a classification scheme consisting of the emerged inferential codes ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ) , also referred to as themes ( Saldaña 2012 ) , e . g . regulations or benefits as represented in Table 2 . Along with the late phases and matching meetings of the open coding , more explanatory themes emerged and were discussed . In the next step , we identified more general struc - tures and explanations for local incidents , and connections between codes . Pattern coding ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ) was applied and more abstract analytic units could be identi - fied to group the codes . This step also resulted in recoding cycles , a refinement of the classification scheme and , thus , conceptual density of the codes ( Corbin and Strauss 1990 ) . For a more detailed specification of our work ( see Diehl and Schubert 2012 ) . Table 1 Overview of analyzed case studies Case No . of employees Source Industry sector E2 . 0 project objective Software ABB AG 120 , 000 E2 . 0 Cases Energy and automation technology Blog and Wiki for enterprise communication Windows SharePoint Services 3 . 0 ADTELLIGENCE 10 E2 . 0 Cases Advertising Organizing all information with social software ( start - up company ) Misc . Web 2 . 0 tools Börse Berlin 26 eXperience Securities trading , B2B Communication exchange between exchange and private investors Invision Powerboard BSCC 700 eXperience Chamber of Commerce Communication with members Salesforce Capgemini 100 , 000 eXperience Service and solutions , B2B Expert identification and discussion Yammer Communardo Software 180 + E2 . 0 Cases IT , software Enterprise microblogging Microblogging bespoke software ESG 700 eXperience Development , integration and operations , B2B Knowledge management Atlassian Confluence FRITZ & MACZIOL 700 eXperience Consulting and system house , B2B / B2A Knowledge gathering , transfer and expert search Lotus Connections Lecos 157 eXperience Consulting and services , B2A Team rooms , document exchange with external partners Lotus Quickr Namics AG 280 E2 . 0 Cases E - Business services Company - internal multi blogging Wordpress Blog Obermeyer Planen + Beraten 700 eXperience Construction Internet - based collaborative project management Conject project management software Pentos AG 35 E2 . 0 Cases IT , software , consulting Employee blogging IBM Lotus Notes Rheinmetall 20 , 000 eXperience Development and production , B2B / B2A Team room , discussions and yellow pages IBM Lotus Collaboration Technology SFS Services AG 4246 E2 . 0 Cases IT services Wiki for knowledge transfer MediaWiki Siemens 405 , 000 eXperience Consulting , development and production , B2B Global knowledge management and expert search Liferay T - Systems Multimedia Solutions 1 , 000 E2 . 0 Cases Software , consulting Collaborative team work Atlassian Confluence Enterprise Wiki T . Kuettner et al . Findings from the case studies and expert interviews In the following sections , the outcomes of the coding process will be discussed : a coding scheme and theme analysis , as well as implications . Conceptualized coding results Following our research interest , 170 codes emerged during the coding process as described in the previous section . Specifi - cally for the area of change , a classification scheme of 54 refined inferential codes emerged , relating to 267 quotations within the case studies . A comprehensive representation of the classification scheme for the area of change management in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives can be found in Diehl and Kuettner ( 2012 ) . The classification scheme consists of a list of inferential codes that were grouped as described within the section Coding Process . These groups were sorted into three major categories : prereq - uisites , measures , and implications . Moreover , we identified four areas of action within a business as a second dimension , the codes related to : organization , processes , people , and technology . All of the categories and areas appear to be closely interrelated and interdependent . Review of coding results In this section , we will discuss local incidents and resulting dependencies within our data , starting with the major catego - ries identified in our classification scheme . Prerequisites characterize the initial situation of the organi - zations , whilst implications describe the post - implementation state . Measures were carried out from existing prerequisites and lead to implications of the Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives . These observations allow for a sequencing of the major categories : initial situation ( prerequisites ) , followed by actions within the initiative ( measures ) , resulting in a final situation ( implications ) . To illustrate the major categories and their existing rela - tions , Table 2 shows the common themes based on their quotation frequency . Further comparison of the areas of action , based on the distribution of codes across them draws a relation to the sequencing order of the major categories : & Prerequisites ( total : 12 codes ) can be primarily found in the area people ( seven codes ) , whereas four codes are associated with organization . & Measures ( total : 27 codes ) most often address the area of organization ( 22 codes ) . & Implications ( total : 15 codes ) are spread evenly over the four fields of action ( organization : five codes , people : four codes , processes : three codes , technology : three codes ) . Despite the prominent association of the area people within prerequisites , measures are mostly taken in the organizational area , although implications are almost equally distributed across all areas . Expert interviews Following the case study analysis and the theoretical integra - tion ( Urquhart et al . 2010 ) of the findings , we conducted three interviews with Enterprise 2 . 0 experts in different IT industry roles . The motivation to gather additional data was twofold : firstly , we aimed at thoroughly discussing and , thereby , ex - amining our conclusions as suggested by Corbin and Strauss ( 1990 ) . Secondly , we strived to achieve a deeper understand - ing of the individual change factors identified , especially in context of the PSIC model ’ s depiction of change ( Lyytinen and Newman 2008 ) . Industry experts can provide critical insight , as they are able to report on a multitude of cases they encounter in their work and can compare individual case findings with industry trends . For the industry experts , we specifically selected inter - viewees who exhibit the following traits : most importantly , each interviewee ’ s professional role is focused on the field of Enterprise 2 . 0 , which assures a wide range of expertise in the subject of our study . Moreover , all of them have been profes - sionals in the IT industry for more than ten years , ensuring they command a broad overview of IT projects beyond En - terprise 2 . 0 initiatives only . Their roles , however , differ , and encompass three perspectives , ranging from product manage - ment , to solution management and presales . Finally , the orga - nizations they belong to fill distinct roles in the industry value chain : one is a channel partner , the other a global software vendor , whereas the third is a global information technology vendor . Table 3 provides an overview of the interviewees , and their respective companies and roles . The interviews were split in two segments : the first seg - ment followed a semi - structured interview guideline with the Table 2 Quotation frequency of common themes in major categories Category Theme Frequency Prerequisites Management involvement & support 48 % ( Open minded ) Culture 36 % Measures Implementation strategy 40 % User training 20 % Regulations 19 % Internal promotion 16 % Implications User acceptance 45 % Design of processes and access management 20 % Benefits 17 % Innovation capabilities 6 % Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives aim of exploring the experts ’ knowledge on Enterprise 2 . 0 , especially focusing on the aspects of change and distinctions to ERP projects . At this point , the interviewees had not been informed by the findings from the cases , and their answers drew upon their own ideas . After the first segment , we provided the interviewees two tables summarizing the conclusions from the case analysis ( see Tables 6 and 7 , further below ) . We explained the tables ’ structure and context and asked for the interviewee ’ s evalua - tion and comments . The main purpose of this segment was to utilize the experts ’ judgment to review the findings and ad - vance our conclusions . The interviews lasted for 60 to 90 min and were fully transcribed . The additional insight provided by the interviews played a key role in further refining the findings . For reasons of clarity and readability , the interview findings have been integrated in the following sections . Theoretical integration The previous chapter consisted of a cross - case analysis of En - terprise 2 . 0 case studies , following a grounded theory approach . As suggested by Urquhart et al . ( 2010 ) for grounded theory research , we put the findings in context to achieve theoretical integration . In doing this , our objective is to contribute to understanding the following additional research questions : RQ2 : How do the case study findings relate to research in the IS field , specifically the issue of socio - technical change in information systems ? RQ3 : Are the findings consistent with socio - technical change issues in enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) settings ? RQ4 : What constitutes the characteristics of socio - technical change in the context of Enterprise 2 . 0 ? In order to address these questions , we will briefly discuss theoretical contributions in the field of socio - technical change in information systems , drawing upon one framework – Lyytinen and Newman ’ s ( 2008 ) PSIC model – in particular , as well as evaluate the findings in comparison to research findings in the area of ERP systems . Finally , we will examine the compatibilities and differences , and point out what we find to be specific characteristics of change in Enterprise 2 . 0 settings . Socio - technical change in the information systems discipline Change in the context of information systems remains a complex , challenging issue , which spans across several disci - plines , including computer and information science , as well as management and organization sciences . As the aspect of socio - technical change plays an important role as inhibitor or enabler in the successful adoption and use of information systems ( Bostrom and Heinen 1977 ) , it has been a focus area of IS research . Socio - technical systems were first conceptualized by Bamforth , Emery and Trist ( Trist 1981 ) of the Tavistock Institute , in their action research in the coal - mining industry and the concept later evolved into an important theoretical lens in IS ( Mumford 1985 ) , and especially in context of socio - technical change ( Ropohl 1999 ) . A socio - technical system consists of two subsystems , a social subsystem , encompassing people ( actors ) and structure , and a technical subsystem , consisting of tasks and technology ( Kaiser and Bostrom 1982 ) . In their approach to explaining information systems change , Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) develop a punctuated socio - technical change framework they termed PSIC model ( see Fig . 3 for a representation of their framework ) . They define change as multi - level and punctuated : it is multi - level , since it “ re - configures work systems by embedding … information technology components ” . As these work systems are rigid and complex , Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) postu - late IS change “ must be planned and deliberate ” . Following Gersick ’ s ( 1991 ) understanding of change , Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) also define IS change as primar - ily punctuated , taking place in metamorphic ( revolutionary ) episodes , and not primarily being incremental and continuous . Socio - technical systems , Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) posit , possess deep structure , go through periods of stability and face episodes of system upheaval . This punctuated change appears on multiple levels of the system . They also point out that this change does not need to be understood as a negative event . Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) define four possible out - comes from events : the first is a failed intervention , which is not sufficient to remove a gap . The second is a successful intervention , removing the gap with incremental change to the system . The third outcome is punctuation , a revolutionary change that generates a new deep structure . Finally , the fourth possible outcome would be a crisis , which would include an increased gap , and imply further problems and an ongoing transition . Although their framework is not focused on incremental change , Lyytinen and Newman ( 2008 ) argue that it does , in fact , account for phases of incremental change , as well . Closer examination reveals that the findings of our study can be represented through the PSIC model , but the frame - work ’ s paradigm that IS change needs to be “ planned and Table 3 Expert interviews , corresponding companies and roles Interview Company Role A Global software vendor Product manager for Enterprise 2 . 0 suite B Channel partner Enterprise 2 . 0 solution manager C Global IT vendor Enterprise 2 . 0 presales specialist T . Kuettner et al . deliberate ” , is in conflict with our findings , which indicate gradual and sometimes incremental adoption . Socio - technical change in ERP Enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) systems represent a sig - nificant area of both investment and change for enterprises , with large firms usually spending hundreds of millions of dollars on ERP implementation ( Seddon 2005 ) . Supporting enterprise - wide business activities , they represent complex socio - technical change , and they require integration with existing technologies , infrastructures , policies and practices , both on an intra - and inter - organizational level ( Williams and Hardy 2005 ) . By integrating an enterprise ’ s workflows and information , an ERP system “ imposes its own logic on a company ’ s strategy , organization , and culture ” ( Davenport 1998 ) . Thus , ERP systems embody socio - technical change , and the process of successful adoption has been extensively addressed by research ( e . g . , Aladwani 2001 ; Finney and Corbett 2007 ; Holland and Light 1999 ) . Hong and Kim ( 2002 ) have found organizational fit to be of critical importance to ERP implementation success , while organizational resistance plays a minor role . Markus and Tanis ( 2000 ) point out the normative nature of change in the ERP context , as system use is usually mandatory , which could explain that organizational resistance is often fruitless or car - ried out on a non - transparent level . In their literature review of ERP success factors , Finney and Corbett ( 2007 ) state that change management is “ one of the most critical of all ERP implementation success factors ” , but concede that there is “ still much confusion [ … ] what exactly is included in the construct ” . Shedding light on the importance of success factors in various stages of ERP imple - mentation , Somers and Nelson ( 2001 ) prioritize top manage - ment support , project team competence and interdepartmental cooperation as the top three factors overall ( see Table 4 ) . In the acceptance stage , the top three factors identified were interdepartmental communication , interdepartmental cooper - ation and top management support ( see Table 5 ) . Not within the overall top five factors , but ranked fifth during acceptance stage , was education about new business processes . Although change management appears separately in their study , ranked 19th , many of the other factors fit the range of typical change management activities , such as building management com - mitment , setting goals , involvement and training of users ( Finney and Corbett 2007 ) . These rankings provide an interesting basis for comparison with our findings . Because ERP systems are so widely used by enterprises , their implementation challenges have been addressed in more detail than those of Enterprise 2 . 0 initia - tives . In the following section , we investigate the general and specific characteristics of Enterprise 2 . 0 , by discussing the similarities and differences of change factors between ERP and Enterprise 2 . 0 ( see Table 6 ) . Distinction of socio - technical change in Enterprise 2 . 0 and ERP contexts In this section , change factors of ERP projects are compared with those identified in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives . In addition to the studied Enterprise 2 . 0 cases , we draw upon the findings from the expert interviews in this part . Top management support , ranked first among ERP imple - mentation success factors , includes setting reasonable Fig . 3 Framework of punctuated socio - technical change : PSIC model ( adapted from Lyytinen and Newman 2008 ) Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives objectives , developing an understanding of IT ’ s potential and limitations , and communicating corporate strategy ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) . This understanding fits the Enterprise 2 . 0 case finding that management involvement and support is a critical pre - requisite . Not surprisingly , this is supported by the expert interviews , as well . Apart from repeatedly pointing out the importance of top management commitment in general , one of the experts also stressed that Enterprise 2 . 0 “ [ … ] projects are only accepted by the majority , if the new process - es are exemplified by top management . ” In this aspect , the role of top management is distinctive in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives : visibly using the new technologies is seen as an important factor for management to demonstrate credibility and to in - spire an organization ’ s adoption . Project team competence , covering the skill level of the project team , and including both technological expertise and understanding of business requirements , was ranked second , overall ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) . In our study , the corre - sponding measures of project management , organization and project support have received less attention and are not as focused on skill levels . A reason for this difference can be seen in the more complex nature of ERP implementations , both on a technological and business process level , whereas the En - terprise 2 . 0 initiatives we studied emphasize leaner project teams . In our interviews , experts pointed out that ERP projects are technologically more demanding , whereas an Enterprise 2 . 0 implementation “ [ … ] is a technical task to a much smaller extent [ … ] ” . The change in Enterprise 2 . 0 projects is on “ [ … ] the human and cultural level , that is , the collaborative pro - cesses are changing , the information flow is changing , which means the organization is changing . ” The factors of interdepartmental communication and co - operation , ranked first and second during acceptance stage , includes the broad activities of sharing common goals , coor - dinating and communicating across departments , and within the project team ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) . In our study , equivalent was internal promotion , which has a slightly dif - ferent connotation . In ERP projects , business processes have to be defined and agreed upon across different business units , which implies the importance of cross - departmental coopera - tion . In the Enterprise 2 . 0 context , we found communication and coordination activities to be more limited to promoting tool capabilities and benefits to inspire acceptance . The expert interviews confirmed the use - inspiring and voluntary nature of most initiatives , however experts also remarked that the technology ’ s adoption could benefit from a certain level of mandatory use : “ Nobody cuts email off overnight . [ … ] Some - times it would be better [ … ] to get people out of their comfort zone . ” This issue of a required critical mass of adopters ( Markus and Connolly 1990 ) is further emphasized by the information that there are “ [ … ] functionalities that work only if they are used enterprise - wide , such as profiles . ” Thus , our study indicates organizations face the challenge to balance the potentially conflicting objectives of voluntary , use - inspiring adoption and wide dissemination of an Enterprise 2 . 0 initiative . Clear goals and objectives , ranked fourth in Somers and Nelson ’ s ( 2001 ) study , encompasses determining the direction of the project , managing the “ triple constraint ” of scope , time and cost , as well as defining measurable objectives , and setting goals prior to approaching top management . In our research , the matching measures are implementation strategy , and the establishment of a set of rules . While this also implies setting objectives , it emphasizes the actual activities of implementing and using the tools , whereas in the ERP con - text , the meta - level aspect of project controlling is more prominent . The interviews confirm this reasoning , and experts point out that “ [ … ] benefit is formulated little , or not at all . In the best case , customers have an idea of [ … ] use cases . ” Even more so than in ERP projects ( e . g . , Kohli and Grover 2008 ; Kuettner and Schubert 2012 ) , they concede a lack of measur - ability in Enterprise 2 . 0 : “ [ … ] It is still very difficult to quantify actual benefits , ” comparing the challenge with “ [ … ] asking how much employee talk benefits from the coffee machine . ” Project management , ranked fifth overall , is a broad term , including project planning , control , as well as defining and managing size , structure and scope ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) . Again , the corresponding measures of project manage - ment , organization and project support in the cases we stud - ied point at a different level of complexity . ERP projects are large - scale undertakings involving project organizations Table 4 Ranking of ERP CSFs across all stages ( adapted from Somers and Nelson 2001 ) All stages Rank Critical success factor 1 Top management support 2 Project team competence 3 Interdepartmental cooperation 4 Clear goals and objectives 5 Project management Table 5 Ranking of ERP CSFs in the acceptance stage ( adapted from Somers and Nelson 2001 ) Acceptance stage Rank Critical success factor 1 Interdepartmental communication 2 Interdepartmental cooperation 3 Top management support 4 Project team competence 5 Education on new business processes T . Kuettner et al . consisting of steering committees , core teams and sub - teams . Actual teams of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives , on the other hand , often consist of less than a dozen members . The interviews supported this perspective , however one expert specified , “ [ … ] companies wishing to introduce Enterprise 2 . 0 are doing it chronically understaffed , [ … ] because they are not aware of the complexity . ” In fact , experts pointed out that in Enterprise 2 . 0 , “ [ … ] go - live is 10 % , and then follow 90 % which nobody considers . ” Compared to ERP , in Enterprise 2 . 0 ini - tiatives , the post - implementation phase is more important and requires a larger share of the total project resources . Finally , education on new business processes , ranked fifth in the acceptance stage , is concerned with the business process reengineering perspective , and with educating and communi - cating goals and perspectives to gain support of employees ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) . This corresponds to internal pro - motion and training in our study . However , in the Enterprise 2 . 0 context , training programs are often straightforward and basic , and sometimes dispensed with completely , when tools support a learning - by - doing approach ( McAfee 2011a ) . In the ERP context , the business process reengineering perspective also addresses fears relating to job security , whereas Enter - prise 2 . 0 tools are often promoted as increasing productivity without endangering employment . In the interviews , however , the experts extensively stressed privacy concerns : “ It starts with the works council : ‘ Surveillance ’ . [ … ] In the collabora - tive or social approach it is more about how people train their soft skills , netiquette , for instance . How do I publish in a blog ? How private is it ? It is very important to alleviate fears . ” Contrasting to ERP projects , the experts pointed out that in Enterprise 2 . 0 , “ it is not about an anonymous process you execute . ” People are public , and would ask , “ Could this cause harm to myself and my company . [ … ] Could I face jurisdic - tion ? ” The experts also questioned the value of training Table 6 Factors in ERP context compared to Enterprise 2 . 0 Table 7 Nature of socio - technical change in Enterprise 2 . 0 vs . ERP Traditional ( ERP ) context Enterprise 2 . 0 context Revolutionary change Evolutionary change Large - scale projects Small - scale projects Cross - departmental business processes Ranging from project - team focused to enterprise - wide High degree of planning and foresight Flexibility and adhocracy Mandatory use Often voluntary use Existing change management skill set New change management skill set , new organizational roles Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives programs and rather called for “ [ … ] a team of evangelists and enthusiasts [ … ] ” to inspire users with ideas and collaboration scenarios . Socio - technical change in Enterprise 2 . 0 is distinct and calls for new roles In the preceding part , similarities and differences between change factors in the ERP and Enterprise 2 . 0 contexts have been discussed . We found that most factors that highly ranked in the ERP context ( Somers and Nelson 2001 ) could be mapped to corresponding change factors in the Enterprise 2 . 0 context ( see Table 6 ) . However , a closer examination of the correspond - ing factors revealed distinct and different focus areas : whilst ERP projects call for complex project management activities , the equivalent activities in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives implied much leaner team constellations . More importantly , the large - scale nature of ERP implementations with its mandatory use and set go - live dates requires a planned approach to managing change in a revolutionary context . The adoption of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives , on the other hand , often includes gradual diffu - sion and evolutionary change , being based on voluntary use or starting with one business unit or project team . Hence , change strategies have to rely more on promotion . This more positive connotation of Enterprise 2 . 0 inspired change , in comparison to ERP implementations , is a significant difference , and implies an Enterprise 2 . 0 specific approach to change management ( see Table 7 ) . In particular , the results of the expert interviews indicate Enterprise 2 . 0 requires a novel skill set to deal with socio - technical change , and creates “ new roles , such as the communication officer , ” who tracks internal communication jointly with IT staff , or “ social media managers , [ … ] who facilitate projects . ” As a caveat , despite the idiosyncrasies , there are interde - pendencies between ERP and Enterprise 2 . 0 , as well . The experts outlined , “ it is our approach to integrate these worlds ” and stressed it is paramount to avoid “ using a parallel system and enter data twice . ” Conclusion , limitations and outlook The purpose of this article is to contribute to the understanding of socio - technical change in the Enterprise 2 . 0 context . To accomplish this , we have followed a grounded theory ap - proach to analyze 16 case studies of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives and identify common patterns of pre - requisites , measures and implications . Integrating the findings into theory , we have drawn upon socio - technical change theory and compared the results to research in the ERP field . In doing so , we have identified similarities and distinctions between change in En - terprise 2 . 0 initiatives versus ERP projects . To review the conclusions and further advance our findings , we have conducted interviews with industry experts , leading us to refine the results . Whilst similarities exist especially on the top level in terms of change factors , the results indicate that change in an Enterprise 2 . 0 context differs from change in ERP projects in several ways : ERP projects , due to their complex and business - critical nature , require large - scale pro - jects with a high degree of control and foresight , affecting the whole organization , often in a big - bang roll - out . Accordingly , socio - technical change in ERP projects is revolutionary and often actively managed in a change program , which represents a project in itself . Enterprise 2 . 0 , on the other hand , frequently implies evolutionary change , as new initiatives are gradually adopted and regularly used on a voluntary basis . Hence , managing change in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives relies less on formal training and planning , and more on promotion and exploration ( Richter and Stocker 2011 ) . Thus , the success of Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives is to a greater extent determined independently of the technical implementation phase , and requires the organizations to skillfully plan and manage the adoption process ( Miller et al . 2012 ) . This includes new change management skill sets and roles , and calls for the establishment of evangelists and the involvement of top man - agement to exemplify utilizing collaboration technologies . Simultaneously , since integration of business processes is the overarching paradigm of enterprise systems ( Davenport 1998 ; Markus and Tanis 2000 ; Lee et al . 2003 ) , organizations are required to balance these initiatives and their interdependencies with existing enterprise systems . As a result , we expect a new era of enterprise application integration initiatives , integrating enterprise resource planning systems ( ERP ) and enterprise collaboration systems . Our findings contribute to both research and practice : prac - titioners benefit from caution when applying change manage - ment concepts from other areas , such as ERP , to Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives . Instead , their activities need to be adapted to the specifics of Enterprise 2 . 0 . For researchers , our study presents a point of departure to further investigate the specifics of socio - technical change in the Enterprise 2 . 0 field . We suggest a research agenda combining three perspectives : firstly , adapting a socio - technical change framework to integrate Enterprise 2 . 0 specifics would contribute to theory and pro - vide a basis for future research . Secondly , defining the tasks , skill sets and roles of Enterprise 2 . 0 evangelists would refine and advance our contribution . Thirdly , investigating the inte - gration of ERP systems and enterprise collaboration systems is essential to identify interdependencies and future develop - ments . Finally , we look forward to testing and expanding the findings on a broader empirical basis . This could address the main limitations of this study , which are rooted in its narrow qualitative sample and , hence , do not support generalization . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments . T . Kuettner et al . References Aladwani , A . M . ( 2001 ) . Change management strategies for successful ERP implementation . Buiness Process Management Journal , 7 ( 3 ) , 266 – 275 . Andriole , S . J . ( 2010 ) . Business impact of Web 2 . 0 technologies . Communications of the ACM , 53 ( 12 ) , 67 – 79 . Back , A . , & Irmler , P . ( 2012 ) . Implementing a classification scheme for Enterprise 2 . 0 . IT - Information Technology , 54 ( 5 ) , 220 – 227 . Bostrom , R . P . , & Heinen , J . S . ( 1977 ) . MIS problems and failures : a sociotechnical perspective part I : the cause . MIS Quarterly , 1 ( 3 ) , 17 – 32 . Büchner , T . , Matthes , F . , & Neubert , C . ( 2009 ) . A concept and service based analysis of commercial and open source Enterprise 2 . 0 tools . Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Management and Information Sharing , Madeira , Portugal . Charmaz , K . ( 2006 ) . Constructing grounded theory : a practical guide through qualitative analysis . London : Sage . Corbin , J . M . , & Strauss , A . ( 1990 ) . Groundedtheoryresearch : procedures , canons , and evaluative criteria . Qualitative Sociology , 13 ( 1 ) , 3 – 21 . Davenport , T . H . ( 1998 ) . Putting the enterprise into the enterprise system . Harvard Business Review , 76 ( 4 ) . Diehl , R . , & Kuettner , T . ( 2012 ) . Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initia - tives : a multi - case comparison . Proceedings of the 25th International Bled eConference . Slovenia : Bled . Diehl , R . , & Schubert , P . ( 2012 ) . Der WegzurSocial Software Lösungfür Unternehmen : Bedürfnisanalyse für kollaborative Technologien . Proceedings of the Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik 2012 . Braunschweig , Germany . Eisenhardt , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Building theories from case study research . Academy of Management Review , 14 ( 4 ) , 532 – 550 . Fereday , J . , & Muir - Cochrane , E . ( 2006 ) . Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis : a hybrid approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development . International Journal of Qualitative Methods , 5 ( 1 ) , 80 – 91 . Finney , S . , & Corbett , M . ( 2007 ) . ERP implementation : a compilation and analysis of critical success factors . Business Process Management Journal , 13 ( 3 ) , 329 – 347 . Gartner . ( 2012a ) . Amplify the enterprise : Creating new connections with IT . Retrieved from http : / / imagesrv . gartner . com / summits / docs / na / cio / CIO - Forum - 2012 - brochure . pdf . Gartner . ( 2012b ) . Hype cycle for emerging technologies . Available from http : / / www . gartner . com / it / page . jsp ? id = 2124315 . Gersick , C . J . ( 1991 ) . Revolutionary change theories : A multilevel exploration of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm . Academy of management review , 16 ( 1 ) , 10 – 36 . Glaser , B . G . , & Strauss , A . L . ( 1967 ) . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies for qualitative research . London : Wiedenfeld & Nicholson . Holland , C . R . , & Light , B . ( 1999 ) . A critical success factors model for ERP implementation . IEEE Software , 16 ( 3 ) , 30 – 36 . Hong , K . K . , & Kim , Y . G . ( 2002 ) . The critical success factors for ERP implementation : an organizational fit perspective . Information & Management , 40 ( 1 ) , 25 – 40 . IDC . ( 2011 ) . IDC predictions 2012 : Competing for 2020 . http : / / www . idc . com / getdoc . jsp ? containerId = 231720 . Kaiser , K . M . , & Bostrom , R . P . ( 1982 ) . Personalitycharacteristics ofMIS project teams : an empirical study and action - research design . MIS Quarterly , 6 ( 4 ) , 43 – 60 . Kaplan , A . M . , & Haenlein , M . ( 2010 ) . Users of the world , unite ! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media . Business Horizons , 53 ( 1 ) , 59 – 68 . Kelle , U . , & Kluge , S . ( 2010 ) . VomEinzelfall zum Typus : Fallvergleich und Fallkontrastierung in der qualitativen Sozialforschung ( Qualitative Sozialforschung 2nd ed . , Vol . 15 ) . Wiesbaden : VS Verlag . Koch , M . ( 2008 ) . CSCW and Enterprise 2 . 0 - Towards an Integrated Perspective . Proceedingsof the21thInternationalBledeConference . Bled , Slovenia . Kohli , R . , & Grover , V . ( 2008 ) . Business value of IT : an essay on expanding research directions to keep up with the times . Journal of AIS , 9 ( 1 ) , 23 – 39 . Kuettner , T . , & Schubert , P . ( 2012 ) . IT - based competitive advantage : a cross - case comparison of business software usage . Procedia Tech - nology , 5 , 181 – 189 . Lee , J . , Siau , K . , & Hong , S . ( 2003 ) . Enterprise integration with ERP and EAI . Communications of the ACM , 46 ( 2 ) , 54 – 60 . Levy , M . ( 2009 ) . WEB 2 . 0 implications on knowledge management . Journal of Knowledge Management , 13 ( 1 ) , 120 – 134 . Lyytinen , K . , & Newman , M . ( 2008 ) . Explaining information systems change : a punctuated socio - technical change model . EuropeanJournal of Information Systems , 17 ( 6 ) , 589 – 613 . Mangold , W . G . , & Faulds , D . J . ( 2009 ) . Social media : the new hybrid element of the promotion mix . Business Horizons , 52 ( 4 ) , 357 – 365 . Markus , M . L . , & Connolly , T . ( 1990 ) . Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 371 – 380 . NY , USA . Markus , M . , & Tanis , C . ( 2000 ) . The enterprise systems experience – from adoption to success . In R . W . Zmud ( Ed . ) , Framing the domains of IT management : Projecting the future through the past ( pp . 173 – 207 ) . Cincinnati , OH : Pinnaflex Educational Resources Inc . Mayring , P . ( 2000 ) . Qualitative content analysis . Forum : Qualitative social research . Retrieved February 19 , 2012 , from http : / / www . qualitative - research . net / index . php / fqs / article / view / 1089 / 2385 . McAfee , A . P . ( 2006 ) . Enterprise 2 . 0 : the dawnofemergent collaboration . MIT Sloan Management Review , 47 ( 3 ) , 21 – 28 . McAfee , A . P . ( 2011a ) . Shattering the myths about enterprise 2 . 0 ( Research Brief No . 13 ( 1 ) ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Center for Digital Business . Retrieved from http : / / ebusiness . mit . edu / research / Briefs / mcafee - xiii _ may11 . pdf . McAfee , A . ( 2011b ) . When social meets business real work gets done - connectingsales andmarketing ( whitepaper ) . AIIM . Retrievedfrom www . aiim . org . McKinseyGlobalInstitute . ( 2012 ) . The social economy : Unlockingvalue and productivity through social technologies . New York : McKinsey Global Institute . Miles , D . ( 2010 ) . Putting Enterprise 2 . 0 to work ( White paper ) . AIIM . Retrieved from www . aiim . org . Miles , D . ( 2011 ) . Social Business Systems - success factors for Enterprise 2 . 0 applications ( White paper ) . AIIM . Retrieved from www . aiim . org . Miles , M . B . , & Huberman , A . M . ( 1994 ) . Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Miller , M . , Marks , A . , & DeCouloude , M . ( 2012 ) . Metrics that matter : Social software for business performance ( White paper ) . Westlake , Texas : Deloitte University . Retrieved from http : / / dupress . com / articles / metrics - that - matter / . Mumford , E . ( 1985 ) . Sociotechnical systems design : Evolving theory and practice . Manchester : Manchester Business School . Owyang , J . K . , Bernoff , J . , Pflaum , C . , & Bowen , E . ( 2009 ) . The future of the social web ( White paper ) . Cambridge , MA : Forrester Research , Inc . Retrieved from http : / / www . forrester . com / . Richter , A . , & Stocker , A . ( 2011 ) . Exploration & Promotion : Einführungsstrategien von Corporate Social Software . Proceedings of the 10th International Conference Wirtschaftsinformatik . Zuerich , Switzerland . Richter , D . , Richter , A . , Hamann , J . , Riemer , K . , & Vehring , N . ( 2013 ) . Infrastructures - in - Practice : Cultivating Enterprise Microblogging . 46th HawaiiInternational Conference onSystem Sciences ( HICSS ) . Riemer , K . , Steinfield , C . , & Vogel , D . ( 2009 ) . eCollaboration : on the nature and emergence of communication and collaboration technologies . Electronic Markets , 19 ( 4 ) , 181 – 188 . Change factors in Enterprise 2 . 0 initiatives Ropohl , G . ( 1999 ) . Philosophy of socio - technical systems . Society for Philosophy and Technology , 4 ( 3 ) , 59 – 71 . Saldaña , J . ( 2012 ) . Thecodingmanual forqualitativeresearchers . London : Sage . Schubert , P . , & Koch , M . ( Eds . ) ( 2011 ) . Wettbewerbsfaktor Business Software . Munich : Hanser . Schubert , P . , & Wölfle , R . ( 2007 ) . The eXperience methodology for writing IS case studies . Proceedings of the Thirteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems ( AMCIS ) . Key - stone , Colorado . Seddon , P . B . ( 2005 ) . Are ERP systems a source of competitive advantage ? Strategic Change , 14 ( 5 ) , 283 – 293 . Somers , T . M . , & Nelson , K . ( 2001 ) . Theimpact ofcritical success factors across the stages of enterprise resource planning implementations . Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Suddaby , R . ( 2006 ) . From the editors : what grounded theory is not . The Academy of Management Journal , 49 ( 4 ) , 633 – 642 . Trist , E . ( 1981 ) . The evolution of socio - technical systems . Occasional Paper , 2 . Urquhart , C . , Lehmann , H . , & Myers , M . D . ( 2010 ) . Putting the ‘ theory ’ back into groundedtheory : guidelinesforgrounded theory studies in information systems . Information Systems Journal , 20 ( 4 ) , 357 – 381 . Williams , S . P . ( 2011 ) . Das 8C - Modell für kollaborative Technologien . In P . Schubert & M . Koch ( Eds . ) , Wettbewerbsfaktor Business Soft - ware ( pp . 11 – 21 ) . Munich : Hanser . Williams , S . P . , & Hardy , C . ( 2005 ) . Public eProcurement as socio - technical change . Strategic Change , 14 ( 5 ) , 273 – 281 . Williams , S . , & Schubert , P . ( 2011 ) . An empirical study of enterprise 2 . 0 in context . Proceedings of the 24th International Bled eConference . Bled , Slovenia . Wilson , D . C . ( 1992 ) . Strategy of change : Concepts and controversies in the management of change . London : Routledge . Yin , R . K . ( 2003 ) . Applications of case study research ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . T . Kuettner et al .