International Journal of e - Collaboration , 9 ( 2 ) , 61 - 77 , April - June 2013 61 Copyright © 2013 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . An Empirical Investigation of Two Group Idea Generation Techniques : Manual vs . Electronic Gallery Writing Kaushik Ghosh , Department of Information Systems and Analysis , College of Business , Lamar University , Beaumont , TX , USA Milam Aiken , Department of Management Information Systems , School of Business Administration , University of Mississippi , University , MS , USA ABSTRACT Gallery writing is a widely used variant of brainwriting and the technique is available in electronic and manual forms . This study posits a model based on the input - process - output framework to empirically test the relative efficacy of electronic and manual gallery writing . An experiment using a student sample was conducted and data were collected to test the proposed model . Path analysis shows that while either technique can be used successfully , groups using the electronic version generated more text . Also , free riders were dissatisfied with the meeting process . Some implications of this study are that when a large number of ideas are desired in group meetings , electronic gallery writing might be the preferred technique , while manual gallery writing might be better when meeting participants want to keep the discussion focused on succinct ideas . Keywords : Brainwriting , Electronic Gallery Writing , Electronic Meetings , Gallery Writing , Group Idea Generation , Manual Gallery Writing INTRODUCTION Spending on meetings in the United States ( US ) reached over US $ 263 billion in 2009 ( Davis , 2011 ) , and on average , 25 million meetings take place in corporate America every day . According to some estimates , over 50 % of the time spent in these discussions is unproductive ( Moncrief , 2011 ) . Consequently , for several decades , researchers have sought ways to make meetings more effective . Some studies of meetings in the past have highlighted the superiority of brainwriting ( a group of techniques characterized by the silent and simultaneous exchange of written or typed comments ) over the more traditional practice of generating ideas orally . One of these text - based methods , poolwriting , involves swapping papers or electronic files , and the computer - ized form was used often in early experiments with electronic meeting systems ( Gallupe et al . , 1998 ) . Results of studies using electronic DOI : 10 . 4018 / jec . 2013040103 62 International Journal of e - Collaboration , 9 ( 2 ) , 61 - 77 , April - June 2013 Copyright © 2013 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . poolwriting showed that group members saved up to 56 % of their labor costs ( Grohowski et al . , 1990 ) and up to 71 % of their overall project time ( Martz et al . , 1992 ) . As an example , IBM saved US $ 4 million a month using these electronic meetings to conduct business ( IBM , 2008 ) . Some research has shown that another form of brainwriting called gallery writing is superior to poolwriting and oral brainstorming ( Aiken & Vanjani , 2003 ) . Using manual gallery writ - ing ( MGW ) , group members write comments on sheets of paper on a wall and are thus able to view all of the text at the same time ( unlike with poolwriting ) . In addition , the electronic and manual versions of gallery writing are used more often than those for poolwriting . Computer chat rooms and bulletin boards are based upon electronic gallery writing ( EGW ) , and numer - ous organizations such as Apple , Microsoft , AT & T , General Electric , NASA , McDonalds , PepsiCo , and Proctor & Gamble have used MGW to record ideas in meetings ( Fredman , 2008 ) . In addition , this technique has been used to facilitate multilingual group communication ( Aiken et al . , 2011 ) . The characteristics of each technique are summarized in Table 1 . Although gallery writing has been used extensively , relatively little research has been conducted on detailed comparisons between MGW and EGW , and small differences in the features of apparently similar tools could affect usage patterns ( Markus , 2005 ) . In this paper , we look at the roles of several process losses including production blocking , evaluation ap - prehension , and free riding in the manual and electronic versions of gallery writing meetings . First , we discuss our theoretical model and then present the results of an experiment comparing the two methods . The paper concludes with implications for practice and research . THEORETICAL MODEL AND HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT The theoretical model shown in Figure 1 bor - rows from the input - process - output ( IPO ) framework that has been the basis of much research into the productivity of teams ( Ilgen et al . , 2005 ) . The model posits that the success of a meeting ( e . g . , meeting satisfaction and the number of relevant comments generated ) is determined by the technique employed ( MGW or EGW ) , but this productivity is mitigated by process losses such as production blocking , evaluation apprehension , and free riding ( Den - nis et al . , 2005 ; Rittgen , 2009 ) . The underlying assumption of this model is that group productivity is a function of the resources available to a group . For example , a group of skilled members ( those having appro - priate knowledge , skills , and motivation ) will on an average be more effective than a group with less qualified members . Just as a group will be more effective if they have qualified personnel , it is obvious that the group will also be more effective if they have the appropriate technology to support group activities . Also , prior research ( e . g . , Potter & Balthazard , 2004 ) has focused principally on these constructs to analyze group productivity . Table 1 . MGW and EGW Features Comparison MGW EGW Meeting participants write comments on sheets of paper on a wall . Meeting participants type comments on computers con - nected in a network . Meeting participants can submit new and view all public comments at any time . Meeting participants can submit new and view all public comments at any time . Comments can be linked to each individual as they are not anonymous . It is difficult to link comments to each individual as they are anonymous . 15 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / article / empirical - investigation - two - group - idea / 77846 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Journals , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Communications and Social Science , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Communications , Online Engagement , and Media eJournal Collection , InfoSci - Journal Disciplines Business , Administration , and Management . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 2 Related Content Visualizing Moderating Effects in Path Models with Latent Variables Ned Kock ( 2016 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 1 - 7 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / visualizing - moderating - effects - in - path - models - with - latent - variables / 143886 ? camid = 4v1a Leadership Constraints : Leading Global Virtual Teams Through Environmental Complexity Leslie C . Tworoger , Cynthia P . Ruppel , Baiyun Gong and Randolph A . Pohlman ( 2013 ) . International Journal of e - Collaboration ( pp . 34 - 60 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / leadership - constraints - leading - global - virtual / 77845 ? camid = 4v1a Post Disaster Housing Management for Sustainable Urban Development : A Review Kanu Kumar Das and Nagendra Kumar Sharma ( 2018 ) . E - Planning and Collaboration : Concepts , Methodologies , Tools , and Applications ( pp . 1673 - 1691 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / post - disaster - housing - management - for - sustainable - urban - development / 206078 ? camid = 4v1a Supporting Communities of Practice by Advancing Knowledge Management Anna De Liddo and Grazia Concilio ( 2011 ) . Technologies for Supporting Reasoning Communities and Collaborative Decision Making : Cooperative Approaches ( pp . 340 - 357 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / supporting - communities - practice - advancing - knowledge / 48255 ? camid = 4v1a