1 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports Lifeact - TagGFP2 alters F - actin organization , cellular morphology and biophysical behaviour Luis R . Flores , Michael C . Keeling , Xiaoli Zhang , Kristina Sliogeryte & Núria Gavara Live - imaging techniques are at the forefront of biology research to explore behaviour and function from sub - cellular to whole organism scales . These methods rely on intracellular fluorescent probes to label specific proteins , which are commonly assumed to only introduce artefacts at concentrations far - exceeding routine use . Lifeact , a small peptide with affinity for actin microfilaments has become a gold standard in live cell imaging of the cytoskeleton . Nevertheless , recent reports have raised concerns on Lifeact - associated artefacts at the molecular and whole organism level . We show here that Lifeact induces dose - response artefacts at the cellular level , impacting stress fibre dynamics and actin cytoskeleton architecture . These effects extend to the microtubule and intermediate filament networks as well as the nucleus , and ultimately lead to altered subcellular localization of YAP , reduced cell migration and abnormal mechanical properties . Our results suggest that reduced binding of cofilin to actin filaments may be the underlying cause of the observed Lifeact - induced cellular artefacts . Live - cell actin visualization is routinely performed and presented in a large percent of cell biology research , including studies where actin or the cytoskeleton may only be secondary players on the observations reported . Lifeact , a small peptide with affinity for actin microfilaments 1 – 3 , has become one of the gold standards in live cell imaging of actin structures in particular , and overall cell morphology in general . A number of reports have assessed the suitability of Lifeact as a cytoskeletal marker , focusing primarily on qualitative observations of which structures are preferentially labelled by Lifeact relative to other probes such as phalloidin , utrophin or actin - GFP 4 , 5 . It has been recently reported that Lifeact alters actin filament arrangement and dynamics in fission yeast cells 6 . Similarly , strong in vivo Lifeact expression causes sterility in fruit flies 7 , associated with severe actin defects and multiple nuclei in follicle cells . In addition , the detrimental effects of strong Lifeact expression in cells appear to be linked to the specific promoter and fluorescent protein tag used 8 , 9 . The aforementioned studies have focused on highlighting the abnormal morphologies , dynamics and overall behaviour of cells associated with strong Lifeact expression . Nevertheless , it remains to be discerned whether low to mid - level expression of Lifeact results in unaltered actin dynamics , or conversely if Lifeact induces broad dose - dependent effects on the actin cytoskeleton . Such an understanding is still missing to better define the experimental conditions under which Lifeact is to be considered a suitable probe to image actin structures . Results Cell cultures transduced with Lifeact - TagGFP2 display altered morphologies . In our experi - ments , we first performed an overnight transduction of human Mesenchymal Stem Cells ( hMSCs ) with increas - ing concentrations ( presented as Multiplicity of Infection - MOI ) of commercial adenoviral vectors delivering rAVCMV - LifeAct - TagGFP2 plasmid . We transduced cells with MOI ranging from low levels ( MOI 100 ) up to the highest dose recommended by the supplier ( MOI 1000 ) . Samples were fixed 1 – 7 days post transduction , co - stained with TRITC - phalloidin and DAPI , and subsequently imaged via standard epifluorescence microscopy at 20x magnification ( Supplementary Fig . 1 and Table 1 ) . When pooling together data at the population level , we found a statistically significant increase in GFP intensity for experiments using higher MOIs ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Likewise , we found that GFP levels significantly changed with increasing expression time , with the peak of expression occurring 5 days post transduction . Surprisingly , we found comparable trends when we measured simple parameters that describe cellular morphology and actin assembly , such as cell area and filamentous - ac - tin ( F - actin ) amount ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . These analogous temporal and concentration - dependent trends School of Engineering and Materials Science , Queen Mary University of London , Mile End Road , E1 4NS , London , UK . correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to n . G . ( email : n . gavara @ qmul . ac . uk ) Received : 7 June 2018 Accepted : 8 February 2019 Published online : 1 March 2019 OPEN Corrected : Author Correction 2 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / observed at the population level suggested that intracellular Lifeact may result in altered cellular and cytoskeletal morphology . Lifeact - TagGFP2 alters actin organization in a dose - response manner . Traditional methods based on population averages may mask the fact that a great variation exists in the uptake of plasmid or vector copy number for each cell within a transduced cell culture 10 , 11 . Thus , to accurately assess the dose - response effects of Lifeact expression at the cellular level , we devised an alternative approach based on pooling together single - cell data according to their measured Lifeact expression , irrespective of initial MOI or time post - transduction . Two critical aspects of our methodological approach need to be emphasised here . First , the quantification of param - eters related to cytoskeleton organization and cell morphology was performed using images obtained through TRITC - phalloidin staining , i . e . independently of Lifeact - TagGFP2 driven fluorescence . By doing so the cytoskel - eton of cells with low Lifeact - TagGFP2 expression ( displaying low GFP fluorescence intensities , Fig . 1b ) could be resolved with similar accuracy to those expressing larger Life - GFP levels ( Fig . 1d ) . Second , we took advantage of the 1 : 1 stoichiometry between the Lifeact peptide and the GFP tag , and measured for each cell its total GFP fluorescence as a surrogate indicator of Lifeact expression 12 . Furthermore , we extended our previously - developed image quantification pipelines 13 , 14 to describe in a multiplex fashion the organization of the cytoskeleton and nucleus of individual cells . We constructed dose - response curves ( DRC ) to depict morphometric parameters as a function of intracellular GFP intensity and observed clear morphological trends linking increased Lifeact expression with altered cellular phenotypes ( Fig . 2 and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . In particular , cells displaying the highest Lifeact expression had 10 - fold larger spread areas , smaller aspect ratios and a less stellate morphology ( Fig . 2 ) . Concurrently , when assessing actin organization , Lifeact expression caused a 50 - fold increase in F - actin assembly ( Fig . 2d ) , leading to stress fibres that were longer ( Supplementary Fig . 4b ) , thicker ( Fig . 2e ) and with an increasing radial orientation ( Fig . 2f ) . To verify that the effects observed were associated with Lifeact rather than its fluorescent tag , we gener - ated similar DRC with cells transduced with the same promoter and a GFP tag only ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . While the DRCs obtained were not so broad in terms of expression levels reached , we verified that the dose - response behaviour was lost when only GFP was transduced . In particular , multiple comparisons analysis ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) showed that , even with the highest transduction levels reached with the pCMV - EGFP plasmid there is no significant difference with the lowest dosage with the same treatment . Furthermore , multiple compa - risions analysis also shows that , for the majority of parameters , there are significant differences between cells with the highest dose of pCMV - EGFP and cells displaying similar GFP fluorescence levels but transduced with pCMV - Lifeact - Tag2 . Additional experiments using Lifeact - TagGFP2 recombinant protein delivered into the Figure 1 . Characteristic phenotypes of cells expressing increasing amounts of Lifeact - TagGFP2 and co - stained with phalloidin - TRITC and DAPI . ( a ) Cell cultured on a coverslip dish that was not transduced , ( b ) cell sorted as ‘no - effect regime’ , ( c ) cell sorted as ‘dose - response - regime’ , ( d ) cell sorted as ‘saturation plateau’ . Scale bar corresponds to 15 µ m and is the same for all cells pictured . 3 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / cellular cytoplasm using a membrane fusion reagent resulted again in a dose - response behaviour that displayed marked overlap with the results obtained using adenoviral transduction of Lifeact - TagGFP2 ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . Similar as before , for the majority of parameters , multiple comparisons analysis showed that there were significant differences between cells treated with the highest dose of pCMV - EGFP plasmid and cells treated with the highest doses of recombinant plasmid . Conversely , there were no significant differences between cells treated with the highest dosages of pCMV - Lifeact - Tag2 plasmid versus the recombinant protein . Of note , DRCs generated for all cytoskeletal parameters had at least two marked regimes ( Fig . 2 and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , namely a dose - response behaviour for low to mid expression levels of Lifeact - TagGFP2 ( white background area in panels ) followed by a saturation plateau at very high expression levels ( gray back - ground area in panels ) . In addition , for some cytoskeletal parameters measured we could also identify a range of low Lifeact - TagGFP2 expression levels for which no dose - response effect was observed ( yellow background area in panels ) . Similar dose - response trends were also obtained when NIH / 3T3 or COS - 7 cells were transduced with Lifeact - TagGFP2 vector , even though overall values for parameters such as cell area or F - actin amount were different , as expected for different cell types ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . Altogether , these data evidences that Lifeact - TagGFP2 can have a pronounced effect on cellular morphology and actin cytoskeleton organization . While at the population level these effects are largely dependent on transduction conditions ( MOI and duration of expression ) , at the single cell level Lifeact - induced side effects display large heterogeneity , being predominantly dependent on the amount of peptide expressed by each cell . Lifeact - induced effects extend to other cytoskeletal networks and the nucleus . Having con - firmed the marked effects on whole cell morphology and stress fibre architecture induced by Lifeact expression , we chose to focus on Lifeact - TagGFP2 adenoviral transduction on hMSC and we next investigated cellular com - ponents with a strong link to the actin cytoskeleton , such as microtubules and intermediate filaments . We limited our protocol to MOI 1000 and 5 days post transduction - to maximise the range of Lifeact expression levels - and replaced TRITC - phalloidin staining with antibodies against tubulin and vimentin . Surprisingly , we found that increased levels of Lifeact expression were associated with a build - up in the microtubule and intermediate Figure 2 . Dose - response curves quantifying the effect of Lifeact expression in cell spread area ( a ) , cell perimeter stellate factor ( b ) , aspect ratio ( c ) , f - actin amount ( d ) , fibre thickness ( d ) and chirality of fibres ( f ) . Values for > 100 cells were pooled together to compute each individual data point . Data is presented as geometric mean ( a , d ) , mean ( b , e ) or median ( c , f ) error bars indicate geometric standard deviation , standard deviation or Q1 - Q3 , accordingly . Background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . 4 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / filament networks ( Fig . 3 ) . Given the close interconnectedness between the three cytoskeletal networks 14 , we hypothesise that alterations in tubulin and vimentin assembly are a secondary result from the effects of Lifeact on cell spread area , rather than a direct interaction between Lifeact peptides and tubulin or vimentin monomers . We additionally investigated if Lifeact could also influence the nucleus , since nuclear structure is coupled to cytoskeletal organization and cellular morphology . Based on DAPI images from our previous transduction experiments , we quantified changes in three - dimensional nuclear shape , mechanical attributes and chromatin condensation state 14 . As before , we observed that Lifeact expression altered nuclear state , giving raise to nuclei that were up to 1 . 5 times larger in volume and less auxetic ( Fig . 4 ) , while chromatin condensation remained unaffected ( not shown ) . Again , we hypothesize that the effects of Lifeact on the nucleus are a secondary result of alterations in cellular morphology and cytoskeletal architecture 14 . Together , our results uncover for the first time that Lifeact - induced artefacts on the actin cytoskeleton may have knock - on effects that extend into other critical cellular structures . Lifeact - induced effects on the cytoskeleton lead to altered cell biophysical behaviour . Having established the multiple effects of Lifeact on cellular structures , we moved to examine their impact on cell Figure 3 . Lifeact - driven effects extend to non - actin - based cytoskeletal networks . Quantification of Lifeact effects on intermediate filaments assembly ( a ) and microtubule assembly ( b ) . Values for > 40 cells were pooled together to compute each individual data point . Data is presented as geometric mean , error bars indicate geometric standard deviation . Background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . 5 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / biophysical behaviour . First , we used atomic force microscopy to probe the nanomechanical properties of Lifeact - transduced cells . Our results showed a mild decrease in cellular stiffness at very large peptide concen - trations together with a steady dose - response increase in cellular viscosity ( Fig . 5 ) . These results were initially surprising , as we have previously shown a strong correlation between F - actin assembly and cellular stiffness 13 . Nevertheless , it’s worth stressing that cells with very large levels of Lifeact expression displayed thick fibres dis - jointed from each other ( cell # 2 in Suppl . Fig . 7 ) , sometimes leaving between them large cell areas devoid of any actin - rich structure . This scenario is thus very different from the previously described nematic phase of actin organization 15 ( cell # 1 in Suppl . Fig . 7 ) and may rather resemble the liquid - like behaviour of actin structures recently observed in vitro after coalescence and shortening of actin bundles 16 . Increasing evidence points towards the YAP / TAZ pathway as a crucial regulator of cellular mechanosensing in stem cells 17 . In particular , the translocation of YAP into the cell nucleus constitutes a hallmark of increased intra or extracellular forces that are transmitted through the cytoskeleton and to the nucleus 18 . Accordingly , we set to quantify whether YAP intracellular localization would be affected by Lifeact transduction , as a second evidence of altered cell biophysical properties . To this end , we quantified the ratio of nuclear to cytosolic YAP and observed that cells with higher Lifeact - TagGFP2 expression had lower amount of YAP in the nucleus when compared to weakly - transduced cells ( Fig . 6a ) . Furthermore , we explored whether the ratio of nuclear to cytosolic YAP cor - related with cell spread area , as found by others 19 . In control cells ( not transduced ) we found a constant value of Figure 4 . Lifeact - driven effects modulate nuclear state . Quantification of Lifeact effects on nuclear volume ( a ) nuclear Poisson’s Ratio ( b ) . Values for > 40 cells were pooled together to compute each individual data point . Data is presented as mean , error bars indicate standard deviation . Background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . 6 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / nuclear to cytosolic YAP ratio that was not modulated by cell area ( Fig . 6b ) . Conversely , for cells transduced with Lifeact , nuclear to cytosolic YAP ratios were overall larger , and they tended to decrease with increasing cell area ( Fig . 6b ) . This behaviour is reminiscent of that observed in Fig . 5a for cellular stiffness , and may reflect a mild decrease is intracellular tension with increasing Lifeact expression that then results in decreased nuclear trans - location of YAP . Of note , immunostaining images of YAP used for this analysis showed a striking unexpected feature , that is , Lifeact - dense stress fibres appeared to be decorated with YAP , a feature that was not observed in control cells ( Fig . 6c ) . In both cases , the preferred nuclear localization of YAP was preserved . Furthermore , we verified that this observation was not due to bleed - through between the GFP and TRITC fluorescence signals , or unspecificity of the TRITC - tagged secondary antibody used throughout this study ( Supplementary Fig . 8 ) . Conversely , our analysis shows that YAP colocalization with F - actin fibres increases with increasing Lifeact expression levels ( Fig . 6d ) . As a third biophysical behaviour , we evaluated whether Lifeact expression would affect cell motility by per - forming long - term live cell imaging 5 days post - transduction . Individual cells were tracked by acquiring fluores - cence images of the GFP channel every 10 minutes over a period of 18 hours and the resulting videos were later analysed using the same image analysis pipeline as before . In addition to the parameters describing cytoskeletal Figure 5 . Lifeact expression alters cellular mechanical properties . Lifeact dose dependent effects on cell stiffness ( a ) , and viscosity ( b ) Values for > 10 cells were pooled to compute each individual data point . Data is presented as geometric mean , error bars indicate geometric standard deviation . Background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . 7 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / organization presented above , we also computed the total distance migrated by each cell along with the direc - tionality of migration ( Fig . 7 ) . We found that cells displaying low Lifeact expression migrated for longer distances in a less directed fashion . Conversely , cells with intermediate Lifeact expression tended to exhibit shorter but directionally - persistent trails , consistent with our previous finding that these cells tend to display more aligned stress fibers ( Supplementary Fig . 4d , Supplementary videos ) . Finally , cells with very high levels of Lifeact expres - sion exhibited severely impaired migration , remaining quasi - static and erratic in their displacements . Of note , cells that had lower Lifeact expression did reorganize their cytoskeleton to a larger extend in the timeframe of minutes , as shown by the frame - to - frame changes in F - actin assembly ( Fig . 7c ) . Accordingly , we hypothesize that the impaired migration displayed by cells expressing high levels of Lifeact expression is due to reduced F - actin dynamics when reorganizing their cytoskeleton . Impaired cofilin binding to F - actin as an underlying mechanism for the Lifeact - induced aber - rations in actin organization and dynamics . Finally , we set out to pinpoint the potential mechanism by which Lifeact alters F - actin organization and dynamics . Cofilin was identified as a plausible key player , since Lifeact has been suggested by others to impair actin filament severing by cofilin both in vitro and in yeast cells 6 . We thus carried out several experiments to assess if and how Lifeact expression led to reduced cofilin activity . On the one hand , we followed the procedure devised by Hotulainen et al . , which elegantly show that the G - actin sequestering drug Latrunculin A ( LatA ) fails to depolymerize the actin cytoskeleton when cofilin activity is impaired 20 . We incubated Lifeact - transduced cells with LatA and simultaneously conducted live - cell fluorescence imaging for 30 minutes at 2 - minute intervals . By measuring the relative drop in F - actin amount during treat - ment , we verified that Lifeact reduced LatA - induced cytoskeletal depolymerisation in an expression - dependent manner ( Fig . 8a ) . While this experiment suggested that Lifeact inhibits cofilin activity , it did not identify whether the underlying mechanism is associated with chemical inactivation of cofilin ( via phosphorylation at serine res - idue 3 ) 21 or conformational changes of the f - actin filament upon Lifeact binding that prevent cofilin binding 2 , 6 . Accordingly , we performed western blot measurements of cofilin and p - cofilin expression levels for cell popula - tions transduced with Lifeact or controls ( Fig . 8b , Supplementary Fig . 9 ) . Cells transduced with Lifeact displayed 81 % increase in overall cofilin expression , while the expression levels of p - cofilin increased only by 51 % . Together , these results suggest that Lifeact - transduced cells have higher total amounts of cofilin , and that a lower percentage of said cofilin is in the inactive phosphorylated state . Finally , we performed immunostaining against cofilin to assess whether the drop in cofilin activity was associated with changes in cofilin binding to F - actin . Following the approach devised by Hayakawa et al . 22 using fluorescence image quantification , we measured fluorescence inten - sity levels of cofilin in pixels previously identified as corresponding to an F - actin fibre , thus obtaining a measure of cofilin colocalization to F - actin . When we produced dose - response curves , we found that cells with higher expression of Lifeact had lower amount of cofilin colocalization ( Fig . 8c ) . Collectively , our results reinforce the hypothesis proposed by Courtemanche et al . , where Lifeact binding to F - actin induces a conformational change in actin filament structure which is then incompatible with subsequent cofilin binding 6 . This hypothesis should be contextualized with recent findings on the dual activity of cofilin , involving both severing and depolymerisation Figure 6 . Lifeact expression alters intracellular localization of YAP . Ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic YAP localization according to Lifeact - TagGFP2 cellular fluorescence ( a ) and cell area ( b ) . In ( b ) , black symbols correspond to cells not transduced ( control ) and red symbols correspond to cells transduced with Lifeact - TagGFP2 . ( c ) Example cells displaying localization of YAP staining to Lifeact - containing stress fibres . The cell on the left was transduced with Lifeact and the cell on the right was not transduced . After fixation , cells were stained with DAPI ( middle panels ) and against YAP ( bottom panels ) . Scale bar is 50 µ m . ( d ) Average pixel intentisty of YAP fluorescence colocalized to Lifeact - containing stress fibres is dependant on the total amount of Lifeact expressed in the cell . Data is presented as mean , error bars indicate standard deviation . For ( a ) and ( d ) , background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . Values for > 12 cells were pooled to compute each individual data point . 8 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / of actin filaments 23 . Of note , saturation of actin filaments with cofilin dramatically changes their dynamics towards a depolymerisation - prone state from both barbed and pointed ends 23 . Our findings , together with those Figure 7 . Lifeact expression alters cell migration and F - actin dynamics . Lifeact dose dependent effects on distance migrated ( a ) , directionality of migration ( b ) and F - actin inter - frame changes ( c ) . Values for > 5 cells were pooled to compute each individual data point . Data is presented as geometric mean , error bars indicate geometric standard deviation . Background colours indicate the regimes where cells display no Lifeact - induced effect ( yellow background ) , a dose - response trend ( white background ) and a saturation plateau ( gray background ) , as identified from analyses of peak changes in variability in the neighbourhood of each point for each parameter plotted . 9 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / of others 6 , 23 , support the hypothesis that prior binding of Lifeact to actin filaments would prevent cofilin satura - tion of said filaments , thus inhibiting cofilin - induced actin depolymerisation and reducing overall actin filament dynamics . Figure 8 . Lifeact expression alters cofilin activity . ( a ) Lifeact dose dependent effects on F - actin disassembly after 30 min of Latrunculin A ( 0 . 075 µ g / ml ) treatment . ( b ) Western blot results for cofilin and p - cofilin expression levels relative to GADPH . ( c ) Lifeact dose dependent effects on fluorescence intensities of cofilin colocalized to F - actin fibres . For ( a ) and ( c ) , data is presented as median , error bars indicate Q1 - Q3 , N > 100 cells ; for ( b ) data is presented as mean , error bars indicate standard deviation , N = 3 repeats . 10 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / Discussion In summary , our results suggest that Lifeact - TagGFP2 induces dose - response alterations in the actin cytoskeleton , likely stemming from altered cofilin activity and reduced filament dynamics . The effects extend beyond the actin cytoskeleton , also affecting other cytoskeletal structures and impairing the overall biophysical behaviour of cells . Our findings are more strongly marked in undifferentiated human stem cells , which may be due to a higher capacity to uptake the adenovirally - delivered Lifeact plasmid . Nevertheless , we obtain similar dose - response trends in immortalized cell lines ( NIH / 3T3 and COS - 7 ) , thus expanding the range of cells types were Lifeact has been shown to induce aberrant morphologies 8 , 9 , 24 . It is worth stressing that , in our hands , Lifeact affects different cells types to a different degree , and some cytoskeletal features more strongly than others . An illustrative example of a trend being missing is the parameter stellate factor for COS - 7 cells ( Supplementary Fig . 6b , blue symbols ) . Stellate factor measures the tendency of a cell to display filopodia projections or protuberances ( high value of stellate factor ) . Indeed , COS - 7 cells are rather smooth in their perimetral appearance , and don’t typically extend protrusions . Being that the case , it is difficult to see a trend towards decreasing this value , because even in con - trol conditions this value is low to begin with . Nevertheless , we note that the dose - response trends are typically preserved between cell types , thus suggesting a common origin of the observed changes . The Lifeact plasmid we used included a CMV promoter , which has been shown by others to induce milder aberrations than pBABE and CAG 8 . Of note , our results using a recombinant Lifeact - TagGFP2 protein show that the effect of Lifeact is similar regardless of the way in which the DNA ( or protein ) is delivered and expressed into the cell . Similarly , the GFP tag used ( TagGFP2 ) is a next - generation monomeric fluorescent protein , again being linked to milder aberra - tions than other dimerization - prone GFP tags 8 . Our results are thus obtained in conditions identified by others as conductive to fewest aberrant morphologies in terms of choice of promoter and fluorescence protein tag used . In spite of that , we find a dose - response effect at all MOI and conditions used , thus raising concerns on the use of Lifeact as a cytoskeletal marker . Given that the effects of Lifeact in cytoskeletal organization exhibit a dose - response behaviour with a satu - ration plateau , our results bring new light to the difficult compromise during transduction optimization , that is , maximising the number of transduced cells while reducing the number of cells which are either dead or with aberrant morphologies . Contrary to expected , for all transduction protocols that we tested , the number of cells that are transduced but not aberrant is constant and much lower than anticipated ( < 20 % ) ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . Lifeact transduction protocols found in published literature vary to a certain degree between labora - tories and also according to cell lines used . It may then be difficult to judge , when optimizing a transduction protocol , whether experiments are being carried out in non - artifactual conditions based only on MOI esti - mates . We propose an alternative approach , that is , that the presence of few clearly obvious aberrant cells ( gray bars in Supplementary Fig . 10 ) should be used as a tell - tale sign that a large percentage of cells are within the dose - response regime ( white bars in Supplementary Fig . 10 ) and that few cells will be truly non - artifactual . We note here that transduced cells that display minor aberrations are likely to go unnoticed to the naked eye during the course of an experiment . Selection of these cells in a study will lead to experimental bias or lack of reproduc - ibility with results obtained using other live cell actin probes . Prior to performing experiments , it is important researchers establish a reliable protocol to identify and select only suitable cells within the whole population of heterogeneously transduced cells . Similarly , it would be advisable to report the percentages of not - affected , aberrant and grossly - aberrant cells within the cell population for any given transduction protocol used in a study . Preliminary tests based on co - staining with an actin marker such as phalloidin and image quantification at the single cell level can provide this type of information in a swift manner . With this study , we hope to start an active discussion on what are the limits of suitability of our current live - cell cytoskeletal reporters . This is a timely and much - needed debate , especially with the advent of other actin reporters , such as SiR - actin , Utrophin or F - tractin , which may display similar associated issues . Methods Cell culture , Lifeact - TagGFP2 transduction and immunostaining . Unless stated otherwise , all chemicals and reagents were obtained from Sigma . The majority of measurements were performed in human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells ( Promocell ) , while additional measurements were performed in NIH / 3T3 and COS - 7 cells . Cells were maintained in culture medium consisting of low glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Media ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % foetal bovine serum , and 100 U / ml Penicillin - 100 µ g / ml Streptomycin . hMSCS were additionally supplemented with 10 ng / ml fibroblast growth factor ( Peprotech ) . Cells were kept in tissue culture flasks and cultured at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . Mesenchymal stem cells were used between passages 5 and 9 . Lifeact - TagGFP2 transductions were performed using commercial rAV - CMV - LifeAct - Tag - GFP2 Adenoviral Vectors ( Ibidi ) according to supplier’s instructions , by addition of viral transduction reagent volumes required to achieve the desired MOI ( i . e . 100 , 300 , 600 or 1000 ) on each sample . After the initial 18 hours of incubation for vector uptake , media containing viral particles was exchanged . Cell samples were allowed to express Lifeact - TagGFP2 for a total of 1 , 3 , 5 or 7 days prior to fixation . The pCMV - EGFP plasmid was a kind gift from Dr Julien Gautrot . For experiments using recombinant Lifeact - TagGFP2 protein , Lifeact - TagGFP2 peptides and proprietary Fuse - it - P intracellular protein delivery kits were acquired from Ibidi and prepared according to instructions . Briefly , hMSCs were seeded into coverslips inside 6 - well TCP vessels , three days before experiments . Lyophilised peptides were reconstituted in sterile water , and further diluted in 20 mM HEPES buffer to a concen - tration of 0 . 1 mg / ml . Fuse - it - P was loaded with peptides by following supplier’s instructions . Cells were washed in PBS , and 1 ml of 1 : 50 fusogenic mixture was dispensed to each well . After incubation for 5 minutes at 37 °C , fusogenic mixture was replaced with cell culture medium and returned to an incubator . Cell samples were fixed after 6 hours , to mitigate toxicity effects , stained and imaged as before . All live cell experiments ( migration , AFM and Latrunculin - A treatment ) were conducted on cells transduced at MOI 1000 , at 5 days post transduction . The 11 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / same conditions were used for NIH3 / 3 and COS - 7 cells . At least 3 independent transductions were performed for each set of experiments . For live cell imaging experiments , cells were directly plated onto 6 - well plates and cultured in FBS and anti - biotic supplemented Flurobrite - DMEM imaging specific media ( Thermofisher ) . For AFM measurements , cells were plated in petri dishes and imaging media were supplemented with 50 mM HEPES . For immunostaining experiments , cells were sparsely seeded onto serum coated coverslips inside sterile petri dishes at least 1 day prior to transductions . In brief , cells were fixed by treatment with 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min and permeabilised for 5 min in 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 . To visualize simultaneously F - actin via Lifeact and Phalloidin , cells were stained with phalloidin - TRITC at 2 μ g / ml in PBS for 2 hours . For additional immunostaining exper - iments to visualize other cytoskeletons and proteins , permeabilized cells were treated overnight with primary antibodies against vimentin ( 1 : 400 dilution ; RV202 ) , α - tubulin ( 1 : 50 dilution ; TU - 02 ) , YAP ( 1 : 200 , 63 . 7 ) and cofilin ( 1 : 200 ; E - 8 ) diluted in goat serum blocking buffer at 4 °C ( all antibodies mouse monoclonal from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies ) . The next morning , the samples were washed with PBS and treated with a TRITC - tagged secondary antibody ( 1 : 400 dilution , goat anti - mouse IgG - TRITC , sc - 3796 ) for 1 hour at room temperature . All coverslips were mounted onto glass slides using ProLong ® Gold Antifade Mountant containing DAPI ( Thermo Fisher ) . Control samples were cultured and stained in parallel to transduced cell cultures , but without having been subjected to the transduction protocol . Quantification of cell morphology , cytoskeletal structures and nuclear state from fluorescence images . All fixed samples were imaged using an inverted epifluorescence microscope ( Leica DMI4000B ) with a x20 / 0 . 50 NA objective lens and a CCD camera ( Leica DFC300FX ) . Cells were sequentially imaged on the DAPI ( nuclei ) , TRITC ( phalloidin / antibody staining ) , and FITC ( Lifeact - TagGFP2 ) channels . The algorithm for single - cell quantification of cytoskeleton structures has been described in previous publications 13 , 14 . The coded algorithm ( CSKMorphometrics ) has been implemented in MATLAB ( Mathworks ) and can be found at the File Exchange repository at MATLAB central site . In brief , the quantification of cell morphology and cytoskeleton configuration is based on three steps : ( 1 ) initial fibre segmentation , ( 2 ) fibre refinement , and ( 3 ) determina - tion and subtraction of background . These steps output a variety of maps representing either the brightness of segmented fibres or local fibre orientation , that allow subsequent estimation of morphometric parameters for individual cells . This information is assembled into 14 descriptors ( Supplementary Information ) , e . g . cell spread area , total fibre amount . For the present study , we use the term ‘fibre amount’ to signify the amount of protein organized in fibres , that is , identified by the pipeline as part of the segmented cytoskeleton in the raw image . Quantification of nuclear features to estimate relative nuclear mechanical parameters is described elsewhere 14 . With this method we process DAPI - stained nuclei images to quantify nuclear volume , Poisson ratio and chroma - tin state in individual cells . Finally , the total intensity from GFP images belonging to individual cells was used as a metric for intracellular Lifeact amount to produce graphs correlating cellular morphometrics with peptide expression . Total GFP inten - sity was measured by adding up the fluorescence intensity measured for all pixels within the outline of a cell , once background intensity was subtracted . To statistically identify the three regimes in the dose - response curves , namely a no effect regime , a dose - response regime , and a saturation plateau , threshold points were calculated across all parameters by adapting a method previously developed by us and based on the ratio of variances ( RoV ) 25 , 26 around each point of a DRC ( Figs 2 – 8 and Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . Briefly , a test parameter RoV is defined as = + + − − RoV i var di i N var d N d ( 1 : d ) ( i : i 1 ) , i . e . the ratio of the variances computed in two N - sized small windows to each side of every point i in each DRC . Peaks in RoV displaying regions of high variability in the data , signifying a transition between regimes , were identified in each DRC curve . Two global GFP intensity values corresponding to the transitions point to dose - response and saturation regimes were obtained by averaging out all threshold GFP intensities obtained in Figs 2 – 8 and Supplementary Fig . 4 . The values for the two global GFP intensity thresholds are included in Supplementary Fig . 2 and were used to sort individual cells into the 3 regimes depicted in Supplementary Fig . 10 . Quantification of Nuclear / Cytosolic ratio of YAP . Nuclear / Cytosolic ratio of YAP was assessed as pre - viously described by others 18 . Briefly , we measured the average fluorescence intensities of YAP staining in the nucleus and in an annular region with equal size in the cytosol immediately adjacent to the nuclear region , and computed their ratio . Western Blotting . Cells were washed with chilled PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer for 15 min on ice . The total protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay . Cell lysates were mixed with Laemmeli buffer and dena - tured by heating at 100 °C for 5 min . Proteins were separated by SDS – PAGE and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane . Membranes were blocked in 5 % dry milk for 1 h , followed by incubation with primary antibodies for cofilin ( 1 : 125 , E - 8 , Santa Cruz ) , p - cofilin ( 1 : 250 , E - 5 Santa Cruz ) and control glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehy - drogenase ( GAPDH ) ( 1 : 500 , 0411 , Santa Cruz ) over night at 4 °C . Excess of antibody was removed by washing with PBST three times and the secondary antibody donkey anti - mouse ( IRDye ® 680RD Donkey anti - Mouse IgG ( H + L ) , [ P / N 926 - 68072 ] ; 1 : 10000 ) was added for 1 h at room temperature in dark . The proteins recognized by the antibody were visualized by chemiluminescence . ImageJ was used to quantify the intensity of cofilin , p - cofilin and GAPDH protein bands from each blot . Migration and cytoskeleton disassembly experiments . For migration and Latrunculin - A treatment experiments , live - cell imaging was performed under temperature and CO 2 controlled environment , using an incubator - encased epifluorescence imaging system ( Lumascope 720 , Etaluma ) at 20x magnification . Transduced 12 www . nature . com / scientificreports Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports / cells were cultured inside 6 - well plates until the time of imaging . Individual cells were continuously tracked for 18 hours at 10 - minute intervals , and imaged in the FITC channel . To produce Supplementary videos of long term behaviour in Lifeact - TagGFP2 expressing cells , imaging was conducted under similar conditions using 10x magnification for a period of 4 days , sampled at 1 - hour intervals . Control cells remained untransduced for the duration of the experiment . Other conditions consisted of cells transduced at MOIs of 250 or 500 . To characterize migration patterns , every frame on the 18 hours time - lapse video pertaining to the Lifeact - TagGFP2 channel was analysed using the formerly described image processing algorithms . The positions of cell centroids were tracked from masks of instantaneous cell shape and used to quantify total distance migrated . Migration directionality was defined as the ratio between net cell displacement ( the euclidian distance between starting and ending centroid positions ) and the overall distance travelled by the cell , as = ∑ = = = = = + MD d P P d P P ( , ) ( , ) t t T iT t i t i 0 0 1 . F - actin interframe change was calculated comparing values of F - actin ( FA ) between successive frames , as = ⋅ − + IFC 100 i FA FA FA i i i 1 . For cytoskeleton disassembly studies , cells were imaged for 30 minutes at 2 - minute inter - vals immediately upon addition of Latrunculin A ( 0 . 075 µ g / ml ) to the culture medium . F - actin disassembly was quantified as ⋅ − = = = 100 FA FA FA t min t min t min 0 30 0 Determination of cellular stiffness and viscosity with atomic force microscopy . All measure - ments of cell mechanics were performed on a Nanowizard 4 ( JPK ) , integrated with an Axio Observer Z . 1 epiflu - orescence microscope with Plan - Apochromat lenses ( 20 × ) equipped with a cooled CMOS camera ( Orca Flash 4 ) . Cells were probed using gold - coated rectangular cantilevers ( 0 . 03 N / m nominal spring constant ) with pyram - idal tips ( 12 µ m high with 35° half cone angle , supplied by BudgetSensors ) . Experiments were conducted on petri dishes mounted on a heating accessory to maintain cells at 37 °C . AFM experiments were conducted for a maximum of 1 hr per petri dish . Prior to measurement , the cantilevers were allowed to thermally equilibrate fully submerged in cell media . The cantilever sensitivity was calibrated in contact mode on a bare region of the container , following which the cantilever was moved a minimum of 500 µ m from the surface to calibrate the force constant using thermal fluctuations . We identified individual adherent cells exhibiting varied levels of GFP expression and recorded a fluorescence image of the GFP channel at 20 × magnification before measuring cell mechanics . Imaging parameters ( exposure time and gain ) were kept constant for all experiments . AFM measure - ments were performed using JPK’s QI mode , which rapidly acquires force - curves generating a detailed image of the topography and mechanical properties of the sample . For each measurement we selected a region of 100 by 100 µ m ( 32 × 32 force curves ) ranging from lamellar and cytosolic to nuclear regions of the cell . Force curves had a z - length of ~ 10 µ m , extension speed of 125 µ m / s and a setpoint of 3 – 5 nN . Data analysis of the force - displacement curves was carried out using the BECC model for thin adherent cells on a stiff substrate 25 using a pipeline written in MATLAB as previously described 26 . Cellular viscosity was com - puted using the same force - displacement curves following the method outlined by Rebelo et al . 27 . Statistical analysis . Statistical tests were produced with the OriginLab analysis software . Population results were plotted as box charts presenting median values and first and third quartiles , with error bars indicating the 1 st and 99 th quartiles . Single cell results were expressed either as means or geometric means with error bars repre - senting interquartile range . Two - way ANOVA tests were used to establish the significance of concentration and time effects on the levels of Lifeact expression and of morphological alterations of cell populations . Dunnett’s post - hoc tests where used to determine significant differences between the control group ( no transduction ) and groups treated with increasing MOIs for each day measured . References 1 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Munsie , L . N . , Caron , N . , Desmond , C . R . & Truant , R . Lifeact cannot visualize some forms of stress - induced twisted f - actin . Nat . Methods 6 , 317 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Melak , M . , Plessner , M . & Grosse , R . Actin visualization at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 525 – 530 ( 2017 ) . 4 . Belin , B . J . , Cimini , B . A . , Blackburn , E . H . & Mullins , R . D . Visualization of actin filaments and monomers in somatic cell nuclei . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 982 – 994 ( 2013 ) . 5 . Lemieux , M . G . et al . Visualization of the actin cytoskeleton : different F - actin - binding probes tell different stories . Cytoskeleton 71 , 157 – 169 ( 2014 ) . 6 . Courtemanche , N . , Pollard , T . D . & Chen , Q . Avoiding artefacts when counting polymerized actin in live cells with LifeAct fused to fluorescent proteins . Nat . Cell . Biol . 18 , 676 – 683 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Spracklen , A . J . , Fagan , T . N . , Lovander , K . E . & Tootle , T . L . The pros and cons of common actin labeling tools for visualizing actin dynamics during Drosophila oogenesis . Dev . Biol . 393 , 209 – 226 ( 2014 ) . 8 . Patel , S . et al . Functional characterization of filamentous actin probe expression in neuronal cells . PLoS One 12 , e0187979 ( 2017 ) . 9 . Dyachok , J . , Sparks , J . A . , Liao , F . , Wang , Y . - S . & Blancaflor , E . B . Fluorescent protein - based reportters of the actin cytoskeleton in living plant cells : Fluorophore variant , actin binding domain , and promoter considerations . Cytoskeleton 71 , 311 – 327 ( 2014 ) . 10 . Charrier , S . et al . Quantification of lentiviral vector copy numbers in individual hematopoietic colony - forming cells shows vector dose - dependent effects on the frequency and level of transduction . Gene Ther . 18 , 479 – 487 ( 2010 ) . 11 . Materna , S . C . & Marwan , W . Estimating the number of plasmids taken up by a eukaryotic cell during transfection and evidence that antisense RNA abolishes gene expression in Physarum polycephalum . FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 243 , 29 – 35 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Harterink , M . et al . DeActs : genetically encoded tools for perturbing the actin cytoskeleton in single cells . Nat . Methods 14 , 479 – 482 ( 2017 ) . 13 . Gavara , N . & Chadwick , R . S . Relationship between cell stiffness and stress fiber amount , assessed by simultaneous atomic force microscopy and live - cell fluorescence imaging . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol . 15 , 511 – 523 ( 2015 ) . 14 . Keeling , M . C . , Flores , L . R . , Dodhy , A . H . , Murray , E . R . & Gavara , N . Actomyosin and vimentin cytoskeletal networks regulate nuclear shape , mechanics and chromatin organization . Sci . Rep . 7 , 5219 ( 2017 ) . 15 . Gupta , M . et al . Adaptive rheology and ordering of cell cytoskeleton govern matrix rigidity sensing . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7525 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Weirich , K . L . et al . Liquid behavior of cross - linked actin bundles . Proc . Natl . Acad . USA 114 , 2131 – 2136 ( 2017 ) . 13 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2019 ) 9 : 3241 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 17 . Driscoll , T . P . , Cosgrove , B . D . , Heo , S . J . , Shurden , Z . E . & Mauck , R . L . Cytoskeletal to nuclear strain transfer regulates YAP signaling in mesenchymal stem cells . Biophys . J . 108 , 2783 – 2793 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Force triggers YAP nuclear entry by regulating transport across nuclear pores . Cell 171 , 1397 – 1410 ( 2017 ) . 19 . Nardone , G . et al . YAP regulates cell mechanics by controlling focal adhesion assembly . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15321 ( 2017 ) . 20 . Hotulainen , P . , Paunola , E . , Vartiainen , M . K . & Lappalainen , P . Actin - depolymerizing factor and cofilin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 , 649 – 664 ( 2005 ) . 21 . Mizuno , K . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal . 25 , 457 – 469 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . & Sokabe , M . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 ( 2011 ) . 23 . Wioland , H . et al . ADF / Cofilin accelerates actin dynamics by severing filaments and promoting their depolymerization at both ends . Curr . Biol . 27 , 1956 – 1967 ( 2017 ) . 24 . Sliogeryte , K . et al . Differential effects of LifeAct - GFP and actin - GFP on cell mechanics assessed using micropipette aspiration . J . Biomech . 49 , 310 – 317 ( 2016 ) . 25 . Gavara , N . Combined strategies for optimal detection of the contact point in AFM force - indentation curves obtained on thin samples and adherent cells . Sci . Rep . 6 , 21267 ( 2016 ) . 26 . Gavara , N . & Chadwick , R . S . Determination of the elastic moduli of thin samples and adherent cells using conical atomic force microscope tips . Nat . Nanotechnol . 7 , 733 – 736 ( 2012 ) . 27 . Rebelo , L . M . , de Sousa , J . S . , Mendes Filho , J . & Radmacher , M . Comparison of the viscoelastic properties of cells from different kidney cancer phenotypes measured with atomic force microscopy . Nanotechnology 24 , 055102 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank Dr . Stephen Thorpe , Prof . Martin Knight and Su Fu for critical input . This work was supported in part by a Marie Curie CIG grant ( PCIG14 - GA - 2013 - 631011 CSKFingerprints ) , a Dunhill Medical Trust grant ( R454 / 1115 ) and a BBSRC grant ( BB / P006108 / 1 ) . M . C . K . is supported by a PhD studentship from the Life Sciences Initiative at QMUL , X . Z . is supported by a PhD studentship from the China Scholarship Council . Author Contributions L . R . F . and N . G . designed the studies ; L . R . F . , M . C . K . , X . Z . and K . S . conducted experiments . All authors contributed to analysing and interpreting the data . L . R . F . and N . G . drafted the manuscript and all authors edited the final submission . Additional Information Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 40092 - w . Competing Interests : The authors declare no competing interests . Publisher’s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Cre - ative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per - mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2019