Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Controlled Release journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jconrel Synergistic e ﬀ ects of dendritic cell targeting and laser - microporation on enhancing epicutaneous skin vaccination e ﬃ cacy Yoan Machado a , 1 , Sanne Duinkerken b , Veronika Hoep ﬂ inger a , Melissa Mayr a , Evgeniia Korotchenko a , Almedina Kurtaj a , Isabel Pablos a , Markus Steiner a , 2 , Angelika Stoecklinger a , Joyce Lübbers b , Maximillian Schmid c , 3 , Uwe Ritter c , Sandra Scheiblhofer a , Michael Ablinger d , Verena Wally d , Sarah Hochmann e , Anna M . Raninger e , Dirk Strunk e , Yvette van Kooyk b , Josef Thalhamer a , Richard Weiss a , ⁎ a Department of Molecular Biology , University of Salzburg , Salzburg , Austria b Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology , VU University Medical Centre , Amsterdam , The Netherlands c Department of Immunology , University of Regensburg , Regensburg , Germany d Division of Experimental Dermatology , EB House Austria , Department of Dermatology , Paracelsus Medical University , Salzburg , Austria e Institute of Experimental and Clinical Cell Therapy , Spinal Cord Injury and Tissue Regeneration Center Salzburg , Paracelsus Medical University , Austria A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Dendritic cell targeting C type lectin receptors Mannan Skin vaccination Laser microporation Epicutaneous immunization Hypoallergen Speci ﬁ c immunotherapy A B S T R A C T Due to its unique immunological properties , the skin is an attractive target tissue for allergen - speci ﬁ c im - munotherapy . In our current work , we combined a dendritic cell targeting approach with epicutaneous im - munization using an ablative fractional laser to generate de ﬁ ned micropores in the upper layers of the skin . By coupling the major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 to mannan from S . cerevisiae via mild periodate oxidation we generated hypoallergenic Bet - mannan neoglycoconjugates , which e ﬃ ciently targeted CD14 + dendritic cells and Langerhans cells in human skin explants . Mannan conjugation resulted in sustained release from the skin and retention in secondary lymphoid organs , whereas unconjugated antigen showed fast renal clearance . In a mouse model , Bet - mannan neoglycoconjugates applied via laser - microporated skin synergistically elicited potent hu - moral and cellular immune responses , superior to intradermal injection . The induced antibody responses dis - played IgE - blocking capacity , highlighting the therapeutic potential of the approach . Moreover , application via micropores , but not by intradermal injection , resulted in a mixed TH1 / TH17 - biased immune response . Our data clearly show that applying mannan - neoglycoconjugates to an organ rich in dendritic cells using laser - micro - poration is superior to intradermal injection . Due to their low IgE binding capacity and biodegradability , mannan neoglycoconjugates therefore represent an attractive formulation for allergen - speci ﬁ c epicutaneous immunotherapy . 1 . Introduction In the past decade the skin has gained renewed attention as target for vaccinations due to its unique features such as accessibility , high abundance of skin - resident professional antigen presenting cells ( APCs ) , and e ﬃ cient drainage through lymphatics [ 1 ] . The main dendritic cell ( DC ) populations found in human skin are epidermal Langerhans cells as well as CD1a + , CD14 + and CD141 + DCs in the dermal compartment [ 2 ] . These APC populations di ﬀ er in their capacity to sense pathogens by utilizing di ﬀ erential expression of pattern recognition receptors such as Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) , NOD - like receptors , and C - type lectin re - ceptors ( CLRs ) [ 2 , 3 ] . The latter are immune receptors that recognize carbohydrate epitopes and thus mediate antigen uptake and cross - pre - sentation , and modulate DC immune polarization [ 4 ] . Di ﬀ erent popu - lations of skin - resident APCs express speci ﬁ c sets of CLRs depending on the cell lineage , maturation status and function [ 3 ] . Based on these ﬁ ndings , several CLR targeting approaches aiming to deliver antigen to speci ﬁ c APC subsets have been published recently [ 3 , 5 ] . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2017 . 09 . 020 Received 22 August 2017 ; Accepted 13 September 2017 ⁎ Corresponding author . 1 Present address : Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences , University of British Columbia , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada 2 Present address : Laboratory for Immunological & Molecular Cancer Research , Paracelsus Medical University , Salzburg , Austria 3 Present address : Department of Internal Medicine III , University Hospital Regensburg , Germany E - mail address : Richard . Weiss @ sbg . ac . at ( R . Weiss ) . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 Available online 14 September 2017 0168 - 3659 / © 2017 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . T The concept of targeting antigens to skin - resident APCs enables attractive approaches for the rational design of novel allergy vaccines [ 5 ] . It allows for proper modulation of the immune response based on the targeted receptors . Moreover , regarding allergy vaccines , delivery of the antigen to the upper layers of the skin minimizes the risk of systemic adverse reactions due to the relatively poor vasculature of the skin . However , disrupting the stratum corneum barrier in a precise and controlled way poses a major challenge for e ﬃ cient antigen delivery into the skin [ 6 ] . To date , the best options for overcoming the skin barrier are the use of microneedles and laser ablation [ 7 , 8 ] . In line with this , we have shown in a mouse model of allergen - speci ﬁ c im - munotherapy , that epicutaneous immunization ( ECi ) via laser micro - poration is equally e ﬃ cient compared to subcutaneous im - munotherapy , but avoids a therapy - induced boost of TH2 cytokines [ 9 ] . However , application of allergen to the skin of naïve mice can also result in TH2 - biased immune responses [ 10 , 11 ] . This is a potential risk for allergy vaccination , as it may induce new sensitizations , especially when using allergen extracts [ 12 , 13 ] . Addition of adjuvants has been demonstrated to overcome this unwanted e ﬀ ect and divert the response towards a TH1 or Treg phenotype [ 10 , 14 ] . These data suggest that epicutaneous immunotherapy may greatly bene ﬁ t from using im - munomodulatory molecules that polarize the immune response towards a non - TH2 phenotype . In this context , allergen - carbohydrate neogly - coconjugates are ideal candidates for skin vaccination since they are able to target the allergen to APCs via speci ﬁ c CLRs while promoting a speci ﬁ c type of immune response [ 3 – 5 , 15 ] . We and others have pre - viously shown that allergen - mannan neoglycoconjugates are e ﬃ ciently targeted to APCs , and are potent inducers of humoral and cellular im - mune responses [ 16 – 18 ] . In addition , carbohydrate conjugation renders vaccines hypoallergenic ( i . e . , they no longer bind IgE ) [ 18 ] , thus avoiding potential side e ﬀ ects as observed in the clinic with epicuta - neous delivery of allergen extracts [ 19 ] . In the current work , we explore how the combination of epicuta - neous immunization via laser - microporation with a skin - resident DC targeting vaccine formulation shapes and potentiates anti - allergic im - mune responses . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials Mannan ( MN ) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( average molecular weight approx . 46 kDa ) , Concanavalin A ( ConA ) , sodium cyanobor - ohydride ( NaCNBH 3 ) , sodium borohydride ( NaBH 4 ) , sodium periodate ( NaIO 4 ) , sodium ascorbate , aminoguanidine hydrochloride , Tris ( 3 - hy - droxypropyltriazolylmethyl ) amine ( THTPA ) , Cytochalasin B , Amiloride hydrochloride , Filipin III from Streptomyces ﬁ lipinensis , and Chlorpromazine were purchased from Sigma Aldrich . Anthrone was purchased from Fluka , pHrodo was obtained from Invitrogen . CF647 was purchased from Biotium , 6 - FAM alkyne , Cy5 . 5 Hydrazide , and Cy5 . 5 - NHS from Lumiprobe , and NHS - PEG - 5 - Azido from BaseClick . 2 . 1 . 1 . Expression and puri ﬁ cation of recombinant allergens The major allergens Bet v 1 . 0101 and Phl p 5 . 0101 were expressed from pET28b constructs in Escherichia coli strain BL21 Star ( DE3 ) ( Invitrogen ) . Proteins were puri ﬁ ed according to published protocols [ 20 , 21 ] . Endotoxin removal was performed by using EndoTrap ® red ( Hyglos ) . Protein purity was assessed by SDS - PAGE electrophoresis followed by Coomassie staining as described elsewhere . Endotoxin content was evaluated by Limulus amebocyte lysate assay ( Cape Cod ) according to the manufacturer ' s instructions . Proteins used for all ex - periments had > 95 % purity and the endotoxin content was lower than 0 . 3 pg / μ g . Finally , proteins were dialyzed against 2 mmol / L sodium phosphate bu ﬀ er pH 7 . 4 and stored at − 20 °C . 2 . 1 . 2 . Generation of allergen - mannan glycoconjugates Conjugates were generated by mild oxidation of the mannan moiety followed by reductive amination as described previously [ 18 ] . Brie ﬂ y , 10 mg of mannan were dissolved in 300 μ L of an aqueous solution of 8 mg / mL NaIO 4 and vigorously stirred in the dark at room temperature ( RT ) for 1 h . Excess of NaIO 4 was then removed from the reaction mixture by dialysis against 50 mM sodium phosphate bu ﬀ er pH 7 at 4 °C in the dark using Spectra / Por dialysis tubing , MWCO 6000 – 8000 . Subsequently , 2 mg of lyophilized protein were reconstituted in 300 μ L of the dialyzed oxidized mannan and 100 μ L of a freshly prepared NaCNBH 3 solution ( 10 mg / mL in 50 mM sodium phosphate bu ﬀ er , pH 7 ) were added and the reaction mixture was kept in the dark and stirred at RT for 24 h . To stop the coupling reaction , 40 μ L of a NaBH 4 solution ( 5 g / L in 50 mM borate bu ﬀ er , pH 9 . 5 ) were added to reduce any remaining aldehyde groups . The reaction was stirred in the dark for 6 h at 4 °C . Afterwards , samples were subjected to size exclusion chromatography using a 26 / 60 Sephacryl S - 300 column ( GE Health - care ) in an ÄKTA - Explorer chromatographic system ( GE - Healthcare ) . Fractions corresponding to high molecular weight of Bet v 1 - mannan neoglycoconjugates ( Bet - MN ) were used for subsequent experiments . Coupling e ﬃ ciency was monitored by 10 % reducing SDS - PAGE using colloidal Coomassie staining for protein visualization . The hydrodynamic radius of Bet - MN was analyzed by dynamic light scattering ( DLS802 ; Viscotek ) at 1 mg / mL in PBS , pH 7 . Prior to mea - surements , samples were centrifuged 5 min at 14 , 000 g . Data were ac - cumulated for 15 × 5 s and the correlation function was automatically ﬁ tted into the combined data curve . Intensity distribution was calcu - lated using the solvent settings for water . The calculated intensity dis - tribution was weighted statistically by mass using the mass model for proteins ( OmniSize v 3 . 0 ) . 2 . 1 . 3 . Characterization of Bet - MN by Fourier - transform infrared spectroscopy ( FTIR ) Protein and carbohydrate structure of Bet - MN was studied by atte - nuated total re ﬂ ectance ( Bio - ATR ) Fourier transform infrared spectro - scopy ( FTIR ) using a Tensor 27 instrument ( Bruker ) . 20 μ L of each sample were deposited onto the Bio - ATR cell , and spectra were ob - tained from the average of 120 scans collected over 4000 – 900 cm − 1 . Absorption spectra were shown after atmospheric compensation . Comparison of secondary structure elements in Bet v 1 and Bet - MN was performed by analyzing the amide I band ( 1710 – 1600 cm − 1 ) after correcting for carbohydrate contribution . Mannan structure was mon - itored in the carbohydrate ﬁ ngerprint region 1200 – 900 cm − 1 . Second derivative spectra were obtained following the Savitsky - Golay method ( 9 smoothing points ) . All data were acquired and processed using the OPUS software v 6 . 5 ( Bruker ) . Protein and carbohydrate concentration within the glycoconjugates was estimated by the IR absorption of the Amide II and mannan ﬁ n - gerprint by using standard curves of mannan and Bet v 1 as a reference . 2 . 1 . 4 . Assessing mannan integrity via Concanavalin A binding Mannan integrity in the Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates was analyzed via a precipitation assay using the mannan - binding lectin Concanavalin A ( ConA ) as described by Mislovicová et al . [ 22 ] . In short , 500 μ L of increasing amounts of free mannan or Bet - MN [ 5 – 300 μ g / mL ] in assay bu ﬀ er ( 50 mM sodium phosphate , 0 . 1 M NaCl , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM MnCl 2 × 4H 2 O , pH 7 ) were added to 500 μ L ConA [ 150 μ g / mL ] in assay bu ﬀ er . The reaction mixtures were stirred at 37 °C for 2 h . Afterwards , samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 8400 g and washed twice with 1 mL 1 M NaCl , and the pellet was dissolved in 100 μ L of 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 10 . 5 . The amount of precipitated mannan was measured by the anthrone method [ 23 ] . In order to con ﬁ rm the speci ﬁ city of the ConA / mannan interaction , ConA agonist methyl α , D mannopyranoside was added to a ﬁ nal concentration of 25 mM . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 88 2 . 1 . 5 . Allergenicity of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates The allergenic potential of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates was assessed by IgE - dependent degranulation of rat basophil leukaemia RBL - 2H3 cells ( RBL ) as described previously [ 24 ] . RBL - 2H3 cells were incubated with IgE - containing sera from Bet v 1 - sensitized BALB / c mice . De - granulation was triggered by the addition of serial dilutions of Bet - MN , or Bet v 1 as a reference . Beta - hexosaminidase release was measured by enzymatic cleavage of the ﬂ uorogenic substrate 4 - methylumbelliferyl - N - acetyl - b - D - glucosaminide ( 4 - MUG ) . Data is expressed as percentage of total release after Triton X - 100 treatment . 2 . 1 . 6 . In vitro uptake , dendritic cell and complement activation Bone marrow derived dendritic cells ( BMDCs ) were generated as described previously [ 18 ] . BMDCs were thawed and placed in complete medium in 96 - well polystyrene V - bottom plates ( Greiner ) for 2 h . 10 5 cells per well were treated with 30 μ g / mL pHrodo - labeled Bet v 1 or Bet - MN and uptake was analyzed 60 min later by ﬂ ow cytometry . BMDCs were additionally surface - stained with anti - CD11c Brilliant violet 421 ( Clone N418 , Biolegend ) , MHC - II APC ( Clone M5 / 114 . 15 . 2 , Biolegend ) and CD86 APC - Cy7 ( Clone GL - 1 , Biolegend ) in order to determine DC activation . Bet - MN uptake mechanisms were studied by preincubating freshly generated BMDCs for 2 h with the following inhibitors of endocytosis : Cytochalasin B , an inhibitor of actin polymerization , which prevents phagocytosis [ 25 ] , Amiloride , which inhibits macropinocytosis by blocking Na / H + exchange in macropinosomes [ 26 ] , Chlorpromazine , inhibiting Clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 27 ] , and Filipin , an inhibitor of Caveolae - dependent endocytosis [ 28 , 29 ] . In order to assess mannan dependent endocytosis we used free mannan as a competitive inhibitor at the indicated concentrations . Then , 100 μ g / mL of CF - 647 labeled Bet v 1 , or Bet - MN were added . After 4 h uptake was assessed by ﬂ ow cy - tometry . Data is presented as percentage of total uptake in cell culture medium without inhibitors . As a negative control , BMDCs were meta - bolically inactivated by keeping them at 4 °C , and antigen was added under these conditions to assess the unspeci ﬁ c binding . To assess complement activation by Bet - MN , equal volumes ( 10 μ L ) of Veronal bu ﬀ er ( Sigma ) , human plasma , and various concentrations of Bet - MN in PBS were mixed and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C . The re - action was stopped by adding one volume of SDS - sample bu ﬀ er fol - lowed by 5 min incubation at 95 °C . Samples were separated by SDS - PAGE in 7 . 5 – 20 % gradient gels and C3a formation was measured by western blotting using a biotinylated anti - human C3 antibody ( clone D17 / 1 , Biolegend , 1 : 1000 ) and Streptavidin - HRP ( Biolegend , 1 : 2000 ) . Puri ﬁ ed human C3a des Arg ( Hycult Biotech ) was used as a positive control . 2 . 1 . 7 . Ethics statement Experiments involving human material were conducted in ac - cordance with the guidelines of the World Medical Association ' s Declaration of Helsinki . Human skin explants were obtained with in - formed consent following abdominal resection after cosmetic surgery from healthy donors ( Bergman Clinics , Bilthoven , The Netherlands or University Hospital Salzburg , Austria ) . Experiments were approved by the respective Institutional Review Boards ) . Animal experiments were approved by the Austrian Ministry of Science ( permit number : BMWFW - 66 . 012 / 0003 - WF / V / 3b / 2015 ) . 2 . 1 . 8 . Targeting of skin - resident APCs in human skin explants For tracking antigen internalization in human skin explants , 6FAM - labeled Bet v 1 and Bet - MN were generated via click chemistry . For this , Bet - MN was amino - functionalized by adding ethylenediamine prior to the reduction with NaBH 4 . Then Bet v 1 and Bet - MN were treated with NHS - PEG - 5 - Azide and subjected to click chemistry as described [ 30 ] . Human skin explants were obtained within 24 h after cosmetic surgery from healthy donors . An area of approximately 10 cm 2 was treated using the P . L . E . A . S . E . Professional ® ( Pantec Biosolutions ) laser microporation system with the following settings : ﬂ uency of 22 . 5 kJ / cm 2 , 4 pulses / pore , repetition rate of 200 Hz , pulse duration of 75 μ s , and a pore density of 10 % . Then , 100 μ g ( 1 mg / mL ) of 6 - FAM labeled Bet - MN or Bet v 1 were topically distributed and allowed to dry . A similar amount of antigen , 100 μ g ( 0 . 5 mg / mL ) , was distributed on a 10 cm 2 area by ten equidistant intradermal injections of 20 μ L each . Biopsies of 0 . 6 cm 2 ( 10 per condition ) were collected and cultured with the epidermal side upwards in 48 well plates with 1 mL of IMDM supplemented with 10 % heat inactivated FBS , 2 mM L - glutamine , 50 U / mL penicillin , 50 μ g / mL streptomycin , and 10 μ g / mL gentamycin . Biopsies were cultured for 48 h at 37 °C , 5 % CO 2 and cellular crawl - outs were harvested and pooled per experimental condition . Analysis was performed by ﬂ ow cytometry using an LSRFortessa X - 20 ( BD ) and live APC populations were determined based on the expression of surface markers HLA - DR BV510 ( clone G46 - 6 , BD Biosciences ) , CD14 AF700 ( clone M5E2 , Biolegend ) , CD1a APC ( clone HI149 , BD Biosciences ) , CD141 BV711 ( clone 1A4 , BD Biosciences ) and EpCAM BV421 ( clone EBA - 1 , BD Biosciences ) . In order to visualize the depth and shape of laser micropores in human skin , 6 mm 2 biopsies from the area of immunization were em - bedded in OCT compound ( TissueTek ) and frozen in the gas phase of liquid nitrogen . Tissue sections of 6 μ m were deposited on gelatin - coated slides , stained with Haematoxylin - Eosin for close examination of micropores and search for signs of laser - induced thermal stress . 2 . 1 . 9 . Mouse immunizations and histologic analysis of laser - microporated skin Female , 6 – 10 week - old BALB / c mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories ( Sulzfeld , Germany ) and maintained at the animal facility of the University of Salzburg according to local guidelines for animal care . Mice ( n = 5 ) were immunized 2 times with 20 μ g of Bet v 1 or Bet - MN in PBS on days 0 and 14 . Immunizations were applied at two sites on the back ( 40 μ L each ) either intradermally , or via laser microporation using the P . L . E . A . S . E . Professional ® laser microporation device . For epicutaneous immunizations ( ECi ) mice were depilated the day before using depilatory cream . On the day of immunization , mice were anesthetized and two non - overlapping 1 cm 2 areas on the back were laser - microporated using the following settings : 4 pulses / pore , repetition rate of 500 Hz , pulse duration of 50 μ s , and a pore - density of 5 % . Then , 40 μ L of antigen were applied on top of each laser - micro - porated area and allowed to dry . Immunization sites were covered with a plastic adhesive patch ( OPsite Flexi ﬁ x ) . On day 28 , mice were sacri - ﬁ ced and blood was collected for measuring Bet v 1 speci ﬁ c IgG anti - bodies using a luminometric ELISA ( see Supplementary Methods ) . IgE blocking capacity of sera was tested using RBL - 2H3 cells and high ti - tered sera from allergic donors as described in the online supplement . Splenocytes from treated mice were re - stimulated in vitro with Bet v 1 for 72 h and secreted cytokines were measured using the Flowcytomix mouse TH1 / TH2 / TH17 / TH22 13plex kit ( eBioscience ) according to the manufacturer ' s protocol . See Methods section in the online supplement for more details . Langerin - DTR - EGFP ( langDTR ) mice [ 31 ] were backcrossed onto BALB / c background for 12 generations . Mice were immunized on days 0 and 14 with 20 μ g of Bet v 1 or Bet - MN either via laser - microporated skin or intradermally as described above . Langerin + cells were con - ditionally depleted by intraperitoneal injection of 1 μ g diphtheria toxin ( DT ) on the day before starting the experiment and 400 ng twice a week during the whole experiment . Weight and behavior of the mice were regularly controlled to detect any adverse e ﬀ ects due to the DT ad - ministration . Mice were sacri ﬁ ced on day 28 and Bet v 1 - speci ﬁ c an - tibody levels in sera were measured . Histological analysis of the skin morphology and the cellular in - ﬁ ltrate upon laser microporation was assessed by ﬂ uorescence micro - scopy . Depilated mice were immunized epicutaneously or intradermally on the back with 20 μ g of Bet v 1 , Bet - MN , or PBS . Mice were sacri ﬁ ced after 4 h , 1 day or 3 days later and skin from the immunization area was Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 89 collected , immediately embedded in OCT compound ( TissueTek ) and frozen in the gas phase of liquid nitrogen . Tissue sections of 6 μ m were prepared and deposited on poly - L - Lysine covered microscopy slides . Sections were ﬁ xed with cold acetone , rehydrated in PBS , blocked with naive mouse serum , stained with anti - mouse CD11b Alexa Fluor 488 ( clone M1 / 70 , eBioscience ) for 30 min and counterstained with DAPI . A rat - IgG2b Alexa Fluor 488 ( clone eB149 / 10H5 , Biolegend ) was used as isotype control . After washing , sections were mounted with PermaFluor ( Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁ c ) and observed under an immuno ﬂ uorescence microscope ( Zeiss ) . Image processing was performed using ImageJ [ 32 ] . 2 . 1 . 10 . In vitro antigen permeation To determine the skin permeation capacity of Bet v 1 or Bet - MN when immunized via intradermal injections or laser micropores , the molecules were labeled with Cy5 . 5 NHS esther and Cy5 . 5 hydrazide , respectively . Modi ﬁ cation of Bet v 1 was performed as recommended by the manufacturer . The modi ﬁ cation of Bet - MN with Cy5 . 5 hydrazide was performed by adding a 10 - fold molar excess of hydrazide reagent after coupling Bet v 1 to mannan by aminative reduction . Resulting labeled neoglycoconjugates were puri ﬁ ed by size exclusion chromato - graphy as described above . Skin permeation capacity of Bet v 1 and Bet - MN was evaluated in vitro using pig skin as a model . Permeation rates were determined using a Franz di ﬀ usion cell . Brie ﬂ y , skin sections from the shoulder of freshly slaughtered pigs were collected and shaved . After removal of fatty tissue , full thickness skins ( 2 - 3 mm ) were treated with 20 μ g of Cy5 . 5 labeled Bet - MN or Bet v 1 either via ID or ECi and mounted in a static Franz di ﬀ usion cell with an exchange area of 1 cm 2 . The receptor chambers were ﬁ lled with 8 mL of PBS and kept at 37 °C under stirring . Permeation to the lower chamber was monitored by collecting 100 μ L of the lower chamber at 1 h , 3 h , 6 h and 24 h and measuring the amount of antigen . Volume collected at each time was replaced with PBS . The amount of antigen was determined by adding 100 μ L of 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride to 20 μ L of sample and measuring the ﬂ uorescence of Cy5 . 5 ( 675 / 710 Ex / Em ) using a ﬂ uorescence plate reader ( In ﬁ nite M200 Pro plate reader , Tecan ) . Standard curves of Cy5 . 5 labeled Bet - MN and Bet v 1 were used to calculate the amount of antigen in the lower chamber . 2 . 1 . 11 . In vivo antigen distribution To determine the amount of Bet v 1 or Bet - MN delivered to di ﬀ erent organs in vivo , mice ( n = 3 ) were immunized with 20 μ g Bet v 1 - Cy5 . 5 or Bet - MN - Cy5 . 5 intradermally or epicutaneously as described above . After 0 . 5 , 6 , 14 and 48 h , mice were euthanized and the organs were harvested . A skin area of 1 cm 2 was excised per immunization site . Then skin draining lymph nodes ( i . e . axillary , brachial and inguinal ) were harvested . In addition , the spleen , kidneys and liver were collected . All organs were homogenized in 0 . 5 mL of PBS , except for the liver ( 1 mL ) . The amount of antigen was determined by adding 100 μ L of guanidi - nium hydrochloride to 20 μ L of the tissue homogenate and measuring the ﬂ uorescence of Cy5 . 5 ( 675 / 710 Ex / Em ) using a ﬂ uorescence plate reader ( In ﬁ nite M200 Pro plate reader , Tecan ) . Standard curves were constructed using Cy5 . 5 labeled Bet v 1 and Bet - MN . Tissue homo - genates from naïve mice were used to determine the background ﬂ uorescence for each organ as well as matrix interferences with Cy5 . 5 ﬂ uorescence . Fig . 1 . Bet v 1fold is nota ﬀ ectedbythe coupling ofmannan . ( A ) FTIR - ATR spectra ofBet v 1 . ( B ) Overlay ofBet v1 and Bet - MN second derivativeof theamide Iband ( 1700 – 1600 cm − 1 ) shows a typical beta sheet structure ( strong 1625 – 1635 cm − 1 and 1695 – 1685 cm − 1 ) . The slight increase in absorption at 1680 – 1650 cm − 1 region suggests the presence of more disordered regions compared to native Bet v 1 . C ) Overlay of mannan and Bet - MN second derivative of the mannan ﬁ ngerprint region 1200 – 900 cm − 1 . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 90 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Generation and characterization of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates Bet - Mannan neoglycoconjugates ( Bet - MN ) were prepared by mild oxidation of mannan polysaccharide followed by reductive amination as previously described [ 18 ] . Conjugation e ﬃ cacy was nearly 100 % as revealed by SDS - PAGE ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Resulting Bet - MN was fractionated over size exclusion chromatography in order to generate neoglycoconjugates with a more de ﬁ ned size distribution . For sub - sequent studies we used the high molecular weight fraction with a mean hydrodynamic radius of 10 nm which showed the highest uptake e ﬃ cacy and activation of BMDCs ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . We explored the composition and structure of the Bet - MN neogly - coconjugates by Fourier - Transform Infrared spectroscopy ( FTIR ) . The IR spectrum of the Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates showed the typical amide I and amide II bands corresponding to the peptide backbone in the region of 1700 – 1450 cm − 1 and the mannan ﬁ ngerprint in the re - gion 1200 – 900 cm − 1 ( Fig . 1A ) . Analysis of the second derivative of the amide I band ( 1710 – 1600 cm − 1 ) [ 33 , 34 ] revealed typical strong beta sheet signals ( 1625 – 1635 cm − 1 and 1695 – 1685 cm − 1 ) corresponding to the natural Bet v 1 fold , which remained unaltered within Bet - MN ( Fig . 1B ) . Only minor changes consistent with a slight increase of dis - ordered regions ( 1680 – 1650 cm − 1 ) were observed . Notably , there were no major di ﬀ erences between coupled and free mannan spectra in the mannan ﬁ ngerprint region 1200 – 900 cm − 1 ( Fig . 1C ) . The change of the double band at 990 – 970 cm − 1 can be explained by the change of the hydrogen bonding pattern around the glycosidic bond [ 35 ] . As the IR absorption of the protein and sugar bands are not overlapping ( Fig . 1A ) , and IR absorption linearly follows the Lambert - Beer law over a highly dynamic range of concentrations [ 36 ] , we used this technique for ac - curate quanti ﬁ cation of sugar and protein moieties within the neogly - coconjugates . As a reference we constructed standard curves with known amounts of Bet v 1 and mannan . Importantly , the mannan moiety in the Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates retained its biological activity as con ﬁ rmed by the speci ﬁ c recognition by the mannose binding lectin ConA . The addition of 25 mM ConA agonist , methyl α - D mannopyranoside competitively inhibited this in - teraction ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . As previously shown for papain [ 18 ] , Bet - MN showed 10 6 times less capacity to induce IgE mediated basophil degranulation in relation to Bet v 1 ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) , an im - portant prerequisite for epicutaneous immunotherapy of allergies . 3 . 2 . Mannan neoglycoconjugates facilitate cellular uptake and activation Next we compared the uptake of pHrodo labeled Bet v 1 and Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates by BMDCs and investigated the subsequent acti - vation of the cells ( Fig . 2 ) . Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates were inter - nalized much more e ﬃ ciently than Bet v 1 ( Fig . 2A ) suggesting an active transport mechanism . In order to con ﬁ rm this hypothesis , we assessed the uptake of Bet - MN and Bet v 1 in the presence of inhibitors of the major endocytic pathways ( Fig . 2B ) . Uptake of soluble Bet v 1 was only inhibited by Amiloride , suggesting internalization by pino - cytosis . As expected , Bet - MN was internalized by Clathrin - dependent receptor mediated endocytosis since it was blocked by the addition of Chlorpromazine , which inhibits the assembly of Clathrin - coated pits . The mechanism proved to be mannan - speci ﬁ c , as addition of mannan competitively inhibited the internalization of Bet - MN . Furthermore , high doses of the Caveolae inhibitor Filipin showed to have a negative e ﬀ ect on uptake , suggesting either the presence of an alternative Ca - veolae - dependent uptake mechanism or a disruption of lipid rafts [ 28 ] , where CLRs are known to form microdomains [ 37 , 38 ] . The con - centrations of the inhibitors used were chosen as previously reported [ 39 ] [ 40 ] , and their e ﬀ ect on BMDC viability was tested by using the Viability Dye eFluor ® 780 ( eBioscience ) reproducing the experimental conditions previously described . Under these conditions , no decrease in cell viability was observed ( data not shown ) . 3 . 3 . Application of Bet - MN to laser - microporated human skin preferentially targets CD14 + skin resident DCs and Langerhans cells We and others have previously shown that mannan neoglyco - conjugates are e ﬃ ciently targeted to murine CD11b + CD8 − DCs in vivo [ 18 ] and that human monocyte derived DCs internalize mannan - con - jugated allergoids via mannose receptors in vitro [ 17 ] . However , little is known about APC targeting via mannan - recognizing receptors in human skin . Therefore , we tested the targeting capacity of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates when applied intradermally ( ID ) or via epicuta - neous immunization ( ECi ) through laser microporation in an ex vivo human skin model ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . To track the antigen internalization by skin DCs , labeled Bet v 1 or Bet - MN were distributed on top of the laser - microporated area and were allowed to penetrate into the skin until dry . Then , 10 skin biopsies of 0 . 6 cm 2 were collected and transferred into 1 mL cell culture medium and cultured for 48 h . Skin cellular crawl - outs were analyzed by ﬂ ow cytometry and cell populations were determined according to the ex - pression of surface molecules HLA - DR , CD14 , CD1a , CD141 and EpCAM ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) . According to this , six populations of HLA - DR high skin - resident APCs were de ﬁ ned : CD14 + , CD14 + CD1a + , CD141 + DCs , CD1a − CD14 − ( from now on called DN ) , CD1a + , and Langerhans cells were gated as CD1a high EpCAM + . The migratory DCs consisted mainly of CD1a + dermal DCs ( dDCs ) comprising 50 % of the total HLA - DR + cells , followed by CD14 + cells ( sum of CD14 + and CD14 + CD1a + ) , DN , and CD141 + cells ( Supplementary Fig . 8 ) . Langerhans cells were found at very low rates ( 1 – 2 % of total HLA - DR + population ) . Regardless of the route of immunization , Bet - MN neoglycoconju - gates showed increased uptake by virtually all populations of skin - re - sident DCs compared to Bet v 1 ( Fig . 3 ) . The uptake was more evident in DC populations expressing the CD14 surface marker ( i . e . CD14 + DCs and CD14 + CD1a + DCs ) and LCs . Furthermore , a trend towards upre - gulation of the activation marker CD83 was observed in CD14 + DCs following Bet - MN immunization ( Supplementary Fig . 9 ) . 3 . 4 . Epicutaneous immunization with Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates elicits rapid and potent antibody responses that e ﬃ ciently block IgE reactivity In order to test the immunogenicity of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates , we immunized mice epicutaneously via laser microporated skin or by intradermal needle injections . Fourteen days later , mice were boosted using the same antigens and routes and the antibody response was measured at day 28 . In a separate experiment , another booster was applied at day 28 and antibody responses were measured at day 35 . Interestingly , Bet - MN was highly immunogenic when applied via ECi while a 10 - fold weaker and delayed immunogenicity was elicited by ID . No measurable antibody response was generated against unconjugated Bet v 1 , regardless the route ( Fig . 4 ) . It has been suggested that mannan can be used as adjuvant due to its ability to trigger maturation of APCs via CLR and TLR ligation [ 41 ] . We evaluated the adjuvant e ﬀ ect of mannan in the ECi setting , by im - munizing a group of mice with Bet v 1 mixed with free mannan . As shown in Supplementary Fig . 10 , no immune response was induced suggesting that a physical link between Bet v 1 and mannan is needed for Bet - MN immunogenicity . It is now established that one of the mechanisms of allergen speci ﬁ c immunotherapy is the induction of IgE - blocking antibodies [ 42 ] . These are mainly high a ﬃ nity IgG antibodies directed against the allergens that prevent the binding of IgE either by directly competing for the same epitope or by increasing the steric hindrances [ 43 ] . We therefore measured the ability of the Bet - MN induced antibodies to inhibit IgE binding . Sera from mice immunized with Bet - MN e ﬃ ciently inhibited the Bet v 1 induced degranulation of RBL cells , loaded with sera from Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 91 Fig . 2 . Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates induce increased antigen uptake by mannan - speci ﬁ c receptors and promote DC activation . ( A ) BMDCs were incubated with 30 μ g / mL ﬂ uorescently labeled Bet v 1 or Bet - MN . ( B ) Expression of CD86 and ( C ) MHC - II on CD11c gated cells was analyzed by ﬂ ow cytometry . * * P - value < 0 . 01 , * P - value < 0 . 05 Student ' s t - test . ( D ) Bet - MN uptake is receptor mediated and mannose - dependent . BMDCs were pre - incubated 2 h with the endocytosis inhibitors , Cytochalasin B ( phagocytosis ) , Amiloride ( pinocytosis ) , Chlorpromazine ( Clathrin mediated endocytosis ) , and Filipin ( Caveolae dependent endocytosis ) at the indicated concentrations . Mannan was used as a competitive inhibitor of mannan - recognizing receptors and was added together with the antigens . Cellular uptake of pHrodo labeled Bet v 1 and Bet - MN was measured 4 h later by ﬂ ow cytometry . Data is presented as percentage of total uptake without inhibitors . Dashed line indicates 50 % of control uptake . Fig . 3 . Laser microporation of Bet - MN targets CD14 + , CD14 + CD1a + and DN dendritic cell populations as well as Langerhans cells in human skin explants . Abdominal skin explants ( n = 4 ) were treated with 100 μ g of ﬂ uorescently labeled Bet v 1 or Bet - MN by epicutaneous immunization ( ECi ) via laser microporation or intradermal injections ( ID ) . As a negative control , laser - microporated skin was treated with PBS ( sham ) . 10 biopsies of 0 . 6 cm 2 were collected and cultured for 48 h . Cellular crawl - outs were analyzed by ﬂ ow cytometry and APC populations were determined based on the expression of surface markers CD14 , CD1a , CD141 , and EpCAM . Di ﬀ erences between groups were analyzed using repeated measures one way ANOVA and Tukey ' s post - hoc test * * * P - value < 0 . 001 , * * P - value < 0 . 01 , * P - value < 0 . 05 , ns not signi ﬁ cant . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 92 Bet v 1 allergic patients ( Fig . 4E and F ) . In agreement with the stronger immunogenicity observed , epicutaneous immunization showed a stronger inhibitory capacity than intradermal immunization . Interest - ingly , intradermal immunization with Bet v 1 elicited low levels of IgE blocking although no IgG1 or IgG2a could be measured ( at a serum dilution of 1 : 100 ) . No blocking e ﬀ ect was observed when Bet v 1 was immunized via the epicutaneous route . In order to investigate whether the di ﬀ erences in immunogenicity observed for Bet - MN glycoconjugates upon ECi or ID re ﬂ ect a general phenomenon , another antigen , the major grass pollen allergen Phl p 5 , was used for the generation of neoglycoconjugates ( Phl - MN ) using the same procedure as described above . We immunized mice with Bet - MN , Bet v 1 , Phl p 5 , or Phl - MN via laser - microporated skin or intradermally twice in a 14 days interval and measured the humoral immune response at day 28 . As seen in previous experiments , after two immunizations Bet v 1 only elicited a detectable humoral immune response when the an - tigen was coupled to mannan and immunized epicutaneously via laser micropores ( Fig . 5A ) . As Phl p 5 is a very strong immunogen , it also elicited antibody responses when applied intradermally without conjugation . ECi boosted the antibody responses against the free pro - tein , indicating an adjuvant e ﬀ ect of the laser microporation process itself . Consistent with the data observed for Bet v 1 , mannan glyco - conjugation to Phl p 5 had a synergistic e ﬀ ect on the antibody responses only when applied via laser microporation ( Fig . 5B ) . Moreover , epicu - taneous immunization with Bet - MN or Phl - MN induced high levels of IL - 17 and IL - 22 and , to a lesser extent , Interferon γ and IL - 2 . Interest - ingly , typical TH2 cytokines like IL - 4 , IL - 5 and IL - 13 were also present . Immunizations with native allergens only induced the TH2 cytokines IL - 5 and IL - 13 independent of the route of immunization . Similarly , ID immunization with Bet - MN and Phl - MN resulted in IL - 5 and IL - 13 ( Fig . 5 ) . Summing up , the natural TH2 immune response against al - lergens is shifted to TH1 / TH17 with the combination of ECi and mannan coupling . 3 . 5 . Bet - MN is e ﬃ ciently retained in skin and secondary lymphoid organs while Bet v 1 is rapidly eliminated Since keratinocytes have been shown to express a mannose - binding Fig . 4 . Antibody responses after immunization with Bet v 1 or Bet - MN via epicutaneous immunization ( ECi ) using laser microporation or intradermal injection ( ID ) . Balb / c mice ( n = 5 ) were immunized at days 0 and 14 . Bet v 1 - speci ﬁ c serum IgG1 ( A ) and IgG2a ( C ) responses were measured at day 28 by a luminometric ELISA . Serum dilutions were 1 : 10 , 000 for IgG1 and 1 : 100 for IgG2a . In a separate ex - periment , another booster was applied at day 28 and anti - body responses were measured at day 35 ( B , D ) . Data are shown as relative luminescence units ( RLU ) of a lumino - metric ELISA . Blocking activity was assessed as the capacity to inhibit Bet v 1 mediated degranulation of RBL cells loaded with sera from allergic patients ( n = 5 ) . Representative IgE blocking assay is shown in ( E ) . IgE - blocking capacity of Bet v 1 immune sera ( F ) at 10 ng dose was analyzed by one way ANOVA followed by Tukey ' s post hoc test . * * * P - value < 0 . 001 , * * P - value < 0 . 01 , * P - value < 0 . 05 , ns not signi ﬁ cant . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 93 receptor [ 44 ] , we hypothesized that skin vaccination with Bet - MN would result in a controlled release from the vaccination site . Using a Franz static di ﬀ usion cell , we applied Cy5 . 5 - labeled Bet v 1 or Bet - MN to full thickness ( 2 – 3 mm ) porcine skin either ID or via ECi and mea - sured the transmigration of the labeled antigen into the receptor chamber . As expected , ID injected Bet v 1 was able to penetrate through the skin , while Bet - MN stayed at the injection site and was only slowly released into the lower chamber ( Supplementary Fig . 11 ) . At the same concentration , permeation of both Bet v 1 and Bet - MN was below the detection limit after ECi . Upon immunization , the antigen is transported to the secondary lymphatic organs ( SLOs ) either as a soluble component of the lymph or by patrolling APCs , mainly DCs , which internalize antigen in the per - iphery and transport it to the LNs . Since the transport of antigen to the SLOs is a fundamental part of immunity , we measured the distribution kinetics of Bet v 1 and Bet - MN between the skin ( site of immunization ) , lymphoid ( a ﬀ erent skin draining lymph nodes and spleen ) and non - lymphoid ( liver + kidneys ) compartments ( Fig . 6 ) . Mice were im - munized with Cy5 . 5 labeled Bet v 1 and Bet - MN either by the epicutaneous or intradermal route . At di ﬀ erent time points , mice were euthanized and the organs were harvested , homogenized , and the amount of antigen was quanti ﬁ ed . Quanti ﬁ cation of antigen remaining at the site of immunization revealed that the amount of antigen delivered into the skin by ECi is about 50 times lower compared to ID . Interestingly , few hours after immunization unconjugated Bet v 1 was found in the non - lymphoid compartment , mainly in the kidneys . Bet - MN ID showed a more sus - tained release from the skin and accumulation in the lymphoid com - partment compared to Bet v 1 . The lower bioavailability of Bet v 1 compared to Bet - MN in lymphoid organs may explain the lack of im - munogenicity observed . Surprisingly , delivery of Bet - MN via epicuta - neous route was barely detected in the lymphoid compartment , which is in striking contrast to the strong immunogenicity observed pre - viously . Fig . 5 . Epicutaneous immunization via laser micropores with allergen - mannan neoglycoconjugates boosts the antibody responses and shifts the immune response towards TH1 / TH17 . Balb / c mice were immunized twice every 14 days epicutaneously via laser - microporated skin ( ECi ) or intradermally ( ID ) . On day 28 , animals were euthanized and speci ﬁ c antibody titers were measured and displayed as relative luminescence units ( RLU ) ( A and B ) . Splenocytes from treated mice were re - stimulated in vitro with the corresponding allergen and secreted cytokines ( shown as pg / mL ) were quanti ﬁ ed . Fig . 6 . Mannan conjugation reduces release of antigen into non - lymphoid compartments and favors accumulation in lymphoid tissues . Mice ( n = 3 ) were immunized intradermally ( ID ) or epicutaneously ( ECi ) with either Bet v1 or Bet - MN , and the amount of antigen in skin , lymphoid and non - lymphoid compartments was quantitated after 0 , 5 , 6 , 24 , and 48 h . Data are shown as total amount of antigen in the respective compartments in pg . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 94 3 . 6 . CD11b + dDCs , but not Langerin + DCs are responsible for inducing potent humoral immunity against mannan neoglycoconjugates In human skin , Bet - MN was e ﬃ ciently internalized by CD14 + cells and Langerhans cells independently of the route of administration . However , in mice only the antigen applied epicutaneously via laser micropores resulted in strong antibody responses . In order to get insight into this puzzling observation , we immunized Bet - MN via laser micro - poration or intradermally in Balb / c - langDTR mice in which all Langerin + DCs ( Langerhans and dermal Langerin + DCs ) were depleted prior to the immunization . Surprisingly , the ablation of all Langerin + DCs in the skin resulted in a boost of immunogenicity against Bet - MN and this e ﬀ ect was more pronounced after ID immunization ( Fig . 7 ) . This data suggests a regulatory rather than immune potentiating func - tion of Langerin + DCs in Bet - MN immunity . Together with our previous data that identi ﬁ ed CD11b + DCs as the major antigen - carrying DC population in mice after ECi [ 11 ] we suggest that CD11b + dDCs , but not Langerin + DCs are responsible for inducing potent humoral im - munity against mannan neoglycoconjugates after ECi . 3 . 7 . Laser microporation induces a proin ﬂ ammatory cytokine / chemokine milieu in the skin Recently , it has been shown that preconditioning the skin with a short laser treatment prior to in ﬂ uenza vaccination results in potent humoral and cellular immune responses [ 45 ] . The latter is due to local secretion of in ﬂ ammatory cytokines and chemokines by skin resident cells . Taking that into account , we hypothesized that skin ablation with the fractional laser treatment would induce a local proin ﬂ ammatory milieu responsible for the strong - route e ﬀ ect observed . The local cy - tokine / chemokine milieu induced solely by laser microporation ( without antigen application ) was measured after 6 , 24 and 48 h post treatment . The concentration of proin ﬂ ammatory cytokines ( TNF - α , IL - 6 ) and chemokines ( CCL2 , CCL3 , CCL7 , CCL - 12 [ not shown ] , CXCL - 10 , and TSLP ) were increased in response to laser treatment , whereas IL12p70 was not altered . Other cytokines / chemokines measured ( IL - 2 , IL - 4 , IL - 5 , IL - 10 , IL - 13 , IL - 17A , IL - 21 , IL - 22 , IFN - γ , CCL - 20 , HSP - 70 , TMEM173 / STING ) were not signi ﬁ cantly elevated compared to naïve controls ( data not shown ) . From the kinetics , we could distinguish two waves of distinct cytokines / chemokines . IL - 6 , CCL2 and CCL7 are se - creted rapidly and decline over time while TNF - α , TSLP , CXCL - 10 and CCL - 3 peak at 24 h ( Fig . 8 ) . This cytokine kinetics suggests a wound healing - like process where monocytes / macrophages are recruited to the site of injury , which is resolved within three days after the laser treatment ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) with the concomitant decrease in in ﬂ ammatory mediators . The addition of mannan had no measurable additive e ﬀ ect in the skin cytokine / chemokine milieu induced by the laser ( data not shown ) . However , we observed that the in ﬂ ammatory CD11b + in ﬁ ltrate at the site of immunization lasted longer when mannan neoglycoconjugates were administered via laser micropores ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . 4 . Discussion In this work we explored the combination of epicutaneous im - munization via laser microporation with dendritic cell targeting using mannan neoglycoconjugates , with the aim to increase e ﬃ cacy and safety of allergy vaccines . The clinically relevant major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 was used as a model molecule . To conjugate Bet v 1 to mannan , we employed a protocol based on mild oxidation of mannan followed by conjugation via aminative reduction . Resulting Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates had an average size of about 10 nm hydrodynamic radius ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . A ﬁ ne control of the oxidation degree was achieved by kinetic and stoichiometric control of the oxidation reaction , thus preventing extensive destruction of mannose epitopes that may result in an impaired C - type lectin receptor recognition [ 18 ] and immunogenicity [ 17 ] . Similarly , aminative reduction was per - formed under mild conditions with an excess of oxidized mannan to ensure optimal coupling . This strategy resulted in a high coupling yield while preserving mannan and Bet v 1 structures as demonstrated by FTIR ( Fig . 1 ) , ConA binding ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) and mannan spe - ci ﬁ c cellular uptake ( Fig . 2 ) . Since the presence of IgE - mediated systemic or local side e ﬀ ects at the site of immunization is a main concern for allergy vaccines [ 6 , 46 ] , we tested the capacity of Bet - MN to trigger IgE dependent degranula - tion . Bet - MN was about six orders of magnitude less allergenic than the soluble Bet v 1 as revealed by RBL degranulation assay ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . The mannan - dependent inhibition of IgE binding to Bet v 1 is likely due to steric hindrance rather than direct modi ﬁ cation of the binding site , since no lysine is directly involved in IgE binding [ 47 , 48 ] . The low allergenicity of Bet - MN neoglycoconjugates makes them ideal “ hypoallergenic ” candidates for safe allergy vaccines as they cannot trigger IgE - dependent immediate responses . The conjugation conditions optimized for birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 also rendered the grass pollen allergen Phl p 5 hypoallergenic . Similarly , we have previously shown that hypoallergenic variants of the model allergen papain can be generated by mannan coupling [ 18 ] thus demonstrating the broad ap - plicability of this strategy to generate hypoallergenic vaccines . DC targeting and maturation capacity of pHrodo labeled Bet - MN was studied in vitro using BMDCs . The results showed that Bet - MN boosted both uptake and activation compared to soluble Bet v 1 . The targeting capacity was conferred by the mannan moiety as free mannan could competitively inhibit the internalization of Bet - MN . Furthermore , the uptake mechanism depended on receptor mediated endocytosis Fig . 7 . Langerhans cells and Langerin + dDCs are dispensable for eliciting strong antibody responses via ECi and show an immunosuppressive phenotype in the intradermal setting . All Langerin + cells were conditionally ablated in Balb / c - langDTR mice ( n = 5 ) . Two immunizations of Bet v 1 or Bet - MN were applied in a 14 days interval . Bet v 1 - speci ﬁ c IgG , IgG1 , and IgG2a antibodies were measured at day 28 at serum dilutions of 1 : 1000 , 1 : 400 , and 1 : 100 , respectively . Data are shown as relative luminescence units ( RLU ) of a luminometric ELISA . DTR was applied every 3rd day to prevent repopulation of the skin by self - renewing Langerin + dermal DCs . Di ﬀ erences between groups were analyzed using repeated measures one way ANOVA and Tukey post - hoc test * * * P - value < 0 . 001 , ns not statistically signi ﬁ cant . . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 95 pointing to the involvement of endocytic CLRs [ 4 , 15 , 49 ] . Moreover , Bet - MN showed a strong activation of complement ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) which also can facilitate internalization via complement re - ceptors [ 50 , 51 ] , and antigen delivery to follicular DCs [ 52 ] . An in - creased uptake , together with upregulation of MHC - II and costimula - tory molecules , favors the immunogenicity of Bet - MN conjugates in vivo as compared to Bet v 1 . In human skin explants , mannan coupling boosted antigen uptake by all analyzed skin populations . Compared to the native allergen , Bet - MN was targeted more e ﬃ ciently to CD14 + dermal DCs and LCs ( Fig . 3 ) . CD14 + dermal DCs overexpress mannose receptor and have a high endocytic capacity that explains the preferential uptake of Bet - MN [ 53 ] . The involvement of LCs is in agreement with previous ﬁ ndings showing that ( i ) mannose residues are recognized by Langerin [ 54 ] , ( ii ) mannan can block internalization of viral and fungal antigens by LCs [ 55 , 56 ] , and ( iii ) FITC - mannan painted on mouse skin is e ﬃ ciently internalized by LCs [ 57 ] . There were no route - speci ﬁ c di ﬀ erences in the cellular uptake or DC targeting capacity of Bet - MN in human skin ex - plants . This result highlights the suitability of laser microporation for e ﬃ cient targeting of antigens to human skin DCs . Moreover , we ob - served a trend for the upregulation of the activation marker CD83 in CD14 + and CD14 + CD1a + DC populations after immunization with Bet - MN in skin explants ( Supplementary Fig . 9 ) . The relatively low increase of the DC activation marker relative to untreated skin may be explained by a pre - existing strong activation of the crawl - outs due to the extensive manipulation of the skin from the moment of the surgery . Under such conditions , also strong TLR agonists such as LPS , p ( I : C ) , or glucopyranosyl lipid A only induce modest upregulation of costimula - tory molecules [ 58 ] . In the mouse model , epicutaneous immunization of Bet - MN via laser micropores elicited strong antibody responses after only two im - munizations ( Fig . 4A , C ) . In contrast , soluble Bet v 1 was not im - munogenic in any of the conditions tested . This is in agreement with previous observations that in the absence of adjuvant , even four in - tradermal immunizations with soluble Bet v 1 are only poorly im - munogenic . One reason for the low immunogenicity of soluble Bet v 1 is its early degradation in the endolysosomal compartment of APCs leading to a reduced presentation of T cell epitopes [ 24 ] . Additionally , we were able to show that covalent linking between sugar and protein is needed to enhance the immunogenicity of Bet v 1 since the addition of free mannan has no e ﬀ ect on the immune response ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . In contrast , mannan coupling leads to increased antigen in - ternalization ( Fig . 2 ) and therefore a higher probability to reach MHC class II antigen loading compartments . Moreover , mannan coupling might prevent premature endosomal degradation of Bet v 1 by limiting the access of proteases due to steric hindrances as observed for other glycosylated antigens [ 59 ] . The T helper responses elicited by ECi with allergen - mannan con - jugates were TH1 / TH17 skewed , according to the fungal origin of the mannan [ 60 ] ( Fig . 5 ) . Interestingly , also higher levels of IL - 13 were found in the Bet - MN ECi groups . While traditionally considered a TH2 cytokine , IL - 13 has been recently shown to be frequently produced also by TH1 and TH17 cells [ 61 ] . In contrast , ECi with unconjugated Bet v 1 or intradermal immunizations with Bet v 1 or Bet - MN resulted in in - creased amounts of IL - 5 although no or only low - level antibody re - sponses were detected . The TH17 polarization observed with allergen - mannan neoglycoconjugates applied via laser microporated skin may turn out problematic when treating allergic diseases where a clear TH17 etiology has been established like atopic dermatitis [ 62 , 63 ] and certain types of asthma [ 64 , 65 ] . On the other hand , our own data show that induction of in ﬂ ammatory responses ( TH1 / TH17 ) against allergens is one of the common mechanisms of protection against grass pollen allergy in healthy individuals [ 66 ] . Moreover , a high degree of in - stability and plasticity of TH17 cells towards regulatory functions has been recently described [ 67 ] , supporting that this phenotype represents one possible mechanism of naturally acquired immunity against al - lergy . Mannans from other sources may also be employed to induce di ﬀ erent immunological outcomes . One possible candidate would be mannosylated lipoarabinomannan ( ManLAM ) from mycobacterium tu - berculosis , which has been shown to promote TH1 / Treg polarization [ 68 ] . Remarkably , we showed that the antibodies induced by Bet - MN immunization are able to block the IgE - dependent degranulation of basophils loaded with sera from Bet v 1 allergic patients ( Fig . 4E , F ) . This is due to the presence of IgG antibodies directed against the IgE epitopes of Bet v 1 , thus preventing the crosslinking of Fc ε receptors on basophils , eosinophils and mast cells , which are responsible for the immediate allergic symptoms . The induction of blocking antibodies is acknowledged as one of the main therapeutic mechanisms of allergy vaccines [ 42 ] , thus highlighting the suitability of Bet - MN for allergy Fig . 8 . Immune potentiating cytokine / chemokine milieu in mouse skin 6 , 24 , and 48 h following laser treatment . Balb / c mice ( n = 3 ) were laser microporated with the ablative laser system with the settings used previously for immunizations . Skin samples were excised at the indicated time points , homogenized in PBS and analyzed for cytokine / chemokine content . Samples from naïve mice served as base line controls ( dashed line ) . * * * P - value < 0 . 001 , * * P - value < 0 . 01 , * P - value < 0 . 05 Student ' s t - test . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 96 treatment . There was a clear route e ﬀ ect on the immunogenicity of mannan neoglycoconjugates . Intradermal immunization resulted in poor im - mune responses while ECi elicited strong antibody responses ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . This dichotomy is puzzling since there were no detectable route - related di ﬀ erences in the antigen uptake or APC targeting by Bet - MN in human skin explants ( Fig . 3 ) . Hence , we further dissected the con - tribution of key players involved in the immunity to skin vaccination ; e . g . the nature of the antigen , CLR targeting , amount of antigen reaching SLOs , local danger signals from laser - induced skin damage , and attraction of immune cells . As previously mentioned , recombinant Bet v 1 is inherently a poor antigen without adjuvantation . Therefore , we additionally used the highly immunogenic allergen Phl p 5 to vac - cinate mice intradermally or via ECi . As expected , intradermal im - munization of Phl p 5 elicited good antibody titers , however ECi im - proved the immune response against the wild - type allergen , and mannan coupling boosted the immune response even further , but only when applied via laser micropores , thus con ﬁ rming the results obtained with the weak antigen Bet v 1 ( Fig . 5 ) . In human skin explants mannan coupling enhanced antigen uptake by all skin resident APCs , particularly CD14 + cells and LCs , in - dependently of the route of administration ( Fig . 3 ) . Therefore , we asked whether the improvement in antibody titers is due to additional factors derived from the laser treatment as suggested by Wang et al . [ 45 ] . Control experiments revealed that laser microporation induced a strong proin ﬂ ammatory cytokine / chemokine milieu at the site of antigen ap - plication , including TNF - α , IL - 6 , CCL2 , CCL3 , CCL7 , CXCL - 10 , and TSLP ( Fig . 8 ) . This in ﬂ ammatory environment promotes the maturation and migration of APCs resulting in potent immune responses . Thus , danger associated molecular patterns induced by the microporation process itself may synergize with mannan induced immune modulation to boost immunity . The synergism of laser - induced damage and mannan coupling in boosting the antibody responses becomes more evident when analyzing the amount of antigen e ﬀ ectively reaching the SLOs . Intradermal im - munization of Bet - MN resulted in two orders of magnitude higher amount of antigen in the SLOs compared to epicutaneous immunization ( Fig . 6 ) . It is well established that immune responses against foreign antigens are initiated in the SLOs and that the mode of antigen trans - port into skin draining lymph nodes ( SDLN ) impacts the subsequent immune response [ 69 – 71 ] . In this context , ECi using Bet - MN generates a proin ﬂ ammatory environment ( Fig . 8 and Supplementary Fig . 12 ) and a controlled release of antigen at the site of immunization ( Fig . 6 and Supplementary Fig . 11 ) that favor active transport of the Bet - MN to the SLOs by activated in ﬂ ammatory cells . On the other hand , intradermal injection lacks the in ﬂ ammatory component , thus promoting a passive transport via the lymph . Summing up , ECi using laser microporation disrupts the upper layers of the skin , and the antigen is deposited on top of the pores . Due to the laser - induced skin damage , in ﬂ ammatory cells , including DCs , are activated and recruited to the site of immunization where they encounter the antigen and become activated . Upon activation , cells migrate to the SLOs and enter the T cell areas , where the immune re - sponse is initiated . Conversely , intradermal immunization delivers the antigen into deeper layers of the skin and therefore most of the antigen is passively drained to the SLOs . High molecular weight antigens such as Bet - MN reaching the lymph nodes via a ﬀ erent lymphatics are di - verted to the subcapsular sinus ( SCS ) of SDLNs . Here , antigens are captured by SCS macrophages and SCS - lining DCs , which transport them to the interfollicular regions and T cell areas . This transport is further enhanced by complement opsonization [ 72 ] , which we also demonstrated for Bet - MN ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . As shown for Bet - MN ID , this process is highly e ﬃ cient and leads to the accumulation of antigen in the lymph nodes . However , since there is no additional adjuvant present other than mannan , DCs activation in the LNs after ID injection may be suboptimal , leading to poor T cell activation and weak immune responses [ 71 ] . Since mannan coupling e ﬃ ciently targeted CD14 + dDCs and LCs ( Fig . 3 ) , we further investigated the role of LCs and Langerin + dDCs in the immune response after ECi or ID of Bet - MN . Surprisingly , condi - tional ablation of all Langerin + DCs resulted in enhanced im - munogenicity of Bet - MN , both after ECi and ID injection ( Fig . 7 ) . These data suggest that in our experimental system , Langerin + DCs not only are dispensable for mounting e ﬀ ective humoral immune responses against Bet - MN , but rather play a suppressive role . While both Lan - gerhans cells and Langerin + dDCs have been shown to be inducers of regulatory T cell responses under steady state conditions [ 73 ] , the si - tuation under in ﬂ ammatory conditions is less clear [ 74 ] . In line with our observations , depletion of Langerhans cells ( but not Langerin + dermal DCs ) aggravated skin in ﬂ ammation in a psoriasis mouse model [ 75 ] . Similarly , Treg generation was severely impaired in a mouse model of cutaneous Leishmaniasis in absence of Langerhans cells [ 76 ] . This indicates that laser microporation of the skin obviously generates an in ﬂ ammatory environment that promotes strong immune responses mainly mediated by CD11c + CD11b + dDCs [ 11 ] . In humans , skin CD14 + DCs which preferentially uptake Bet - MN , may have a similar role . Based on our observations , we propose skin vaccination via laser microporation with allergen neoglycoconjugates as an e ﬃ cient way to elicit strong anti - allergic immune responses . The main advantages of the glycoconjugation are the hypoallergenic nature of the resulting neoglycoconjugates , the superior targeting to APCs via CLRs and the possibility to bias the immune response depending on the nature of the polysaccharide used . Skin barrier disruption via laser micropores allows for e ﬃ cient delivery of the vaccine to skin - resident DCs while creating a proin ﬂ ammatory milieu that ensures the e ﬃ cient recruitment and maturation of APCs . In conclusion , our work shows that mannan conjugation is an e ﬃ - cient mechanism to generate safer and highly immunogenic allergy vaccines . In addition , we showed that a potent vaccine results from the combination of targeting the antigen to specialized DC populations and optimal activation of these DCs rather than increased delivery to lym - phoid organs . Finally , mannan conjugation combined with epicuta - neous immunization induces potent IgE - blocking antibodies and non - TH2 responses against Bet v 1 , both mechanisms accounting for the therapeutic e ﬀ ect of allergy vaccines . Therefore , application of neo - glycoconjugates via laser microporation represents a promising plat - form of highly e ﬃ cient , safe , and painless vaccines for allergy treat - ment . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Allergy - Cancer - BioNano Research Centre of the University of Salzburg , the PhD program Immunity in Cancer and Allergy , funded by the Austrian Science Fund ( FWF , grant W 1213 , JT ) , the European Research Council ( ERCAdvanced 339977 ) , the Anniversary Fund of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank ( OeNB , grant 15941 , DS ) and a Trans4tech funding of the Government of the region of Salzburg ( grant 20102 - P1509072 - T4T01 - 2015 , DS ) . The au - thors would like to acknowledge Prof . Claus - Michael Lehr and Ankit Mittal from the Helmholtz - Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarbrücken for preliminary characterization of mannan glycoconju - gates and advice in nanoparticle characterization . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2017 . 09 . 020 . References [ 1 ] G . Senti , S . von Moos , T . M . Kundig , Epicutaneous allergen administration : is this Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 97 the future of allergen - speci ﬁ c immunotherapy ? Allergy 66 ( 2011 ) 798 – 809 . [ 2 ] M . Pasparakis , I . Haase , F . O . Nestle , Mechanisms regulating skin immunity and in ﬂ ammation , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 14 ( 2014 ) 289 – 301 . [ 3 ] C . M . Fehres , J . J . Garcia - Vallejo , W . W . Unger , Y . van Kooyk , Skin - resident antigen - presenting cells : instruction manual for vaccine development , Front . Immunol . 4 ( 2013 ) 157 . [ 4 ] T . B . Geijtenbeek , S . I . Gringhuis , Signalling through C - type lectin receptors : shaping immune responses , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 9 ( 2009 ) 465 – 479 . [ 5 ] R . Weiss , S . Scheiblhofer , Y . Machado , J . Thalhamer , New approaches to transcu - taneous immunotherapy : targeting dendritic cells with novel allergen conjugates , Curr . Opin . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 13 ( 2013 ) 669 – 676 . [ 6 ] S . von Moos , P . Johansen , F . Tay , N . Graf , T . M . Kundig , G . Senti , Comparing safety of abrasion and tape - stripping as skin preparation in allergen - speci ﬁ c epicutaneous immunotherapy , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 134 ( 2014 ) 965 – 967 ( e964 ) . [ 7 ] S . M . Bal , Z . Ding , E . van Riet , W . Jiskoot , J . A . Bouwstra , Advances in transcuta - neous vaccine delivery : do all ways lead to Rome ? J . Control . Release 148 ( 2010 ) 266 – 282 . [ 8 ] S . Scheiblhofer , J . Thalhamer , R . Weiss , Laser microporation of the skin : prospects for painless application of protective and therapeutic vaccines , Expert Opin . Drug Deliv . 10 ( 2013 ) 761 – 773 . [ 9 ] D . Bach , R . Weiss , M . Hessenberger , S . Kitzmueller , E . E . Weinberger , W . D . Krautgartner , C . Hauser - Kronberger , C . Boehler , J . Thalhamer , S . Scheiblhofer , Transcutaneous immunotherapy via laser - generated micropores e ﬃ ciently alleviates allergic asthma in Phl p 5 - sensitized mice , Allergy 67 ( 2012 ) 1365 – 1374 . [ 10 ] M . Hessenberger , R . Weiss , E . E . Weinberger , C . Boehler , J . Thalhamer , S . Scheiblhofer , Transcutaneous delivery of CpG - adjuvanted allergen via laser - generated micropores , Vaccine 31 ( 2013 ) 3427 – 3434 . [ 11 ] R . Weiss , M . Hessenberger , S . Kitzmuller , D . Bach , E . E . Weinberger , W . D . Krautgartner , C . Hauser - Kronberger , B . Malissen , C . Boehler , Y . N . Kalia , J . Thalhamer , S . Scheiblhofer , Transcutaneous vaccination via laser microporation , J . Control . Release 162 ( 2012 ) 391 – 399 . [ 12 ] T . Ball , W . R . Sperr , P . Valent , J . Lidholm , S . Spitzauer , C . Ebner , D . Kraft , R . Valenta , Induction of antibody responses to new B cell epitopes indicates vac - cination character of allergen immunotherapy , Eur . J . Immunol . 29 ( 1999 ) 2026 – 2036 . [ 13 ] R . Moverare , L . Elfman , E . Vesterinen , T . Metso , T . Haahtela , Development of new IgE speci ﬁ cities to allergenic components in birch pollen extract during speci ﬁ c immunotherapy studied with immunoblotting and Pharmacia CAP System , Allergy 57 ( 2002 ) 423 – 430 . [ 14 ] M . N . Kumar , C . Zhou , M . X . Wu , Laser - facilitated epicutaneous immunotherapy to IgE - mediated allergy , J . Control . Release 235 ( 2016 ) 82 – 90 . [ 15 ] C . G . Figdor , Y . van Kooyk , G . J . Adema , C - type lectin receptors on dendritic cells and Langerhans cells , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 2 ( 2002 ) 77 – 84 . [ 16 ] S . Schulke , S . Vieths , Dendritic cell targeting with C - type lectins for improvement of allergen immunotherapy , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 138 ( 2016 ) 568 – 570 . [ 17 ] S . Sirvent , I . Soria , C . Cirauqui , B . Cases , A . I . Manzano , C . M . Diez - Rivero , P . A . Reche , J . Lopez - Relano , E . Martinez - Naves , F . J . Canada , J . Jimenez - Barbero , J . Subiza , M . Casanovas , E . Fernandez - Caldas , J . L . Subiza , O . Palomares , Novel vaccines targeting dendritic cells by coupling allergoids to nonoxidized mannan enhance allergen uptake and induce functional regulatory T cells through pro - grammed death ligand 1 , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 138 ( 2016 ) 558 – 567 ( e511 ) . [ 18 ] E . E . Weinberger , M . Himly , J . Myschik , M . Hauser , F . Altmann , A . Isakovic , S . Scheiblhofer , J . Thalhamer , R . Weiss , Generation of hypoallergenic neoglyco - conjugates for dendritic cell targeted vaccination : a novel tool for speci ﬁ c im - munotherapy , J . Control . Release 165 ( 2013 ) 101 – 109 . [ 19 ] G . Senti , S . von Moos , F . Tay , N . Graf , P . Johansen , T . M . Kundig , Determinants of e ﬃ cacy and safety in epicutaneous allergen immunotherapy : summary of three clinical trials , Allergy 70 ( 2015 ) 707 – 710 . [ 20 ] K . Ho ﬀ mann - Sommergruber , M . Susani , F . Ferreira , P . Jertschin , H . Ahorn , R . Steiner , D . Kraft , O . Scheiner , H . Breiteneder , High - level expression and pur - i ﬁ cation of the major birch pollen allergen , Bet v 1 , Protein Expr . Purif . 9 ( 1997 ) 33 – 39 . [ 21 ] S . Vrtala , M . Susani , W . R . Sperr , P . Valent , S . La ﬀ er , C . Dolecek , D . Kraft , R . Valenta , Immunologic characterization ofpuri ﬁ ed recombinant timothy grass pollen ( Phleum pratense ) allergens ( Phl p 1 , Phl p2 , Phl p 5 ) , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 97 ( 1996 ) 781 – 787 . [ 22 ] D . Mislovicova , J . Masarova , P . Gemeiner , Study of interaction of mannan - BSA neoglycoconjugates with Concanavalin A , Artif . Cells Blood Substit . Immobil . Biotechnol . 29 ( 2001 ) 335 – 345 . [ 23 ] A . Laurentin , C . A . Edwards , A microtiter modi ﬁ cation of the anthrone - sulfuric acid colorimetric assay for glucose - based carbohydrates , Anal . Biochem . 315 ( 2003 ) 143 – 145 . [ 24 ] Y . Machado , R . Freier , S . Scheiblhofer , T . Thalhamer , M . Mayr , P . Briza , S . Grutsch , L . Ahammer , J . E . Fuchs , H . G . Wallnoefer , A . Isakovic , V . Kohlbauer , A . Hinterholzer , M . Steiner , M . Danzer , J . Horejs - Hoeck , F . Ferreira , K . R . Liedl , M . Tollinger , P . Lackner , C . M . Johnson , H . Brandstetter , J . Thalhamer , R . Weiss , Fold stability during endolysosomal acidi ﬁ cation is a key factor for allergenicity and immunogenicity of the major birch pollen allergen , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 137 ( 2016 ) 1525 – 1534 . [ 25 ] S . E . Malawista , J . B . Gee , K . G . Bensch , Cytochalasin B reversibly inhibits phagocy - tosis : functional , metabolic , and ultrastructural e ﬀ ects in human blood leukocytes and rabbit alveolar macrophages , Yale J . Biol . Med . 44 ( 1971 ) 286 – 300 . [ 26 ] M . Koivusalo , C . Welch , H . Hayashi , C . C . Scott , M . Kim , T . Alexander , N . Touret , K . M . Hahn , S . Grinstein , Amiloride inhibits macropinocytosis by lowering sub - membranous pH and preventing Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling , J . Cell Biol . 188 ( 2010 ) 547 – 563 . [ 27 ] L . H . Wang , K . G . Rothberg , R . G . Anderson , Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit formation , J . Cell Biol . 123 ( 1993 ) 1107 – 1117 . [ 28 ] J . E . Schnitzer , P . Oh , E . Pinney , J . Allard , Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capil - lary permeability of select macromolecules , J . Cell Biol . 127 ( 1994 ) 1217 – 1232 . [ 29 ] P . A . Orlandi , P . H . Fishman , Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains , J . Cell Biol . 141 ( 1998 ) 905 – 915 . [ 30 ] S . I . Presolski , V . P . Hong , M . G . Finn , Copper - catalyzed azide - alkyne click chemistry for bioconjugation , Curr . Protoc . Chem . Biol . 3 ( 2011 ) 153 – 162 . [ 31 ] A . Kissenpfennig , S . Henri , B . Dubois , C . Laplace - Builhe , P . Perrin , N . Romani , C . H . Tripp , P . Douillard , L . Leserman , D . Kaiserlian , S . Saeland , J . Davoust , B . Malissen , Dynamics and function of Langerhans cells in vivo : dermal dendritic cells colonize lymph node areas distinct from slower migrating Langerhans cells , Immunity 22 ( 2005 ) 643 – 654 . [ 32 ] J . Schindelin , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , J . Y . Tinevez , D . J . White , V . Hartenstein , K . Eliceiri , P . Tomancak , A . Cardona , Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis , Nat . Methods 9 ( 2012 ) 676 – 682 . [ 33 ] M . Jackson , H . H . Mantsch , The use and misuse of Ftir spectroscopy in the de - termination of protein - structure , Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . 30 ( 1995 ) 95 – 120 . [ 34 ] A . Barth , C . Zscherp , What vibrations tell us about proteins , Q . Rev . Biophys . 35 ( 2002 ) 369 – 430 . [ 35 ] A . Zimkus , A . Misiunas , L . Chaustova , Spectroscopic study of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall structure , Chem . Aust . 22 ( 2011 ) 80 – 84 . [ 36 ] M . R . Plata , C . Koch , P . Wechselberger , C . Herwig , B . Lendl , Determination of car - bohydrates present in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using mid - infrared spectroscopy and partial least squares regression , Anal . Bioanal . Chem . 405 ( 2013 ) 8241 – 8250 . [ 37 ] A . Cambi , F . de Lange , N . M . van Maarseveen , M . Nijhuis , B . Joosten , E . M . van Dijk , B . I . de Bakker , J . A . Fransen , P . H . Bovee - Geurts , F . N . van Leeuwen , N . F . Van Hulst , C . G . Figdor , Microdomains of the C - type lectin DC - SIGN are portals for virus entry into dendritic cells , J . Cell Biol . 164 ( 2004 ) 145 – 155 . [ 38 ] A . Cambi , M . Koopman , C . G . Figdor , How C - type lectins detect pathogens , Cell . Microbiol . 7 ( 2005 ) 481 – 488 . [ 39 ] A . Diaz - Moscoso , D . Vercauteren , J . Rejman , J . M . Benito , C . Ortiz Mellet , S . C . De Smedt , J . M . Fernandez , Insights in cellular uptake mechanisms of pDNA - poly - cationic amphiphilic cyclodextrin nanoparticles ( CDplexes ) , J . Control . Release 143 ( 2010 ) 318 – 325 . [ 40 ] U . S . Huth , R . Schubert , R . Peschka - Suss , Investigating the uptake and intracellular fate of pH - sensitive liposomes by ﬂ ow cytometry and spectral bio - imaging , J . Control . Release 110 ( 2006 ) 490 – 504 . [ 41 ] N . Petrovsky , P . D . Cooper , Carbohydrate - based immune adjuvants , Expert Rev . Vaccines 10 ( 2011 ) 523 – 537 . [ 42 ] L . K . James , M . H . Shamji , S . M . Walker , D . R . Wilson , P . A . Wachholz , J . N . Francis , M . R . Jacobson , I . Kimber , S . J . Till , S . R . Durham , Long - term tolerance after allergen immunotherapy is accompanied by selective persistence of blocking antibodies , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 127 ( 2011 ) e501 – 505 509 – 516 . [ 43 ] T . S . Dodev , H . Bowen , M . H . Shamji , H . J . Bax , A . J . Beavil , J . M . McDonnell , S . R . Durham , B . J . Sutton , H . J . Gould , L . K . James , Inhibition of allergen - dependent IgE activity by antibodies of the same speci ﬁ city but di ﬀ erent class , Allergy 70 ( 2015 ) 720 – 724 . [ 44 ] G . Szolnoky , Z . Bata - Csorgo , A . S . Kenderessy , M . Kiss , A . Pivarcsi , Z . Novak , K . Nagy Newman , G . Michel , T . Ruzicka , L . Marodi , A . Dobozy , L . Kemeny , A mannose - binding receptor is expressed on human keratinocytes and mediates killing of Candida albicans , J . Invest . Dermatol . 117 ( 2001 ) 205 – 213 . [ 45 ] J . Wang , D . Shah , X . Chen , R . R . Anderson , M . X . Wu , A micro - sterile in ﬂ ammation array as an adjuvant for in ﬂ uenza vaccines , Nat . Commun . 5 ( 2014 ) 4447 . [ 46 ] A . J . Frew , Allergen immunotherapy , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 125 ( 2010 ) S306 – 313 . [ 47 ] M . D . Spangfort , O . Mirza , J . Holm , J . N . Larsen , H . Ipsen , H . Lowenstein , The structure of major birch pollen allergens — epitopes , reactivity and cross - reactivity , Allergy 54 ( Suppl . 50 ) ( 1999 ) 23 – 26 . [ 48 ] M . D . Spangfort , O . Mirza , H . Ipsen , R . J . Van Neerven , M . Gajhede , J . N . Larsen , Dominating IgE - binding epitope of Bet v 1 , the major allergen of birch pollen , characterized by X - ray crystallography and site - directed mutagenesis , J . Immunol . 171 ( 2003 ) 3084 – 3090 . [ 49 ] A . M . Kerrigan , G . D . Brown , C - type lectins and phagocytosis , Immunobiology 214 ( 2009 ) 562 – 575 . [ 50 ] Z . Bajtay , E . Csomor , N . Sandor , A . Erdei , Expression and role of Fc - and comple - ment - receptors on human dendritic cells , Immunol . Lett . 104 ( 2006 ) 46 – 52 . [ 51 ] M . van Lookeren Campagne , C . Wiesmann , E . J . Brown , Macrophage complement receptors and pathogen clearance , Cell . Microbiol . 9 ( 2007 ) 2095 – 2102 . [ 52 ] B . A . Heesters , R . C . Myers , M . C . Carroll , Follicular dendritic cells : dynamic antigen libraries , Nat . Rev . Immunol . 14 ( 2014 ) 495 – 504 . [ 53 ] C . M . Fehres , S . C . Bruijns , B . N . Sotthewes , H . Kalay , L . Scha ﬀ er , S . R . Head , T . D . de Gruijl , J . J . Garcia - Vallejo , Y . van Kooyk , Phenotypic and functional properties of human steady state CD14 + and CD1a + antigen presenting cells and epidermal Langerhans cells , PLoS One 10 ( 2015 ) e0143519 . [ 54 ] M . A . de Jong , L . E . Vriend , B . Theelen , M . E . Taylor , D . Fluitsma , T . Boekhout , T . B . Geijtenbeek , C - type lectin Langerin is a beta - glucan receptor on human Langerhans cellsthat recognizes opportunistic and pathogenic fungi , Mol . Immunol . 47 ( 2010 ) 1216 – 1225 . [ 55 ] L . de Witte , A . Nabatov , M . Pion , D . Fluitsma , M . A . de Jong , T . de Gruijl , V . Piguet , Y . van Kooyk , T . B . Geijtenbeek , Langerin is a natural barrier to HIV - 1 transmission Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 98 by Langerhans cells , Nat . Med . 13 ( 2007 ) 367 – 371 . [ 56 ] S . G . Turville , P . U . Cameron , A . Handley , G . Lin , S . Pohlmann , R . W . Doms , A . L . Cunningham , Diversity of receptors binding HIV on dendritic cell subsets , Nat . Immunol . 3 ( 2002 ) 975 – 983 . [ 57 ] R . E . Fruge , C . Krout , R . Lu , H . Matsushima , A . Takashima , Real - time visualization of macromolecule uptake by epidermal Langerhans cells in living animals , J . Invest . Dermatol . 132 ( 2012 ) 609 – 614 . [ 58 ] L . P . Schneider , A . J . Schoonderwoerd , M . Moutaftsi , R . F . Howard , S . G . Reed , E . C . de Jong , M . B . Teunissen , Intradermally administered TLR4 agonist GLA - SE enhances the capacity of human skin DCs to activate T cells and promotes emigration of Langerhans cells , Vaccine 30 ( 2012 ) 4216 – 4224 . [ 59 ] T . Ninkovic , F . G . Hanisch , O - glycosylated human MUC1 repeats are processed in vitro by immunoproteasomes , J . Immunol . 179 ( 2007 ) 2380 – 2388 . [ 60 ] H . Uryu , D . Hashimoto , K . Kato , E . Hayase , S . Matsuoka , R . Ogasawara , S . Takahashi , Y . Maeda , H . Iwasaki , T . Miyamoto , S . Saijo , Y . Iwakura , G . R . Hill , K . Akashi , T . Teshima , alpha - Mannan induces Th17 - mediated pulmonary graft - versus - host disease in mice , Blood 125 ( 2015 ) 3014 – 3023 . [ 61 ] E . Gallo , S . Katzman , A . V . Villarino , IL - 13 - producing Th1 and Th17 cells char - acterize adaptive responses to both self and foreign antigens , Eur . J . Immunol . 42 ( 2012 ) 2322 – 2328 . [ 62 ] P . Y . Ong , New insights in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis , Pediatr . Res . 75 ( 2014 ) 171 – 175 . [ 63 ] T . Biedermann , Y . Skabytska , S . Kaesler , T . Volz , Regulation of T cell immunity in atopic dermatitis by microbes : the Yin and Yang of cutaneous in ﬂ ammation , Front . Immunol . 6 ( 2015 ) 353 . [ 64 ] D . F . Choy , K . M . Hart , L . A . Borthwick , A . Shikotra , D . R . Nagarkar , S . Siddiqui , G . Jia , C . M . Ohri , E . Doran , K . M . Vannella , C . A . Butler , B . Hargadon , J . C . Sciurba , R . L . Gieseck , R . W . Thompson , S . White , A . R . Abbas , J . Jackman , L . C . Wu , J . G . Egen , L . G . Heaney , T . R . Ramalingam , J . R . Arron , T . A . Wynn , P . Bradding , TH2 and TH17 in ﬂ ammatory pathways are reciprocally regulated in asthma , Sci . Transl . Med . 7 ( 2015 ) 301ra129 . [ 65 ] L . Cosmi , F . Liotta , E . Maggi , S . Romagnani , F . Annunziato , Th17 cells : new players in asthma pathogenesis , Allergy 66 ( 2011 ) 989 – 998 . [ 66 ] A . Kurtaj , C . Hillebrand , G . Fichtinger , E . Hattinger , M . Lietzenmayer , Y . Machado , S . Scheiblhofer , A . Stoecklinger , T . Thalhamer , S . Suessner , M . Danzer , S . Keplinger , J . Weinberger , S . Schaller , S . Winkler , C . Gabriel , J . Thalhamer , R . Weiss , Natural protective immunity against grass pollen allergy is maintained by a diverse spec - trum of response types , J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . ( 2017 ) ( in press ) . [ 67 ] N . Gagliani , M . C . Amezcua Vesely , A . Iseppon , L . Brockmann , H . Xu , N . W . Palm , M . R . de Zoete , P . Licona - Limon , R . S . Paiva , T . Ching , C . Weaver , X . Zi , X . Pan , R . Fan , L . X . Garmire , M . J . Cotton , Y . Drier , B . Bernstein , J . Geginat , B . Stockinger , E . Esplugues , S . Huber , R . A . Flavell , Th17 cells transdi ﬀ erentiate into regulatory T cells during resolution of in ﬂ ammation , Nature 523 ( 2015 ) 221 – 225 . [ 68 ] A . Garg , P . F . Barnes , S . Roy , M . F . Quiroga , S . Wu , V . E . Garcia , S . R . Krutzik , S . E . Weis , R . Vankayalapati , Mannose - capped lipoarabinomannan - and pros - taglandin E2 - dependent expansion of regulatory T cells in human Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection , Eur . J . Immunol . 38 ( 2008 ) 459 – 469 . [ 69 ] V . Abadie , O . Bonduelle , D . Du ﬀ y , C . Parizot , B . Verrier , B . Combadiere , Original encounter with antigen determines antigen - presenting cell imprinting of the quality of the immune response in mice , PLoS One 4 ( 2009 ) e8159 . [ 70 ] W . Hu , C . Pasare , Location , location , location : tissue - speci ﬁ c regulation of immune responses , J . Leukoc . Biol . 94 ( 2013 ) 409 – 421 . [ 71 ] F . Liang , G . Lindgren , K . J . Sandgren , E . A . Thompson , J . R . Francica , A . Seubert , E . De Gregorio , S . Barnett , D . T . O ' Hagan , N . J . Sullivan , R . A . Koup , R . A . Seder , K . Lore , Vaccine priming is restricted to draining lymph nodes and controlled by adjuvant - mediated antigen uptake , Sci . Transl . Med . 9 ( 2017 ) . [ 72 ] S . F . Gonzalez , V . Lukacs - Kornek , M . P . Kuligowski , L . A . Pitcher , S . E . Degn , S . J . Turley , M . C . Carroll , Complement - dependent transport of antigen into B cell follicles , J . Immunol . 185 ( 2010 ) 2659 – 2664 . [ 73 ] S . Yamazaki , A . Morita , Dendritic cells in the periphery control antigen - speci ﬁ c natural and induced regulatory T cells , Front . Immunol . 4 ( 2013 ) 151 . [ 74 ] A . Said , G . Weindl , Regulation of dendritic cell function in in ﬂ ammation , J Immunol Res 2015 ( 2015 ) 743169 . [ 75 ] E . Glitzner , A . Korosec , P . M . Brunner , B . Drobits , N . Amberg , H . B . Schonthaler , T . Kopp , E . F . Wagner , G . Stingl , M . Holcmann , M . Sibilia , Speci ﬁ c roles for dendritic cell subsets during initiation and progression ofpsoriasis , EMBOMol . Med . 6 ( 2014 ) 1312 – 1327 . [ 76 ] K . Kautz - Neu , M . Noordegraaf , S . Dinges , C . L . Bennett , D . John , B . E . Clausen , E . von Stebut , Langerhans cells are negative regulators of the anti - Leishmania response , J . Exp . Med . 208 ( 2011 ) 885 – 891 . Y . Machado et al . Journal of Controlled Release 266 ( 2017 ) 87 – 99 99