Grieﬁng in virtual worlds : causes , casualties and coping strategies Thomas Chesney , * Iain Coyne , † Brian Logan ‡ & Neil Madden § * Nottingham University Business School , University of Nottingham , Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road , Nottingham , NG8 1BB , UK , email : thomas . chesney @ nottingham . ac . uk , † Institute of Work , Health & Organisations , University of Nottingham , Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road , Nottingham , NG8 1BB , UK , email : iain . coyne @ nottingham . ac . uk , ‡ School of Computer Science , University of Nottingham , Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road , Nottingham , NG8 1BB , UK , email : bsl @ cs . nott . ac . uk , and § School of Computer Science , University of Nottingham , Jubilee Campus , Wollaton Road , Nottingham , NG8 1BB , UK , email : nem @ cs . nott . ac . uk Abstract . A virtual world is a computer - simulated three - dimensional environment . They are increasingly being used for social and commercial interaction , in addition to their original use for game playing . This paper studies negative behaviour , or ‘grieﬁng’ , inside one virtual world through a series of observations and focus groups with users . Data were collected to identify grieﬁng behaviours and their impact , examine why grieﬁng happens and who the likely targets and perpetrators are , and suggest strategies for coping with it . Findings show that grieﬁng behav - iour is common . It is deﬁned as unacceptable , persistent behaviour and is typically targeted at inexperienced residents by those with more knowledge of the virtual world . Community and individual coping strategies are identiﬁed and discussed . Keywords : antisocial behaviour , virtual worlds , interpretative phenomenological analysis isj _ 330525 . . 548 INTRODUCTION A virtual world is a computer - simulated three - dimensional environment in which individuals interact . On screen , users are represented by an avatar . The concept began as a platform for game playing but has emerged into a more general mode of social and commercial interaction . Already , some commentators are predicting that three - dimensional environments will become the dominant means to access information over the internet in the future ( Castronova , 2001 ; Gartner , 2007 ) . Such claims have been made before about new technologies , and they have not always been borne out ( see for example , Grant et al . , 2006 ) . However , a growing user base and the nature of the interaction make virtual worlds social phenomena worthy of study ( Castronova , 2005 ) . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2575 . 2009 . 00330 . x Info Systems J ( 2009 ) 19 , 525 – 548 525 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd One popular virtual world is Linden Lab’s Second Life ( http : / / secondlife . com ) . Second Life is making an impact in popular culture , business and education . For example musically , Duran Duran plan to hold concerts there ( Lombardi , 2006 ) and Suzanne Vega already has ( Suzannevega . com , 2006 ) . Commercial organizations such as IBM , Nissan , Starwood Hotels & Resorts and Toyota have , or have had , buildings in Second Life ( Rushe , 2006 ; Fass , 2007 ) . Many universities now have a presence there ( SimTeach , 2007 ) , for instance , Edinburgh University run an e - learning degree in part using Second Life ( Farrar , 2006 ; see also http : / / www . education . ed . ac . uk / e - learning / ) . Even entire countries are getting involved . Sweden has opened an embassy there ( BBC , 2007 ) to provide information about the country . Second Life has also begun to attract the attention of social scientists . Bainbridge ( 2007 ) suggests that the environment can be used to create social science laboratories to run ‘in - world’ experiments , ‘in - world’ meaning inside Second Life . Second Life is appropriate in studying virtual world interaction for two reasons . One , it is not a game . There is no overall objective ( or series of objectives ) that typiﬁes other virtual worlds such as World of Warcraft , which is a fantasy role - play game . Rather than being a game , Second Life is more an ‘arena of creativity’ – Linden Lab has set up an environment for users which enables them to do whatever they can imagine . Consequently , and the second reason it is suitable ; Second Life allows for the creation of objects and scenarios ( such as a social science laboratory ) that would be more difﬁcult to do in , say , World of Warcraft . This paper examines one form of interaction within Second Life – ‘grieﬁng’ , which in online communities loosely means unacceptable behaviour . The objectives are to : 1 identify grieﬁng behaviours in Second Life as representative of virtual worlds and examine similarities and / or differences with behaviours seen in other contexts ( e . g . school or workplace ) ; 2 examine the perceptions of victims on the impact of such behaviour ; 3 assess potential reasons why grieﬁng occurs and possible options to combat such behav - iour ; and 4 attempt to quantify who the likely targets and perpetrators are . If virtual worlds do continue to become more popular , then an understanding of why grieﬁng occurs and how best to deal with it becomes an important issue . In extreme cases , grieﬁng has led to tragedy . This can be seen by looking to behaviours similar in nature to grieﬁng that have happened outside of Second Life : on 7 Oct 2003 , 13 - year - old Ryan Hal - ligan took his own life after being the victim of cyberbullying ( Halligan , 2005 ) , a term that is examined later in this paper ; in November 2001 , 21 - year - old Shaun Woolley shot himself , some suggest that this was because of events that took place in the virtual world Everquest , although it is unclear what these events were ( Spencer , 2002 ) ; in China , authorities have introduced a limit on the amount of time that players can spend in virtual worlds , after one user was murdered by another because of the theft of a virtual sword ( Warner & Raiter , 2005 ) . 526 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT OF THE STUDY Second Life ( Figure 1 ) is one of a growing number of virtual worlds . Getting data on user numbers is troublesome , with often a substantial difference between the number of registered users and number of active users . In addition , some users register multiple accounts . However , at the time of writing ( January 2009 ) , there are over 16 million registered accounts . Studies suggest that at any time , around 30 000 people are in Second Life , and the world clocks up an estimated 20 million user hours every month ( Chesney et al . , 2009 ) . The majority of users are from the US and European Union , and are aged between 18 and 34 years ( see Table 1 ) . Further details can be found at http : / / secondlife . com / whatis / economy . php . Second Life is divided into different ‘geographical’ sectors which have topographical features such as rivers , mountains and beaches , and objectiﬁed ﬂora and fauna . Avatars are able to walk , run and ﬂy through the world . Communication is mostly by text , both public and private , although voice input / output has recently been introduced , and avatars can also communicate by limited body language – yawning or pointing , for instance . Public chat is received by other avatars in the immediate vicinity . Users can edit their avatar any way they wish . As a result , Second Life is populated by humans , animals , fantasy creatures and a variety of objects . Second Life has its own currency , the Linden dollar ( L $ ) which can be bought and sold . Around L $ 250 is worth USD1 . According to Linden Lab Chief Executive Ofﬁcer Philip Rosedale , Second Life is in direct competition with ‘real’ life ( Rushe , 2006 ) , also known as ‘First Life’ , which is the preferred term and the one that is used throughout this paper . With this in mind , a resident can do common activities in Second Life such as ﬁshing , skydiving , jet skiing , shopping , getting married and even raising children . As alluded to in the Introduction , this makes Second Life fundamentally different from other gaming virtual worlds . Users adopt a gaming world solely for hedonic Figure 1 . Second Life . In the picture on the left , the avatar in the middle is about to say something ; this is known because his hands are lifted up and he appears to be typing on an invisible keyboard , the Second Life animation to show someone is typing text . The picture on the right shows a typical Second Life scene ; four avatars are shown – an octopus , a humanoid cat and two humans , one lying on the bench . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 527 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 reasons ( such as those studied by Van der Heijden , 2004 ) , whereas Second Life is used for both utilitarian reasons ( commercial and educational ) and hedonic reasons . In this respect , Second Life grieﬁng ( and in fact , other Second Life behaviours ) deserves attention separate from grieﬁng inside gaming worlds , where some work has already started ( see for instance : Foo & Koivisto , 2004 ; Kuecklich , 2004 ; Smith , 2004 ) . From an information systems ( IS ) point of view , it may be more important to consider Second Life because if three - dimensional interfaces do become ubiquitous , they will probably be closer to Second Life than to gaming worlds . Already , some companies are experimenting with using Second Life as a platform to facilitate group work ( Ward , 2007 ) . As an example of the direction Linden Lab may be planning for their technology , Jeff Bezos , the founder of Amazon , is one of the ﬁnancial backers of Second Life , and Philip Rosedale has pointed out that whenever someone visits Amazon , there are thousands of other shoppers on the site with them . He has expressed opinion that it would be a good thing if all those shoppers could both see and interact with each other ( Rushe , 2006 ) . Like other communication channels , Second Life can be characterized according to its ‘richness’ ( Daft & Lengel , 1986 ) . Richness is determined by a medium’s ability to transmit Table 1 . Second Life user statistics , taken from Chesney et al . ( 2009 ) Country Percentage of residents United States 31 . 19 France 12 . 73 Germany 10 . 46 United Kingdom 8 . 09 Netherlands 6 . 55 Spain 3 . 83 Brazil 3 . 77 Canada 3 . 30 Belgium 2 . 63 Italy 1 . 93 Australia 1 . 48 Switzerland 1 . 29 Japan 1 . 29 Sweden 0 . 95 Denmark 0 . 88 Age band Percentage of active users 13 – 17 ( Teen grid ) 1 . 24 18 – 24 27 . 46 25 – 34 38 . 78 35 – 44 21 . 00 45 + 11 . 52 NotethattheTeenGridisentirelyseparatefromthemaingridandinaccessibletotheauthors ; therefore , nooneofthisagewasinvolvedinthestudy . Theaverageageofmaingridresidents is 33 . 528 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 non - verbal cues , varied language and a sense of personalness , and provide immediate feedback ( Fulk et al . , 1995 ) . Daft et al . ( 1987 ) present a media richness hierarchy that incor - porates four media classiﬁcations : a face - to - face meeting , a telephone call , addressed docu - ments such as a letter , and unaddressed documents such as a notice on a bulletin board . The authors claim that users should choose the communication medium that has the correct richness for the information that needs to be communicated . This ‘correct richness’ depends on message ambiguity – essentially , they claim that a potentially ambiguous message needs a richer medium . Support for whether a potentially ambiguous message needs a richer medium is mixed . An alternative idea is based on media features , but it would seem that media choice is not as simple as richness versus features , and that there is a complex interplay of factors at work . In an examination of this issue , El - Shinnawy & Markus ( 1998 ) look at email and voice mail and ﬁnd little support for either theory . However , an examination of Second Life’s richness and features is helpful to position the technology . Second Life’s richness is high , and it can be placed below a face - to - face meeting , but above a telephone call – voice input / output makes Second Life as rich as a phone call , plus it has additional visual cues such as body gestures . Second Life’s feature list ( as a communication channel ) is also high and varied . The technol - ogy is capable of approximating instant messaging , email , a telephone call , limited body language and other visual cues ( a chart could easily be displayed on a surface and pointed to , for example ) . The richness of Second Life , and the features it offers , supports Rosedale’s assertion that Second Life is trying to approximate First Life . Therefore , we might look to First Life bullying , harassment and abuse to gain insight into Second Life grieﬁng , as well as the literature on cyberbullying and grieﬁng in multi - player computer games . Existing work on the causes , casualties and coping strategies of these behaviours is now examined . Bullying , cyberbullying and grieﬁng The deﬁnition of bullying is not universally agreed but is usually characterized by aggressive behaviour in a relationship of imbalanced power , which happens over a prolonged period of time ( Olweus , 1991 ; Smith & Thompson , 1991 ) . The imbalance of power often comes from the victim being physically weaker , by being outnumbered , or by being subordinate in an organi - zational hierarchy . Bullying takes place in relatively social groups in which the victim has little possibility of avoiding their tormentors ( Salmivalli et al . , 1996 ) . Some writers make a distinction between direct ( overt ) bullying and indirect ( covert , relational ) bullying ( van der Wal et al . , 2003 ) . Direct bullying describes all physical and verbal aggression such as hitting , kicking , making threats and throwing insults . Indirect bullying forces the victim into social isolation by ignoring them , spreading rumours and talking about them behind their back ( Rivers & Smith , 1994 ) . Bullying has been identiﬁed in almost identical form , all over the world ( Smith & Brain , 2000 ) . In the literature on aggressive behaviour , the term harassment encompasses bullying but is wider in scope ( Rayner & Hoel , 1997 ) . The most common form in the literature is sexual harassment , deﬁned generally as the unwanted and unwelcome behaviours of a sexual nature that make the victim feel uncomfortable ( see http : / / www . equalityhumanrights . com for a legal Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 529 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 deﬁnition ) . Often , no objective measure of what exactly does and does not constitute harass - ment can be made , but it is assumed that people ‘know it when they see it’ ( Rotundo et al . , 2001 ) . The term abuse means to treat someone ( or something ) in such a way as to cause harm . It encompasses many of the same elements of bullying and harassment , and , depending on your point of view , harassment can be seen as a form of abuse , or abuse as a form of harassment . In the mind of many people , abuse is more serious than harassment , and the distinction between the two is one of severity , although this is not universally accepted . Unlike bullying , abuse can be a one off event ( for instance , saying something offensive to a stranger ) , or prolonged ( as would be the case in stalking ) . It is not universally agreed which of these applies to harassment ( Brodsky , 1976 ) . There are a number of distinctions between bullying , harassment and abuse , and Second Life grieﬁng . For one , with grieﬁng , the bully is not physically present , which may make it seem less threatening . In addition , the griefer will not normally know the identity of the user they are grieﬁng and vice versa . The victim can end the grief at any time by ( 1 ) disconnecting from Second Life ; ( 2 ) moving to a private area ; and ( 3 ) entering the world with a new avatar . However , by doing these , the victim is denying themselves , respectively , ( 1 ) access to the world ; ( 2 ) access to a part of the world ; and ( 3 ) access to their original avatar and the reputation built up in its name . Second Life grieﬁng is closest to cyberbullying . For example , in schools , rumours are often spread by mobile phone text messaging rather than notes in class , mobile phones are used to take and share pictures from changing rooms , and websites such as ( the now defunct ) schoolscandals . com are used to spread vicious gossip ( Paulson , 2003 ) . These types of activities are often grouped under the label ‘cyberbullying’ . Cyberbullying has been described as ‘ [ a ] n aggressive , intentional act carried out by a group or individual , using electronic forms of contact , repeatedly and over time against a victim who cannot easily defend him or herself’ ( Smith et al . , 2008 ) . These electronic forms of contact include email , instant messages , text messages , blogs and websites . Although the bully may not be physically present , they are potentially able to reach their victim at any time and copies of exchanges can reach a wide audience . A term related to cyberbullying is ﬂaming , the act of an online community sending negative messages , ‘ﬂames’ , to someone who has broken implicit or explicit rules . There is no agreed deﬁnition of what constitutes a ﬂame , leaving some to simply state ‘ﬂaming is in the eye of the beholder’ ( Thompsen & Foulger , 1996 ) ; however , often , authors agree that it is char - acterized by profanity , obscenity and insults that inﬂict harm ( Reinig et al . , 1998 ; Alonzo & Aiken , 2004 ) . Flaming is not always considered to be cyberbullying as a ﬂame is not neces - sarily intended to be destructive but may be a genuine attempt by the ﬂamer to educate others ( McKee , 2002 ) . Some work has examined unacceptable behaviour in multi - player computer games , which is also sometimes known as grieﬁng ( the term is not unique to Second Life ) . What constitutes computer game grieﬁng is different from Second Life grieﬁng – for instance , killing another player is allowed , even encouraged in many gaming worlds , whereas attacking another resident in Second Life can result in a ban . Even so , this work may provide insight here . 530 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 In one of the earliest and most comprehensive examinations of why people play multi - player online games , Yee ( 2002 ) lists ‘grief’ ( or competing unfairly ) as a motivation . Grieﬁng in multi - player games has been deﬁned as ‘ [ i ] ntentional harassment of other players . . . which utilizes aspects of the game structure or physics in unintended ways to cause distress for other players’ ( Warner & Raiter , 2005 , p . 47 ) . Some authors and , indeed , some gamers themselves simply equate grieﬁng with cheating , which is to say , anything within the game’s rules is acceptable , but behaviour outside of this , such as exploitation of loopholes ( or bugs ) in the environment , is grieﬁng . Such loopholes do exist – Guest ( 2007 ) tells of one Everquest 2 player who found that he was able to buy an item , make multiple copies of it and sell it to as many buyers he could ﬁnd . The view that grieﬁng equals cheating is not universally accepted ; as Foo & Koivisto ( 2004 ) point out , killing another player may be within the rules , but repeated killing of the same character would be considered grieﬁng . Second Life does in fact have a set of community standards that could be analogous to a game’s rules . Known as the Big Six ( see : http : / / secondlife . com / corporate / cs . php for more detail ) , they are the behaviours that are forbidden and are : 1 Intolerance ; this is deﬁned as actions that marginalize , belittle or defame individuals or groups . 2 Harassment ; examples are communicating or behaving in a manner which is offensively coarse , intimidating or threatening , making unwelcome sexual advances . 3 Assault ; this is the equivalent of First Life physical abuse and in - world , it means to push a resident . 4 Disclosure ; this is perhaps seen as the most serious and refers to disclosing information about a user ( such as their First Life name or First Life location ) . 5 Indecency ; this could be swearing , nudity or the depiction of sex or violence in a so - called ‘PG zone’ . 1 6 Disturbing the peace ; examples include repeated transmission of undesired advertising content , the use of repetitive sounds , or other objects that intentionally slow server performance . It should be noted that not all six apply universally throughout Second Life , for instance , in areas where ﬁghting games are played , or mature areas where sexual content is allowed . When a resident breaks the Second Life community standards , or the terms of service , another resident can ﬁle an abuse report – a short description of the incident which is sent to Linden Lab customer service . Toward the end of 2006 , Linden Lab received close to 2000 abuse reports every day ( Daniel Linden , 2006 ) . About 6 . 5 % of logged - in residents report abuse each month ( Second Opinion , 2006 ) . Abuse reports can lead to account suspension . Considering the impact of these behaviours , a substantial amount of research has found that victims of school and workplace bullying experience negative well - being ( e . g . Boulton & Smith , 1994 ; Niedl , 1996 ; Hawker & Boulton , 2000 ; Hoel et al . , 2004 ) . Negative outcomes have also emerged for individuals experiencing cyberbullying ( e . g . Ybarra , 2004 ; Patchin & 1 Nudity , sexual content and profanity are not allowed in a PG zone . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 531 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Hinduja , 2006 ; Ybarra et al . , 2006 ) . Most of the work in this area has focused on school cyberbullying , and , therefore , the victims are young ( recall from Table 1 , all users of the Second Life main grid where the research was conducted , are 18 or older ) . Victims have reported being frustrated and angry , and claim an impact on home and school life ( Patchin & Hinduja , 2006 ) . In the workplace , both Overell ( 1998 ) and Welch ( 1997 ) found that receiv - ing ﬂame messages can increase stress - related illness . In a study of bullying ( including cyberbullying ) in the workplace , Baruch ( 2005 ) showed that the negative outcomes of bul - lying exist regardless of the communication medium ( face - to - face or email ) ; outcomes such as an increase in anxiety , an intent to leave the organization and a decrease in job satis - faction and performance were all evident . Motivations of cyberbullies and griefers Across the school and workplace bullying domains , explanations for the causes of such behaviour have tended to focus on organizational and individual / social factors . These expla - nations could be useful when thinking about why grieﬁng occurs . Fitzgerald et al . ( 1997 ) examined the antecedents of sexual harassment in organizations . They found it to be a function of two factors : organization factors that communicate tolerance of harassment , and job characteristics such as gender ratio and nature of job tasks . An organization that is perceived by its employees to tolerate harassment will breed harassment , and females are more likely to be harassed in jobs where they are in a minority or doing tasks traditionally performed by men . Smith et al . ( 2003 ) suggest that in both school and working contexts , the culture of the organization and the structure / management of day - to - day activities play a role in bullying . For example , organizations where clear - cut procedures are not in place , where management responsibility is unclear and where management are poor conﬂict resolvers are breeding grounds for bullying ( Einarsen et al . , 1994 ; Vartia , 1996 ; Seigne , 1998 ; Einarsen , 1999 ) . However , individual factors have also been shown to play a contributory role in workplace bullying with researchers suggesting that low self - esteem , unassertiveness , intro - version , lack of friends and sociometric rejection may pre - dispose an individual to be a target of bullying ( Coyne et al . , 2000 ; Hawker & Boulton , 2000 ) . Individual characteristics have also been researched in relation to perpetrator pre - disposition ( e . g . Ashforth , 1994 ; Seigne et al . , 2007 ) . The Second Life environment might also contribute to negative behaviour . A lot of work on why negative behaviour may manifest itself during Computer Mediated Communication ( CMC ) has focused on the notion of deindividuation and may explain why someone who would not bully in First Life , might grief in Second Life . The literature in this area has discussed how people write comments to online fora ( Alonzo & Aiken , 2004 ) , blogs ( Chesney , 2005 ) , personal web pages ( Stern , 1999 ) and ﬂame messages ( Grosvenor , 1998 ) containing content that , it is reported , they would never speak out loud to someone standing in front of them . Deindividuation theory ( Festinger et al . , 1952 ) proposes that when individuals are sub - merged in a crowd , their identiﬁability is lowered and their consideration of the conse - quences of their actions is diminished so that they lack accountability . When applied to CMC 532 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 in Second Life , the theory suggests that when people enter the world , they feel anonymous and detached from First Life ; they will be less inhibited and say and do things they would not say and do in First Life . Joinson ( 2001 ) studied the impact of visual anonymity on CMC , which is relevant to Second Life as residents cannot see each other , they can only see each others’ avatars . When participants were visually anonymous , they exhibited higher levels of self - disclosure . Joinson’s explanation for this is that , with visual cues ( i . e . when participants can see each other ) , there is heightened public self - awareness , which leads to relative social inhibition , whereas with no visual cues , there is heightened private self - awareness , which leads to increased self - disclosure . This is especially true when coupled with a reduc - tion in self - presentation concerns ( communicators do not have to worry about how they look ) . Reduced social cues theory models behaviour during communication as being depen - dent on social context cues such as nodding in agreement or looking sceptical ( Joinson , 2003 ) . The theory predicts that removing social cues , such as all aspects of identity , will allow communication to be more ‘free’ and social standards will become less important ( Kiesler et al . , 1984 ) . This is because the attention of those involved in the communication will not be split between the message and each other but will be entirely focused on the message . If social context cues are weak , communication will be weakly regulated and behaviour will be less inhibited ( Joinson , 2003 ) . However , the situation appears more complicated than this . Postmes et al . ( 1998 ) con - ducted a meta - analysis of 60 deindividuation studies and concluded that no support was found for increased anti - normative behaviour due to deindividuation . That is , CMC does not lead to less inhibited communication . However , it may affect communication . In fact , Postmes’ meta - analysis showed that deindividuated individuals complied more strongly with the situational norm than individuals who were identiﬁable . This means that deindividuated individuals will tend to go along with group behaviour , whereas individuals who are identiﬁable tend not to go along with the norm so readily . Reicher ( 1982 ) predicted this ﬁnding and argued that anonymity does not make an individual lose awareness of their identity but shifts their awareness away from personal identity to social identity . An individual’s social identity is them perceiving themselves as part of a social group . Someone whose awareness is focused on his social identity will take on the group’s norms and behave in a manner accepted by the group . These ideas have been formulated into the Social Identity model of Deindividuation Effects ( SIDE ) for interaction via computers . SIDE depends on the assumption that a unique personal self is the basis of all rational action and that CMC can serve to impede the operation of such selfhood ( Reicher et al . , 1995 ) . SIDE has some empirical support ( for example , Douglas & McGarty , 2002 ) . How the group norms and rules develop in the ﬁrst place is determined , in part , by the technology itself and , in part , by how the group uses the technology ( Poole & DeSanctis , 1990 ) . Second Life is a new technology to many users , who have never met one another and are anonymous to one another , and use is non - mandatory . We can picture these group norms developing over time within and between groups of users and the judgement of whether behaviour is acceptable or unacceptable stemming from these norms . According to SIDE , new users are drawn into , or accept , these norms through deindividuation . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 533 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Coping strategies Like the rest of the literature on bullying , research looking at the coping strategies of victims is split between school bullying and workplace bullying . Coie et al . ( 1991 ) listed the strategies 7 – 9 - year - old male victims can use as : escalating the aggression , defending oneself , attempt - ing to resolve the conﬂict , ignoring the bully and submitting to the bully . Submission was most common , with defending as the second most frequent response . Salmivalli et al . ( 1996 ) , studying older children ( 12 – 13 ) , found three strategies – counter - aggression ( standing up to the bully ) , helplessness and nonchalance ( acting like they do not care ) . Actions of teachers ( who in Second Life might be considered analogous to Linden Lab or possibly onlookers ) in response include ignoring the incident , facilitating peer resolution , discussing the incident with the entire class , telling the victim to ‘be tough’ , comforting the victim and reporting the incident to a higher authority ( Bauman & Del Rio , 2006 ) . Limper ( 2000 , p . 128 ) outlines the following strategies : 1 Help for the child who is being bullied in the form of advice and ( in some cases ) social skills training . 2 Help for the bully in the form of social skills training or a course in coping with aggression . 3 Help for the silent majority in the form of mobilizing this group . 4 Help for the teacher , providing background information about the phenomenon , such as signs , causes , consequences and concrete ( preventive and curative ) ways of tackling it . 5 Help for the parents in the form of background information and advice . A common coping strategy used by victims of workplace bullying is to leave the organization ( Quine , 1999 ) . Djurkovic & McCormack ( 2006 ) report that managers should be trained to deal with bullying and foster an anti - bullying culture both formally ( policies and procedures ) and informally ( e . g . as a role model ) . RESEARCH METHOD Data for this study were collected by observation and focus group . Prior to the start of the project , one of the authors spent around an hour a day in - world for nearly 6 months , getting to know the interface and the accepted culture of residents . During this time , we negotiated with Linden Lab for permission to perform our study , in accordance with their rules for researchers ( which are in fact no longer in force ) . At the end of this period , two of the authors carried out the non - participant observation part of the study . For 5 days in one week , behaviour was observed for 3 hours each day : 1 hour early in the morning , one in the afternoon and one in the evening . This timing allows for the international nature of Second Life as users are spread across the world ( Table 1 ) . The avatar of one of the authors would go to an area where a group of residents were gathered , sit down and watch what happened . The results of the observation are given in the Observation section . At about the same time as the observation , an in - world ofﬁce was set up ( Figure 2 ) . This was intended as a place where online synchronous focus groups could be run with reasonable 534 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 privacy for participants . Whenever anyone entered the ofﬁce , they were automatically given a note card explaining what the focus group was about , what information would be recorded and what their rights were . To summarize these rights : information that was collected was initially associated with the avatar’s name but was then analysed anonymously . Participants were free to leave the project at any time , either during or after the focus group , and if they chose to do so , all the information they had contributed would be deleted . The idea was that people would assemble downstairs , have an opportunity to ask any questions and resolve any outstanding issues then go upstairs for the actual discussion . To run the focus groups , three people were actively involved , using two PCs and a data projector . The ﬁrst person was the focus group facilitator who guided the discussion as any focus group facilitator would , except that everything they wanted to say was typed by the second person who was controlling the in - world focus group facilitator ( the avatar shown in Figure 2 ) . The third person was controlling a second avatar , through the second PC . This avatar stood in the focus group room and recorded a video of what was going on . They were also on standby to take over in case of technical problems with the ﬁrst PC , which would result in the loss of the in - world facilitator . All participants were aware of who this second avatar was . The second PC was projected onto a wall for the facilitator to clearly see what was going on . An object ( designed to look like a ﬂip chart ) was created by one of the authors which would email the text of the conversation out of Second Life for analysis , negating the need for transcription ( the focus groups were run before voice input / output was available ) . To create the sample , it was decided to randomly choose an area , teleport to it and ask the ﬁrst person to be seen , in a private message , whether they would take part , and then move on to another area . Typically , around 30 residents were invited to get enough people to run one focus group . Participation was voluntary and all participants , who were aged 18 years or over , gave consent for their data to be collected . A picture from one of the focus groups is shown in Figure 3 . To test the method , a pilot focus group was run about educational opportunities in Second Life . Table 2 shows a section of the Figure 2 . The in - world ofﬁce . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 535 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 conversation that took place during the pilot study , to illustrate what a conversation log looks like . Avatar names have been removed and the in - world time ( which is the Paciﬁc time zone ) is shown in square brackets . The focus group data were analysed using Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis ( IPA ; Smith & Osborn , 2003 ) . IPA is a qualitative technique used to gain insight into the experiences Figure 3 . A focus group . The avatar standing at the back is videoing the proceedings . Table 2 . A sample conversation log [ 3 : 02 ] PARTICIPANT 1 : classes in SL can help in education such as technology and graphics due to modleing and scripting can help with I . T . [ 3 : 02 ] MODERATOR : Do you think only technology subjects are appropriate to learn here ? [ 3 : 03 ] PARTICIPANT 1 : no . . . it also teaches math as in what angle to put an object and how much you need to turn it . but that is basic maths . [ 3 : 03 ] PARTICIPANT 2 : Appropriate is not the word I would use . [ 3 : 03 ] PARTICIPANT 3 : well , everyone learns to be polite [ 3 : 03 ] MODERATOR : What word would you use ? [ 3 : 03 ] PARTICIPANT 2 : Possible yes . Practicable if there is such a word . [ 3 : 04 ] MODERATOR : Yes . [ 3 : 04 ] PARTICIPANT 4 : may i help . [ 3 : 04 ] PARTICIPANT 2 : Anything really if one puts his mind to it . [ 3 : 04 ] PARTICIPANT 3 : I suggest technology subjects are largely innapprpriate . [ 3 : 04 ] PARTICIPANT 1 : but their not . [ 3 : 04 ] PARTICIPANT 3 : better suited for arts . [ 3 : 04 ] MODERATOR : Why PARTICIPANT 3 ? [ 3 : 05 ] PARTICIPANT 1 : technology helps everyone in some way . with out it there would be no computers with no computers no SL . [ 3 : 05 ] PARTICIPANT 3 : because this place is all about expression . . . . it is a visual medium . 536 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 of individuals and to examine how individuals interpret their experience of a phenomenon . These data are then reinterpreted by researchers to draw out themes and linkages between these themes to answer broad research questions . The aim is not to try to create an objective view of the phenomenon ( Smith et al . , 1999 ) . The technique is similar to grounded theory in that the researcher does not start the interpretation of data with hypotheses which he or she intends to test . IPA is therefore an exploratory tool that is data driven rather than theory driven ( Shaw , 2001 ) . Analysts attempt to capture and understand the meanings in the data that reveal the respondent’s psychological world , something that comes from a sustained engagement with the data and a process of interpretation ( Smith & Osborn , 2003 ) . After individuals’ experiences are analysed in this way , connections between the themes are sought , constantly checking the raw data to conﬁrm these emerging overarching or superordinate themes . In this way , the hermeneutic circle is closed ( Klein & Myers , 1999 ) . An interesting point to consider is whether we are researching residents or users ( the term ‘resident’ referring to an avatar and ‘user’ referring to the human controlling the avatar ) . They are not necessarily the same . Turkle ( 1995 ) discusses one of the appeals of virtual worlds as being the ability of a user to change themselves , with change of gender being discussed most . For example in one study of a Japanese virtual world , many tens of thousands of users were found to be swapping gender ( Turkle , 1995 ) . The approach taken here was that we were collecting information from residents about acts performed by residents and the effect on other residents . No data were collected on participants’ First Life . OBSERVATION During the observation sessions , observation sheets were created by two observers indepen - dently to detail any grieﬁng that was observed . A description of each incident was recorded along with the location and type of behaviour . These types were the ‘Big Six’ and were coded using the numbers given in the Bullying , cyberbullying and grieﬁng section . When the obser - vation sheets were examined for inter - rater reliability , there was 79 % agreement on whether an act of grieﬁng had occurred and what type it was . The agreement expected by chance was 28 % and Cohen’s kappa was calculated to be 0 . 71 , which indicates a good level of agreement . The counts of each behaviour that were coded by the two observers are shown in Table 3 . Even though , for this study , only a tiny fraction of Second Life was observed , all of the ‘Big Six’ were witnessed . Examples of each of these are given in here to illustrate how the authors interpreted them and the sort of behaviour discussed in the focus groups . 1 Intolerance . Two residents with swastikas on their chests were talking in extreme terms about how different races offended them , in a public area . One resident was seen to make fun of another resident’s clothes . Another resident made derogatory comments about Americans and dressed up as a chimpanzee to mock the US . 2 Harassment . Verbal harassment was observed . 3 Assault . Bombings and shootings were witnessed . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 537 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 4 Disclosure . We observed two residents discussing a user’s sexuality , and heard one resident complain of being banned from Second Life for a time for mentioning a user’s real name in another conversation ( Note that this second incident was not coded as grieﬁng as we did not observe it ) . 5 Indecency . In PG zones , we repeatedly witnessed nudity and swearing . 6 Disturbing the peace . In one area , music from a television programme popular in the UK in the 1980s was played repetitively , to the annoyance of the residents there . In another , an object became attached to a resident which they could not remove , which repeated the words ‘banana phone’ audibly every few seconds . FOCUS GROUPS In all , four focus groups were run with a total of 14 residents . Four superordinate themes emerging from the data are presented next and discussed in the Discussion section ( note that quotations have been edited for grammar , punctuation and spelling ) . The nature of grieﬁng This theme reﬂects the perception of residents on what grieﬁng actually is within the context of Second Life . All but two of the participants had direct experience of grieﬁng , which they saw as unacceptable , persistent behaviour which disrupts the ability to enjoy Second Life . Residents talked about grieﬁng having some form of intent and persistence , and were clear that acci - dental aggression ( e . g . accidentally bumping into someone ) was not considered grieﬁng . They felt that the behaviour should not be tolerated within Second Life . ‘Unacceptable , totally . [ S ] ometimes avatars appear invisible to others due to lag , so [ pushing ] may be accidental but if they constantly follow you pushing you then you know it’s grieﬁng’ ( SM ) . Table 3 . Counts of observed grieﬁng ; Type 1 through 6 refers to the numbers given to the ‘big six’ in the Introduction Observer 2 Type 1 2 3 4 5 6 Totals O b s e r v e r 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 1 3 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 2 0 0 1 3 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 5 1 0 0 0 8 1 10 6 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 Totals 3 1 2 1 8 4 19 The diagonal in bold shows agreement , the numbers above and below the diagonal show disagreement . 538 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Some of the participants ran businesses in Second Life and felt that grieﬁng did more than just disrupt enjoyment but interfered with income - generating work : ‘It means to me not being able to ﬁnish products on time because someone likes to bomb my shop . And that costs real money in the long run’ ( JS ) . Two participants took the view that grieﬁng was only harmless fun : ‘I was caged once when I ﬁrst got to SL , I thought it was funny , and moved on’ ( JE ) . Griefer motivation Participants described a number of motives that may explain why grieﬁng occurs . The ﬁrst , asserting power through knowledge sees knowledge of Second Life ( the controls , norms , scripting language etc . ) as power which can be exerted over others who lack this knowledge , typically those new to the world . Furthermore , mixed perceptions and attitudes to using Second Life , as well as its being a ‘safe environment’ for grieﬁng were also considered motives for grieﬁng . Asserting power through knowledge There was a strong experience that griefers are driven by their need to assert power . This same motivation is found in First Life bullying . In the context of First Life bullying , the victim is weaker than the bully in some way . In Second Life , this weakness translates as lack of knowledge about the virtual world , which prevents the victims from being able to defend themselves from griefers . As a simple example , if an avatar sits down on a surface ( a chair or on the ﬂoor ) , it becomes impossible for them to be pushed . Someone who knows this fact can use it to deal with an assault . Griefers were seen as trying to assert their knowledge over those who lack it : ‘there’s some smart cookies here that take pride in their ability to do things that others can’t’ ( SM ) . Participants in two of the focus groups felt that the power differential is focused on new residents or ‘newbies’ because they are ‘naive maybe , easy prey’ ( SM ) . One resident in particular had experience of being griefed as a new resident : ‘when I was a newbie there was group of 4 : two girls and 2 boys [ and ] they would throw me around . They destroyed my ﬁrst house and ﬁred at me . After I read what I could do [ to protect myself , I ] put up [ a ] wall’ . Second Life as a game This theme illustrates the differing perspectives on why residents use Second Life , which was raised in three of the focus groups . There is a conﬂicting view among users , between those who see Second Life as a game and those who do not . ‘It really depends on whether this is a game or not . I am fascinated by the potential for it to be much much more . But if some folks are treating it as just fun , then others who have a different perspective ﬁnd it harder to achieve their goals’ ( HY ) . This leads to friction as some residents treat Second Life as a means to work or socialize , while others act according to gaming norms : ‘I think some people think of SL like other games such as World of Warcraft and think idea is to destroy everything’ ( VK ) and ‘I think here it’s a problem because its a mix of both play and work . Some of us are working to make Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 539 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 real money . Others are just here to play’ ( JS ) . Those with the view that Second Life is a game were also those who did not see grieﬁng as a problem : ‘as much as we would like to play ‘make believe’ and pretend that real people are under attack . . . . it is just a virtual world , real rules can and do not apply’ ( JE ) . Second Life as a safe environment The central tenet running through this theme is the notion that Second Life may promote grieﬁng as a ‘safe’ and easy environment to bully in : ‘The suspension of cultural norms and societal rules in general . People see the internet as a free for all . And , I’d say I agree with [ XS ] about pent up anger being expressed in a no consequence environment’ ( TV ) . Participants felt that griefers were helped by a sense of anonymity . This links back to the organization causes of bullying which included an environment that tolerates it , and to SIDE which suggests that anonymity will affect communication . On the victim side , there was some suggestion that the consequences are less severe in Second Life ; ‘ [ it’s ] much worse in [ real life ] , in SL [ you ] can log off or go somewhere else in - world’ ( VK ) . This is similar to victims of workplace bullying dealing with the problem by leaving the organization . However , both cases involve the victims denying themselves something they likely value . Shared responsibility to control This theme reﬂected residents’ perceptions that all stakeholders in Second Life share a responsibility to control and reduce cases of grieﬁng . Managing grieﬁng was seen as the responsibility of the developers ( Linden Lab ) , individual avatars and the community of residents . Developer’s responsibility In three of the focus groups , participants suggested that Linden Lab should take a lead in controlling grieﬁng . ‘Grieﬁng happens all the time because the Lindens can’t do anything about it , really’ ( SR ) . One example of something that Linden Lab does do to prevent grieﬁng was described as ‘sometimes they disable scripts if a problem appears . Like someone setting off a bomb to crash grids . [ D ] isabling scripts stops that’ ( JS ) . The suggestion that Linden Lab should intervene is in line with the literature on workplace bullying , which places a responsibility on management to prevent and resolve problems . Individual responsibility Suggestions about individual actions that could be taken to control grieﬁng included ‘grieﬁng the griefers’ and ignoring them . However , no one was keen on counter - aggression : ‘You know that saying , “An eye for an eye leaves us all blind ? ” That’s what keeps me from retaliating’ ( XS ) . One participant said that ﬁghting back was ‘not why I am in SL’ ( HY ) . Both of these 540 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 strategies are given in the literature on coping with bullying , which also includes other ideas which were not raised in the focus groups ( for example attempting to resolve the conﬂict ) . Community responsibility The community response included the suggestion that residents should club together to ban / restrict griefers’ freedom ( something that has in fact now been implemented ) : ‘like Las Vegas banned from all clubs if [ they ] cause trouble in one’ ( RR ) ; ‘ [ We ] could share information with others to prevent bullies from getting in , if they ﬁnd more and more places they are banned [ they ] might give up’ . ( VK ) . This suggests that the Second Life community would be happy to police itself . In two focus groups , participants went further than this , proposing some sort of ofﬁcial Second Life police force , but in each case , this was met with scepticism : ‘that’s ridiculous . You can already report abuse . Are you really suggesting that they hire real people that wear badges and uniforms to make sure that you don’t get put in a cage , or pushed away from your project ? You can report abuse , what more do you want ? ’ ( JE ) . Relationship between First and Second Life The relationship between First and Second Life theme contained two sub - themes . First , the notion of whether the resident and user are the same . Opinion was divided on this . The following two quotations illustrate one side of the argument , which the majority of residents agreed with : ‘I am somewhat the same in [ First Life ] as in SL . Except not as thin’ ( VK ) and ‘my avatar is reﬂecting my will , and directly performing my acts . In my case , if you are harassing my avatar , you are harassing me’ ( HY ) . The following two quotations illustrate the other side : ‘ [ i ] t is not an individual , it is an avatar , think about it’ ( JE ) and ‘ [ a ] re you all exactly the same people on here as what you are in RL ? I’m not . In [ First Life ] I’m shy and can’t talk to anyone except one friend and my ﬁancé . In SL i feel as though i am someone else’ . ( KP ) . The second sub - theme explored interaction between First Life and Second Life : MB : ‘I don’t know if you are from USA , but there seems to be a problem here with kids taking guns to school . And using them . Where do they get the ideas ? ( Give you a hint ? ) Games’ ( MB ) . Another participant suggested that , ‘ [ i ] f someone is being bullied in [ real life ] they may use SL as an escape . If they were then to be bullied in SL then i think it would be much worse for them’ ( KP ) . The following dialogue shows more First and Second Life interaction : VK : that’s interesting [ RR ] do you think people take out [ real life ] frustrations in SL ? ( VK ) RR : Yes I do . Some people’ ( RR ) This theme reveals a complex interplay between users and their online personas , which can bring the impact of grieﬁng out of the virtual world and into the user’s First Life , something mentioned dramatically in the Introduction which discussed several suicides and deaths caused by virtual world events . It appears that for some users , their Second Life stops at the computer , whereas others ﬁnd it harder to ‘switch it off’ . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 541 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 DISCUSSION Using a cross - disciplinary approach with a quantitative and qualitative methodology , this paper has explored the concept of grieﬁng in Second Life . As seen in the number of abuse reports Linden Lab now receive each day ( discussed in the Background and Context of the Study ) , and given that all of the Big Six were readily observed by the authors , and the fact that almost all the focus group participants had direct experience of it , grieﬁng appears to be common . The analysis of in - world synchronous focus groups highlighted emerging themes relating to how residents view grieﬁng , why they feel grieﬁng occurs and what interventions can be imple - mented to control this behaviour . The ﬁrst two objectives of this paper were to identify grieﬁng behaviours in virtual worlds and examine similarities and / or differences with behaviours seen in other contexts , and to examine the perceptions of victims on the impact of such behaviour . Based on the focus group themes , we propose a deﬁnition of grieﬁng as : ‘intentional , persistent , unacceptable behaviour which disrupts a resident’s ability to enjoy Second Life and which may have negative consequences for the resident both in Second Life and First Life . Mostly this behaviour is directed at a resident who cannot easily defend him or herself’ . This deﬁnition also reﬂects the key elements of school , workplace and cyber bullying . Within these deﬁni - tions , bullying is characterized as a repeated , persistent act involving a systematic abuse of power where a victim is in an inferior position . Given this , grieﬁng can be framed within the general bullying domain and can be considered as an extension to the phenomenon of cyberbullying . As with bullying , both direct ( e . g . verbal abuse ) and indirect ( e . g spreading rumours ) grieﬁng are possible in Second Life . The literature revealed that the following are frequent outcomes from bullying and cyberbullying : negative well - being including stress - related illness , feelings of frustration , anxiety and anger , and an impact on home , school and work life . As discussed in the Second Life environment sub - theme , the participants perceive that consequences of grieﬁng are less severe than bullying . We did not uncover any cases of ill health caused by grieﬁng , but some participants discussed feelings of frustration and anger , and we found negative effects on First Life . The impact on First Life was seen in the feeling that residents and users are one and the same ( recall ‘if you are harassing my avatar , you are harassing me’ ) . To examine the question of why grieﬁng occurs and suggest possible options to combat such behaviour ( Objective 3 ) , the focus groups revealed three contributing factors . The ﬁrst motivation is that grieﬁng occurs because the griefers want to show off their superior knowl - edge of Second Life to those who lack this knowledge . This was seen in the ‘asserting power through knowledge’ sub - theme . It is this superior knowledge that leads to the imbalance in the relationship between griefer and victim , common in all forms of bullying . The second motivation is that people grief because of the online gaming culture that brings the ﬁghting of other virtual worlds such as World of Warcraft , into Second Life . This differing view between those who see Second Life as a game and those who see it as something more causes problems . Those who see Second Life as a game do what they would do in many other 542 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 games , and attack the people they meet , conﬂicting with those who want to do business or socialize . The last motivation comes from Second Life being a ‘safe’ and easy place to grief . Ante - cedents to bullying , discussed in the Background and Context of the Study , include organiza - tional and individual factors . These organizational factors are the make - up of the group and an environment that allows it to go on , which includes loose management structures that do nothing to prevent it . The view that came out in the developer’s responsibility to control sub - theme ( presented in the Shared responsibility to control section ) is that Linden Lab are unable or unwilling to prevent grieﬁng . This is actually entirely in line with Linden’s philosophy for Second Life , that residents have freedom to take on any ‘life’ they like and that people who choose to grief have the right to do so . As such , they have not introduced many technical controls to forcibly control grieﬁng . Allowing users to ban certain avatars from entering their land and preventing the creation of self - replicating objects , which can crash the servers , are examples of controls they have put in place . Aside from technical controls , the Big Six are an attempt to shape the society for everyone’s enjoyment , with punishments for offenders ( sus - pension of account for instance ) . However , griefers can easily circumvent a ban by entering the world with a new account . Deindividuation features of Second Life did come up in the focus groups as contributing to the safe environment for griefers . All of this support the assertion that the environment is a safe place to grief . As the focus group participants discussed , the environment is also a safer place to be griefed , with less severe potential consequences than other forms of bullying . It may be that the griefers realize this and think that their actions are unlikely to cause any lasting harm . Individual factors that can lead to becoming a victim of bullying include low self - esteem and unassertiveness . Individual psychological factors such as these do not come into play in grieﬁng with the only victim characteristic identiﬁed as the inability to defend oneself due to lack of knowledge / experience of Second Life . These motivations and the shared responsibility to control theme suggest potential strate - gies for coping with grieﬁng . The ﬁrst is gaining enough experience of the world to be able to defend oneself . This could incorporate several of the strategies discussed – counter - aggression ( by using your experience to ﬁght back ) , defending oneself ( for example , using your experience to get out of a cage ) and ignoring the bully , ( for example , using your experience to block a griefer’s messages ) . Respondents were reluctant to use ‘grieﬁng the griefers’ ( counter - aggression ) as a potential coping strategy , but the other ideas were seen as acceptable . This attitude is another stark difference from other online communities where starting a ‘ﬂame war’ is a normal retaliation to a ﬂame . The developer’s and community’s responsibility sub - themes also suggest coping strategies . It was felt that Linden Lab could introduce technical controls to prevent grieﬁng , but as we have seen , they are not inclined to do so . The community responsibility seems more positive and more likely to be effective , and it was interesting to see that some respondents suggested this and the others supported it . As stated earlier , this sort of thing has already begun – the banning of griefers from multiple areas has already been implemented ( although is not yet well known ; see www . slbanlink . com ) . That the community is ready and willing to band together is encour - aging for the future of virtual worlds . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 543 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Regarding who the likely targets and perpetrators are , the likely targets are residents less experienced than the griefers . All that can be said about the likely perpetrators given the data collected so far is that they are more experienced users than their victims . CONCLUSION Drawing on work from IS , occupational psychology and computer science , this paper has examined the phenomena of unacceptable behaviour , or ‘grieﬁng’ , in the massively multi - player online virtual world Second Life . By observation and a series of in - world focus groups , we collected data to identify grieﬁng behaviours and their impact , examine why they occur and how to combat them , and identify who the likely targets and perpetrators are . Findings show that grieﬁng is unacceptable , persistent behaviour typically targeted at inexperienced residents by those with more knowledge of the virtual world . A potential strategy for coping with grieﬁng is for the community of users to use the controls available to them ( land controls for instance ) to collectively deal with troublesome avatars . The ﬁndings may have implications for similar virtual worlds that currently exist and , perhaps more importantly , those that do not yet exist , as many commentators believe that ‘Second Life - like’ environments will become one of the main interfaces through which people will access information in the future . In addition , the paper makes a methodological contribution demonstrating that ‘in - world’ research is both possible and valuable . The main limitation this study has is in its ability to generalize results to other virtual worlds , whose communities may not be adequately represented by the experiences of the sample of Second Life users reported here . Further research should address this using quantitative methods . Perhaps importantly for bullying research in general , virtual worlds offer the potential oppor - tunity to collect data from perpetrators , something which is often unavailable to bullying researchers . Given the anonymity that the Second Life interface offers , and based on our experiences interacting with users , it looks likely that griefers would be willing to be involved in future research . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to thank Christine Ennew . REFERENCES Alonzo , M . & Aiken , M . ( 2004 ) Flaming in electronic communication . Decision Support Systems , 36 , 205 – 213 . Ashforth , B . ( 1994 ) Petty tyranny in organizations . Human Relations , 47 , 755 – 770 . Bainbridge , W . S . ( 2007 ) The scientiﬁc research potential of virtual worlds . Science , 317 , 472 – 476 . Baruch , Y . ( 2005 ) Bullying on the net : adverse behaviour on email and its impact . Information and Management , 42 , 361 – 371 . 544 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Bauman , S . & Del Rio , A . ( 2006 ) Preservice teachers’ responses to bullying scenarios : comparing physical , verbal and relational bullying . Journal of Educational Psychology , 98 , 219 – 231 . BBC ( 2007 ) Sweden plans Second Life embassy . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / 1 / hi / world / europe / 6310915 . stm ( accessed 1 August 2008 ) . Boulton , M . J . & Smith , P . K . ( 1994 ) Bully / victim problems in middle - school children : stability , self - perceived compe - tence , peer perceptions and peer acceptance . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 12 , 315 – 329 . Brodsky , C . ( 1976 ) The Harassed Worker . Lexington Books , Toronto , ON , Canada . Castronova , E . ( 2001 ) Virtual worlds : a ﬁrst - hand account of market and society on the cyberian frontier . CESifo Working Paper Series No . 618 . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract _ id = 294828 ( accessed 5 August 2008 ) . Castronova , E . ( 2005 ) Synthetic Worlds : The Business and Culture of Online Games . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . IL , USA . Chesney , T . ( 2005 ) Online self disclosure in diaries and its implications for knowledge managers . UKAIS Confer - ence , 22 – 24 March , Northumbria University , Newcastle , UK . Chesney , T . , Chuah , S . & Hoffmann , R . ( 2009 ) Virtual world experimentation : an exploratory study . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , in press . Coie , J . D . , Dodge , K . A . , Terry , R . & Wright , V . ( 1991 ) The role of aggression in peer relations : an analysis of aggression episodes in boys’ playgroups . Child Devel - opment , 62 , 812 – 826 . Coyne , I . , Seigne , E . & Randall , P . ( 2000 ) Predicting workplace victim status from personality . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 9 , 335 – 349 . Daft , R . L . & Lengel , R . H . ( 1986 ) Organizational informa - tion requirements , media richness and structural design . Management Science , 23 , 554 – 571 . Daft , R . L . , Lengel , R . H . & Trevino , L . K . ( 1987 ) Message equivocality , media selection and manager perfor - mance : implications for information systems . MIS Quar - terly , September , 355 – 366 . Daniel Linden ( 2006 ) Abuse reporting begins overhaul . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / blog . secondlife . com / 2006 / 12 / 08 / abuse - reporting - begins - overhaul / ( accessed 2 March 2007 ) . Djurkovic , N . & McCormack , D . ( 2006 ) Neuroticism and the psychosomatic model of workplace bullying . Journal of Managerial Psychology , 21 , 73 – 88 . Douglas , K . M . & McGarty , C . ( 2002 ) On computers and elsewhere : a model of the effects of internet identiﬁability on communicative behaviour . Group Dynamics , 6 , 17 – 26 . Einarsen , S . ( 1999 ) The nature and causes of bullying at work . International Journal of Manpower , 20 , 16 – 27 . Einarsen , S . , Raknes , B . I . & Matthiesen , S . B . ( 1994 ) Bul - lying and harassment at work and its relationship with work environment quality . The European Work and Organisational Psychologist , 4 , 381 – 401 . El - Shinnawy , M . & Markus , M . ( 1998 ) Acceptance of com - munication media in organizations : richness or features ? IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication , 41 , 242 – 256 . Farrar , S . ( 2006 ) Campus created in an acre of pixels . Times Higher Education Supplement , published 1 December 2006 . Fass , A . ( 2007 ) Sex pranks and reality . Forbes . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / members . forbes . com / forbes / 2007 / 0702 / 048 . html ( accessed 6 August 2008 ) . Festinger , L . , Pepitone , A . & Newcomb , T . ( 1952 ) Some consequences of deindividuation in a group . Human Computer Interaction , 6 , 119 – 146 . Fitzgerald , L . F . , Drasgow , F . , Hulin , C . L . , Gelfand , M . J . & Magley , V . J . ( 1997 ) Antecedents and consequences of sexual harassment in organisations : a test of an inte - grated model . Journal of Applied Psychology , 82 , 578 – 589 . Foo , C . Y . & Koivisto , E . M . I . ( 2004 ) Deﬁning grief play in MMORPGs : player and developer perceptions . Interna - tional Conference on Advances in Computer Entertain - ment Technology , 3 – 5 June , Singapore . Fulk , J . , Schmitz , J . & Ryu , D . ( 1995 ) Cognitive elements in the social construction of communication technology . Management , 8 , 259 – 288 . Gartner ( 2007 ) Virtual worlds – real opportunities . Gartner Symposium ITXPO 2007 , 20 – 23 May , Barcelona , Spain . Grant , D . , Hall , R . , Wailes , N . & Wright , C . ( 2006 ) The false promise of technological determinism : the case of enter - prise resource planning systems . New Technology , Work and Employment , 21 , 2 – 15 . Grosvenor , L . ( 1998 ) Hybrid language : a study of e - mail and miscommunication . 45th Annual Conference Pro - ceedings , Society for Technical Communication , Arling - ton , VA , USA , 1998 . Guest , T . ( 2007 ) Second Lives . Random House , London . Halligan , J . ( 2005 ) Death by cyber - bully . Boston Globe , 17 August 2005 . Hawker , D . S . J . & Boulton , M . J . ( 2000 ) Twenty years research on peer victimization and psychosocial malad - Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 545 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 justment : a meta - analytic review of cross - sectional studies . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 41 , 441 – 455 . Hoel , H . , Faragher , B . & Cooper , C . L . ( 2004 ) Bullying is detrimental to health , but all bullying behaviours are not necessarily equally damaging . British Journal of Guid - ance and Counselling , 32 , 367 – 387 . Joinson , A . N . ( 2001 ) Self - disclosure in computer - mediated communication : the role of self - awareness and visual anonymity . European Journal of Social Psychology , 31 , 177 – 192 . Joinson , A . N . ( 2003 ) Understanding the Psychology of Internet Behaviour . Palgrave MacMillan , New York , NY , USA . Kiesler , S . , Siegel , J . & McGuire , T . W . ( 1984 ) Social psychological aspects of computer - mediated communi - cation . American Psychologist , 39 , 1123 – 1134 . Klein , H . K . & Myers , M . D . ( 1999 ) A set of principles for conducting and evaluating interpretive ﬁeld studies in information systems . MIS Quarterly , 23 , 67 – 94 . Kuecklich , J . ( 2004 ) Other playings – cheating in computer games . Other Players Conferences , University of Copenhagen , Denmark , 6 – 8 December . Limper , R . ( 2000 ) Cooperation between parents , teachers , and school boards to prevent bullying in education : an overview of work done in the Netherlands . Aggressive Behaviour , 26 , 125 – 134 . Lombardi , C . ( 2006 ) Duran Duran gets a Second Life . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / news . com . com / 2061 - 10802 _ 3 - 6103161 . html ( accessed 1 August 2008 ) . McKee , H . ( 2002 ) ‘YOUR VIEWS SHOWED TRUE IGNO - RANCE ! ! ! ’ : ( mis ) communication in an online interracial discussion forum . Computers and Composition , 19 , 411 – 434 . Niedl , K . ( 1996 ) Mobbing and well - being : economic and personnel development implications . European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology , 5 , 239 – 249 . Olweus , D . ( 1991 ) Bully / victim problems among school - children . In : The Development and Treatment of Child - hood Aggression , Pepler , D . J . & Rubin , K . H . ( eds ) , pp . 411 – 447 . Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , USA . Overell , S . ( 1998 ) Hotline reveals underbelly of British working practice . People Management , 4 , 10 . Patchin , J . W . & Hinduja , S . ( 2006 ) Bullies move beyond the schoolyard : a preliminary look at cyberbullying . Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice , 4 , 148 – 169 . Paulson , A . ( 2003 ) Internet bullying . Christian Science Monitor , published 30 December 2006 . Poole , M . S . & DeSanctis , G . ( 1990 ) Understanding the use of group decision support systems : the theory of adap - tive structuration . In : Organizations and Communication Technology , Fulk , J . & Steinﬁeld , C . ( eds ) , pp . 173 – 193 . Sage Publications , London , UK . Postmes , T . , Spears , R . & Lea , M . ( 1998 ) Breaching or building social boundaries . Communication Research , 25 , 689 – 715 . Quine , L . ( 1999 ) Workplace bullying in NHS community trust : staff questionnaire survey . British Medical Journal , 318 , 569 – 573 . Rayner , C . & Hoel , H . ( 1997 ) A summary review of litera - ture relating to workplace bullying . Journal of Commu - nity & Applied Social Psychology , 7 , 181 – 191 . Reicher , S . ( 1982 ) The determination of collective behav - iour . In : Social Identity and Intergroup Relations , Tajfel , H . ( ed . ) , pp . 41 – 83 . Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , UK . Reicher , S . , Spears , R . & Postmes , T . ( 1995 ) A social identity model of deindividuation phenomena . European Review of Social Psychology , 6 , 161 – 198 . Reinig , B . A . , Briggs , R . O . & Nunamaker , J . F . ( 1998 ) Flaming in the electronic classroom . Journal of Manage - ment Information Systems , 14 , 45 – 59 . Rivers , I . & Smith , P . K . ( 1994 ) Types of bullying behaviour andtheircorrelates . AggressiveBehaviour , 20 , 359 – 368 . Rotundo , M . , Nguyen , D . - H . & Sackett , P . R . ( 2001 ) A meta - analytic review of gender differences in percep - tions of sexual harassment . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 86 , 914 – 922 . Rushe , D . ( 2006 ) Life in the unreal world . The Sunday Times Magazine , published 10 December 2007 . Salmivalli , C . , Lagerspetz , K . , Bjorkqvist , K . , Osterman , K . & Kaukiainen , A . ( 1996 ) Bullying as a group process : participant roles and their relations to social status within the group . Aggressive Behavior , 22 , 1 – 15 . Second Opinion ( 2006 ) Police blotter . October 2006 . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / secondlife . com / newsletter / 2006 _ 10 / html / police _ blotter . html ( accessed 7 August 2008 ) . Seigne , E . ( 1998 ) Bullying at work in Ireland . In : Bullying at Work , 1998 Research Update Conference Proceedings , Rayner , C . , Sheehan , M . & Barker , M . ( eds ) . Stafford - shire University , Stafford , UK . Seigne , E . , Coyne , I . , Randall , P . & Parker , J . ( 2007 ) Personality traits of bullies as a contributory factor in workplace bullying . An exploratory study . International Journal of Organization Theory and Behavior , 10 , 118 – 132 . Shaw , R . L . ( 2001 ) Why use interpretative phenomenologi - cal analysis in health psychology ? Health Psychology Update , 10 , 48 – 52 . 546 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 SimTeach ( 2007 ) Second Life : universities and private islands . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / www . simteach . com / wiki / index . php ? title = Second _ Life : _ Universities _ and _ Private _ Islands ( accessed 1 August 2008 ) . Smith , J . & Osborn , M . ( 2003 ) Interpretative phenomeno - logical analysis . In : Qualitative Psychology : A Practical Guide to Research Methods , Smith , J . ( ed . ) , pp . 51 – 80 . SAGE , London . Smith , J . A . , Jarman , M . & Osborne , M . ( 1999 ) Doing inter - pretative phenomenological analysis . In : Qualitative Health Psychology , Murray , M . & Chamberlain , K . ( eds ) , pp . 218 – 240 . Sage , London , UK . Smith , J . H . ( 2004 ) Playing dirty – understanding conﬂicts in multiplayer games . The 5th Annual Conference of the Association of Internet Researchers , University of Sussex , UK , 19 – 22 September . Smith , P . K . & Brain , P . ( 2000 ) Bullying in school : lessons from two decades of research . Aggressive Behavior , 26 , 1 – 9 . Smith , P . K . & Thompson , D . ( 1991 ) Practical Approaches to Bullying . David Fulton , London , UK . Smith , P . K . , Singer , M . , Hoel , H . & Cooper , C . ( 2003 ) Victimization in the school and the workplace : are there any links ? British Journal of Psychology , 94 , 175 – 188 . Smith , P . K . , Mahdavi , J . , Carvalho , M . , Fisher , S . , Russell , S . & Tippett , N . ( 2008 ) Cyberbullying : its nature and impact in secondary school pupils . Journal of Child Psy - chology and Psychiatry , 49 , 376 – 385 . Spencer , S . ( 2002 ) Addicted : suicide over everquest ? CBS News . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / www . cbsnews . com / stories / 2002 / 10 / 17 / 48hours / main525965 . shtml ( accessed 17 July 2008 ) . Stern , S . ( 1999 ) Adolescent girls’ expression on web home pages : spirited , sombre and self - conscious sites . Con - vergence , 5 , 22 – 41 . Suzannevega . com ( 2006 ) The Ofﬁcial Community of Suzanne Vega . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / www . suzannevega . com / ( accessed date 1 August 2008 ) . Thompsen , P . A . & Foulger , D . A . ( 1996 ) Effects of picto - graphs and quoting on ﬂaming in electronic mail . Com - puters in Human Behavior , 12 , 225 – 243 . Turkle , S . ( 1995 ) Life on the Screen . Orion , New York , NY , USA . Van der Heijden , H . ( 2004 ) User acceptance of hedonic information systems . MIS Quarterly , 28 , 695 – 704 . Vartia , M . ( 1996 ) The sources of bullying – psychological work environment and organisational climate . European Journal of Work and Organisational Psychological , 5 , 203 – 214 . van der Wal , M . F . , de Wit , C . A . M . & Hirasing , R . A . ( 2003 ) Bullying psychosocial health among young victims and offenders of direct and indirect . Pediatrics , 111 , 1312 – 1317 . Ward , M . ( 2007 ) When work becomes a game . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / news . bbc . co . uk / 1 / hi / technology / 7030234 . stm ( accessed 18 July 2008 ) . Warner , D . E . & Raiter , M . ( 2005 ) Social context in Massively - Multiplayer Online Games ( MMOGs ) : ethical questions in shared space . International Review of Infor - mation Ethics , 4 , 46 – 52 . Welch , J . ( 1997 ) Electronic menaces are a ﬂaming liability . People Management , 3 , 14 . Ybarra , M . L . ( 2004 ) Linkages between depressive symp - tomatology and internet harassment among young regular internet users . CyberPsychology and Behaviour , 7 , 247 – 257 . Ybarra , M . L . , Mitchell , K . J . , Wolak , J . & Finkelhor , D . ( 2006 ) Examining characteristics and associated dis - tress related to internet harassment : ﬁndings from the second youth internet safety survey . Pediatrics , 118 , 1169 – 1177 . Yee , N . ( 2002 ) Motivations of play in MMORPGs . [ WWW document ] . URL http : / / www . nickyee . com ( accessed 17 July 2008 ) . Biographies Thomas Chesney is a Member of the International Centre for Behavioural Business Research at the University of Nottingham . He has a PhD in Information Systems from Brunel University , an MSc in Informatics from Edinburgh University and a BSc in Information Management from the Queen’s University of Belfast . He has a diploma in learning and teaching in higher education and is a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy . His research involves looking at people’s interaction with , and reaction to , information systems . Iain Coyne is an Associate Professor in Occupational Psychology at the Institute of Work , Health & Organisa - tions , University of Nottingham and a Chartered Psycholo - gist and Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society ( BPS ) . His research interests include bullying at work and productive and counterproductive behaviour in the workplace and he has written a number of papers and has presented at national and international conferences on these areas . Currently , Dr . Coyne is a management com - mittee member of a European COST programme examin - ing cyber - bullying within educational contexts . Grieﬁng in virtual worlds 547 © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548 Brian Logan is a Member of the Agents Lab and the Mixed Reality Laboratory at the University of Nottingham . His research interests lie in the area of agent systems , and span the speciﬁcation , design and implementation of agents , including agent architectures , agent programming languages and logics and theories for agent - based systems . He is also interested in applications of agents , particularly in virtual environments and in simulation . Neil Madden is a Research Associate in the Mixed Reality Lab at the University of Nottingham where he did his PhD thesis on generating narrative from the activities in persistent virtual environments . He has a BSc in Computer Science also from the University of Nottingham . Current research interests include narrative generation , agent - oriented programming , knowledge representation and ubiquitous / pervasive computing . 548 T Chesney et al . © 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd , Information Systems Journal 19 , 525 – 548