ORIGINAL ARTICLE Gamification for development : a case of collaborative learning in Sri Lankan primary schools Thilina Halloluwa 1 & Dhaval Vyas 1 & Hakim Usoof 2 & K . P . Hewagamage 2 Received : 14 November 2016 / Accepted : 25 July 2017 # Springer - Verlag London Ltd . 2017 Abstract Mobile applications and gamification approaches have the potential to provide a better learning experience to children . However , these practices are rarely applied in the developing world . This paper presents a case study of a tablet - based application designed for primary school students in rural Sri Lanka for learning mathematics . In contrast to the previous studies done in developing countries , we carried out an in situ field study over 2 weeks with grade three students ( 8 - year - olds ) in two different under - resourced government schools . A comparison study was performed between students who learned through the traditional teaching methods and the ones who learned through the gamified tablet application . Using the post - colonial computing perspective , we report how some of the assumptions commonly applied in the devel - oped countries do not work in a developing country such as Sri Lanka and how the introduction of gamified tablet appli - cations afforded an environment that defied certain cultural norms making students feel comfortable around the teacher . We also observed the traditional teacher - centric learning transforming into a balanced mix of student - centric learning where students took ownership of their learning . Keywords Human computer interaction . Gamification . ICT4D . Collaboration learning . Interaction design for children 1 Introduction One of the major issues the Sri Lankan education sector faces is the high failure rate of students in subjects such as mathe - matics . For instance , approximately 90 % of the students who sit for grade 5 scholarship examination fail and in grade 11 this number is close to 45 % [ 22 ] . Studies have shown that a lack of sound primary education can directly affect students ’ educa - tional achievements in higher studies [ 2 ] . Additionally , the learning environment and learning experience can have a di - rect impact on the educational achievement of a student [ 59 ] , especially with younger learners [ 69 ] . In Sri Lanka , the learn - ing and teaching environment is mostly teacher - centric , but efforts are being made to make it more student - centric [ 20 ] . In primary education , students learn a fair amount of things in - formally . Teachers use tools and activities to link formal edu - cation and informal education to support effective learning . The use of Information Communication Technology ( ICT ) and collaboration with peers ( group work ) are examples of such tools and activities . Research suggests that a group of individuals can solve a diverse set of problems effectively than when they work independently [ 60 ] . Hence , collaborative learning can be used as a pedagogical means to provide a better learning experience while ICT enhance that experience . Projects such as One Laptop Per Child ( OLPC ) [ 53 ] and hole - in - the - wall [ 51 ] have attempted to integrate technology into rural regions in the developing countries with both posi - tive and negative outcomes . Ames [ 4 ] describes this type of technologies as charismatic technologies . Even though the use of tablet technologies for education has already begun in the * Dhaval Vyas d . vyas @ qut . edu . au Thilina Halloluwa thilina . halloluwa @ hdr . qut . edu . au Hakim Usoof hau @ ucsc . cmb . ac . lk K . P . Hewagamage kph @ ucsc . cmb . ac . lk 1 Queensland University of Technology ( QUT ) , Brisbane , Australia 2 University of Colombo School of Computing , Colombo , Sri Lanka Pers Ubiquit Comput DOI 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 017 - 1073 - 6 developed countries , questions of how to design applications that cater to the requirements of children and teachers in the developing countries are still under - explored [ 47 ] . Researchers often assume the availability of stable and reliable power sup - plies , affordable and ubiquitous cell coverage , and internet facil - ities when designing for the developing countries [ 3 ] . However , in many of the developing countries , none of these assumptions are guaranteed . Irani et al . [ 34 ] referred to these differences and the challenges faced in the developing world when designing , under the umbrella of B post - colonial computing . ^ In this paper , we present a case study which explores the use of a gamified tablet application for promoting collaborative learning at two under - resourced primary schools of Sri Lanka . This setting represents a substantially different learning and teaching environment to the ones generally depicted in the developed countries [ 39 , 46 ] . We present the findings from an in situ study with 130 grade three students ( 8 - year - olds ) who used our gamified mobile application over 2 weeks using 40 tablet computers . This was a Sri Lankan government spon - sored study which was carried out in partnership with a Sri Lankan university . Approximately 70 % of the participating students were under - privileged and came from neighbouring orphanages . All the students had very limited exposure to in - formation technology and smart mobile devices . A comparison study was carried out between two student groups : one group was taught using the traditional teaching methods and the other using the gamified mobile application . Using the post - colonial perspective [ 26 ] , this paper reports on how these under - privileged students used the gamified mo - bile applications on tablet computers in a classroom setting and how the social and cultural changes were brought forward by the introduction of a new technology . Rather than focusing on the pedagogical side of education , our work focuses on under - standing the learning experiences of students facilitated by the new technology . We found that the traditional authoritative fig - ure of teachers transformed into a friendly facilitator , where students become more comfortable around them . The classroom setting shifted into a collaborative , flexible learning environ - ment . From this paper , we make a case for using mobile appli - cations in the Sri Lankan education setting and critique certain assumptions about gamification mechanisms that are built on the developed world perspective . Overall , this paper makes a contribution to the human - computer interaction ( HCI ) field by designing , implementing , and evaluating a gamified learning experience in primary education in a developing country setting . 2 Related work 2 . 1 Mobile HCI and children Technology - mediated interactions play an important role in the development of affinity spaces and communities for collaborative learning [ 10 ] . Recent studies have started to ex - plore the impact of mobile devices in education [ 31 ] . It has been identified that with touch gestures , children are facing many challenges such as acquiring onscreen targets [ 5 ] . They also encounter problems with handling devices since they have smaller fingers , weaker arms , and less fine motor skills [ 14 ] . Therefore , the findings of studies which target adult au - dience [ 72 ] cannot be generalized for younger users . Even though the subject of mobile devices and its usage in educa - tion have been identified , there are very few studies which were carried out on designing for learning on multi - touch devices for young learners . Studies have been carried out to understand the impact of mobile devices on differently abled children . MyCalendar [ 1 ] is one such application which in - volved 11 children with autism spectrum disorder over 6 months . The researchers found that the children have be - come more engaged and interested when they were using the application . On their study , Lisa et al . [ 5 ] present a set of design recommendations for touch and gesture interactions for children such as techniques on ignoring holdover touches , activating intended widgets , and various interface design tech - niques . While this study provides a good set of recommenda - tions , it has been done with children from ages 6 to 17 . The study concludes by saying that the recommendations they have given did not apply for younger children . Additionally , they have done this study only with smartphones with small screens . They have not focused on the devices with larger screens such as tablets . A recent study done in the UK [ 47 ] has looked at the role of iPad , within learning activities across a school year . The study reports that the iPads can have a positive impact on student learning and it allows them to be - come more independent . Although there are various studies showcasing the positive impact of introducing mobile devices such as tablet computers to classes [ 30 , 48 , 54 ] , there are other studies which report negative influences [ 19 ] reporting that it distracts children . In contrast , from a comparative analysis done by Stren [ 64 ] between students who learned with tablet devices and the ones who learned with paper , reports that while students showed a significant preference to use tablets , the medium of which content was delivered made little effect on engagement or retention . However , properly designed ap - plications can lead to improvements in retention and learning . Ames [ 4 ] defined this holding power of devices as charisma and reports that this type of technology adaptations sometimes depicts the outcomes straightforward instead of a difficult pro - cess infused with choices and politics . Studies show that children find it challenging to interact with computers using input devices [ 25 ] . Children face diffi - culties with interactions such as marquee selection , double click , and drag and drop when using computer mouse [ 65 ] . Bederson et al . [ 9 ] suggest that interface designers should not rely on the child ’ s ability to distinguish left from their right since children cannot reliably identify those . The use of text is Pers Ubiquit Comput another concern when designing for children . Furthermore , many user interfaces are also based on the office metaphors . For instance , to open something , it is often depicted using the B open file folder ^ and to save something the B floppy disk ^ icon is used . However , children are not familiar with these metaphors and related icons which in turn leads to confusion . Therefore , it can be concluded that when designing for chil - dren , we should avoid using the conventional office - related metaphors as much as possible . There is a separate branch of research which argues that when technology is implemented for children , it is critical to involve them in all aspects of design [ 26 ] . It has been identi - fied that the children aged between 7 and 10 are the best candidates for this type of studies due to the lack of precon - ception about the design space [ 57 ] . Over the years , various studies have been conducted which discuss the ways children can be involved in the design . Druin [ 26 ] reports that children should be involved as design partners where the adults and children are treated as equals . Read et al . [ 57 ] suggest different levels of involvement , namely informant , balanced , and facil - itated . In addition , many methods such as cooperative inquiry [ 26 ] , bonded design [ 43 ] , and KidStory [ 68 ] have been intro - duced to design with children and several techniques such as bags of stuff [ 78 ] , storyboarding [ 71 ] , and layered elaboration [ 73 ] have been introduced to get them engaged . 2 . 2 ICT4D One similarity between all these studies is that a majority of these are from the developed country settings . Although there have been many attempts to integrate technology in the devel - oping regions , especially in low - resource environments , rang - ing from the health sector to agriculture [ 41 , 49 , 77 ] , we could find only a few studies done in the developing regions in the context of younger learners . The work done within the HCI community on mobility and ubiquitous technologies are struc - tured around assumptions [ 3 ] . These assumptions are mostly based on practices and facilities available in the developed world . The assumptions made on infrastructure availability are one such assumption which is proven invalid in most post - colonial environments [ 3 ] . Suchman [ 66 ] has also report - ed the differences in practices and the importance of not rely - ing on the assumptions made at the B hyper - developed world ^ when designing for post - colonial or marginalized populations . Kam et al . [ 37 ] have carried out a study on designing digital games in a rural Indian village with students from three schools . They have given students to play a game for 1 . 5 h . These games were traditional village games . They state that it is easier for rural children to relate to technologically en - hanced education systems if it has the same game mechanics as a traditional game . The focus of the study was on designing for keypad mobile phones . Another study [ 42 ] has attempted to integrate mobile phones in an Indian village and has focused on exploring how unsupervised mobile learning is done in rural India . They report how village children used mobile phones in their day - to - day lives along with their im - provements in English as a second language . This study was done using basic mobile phones and not in a classroom envi - ronment . Larson et al . [ 44 ] have conducted an experiment with 63 students in India on improving English literacy . This is a mobile game , based on the popular sport cricket , targeting to improve pronunciation skills of rural Indian children . Nevertheless , this was done using low end basic mobile phones . OLPC is a concept that was introduced to promote technology use in primary education in developing countries . This initiative has shown both positive and negative impacts in different contexts . For instance , a study was done in Ethiopia [ 67 ] which focused on child literacy have shown positive results , while in the US [ 74 ] , it was identified a failure due to various factors . The OLPC Sri Lanka initiative reports that B only giving XO machines did not make a big change among these young learners in general ^ [ 32 ] . They claim that the background has to be set including conducting teacher training and setting a sound pedagogy . Ames [ 4 ] argues that the positive results and claims made by OLPC studies in the developing world are mainly due to the charismatic nature of the device . 2 . 3 Games for education and gamification Several studies have been carried out in developed countries which suggest that technology and games help students achieve better educational goals [ 8 ] . These studies have used different devices ranging from desktop computers to multi - touch setups [ 62 ] . The researchers argue that the games that consist of both fun and motivational features can be used as a means to improve and strengthen the quality of education . Serious games , edutainment systems , and simulations are terms that are closely related when games for education is concerned . Charsky [ 16 ] suggests that the terms , games , and simulations are mostly similar with one significant difference , which is B fantasy . ^ In most cases , the simulations are based on real - life scenarios . The term edutainment is formed by com - bining the words B education ^ and B entertainment ^ together . By definition , an edutainment system is something that pro - vides education along with entertainment [ 16 ] . Therefore , this term can be applied to not only games but also movies , doc - umentaries , etc . The term serious game has been defined in many ways . Breuer and Bente [ 12 ] define it as B a game in which education ( in its various forms ) is the primary goal , rather than entertainment . ^ However , the definition of Zyda [ 79 ] helps to bridge the gap between simulations and serious games . He defines it as B a mental contest , played with a com - puter in accordance with specific rules that uses entertainment to further government or corporate training , education , health , public policy , and strategic communication objectives . ^ With Pers Ubiquit Comput both of these definitions , we can conclude that a serious game is a digital game having a B serious purpose ^ other than pure entertainment . Unlike the video games , which are purely based on entertainment , serious games use pedagogy to incor - porate learning experience while keeping the entertainment intact . There is an abundance of research work that describes suc - cess stories of the application of games in education . Three separate reviews have analysed the empirical studies that are done on the effectiveness of games in learning . Hays [ 29 ] reviewed 48 studies published between 1982 and 2005 . In his conclusions , he mentions that the empirical research on the effectiveness is fragmented and is filled with methodolog - ical flaws . However , he concludes that some games can pro - vide effective learning for a variety of learners . In their study , Tomic and Divjak [ 70 ] reviewed 32 papers published from 1995 to 2010 . They found mixed results where 21 out of 32 studies showing positive results on the effectiveness of games in learning . They conclude by mentioning that the computer games have to be pedagogically designed in order to have a positive impact . However , only 16 out of the 32 studies were done with primary students . A recent study [ 7 ] looks at 40 papers published from 2002 to 2012 . Twenty - one ( 21 ) of the 40 studies were done with elementary kids . Even this review generated mixed results . They conclude that there is a lack of longitudinal empirical studies of the actual use of games for learning and the positive results received in many cases might have been due to the novelty factor . Researchers use the terms B gamification ^ and B game - based learning ^ ( GBL ) interchangeably . Therefore , it is important to distinguish between the two terms . Since the concept of gamification is relatively new , there is a wide range of defini - tions for gamification . Nevertheless , a widely accepted defi - nition is B the use of game design elements in non - game contexts ^ [ 23 ] . Gamification can be utilized to motivate users to carry out tasks . Applications such as Foursquare reward users for checking into their current location . When a user check - in , the application gives out points which help the user to become the B mayor ^ of that location . In the context of education , it can be can be used to transform the learning process into a game . It takes game mechanics and gameplay elements such as badges , points , leaderboards , progress bars , and levels and applies them to existing learning programs . In contrast , GBL refers to the use of a game as part of the learn - ing process [ 40 ] . It selects a game and uses it to learn . For example , SimSE is a game used by the University of California to teach software engineering concepts . However , researchers agree that the goal of both gamification and GBL remain the same . In his book , Kapp [ 38 ] states that B When you get right down to it , the goals of both are relatively the same . Serious games and gamification are both trying to solve a problem , motivate , and promote learning using game - based thinking and techniques . ^ Since its introduction , gamification has been used in many educational studies in various forms . Diverse motivation the - ories have been used to explore how gamification triggers positive engagement [ 38 ] . Brewer et al . [ 13 ] have carried out a study with children from ages 5 to 7 in a laboratory setting from the USA . They have reported that the completion rate of the study task increased from 73 to 97 % with the introduction of gamified elements . However , one limitation of this study is that it has been carried out in a laboratory setting . The impact of these gamified activities was not tested in the natural set - ting . Another study [ 52 ] discusses a research study done in Greece , targeting primary and secondary students . This study aimed at motivating and promoting early literacy and extra - curricular reading of students using 3D immersive technolo - gies . They have found the introduction of gamified 3D immersive learning environments significantly increasing stu - dents ’ motivation and engagement . However , Domínguez et al . [ 24 ] claim that using gamification in education can pro - duce negative outcomes as well . They report that while the students who completed the gamified experience got better scores in practical assignments , they performed poorly on written assignments . Another finding is that even though the initial motivation is high , the students who completed the gamified experience participated less in class activities . Caponetto et al . [ 15 ] have reviewed 119 papers between 2000 and 2014 published on gamifying the education field . However , all most all those studies ( > 97 % ) had been con - ducted in developed countries . According to the same re - searchers , only 3 % of the total studies are with primary stu - dents where 43 % is with universities and 48 % with other training activities . Only 6 % of those studies were done in secondary schools . Another similar study [ 21 ] reports that only two studies out of 357 were carried out with primary students . This shows that while there are many studies done on GBL , there is a significant lack of research done on gamification in school education sector . 2 . 4 Need to go in situ While there are multiple studies done in the developed world on the use of technology in education , there are very limited studies on designing technologically enhanced learning in the developing countries . This might be due to various socioeco - nomic reasons and the significant digital divide between the two regions . For instance , while more than 70 % UK schools use tablet devices and 10 % of them initiated one - tablet - per - pupil policy [ 17 ] , it is prohibited to bring a mobile device to the schools in Sri Lanka [ 6 ] . Additionally , only 22 . 4 % house - holds in Sri Lanka own a desktop or a laptop . In rural estates , this statistic drops to 4 . 6 % . Only 10 . 3 % of the households of Sri Lanka have internet connection [ 63 ] . Only 8 . 9 % of prima - ry school students are computer literate while only 3 . 2 % of the children in Sri Lanka ( age 5 to 14 ) use the internet . Therefore , Pers Ubiquit Comput it is safe to argue that the results received from a developed country might be different from the ones taken from a devel - oping country such as Sri Lanka . Furthermore , most studies have been carried out in a controlled environment or targeting informal education outside the school . Research stresses the need for conducting studies exploring the impact of these type of devices in the education sector in situ [ 50 ] , which is a challenge well recognized by the HCI researchers [ 28 ] . Table 1 shows a summary of some pertinent HCI studies in this area . We will use the work referred in the table to build a discussion which illuminates the novelty of our study . Ours will be the first in situ study on designing gamified mobile applications aiming to investigate how technologically en - hanced gamified mobile educational applications support learning and enhance the learning experience in primary school classroom of a South Asian developing country . 3 The gamified mobile application The gamified educational mobile application was developed according to the grade three primary mathematics syllabus in one of Sri Lankan native languages ( Fig . 1 ) . We conducted an informal observation to understand how the teaching unfolded in school ’ s natural setting . Afterwards , we have decided to integrate gamified elements such as progression , narrative , rewards , and feedbacks to the current teaching and learning practices instead of using an existing learning game for teach - ing . The intention was to use this application to get the chil - dren engaged in the regular learning activities , without distracting them with complex game features . In that sense , this application falls into the category of a gamified applica - tion rather than an educational game . The syllabus is currently divided into four main modules . 1 . Number sense and operations 2 . Algebra — learning to recognize patterns and sets . 3 . Geometry and spatial sense — knowledge of basic shapes 4 . Measurements — length , weight , time capacity , tempera - ture , and currency Conforming to this modular division , the gamified applica - tion was developed in four modules . The B shopper ^ ( Fig . 1b ) , comes under B measurements ^ ➔ B currency ^ stage . Since the participants are small children , a lot of child - related metaphors were used when developing the application . Cartoon charac - ters , animated animals , toffees , and coins were heavily used . The application was named B Sellam Gannan ^ which trans - lates to B playful math . ^ 3 . 1 Gamified features Werbach [ 75 ] propose a framework for using gamification and gamified elements ( the pyramid of elements ) as a pyramid structure . It divides all the elements into three categories : dy - namics , mechanics , and components . He also emphasizes on the importance of aesthetics ( sound , visual elements , etc . ) for the gamified activities . According to Werbach , the elements which come under B dynamics ^ are the high - level conceptual elements that make the gamified experience feel more cohe - sive . The B mechanics ^ are the elements that motivate users to progress further and drive participation . B Components ^ Table 1 Summary of recent literature in HCI on the use of technology in the classroom for primary students Ref . Context Findings [ 37 ] India , informal learning Traditional games can inform the design of digital learning games ; such games can have a positive impact on learning English as a second language . [ 42 ] India , informal learning Social contexts and practices impact learning . There is a reasonable level of improvement of academic learning and motivation with the introduction of mobile games . [ 44 ] India , formal learning Cultural motivations such as fondness to cricket can be used to improve spoken English of school kids . [ 10 ] USA , informal learning Technology - mediated interactions play a deep role in the development of affinity spaces and communities for collaborative learning ( science ) . [ 64 ] USA , informal learning The medium in which content was delivered made little effect on engagement or retention . However , properly designed applications can lead to improvements in retention and learning . [ 54 ] USA , formal learning Children who used app - infused curriculum show significant learning gains in mathematics [ 47 ] UK , formal learning Tablet computers play three roles ( friend , functionary , and facilitator ) when used as a part of learning activities . But more work is needed to assess how introduction of technology impact educationally on the children as well as consider how best to meet the current and future needs of this kind of environment Pers Ubiquit Comput represents the specific instantiations of the dynamics and me - chanics . Aligned with the pyramid of elements , all the stages of our application associated the following gamified features . 3 . 1 . 1 Progression Progression and cascading information [ 61 ] are both similar concepts which describe the importance of unlocking infor - mation continually . Following up on this conceptual frame - work , the four main modules of the gamified educational mo - bile application was developed consisting different stages and multiple levels in each stage . In order to progress through the stage , the students have to complete the previous level . For instance , the shopper is a stage which composed with three levels . In order to complete the stage , all three levels need to be completed . 3 . 1 . 2 Narrative Narrative refers to a story line which glues the activities to - gether . It helps the activities to make sense . The application has a narrative feature at the beginning of each level which shows a video explaining what is happening with that level . This feature was used as a B how to ^ feature as well . 3 . 1 . 3 Rewards As rewards for the system , a 5 - point scoring / rewarding system was developed with the use of stars ( Fig . 1c ) . We used stars instead of giving a numerical score to the students . We en - sured that the students would get at least some reward for attempting . Therefore , even if they perform badly , they would at least get a single star with an encouraging message to try it again . The better they perform the more stars they get . 3 . 1 . 4 Feedback It is paramount that users visualize their progression real - time . Feedbacks can be used to facilitate this requirement . Whenever a user completes an activity , a feedback will be generated ( Fig . 1d ) . If it was a successful attempt , the feed - back is a congratulating pop - up . However , since the target users are small children , in an unsuccessful attempt , they would not receive a negative feedback . Instead , they would receive an encouraging feedback for them to try again . After completing each level , the users receive an overall feedback summarizing their performance during the usage . 4 Method 4 . 1 Participants The participants of our study were 130 grade three students and four teachers from two primary schools in the Sri Lankan capital region . Grade three students ( 8 - year - olds ) were select - ed , following Jean Piaget ’ s stages of cognitive development [ 56 ] as it states that the children in ages 7 – 11 start building logical thinking capabilities . This decision is also backed by the findings of Read and colleagues [ 57 ] , where they state that children in these age groups are the ideal candidates for de - signing with . Approximately 70 % of the students were under - privileged and from neighboring orphanages . None of the stu - dents or teachers had used tablet computers before ; however , Fig . 1 Use of animated graphics and child - related metaphors ( a ) , the shopper stage used for the study ( b ) , a leader board that uses star ( c ) , and feedback received at the finish of each level ( d ) Pers Ubiquit Comput the teachers had limited exposure of using touchscreen - based smartphones . Since the study involves working with children , ethical concerns were considered . A formal ethical clearance process was followed where parent / guardian consents were taken in writing and special permissions were sought from the Department of Education , Sri Lanka ( Ref . Number : 02 / 130 ) . All the participants and parents / guardians were informed that the participation in the study was volun - tarily and they could opt out at any given time without having to provide reasons . 4 . 2 The study We designed our study based on the recommendations of OLPC Sri Lanka initiative [ 32 ] . According to that report , one reason that the OLPC project failed in Sri Lanka was the mismatch between application content and the curriculum . Hence , as the initial step , we designed and implemented the gamified activities aligning with the grade three curriculum with direct insights from teachers . We distributed the tablet computers with the gamified application pre - installed and car - ried out an in situ field study . Students in each school were divided into two groups , consisting around 30 ~ 35 students in each group . The students were assigned to groups by the teachers based on the student registry which was ordered chro - nologically by their names . In one school , one group of stu - dents learned the concept of currency interactions using the traditional classroom methods and the other group learned through the gamified tablet application with the teacher still in charge of the class . The same teacher taught both the groups in that school . We applied the same process to the second school . The application we implemented covered a specific part of the mathematics curriculum which would usually be taught at the end of the semester . This was done to make sure that the concept being tested is relatively new to the students . Accordingly , the shopper ( Fig . 1b ) stage of the application is selected which involves interacting with currency and numer - ic finances . The selected stage has three main levels including an initial training level ( coin identification ) which the students play prior to the study . & Training level & Level A : Purchase goods by using coins which measure the students ’ number addition ability . & Level B : Give balance after the payment was made using notes . The second level measures the students ’ subtraction ability . Conforming to the design of the application , the lesson was divided into two sessions as well . The focus of the first session was to teach the students how to purchase goods by using coins ( referring to level A ) while the second session focused on teaching how to give balance ( referring to level B ) . The two teachers who were involved in our research collaboratively developed a short mathematics test for the grade three students . This test was used as a common eval - uation method in both the scenario ( with and without the tablet application ) for all the students . Tests were carried out before and after each session ( session 1 referring to level A and session 02 referring to level B ) to evaluate the impact of teaching / learning method . These tests were paper - based conforming to the standard examination pro - cedure in Sri Lanka . While giving out the test papers , the teachers made it clear to the students that this test was not going to affect their formal grades . Another recommendation of the OLPC Sri Lanka initiative was to carry out teacher training prior to the study . Hence , we have conducted additional training sessions to the teachers on how to operate the tablet computers . Since none of the participating students have used a tablet computer be - fore , we gave an additional 1 h for the students to get familiar with the tablet device by playing a simple game of coin iden - tification . This was the training level of the shopper . Each student of the group which used the gamified mobile applica - tion spent about 4 h with the devices excluding the additional 1 - h training session . 4 . 3 Data collection and analysis A combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches [ 18 ] was used for gathering and analysing data since it allows investigators to use different types of data to under - stand the research problems better . Participants were ob - served and video - recorded during the study . Both teachers and students were interviewed after the study . These were semi - structured interviews where we aimed to understand their previous experience of interacting with tablet appli - cations and understand their learning experiences with the gamified mobile application . We have provided a script of the interview in the Appendix . Each interview was approx - imately 10 – 15 min and took place immediately after finishing the study . Pre - and post - test results of both ses - sions were collected . Interview data were transcribed . Thematic analysis [ 11 ] was used to analyse the transcriptions and video clips of field study observations that were made in the school set - ting . In particular , we were observing how the technology supported engagement between teachers and children dur - ing the teaching sessions . Three researchers marked the pre - and post - test papers of the students under the supervision of a teacher . An independent - samples t test was conducted between the results of both sessions to determine whether the introduction of gamified mobile applications has an impact on students ’ edu - cational achievements . Pers Ubiquit Comput 5 Results 5 . 1 Cultural shift Usually , in most of the Asian countries ’ education systems , the teacher is recognized as an authoritative figure and the learning environment is mostly non - participative [ 55 ] . The students are encouraged to keep quiet in the classroom during the teaching period because if they were shouting , the teachers will not be able to talk to the entire classroom . A side effect of this is that the students refrain from asking questions from the teachers , even when they have an issue . They wait till the teacher finish teaching , but afterwards , the question is forgotten . When the teacher was teaching the traditional methods , she mostly used the chalk and talk method . The teacher talked to the students , drew coins on the blackboard , showed them the coins , etc . She would then ask questions from the students to make sure the students understood what she taught . The ma - jority of the time the teacher stood in front of the classroom because that allowed her to look at the whole classroom . However , she mentioned that due to a large number of stu - dents , it is very difficult for her to pay individual attention to each student . We observed a set of students being neglected during the session . Even though these students were clearly struggling to answer the questions the teacher is asking , they kept quiet and did not attempt to discuss with their friends sitting next to them . There were multiple instances where the teacher highly discourages the students from talking with each other . Figure 2 shows how both teachers taught to their respective classrooms . However , when the same teacher taught to the other group , using the mobile application , the atmosphere changed . The teacher gave an introduction to the coins and used the appli - cation as a teaching tool . She demonstrated how to interact with coins and notes by narrating a story to the students . After that , she asked the students to continue playing the game . In order to access the second level of the game , the students should first complete the training level as well as the level one . Since they wanted to complete activities , they were ask - ing for help from the teacher and their friends . The teacher did not stop them from talking to each other as well . She went to the students regularly and tried to help them complete the activities ( Fig . 3 ) . We understand this as an instance where the students took ownership to their own learning . The introduction of the gamified mobile application to the classroom changed the approach of teacher interacting with the students . The following excerpt from a teacher interview clearly depicts this change . Earlier I had to spend a lot of time getting students to concentrate on what I am teaching . And they had to imagine the teaching examples . But now since they can see what I am teaching , all I have to do is to explain the concept and help them to do it by themselves . So it saves me time Teacher 01 In the group which used the gamified mobile application , the atmosphere shifted to a more student - focused collaborative environment . It can be seen that the more competent students regularly try to help the slow learners catch up ( Fig . 4 ) . It was evident that students were eager to learn more about the ac - tivities and the device so that they can share them with other students . 5 . 2 Student - focused collaborative learning A teacher stated that previously she was struggling get stu - dents collaborate in classroom activities . This teacher has been trying to get the students to form groups and do an activity with measurement tools . Students are enjoying this a lot . Even yesterday I tried to get them to do an educational group work . But could not get them together even for 10 minutes . Now they are working in groups voluntarily Teacher 02 Furthermore , we observed the seating arrangements of the students change when the mobile applications were intro - duced in the second school . Initially , the students were seated in rows and listening to the teacher . But with the introduction of mobile applications , some students formed groups and ar - ranged their chairs in a circle so that they can work together . We also observed in some cases , there was an B alpha student ^ who would always get familiar with the activities faster than the others and then take a leading role in helping Fig . 2 The traditional way of teaching Pers Ubiquit Comput others comprehend ( Fig . 5 ) . In this case , the alpha student took the role of the teacher to his / her peers . 5 . 3 Impact on student performance An independent - samples t test was conducted to compare the pre - and post - test results when learning with and without the gamified application for both sessions . The first session re - ferred to the level A of the application while the second ses - sion referred to the level B . The purpose of this was to mea - sure the impact of the gamified mobile application to the ac - ademic performance of students . From the results of the first session , we found that there was a significant difference be - tween the pre - test scores ( M = 4 . 18 , SD = 2 . 50 ) and the post - test scores ( M = 5 . 44 , SD = 2 . 39 ) when learning with the gamified application ; p = 0 . 003 . However , we were unable to find a significant difference between the pre - test scores ( M = 4 . 00 , SD = 2 . 65 ) and the post - test scores ( M = 4 . 97 SD = 3 . 00 ) when learning the traditional methods ; p = 0 . 063 . We were able to discover a higher statistical significance with the second session . In the second session , the difference between the pre - test scores ( M = 0 . 82 , SD = 1 . 432 ) and the post - test scores ( M = 3 . 48 , SD = 2 . 501 ) when learning with the gamified application was highly significant with p = 0 . 000 . Furthermore , with the traditional methods , the dif - ference was insignificant ( p = 0 . 878 ) between pre - test scores ( M = 0 . 60 , SD = 1 . 182 ) and post - test scores ( M = 0 . 63 , SD = 1 . 193 ) . These results suggest that the introduction of gamified mobile applications had an effect on the student per - formance in the classroom . Specifically , when the instructions are coupled with gamified applications , the children ’ s perfor - mance within the classroom increases . Figure 6 depicts the changes ( improvements and deteriorations of scores between pre - and post - tests ) in pre - and post - test results when learning with and without the application after completing session 1 and session 2 , respectively . Although we were able to discover a significant improve - ment in scores when learning with the gamified application , the analysis showed a mismatch between the results of two sessions . That is , the significance level between the pre - and post - test is higher with the second session than with the first session . The post - session interviews revealed that majority of the students are attending private tuition classes and the tuition master has covered the first section of the currency lesson ( session 0 - level A ) during the first half of the semester . Thus , even though the schools have not covered that section of the syllabus , most students had prior knowledge about that concept . It can be said that this was the reason for not observ - ing a similar improvement in the first session . 5 . 4 Improvements in writing answers Another observation was the improvement of the quality of student answers . For an example , in their pre - test paper , the question was as follows : & You are going to the shop and buying 1 chocolate . The price of the chocolate is Rs . 17 ( Rs = Rupees , the standard currency in Sri Lanka ) . Assuming that you have all types of coins with you , what coins should you give to the shop owner ? For the post - test , the students received the same type of question but only the price was changed . It is now Rs . 19 instead of Rs . 17 . Figure 7 shows an answer a student has given . In the pre - test , the student has answered , he / she should Fig . 3 The teacher helping students and becoming part of the collaborative group Fig . 4 Collaborative learning and sharing the devices Pers Ubiquit Comput need two six - rupee coins and one five - rupee coin to pay Rs . 17 . 00 ( 6 × 2 + 5 = 17 ) . While mathematically the answer is correct , the teacher has marked it as an incorrect answer , since Sri Lanka does not have six - rupee coins . But in the post - test , that student has identified the mistake . This time , to pay Rs . 19 . 00 , he / she is giving one ten - rupee coin , one five - rupee coin , and four one - rupee coins ( 10 + 5 + 1 × 4 = 19 ) . They were also able to distinguish the differences between the concept of rupees and cents faster . Initially , the teacher stated that it is difficult to teach the students the difference between rupees and cents during this small period of time . However , we observed that most of the students in the group using the gamified mobile application have understood this concept . For example , following is one question we had which evaluates the students ’ knowledge in rupees and cents . & Imagine that you are buying a book . The price of the book is Rs . 8 . 50 ( eight rupees and fifty cents ) . How are you paying for the book using coins ? In the post - test , a similar question was asked , by changing the item and the price . This time , the student was buying an eraser and the price is Rs . 3 . 50 ( three rupees and fifty cents ) . Figure 8 shows the answers of a student gave for the both papers . In the pre - test , the student has said that to give Rs . 8 . 50 , he / she would need a 50 - rupee coin , 5 - rupee coin , and a 3 - rupee coin . The teacher confirmed that this is the usual answer a student would give to this question and it takes at least 3 ~ 4 weeks for the students to understand this concept . But when we were doing the post - test , we could observe that most of the students in the group using gamified mobile ap - plication have correctly understood the concept . So , in the post - test paper answer , the same student has written , to pay Rs . 3 . 50 , he / she has to pay a two - rupee coin , a one - rupee coin , and a 50 - cent coin . The underlying reasons for the improvements in answers could not be uncovered from the post - interviews with the students since they did not know exactly how they were able to do it . However , the teacher stated that it could be because the students are frequently visually interacting with the coins when they were using the gamified applications . Further stud - ies will be carried out to determine the reasons for this . 5 . 5 Students ’ and teachers ’ experience The students were deeply engaged in the application and they did not pay any attention to us video - recording them . In our post - session interviews , a common question they asked was that when are we coming back to work with them . The stu - dents said it was easier to understand what the teacher is say - ing since the application visualized what teacher is teaching . There were two students in one school who could not either read or write . These students were both orphans and the teach - er said that she has been struggling to teach them anything . While both of them did not participate in pre - and post - test papers , it could be seen that both of them are playing the games and scoring . Both teachers stated that teaching to the experimental group was fun because they could see the stu - dents are enjoying themselves while learning . Going by the number of questions asked from the teachers , it was evident Fig . 5 Student showing others how to use certain features Fig . 6 The comparison of the pre - and post - test scores of both groups in both sessions Pers Ubiquit Comput that the students were actively engaging in the activities . One teacher mentioned that she initially thought it will be difficult to teach the currency lesson to the students since it is usually taught at the end of the semester . However , she said that she found it easier to make the students comprehend the concept since the application visually demonstrating the activity . 5 . 6 Design elements We distributed the devices pre - installed with the applications for the students . All the devices were switched on . During the period of playing the training level of the application , we ob - served that almost all the students were confused and complaining their applications were not working . We realized that they were confused with the device features such as screen timeouts and rotations . Since these students have never used a smart mobile device before , they thought that they have broken the devices and were afraid we would punish them . Even after the teacher demonstrated how to turn the screen back on , the device screen kept on timing outing and it was distracting students . We realized that we should disable these device fea - tures to allow the students to have an uninterrupted educational experience . We were not able to observe major usability issues when level A ( Fig . 9a ) of the application was in use . In level B ( Fig . 9b ) , we observed some major usability is - sues . Level B required multiple actions such as giving the notes , confirming , giving out the balance , and then moving away . However , in level A , that had only two actions , giving coins and confirming , students had no complications . Some students were complaining that the interactions in level B were complex . Please tell me what to do next . I gave money to a shop owner but nothing happened afterwards Student 01 We also observed that most students struggle with drag and drop ( Fig . 10 ) interaction . The students were able to drag an element a smaller distance . But when they are required to drag it across the screen , they tend to release the pressure to the element on the way . Since the application used the drag and drop interaction on almost all the activities , some students found it challenging to complete the activities . The students found the feedback and rewarding system very engaging and that promoted a friendly competition among the students . There were multiple instances where they would play the game and shout how many stars they received . This also promoted a form of collaboration among the stu - dents . The students who received more stars started to help other students to increase the number of stars . Yeah , I got 4 stars . I got 4 stars in my previous attempt too Student 03 However , we were not able to evaluate features which support collaboration in the gamified application . According to Werbach [ 75 ] , the components provide specific ways to per - form the activities that dynamics and mechanics represent . Multiple components such as avatars , badges , leader boards , social graphs , and gifting are needed to provide a comprehen - sive gamified experience to the users . However , all these com - ponents are designed based on the assumption of having a reliable wireless network . Since the schools did not have a wireless network , we were not able to evaluate the impact of those features . In addition to the lack of wireless network , we were not able to charge the devices at school as the power sockets were available only at the principal ’ s office and he objected for them being charged at school as it might have an impact on the school ’ s budget . Fig . 7 Sample answer of a student which depicts their improvement of understanding different types of coins Fig . 8 Sample answer of a student which depicts their improvement of understanding the concept of rupee and cents ( rupee , cent ) Pers Ubiquit Comput 6 Discussion The findings of our study provide useful insights into how primary school children and teachers in Sri Lanka used tablet computers as a part of their classroom activities . 6 . 1 Post - colonial computing While it is identified that most of the related work was carried out in the developed countries , we also realized that the work done by the HCI community on designing technologies for developing countries has been led by researchers from the developed world [ 27 , 33 , 35 , 37 ] . We make the case that the facilities and resources the researchers from the developed world take for granted and base their assumptions on might not be valid in the developing countries . 6 . 1 . 1 Post - colonial users and learning environment The sociocultural and economic reasons play an important role in the use of technology . In contrast to the developed country settings , the Sri Lankan education system remains mostly teacher - centred . Therefore , while it is easy for the chil - dren in the developed world to adapt into technology inter - ventions , it can be a difficult task for the children in develop - ing countries . The students are trained to sit for examinations from a very young age [ 39 , 45 ] by the teachers and parents , whereas in the developed countries , they are encouraged to explore and play at the primary school environment [ 58 , 76 ] . However , with the introduction of the mobile application , there was a clear transformation of the classroom environ - ment . We were able to see the children , as well as the teachers , react positively towards the new intervention despite the changes in teaching / learning environment and education systems . By introducing the mobile application , we were able to discover that the learning environment shifting into a more balanced mix of student - centric learning where students take ownership of their learning . We report this as an instance where the learning / teaching environment went beyond the cultural norms . The teacher shifted from being an authoritative figure to being a part of the collaborative group . The students became more comfortable around the teachers and they kept on asking for her help to comprehend what is happening so that they can complete the activities . The teachers found this Fig . 9 The shopper stage with two levels a level A with simple interactions and b level B with complex interactions Fig . 10 A student getting help with drag and drop Pers Ubiquit Comput change in the students welcoming and motivating . The stu - dents found learning through the applications are easier since it allows them to experience what the teacher is teaching . Another important observation of note is the change in seating arrangements . Usually , in the Sri Lankan school setting , the children are seating in rows . However , in the second school , when the gamified mobile application is introduced , we could see the seating arrangement changed into a circle . There were instances where two students get together and work as a group instead of seating in rows and listening to the teacher . Therefore , it can be said that the introduction of gamified mobile applications promoted collaborative learning and the impact of it was evident when the pre - and post - test results were compared . Although we were able to observe these positive changes , we could see that teachers were uncomfortable with the de - vices . When the children had issues with screen rotations and timeouts , the teachers were clearly confused and we had to intervene . We believe that these types of observations further strengthen the argument towards the difference in users in countries such as Sri Lanka . Therefore , it was evident that while it is enough to hand over the tablet computers to stu - dents in the developed countries and see improvements [ 47 , 48 , 54 ] , more work is needed in the context of the developing countries . This can be done through conducting comprehen - sive training sessions to teachers on the use of tablet devices before conducting the study with the children . Another such assumption is that familiarity of these devices and interactions for the children . For instance , while 70 % of the schools in the UK use tablet computers in their day - to - day classroom activ - ities [ 17 ] , none of the children participating in our study had expertise with a touchscreen device . Hence , it can be seen that some of the students were frustrated with drag and drop fea - ture especially when they are required to drag an element across the screen . Although we believe that it is mainly due to the inexperience of the students and the novelty of the tools , they continually failed to perform the action even at the end of the study . However , they were all comfortable with B touch and point ^ gestures . Therefore , we believe that the designers should incorporate more touch and point gestures than drag and drop when children from developing countries are con - sidered . Additionally , we realized that we should disable the screen timeout and screen rotations of the device as those features kept on distracting students . Hence , it is clear that the use of technology in the classroom can be used to provide a better learning / teaching experience to the post - colonial users if a conductive background is set . 6 . 1 . 2 Gamification and post - colonial computing According to Werbach ’ s pyramid of elements , components provide specific ways to perform the activities that dynamics and mechanics represent [ 75 ] . Therefore , to provide a complete gamified experience , there need to be multiple com - ponents such as avatars , badges , leader boards , social graphs , and gifting . All of these components help provide a gamified social experience to the user . However , in the Sri Lankan school context , it is an ardours task to provide these function - alities due to lack of networking facilities in schools . Most of the components in the pyramid of elements are designed under the assumption of having reliable wireless or cellular network . However , the majority of the schools in Sri Lanka do not have network capabilities and it is banned by the government to use mobile devices with sim cards in the School . Therefore , we were not able to provide a comprehensive gamified environ - ment to the students . The participating students or the teachers did not complain or comment regarding the lack of these functionalities since they did not have any prior experience with this type of applications . However , we believe that adding those features might have had a significant impact as it can be seen that the students were very eager to share the number of stars they received , compare their scores with others , and explore the various device features . 6 . 2 Gamified mobile applications as a B charismatic ^ technology An issue with this type of technology interventions is its de - ceptive nature . That is , in certain settings , it tends to illuminate the changes of technology introductions as a straightforward outcome rather than a complex phenomenon of cultural and social changes [ 4 ] . These are understood as charismatic tech - nologies . Therefore , in contrast to the studies which directly look at educational improvements the study has put forward [ 54 , 64 ] , it is worthwhile to explore the cultural and social changes it brought out as well . The changes in the teachers ’ students ’ attitudes are examples of those changes . These changes were evident since we conducted our study in situ , as opposed to most prior work within the HCI community [ 36 , 37 , 44 , 47 ] . The charismatic nature of these technologies can lead to a major criticism . That is , the positive results in motivation and engagements might be due to the novelty factor of the tech - nology intervention . Even from this study , we cannot completely dispute that argument as one major limitation is the time the students spent with the devices . Focusing more on the design of the applications as well as the interactions can also be seen as a potential answer for this criticism . With our study , we allowed the students to get used to the devices by playing the training level of the application to counter this criticism . As a result , we were able to see the students perform better at the second session with the gamified application than at the first session . We believe that our attempt to design the application to get the children engaged in the regular learning activities , without distracting them with complex game fea - tures also played a major role at this . Nonetheless , we were not Pers Ubiquit Comput able to let students use the tablet for longer periods of time continually because the battery of the tablet device drained after some time . Charging the devices in the schools were not permitted since the principal of the school objected men - tioning that it would exceed the budget allocated for the schools ’ utility bills . Therefore , we recommend that the future researchers use portable charging stations or power banks when conducting these types of studies in developing , post - colonial environments . We have also decided to carry out a longitudinal study with the students by giving them the gamified mobile applications for a longer duration . Though the gamified mobile application proved motivating and engag - ing to students , it may not be so in a longitudinal study . 6 . 3 Positioning our findings in the existing literature The observations of this study have a strong significance in the field of computer - supported collaborative learning and the education systems in developing countries such as Sri Lanka . Most studies that are done in the developing countries [ 32 , 37 , 42 , 51 ] are not done in the natural classroom settings . Research states that the studies on the use of tablet computers in classrooms need to be done in situ , within the relevant context of use [ 50 ] . This is a challenge identified by previous HCI research as well [ 28 ] . While the recent studies conducted in the developed world aligned their research on these findings [ 47 , 54 ] , all prior work done in the developing countries [ 36 , 42 , 44 ] has been carried out outside the classroom . Additionally , they have not explored how technologies can be incorporated into the natural setting . For instance , the work conducted by Kam et al . [ 37 ] in India reports how traditional games were transformed into digital learning games . The fo - cus of their work is to explore how traditional practices can be incorporated into learning . Kumar et al . [ 42 ] have explored the impact of social contexts such as caste system to unsupervised learning while Larson et al . [ 44 ] have looked at how cultural motivations such as fondness to cricket can be used in learn - ing . Conducting studies which similar to the ones which are done in the developed world can be an arduous task in the developing world due to various social , political , and econom - ic reasons . We believe that this is the reason for HCI re - searchers not conducting their studies in the natural classroom setting . Hence , our work will contribute to the existing work within the HCI community on designing and evaluating the introduction of technology in the natural classroom setting in a developing country . Not conducting the work in situ brings forward another gap in the existing work . That is to explore the contribution of teachers as they play a major role in younger learner ’ s education . In contrast to work of Stern [ 64 ] and Bonsignore et al . , [ 10 ] where the focus was only on children , our study has a strong focus on the teachers as well as students . We present how the teachers themselves voluntarily transformed themselves from traditional teachers into facilitators . They were able to focus more on children rather than being an information source . Mann et al . [ 47 ] have reported how the use of iPads in the classroom provided a positive impact on student learning and how it changed students ’ attitudes . While they have incorporat - ed teachers in their study , they have not observed a shift in cultural norms . Our intervention study is another contribution . While the previous studies within the HCI community have focused on the impact of tablet technologies in learning , we could find only limited comparative studies done . Stern [ 64 ] has done a comparison between children who learned magazine article on paper and a tablet computer and reported that the medium in which content was delivered made little effect on engagement or retention . However , all the participating children have used tablet technologies at school before . In contrast , Orr et al . [ 54 ] report that the group using the applications showed improve - ment in mathematical skills for a quantitative analysis . Our work makes a contribution to the existing literature as it is an intervention study done in a post - colonial environment where there is a quantitative as well as a qualitative analysis . We also bring forward the use of gamification principles in the developing world as none of the work done within the HCI community [ 35 , 37 , 42 , 44 , 47 , 54 , 64 ] has a strong focus on gamification . We have presented the principles we have ad - hered to and the principles which did not use due to limitations in the resources of the schools . We make the case that while the gamification principles can be used to provide a better learning experience to children in the developing world , some of the assumptions these principles are based on are not valid in the developing world . However , there were few limitations of the study . Interacting with currency , a section in the curriculum which is supposed to be taught at the end of the semester , was selected for the study assuming that the students would not have prior knowledge of the concepts . However , the comparison of the pre - and post - test results of the two groups after the first session ( after completing level , A ) did not demonstrate a relatively significant difference between the two groups . But , the data of the second session ( completing level B ) showed a significant improvement in post - test results of the group of students who used the gamified mobile application . It was identified that the previous assump - tion of students not having prior knowledge is wrong and they have received additional training on the first half of the curren - cy section at a tuition class . However , the second half of the currency section was not covered and for that scenario , our assumption was valid . Thus , it was clear that the new method of teaching and learning is much more effective in achieving educational goals than the previous chalk and talk method . Although our results are specific to the Sri Lankan conditions and other South Asian developing countries such as India or Bangladesh , these may not be generalized across all developing countries across the globe . Pers Ubiquit Comput For the current study , we failed to define the exact role of the teacher when conducting the class with the tablet computers . While in this instance , the teachers took the role of a facilitator voluntarily , we noticed on some occasions the teacher per - formed the learning task for the students instead of helping the student comprehend and do it themselves . Therefore , fur - ther work is required to design interactions between teachers , students , and devices so that the gamified mobile application can be used in a longitudinal study . Additionally , more work is required to understand the benefits and challenges of incorpo - rating gamified mobile applications to rural primary schools in Sri Lanka . In order to determine how the findings translate to all the primary students in Sri Lanka , multiple trials need to be carried out with different schools with varying resources . 7 Conclusion Though it is well - established that gamified approaches and mo - bile applications can confer learning benefits to students in the developed countries , it is under - explored in the developing countries due to various sociocultural and economic reasons . This paper has presented our observations of incorporating gamified educational mobile applications in primary school mathematics classrooms in rural Sri Lanka . With data from 130 students , we have found that , in general , the use of tablet technologies along with specifically designed applications has the potential to provide a better learning experience to students in these settings as well . However , the applications should not be designed based on assumptions made from the developed coun - tries point of view as the contexts and practices used in these countries are different . Therefore , we suggest that future re - searchers should take these post - colonial environments into con - sideration and not to rely on findings of the developed world . We have identified the usability issues and the challenges faced from an interaction design point of view . We also observed a change in a classroom environment where it shifted from a traditional teacher - centric one to a student - centric learning envi - ronment . Students were found collaborating with each other freely without being forced . Additionally , we observed that there is an improvement in educational achievement of the students by gamifying the curriculum . Since this study was done within a time span of 2 weeks , we strongly believe that a longitudinal study needs to be carried out to see if these effects persist . The novelty of this research is that this is the first in situ intervention studies done on exploring how gamified mobile educational applications impact the teaching / learning experi - ence in a primary school classroom of a South Asian devel - oping country . Consequently , these findings will make a con - tribution to the existing empirical evidence in the field of HCI by designing , implementing , and evaluating the learning / teaching experience of primary school children incorporating technology into their day - to - day classroom activities . Appendix Interview — schedule , script , and questions Schedule & Introduction and set - up ( 1 min ) & Questions ( 8 – 10 min ) & Conclusion ( 2 min ) Script Introduction Introduce myself and my research . Hi , my name is < interviewer name > . Thank you for taking part in the field trial of the B shopper ^ application . Questions ( 8 – 10 min ) The following is a list of questions that will be asked ( not more than 10 min ) & Are you using a mobile device ? How ? & Do you know how to interact with money ? How did you learn ? & What are the most engaging parts of the mobile application ? & What are the most motivating parts of the mobile application ? & How did you find the challenges ? Any comments ? & Did you interact with your friends while using the appli - cation ? How ? Why ? & Did you interact with your teacher while using the appli - cation ? How ? Why ? & What types of issues or problems did you face during the field trial ? Conclusion ( 1 min ) Any other further comments you ’ d like to add ? Wrap up and thank the participant . References 1 . Abdullah , MHL , Brereton M ( 2015 ) MyCalendar : fostering commu - nication for children with autism spectrum disorder through photos and videos . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction : 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838785 2 . Adesina AE ( 2011 ) Perceived impact of primary education on the attainment of Nigeria Vision 20 : 2020 . Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Teaching , Learning and Change ( c ) International Association for Teaching and Learning ( IATEL ) , 729 – 735 3 . Ahmed SI , Jackson SJ ( 2015 ) Residual mobilities : infrastructural dis - placement and post - colonial computing in Bangladesh . Proceedings of Pers Ubiquit Comput the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 437 – 446 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702573 4 . Ames MG ( 2015 ) Charismatic technology . Proceedings of the 5th Decennial AARHUS Conference : 109 – 120 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19447014508661941 5 . Anthony L , Brown Q , Tate B , Nias J , Brewer R , Irwin G ( 2014 ) Designing smarter touch - based interfaces for educational contexts . Pers Ubiquit Comput 18 ( 6 ) : 1471 – 1483 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 013 - 0749 - 9 6 . Asia One ( 2009 ) Sri Lanka bans mobile phones at schools after suicide . Asia One . Retrieved from http : / / news . asiaone . com / News / Education / Story / A1Story20090728 - 157608 . html 7 . Backlund P , Hendrix M ( 2013 ) Educational games : are they worth the effort ? Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications , 1 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1109 / VS - GAMES . 2013 . 6624226 8 . Barlett CP , Anderson CA , Swing EL ( 2009 ) Video game effects - confirmed , suspected , and speculative : a review of the evidence . Simul Gaming 40 : 377 – 403 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1046878108327539 9 . Bederson BB , Hollan JD , Druin A , Stewart J , Rogers D , Proft D ( 1996 ) Localtools : an alternativetotoolpalettes . Proceedingsofthe 9th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and tech - nology : 169 – 170 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 237091 . 237116 10 . Bonsignore E , Ahn J , Clegg T et al ( 2014 ) Selfies for science : collaborative configurations around science kit . Proceedings of the companion publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing - CSCW Companion ‘ 14 , 133 – 136 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2556482 11 . Braun V , Clarke V ( 2006 ) Using thematic analysis in psychol - ogy . Qual Res Psychol 3 ( May 2015 ) : 77 – 101 . doi : 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa 12 . Breuer J , BenteG ( 2010 ) Why soserious ? On the relation ofserious games and learning . J Comput Game Cult 4 ( 1 ) : 7 – 24 13 . Brewer R , Anthony L , Brown Q , Irwin G , Nias J , Tate B ( 2013 ) Using gamification to motivate children to complete empirical stud - ies in lab environments . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children : 388 – 391 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485816 14 . Brown Q , Anthony L ( 2012 ) Toward comparing the touchscreen interaction patterns of kids and adults . ACM SIGCHI Educ Interfeces , Softw Technol Workshop 2012 : 1 – 4 15 . Caponetto I , Earp J , Ott M et al ( 2014 ) Gamification and education : a literature review . Proc Eur Conf Games Based Learn 1 ( 2009 ) : 50 – 57 16 . Charsky D ( 2010 ) From edutainment to serious games : a change in the use of game characteristics . Games Cult 5 ( 2 ) : 177 – 198 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1555412009354727 17 . CoughlanS ( 2014 ) Tabletcomputersin ‘ 70 % ofschools ’ . BBCnews . Retrieved from http : / / www . bbc . com / news / education - 30216408 18 . Creswell JW ( 2003 ) Research design Qualitative quantitative and mixed methods approaches . doi : 10 . 3109 / 08941939 . 2012 . 723954 19 . Culén AL , Gasparini A ( 2012 ) iPad : a new classroom technology ? A report from two pilot studies . INFuture2011 : B Information Sciences and e - Society , ^ November 2011 : 199 – 208 20 . Dahanayake ( 2006 ) Implementation of the philosophical concept of student centred education at senior secondary level . Retrieved from http : / / archive . cmb . ac . lk / research / bitstream / 70130 / 2186 / 1 / daha . pdf 21 . de Sousa Borges S , Durelli VHS , Macedo Reis H , Isotani S ( 2014 ) A systematic mapping on gamification applied to education . Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing - SAC ‘ 14 : 216 – 222 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2554850 . 2554956 22 . Department of Examinations — Sri Lanka ( 2015 ) Department of examinations — Sri Lanka . Retrieved April 10 , 2016 from http : / / www . doenets . lk / exam / downloads . jsf 23 . Deterding S , Dixon D , Khaled R , Nacke L ( 2011 ) From game design elements to gamefulness : defining B gamification . ^ Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human factors in com - puting systems - CHI EA ‘ 11 , 2425 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979575 24 . Domínguez A , Saenz - De - Navarrete J , De - Marcos L , Fernández - Sanz L , Pagés C , Martínez - Herráiz JJ ( 2013 ) Gamifying learning experiences : practical implications and outcomes . Comput Educ 63 : 380 – 392 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2012 . 12 . 020 25 . Donker A , Reitsma P ( 2007 ) Drag - and - drop errors in young chil - dren ’ s use of the mouse . Interact Comput 19 ( 2 ) : 257 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2006 . 05 . 008 26 . Druin A ( 1999 ) Cooperative inquiry : developing new technologies for children with children . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , January 1999 : 592 – 599 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 27 . Frias - Martinez V , Virseda J , Gomero A ( 2012 ) EducaMovil : a mo - bile learning tool for low - income schools . Proceedings of the 14th international conference on Human - computer interaction with mo - bile devices and services companion - MobileHCI ‘ 12 : 169 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2371664 . 2371701 28 . Harrison S , Tatar D , Sengers P ( 2007 ) The three paradigms of HCI . Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI … : 1 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1234 / 12345678 29 . Hays RT ( 2005 ) The effectiveness of instructional games : a litera - ture review and discussion . Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division : 1 – 63 . http : / / doi . org / citeulike - article - id : 3089090 30 . Henderson S , Yeow J ( 2012 ) iPad in education : a case study of ipad adoption and use in a primary school . 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IEEE Computer Society , 78 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2012 . 390 31 . Henze N , Rukzio E , Boll S ( 2011 ) 100 , 000 , 000 Taps : analysis and improvement of touch performance in the large . Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services — MobileHCI ‘ 11 : 133 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2037373 . 2037395 32 . Hewagamage KP , Meewellewa HMSJ , Munasinghe GK , Wickramarachi HA ( 2011 ) Role of OLPC to empower ICT adap - tation in the primaryeducation . Educationina technological world : communicating current and emerging research and technological efforts : 391 – 398 33 . Hiniker A , Sobel K , Hong SR et al ( 2015 ) Touchscreen prompts for preschoolers : designing developmentally appropriate techniques for teaching young children to perform gestures . Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children : 109 – 118 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771851 34 . Irani L , Vertesi J , Dourish P , Philip K , Grinter RE ( 2010 ) Postcolonial computing : alensondesignanddevelopment . Proceedingsofthe2010 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM 35 . Kam M , Rudraraju V , Tewari A , Canny J ( 2007 ) Mobile gaming with children in rural India : contextual factors in the use of game design patterns . Proceedings of the 3rd Digital games research as - sociation international conference ( DiGRA ‘ 07 ) : 24 – 28 36 . Kam M , Agarwal A , Kumar A , Lal S , Mathur A , Canny J ( 2008 ) Designing E - learning games for rural children in India : a format for balancing learning with fun . Electr Eng : 58 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1394445 . 1394452 37 . Kam M , Akhil M , Kumar A , Canny J ( 2009 ) Designing digital games for rural children : a study of traditional village games in India . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI 09 , 31 – 40 38 . Kapp KM ( 2012 ) The gamification of learning and instruction : game - based methods and strategies for training and education . Pfeiffer , San Francisco . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2207270 . 2211316 39 . Keerthisinghe L ( 2012 ) Is Sri Lanka ’ s education system faced with a crisis ? The Sunday Leader . Retrieved from http : / / www . thesundayleader . lk / 2012 / 01 / 22 / is - sri - lankas - education - system - faced - with - a - crisis / 40 . Kiili K ( 2005 ) Digital game - based learning : towards an experiential gaming model . Internet and High Educ 8 ( 1 ) : 13 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . iheduc . 2004 . 12 . 001 Pers Ubiquit Comput 41 . Kolko BE , Hope A , Brunette Wet al ( 2012 ) Adapting collaborative radiological practice to low - resource environments . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work : 97 – 106 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145223 42 . Kumar A , Tewari A , Shroff G , Chittamuru D , Kam M , Canny J ( 2010 ) An exploratory study of unsupervised mobile learning in rural India . Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 10 : 743 – 752 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753435 43 . LargeA , Nesset V , Beheshti J , BowlerL ( 2006 ) B Bonded design ^ : a novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Libr Inf Sci Res 28 ( 1 ) : 64 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lisr . 2005 . 11 . 014 44 . Larson M , Rajput N , Singh A , Srivastava S ( 2013 ) I want to be SachinTendulkar ! : a spoken english cricketgame for ruralstudents . Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported coop - erative work : 1353 – 1364 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441928 45 . Little AW ( 2010 ) Primary education reformation in Sri Lanka . doi : 10 . 1017 / CBO9781107415324 . 004 46 . LiyanageIMK ( 2013 ) Educationsystem ofSri Lanka : strengths and weaknesses 47 . Mann A - M , Hinrichs U , Read JC , Quigley A ( 2016 ) Facilitator , functionary , friend or foe ? : Studying the role of ipads within learn - ing activities across a school year . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 1833 – 1845 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858251 48 . McPhee I , Marks L , Marks D ( 2013 ) Examining the impact of the apple B iPad ^ on male and female classroom engagement in a pri - mary school in Scotland . Icicte : 443 – 451 49 . Medhi - thies I , Ferreira P , Gupta N , O ’ Neill J , Cutrell E ( 2015 ) KrishiPustak : a social networking system for low - literate farmers . Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & SocialComputing , ACM , 1670 – 1681 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675224 50 . Meyer B ( 2015 ) IPads in inclusive classrooms : ecologies of learn - ing . In E - Learning Systems , Environments and Approaches . Springer International Publishing , 25 – 37 51 . Mitra S ( 2003 ) Minimally invasive education : a progress report on the B hole - in - the - wall ^ experiments . Br J Educ Technol 34 ( 3 ) : 367 – 371 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 – 8535 . 00333 52 . Mystakidis S , Lambropoulos N ( 2014 ) Playful blended digital sto - rytelling in 3D immersive elearning environments : a cost effective early literacy motivation method . Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Interaction Design in Educational Environments Pages 97 . 53 . OLPC ( 2005 ) One Laptop Per Child . OLPC , Inc . Retrieved May 3 , 2016 from http : / / one . laptop . org / 54 . Orr J , Flannery L , VaheyP , AveR , ParkM , Latimore S ( 2015 ) Early Math with Gracie & Friends ™ Demo : app - infused curriculum and teacher support for preschool . Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , 458 – 461 55 . Pham TTH , Renshaw P ( 2013 ) How to enable Asian teachers to empower students to adopt student - centred learning . Aust J Teach Educ 38 ( 11 ) : 65 – 85 56 . Piaget J ( 1964 ) Part I : cognitive development in children : Piaget . Development and learning . J Res Sci Teach 2 ( 3 ) : 176 – 186 . doi : 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660020306 57 . Read J , Gregory P , MacFarlane S , McManus , B , Gray P , Patel R ( 2002 ) An investigation of participatory design with children - infor - mant , balanced and facilitated design . Interact Des Child , JANUARY : 53 – 64 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1 . 1 . 109 . 1324 58 . Roberts A , de Jong A ( 2016 ) Kids gone wild . SBS News , 1 – 22 . Retrieved from http : / / www . sbs . com . au / news / dateline / story / kids - gone - wild 59 . Roussou M ( 2004 ) Learning by doing and learning through play . Comput Entertain 2 ( 1 ) : 1 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 973801 . 973818 60 . Salvin RE ( 1978 ) Using student team learning : the Johns Hopkins Team Learning Project . 2 – 50 61 . Samsel C , Beul - Leusmann S , Wiederhold M , Krempels K - H , Ziefle M , Jakobs E - M ( 2009 ) Cascading information for ubiqitous mobil - ity assistance . Lect Notes Bus Inf Process 18 : 3 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 – 3 – 642 - 01344 - 7 62 . Schneider J , Derboven J , Luyten K et al ( 2010 ) Multi - user multi - touch setups for collaborative learning in an educational setting . Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics ) 6240 LNCS : 181 – 188 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 – 3 – 642 - 16066 - 0 _ 28 63 . Sri Lanka ( 2014 ) Computer literacy statistics — 2014 Department of Census and Statistics 64 . Stern J ( 2014 ) Digital classroom magazines : design considerations for young learners . CHI ’ 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in … : 921 – 926 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2579412 65 . Strommen E ( 1994 ) Children ’ s use of mouse - based interfaces to control virtual travel . Hum Factor Comput Syst : 405 – 410 66 . Suchman L ( 2002 ) Practice - based design of information systems : notes from the hyperdeveloped world . Inf Soc 18 ( 2 ) : 139 – 144 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 01972240290075066 67 . Talbot D ( 2012 ) Given tablets but no teachers , Ethiopian children teach themselves . MIT Technology . Review , October 29 , 2012 . https : / / www . technologyreview . com / s / 506466 / given - tablets - but - no - teachers - ethiopian - children - teach - themselves / . accessed 5 Aug 2017 68 . Taxen G , Druin A , Fast C , Kjellin M ( 2001 ) KidStory : a technology design partnership with children . Behav Inform Technol 20 ( 2 ) : 119 – 125 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 01449290010020701 69 . Tizard B , Hughes M ( 2008 ) Young children learning . John Wiley & Sons , USA 70 . Tomic D , Divjak B ( 2011 ) The impact of game - based learning on the achievementoflearninggoalsandmotivation for learning math - ematics — literature review . J Inf Organ Sci 35 ( 1 ) : 15 – 30 71 . Truong KN , Hayes GR , Abowd GD ( 2006 ) Storyboarding : an em - pirical determination of best practices and effective guidelines . Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Designing Interactive systems - DIS ‘ 06 , 12 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142410 72 . Vogel D , Balakrishnan R ( 2010 ) Direct pen interaction with a con - ventional graphical user interface . Hum Comput Interact 25 ( 4 ) : 324 – 388 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2010 . 499839 73 . Walsh G , Druin A , Guha ML et al ( 2010 ) Layered elaboration : a new technique for co - design with children . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1237 – 1240 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753512 74 . Warschauer M , Cotten S , Ames M ( 2011 ) One laptop per child Birmingham : case study of a radical experiment . Int J Learn Media 3 ( 2 ) : 61 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1162 / IJLM 75 . Werbach K , Hunter D ( 2015 ) The gamification toolkit : dynamics , me - chanics , and components for the win . Wharton Digital Press . Retrieved from http : / / wdp . wharton . upenn . edu / book / gamification - toolkit / 76 . Wilby P ( 2013 ) Finland ’ s education ambassador spreads the word . The Guardian , 1 – 5 . Retrieved from http : / / www . theguardian . com / education / 2013 / jul / 01 / education - michael - gove - finland - gcse 77 . Wyche SP , Lampe C , Rangaswamy N , Peters A , Monroy - Hernández A , Antin J ( 2014 ) Facebook in the developing world : the myths and realities underlying a socially networked world . CSCW Companion ‘ 14 : Proceedings of the companion publication of the 17th ACM con - ference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing : 121 – 124 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556420 . 2556851 78 . Yip J , Clegg T , Bonsignore E , Gelderblom H , Rhodes E , Druin A ( 2013 ) Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? Domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ‘ 13 : 201 – 210 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485763 79 . Zyda M ( 2005 ) From visual simulation to virtual reality to games . Computer 38 ( 9 ) : 25 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1109 / mc . 2005 . 297 Pers Ubiquit Comput