NoizCrowd : A Crowd - Based Data Gathering and Management System for Noise Level Data Mariusz Wisniewski 1 , Gianluca Demartini 1 , Apostolos Malatras 2 , and Philippe Cudr´e - Mauroux 1 1 eXascale Infolab , University of Fribourg , Switzerland 2 Pervasive and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Group , University of Fribourg , Switzerland { firstname . lastname } @ unifr . ch Abstract . Many systems require access to very large amounts of data to properly function , like systems allowing to visualize or predict me - teorological changes in a country over a given period of time , or any other system holding , processing and displaying scientiﬁc or sensor data . However , ﬁlling out a database with large amounts of valuable data can be a diﬃcult , costly and time - consuming task . In this paper , we present techniques to create large amounts of data by combining crowdsourc - ing , data generation models , mobile computing , and big data analytics . We have implemented our methods in a system , NoizCrowd , allowing to crowdsource noise levels in a given region and to generate noise models by using state - of - the - art noise propagation models and array data man - agement techniques . The resulting models and data can then be accessed using a visual interface . 1 Introduction Big data has become a key element to support decision making at diﬀerent levels of granularity , for example on continuous streams of data generated by sensors spread around a given environment ( e . g . , meteorological stations in cities ) . An - alytics on sensor data is of high importance to support many critical decisions , such as when stopping the car traﬃc on certain days to limit pollution . However , sensors are expensive to install and maintain and need to be placed at speciﬁc geographical locations , which are typically application and context - dependent . Acquiring , deploying , and maintaining a large - scale sensing infrastructure for a given problem is hence diﬃcult , costly and time - consuming . In this paper we propose NoizCrowd : a crowd - sensing approach to big data generation using commodity sensors . The proposed system , built on top of a database management system for data - intensive applications , is able to collect streams of data from participating users’ mobile devices and generate additional data thanks to statistical models based on the crowd input . NoizCrowd also provides dynamic visualizations of both sensor and model data to support user decision queries , for instance to determine regions with low noise levels in a given neighborhood to build a house or buy an apartment . F . Daniel , G . A . Papadopoulos , P . Thiran ( Eds . ) : MobiWIS 2013 , LNCS 8093 , pp . 172 – 186 , 2013 . c (cid:2) Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 NoizCrowd : A Crowd - Based Data Gathering and Management System 173 In more detail , NoizCrowd consists of four diﬀerent components : i ) a mobile application allowing the crowd to measure noise levels accurately using com - modity smartphones ii ) a scalable array storage layer to manage all the pieces of data gathered from the smartphones iii ) a higher - level modeling layer capable of generating continuous models from the ( potentially ) sparse data gathered by the crowd and iv ) a data export and visualization layer to interface with the end - users and support interactive decision making . The proposed approach has the following advantages : i ) it allows any mobile user to report the noise level at any place and time ii ) it generates and manages large - scale data about noise levels in order to cover diﬀerent regions and time intervals and iii ) it supports users by answering data analytics requests on noise levels . The rest of the paper is structured as follows . We start below in Section 2 by comparing NoizCrowd with previous work including sensor data generation applications running smartphones and noise mapping applications . In Section 3 , we describe the architecture components of NoizCrowd in more detail , includ - ing the mobile application used to gather sensor data as well as the scalable storage system . We present in Section 4 the crowdsourcing model used to ob - tain noise - level data from geographically distributed users , as well as the data generation models used to integrate and extend potentially sparse user data . Section 5 presents the results of an experimental evaluation of the proposed sys - tem based on several live deployments . Finally , Section 6 concludes the paper by highlighting the main ﬁndings of our project . 2 Related Work The notion of participatory sensing [ 2 ] , namely user - centric monitoring and sens - ing of environmental conditions by means of high - end mobile phones , has recently emerged as a promising , low - cost alternative to traditional large - scale , costly and diﬃcult to manage sensing infrastructures based on sensor networks [ 6 ] . Whereas there are several potential shortcomings for such an approach , especially in terms of privacy [ 4 ] and quality of data collection [ 11 ] , its beneﬁts nonetheless are far from negligible . In particular , attributed to the ubiquity of users with mobile de - vices equipped with sensors , participatory sensing applications can provide great data collection services at high granularity ( spatial and temporal ) and with a low cost [ 14 ] . Such applications , spurred by active research and development eﬀorts in the domains of pervasive computing and the Internet of Things , are inherently distributed and lacking centralized infrastructures and therefore ensure robust operation and minimal management needs [ 3 ] . Participatory sensing applications have been considered for a wide range of sensed information , with typical examples including environmental impact [ 19 ] , green vehicle routing [ 10 ] , bargain shopping [ 7 ] , etc . NoizCrowd focuses instead on the collection of urban noise levels using participatory sensing applications and their spatio - temporal representation on maps . This has generated great in - terest in the research community for a variety of reasons , the most important of