753 In Focus Text by Ben Short bshort @ rockefeller . edu In Focus • THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY Actin oligomers hit the assembly line A ctin fi lament production is a “green” industry . New fi laments are assembled from a renewable pool of actin monomers , recycled from older , depolymerizing fi laments . Okreglak and Drubin now reveal that old fi laments aren’t always completely broken down— short fragments generated by the severing protein cofi lin are reused directly to con - struct new actin structures ( 1 ) . Voytek Okreglak and David Drubin , from the University of California , Berkeley , study actin dynamics at sites of endocytosis in budding yeast . “Endocytosis culminates in a predictable burst of actin polymer - ization followed by rapid disassembly , so we can watch and analyze the process at the cell cortex , ” Drubin explains . To make these dynamics easier to see , the researchers often use mutant yeast that grow particularly large actin tails at their endocytic sites . In these enlarged tails , actin subunits are added at the end nearest the plasma membrane and removed at the opposite end , leading to a measurable fl ux of actin toward the cell interior . “It’s similar to the leading edge of a migrating fi broblast , ” says Drubin . In 2007 , Okreglak and Drubin used this system to study the fi lament - severing pro - tein cofi lin’s contribution to actin turnover in endocytosis ( 2 ) . Okreglak followed this up by examining Aip1 , a pro - tein that works with cofi lin to disassemble actin fi la - ments in vitro ( 3 ) . To his sur - prise , deleting Aip1 had no effect on disassembly rates in vivo , but in the course of his studies Okreglak noticed something even odder : actin fi laments continued to as - semble at endocytic sites in the presence of high concen - trations of latrunculin A ( lat A ) , a drug that inhibits polymerization by sequestering actin monomers . This lat A – resistant assem - bly also occurred in wild - type cells , but was more pronounced in yeast lacking Aip1 . “This was totally unexpected , ” says Drubin . “It meant that there was some property of actin that we didn’t understand . ” One possibility was that these actin fi laments evaded lat A inhibition by directly incorporating short actin oligomers instead of monomers . This mode of assembly has been seen in vitro ( 4 , 5 ) but it wasn’t thought to occur in living cells—actin assembly is a highly controlled process , and it’s not clear how oligomers would be regulated . “Also , ” adds Drubin , “we assumed that actin disassembly always went to comple - tion , so that there wouldn’t be a pool of actin oligomers available in vivo . ” If lat A – resistant actin polymerization is mediated by oligomer assembly , why is the process enhanced in cells lacking Aip1 ? The re - searchers wondered whether Aip1 regulates the balance between actin oligomers and monomers . The protein’s function in actin disassembly could be to generate monomers from the oligomeric fragments produced by cofi lin . In Aip1’s absence , the fragments wouldn’t be dis - mantled , and would be more available for lat A – resistant fi lament assembly . To test this idea , Okreglak and Drubin examined how Aip1 affected the oligomeric state of actin . In vitro , Aip1 increased the amount of monomeric actin produced when actin fi laments were bro - ken down by cofi lin . In yeast cells lacking Aip1 , on the other hand , the amount of actin monomer was reduced by 45 % . Thus , Aip1 renews the actin monomer pool during fi lament disassembly , but this regeneration isn’t necessary because short actin oligomers can be used to build new fi laments instead . “Oligomers have really been overlooked , ” says Drubin . “But they clearly contribute to actin assembly at endocytic sites , even in wild - type cells . ” Drubin now plans to investigate how Aip1 separates oligomeric fragments into monomers , and to determine how oligom - ers are incorporated into growing fi laments at endocytic sites . “No one had detected this pathway before , ” says Drubin . “Now people have to look to see if it’s involved in other actin assembly processes too . ” 1 . Okreglak , V . and D . G . Drubin . 2010 . J . Cell Biol . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200909176 . 2 . Okreglak , V . , and D . G . Drubin . 2007 . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . 3 . Rodal , A . A . , et al . 1999 . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1251 – 1264 . 4 . Kawamura , M . , and K . Maruyama . 1970 . J . Biochem . 67 : 437 – 457 . 5 . Murphy , D . B . , et al . 1988 . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1947 – 1954 . David Drubin and Voytek Okreglak ( holding his son , Simon ) discover that actin ﬁ laments can assemble through the direct annealing of short actin fragments , rather than relying exclusively on the addition of monomers . The pathway is revealed by the continued assembly of actin ( red ) at sites of endocytosis ( green ) in the presence of latrunculin A ( bottom ) , a drug that inhibits the polymerization of actin monomers . The process is particularly evident in budding yeast lacking the protein Aip1 ( pictured ) , which , the researchers show , converts the actin oligomers produced by the ﬁ lament - severing protein coﬁ lin into latrunculin A – sensitive monomers . “Oligomers have been overlooked , but they clearly contribute to actin assembly . ” Study identifies a new way for actin filaments to polymerize in vivo . F OCAL P OINT