Forecasting of Cardiovascular Disease Using Machine Learning Azarudeen A PG Scholar , Department of Computer Application , Hindustan Institute of Technology and science , Chennai , India azar0303a @ gmail . com Dr . Hemavathy p Associate professor , Department of IT , Hindustan institute of Technology and science , Chennai , India hemamanigandan @ gmail . com Abeer Mohsen Jabbar , Collage of Engineering , National University of Science and Technology , Dhi Qar , Iraq Sarah Jassim Abed , Collage of Engineering , National University of Science and Technology , Dhi Qar , Iraq Fay Fhadil , Medical Laboratory Techniques Department , Al - Farahidi University , Iraq , Baghdad Aqeel Ali , Medical Laboratory Techniques Department , Al - Farahidi University , Iraq , Baghdad Abstract - heart disease or cardiovascular disease includes several circumstances that affect the heart and is one among major reason of putting to demise globally . Here , we employ Machine Learning to predict cardiovascular disease using a data set containing 14 components . Computers are taught to learn knowledge on their own using machine learning , a form of artificial intelligence . Machine learning in healthcare is increasingly being used and helps victims and clinicians in a variety of ways . The automated identification and diagnosis system ' s performance is comparable to that of a skilled radiologist . This article presents multiple heart disease - related characteristics , and includes models constructed using supervised learning techniques such as the Random Forest and K - Nearest Neighbor algorithms . It also focuses on which patients , given certain medical characteristics , are more likely to suffer cardiovascular - disease . Index Terms – Machine learning , health care , K - Nearest Neighbour , Random Forest , Visualization , disease prediction model . I . I NTRODUCTION Machine learning is an emerging field today . Apart from healthcare , machine learning is used in different industries like marketing , finance , logistics , etc . The works proposed in this paper mainly focus on different data processing methods used to predict cardiac disease . The fundamental structural component of a human being is their heart . It regulates blood flow throughout our body . Any disruption to the normal operation of the intestines is typically classified as a cardiovascular condition and is among the leading causes of death globally the proposed work attempts to detect these heart conditions in patients to avoid disastrous consequences . Having a secured hospital dataset is the biggest challenge in this regard , which is why the heart disease dataset available on Kaggle is used here . This system ' s objective is to give physicians a tool for spotting cardiac problems . This will continuously allow effective medical care of the patient and avoid serious outcomes . Due to the critical role that machine learning ( ML ) plays in uncovering hidden discrete patterns , data analysis is offered . II . L ITERATURE S URVEY [ 1 ] Simanta Shekhar Sarmah proposed a work to predict heart disease utilizing a tuned deep learning neural network . In this article , system performance is run through " 3 " steps . 1 ) Authentication 2 ) Encryption 3 ) Classification utilizing a altered IOT - centric deep - learning neural - network ( DLMNN ) . Cardiac patient data from a designated hospital are validated . A wearable IoT device , attached to the patient , securely sends sensor data to the cloud through encryption . The DLMNN classifier then decrypts the encrypted data . Classified results include " 2 " data types : i ) Normal ii ) Abnormal . The doctor will receive an SMS alert to treat the patient if the results are abnormal . This data transfer result is 95 . 87 % . [ 2 ] In this paper , An IoMT framework for cardiology diagnosis that enhances prediction accuracy by employing a MSSO and an ANFIS for neural fuzzy inference system . The suggested MSSO - ANFIS method seeks to enhance search through the utilize of the Levy flight method . The state of the heart is established by categorizing sensor readings with MSSO - ANFIS . Simulations and analyses are carried out to prove the superiority of MSSA - ANFIS in forecasting epidemics . The simulation results show that the MSSOANFIS forecasting model has better accuracy compared to other methods . This model has an accuracy of 99 . 45 . [ 3 ] In this paper , the dataset is treated with attribute selection and filters of preprocessing like normalize using attribute and randomize using instance levels . The Expectation and Maximization and K - Means algorithms are applied and the output are compared and verified for reduction of data . The performance of the K - Means algorithm can be enhanced for large datasets by using attribute selection and a filter named " randomize " during instance selection , resulting in better results compared to other clustering method . [ 4 ] A new diagnostic system was developed . To evaluate the precision of the suggested method , two trials were conducted the initial analysis only produced a random forest model , whereas a RF clustering method on the suggested 2023 3rd International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engineering ( ICACITE ) 979 - 8 - 3503 - 9926 - 4 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE 179 2023 3 r d I n t e r n a ti on a l C on f e r e n ce on A dv a n ce C o m pu ti ng a nd I nnov a ti v e T ec hno l og i e s i n E ng i n ee r i ng ( I C A C I TE ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 99 2 6 - 4 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / I C A C I TE 57410 . 2023 . 10183251 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . random search algorithm was created in the second experiment . The suggested approach is superior and less complicated compared to the traditional random forest model as it provides an accuracy improvement of 3 . 3 times . This gives us a 93 . 33 % accuracy rate [ 5 ] In this paper , how to use Modified Deep Neural Networks is suggested as a framework for the Internet of Things to detect heart disease ( MDCNN ) more correctly . The patient is equipped with smart watches and cardiac monitors to keep an eye on their electrocardiogram and blood pressure ( ECG ) . Sensor data is classified into normal and abnormal states using MDCNN . The system performance was evaluated by comparing MDCNN to neural net and logistic regression . The outcome indicates that the suggested MDCNN system for predicting cardiac disease outperforms alternatives This process has a 98 . 2 % accuracy rate . [ 6 ] In this study , a process by utilizing machine learning techniques , the novel strategy that has been suggested seeks to enhance the precision of cardio - vascular disease prediction . In conjunction with various feature combinations and several commonly used classifiers , the prediction model is introduced . They improved the efficiency of the predicting Heart Illness Model using the HRFLM . The accuracy that results is 88 . 7 % [ 7 ] Study suggest hybrid classifiers that blend an ensemble method with a supermajority method to enhance the precision of predictions . It has been proposed to use a genetic algorithm for pre - processing and feature selection the aim is to increase the precision of forecast while reducing the overall processing duration . The accuracy of this model was 98 . 18 % . [ 8 ] This study employs machine learning methods was suggested as the foundation for an effective and precise system to diagnose heart disease . To address the issue of feature selection , they also put forth a brand new , A rapid approach for selecting features with mutual information . Features natural selection strategies are used to gain classification precision and decrease the processing period of time for classifications . The experimental results demonstrate that a rising AI system to diagnose heart disease using the classifier Support Vector Machine . The research findings indicate that the suggested feature selection technique ( FCMIM ) can be employed to create a sophisticated system for heart disease classification using a support vector machine . [ 9 ] A cardiac disease detection framework using artificial intelligence The MIFH has been suggested . In order to extract features from a dataset , derive those features from the data set , MIFH employs factor analysis of mixed data to develop machine learning forecasting analytics ( FAMD ) . According to experimental findings , MIFH performed well when compared to a number of standard baseline techniques and was equivalent in terms of accuracy and specificity . When performance requirements are taken into consideration , MIFH provides the best result among all input prediction models , boosting the system’s efficacy . [ 10 ] In this study , a useful HDPM for a Clinical Decision Support System is proposed . It employs XGBoost to forecast cardiac disease , a hybrid Synthetic Minority Over - Sampling Technique - Edited Nearest Neighbour to even out the distribution of training sample , and DBSCAN to find and eliminate anomalies . By reaching levels of accuracy of 95 . 90 % and 98 . 40 % , The outcomes demonstrated that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing models and earlier studies [ 11 ] In this study , A two - phase method is used to build the training data set : 1 ) Using Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) , The first training date set is separated into two sets , general and extremely prejudiced . Afterwards , two classifiers based on deep neural networks further divide the training groups . The initial experiment demonstrates the capability of PCA and autoencoder model to improve the effectiveness of a standalone deep neural network . The subsequent test contrasts the suggested approach with standard machine learning algorithms , such as NB , RF , KNN , DT , SVM , and Dynamic Augmentation . The accuracy of this study is 0 . 892 [ 12 ] In a different study , Gudadhe created a disease diagnosis for cardiovascular disease categorization utilising multi - layer Perceptron and support vector machine ( SVM ) algorithms , and the system ' s accuracy was 80 . 41 % . [ 13 ] The two - tier ensemble model put forward by Tama uses some classifications as the base classifiers for another ensemble . Extreme Gradient Boosting ( EGB ) , Random Forest ( RF ) , and Gradient Boosting Machine ( GBM ) class labels are used to create the suggested stacking architecture ( XGBoost ) . Four different types of datasets are used to evaluate their suggested detection model . Additionally , they employed feature selection methods based on particle swarm optimization . In regard to the 10 - fold cross - validation , their suggested model fared better . The authors only took the stacking of tree - based models into account . To enhance model findings , further statistical and regression - based approaches could be employed . [ 14 ] The patient with diabetes and heart problems was the subject of Parthiban and Srivatsa ' s research . They made use of a variety of prognostic factors , including age , hypertension , and sugar levels . By using the SVM , they attained an accuracy of 94 . 60 % . The data collection was unbalanced , and the authors made no attempt to address this issue . [ 15 ] In a research study , MOHAN et al . developed a hybrid machine learning - based HD prediction system . Additionally , he put out a fresh approach to choosing important features from the data for machine learning classifiers ' training and testing . They had a documented classification accuracy of 88 . 07 % . [ 16 ] In order to extract usable information from huge data , data mining is crucial . It is extensively employed in virtually every sphere of human endeavour , including engineering , business , and education . Data mining is the process of examining data to uncover hidden information that can be utilised to make critical decisions in the future . By reducing the inaccuracy in prediction and factual outcomes , a range of machine learning methods have been employed to comprehend the complexity and non - linear interaction between various components . III . P ROPOSED S YSTEM In this work , the classification of cardiac disease was done using a Jupiter notebook . It offers a simple and comprehensible graphical illustration of the data set , operating environment , and progress in predictive analysis . The initial stage in the machine learning procedure is the data processing stage , which is succeeded by the selection of 2023 3rd International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engineering ( ICACITE ) 180 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . features utilizing standard scaling , evaluation of classification performance , and improved accuracy of results . Heart disease is predicted using trained data ( patient data ) , and the accuracy rate for two machine learning methods is determined . The algorithm with the highest accuracy is successfully identified [ 17 - 21 ] . IV . A RCHITECTURE D IAGRAM Fig 1 : Architecture diagram [ 24 ] V . D ATASET T HE DETAILED DATASET PARAMETERS EXPLANATION No Attributes Data types Description 1 age Numerical Patient’s age 2 sex Integer Gender of patient ( male - 0 female - 1 ) 3 Chest pain Integer Chest pain type 4 trestbps Integer Resting blood pressure 5 chol Integer Cholesterol level 6 fbs Integer Fasting blood sugar 7 restecg Numerical Resting ecg 8 thalach Numerical Maximum cardio rate 9 exang Numerical Exercise induced angina 10 oldpeak float ST depression 11 slope integer Slope of the peak exercise ST segment 12 ca Integer Number of major vessels ( 0 - 3 ) 13 thal Integer Defect types 14 target Integer Two classes A . Understanding The Data A data set must first be understood and analyzed before processing . Accessing the data requires first understanding it . Only through understanding the data , wecan come to an idea how to proceed with the data . Understanding data visually helps to relate more with the data . (cid:3) Fig 2 : Count plot (cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3) B . Data Processing The data processing stage involves the completion of all necessary steps to prepare the data for model creation . Required processes include giving dummy variables and scaling the data . After collecting and analyzing multiple records , preprocessing of heart disease data takes place . Fig 3 : The correlation heatmap for the dataset . The data obtained from kaggle ( https : / / www . kaggle . com / datasets / yasserh / heart - disease - dataset ) C . Build Model To build the model , the data are trained . For the purpose of building a model , the machine learning algorithms random forest and KNN are considered . KNN , a supervised machine learning method , can be employed for in addition categorization and prediction problems for prediction challenges . K nearest neighbour denotes a straightforward method that , after storing all of the pre - existing cases , ranks incoming examples based on a similarity metric . For classification and regression , the Random Forest supervised learning method is used . But classification issues are where it is most frequently employed . A forest is made up of trees , as is completely clear , and a forest with more trees will be sturdy . Similarly , the random forest approach creates decision trees by using subsets of the data , It produces KNN EVALUATION RANDOM FOREST DATASET DATA PROCESSING BUILD MODEL 2023 3rd International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engineering ( ICACITE ) 181 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . forecasts from each individual , and employs voting to select the optimal solution . D . Prediction Processing raw heart patient records would facilitate the long - term preservation of human life and early detection of anomalies in cardiac conditions . In this research , raw information was analyzed using machine learning techniques to produce a model insight of cardiovascular disorder . Forecasting heart disease is a critical but crucial task in the healthcare domain . The project ' s conclusion is a forecast . It is an act of predicting the output of the whole project . The prediction in this project is made using the machine learning techniques indicated above , and the result is expressed as a percentage ( i . e . , accuracy level ) E . Evaluation Evaluation is a stage which allows us to make judgements and proper decisions with respect to the output of the project . Here in this project , accuracy level is found for two machine learning algorithms and an algorithm which gives the best accuracy for prediction is found . Fig 4 : KNN accuracy graph VI . C ONCLUSION In this proposed system , the accuracy of forecasting cardiovascular disease is enhanced by utilizing two supervised machine learning algorithms . The K nearest neighbour has predicted the cardio - vascular disease with a precision of 87 % and random forest with 79 % . The algorithm with the highest accuracy is predicted . In future , the designed system can be used to predict or diagnose other diseases . VII . R EFERENCE [ 1 ] S . S . Sarmah , ‘An efficient IoT - based patient monitoring and heart disease prediction system using deep learning modified neural network’ , Ieee access , vol . 8 , pp . 135784 – 135797 , 2020 . [ 2 ] M . A . Khan and F . Algarni , ‘A healthcare monitoring system for the diagnosis of heart disease in the IoMT cloud environment using MSSO - ANFIS’ , IEEE Access , vol . 8 , pp . 122259 – 122269 , 2020 . [ 3 ] P . Hemavathy and M . Chinnadurai , ‘Performance validation of clustering algorithms using selection of attributes and application of filters in terms of data reduction’ , Concurrency and Computation : Practice and Experience , vol . 34 , no . 8 , p . e5364 , 2022 . [ 4 ] A . Javeed , S . Zhou , L . Yongjian , I . Qasim , A . Noor , and R . Nour , ‘An intelligent learning system based on random search algorithm and optimized random forest model for improved heart disease detection’ , IEEE access , vol . 7 , pp . 180235 – 180243 , 2019 . [ 5 ] M . A . Khan , ‘An IoT framewor k for heart disease prediction based on MDCNN classifier’ , IEEE Access , vol . 8 , pp . 34717 – 34727 , 2020 . [ 6 ] S . Mohan and T . Chandrasegar , ‘Srivastava Gautam Effective heart disease prediction using hybrid machine learning techniques’ , IEEE Access , vol . 7 , pp . 81542 – 81554 . [ 7 ] S . E . A . Ashri , M . M . El - Gayar , and E . M . El - Daydamony , ‘HDPF : Heart Disease Prediction Framework Based on Hybrid Classifiers and Genetic Algorithm’ , IEEE Access , vol . 9 , pp . 146797 – 146809 , 2021 . [ 8 ] J . P . Li , A . U . Haq , S . U . Din , J . Khan , A . Khan , and A . Saboor , ‘Heart disease identification method using machine learning classification in e - healthcare’ , IEEE Access , vol . 8 , pp . 107562 – 107582 , 2020 . [ 9 ] A . Gupta , R . Kumar , H . S . Arora , and B . Raman , ‘MIFH : A machine intelligence framework for heart disease diagnosis’ , IEEE access , vol . 8 , pp . 14659 – 14674 , 2019 . [ 10 ] N . L . Fitriyani , M . Syafrudin , G . Alfian , and J . Rhee , ‘HDPM : an effective heart disease prediction model for a clinical decision support system’ , IEEE Access , vol . 8 , pp . 133034 – 133050 , 2020 . [ 11 ] T . Amarbayasgalan , V . - H . Pham , N . Theera - Umpon , Y . Piao , and K . H . Ryu , ‘An efficient prediction method for coronary heart disease risk based on two deep neural networks trained on well - ordered training datasets’ , IEEE Access , vol . 9 , pp . 135210 – 135223 , 2021 . [ 12 ] M . Gudadhe , K . Wankhade , and S . Dongre , ‘Decision support system for heart disease based on support vector machine and artificial neural network’ , in 2010 International Conference on Computer and Communication Technology ( ICCCT ) , 2010 , pp . 741 – 745 . [ 13 ] B . A . Tama , S . Im , and S . Lee , ‘Improving an intelligent detection system for coronary heart disease using a two - tier classifier ensemble’ , BioMed Research International , vol . 2020 , 2020 . [ 14 ] G . Parthiban and S . K . Srivatsa , ‘Applying machine learning methods i n diagnosing heart disease for diabetic patients’ , International Journal of Applied Information Systems , vol . 3 , no . 7 , pp . 25 – 30 , 2012 . [ 15 ] S . Mohan , C . Thirumalai , and G . Srivastava , ‘Effective heart disease prediction using hybrid machine learning technique s’ , IEEE access , vol . 7 , pp . 81542 – 81554 , 2019 . [ 16 ] S . F . Weng , J . Reps , J . Kai , J . M . Garibaldi , and N . Qureshi , ‘‘Can machine - learning improve cardiovascular risk prediction using routine clinical data ? ’’ PLoS ONE , vol . 12 , no . 4 , 2017 , Art . no . e0174944 . [ 17 ] K . K . Jha , A . K . Jha , K . Rathore , and T . R . Mahesh , ‘Forecasting of Heart Diseases in Early Stages Using Machine Learning Approaches’ , in 2021 International Conference on Forensics , Analytics , Big Data , Security ( FABS ) , 2021 , vol . 1 , pp . 1 – 5 . [ 18 ] S . Sanyal , D . Das , S . K . Biswas , M . Chakraborty , and B . Purkayastha , ‘Heart Disease Prediction Using Classification Models’ , in 2022 3rd International Conference for Emerging Technology ( INCET ) , 2022 , pp . 1 – 6 . [ 19 ] C . C . - 19 R . Team et al . , ‘Preliminary estimates of the prevalence of selected underlying health conditions among patients with coronavirus disease 2019 — United States , February 12 - - March 28 , 2020’ , Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report , vol . 69 , no . 13 , pp . 382 – 386 , 2020 [ 20 ] R . Meng et al . , ‘Association of depression with all - cause and cardiovascular disease mortality among adults in China’ , JAMA network open , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . e1921043 – e1921043 , 2020 . [ 21 ] F . Thienemann , N . A . B . Ntusi , E . Battegay , B . U . Mueller , and M . Cheetham , ‘Multimorbidity and cardiovascular disease : a perspective on low - and middle - income countries’ , Cardiovascular diagnosis and therapy , vol . 10 , no . 2 , p . 376 , 2020 . [ 22 ] C . Gonçalves and S . Abreu , ‘Sodium and potassium intake and cardiovascular dise ase in older people : A systematic review’ , Nutrients , vol . 12 , no . 11 , p . 3447 , 2020 . [ 23 ] M . R . Sarveshvar , A . Gogoi , A . K . Chaubey , S . Rohit , and T . R . Mahesh , ‘Performance of different machine learning techniques for the prediction of heart diseases’ , in 202 1 international conference on forensics , analytics , big data , security ( FABS ) , 2021 , vol . 1 , pp . 1 – 4 . [ 24 ] R . Baxani and M . Edinburgh , ‘Heart Disease Prediction Using Machine Learning Algorithms Logistic Regression , Support Vector Machine and Random Forest Clas sification Techniques’ , Support Vector Machine and Random Forest Classification Techniques ( July 1 , 2022 ) , 2022 . 2023 3rd International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engineering ( ICACITE ) 182 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .