1 William E . Lee III , Dept . of Chemical Engineering , lee @ eng . usf . edu 2 G . Douglas Lunsford , Dept . of Educational Measurement and Research , glunsford @ tamapay . rr . com 3 Jack Heller , School of Music , heller @ arts . usf . edu 4 Mernet Larsen , Division of Visual Arts , mlarsen @ arts . usf . edu San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 1 Session R4F A Problem Solving Engineering Model with Comparisons to Problem Solving in the Arts William E . Lee III 1 , G . Douglas Lunsford 2 , Jack Heller 3 , and Mernet Larsen 4 Abstract - Engineers are problem solvers , although they may not employ a model of problem solving . While there is a literature on addressing the “technical” problem , other aspects such as the role of knowledgeable peers , society and cultural values , “aesthetics” , etc . are often downplayed if not totally omitted . A broad model of engineering problem solving will be presented that identifies the role of one’s technical community , the technical “culture” , the broader societal and cultural context , etc . This model evolved from a consideration of problem solving from first the engineering / technical problem , then branching out to consider insights gleaned from the psychology and educational literature , and finally incorporating observations from problem solving in the visual and performing arts . The last activity may be particularly insightful in that engineers can learn much about problem solving from their artistic counterparts . Engineering and the visual and performing arts examples will be included in the discussion . Index Terms - aesthetics , arts , education , problem solving INTRODUCTION Problem solving skills are an essential element of the engineer’s “tool kit” . Most engineering problems deal with complex issues for which there may be a number of alternative paths that may lead to multiple possible answers . Constraints may include timing and economics . A common challenge is determining when the problem is in fact “solved” . Engineering are usually initially exposed to problem solving during their undergraduate training , often converging on a comprehensive design project in their senior year . After graduation , their problem solving skills grow in response to the demands of the current work environment . For engineers , only passing references to societal and other nontechnical issues may be made . Problem solving is envisioned as a means to an end ; there is no thought to any underlying philosophy or “aesthetics” . In reality , engineering problems are solved by humans often operating in groups as part of a profession . The problems exist within a society with certain values and aesthetics . It is all interactive . Petroski [ 1 ] observed that “ . . . each engineering project is touched by the idiosyncracies of individual engineers , companies , communities , and marketplaces . And there are questions of economics , politics , aesthetics , and ethics . ” Similarly , Bloor has observed that social factors such as conventions , interests , and traditions play a role in terms of how knowledge advances [ 2 ] . Many feel that there has been a decline in the ability of engineering students to solve real world problems , a problem recognized as early as the late 1950 ' s [ 3 ] . One engineering educator has observed [ 1 ] : “Design has been a notoriously problematic aspect of the engineering curriculum . ” With more faculty driven by research agendas , design per se has perhaps declined in terms of an identified area of educational focus . Two ideas will be explored and developed in this paper . First , the solution to many engineering problems reflects an engineering “aesthetics” and depends on interaction with groups of individuals not directly associated with the problem , including a broader public with its own set of values . Second , engineers can learn from their colleagues in the arts who also have advanced problem solving skills , also in an environment where the art community’s values and the broader societal values play an important role . The parallels between the two “cultures” are not as disparate as one might think ; in fact , there are many similarities in problem solving methodologies . Engineering educators can use these parallels to reinforce problem solving skills typically presented to undergraduate students . BACKGROUND General problem solving Kahney [ 4 ] presents a definition of both “problem” and “problem solving” : “A person has a ‘problem’ when he or she has a goal which cannot be achieved directly . Any action taken by a person in pursuit of a blocked goal , whether physical or mental , is regarded as problem solving . ” Psychologists and philosophers feel that problem solving is one of the most complex forms of cognitive activity , involving one’s accumulated knowledge and skills . General surveys of problem solving are readily found in San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 2 the literature ( for example , [ 5 ] - [ 6 ] ) . More focused treatments may stress various methodologies and strategies such as problem decomposition [ 7 ] , working backwards means - end analysis [ 8 ] - [ 9 ] , forward chaining [ 10 ] , state - space solutions or tree diagram style approaches , heuristic or “rule of thumb” solutions , algorithmic solutions , etc . Good problem solvers are often good at deriving representations or models of the problem and its associated solution pathway ( s ) [ 11 ] . Indeed , one way to break through a period of limited progress is to find a new way of visualizing the problem [ 7 ] , [ 12 ] . Psychologists have traditionally described problem solving as consisting of several steps or stages : 1 ) The information phase , involving background research and problem definition ; 2 ) The ideation or incubation phase , where possible solution pathways may become identified ; 3 ) The evaluation or judgement phase , where the ideas / leads / etc generated in phase two are critically evaluated , refined , etc . ; 4 ) The implementation or action phase where the steps / action plan is executed , hopefully arriving at a solution ; and 5 ) A verification phase , where the solution is verified [ 13 ] - [ 14 ] . This process may be iterative . Less sophisticated versions describe moving from start to finish in a more continuous fashion rather than through stages [ 15 ] . Other viewpoints include the Gestalt approach , involving the integrating of previously learned responses [ 16 ] and computer program models ( algorithmic solutions ) [ 17 ] . Engineering problem solving Overviews of the engineering approach to problem solving are presented by Migliore [ 18 ] and Koen [ 19 ] . Engineers are usually more interested in “practical’ problem solving rather than more philosophical aspects of general problem solving . Koen noted that while science has a well - developed literature of scientific method , engineering as comparatively very little in terms of literature that addresses “engineering method” . Problem solving in the arts Problem solving is a common activity in the visual and performing arts . Musicians develop compositions , often interacting with other musicians and a critical audience . Often an iterative process , many versions of the composition may be considered . Visual artists may do a variety of smaller scale studies as they evolve their works , often seeking feedback from other artists while maintaining the public’s aesthetics in the process . Bloor observes [ 2 ] : “Consider a mundane example of art creation . An artist paints away in his studio on a canvas and after a while says to himself ‘ It’s finished’ , and he then signs the painting . ” The artist exercises a certain type of authority in declaring ‘it is finished’ , an authority described by Davies as [ 20 ] “ . . . the authority to exercise an entitlement to employ art - making conventions . ” . Dickie feels this “authority” can also reflect the artist’s knowledge or skill [ 21 ] . This also applies to the theater , dance , and even literature . Heller observes [ 22 ] : “The process of creating any work of art . . . involves making an enormous number of aesthetic decisions about even the most minute details . ” Beethoven related [ 23 ] : “I alter a great deal , discard it and try again until I am satisfied . And then inside my head I begin to work it out , broadening it here , restricting it there , deepening it and heightening it ; and since I am conscious of what I am trying to do , I never lose sight of the fundamental idea . It rises up higher and higher , and grows before my eyes until I hear and see the image of it , molded and complete . ” Beethoven kept note books with him all the time , jotting down ideas and reworking themes ; he worked on the 9 th symphony for over six years [ 24 ] . Regarding the visual arts , Baxandall observes [ 25 ] : “The painter’s complex problem of good picture - making becomes a serial and continually self - redefining operation , permanent problem - reformulation , as soon as he enters the process of actually painting . ” Wordsworth worked on poems for years , constantly changing verse composition , often reflecting criticism from his peers [ 26 ] . Turchi has observed that writing consists of two separate activities . First is the act of exploration : “some combination of premeditated searching and undisciplined , perhaps only partly conscious rambling . This includes scribbling notes , considering potential scenes , lines , or images , inventing characters , even writing drafts . ” Second is presentation : “Applying knowledge , skill , and talent , we create a document meant to communicate with , and have an effect on , others . ” [ 27 ] Russo writes [ 28 ] : “Our struggles with our material are as individual as we are . . . Cross - fertilization” - how figuring out the answer or solution to one problem makes the solution to later similar problems a little easier . ” The CEDFA ( Center for Educator Development in Fine Arts ) website ( finearts . esc20 . net ) presents good summaries of contemporary problem solving protocols for art , music , dance and theater . Sapp [ 29 ] presents a detailed treatment of problem solving in visual art and Smith - Autard [ 30 ] in dance composition . Group efforts The use of interdisciplinary teams is very useful in problem solving [ 31 ] . Team projects , including both within - discipline and interdisciplinary teams , are increasingly common in academics . Recognizing the value of team efforts , the Engineering Accreditation Commission ( ABET ) 2006 - 2007 criteria includes ( Criterion 3 ) : “an ability to function on multidisciplinary teams” . Historical psychological literature on creativity focuses on solitary activities . A more recent trend involves the sociocultural approach where learning and creative activities occur within social and cultural context , proposing that creativity is both an individual and group behavior [ 32 ] - [ 35 ] . Group creativity ( including problem solving ) is a characteristic of many creative efforts in 20 th century music and theater , often involving “peer collaboration” [ 36 ] . Artists have often developed and relied upon supportive / collaborative peer groups , sometimes San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 3 TABLE 1 A COMPARISON OF THE ACTIVITIES OF ENGINEERS AND SELECTED VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTISTS Performer “Art” objective Composition activity Finished “art” Performance Constraints Engineer " Better one of . . . " New one of . . . " New application of . . . " Problem identification " Problem analysis " Alternatives development " Analysis " Design Final product , design , structure , plan , etc . " Building the . . . " Making the . . . " Implementing the . . . " Economics " Client / user expectations " Societal values " Professional standards Visual artist " Creative work : - Academic art - Abstract art " Specific illustration , advertisement , etc . " Problem identification " Problem analysis " Alternative possibilities " Piece production " Analysis Finished work ( painting , illustration , etc . ) " Gallery display " Art show " Print ( magazine , advertisement , etc . ) " Economics " Client / user expectations " Societal values " Professional standards Composer / musician " Composition " Problem identification " Problem analysis " Alternative possibilities " Composition " Analysis Score Music performance " Economics " Client / user expectations " Societal values " Professional standards Playwright " Play " Problem identification " Problem analysis " Alternative possibilities " Script production " Analysis Script Play performance " Economics " Client / user expectations " Societal values " Professional standards establishing “artists’ colonies” . For example , late 1800 ' s Paris saw a network of interacting artists including van Gogh , Gauguin Signac , de Toulouse - Lautrec , and Serat [ 37 ] . The collaborations between Picasso and Georges Braque is another good example . Speaking of science , Ghiselin observes [ 38 ] : “In thus emphasizing the creative worker’s dependence on affective guides rather than on any explicit intellectual process , the mathematicians are in essential agreement with the artists . ” Sociology and cultural aspects Creative individuals ( and groups ) work within societal and institutional frameworks . Baxandall observes [ 25 ] : “Painters cannot be social idiots : they are not somehow insulated from the conceptual structures of the cultures in which they live . ” Gruber [ 39 ] observes that creativity involves an approach that is experientially sensitive : “The creator is not considered simply as the doer of the work , but also as a person in the world . Such a person has emotions and aesthetic feelings as well as social awareness of the relation of his or her work to the world’s work , its needs , and feelings . ” Stein [ 40 ] defined creativity as a “process which results in a novel work that is accepted as tenable or useful or satisfying by a group at some point in time” . Adopting a sociological viewpoint , Bloor argues that knowledge is “ . . . whatever people take to be knowledge . ” [ 2 ] The public aesthetic of the moment plays a significant role in establishing what art will be successful ; artists often create their works with this in mind . Valéry wrote [ 41 ] : “At the very heart of the scholar’s or artist’s thought . . . there is present some strange anticipation of the external reactions to be provoked by the work now in the making . ” Helm notes [ 42 ] : “But in general , the composer writes with the intention of having his music performed for a body of receptors which we will call the public . ” Helm goes on to subdivide the listening public into “ . . . the small , intelligent elite and the less intelligent majority . ” Picasso noted : “ . . . a picture lives only through him that looks at it . ” [ 43 ] While many would argue that “culture” plays a significant role in how knowledge advances , it was not until recently that science was considered to be a part culture . Fischman observed [ 44 ] : “It is therefore reasonable to maintain that science has become part of our culture , our ‘inherited ideas , beliefs , values and knowledge , which constitute the shared bases of social action’ . ” Fischman argues that musicians should incorporate science into their compositions since “science” is a part of our culture . ENGINEERING AND THE ARTS - COMMON THEMES Table 1 examines several aspect of the activities that engineering and selected art disciplines ( visual art , music , and theater ) in terms of the purpose or goal of the work or project , types of activities that will occur to produce the work or project , the final product , the public presentation of the final work or product , and constraints that may apply . This reflects our claim that engineering can be thought of as an “art” very much in the same sense as the word is used in music , visual art , dance , theater , etc . Furthermore , an engineer’s “performance” is the presentation of San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 4 FIGURE 1 A PROBLEM SOLVING MODEL his / her work to the public , be it in the form of a finished design , product , structure , etc . It is also appropriate for both engineering and the arts to talk in terms of their “aesthetic” . Woodward ( 1989 ) describes the academic contributions of organic chemist Robert Burns ( who won the Nobel Prize in 1965 ) to organic chemistry in terms of artistic aesthetics [ 45 ] . Ghiselin opines [ 38 } : “But it is evident that in both art and science the inventor is to some degree incited and guided by a sense of value . . . ” Finally , “poetics” has come to mean both the production of a literary work ( historically poetry , but later expanded to any creative writing ) and general aesthetics . Musicologist Zak observes that “poetics” involves aspects of feeling , intuition , creativity , and imagination and extends the concept to music , hence the phrase musica poetica [ 46 ] . It may seem appropriate to propose the phrase “the poetics of engineering” in this vein . PROBLEM SOLVING MODEL Figure 1 presents a problem solving model that follows from the discussed above . Several comments : First , the original source of the project may either be self - defined ( often the case in the arts ) or via assignment or commission ( many arts and most engineering projects ) . Second , “feedback” ( solicited or unsolicited ) can come from the individual’s own aesthetics ( easily extended to a group ) , knowledgeable individuals groups ( further broken down into “inner circle” and “outside critics” ) , “history” , and the public ( further broken down into the smaller “educated public” and broader “general public” ) . Third , the actual final product may be a “performance” or introduction of the final product into the public domain . Fourth , the iterative nature of problem solving is incorporated . Fifth , the possible influence of the current problem and its attempted solution on both the present and future is considered , recognizing both individual and “cultural” benefits . Applicable to most disciplines , it is a matter of interpreting the model in terms of the specific discipline ( s ) being considered . For example , the “inner circle” could be co - workers , peers , etc . of comparable or advanced relevant knowledge and experience . Feedback from the “inner circle” may be for total internal consumption , i . e . , there may be no communication beyond the group . “Outside critics” ( or external reviewers ) may include individuals not part of the designated working group but with similar credentials to the “inner circle” . “History” is intended to capture the essence of the relevant historical perspective and associated historical values , which may only extend back in time to a limited extent ( “the current practice or style” ) or possibly reflect an “established” viewpoint of longer extent ( a “tradition” ) . Many technology projects begin with varying degrees of understanding regarding the “starting point” . This may not always be true within the arts ; artists often experience some challenges in defining the problem initially . Thomas observed [ 47 ] : “The moment of conception of a piece is rarely definable . At first , it is often difficult to know exactly what is being conceived . ” Thus , arts problem - solving may be highly iterative . Two engineering examples A historical example that illustrates the applicability of this model to engineering design is the design of the Forth Bridge by San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 5 engineers Benjamin Baker and John Fowler [ 25 ] . This was a 19 th century project that sought to connect two regions in Scotland . Baker was an unusual engineer who possessed a historical knowledge of bridge design in addition to being current on contemporary design strategies . The bridge design proceeded through several evolutions ( see [ 25 ] ) that included interactions with “knowledgeable peers” and public aesthetics of the time ( including “critics” ) . The final “performance” was the construction of the actual bridge . Baxandall compares the process of designing the Forth Bridge to Picasso’s evolution of the production of several works , including Les Demoiselles d’Avignon and Portrait of Kahnweiler . A second and more contemporary example relates to the various proposals to replace the World Trade Center in New York City . Stephens presents a detailed summary of this design activity , documenting various official and unofficial designs for the site [ 48 ] . This activity definitely incorporates design alternatives , peer feedback , public aesthetics , etc . per Figure 1 . DISCUSSION It is important for engineers to recognize the influence of the factors identified in the model ( Figure 1 ) as real contributors to engineering problem solving . Other creative individuals have recognized the influence of culture / society and have become more effective problem solvers . Failure to do so may result in a problem solution that is technically ( or “artistically” ) sound , but of limited practical value , i . e . , a technical / artistic success but economic and / or societal failure . In 20 th century philosophy of art , the institutional theory of art is a dominant viewpoint . This theory is based on a cultural viewpoint where works of art are produced and derive meaning and value in terms of a variety of culturally - defined roles . George Dickie outlines the basics [ 49 ] : 1 . An artist is a person who participates with understanding in the making of a work of art . 2 . A work of art is an artifact of a kind created to be presented to an artworld public . 3 . A public is a set of persons the members of which are prepared in some degree to understand an object which is presented to them . 4 . The artworld is the totality of all artworld systems . 5 . An artworld system is a framework for the presentation of a work of art by an artist to an artworld public . This approach is readily translated into the engineering world , with the equivalent statements proceeding : 1 . An engineer is a person who participates in the design or production of a work of technology . 2 . Technology is an artifact of a kind created for presentation and consumption to a technology - conscious public . 3 . A technology - conscious public is a set of persons who to some degree understand the technology that is presented to them ( and used by them ) . 4 . Technology is the totality of all technology disciplines and subdisciplines . 5 . A technology discipline is a framework for the presentation of a work of technology by an engineer to the technology - conscious public . The form of these statements was chosen to deliberately mimic the art statements presented above . Thus it is possible to talk of an “institutional theory of engineering art” that links the engineering activity with its public domain within which it practices . The artists have already accomplished this within their world . Such a philosophy is actually very consistent with the “pragmatic” viewpoint commonly held by engineers . Analyzing engineering problem solving within the framework of arts - based problem solving may appear challenging to some engineers / technologists . Ferguson observed [ 3 ] : “Most engineers today are happy to be called scientists but resist being called artists” . It is a matter of a cultural shift of sorts , for one to think outside the box . As Ghiselin reflects [ 38 ] : “The creative process is not only the concern of specialists , however ; it is not limited to the arts and to thought , but is as wide as life . ” Creativity , problem solving , etc . are not the exclusive property of any single intellectual discipline . Ackoff observes [ 31 ] : “The more philosophy and science I tried to bring to bear on problem solving , the more I came to realize that even together they can assure us no more than adequate solutions to problems . They cannot provide exciting solutions , ones that we call ‘beautiful’ . Only the kind of problem solving that involves art can do this . And art implies creativity . ” CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Engineering ( both students and professionals ) can indeed learn from the arts . Educators may invite professional artists , musicians , etc . to capstone engineering design classes to discuss their problem solving experiences and demonstrate that the model ( Figure 1 ) works for both the arts and engineering . Such experiences also help to break down barriers between the “two cultures” . Also , educators should analyze problems that were not successfully solved in terms of the model in order to appreciate its functioning ( “learning from mistakes” - for more discussion , see [ 50 ] ) . Bellinger observed [ 51 ] : “Once we embrace the complexity we have created , and find the simplicity on the other side , we no longer need to be victims , for we can use our understanding to change our actions , and thereby our world . ” Smith - Autard states [ 30 ] : “In the arts , to compose is to create - to make something which , for each particular artist , has not been in existence before . Artists who attain the highest peaks of perfection in composition - dance : the choreographer , music : the composer , art : the painter or sculptor , drama : the dramatist or playwright , literature : the poet or novelist - are inspired people San Juan , PR July 23 - 28 , 2006 9 th International Conference on Engineering Education R4F - 6 of imagination and vision . ” This quote is absolutely applicable to engineers and their “art” as well . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by a grant from the National Sciences Foundation ( NSF # 0235214 ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Petroski , H , “ Invention by design : How engineers get from thought to thing” , Harvard University Press , 1996 . [ 2 ] Bloor , D , “Knowledge and social imagery” , The University of Chicago Press , 1991 . [ 3 ] Ferguson , ES , “Engineering and the mind’s eye Cambridge” , The MIT Press , 1994 . [ 4 ] Kahney , H , “Problem solving : A cognitive approach” , Open University Press , 1986 . [ 5 ] Sternberg , RJ ed . , “Thinking and problem solving” , Academic Press , 1994 . [ 6 ] Fogler , HS and LeBlanc , SE , “Strategies for creative problem solving” , Prentice Hall , 1995 . [ 7 ] Hayes , JR , “The complete problem solver” , Franklin Institute Press , 1981 . [ 8 ] Newell , A and Simon , HA , “Human problem solving” , Prentice - Hall , 1972 . [ 9 ] Anderson , JR , “Problem solving and learning” , American Psychologist 48 , 1993 , 35 - 44 . [ 10 ] Simon , DP and Simon , H . A , “Individual differences in solving problems” Children’s thinking : What develops ? Siegler , RS , ed . , Erlbaum , 1978 . [ 11 ] Larkin , JH , McDermott , J , Simon , DP and Simon , HA , “Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems” , Science 208 , 1980 , 1335 - 1342 . [ 12 ] Greeno , JG , “Trends in the theory of knowledge for problem solving” , Problem solving and education : Issues in teaching and research , Tuma , DT and Reif , R , eds . , Erlbaum , 1980 . [ 13 ] Green , BF , Jr . , “Current trends in problem solving” , Problem solving : Research , method , and theory , Kleinmuntz , B , ed . , John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , 1966 . [ 14 ] Dombroski , TW , “Creative problem solving : The door to progress and change” , toExcel Press , 2000 . [ 15 ] Newell , A , Shaw , JC , and Simon , HA , “Elements of a theory of human problem solving” Psychol . Rev . 65 , 1958 , 151 - 166 . [ 16 ] Wertheimer , M , . “Productive thinking” , Harper & Row , 1945 . [ 17 ] Scandura , JM , “ Problem solving : A structural / process approach with instructional implications” , Academic Press , 1977 . [ 18 ] Migliore , H , “The engineering design formula” , 1977 . www . cecs . pdx . edu / % 7Eherm / capstone / mee9899 / design / methods / method . htm . [ 19 ] Koen , BV , “Discussion of the method : Conducting the engineer’s approach to problem solving” , Oxford University Press , 2003 . [ 20 ] Davies , S , “ Definitions of art” , Cornell University Press , 1991 . [ 21 ] Dickie , G , “Art and value” , Blackwell Publishers , 2001 . [ 22 ] Heller , NG , “Why a painting is like a pizza : A guide to understanding and enjoying modern art” , Princeton University Press , 2002 . [ 23 ] Mies , P , “Beethoven’s sketches : An analysis of his style based on a study of his sketch - books” , Oxford University Press , 1929 . [ 24 ] Lockwood , L , “Beethoven : Studies in the creative process” , Harvard University Press , 1992 . [ 25 ] Baxandall , M , “Patterns of intention : On the historical explanation of pictures” , Yale University Press , 1985 . [ 26 ] Jeffrey , LR , “Writing and rewriting poetry : William Wordsworth” , Creative people at work : Twelve cognitive case studies , Oxford University Press , 1989 . [ 27 ] Turchi , P , “Maps of the imagination : The writer as cartographer” , Trinity University Press , 2004 . [ 28 ] Russo , R , in the introduction to “The story behind the story : 26 stories by contemporary writers and how they work “ , Turchi , P and Barrett , A eds . , W . W . Norton and Company , 2004 . [ 29 ] Sapp , DD , “Creative problem - solving in art : A model for idea inception and image development” , Journal of Creative Behavior 29 ( 3 ) , 1995 , 173 - 185 . [ 30 ] Smith - Autard , JM , “Dance composition : A practical guide to creative success in dance making” , Routledge , 2004 . [ 31 ] Ackoff , R , “The art of problem solving” , John Wiley & Sons , 1978 . [ 32 ] Maier , NRF , “The problem - solving attitude” , Problem solving and creativity in individuals and groups , Maier , NRF , ed . Wadsworth Publishing Co . , 1970 . [ 33 ] Rogoff , B , “Cognition as a collaborative process” , Handbook of child psychology . 5 th ed . , Kuhn , D . and Siegler , RS , eds . , Wiley , 1988 . [ 34 ] Rogoff , B , “Apprenticeship in thinking : Cognitive development in social context” , Oxford University Press , 1990 . [ 35 ] Mockros , CA and Csikszenthmihalyi , M , “The social construction of creative lives” , Social creativity . Vol . 1 . , . Montuori , A and Purser , RE eds . , Hampton Press , Inc . , 1999 . [ 36 ] Sawyer , RK , “Group creativity : Music , theater , collaboration” , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers , 2003 . [ 37 ] Brower , R , “The role of social comparison in the artistic development of Vincent van Gogh” , Education , arts , and morality : Creative journeys , Wallace , DB , ed . , Klewer Academic , 2005 . [ 38 ] Ghiselin , B , ed . , “The creative process : Reflections on invention in the arts and sciences” , University of California Press , 1985 . [ 39 ] Gruber , HE , “The evolving systems approach to creative work” , Creative people at work : Twelve cognitive case studies , Oxford University Press , 1989 . [ 40 ] Stein , M , “A transactional approach to creativity” , Scientific creativity . It’s recognition and development , Taylor , CW and Barron , F , eds . , Wiley , 1963 . [ 41 ] Valéry , P , “The course in poetics : First lesson” , The creative process : Reflections on invention in the arts and sciences , Gheselin , B . , ed . , University of California Press , 1985 . [ 42 ] Helm , E , “Composer , performer , public : A study in communication” , Leo S . Olschki , 1970 . [ 43 ] Zervos , C , “Conversations with Picasso” , The creative process : Reflections on invention in the arts and sciences , Gheselin , B . , ed . , University of California Press , 1985 . [ 44 ] Fischman , R , “ Derivation of organic musical structure and materials from the solutions of Schröedinger’s equation” , Intercultural Music 5 , 2003 , 117 - 143 . [ 45 ] Woodward , CE , “Art and elegance in the synthesis of organic compounds : Robert Burns Woodward” , Creative people at work : Twelve cognitive case studies , Oxford University Press , 1989 . [ 46 ] Zak , AJ III , “The poetics of rock : Cutting tracks , making records” , University of California Press , 2001 . [ 47 ] Thomas , W , “Composition - performance - reception : Studies in the creative process in music” , Aldershot : Ashgate , 1998 . [ 48 ] Stephens , S , “Imagining ground zero : Official and unofficial proposals for the World Trade Center site : , Rizzoli Intl Publications , 2004 . [ 49 ] Dickie , G , “The art circle” , Spectrum Press , 1997 . [ 50 ] Petroski , H , “Design paradigms : Case histories of error and judgement in engineering” , Cambridge University Press , 1994 . [ 51 ] Bellinger , GB , from the Forward to “The art of systems thinking : Essential skills for creativity and problem solving” , O’Connor , J and McDermott , I , Thorsons , 1997 .