Current Biology 23 , 1409 – 1417 , August 5 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 063 Article Membrane Tension in Rapidly Moving Cells Is Determined by Cytoskeletal Forces Arnon D . Lieber , 1 , 2 Shlomit Yehudai - Resheff , 1 Erin L . Barnhart , 4 Julie A . Theriot , 4 and Kinneret Keren 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Department of Physics 2 Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute 3 Network Biology Research Laboratories Technion , Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa 32000 , Israel 4 Department of Biochemistry and Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Stanford School of Medicine , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA Summary Background : Membrane tension plays an essential role in cell motility . The load imposed by the tensed membrane restrains actin polymerization , promotes rear retraction , and inﬂuences membrane transport . Moreover , membrane tension is crucial for large - scale coordination of cell boundary dynamics . Despite its importance , little is known about how membrane tension is set and regulated in cells . The prevailing hypothesis is that membrane tension is largely controlled by membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion and / or changes in membrane area . Results : In this work , we measure the apparent membrane tension in rapidly moving ﬁsh epithelial keratocytes under normal and perturbed conditions with a tether - pulling assay . We ﬁnd that enlargement of the cell surface area by fusion with giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) has only minor effects on membrane tension and on cell movement . However , mod - ulation of the cytoskeletal forces has a substantial inﬂuence on tension : reduction of the actin - pushing forces along the cell’s leading edge leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in mem - brane tension , whereas increase of the strength of adhesion and / or decrease of myosin - induced contraction leads to higher tension . Conclusions : We ﬁnd that the membrane tension in rapidly moving keratocytes is primarily determined by a mechanical force balance between the cell membrane and cytoskeletal forces . Our results highlight the role of membrane tension as a global mechanical regulator of cell behavior . Introduction Motile cells are surrounded by a ﬂexible membrane bilayer that plays a central role in the motility process . Apart from physically separating the interior of the cell from its environ - ment and serving as a dynamic platform for localization of various components which regulate the motility machinery , the cell membrane has an important mechanical role ; the ten - sion in the membrane generates inward forces that inﬂuence all cellular processes involving membrane deformations [ 1 – 4 ] . In particular , membrane tension mechanically restrains actin polymerization [ 5 – 8 ] , contributes to retraction at the trail - ing edge [ 8 , 9 ] , and inﬂuences the rates of membrane trans - port processes in which vesicles bud off from or fuse with the plasma membrane [ 5 , 10 ] . Force equilibration within the membrane is rapid ( w milliseconds ) [ 11 ] , so that a local in - crease in the force exerted on the membrane leads to an almost immediate global increase in membrane tension . Thus , in addition to its local inﬂuence on cell boundary dynamics , membrane tension induces mechanical coupling across the cell , providing rapid means for communication over cellular scales [ 6 – 8 , 12 ] . Recent experiments in various cell types , including neutrophils [ 6 ] , ﬁbroblasts [ 12 ] , and ﬁsh keratocytes [ 7 , 8 ] , highlight the importance of this global mechanical coupling for large - scale coordination of cell behavior . The tension in a lipid bilayer has both entropic and elastic contributions [ 13 ] . For a ﬁxed amount of lipids , the in - plane tension in the membrane increases with the apparent area ( i . e . , the projected area of the membrane ) ; at low tension , this increase is dominated by entropic effects as membrane ﬂuctuations are suppressed as the apparent area increases . Note that these membrane ﬂuctuations are typically nanomet - ric and hence not visible at the level of the light microscope [ 13 ] . At higher tension values , there is a transition to an elastic regime in which the lipids are being pulled away from each other as the membrane is stretched out . Eventually , the bilayer ruptures when the apparent membrane area increases by w 3 % – 5 % compared to its relaxed state and the tension values reach w 3000 – 10 , 000 pN / m m [ 4 ] . In cells , unlike artiﬁcial vesi - cles , the membrane is adhered to the underlying cytoskeleton , and this interaction contributes to the surface energy . The apparent membrane tension in cells is thus a sum of the in - plane tension in the bilayer and the adhesion energy between the membrane and the cytoskeleton [ 14 – 16 ] . These two contributions are generally not separable , as the force felt by , e . g . , a ﬁlament impinging on the membrane or a bead during a tether - pulling assay ( see Figure 1A below ) incorpo - rates both [ 15 ] . The relative importance of the membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion and the in - plane tension will depend on the strength of the interaction between the membrane and the cytoskeleton and on the magnitude of the forces determining the in - plane tension in the bilayer , and can hence vary among different cell types . Membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion was shown to be prominent in melanoma cells and renal epithelial cells in which the apparent tension measured in regions where the cytoskeleton is well adhered to the plasma membrane was substantially higher than the tension in blebs that lack cytoskeletal support [ 14 ] . The amount of cell membrane can change due to transport between internal membranes and the cell membrane . Since the rates of these transport processes are tension dependent [ 10 , 17 ] , cell surface area changes are coupled to membrane tension via mechanical feedbacks [ 3 , 4 , 18 ] . The effective membrane area of a cell can also change by ﬂattening out of membrane folds and invaginations ( e . g . , caveolae ) . Such unfolding has been shown to play a central role in buffering tension and preventing rupture in some cell types such as muscle cells that are subject to abrupt swelling and stretching [ 19 , 20 ] . The extent of plasma membrane reservoirs can vary considerably among cell types and can depend on the cell state [ 1 ] . For example , in spreading ﬁbroblasts , the membrane reservoir can initially be very large ( > 10 % ) [ 12 ] , * Correspondence : kinneret @ physics . technion . ac . il whereas in adhered ﬁbroblasts it is much smaller ( w 0 . 3 % – 1 % ) [ 21 ] . Keratocytes typically do not contain noticeable invaginations or membrane folds ( Figure S1 available online ) and hence are not thought to have extensive membrane reservoirs . Despite the important role of membrane tension as a phys - ical regulator of motile cell dynamics , little is known about how membrane tension is set and regulated . The prevailing view is that membrane tension regulation in cells is primarily controlled by changes in membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion and / or changes in the available membrane area [ 1 , 4 ] , but experimental observations have been limited . Changes in membrane tension have been typically induced by osmolarity shifts or addition of substances that perturb the structure of the membrane bilayer such as detergents or organic solvents . While such externally induced changes in membrane tension can provide insight into the tension dependence of various cellular processes [ 5 , 22 ] , they cannot reveal how membrane tension is determined . To address this important question , we combined detailed measurements of membrane tension in rapidly moving ﬁsh epithelial keratocytes with various bio - physical and biochemical perturbations of the motility machin - ery . The persistent nature of these cells [ 7 , 23 ] allowed us to study the relationship between membrane tension , membrane area , and the motility machinery in essentially steady - state conditions . We show that membrane tension in motile kera - tocytes is primarily determined by cytoskeletal forces , rather than changes in the available membrane area or in mem - brane - cytoskeleton adhesion . Results Measurements of Membrane Tension in Motile Keratocytes Membrane tension was measured in rapidly migrating kerato - cytes with a tether - pulling assay ( Figure 1 and Movie S1 ) [ 24 ] . The apparent membrane tension , T , is proportional to the square of the force opposing tether formation , F T , according to the relation T = F 2 T = 8 p 2 B ; where B is the bending modulus of the membrane ( characterizing the energetic cost of bending the membrane ) [ 15 ] . In a typical experiment , a bead , coated with concanavalin A to promote membrane binding , was manipulated by laser tweezers and attached to the plasma membrane at the rear end of a migrating keratocyte ( Figure 1 and the Experimental Procedures ) . A membrane tether formed as the cell moved away from the bead , and the force opposing tether formation ( F T ) was measured from the displacement of the bead from the center of the laser trap . After an initial tether formation phase , the tether force remained essentially con - stant as the tether elongated , until eventually the tether ruptured ( Figure 1C and Movie S1 ) . The tether force ( in the sta - tionary phase ) in a population of keratocytes ranged between 40 and 70 pN with a mean value of 54 6 1 pN ( mean 6 SEM ; Figure 1C ) . To determine the bending modulus of the membrane , we combined tether - pulling experiments with simultaneous mea - surements of the tether radius by quantitative ﬂuorescence densitometry ( Figures 1B and S2 and the Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . The tether force was inversely proportional to the tether radius R T ( Figure 1D ) , as expected theoretically [ 15 ] , F T = 2 p B = R T : The bending modulus was esti - mated from the proportionality constant , giving B = 0 . 14 6 0 . 01 pN $ m m , comparable to moduli measured in other cell types [ 15 , 25 ] . Membrane tension values were determined from the measured tether forces using this estimate for B , and found to range between 150 and 450 pN / m m , with a mean value of 276 6 10 pN / m m ( mean 6 SEM ; Figure 1E ) . These tension values are high compared to other cell types [ 5 , 6 , 14 , 26 ] , but still an order of magnitude lower than the rupture tension . Fusion of Cells with GUVs Induces a Signiﬁcant Increase in Membrane Area , but Has Only Minor Effects on Membrane Tension and Cell Movement To probe the role of changes in membrane area in determining membrane tension in motile cells , we developed a novel perturbation in which cell membrane area is abruptly A B C D E n = 65 cells Figure 1 . Membrane Tension in Motile Kerato - cytes ( A ) Membrane tension is measured by extraction of a membrane tether from the rear end of a motile keratocyte with laser tweezers as shown schematically . The tether force is measured from the displacement of the bead from the trap center . The membrane tension is squarely pro - portional to the tether force . ( B ) Bright - ﬁeld and epiﬂuorescence images of a motile keratocyte during a tether - pulling experi - ment . The thin membrane tether connecting the cell to the bead ( held by the tweezers ) is not visible in bright ﬁeld but can be observed by ﬂuorescence microscopy after staining the cell with a ﬂuorescent membrane dye ( arrow ; image contrast is enhanced in the inset ) . ( C ) Tether force measurements in motile kerato - cytes . The tether force as a function of time dur - ing a tether - pulling experiment is shown for three different cells ( right ) . After an initial variable phase , the tether force is constant until the tether breaks . A histogram of the values of the tether force during the stationary phase in a population of cells ( n = 65 ) plated on intermediate RGD density substrates is shown ( left ) . ( D ) The tether force and tether radius were measured simultaneously in ﬁve different cells . The tether force is inversely proportional to the tether radius as predictedtheoretically [ 15 ] . Themembrane - bending modulusforkeratocytemembranesisdeterminedfromthe linearﬁt ( grayline ) B = 0 . 14 6 0 . 01pN $ m m . ( E ) A histogram of the measured membrane tension in a population of keratocytes , calculated from the measured tether forces ( C ) with the membrane - bending modulus determined in ( D ) . See also Figure S2 and Movie S1 . Current Biology Vol 23 No 15 1410 increased by electroporation - induced fusion of giant unila - mellar vesicles ( GUVs ) to motile keratocytes ( Figure 2 and the Experimental Procedures ) . To facilitate identiﬁcation of fused cells , we included ﬂuorescent lipids in the GUVs , which incorporate into the cell membrane upon fusion and render fused cells ﬂuorescent ( Figure 2C ) . Fusion induced a signiﬁ - cant increase in cell area ( Figure 2B ) . Surprisingly , fused cells were still able to move persistently despite their increased sur - face area ; fused cells were larger and more elongated ( Figures 2B and 2C ; projected area = 566 6 21 m m 2 , p < 10 2 10 ; aspect ratio = 2 . 24 6 0 . 06 , p < 10 2 3 ; mean 6 SEM ) but moved with similar speed ( 0 . 33 6 0 . 02 m m / s , p > 0 . 03 ) compared to a con - trol population ( projected area = 389 6 14 m m 2 ; aspect ratio = 1 . 98 6 0 . 05 ; speed = 0 . 37 6 0 . 02 m m / s ) . Similar changes were observed within individual cells followed before and after fusion ( Figures 2D – 2G and Movie S2 ) . These results appear to depend primarily on the amount of membrane area added , rather than the details of its lipid composition , as similar results were obtained after fusion with GUVs composed from different lipid mixtures ( Figure S3 ) . Membrane fusion by electroporation induced a large increase ( w 30 % ) in cell membrane area ( Figures 2 and S3A ) , but hardly changed the protein concentration within cells and the cell volume ( Figure S3D ) . If the amount of cell membrane area was an important determinant of membrane tension , such drastic perturbations in membrane area ( much larger than the naturally induced changes by membrane trans - port through imbalance between endo - or exocytosis within a similar time frame ) would lead to a signiﬁcant decrease in membrane tension . However , membrane tension measure - ments done as early as possible after fusion ( w 10 min ) showed that despite the substantial increase in cell membrane area , tension remained nearly unchanged ( Figure 2H ) ; membrane tension values in fused cells were not signiﬁcantly different from the values in a control population of cells ( p > 0 . 2 ) and remained stable over tens of minutes ( Figure S3E ) . It is likely that membrane tension does drop transiently after fusion ( and prior to our earliest measurements ) . However , on time scales longer than the cell translocation time ( w front - to - read cell length / cell speed , w 15 m m / 0 . 3 m m / s , w 1 min ) , which is also the characteristic time scale for actin network reassem - bly , tension returned to approximately its preperturbation values ( Figure 2H ) . These results suggest that the available membrane area does not play a central role in determining membrane tension . The inﬂuence of changes in membrane area on tension appears to be buffered by the dynamic cyto - skeleton , which rapidly responds to the changes in the avail - able membrane area by broadening the lamellipodium A B C D E F G H n = 21 Figure 2 . Fusion of Cells with GUVs Induces a Signiﬁcant Increase in Cell Membrane Area but Has Minor Effects on Membrane Tension and Cell Movement ( A ) Schematic illustration of the cell fusion exper - iments . Motile cells are incubated with ﬂuores - cently labeled GUVs ( top ) . After electroporation , theGUVmembranefuseswiththecellmembrane , their lipids mix rapidly , and the area of the cell membrane increases ( bottom ) . ( B ) Histograms of the projected cell area distribu - tions in a population of live cells after fusion and a controlpopulationofcellsthathadnotundergonefusionfromthesamesamples . Fused cells were identiﬁed by their ﬂuorescence . The population mean and standard deviation are indicatedabove the histograms and the mean cell shape for each population is depicted ( inset ) . Fused cells are signiﬁcantly larger ( p < 10 2 6 ) . ( C ) Phase - contrast ( top ) and ﬂuorescence ( bot - tom ) imagesofacellthathadfused withalabeled GUV ( and is hence labeled with ﬂuorescent lipids ) together with a cellthat had not undergone fusion ( unlabeled ) . ( D ) Phase - contrast and ﬂuorescence images of the same cell before and after fusion ( see also Movie S2 ) . After fusion the cell membrane became ﬂuorescent . ( E – G ) Graphs showing the projected area ( E ) , aspect ratio ( F ) , and speed ( G ) as a function of time , before and after fusion , for the cell shown in ( D ) . The cell became larger and more elongated upon fusion but continued to move with essen - tially the same speed . ( H ) Membrane tension was measured inapopula - tion of fused cells ( 10 – 60 min after fusion ) and a control population of cells from the same sam - ples . The median tension for each population is shown together with the 25 % and 75 % percen - tiles ( colored region ) and the population range ( black whiskers ; crosses indicates outlier points which are more than 2 . 7 SDs from the median ) . The average membrane tension in the population of fused cells was not signiﬁcantly different from the average tension in the control population ( p > 0 . 2 ) , despite the large increase in cell membrane area . See also Figure S3 and Movie S2 . Membrane Tension Determined by Cytoskeletal Forces 1411 ( Figures 2B and 2F ) . Thus , other factors , in particular the cyto - skeletal forces exerted on the membrane , should be respon - sible for dynamically determining membrane tension in rapidly moving keratocytes . Membrane Tension Is Correlated with the Protrusive Force Generated by the Actin Network at the Leading Edge Cell protrusion is driven by a dense , rapidly polymerizing network of actin ﬁlaments [ 27 ] . To demonstrate the impor - tance of protrusive forces in generating tension in the cell membrane , we examined keratocytes in which actin protru - sion was abolished altogether through a combined treatment with blebbistatin followed by jasplakinolide . This treatment interferes with actin disassembly processes and leads to rapid cessation of movement , essentially ‘‘freezing’’ the la - mellipodial actin network [ 28 ] . We found that the tether forces were severely diminished in the absence of protrusive forces , with the apparent membrane tension going down by more than w 80 % on average ( Figure 3 ) . Moreover , we showed that lamellipodial ‘‘freezing’’ led to a sharp drop in membrane tension values within the same cell ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . The residual apparent membrane tension , in the absence of pro - trusive forces , is attributed to the contribution of the mem - brane – cytoskeleton adhesion within ‘‘frozen’’ lamellipodia ( Figure S4 ) . To explore the relation between the actin - generated protru - sive forces at the leading edge and membrane tension , we perturbed actin protrusion biochemically and measured the effect on tension . The fraction of ﬁlaments that are uncapped and hence capable of pushing was lowered with cytochalasin D , which increases the rate of barbed - end capping [ 29 ] ( Fig - ures 4A and 4B , right ) . Alternatively , the total number of ﬁla - ments along the leading edge was reduced with an inhibitor of Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching that hinders nucleation of nascent ﬁlaments [ 30 ] ( Figures 4A and 4B , center ) . Under these conditions , cells retain their lamellipodium and continue moving , albeit slower . Reducing the number of pushing ﬁla - ments along the leading edge , either by lowering the fraction of uncapped ﬁlaments or by decreasing the total number of ﬁlaments , led to a signiﬁcant decrease in the average mem - brane tension , by w 50 % in a population of cytochalasin - treated cells ( T = 151 6 12 pN / m m ; mean 6 SEM ) and w 25 % in Arp2 / 3 - inhibited cells ( T = 222 6 21 pN / m m ) , compared to untreated cells ( T = 300 6 15 pN / m m ; Figure 4C ) . Moreover , we obtained a similar drop in membrane tension within individual cells before and after treatment with cyto - chalasin ( Figure 4D ) . Thus , the actin - generated protrusive forces have a substantial inﬂuence on membrane tension : more pushing ﬁlaments generate a stronger protrusive force , leading to higher membrane tension values , whereas fewer ﬁl - aments produce weaker pushing forces and lower tension values . Cytochalasin treatment also led to the formation of blebs at the rear end of motile keratocytes ( Figure 5 ) , likely due to the reduction in the apparent membrane tension ( Figure 4 ) [ 31 ] . As previously shown , the tether force in newly formed blebs reﬂects the in - plane tension in the bilayer , as there is no actin cytoskeleton in nascent blebs [ 14 ] . We measured tension by pulling tethers from newly formed blebs ( Movie S3 ) , and compared the results to measurements within the same cells in the absence of blebs ( Figure 5 ) . The tether forces measured from blebs were not signiﬁcantly different from the tether forces in nonblebbing regions ( p > 0 . 05 ) , and their average amounted to a considerable fraction ( w 75 % ) of the average tether force in nonblebbing regions . Furthermore , the tether forces in blebbing keratocytes were considerably higher than those measured from blebs in other cell types such as melanoma cells and renal epithelial cells [ 14 ] . These results illustrate the substantial contribution of the in - plane tension to the apparent membrane tension in motile keratocytes . Membrane Tension Depends on the Balance between Adhesion and Contraction Cell - substrate adhesion allows force transduction between the cytoskeletal machinery and the substrate and is hence essential for cell crawling . Previous work has shown that increasing the density of RGD ligands—the integrin - binding motif found in extracellular matrix proteins such as ﬁbronectin and collagen—on the substrate increases the strength of cell - substrate adhesion and affects cell shape and movement [ 32 ] . Strengthening cell – substrate adhesion is expected to increase the force required to retract the trailing edge of the cell , as retraction requires continuous detachment of adhesions at the rear . If membrane tension is determined by a mechanical force balance , then the force required to retract the cell rear should correlate with membrane tension values . Thus , membrane tension is expected to increase as cell - substrate adhesion strengthens [ 1 , 33 ] . To examine the relation between cell - substrate adhesion strength and membrane tension , we measured tension in pop - ulations of keratocytes plated on surfaces coated with low , intermediate , and high RGD densities ( Figure 6A ) . Indeed , we found that the average membrane tension is signiﬁcantly diminished for cells plated on substrates with low RGD density ( T = 200 6 13 pN / m m ; mean 6 SEM ) and elevated on substrates C B A Figure 3 . Membrane Tension Drops Dramatically in Cells with ‘‘Frozen’’ Lamellipodia ( A and B ) Cells were treated with blebbistatin for 3 min , followed by addition of jasplakinolide . Images of the same cell during tether force mea - surementsdonebefore ( A ) andafter ( B ) treatment areshown . Cellcontoursat10stimeintervalsare overlaid on the images , displaying the cessation of cell movement after treatment . The apparent membranetensionvaluesbasedonthemeasuredtetherforcesareindicatedontheimages . Note that the membrane tether becomes visible after treatment , as tension values are reduced and the tether becomes substantially thicker . ( C ) Histograms of the apparent membrane tension values for a population of untreated cells ( top ; as in Figure 1E ) and a population of cells after treatment with blebbistatin and jasplakinolide ( bottom ) . The average membrane tension is reduced by w 80 % . See also Figure S4 . Current Biology Vol 23 No 15 1412 with high RGD density ( T = 342 6 13 pN / m m ) , in comparison to intermediate RGD density ( T = 256 6 11 pN / m m ; Figure 6B ) . The balance between actomyosin contraction and adhesion has an important role in determining cell shape and speed [ 32 , 34 ] . Actomyosin contraction contributes directly to adhe - sion disassembly [ 35 ] and depolymerization and retrograde ﬂow of actin at the rear [ 28 ] . As such , we predicted that increased myosin contraction should be able to compensate for stronger adhesion and reduce membrane tension by facil - itating rear retraction . To test this , we treated cells crawling on low , intermediate , and high adhesion strengths with either blebbistatin , a myosin II inhibitor [ 36 ] , or calyculin A , a phos - phatase inhibitor that promotes myosin contraction [ 37 ] . Within this matrix of variable levels of adhesion strength and myosin contraction , we observed that membrane tension is correlated with adhesion strength and anticorrelated with myosin contraction levels ( Figure 6B ) . While the effect of myosin perturbations on medium adhesion substrates was rather modest , enhancement of myosin activity by calyculin was effective in reducing tension on high adhesion substrates where high levels of myosin activity are required to counter - balance the increased adhesive forces . Conversely , myosin inhibition was found to be most effective in increasing ten - sion on low adhesion substrates , in which myosin plays a more prominent role in rear retraction since adhesion is weak . Together , these results show that membrane tension is correlated with the force required for rear retraction ; B A C D n = 100 n = 60 cells n = 50 n = 30 cells Figure 4 . Membrane Tension Is Correlated with the Protrusive Force Generated by the Actin Network at the Leading Edge ( A ) Fluorescence images of cells ﬁxed and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin to visualize the actin network distribution . An Arp2 / 3 - inhibited cell ( middle ) and a cytochalasin - treated cell ( right ) are shown together with an untreated control cell ( left ) . ( B ) The ﬁlament distribution along the leading edge was measured for populations of ﬁxed cells after Arp2 / 3 inhibition ( middle ) , cytochalasin treatment ( right ) , and without treatment ( left ) . The background - subtracted ﬂuorescence inten - sity along the leading edge , which is proportional to the local ﬁlament density , is plotted as a func - tion of the relative position along the boundary . Data for individual cells ( gray lines ) are shown together with the population averages ( thick lines ) . The fraction of pushing ﬁlaments from the total number of ﬁlaments is expected to be lower in cytochalasin - treated cells due to the higher capping rate . ( C ) A box plot ( as in Figure 2H ) showing mem - brane tension measurements for populations of cells under the different conditions . The tension in cytochalasin - treated cells and Arp2 / 3 inhibi - tor - treated cells is signiﬁcantly lower ( * p < 0 . 01 , * * p < 10 2 4 ) . ( D ) Membrane tension measurements of individ - ualcellsbeforeandafteradditionofcytochalasin . An w 50 % drop in tension is observed in all cells , similar to the average change observed between populations of treated and untreated cells ( C ) . stronger adhesion and / or weaker contraction make it harder to retract the rear and lead to higher membrane tension values , whereas weaker adhesion and / or stronger contraction have the opposite effect . The Inﬂuence of Changes in Membrane Area on Membrane Tension Are Buffered by the Dynamic Cytoskeleton As described previously , increase of cell membrane area by fusion with GUVs had little effect on membrane tension ( Figure 2 ) . To further investigate how fused cells were able to return to essentially the same membrane tension values , we examined the changes in their actin network distribution ( Figures 7A – 7C ) . The total amount of actin is not expected to change in fused cells compared to control cells , since on such short time scales protein production is negligible and the changes induced by leakage during electroporation are expected to be small . However , the balance between mono - meric and ﬁlamentous actin was modiﬁed ; in response to the additional membrane , the lamellipodial actin network expanded , and the total amount of actin in ﬁlamentous form ( determined from the integrated ﬂuorescence signal of phal - loidin - stained cells ) was signiﬁcantly larger in fused cells compared to control cells ( p < 10 2 5 ; Figure 7C ) , while the average actin network density along the leading edge remained nearly the same ( p > 0 . 1 ; Figure 7B ) . Thus , upon fusion , in response to the large increase in membrane area , the dynamic actin network expanded and more actin was shifted from the large reserves of monomeric actin [ 38 ] into the network . Consequently , cells rapidly re - established the Membrane Tension Determined by Cytoskeletal Forces 1413 mechanical balance between the motility machinery and mem - brane tension and continued moving with only minor changes in their motile behavior ( Figure 2 ) . The ability of cells to compensate for increased membrane area by broadening their lamellipodium was not unlimited . Fused cells in which the membrane area increased drasti - cally ( > 70 % ) were unable to sustain steady polarization and exhibited irregular protrusion with markedly slower movement ( Figure 7E ) . Moreover , even fused cells with more modest membrane area increase were occasionally prone to lamelli - podial instabilities [ 9 ] , in which their lamellipodium sponta - neously split , often leading to detachment of lamellipodial fragments ( Figure 7D ) . Discussion The forces generated by the cytoskeletal machinery along the cell boundary have to be locally balanced by the load imposed by membrane tension during steady motility ( Figure 7F ) ; at the leading edge , the membrane - imposed forces have to balance the protrusive force generated by actin polymerization ( and possibly also forces due to hydrostatic pressure gradients ) [ 5 – 8 ] , while at the trailing edge , the force due to membrane ten - sion is required for rear retraction [ 8 , 9 ] . The characteristic time scale for attaining this mechanical force balance is short ( w milliseconds ) since force equilibration within the membrane is rapid [ 11 ] and the molecular events involved ( e . g . , actin poly - merization or detachment of adhesion complexes ) occur on subsecond timescales [ 27 ] . The load imposed by the membrane along the cell boundary integrates contributions from the membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion and the in - plane tension . Our results indicate that while membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion does contribute to the apparent tension , the in - plane tension is the main factor determining tension in rapidly moving keratocytes . We show this by two complementary approaches : ( 1 ) we eliminate the protrusive forces by ‘‘freezing’’ the lamellipodia and show that the measured tension drops dramatically while the mem - brane is still attached to the cytoskeleton ( Figures 3 and S4 ) , and ( 2 ) we pull membrane tethers from blebs and show that a considerable fraction of the apparent tension is retained ( Figure 5 ) . Moreover , the tether forces measured from blebs were substantially larger than what has been measured in slower - moving cells [ 14 ] . As membrane tension in keratocytes arises predominantly from the in - plane tension in the mem - brane , we propose that a mechanical force balance is primarily responsible for setting membrane tension . To that end , we show that perturbations that decrease the pushing forces generated by the actin network at the leading edge lead to reduced membrane tension values ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . Similarly , modulations of the force required for retracting the cell rear through changes in the strength of adhesion to the substrate and / or the strength of myosin - induced contraction lead to cor - responding changes in membrane tension ( Figure 6 ) : high adhesion / low myosin activity lead to high membrane tension and vice versa . Importantly , the continuous interplay and feed - back between the motility machinery and membrane tension provides rapid and efﬁcient means for global mechanical coor - dination of cell boundary dynamics , which plays a crucial role in focusing protrusion to the leading edge [ 6 ] and coordinating protrusion with retraction at the rear [ 8 ] . While the available membrane area and the tension in the cell membrane are obviously coupled [ 3 , 4 , 18 ] , the inﬂuence of changes in membrane area on tension will depend on the timescales involved . In rapidly moving cells like keratocytes , the dynamics of the motility machinery and force equilibration A B n = 7 Figure 5 . Membrane Tension in Blebbing Cytochalasin - Treated Kerato - cytes ( A ) Bright - ﬁeldimageofablebbingcytochalasin - treatedkeratocyteduringa tether - pulling assay . The tether is extracted from a newly formed bleb ( Movie S3 ) . ( B ) A box plot ( as in Figure 2H ) of the membrane tension in cytochalasin - treated cells measured from tethers extracted from newly formed blebs and from nonblebbing regions . The average membrane tension in blebs accounts for w 75 % of the tension measured in nonblebbing regions . See also Movie S3 . A B n = 11 Figure 6 . Membrane Tension Depends on the Balance between Adhesion and Contraction ( A ) Images of cells on low , intermediate , and high RGD densities during tether force measurements . The crosses indicate the position of the trap center . Note the differences in cell shape on the different substrates ( Figure S5 ) [ 32 ] . ( B ) A box plot ( as in Figure 2H ) summarizing membrane tension measure - ments for population of cells plated on low , intermediate , and high RGD densities with normal myosin contraction levels ( untreated ) , inhibition of myosin contraction with blebbistatin ( light colors ) , and enhancement of myosin activity with calyculin A ( dark colors ) . Membrane tension increased with higher adhesion and / or weaker contraction . The lines indicate signiﬁ - cantly different populations ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 ) . See also Figure S5 . Current Biology Vol 23 No 15 1414 in the membrane are faster than the typical timescales for substantial membrane area changes ( e . g . , through endo - and exocytosis ) . Thus , on the relatively short timescales ( w milli - seconds ) over which the mechanical balance between the cytoskeletal forces and the cell membrane is achieved , changes in cell area are negligible and hence do not have a substantial effect on tension determination . Over longer time scales , changes in cell surface area will be accompanied by reorganization of the dynamic cytoskeleton which effectively buffers the effect of membrane area changes on membrane tension . This is clearly illustrated by our fusion experiments ( Figures 3 and 7 ) , in which the lamellipodial actin network ex - pands in response to the dramatic increase in membrane area and cells resume normal movement without a signiﬁcant drop in membrane tension . The measured tether forces in keratocytes ( Figure 1C ) are signiﬁcantly higher than those measured in other adherent cell types , ranging from F T w 7 pN in ﬁbroblasts [ 5 ] to w 30 pN in endothelial cells [ 26 ] and melanoma cells [ 14 ] . We suspect that the higher membrane tension values in kerato - cytes are mainly due to the larger contribution of the in - plane A B D C E F n = 105 Figure 7 . The Lamellipodial Actin Network Expands in Response to an Increase in Cell Membrane Area ( A ) Fluorescenceimagesofafusedcellandacon - trol cell after ﬁxation and staining with ﬂuores - cent phalloidin are shown . The lamellipodium is broader in fused cells compared to control cells , but the actin organization is similar . ( B and C ) Bar graphs ( mean 6 SEM ) of the average actin network density near the center of the leading edge ( B ) and the total actin network density integrated over the entire cell ( C ) in popu - lations of fused cells and control cells which were ﬁxed and stained as in ( A ) . The density of the lamellipodialactinnetworkissimilarinfusedcells and control cells ( p > 0 . 1 ) , whereas the total amount of ﬁlamentousactinis signiﬁcantly higher in fused cells ( p < 10 2 5 ) . ( d ) Phase - contrast images from a movie demon - strating the lamellipodial instabilities observed in fused cells . Time from the ﬁrst image ( which was w 15 min after fusion ) is indicated . The insta - bilities often lead to fragmentation and detach - ment of lamellipodial fragments as shown . ( E ) Phase - contrast images from a movie of a cell whose projected area increased by > 70 % upon GUV fusion . Images before and after fusion are depicted , and the time after fusion is indicated . After fusion , the cell is unable to support a stable lamellipodium , and cell movement is signiﬁcantly hampered ( see also Movie S4 ) . ( F ) Schematic illustration of the force balance between cytoskeletal forces and the cell mem - brane . At the leading edge , the forces generated by actin polymerization are balanced by the load imposed by the tensed membrane , whereas at the rear , membrane tension assists in retraction of the trailing edge . Membrane tension is primar - ily determined by this mechanical force balance . See also Figure S6 and Movie S4 . tension and the lack of substantial mem - brane reservoirs ( Figure S1 ) . In slower - moving cells , like ﬁbroblasts , the in - plane tension is probably much lower , so the dynamic coupling between the cortex and the membrane through membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion [ 39 ] likely accounts for a larger fraction of the membrane tension [ 14 ] and can have a substantial inﬂuence on membrane tension determination [ 1 ] . The load imposed by the membrane on the actin network can be estimated from our membrane tension measurements . The average load imposed per unit length of the leading edge is equal to 2T , since the membrane exerts a pulling force equal to T on both the dorsal and the ventral surface . Using a typical value for the actin ﬁlament density at the edge of protruding lamellipodia ( w 200 ﬁlaments / m m ) [ 38 , 40 ] , we estimate the load force per ﬁlament to be w 3 pN per ﬁlament . Thus , the force imposed by the membrane load amounts to a consider - able fraction of the stall force . This conclusion is consistent with in vivo measurements of the force required to stall protru - sion of the lamellipodial actin network obtained by placing an obstacle in front of motile keratocytes [ 41 ] . Overall , our experiments , together with other recent works [ 6 – 8 , 12 ] , highlight the unique role of membrane tension as a physical variable that regulates and coordinates cellular dynamics . In particular , signal transmission through the Membrane Tension Determined by Cytoskeletal Forces 1415 membrane can be much faster than molecular signaling path - ways , which are limited by the time it takes molecules to trans - port across the cell [ 6 ] . The importance of physical variables is not limited to cell mechanics ; for example , the main determi - nant of a cell’s electrical functionality is the potential difference across the cell membrane . The membrane potential is inﬂu - enced by multiple inputs including the ion concentrations in the environment and the distribution of ion channels in the membrane , and it feeds back and regulates the cell’s electric functionality through , e . g . , voltage - gated ion channels . Simi - larly , membrane tension integrates mechanical inputs from multiple sources , including numerous polymerizing actin ﬁla - ments and adhesion complexes , and feeds back to regulate cell boundary dynamics . Since tension equilibrates rapidly , it serves as a global regulator that effectively coordinates local dynamics over cellular scales . Unraveling the mutual interplay between physical variables like membrane tension and the cellular machinery will undoubtedly continue to be an essential part of understanding any complex cellular process . Experimental Procedures Cell Culture and Pharmacological Treatments Primary cultures were prepared from the Central American cichlid Hypsophrys nicaraguensis . Scales were plucked from the ﬁsh body , sand - wiched between two glass coverslips , and cultured at room temperature in Leibovitz’s L - 15 media ( Gibco - BRL ) , supplemented with 14 . 2 mM HEPES ( pH7 . 4 ) , 10 % fetalbovineserum ( Invitrogen ) , and1 % antibiotic - antimycotic ( Gibco - BRL ) . Sheets of keratocytes that migrate off the scale after w 16 hr were detached and disaggregated into individual cells by treatment with 0 . 1 % trypsin ( Gibco - BRL ) with 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid in PBS for 6min . Addition of 10 3 volume of culture media wasused toquench the trypsin , and the cells were replated onto new substrates . We used substrates with different RGD concentrations prepared as described previously ( see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) [ 32 ] or uncoated glass coverslips . Pharmacological treatments were done by addition of the following to the culture media : 200 m M Arp2 / 3 inhibitor ( CK - 666 , ChemDiv ) , 0 . 5 m M cytochalasin D ( Sigma ) , 50 – 100 m M blebbistatin ( active enantiomer , Sigma ) , or 10 nM calylculin A ( Sigma ) . The doses of the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor and cytochalasin were chosen so that most cells remained motile . Control experiments were done with 0 . 1 % dimethyl sulfoxide . Actin staining experiments were done after w 10 min incubation with Arp 2 / 3 inhibitor or cytochalasin D . Tension measurements were done between 8 and 40 min after addition of the pharmacological agents . Lamellipodial ‘‘freezing’’ was done by incubation in 75 m M blebbistatin for 3 0 , and subse - quent addition of 1 . 5 m M Jasplakinolide ( Sigma ) . Tether - Pulling Experiments and Force Measurements Tether force measurements were carried out with a laser tweezers system ( PALM microtweezers , Carl Zeiss MicroImaging ) with a 63 3 1 . 2 NA water immersion objective and a motorized stage ( Ludl Electronic Products ) on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 200M , Zeiss ) . Trapping was done with a 3W1064nmNd : YAGlaserfocusedtoadiffractionlimitedspot , andimaging by bright ﬁeld and / or epiﬂuorescence was done simultaneously . Tether force measurements on cells were done by attachment of concanavalin - A - coated beads to motile keratocytes and measurement of the force after tether formation . Further details on the tether force measurements , tether radius determination , and calibration of the laser tweezers can be found in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Fusion of Giant Vesicles to Cells GUVs were made by electroformation . A lipid mixture containing 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ; Avanti Lipids ) with 1 . 5 % 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - ( carboxyﬂuores - cein ) ( Fluorescein - DOPE ; Avanti Lipids ) was dried onto two indium tin oxide ( ITO ) surfaces ( Sigma ) . A solution of 300 mM Sorbitol was placed within an O ring between the ITO surfaces , and the sample was subjected to an alter - natingelectricﬁeld . GUVsinwhich60 % oftheDOPCwasreplacedwithtotal liver extract ( Avanti Lipids ) were made in the same way ( Figure S3 ) . For inductionoffusion , cellswereincubatedfor10mininserum - freemediasup - plemented with 10 mM PEG 6000 ( Sigma ) . GUVs were added to the media and allowed to settle on the adherent keratocytes for 5 – 10 min . Electropo - ration was done with a home - made electroporator for adherent cells [ 42 ] . After electroporation , cells were washed with normal media and imaged immediately . Sothatthesamecellcouldbefollowedbeforeandafterfusion , the electroporation was performed on the microscope stage . A cell was imaged before treatment and was then followed continuously during the in - cubation with PEG and GUVs and the electroporation . The samples were subsequently washed , and the same cell was imaged after fusion . Live - cellimagingwasperformedon glass - bottom petridishes ( Fluorodish ; World Precision Instruments ) at room temperature on a Zeiss Axio - Observer inverted microscope and acquired with a CoolSnap HQ2 CCD camera ( Photometrics ) . Measurements of Actin Network Density CellswereﬁxedwithformaldehydeandstainedwithAlexaFluor - 488phalloi - din ( Invitrogen ) as described previously [ 8 ] . For quantitative comparison of actin staining patterns under different conditions , the coverslip was initially partitioned into two regions ( treated separately ) with a Teﬂon separator , which was subsequently removed during staining . Imaging was done on a Zeiss Axio - Observer inverted microscope equipped with a CoolSnap HQ2 CCD camera ( Photometrics ) with a 63 3 objective ( NA = 1 . 4 ) . Actin staining of samples after fusion was done as above except that the cells were ﬁrst incubated with anti - Fluorescein antibodies , ﬁxed , and imaged ( prior to permeabilization and actin staining ) to visualize the ﬂuorescent lipids and identify fused cells and were subsequently stained and visualized again to measure their actin content . The distribution of actin ﬁlament density along the boundary was calcu - lated by averaging the intensity of background - corrected ﬂuorescence images between 1 and 2 m m from the cell edge along the boundary with the CellTool code written in Python [ 43 ] . Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Proce - dures , six ﬁgures , and four movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 063 . Acknowledgments WethankAlexMogilner , MichaelKozlov , ErezBraun , ArielKaplan , ZachPin - cus , Yariv Kafri , and members of our lab for fruitful discussions and com - ments on the manuscript . We thank Gidi Ben - Yoseph for superb technical assistance and Yehudit Schmidt and Daniella Yeheskely - Hayon for help with scanning electron microscopy imaging . This work was supported by aEuropean Research Council Starting Grant anda MarieCurie International Reintegration Grant from the European Research Council to K . K . E . L . B . and J . A . T . were supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Received : September 2 , 2012 Revised : April 23 , 2013 Accepted : May 31 , 2013 Published : July 3 , 2013 References 1 . Gauthier , N . C . , Masters , T . A . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2012 ) . Mechanicalfeed - back between membrane tension and dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 527 – 535 . 2 . Keren , K . ( 2011 ) . Cell motility : the integrating role of the plasma mem - brane . Eur . Biophys . J . 40 , 1013 – 1027 . 3 . Sheetz , M . P . , andDai , J . ( 1996 ) . Modulationofmembranedynamicsand cell motility by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol . 6 , 85 – 89 . 4 . Morris , C . E . , and Homann , U . ( 2001 ) . Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J . Membr . Biol . 179 , 79 – 102 . 5 . Raucher , D . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 – 136 . 6 . Houk , A . R . , Jilkine , A . , Mejean , C . O . , Boltyanskiy , R . , Dufresne , E . R . , Angenent , S . B . , Altschuler , S . J . , Wu , L . F . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2012 ) . Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 . 7 . Keren , K . , Pincus , Z . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Marriott , G . , Mogilner , A . , andTheriot , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Mechanism ofshapedeterminationinmotile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 . Current Biology Vol 23 No 15 1416 8 . Ofer , N . , Mogilner , A . , and Keren , K . ( 2011 ) . Actin disassembly clock determines shape and speed of lamellipodial fragments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 20394 – 20399 . 9 . Cai , Y . , Rossier , O . , Gauthier , N . C . , Biais , N . , Fardin , M . A . , Zhang , X . , Miller , L . W . , Ladoux , B . , Cornish , V . W . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2010 ) . Cytoskeletal coherence requires myosin - IIA contractility . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 413 – 423 . 10 . Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) . Regulation of endocytosis , exocytosis , and shape by membrane tension . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 60 , 567 – 571 . 11 . Kozlov , M . M . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2007 ) . Model of polarization and bist - ability of cell fragments . Biophys . J . 93 , 3811 – 3819 . 12 . Gauthier , N . C . , Fardin , M . A . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2011 ) . Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 14467 – 14472 . 13 . Evans , E . , and Rawicz , W . ( 1990 ) . Entropy - driven tension and bending elasticity in condensed - ﬂuid membranes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 64 , 2094 – 2097 . 14 . Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 3363 – 3370 . 15 . Hochmuth , F . M . , Shao , J . Y . , Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1996 ) . Deformationandﬂowofmembraneintotethersextractedfromneuronalgrowthcones . Biophys . J . 70 , 358 – 369 . 16 . Sheetz , M . P . , Sable , J . E . , and Do¨bereiner , H . G . ( 2006 ) . Continuous membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion requires continuous accommoda - tion to lipid and cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 417 – 434 . 17 . Raucher , D . , Stauffer , T . , Chen , W . , Shen , K . , Guo , S . , York , J . D . , Sheetz , M . P . , andMeyer , T . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - bisphosphatefunc - tions as a second messenger that regulates cytoskeleton - plasma membrane adhesion . Cell 100 , 221 – 228 . 18 . Apodaca , G . ( 2002 ) . Modulation of membrane trafﬁc by mechanical stimuli . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 282 , F179 – F190 . 19 . Sinha , B . , Ko¨ster , D . , Ruez , R . , Gonnord , P . , Bastiani , M . , Abankwa , D . , Stan , R . V . , Butler - Browne , G . , Vedie , B . , Johannes , L . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 , 402 – 413 . 20 . Sens , P . , and Turner , M . S . ( 2006 ) . Budded membrane microdomains as tension regulators . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 73 , 031918 . 21 . Raucher , D . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys . J . 77 , 1992 – 2002 . 22 . Batchelder , E . L . , Hollopeter , G . , Campillo , C . , Mezanges , X . , Jorgensen , E . M . , Nassoy , P . , Sens , P . , and Plastino , J . ( 2011 ) . Membrane tension regulates motility by controlling lamellipodium organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 11429 – 11434 . 23 . Lee , J . , Ishihara , A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Jacobson , K . ( 1993 ) . Principles of locomotion for simple - shaped cells . Nature 362 , 167 – 171 . 24 . Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 68 , 988 – 996 . 25 . Evans , E . A . ( 1983 ) . Bendingelasticmodulusofredbloodcellmembrane derivedfrombucklinginstabilityinmicropipetaspirationtests . Biophys . J . 43 , 27 – 30 . 26 . Sun , M . , Graham , J . S . , Hegedu¨s , B . , Marga , F . , Zhang , Y . , Forgacs , G . , andGrandbois , M . ( 2005 ) . Multiple membrane tethersprobedbyatomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 89 , 4320 – 4329 . 27 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assem - bly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 28 . Wilson , C . A . , Tsuchida , M . A . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Applegate , K . T . , Yam , P . T . , Ji , L . , Keren , K . , Danuser , G . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature 465 , 373 – 377 . 29 . Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 . 30 . Nolen , B . J . , Tomasevic , N . , Russell , A . , Pierce , D . W . , Jia , Z . , McCormick , C . D . , Hartman , J . , Sakowicz , R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 , 1031 – 1034 . 31 . Charras , G . T . , Hu , C . K . , Coughlin , M . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 477 – 490 . 32 . Barnhart , E . L . , Lee , K . C . , Keren , K . , Mogilner , A . , andTheriot , J . A . ( 2011 ) . An adhesion - dependent switch between mechanisms that determine motile cell shape . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001059 . 33 . Hategan , A . , Law , R . , Kahn , S . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Adhesively - tensed cell membranes : lysis kinetics and atomic force microscopy probing . Biophys . J . 85 , 2746 – 2759 . 34 . Gupton , S . L . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 , 1361 – 1374 . 35 . Bell , G . I . ( 1978 ) . Models for the speciﬁc adhesion of cells to cells . Science 200 , 618 – 627 . 36 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal andspatial controlofcytokinesiswithamyosinIIInhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 . 37 . Ishihara , H . , Martin , B . L . , Brautigan , D . L . , Karaki , H . , Ozaki , H . , Kato , Y . , Fusetani , N . , Watabe , S . , Hashimoto , K . , Uemura , D . , et al . ( 1989 ) . Calyculin A andokadaic acid : inhibitors of protein phosphatase activity . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 159 , 871 – 877 . 38 . Koestler , S . A . , Rottner , K . , Lai , F . , Block , J . , Vinzenz , M . , and Small , J . V . ( 2009 ) . F - and G - actin concentrations in lamellipodia of moving cells . PLoS ONE 4 , e4810 . 39 . Diz - Mun˜oz , A . , Krieg , M . , Bergert , M . , Ibarlucea - Benitez , I . , Muller , D . J . , Paluch , E . , and Heisenberg , C . P . ( 2010 ) . Control of directed cell migra - tioninvivobymembrane - to - cortexattachment . PLoSBiol . 8 , e1000544 . 40 . Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , and Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 1721 – 1732 . 41 . Heinemann , F . , Doschke , H . , and Radmacher , M . ( 2011 ) . Keratocyte lamellipodial protrusion is characterized by a concave force - velocity relation . Biophys . J . 100 , 1420 – 1427 . 42 . Teruel , M . N . , Blanpied , T . A . , Shen , K . , Augustine , G . J . , and Meyer , T . ( 1999 ) . A versatile microporation technique for the transfection of cultured CNS neurons . J . Neurosci . Methods 93 , 37 – 48 . 43 . Pincus , Z . , andTheriot , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Comparisonofquantitativemethods for cell - shape analysis . J . Microsc . 227 , 140 – 156 . Membrane Tension Determined by Cytoskeletal Forces 1417