A . Håkansson et al . ( Eds . ) : KES - AMSTA 2009 , LNAI 5559 , pp . 40 – 49 , 2009 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 Structural Changes in an Email - Based Social Network Krzysztof Juszczyszyn and Katarzyna Musiał Wroclaw University of Technology , Wyb . Wyspianskiego 27 , 50 - 370 Wroclaw , Poland { krzysztof . juszczyszyn , katarzyna . musial } @ pwr . wroc . pl Abstract . Different ways of detecting structural changes in email - based so - cial networks are presented in the paper . A social network chosen for experi - ments was created on the basis of the Wroclaw University of Technology email server logs covering the period of 20 months . Structural parameters like degree centrality and prestige , clustering coefficients as well as betweenness and closeness centrality were computed for each of the consecutive months and their changes were analyzed . Our aim was to make an insight into dy - namics of Internet - based social networks based on email service . It was found that the major changes in the structure of the network concern its local topol - ogy . Global indices like betweenness and closeness centrality remain rela - tively stable which also concerns the distribution of the local parameters such as degree centrality and prestige . However , the network size and local topol - ogy changes significantly which may be detected with motif analysis and visible changes in node clustering coefficients . 1 Introduction The variety and many possible areas where social networks ( SN ) can be applied cause that they have become subject of many researches . The concept of SN is utilized to describe the relationships between friends , co – workers , members of the particular society , relatives in the family , etc . The main idea of a social network is simple ( Fig . 1 ) . It is the set of actors i . e . group of people or organizations , who are the nodes of the network , and ties that link the nodes [ 1 ] [ 10 ] [ 18 ] by one or more relations [ 9 ] . Social network indicates the ways in which actors are related . The tie between actors can be maintained according to either one or several relations [ 9 ] . Several examples of social networks can be enumerated : a community of scientists in the given disci - pline who collaborate and prepare common scientific papers , a corporate partnership networks a set of business leaders who cooperate with one other , friendship network of students , company director networks , etc . The social networks of internet users differ substantially from the regular ones . Al - though social networks in the Internet have already been studied in many contexts and many definitions were created , they are not consistent . Also , different researchers name these networks differently . In consequence , these networks are called : com - puter - supported social networks ( CSSN ) [ 19 ] , online social networks [ 9 ] , web - based social networks , web communities , or virtual communities [ 1 ] . Nowadays , based on the kind of service people use , many examples of the social networks in the Internet Structural Changes in an Email - Based Social Network 41 Actor d Actor a Actor b Actor c Actor e Tie Tie Tie Tie Tie Fig . 1 . A regular social network can be enumerated . To the most commonly known belong : a set of people who date using an online dating system [ 5 ] , a group of people who are linked to one another by hyperlinks on their homepages [ 1 ] , customers who buy similar stuffs in the same e - commerce [ 21 ] , the company staff that communicates with one another via email [ 22 ] , people who share information by utilizing shared bookmarking systems [ 14 ] such as del . icio . us . In this paper we analyse the structural measures ( introduced in sec . 2 ) for large so - cial network based on email communication . The set of measures that were taken into consideration are mainly the centrality indices and clustering coefficients . Then their dynamics in the period of 20 months of operation of the university email network are investigated ( sec . 3 ) . The analysis revealed that some of the parameters are more use - ful in order to detect structural changes while other are not sensitive to temporal changes occurring in social network . 2 Centrality and Other Structural Measures in Social Networks The prevailing approaches to social network analysis have provided many measures to determine the characteristics of a member within the network like degree centrality , degree prestige , reachability , connectivity [ 6 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 18 ] . All of them indicate the importance of a member in the network . There are some particular approaches to evaluate one of the above mentioned measures – centrality : closeness centrality , be - tweeness centrality , and degree centrality and prestige [ 7 ] . Degree centrality DC ( x ) of member x takes into account the number of outdegree of member x , [ 17 ] . It is expressed by the normalized number of neighbors that are adjacent ( by means of their outcoming links ) to the given person , as follows : ( ) 1 ) ( − = m x o x DC , ( 1 ) where : o ( x ) – the number of the first level neighbors that are adjacent to x and there is a relation directed from x to them ; m – the total number of members in the social network .