Cell , Vol . 116 , 431 – 443 , February 6 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Periodic Lamellipodial Contractions Correlate with Rearward Actin Waves ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . Indeed , a gradient in ECM stiffness causes fibroblasts to move from soft to stiff substrate ( Lo et al . , 2000 ; Mandeville et al . , 1997 ) , and Gre´gory Giannone , 1 Benjamin J . Dubin - Thaler , 1 Hans - Gu¨nther Do¨bereiner , 1 Nelly Kieffer , 2 Anne R . Bresnick , 3 and Michael P . Sheetz 1 , * lamellipodial extensions are directed by intracellular 1 Department of Biological Sciences traction forces ( Parker et al . , 2002 ) . In no case , however , Columbia University is the precise mechanism for converting the rigidity of New York , New York 10027 theECMintoadirectionalsignalunderstood . Contractile 2 Laboratoire Franco - Luxembourgeois force is postulated to cause membrane channel opening de Recherche Biomedicale ( Gillespie and Walker , 2001 ) , the activation of membrane CNRS / CRP - Sante phosphatase - integrin complexes ( von Wichert et al . , University Center 2003 ) , or the stretching of cytoskeletal proteins ( Sawada 162A Avenue de la Faiencerie and Sheetz , 2002 ) . While these force - activated pro - L - 1511 Luxembourg cesses provide mechanisms for the local generation of 3 Department of Biochemistry signals , the cell must also transmit these signals to re - Albert Einstein College of Medicine mote myosin contraction complexes or to the nuclear 1300 Morris Park Avenue region . To date , no evidence of such remote transmis - Bronx , New York 10461 sion of local signaling exists . In vitro studies of actin polymerization have identified critical proteins recruited by pathogens to enable their Summary actin - based movement in host cytoplasm ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ; Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , there has been recent Cellular lamellipodia bind to the matrix and probe its progress in understanding the mechanism by which ac - rigidity through forces generated by rearward F - actin tin assembly can power cell edge extension . Recent transport . Cells respond to matrix rigidity by moving reviews have summarized some of the current models toward more rigid matrices using an unknown mecha - ( Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ; Small nism . In spreading and migrating cells we find local et al . , 2002 ) . The actin network in both the Listeria actin periodic contractions of lamellipodia that depend on tail and in the lamellipodium has a relatively constant matrix rigidity , fibronectin binding and myosin light lengthandastationarygradientreflectingasteady - state chain kinase ( MLCK ) . These contractions leave peri - process of assembly at the front and disassembly at odic rows of matrix bound (cid:1) 3 - integrin and paxillin therear ( Cameronet al . , 2000 ; Pantaloni etal . , 2001 ) . The while generating waves of rearward moving actin lamellipodium tip engages protein complexes including bound (cid:2) - actinin and MLCK . The period between con - Ena / VASP family proteins , Scar / WAVE , N - WASP , and tractions corresponds to the time for F - actin to move Arp2 / 3 that increase actin filament nucleation and poly - across the lamellipodia . Shortening lamellipodial width merization . Small GTPases from the Rho family have by activating cofilin decreased this period proportion - been linked to this activation step ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; ally . Increasing lamellipodial width by Rac signaling Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . The formation and stabilization of activation increased this period . We propose that an the two - dimensional actin network is achieved by Arp2 / 3 actin bound , contraction - activated signaling complex as well as by actin crosslinking proteins like filamin , is transported locally from the tip to the base of the (cid:1) - actinin , and cortactin . Disassembly of the actin mesh - lamellipodium , activating the next contraction / exten - work is mediated by ADF / cofilin ( Lappalainen and Drubin , sion cycle . 1997 ) and possibly by severing proteins like gelsolin . The inactivation of cofilin , caused by its phosphorylation Introduction by LIM kinase , correlates with the Rac - induced produc - tion of lamellipodia ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) Duringcellspreadingandmigration , cellsextendlamelli - and illustrates the tight link between assembly at the podia and encounter new extracellular matrix ( ECM ) en - front and disassembly at the rear that sets lamellipo - vironments . During this active process , the cell probes dial width . the chemical nature of the matrix through integrin bind - In model systems such as pathogens , the reduction of ing and determines the physical rigidity of the matrix the motility process to itsbasic components can elucidate through contractile forces . As a result , chemical compo - the role of individual constituents in cellular motility . How - sition and rigidity of the matrix are guiding factors in ever , in order to link the activity of the lamellipodium to cell motility ( Bokel and Brown , 2002 ) as well as being complex processes such as cell spreading , migration , required for cell growth , viability , and morphogenesis and polarization , quantitative analysis of lamellipodial ( Huang and Ingber , 1999 ) . Because motility involves the dynamics is required . For example , the cytoskeletal generation of forces , one would expect a coupling be - treadmilling cycle can power actin - based movement of tween the actin assembly causing membrane extension beads or bacteria , without the need for myosin - based ( Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ; Small et contractility ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . However , cell contractil - al . , 2002 ) andtheactivityof myosinscausingcontraction ity is needed for cell spreading ( Cramer and Mitchison , 1995 ) and migration ( Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . We have recently developed a system for analyzing the complete * Correspondence : ms2001 @ columbia . edu Cell432 Figure 1 . Lamellipodial Extension Is Characterized by Periodic Interruptions ( A ) Individual TIRF images of a MEF spreading on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml were analyzed by a program that located the outline between the fluorescent cell and the background and expressed this outline in polar coordinates . The distance ( red line ) from the centroid of the first outline to the outline edge for each frame was determined at evenly spaced angles ( 1 (cid:3) ) around the cell . Scale bars are equal to 10 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Radius as function of angle and time in Cartesian coordinates ( left ) . Radial edge velocity plotted as a function of time and angle , giving a velocity map ( middle left ) . Variation of the cell area during the progression of spreading ( middle right ) . The percent of edge activity ( protrusion in red , retraction in blue ) was determined by taking the quotient of the active length along the periphery and the total length along the periphery for a given time ( right ) . These representations revealed 3 phases of isotropic spreading cells . Acquisition rate : 1 frame every 5 to 10 s . ( C – D ) DIC kymographs of a MEF spreading on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml ( right ) . The dotted rectangles in the left ( beginning of the kymograph ) and middle ( end of the kymograph ) depict the regions used to generate the DIC kymographs . Note the difference in the phase of interruption / retraction generatedbetweentheregions . SeeSupplementalMovieS1A ( availableon Cell website ) tobetterappreciatethegenerationofperiodicinterrup - tions . ( E ) Velocity map of the cell edge detected from a DIC time - lapse . The white lines in the left ( beginning of the time lapse ) and middle ( end of the time lapse ) correspond to detection of the cell edge . The white dots correspond to the dotted black lines in the velocity map ( right ) and to the regions in ( C ) and ( D ) . ( F ) DIC kymograph of a migrating MEF on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml . Migrating cells are defined as cells having active lamellipodia and a polarized morphology ( trigonal ) more than 3 hr after plating . See Supplemental Movie S1B available on Cell website . ( G ) DIC kymograph of a MEF spreading on poly - L - lysine 10 (cid:2) g / ml . ( H ) DIC kymograph of a MEF spreading on a silanized coverglass . Left : Scale bars are equal to 5 (cid:2) m . Right : time bars are equal to 30 s ; scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Arrows indicate the direction of protrusion . Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 433 process of cell spreading on ECM at a submicron level Todetermineifthisperiodicitywasageneralbehavior , we analyzed the lamellipodia of polarized migrating ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) , which reveals a surprising MEFs with or without serum . Cells were chosen based stochastic nature to the spreading process . upon their polarized ( trigonal ) morphology and were In slow - migrating cells , like fibroblasts , rounds of pro - separately analyzed based upon the presence or ab - trusion and retraction that lead to membrane ruffling and sence of filopodia . In lamellipodia lacking filopodia ( 51 (cid:4) a small net movement of the cell have been observed 14 % [ n (cid:5) 72 cells ] in the absence of serum ; 68 (cid:4) 2 % ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . However , EGF stimulated carcinoma [ n (cid:5) 75 cells ] with 10 % serum ) periodic interruptions cells ( Bailly et al . , 1998 ) or serum - starved spreading were observed in most cases ( 91 (cid:4) 3 % [ n (cid:5) 37 cells ] fibroblasts ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) display faster net withoutserum ; 90 (cid:4) 3 % [ n (cid:5) 51cells ] withserum ) ( Figure movement of the leading edge with few ruffling events , 1F ) . However , in lamellipodia having filopodia ( 49 (cid:4) 14 % suggesting acontinuous movement . Aninverse relation - [ n (cid:5) 72 cells ] without serum ; 32 (cid:4) 2 % [ n (cid:5) 75 cells ] ship between the speed of the edge protrusion and with serum ) periodic interruptions were rarely observed rearward movement of the actin cytoskeleton has been ( 17 (cid:4) 7 % [ n (cid:5) 35 cells ] without serum ; 24 (cid:4) 22 % [ n (cid:5) observed in active lamellipodia ( Cameron et al . , 2000 ) 24 cells ] with serum ) ( Supplemental Figure S1A available and filopodia ( Sheetz et al . , 1992 ) . This suggests that at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 116 / 3 / 431 / DC1 ) . fast actin retraction compromises the ability of the cell Furthermore , in polarized endothelial cells having lamel - to extend rapidly ; however , contraction is needed to lipodia without filopodia ( 55 (cid:4) 16 % [ n (cid:5) 73 cells ] with applyforces tointegrins ( Choquetet al . , 1997 ) andprobe serum ) , periodic interruptions were also observed ( 93 (cid:4) ECM rigidity during extension . 7 % [ n (cid:5) 39 cells ] with serum ) . Likewise , in lamellipodia In this study , we explored how the cell can locally with filopodia ( 45 (cid:4) 16 % [ n (cid:5) 73 cells ] with serum ) transduce therigidity of theECM into acontractile signal periodic interruptions were rarely observed ( 20 (cid:4) 14 % used to direct cell edge extension . We discovered a [ n (cid:5) 34 cells ] with serum ) . Periodic interruptions of la - remarkably periodic contraction of lamellipodia without mellipodia were also observed during spreading of an - filopodia in spreading and migrating cells that depends other MEF cell line and of endothelial cells ( Supplemen - upon a stiff substrate , integrin binding , and myosin light tal Figure S1 available on Cell website ) . chain kinase ( MLCK ) activation . Our findings support a To standardize and probe the molecular mechanism local cytoskeletal signal transport hypothesis . In that of the periodic interruptions we focused on isotropic hypothesis , the signal is generated locally by forces spreading MEFs . During isotropic spreading we found applied to a stiff ECM at the tips of lamellipodia and is 3 phases of spreading based on , ( 1 ) the dynamics of the transported by the actin cytoskeleton to the back of leading edge ( Figures 1A and 1B ) , ( 2 ) integrin interaction lamellipodia where it activates contraction , starting the withthe rearwardactinflow ( Figure2 ) , and ( 3 ) thepattern next cycle . of adhesion sites ( Figure 3 ) . In order to view the spread - ing of the entire cell in one graph , we expressed the Results distance from the center to the edge of the cell as a function of time and evenly spaced angles around the Lamellipodial Extension Is Characterized by Periodic cell ( Figure 1B , left ) . Edge velocity at a given time was Interruptions in Spreading and Migrating Cells measured by taking the derivative of distance with re - Cell protrusion during spreading or migration on a ma - spect to time . Using color to designate the velocity , a trix - coated surface requires an actin - dependent mem - two - dimensional ( angle versus time ) plot showed the brane extension , the lamellipodium . Total internal reflec - dynamics of the spreading process ( Figure 1B , middle tion fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy of dye - loaded cells left ) . In the initial phase of spreading ( phase 1 ) , there reveals the region of close contact between the cell was a fast and nearly global protrusion of the edge at and the substrate . Integrin - mediated adherence during a constant rate . In the second phase , the rate of edge lamellipodial extension generates close contact of the extension decreased ( phase 2 ) and displayed periodic cell with the ECM and we calculate variations in this interruptions ( Figures 1C – 1E ) . The final , fully spread region with submicron and second precision ( Figure 1A ) . phase ( phase 3 ) was characterized by two possible cell We analyzed the spreading of mouse embryonic fibro - states . The first state displayed irregular extensions and blasts ( MEFs ) on glass coated with fibronectin ( FN ) and withdrawals of the lamellipodia ( i . e . , STEPs similar to found that there were two modes of spreading : aniso - anisotropicspreadingcells ) . Thesecondstatedisplayed tropic or isotropic ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) . In aniso - continuous extensions with periodic interruptions ( Fig - tropic spreading , extensions are supported by filopodia ure 1F ) . and are irregular with many stochastic transient exten - Periodic interruptions were best seen by differential sion periods ( STEPs ) . In isotropic spreading , extensions interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy in kymographs lack filopodia and are nearly continuous until cells are of the protruding cell edge ( Figures 1C , 1D , and 1F ) . The almost completely spread ( Figure 1B ) . Upon closer ex - regular pattern of interruptions was seen in the majority amination of the isotropic spreading process , we ob - of isotropic spreading cells ( 87 (cid:4) 13 % , n (cid:5) 62 cells ) . served periodic interruptions in the lamellipodial exten - On average a single cycle , defined as a protrusion fol - sion with a period of about 24 s ( Figures 1C – 1E ) . Since lowed by a retraction , had a period of 24 (cid:4) 7 s ( n (cid:5) 95 this oscillating behavior might reflect local regulation of events , 12 cells ) . The duration of the protrusion was the lamellipodial extension process under normal condi - 19 (cid:4) 6 s and the distance traveled by the leading edge tions , we felt that careful examination of the periodic before the retraction period was 1050 (cid:4) 480 nm ( n (cid:5) phenomenon might reveal important mechanisms used 71 events , 9 cells ) giving a mean speed of 50 (cid:4) 17 nm / s ( n (cid:5) 66 events , 9 cells ) . After the retraction , which lasted by the cell to control motility . Cell434 Figure 2 . Generation of Periodic Interruptions Correlates with Increased Forces Applied on Integrins ( A ) Schematic representation of the laser trap experiment during isotropic MEF spreading . FN - coated beads were sequentially positioned on the tip of the protruding lamellipodium using a laser trap during the progression of spreading . ( B ) Displacement versus time plot of a representative experiment showing the movement of restrained FN - coated beads drawn out of the laser trap during isotropic MEF spreading . Color codes specify the time of initial binding of the FN - coated beads . Note the increase in rate and decrease in delay of rearward movement during the progression of spreading . ( C ) Plot corresponding to the cell in ( B ) showing the decrease in the rate of cell protrusion ( blue curve ) , the increase in the rate of FN - coated beads movement ( pink curve ) , and the decrease in the delay of movement ( yellow curve ) . ( D ) Velocity of the cell edge protrusions ( Vprotrusion ) ; ( E ) velocity of the FN - coated bead rearward movement ( Vretraction ) ; ( F ) sum of Vprotrusion (cid:6) Vretractionand ( G ) delayofbeadmovements , versustime ofinitialbindingplots . TheobservedtrendsinVprotrusion , Vretraction , Vprotrusion (cid:6) Vretraction , and in the bead delay time were tested for statistical significance . Slopes of linear fits to the data ( Figures 2D – 2G ) gavequantitativemeasuresofchangesovertime . Ata99 % confidencelevel , Vprotrusiondecreases ( (cid:7) 0 . 11 (cid:4) 0 . 06nm / s 2 ) ; Vretractionincreases ( 0 . 13 (cid:4) 0 . 05 nm / s 2 ) ; Vprotrusion (cid:6) Vretraction stays constant ( 0 . 02 (cid:4) 0 . 06 nm / s 2 ) ; and bead delay decreases ( (cid:7) 0 . 02 (cid:4) 0 . 01 s / s ) . ( H ) Time - lapse sequence ( see Supplemental Movie S2A available on Cell website ) used to generate the DIC kymograph ( I ) , depicting the movement of a FN - coated bead and the movement of the cell edge during an interruption event . Note the correlation of the cell edge retraction ( between dotted red lines ) and the increase in the rate of the FN - coated bead ( superimposed blue line ) ( J ) . This correlation is observed both if the bead is located close to ( K and L , upper bead ) or back from ( I ) the lamellipodium tip , but not on the lamella ( L , lower bead ) . Scale bars are equal to 1 (cid:2) m . Time bars are equal to 10 s . Arrow indicates the direction of protrusion . ( M ) DIC kymographs of a MEF spreading on a stiff polyacrylamide gel ( 20 % acrylamide , 0 . 8 % bisacrylamide ) covalently linked with FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml . Periodic contractions were generated . See Supplemental Movie S2B available on Cell website . ( N ) DIC kymographs of a MEF spreading on an intermediary stiffness polyacrylamide gel ( 10 % acrylamide , 0 . 1 % bisacrylamide ) covalently linked with FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml . Note the effective protrusion of the leading edge without the generation of periodic contractions and the following global ruffling of the lamella . See Supplemental Movie S2C available on Cell website . Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 435 for 5 (cid:4) 2 s for a distance of 220 (cid:4) 130 nm ( n (cid:5) 66 events , 9 cells ) , the net protrusion distance was 840 (cid:4) 520 nm ( n (cid:5) 65 events , 9 cells ) . Although periodic inter - ruptions were seen around the whole edge of the cell , there was no temporal coordination of adjacent se - quences of retraction . Kymographs of closely spaced regions ( Figures 1C and 1D ) , or a velocity map of the leading edge ( Figure 1E ) , showed a similar period with an offset thatvaried along the cell edge . Thus , the period was constant over the cell but was not globally con - trolled . In migrating cells with lamellipodia lacking filo - podia , periodic interruptions were observed having a period of 21 (cid:4) 4 s ( n (cid:5) 124 events , 12 cells ) ( Figure 1F ) , close but significantly different from spreading cells ( Bonferroni post hoc test ) . To determine if the period was dependent on integrin activation and not just binding to the surface , we per - formed the same analysis on cells spreading on poly - L - lysine ( PLL ) . Unlike cells spreading on FN , the protru - sion of the cell edge during the slower second phase was not interrupted by periodic stops ( 5 cells ) ( Figure 1G , Supplemental Figure S2 available on Cell website ) . To further examine the role of integrins , soluble RGD peptide was added and was found to block further spreading on the surface ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) . However , previous studies have shown that cell edge protrusion does not require integrin interaction with the ECM ( Bailly et al . , 1998 ) . Indeed , most cells plated on a nonadherent , silanized coverglass did not spread , but many cells displayed “spontaneous” protrusions close tothe coverglass . Unlikecellson FN - coatedglass , these protrusions were entirely withdrawn without a net cell edge movement ( Figure 1H ) . This behavior , protrusion and withdrawal , was similar to the cell edge movement observed in slowly migrating fibroblasts ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) and reinforced the idea that FN surfaces directed motility but were not required for it to occur . Further - Figure 3 . Interruptions / Contractions Induce the Periodic Formation more , there was no periodicity to the extension and of Transient Integrin and Paxillin Clusters retraction cycles . ( A – B ) TIRF kymographs of MEFs expressing integrin - (cid:8) 3 - GFP ( A ) or paxillin - GFP ( B ) spreading on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml ( right ) . The dotted rectangles in the left ( superposition of 4 successive frames ) depict the regions used to generate the TIRF kymographs . Arrowheads Periodic Interruptions of the Lamellipodial Extension indicatetheformationoftransientrowsofintegrin - (cid:8) 3 - GFPandpaxi - Are Triggered by Increased Actin Rearward llin - GFP . See Supplemental Movie S3 ( available on Cell website ) to Movement from Periodic Contractions better appreciate the generation of periodic integrin rows during Phase 2 of spreading was characterized by the initiation the phase 2 of spreading . Left : scale bars are equal to 5 (cid:2) m . Right : of a fast rearward movement of actin filaments ( Dubin - scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Time bars are equal to 60 s . Arrows Thaler et al . , 2004 ) , indicating that increased forces were indicate the direction of protrusion . Acquisition rate : 1 frame every 10 to 15 s . applied to ECM sites by the actin flow . To estimate ( C ) Histogram of the distribution of distances between integrin - (cid:8) 3 - the rearward movement of lamellipodial actin and the GFP rows . resulting forces exerted on integrins , we analyzed the ( D ) Rows were visualized using superposition of consecutives movement of FN - coated beads boundto the cell surface frames ( left ) . Manual localization of integrin rows was performed on ( Figure 2 ) . Using a laser trap , beads were positioned on the right and distances were analyzed in mathematica . Scale bars the tip of the protruding lamellipodium at different times are equal to 5 (cid:2) m . ( E ) TIRF kymograph of a MEF expressing GFP spreading on FN 10 during the progression of spreading ( Figure 2A ) . We (cid:2) g / ml ( right ) . found that at early times in isotropic spreading ( (cid:9) 100 s ) , corresponding to fast lamellipodial protrusion ( phase ( O ) DIC kymographs of a MEF spreading on a soft polyacrylamide gel ( 10 % acrylamide , 0 . 04 % bisacrylamide ) covalently linked with FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml . Note the absence of both periodic contractions and effective protrusion of the leading edge . See Supplemental Movie S2D available on Cell website . Left : Scale bars are equal to 5 (cid:2) m . Right : time bars are equal to 30 s ; scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Arrows indicate the direction of protrusion . ( P ) Histogram representing the percentage of cells displaying periodic contractions ( black ) , global ruffling ( dark gray ) , continuous protrusion ( light gray ) , and slow protrusion ( white ) for respectively , MEFs spreading on stiff , intermediary , and soft substrate . Cell436 1 ) ( 76 (cid:4) 20 nm / s ; n (cid:5) 13 events , 6 cells ) ( Figure 2D ) , edge , despite active actin rearward movement ( 100 % , 12 cells , Figure 2P ) . Therefore , stiff substrates are restrained FN - beads were drawn out of the laser trap needed for the generation of periodic contractions . Fur - with a large delay ( 10 (cid:4) 5 s ) ( Figure 2G ) and a slow thermore , even though an intermediary stiffness ( 10 % speed ( 25 (cid:4) 15 nm / s ) ( Figure 2E ) . During the next period acrylamide , 0 . 1 % bisacrylamide , Figure 2N ) restored an of spreading , the speed of rearward movement of re - effective protrusion ( 90 (cid:4) 9 % , 74 cells , Figure 2P ) peri - strained FN - coated beads increased to 56 (cid:4) 10 nm / s odic contractions were observed only rarely ( 10 (cid:4) 15 % , ( e . g . , for 100 to 200 s after plating ; n (cid:5) 21 events , 6 74 cells , Figure 2P ) . Those protrusions were often not cells ) and the delay of movement decreased to 6 (cid:4) 3 s stabilized ( 52 (cid:4) 17 % , 74 cells , Figure 2P ) , resulting in a ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . When the cell reached its final area global ruffling of the lamella . Hence , cell probing of a ( phase 3 ) restrained FN - beads were drawn out of the rigid substrate by contractile force generation results in laser trap rapidly ( after (cid:10) 300s , the delay decreased to periodic stabilization and extension cycles unlike less 4 (cid:4) 3 s ; n (cid:5) 18 events , 6 cells ) and the speed increased rigid substrates . to 71 (cid:4) 21 nm / s . The sum of lamellipodia protrusion velocity and rearward transport velocity of beads was Periodic Contractions Trigger Transient Integrin essentially a constant during the entire spreading pro - (cid:1) 3 and Paxillin Clusters cess ( 105 (cid:4) 22 nm / s , n (cid:5) 52 events , 6 cells ) ( Figure If an increase in the retraction of actin causes stabiliza - 2F ) , suggesting a reciprocal relationship between these tion of matrix interactions , then there may be accumula - two parameters . tion of integrins and / or paxillin in a periodic array . We The periodic interruptions observed in lamellipodial used (cid:8) 3 - GFP integrin as a reporter for the formation of extension could result either from a decrease in poly - stronger edge contacts ( Plancon et al . , 2001 ) as well as merization rate or an increase in the velocity of actin paxillin - GFP ( von Wichert et al . , 2003 ) . During the phase rearward movement . Consequently , we simultaneously 1 of spreading , no visible integrin clusters were detected followed the movement of the cell edge and FN - coated using TIRF microscopy ( Figure 3A , first frames of the beadsduring aninterruption ( Figures2H – 2L ) . Atransient kymograph ) . However , during phase 2 of spreading we increase in the velocity of FN - coated beads occurred observed the formation of periodic rows of integrin clus - at the onset of interruptions ( difference in t (cid:5) 0 . 6 (cid:4) 0 . 5 s ; ters ( Figure 3A , arrows and Figure 3D ) . The mean time n (cid:5) 16events , 7 cells ) andthe ratiooftheir durationswas between those rows is 23 (cid:4) 3 s ( n (cid:5) 67 intervals , 4 close to 1 ( duration of periodic interruptions was 5 . 3 (cid:4) cells ) , is very close to the period we measured between 1 . 8 s versus 5 . 2 (cid:4) 1 . 9 s for velocity increases ; ratio 1 (cid:4) interruptions ( Figure 1 ) . The distribution of distances 0 . 1 ; n (cid:5) 16 events , 7 cells ) . Furthermore , the increase between successive rows indicated a peak centered in retraction rate was observed for FN - coated beads around 1150 nm ( Figure 3C , n (cid:5) 121 events , 3 cells ) , close ( Figures 2K and 2L , upper bead ) or back from which is close to the mean distance reached by the ( Figure 2I ) the edge of the lamellipodium but not for leading edge after a single protrusion / retraction cycle beads more distant on the lamella ( Figure 2L , lower ( 840 (cid:4) 520 nm , n (cid:5) 65 events , 9 cells ) . Integrin clusters bead ) . In addition , the sum of the rearward movement were immobile relative to the substrate ( no rearward of FN - coated beads outside the periodic interruption movements ) and were unstable , lasting for about 2 min . ( 47 (cid:4) 15 nm / s ) plus the speed of cell edge retraction During phase 3 of spreading , in cells displaying STEPs , ( 49 (cid:4) 17 nm / s ) was close to the bead speed during the larger adhesion sites , having the characteristics of focal periodic interruption ( 105 (cid:4) 26 nm / s ; n (cid:5) 16 events , adhesions , started to form . Their lifetime was longer 7 cells ) . This shows that interruptions resulted from a compared to integrin rows and they displayed rearward transient localincrease inthe retractionrate ofthe whole movement . Thus , interruptions were concomitant with lamellipodial actin cytoskeleton , as the movement back an increase in integrin density at the edge , which would of a cohesive structure . strengthen the interaction with the substrate . No such row patterning was observed with cells expressing only Force Generation on Rigid Substrates Supports GFP ( Figure 3E ) , ruling out that variation of the cyto - the Generation of Periodic Contractions plasmic thickness , or the distance between the sub - To verify that the generation of periodic contractions is strate and the cell was responsible for the observation . dependent on the stiffness of the substrate and enables If the increased retraction associated with the inter - the cell to achieve full spreading ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) , ruptions resulted in increased force on the integrins , polarization , and migration ( Lo et al . , 2000 ; Mandeville then there should be an increase in the accumulation etal . , 1997 ) , wetestedtheeffectsofthesubstraterigidity of GFP - paxillin ( von Wichert et al . , 2003 ) . Indeed , GFP - on the generation ofperiodic contractions . We observed paxillin formed the same row pattern as integrins ( Figure MEFsspreadingonpolyacrylamidegelsofdifferentstiff - 3B , arrows ) , and was also found in the focal adhesions ness coated with a constant FN concentration ( Figures that formed in phase 3 of spreading . Since GFP - paxillin 2M – 2P ) ( Lo et al . , 2000 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ) . On stiff does not accumulate at FN - bead sites unless force is substrate ( 20 % acrylamide , 0 . 8 % bisacrylamide , Figure applied , it appears that the increased retraction rate 2M ) , mostcells ( 77 (cid:4) 12 % , 43cells , Figure2P ) generated results in increased force being applied to the integrin periodic contractions having a period ( 23 (cid:4) 5 s ; n (cid:5) 136 contacts . events , 14 cells ) not significantly different from cells spreading on FN - coated glass . In contrast , very soft Inhibition of MLCK Affects Spreading substrate ( 10 % acrylamide , 0 . 04 % bisacrylamide , Fig - and Periodic Contractions ure 2O ) neither supported the generation of periodic Since periodic retractions of the lamellipodia are in - duced by force generation , we explored the effect of contractions nor effective protrusion of the leading Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 437 Figure 4 . MLCK Affects the Generation of Periodic Contractions and the Spreading ( A ) DIC kymographs of respectively , control MEF , ML - 7 - treated MEF , and dnMLCK - transfected MEF . Scale bars are equal to 4 (cid:2) m . Time bars are equal to 30 s . Arrows indicate the direction of protrusion . ( B ) Histogram representing the percentage of cells displaying periodic contractions ( black ) , and global retraction ( gray ) for respectively , control MEF , ML - 7 - treated MEF , and dnMLCK - transfected MEF . ( C – D ) Visualization of a control MEF ( C ) and ML - 7 treated MEF ( D ) spreading . Radius as function of angle and time ( left ) . Velocity maps ( middle left ) . Variation of the cell area ( middle right ) . Percent of edge activity ( right ) . Note the global retraction following the phase 1 of spreading for ( D ) . See Supplemental Movie S4 ( available on Cell website ) to better appreciate the transition between phase 1 and phase 2 of spreading . modulating the contractile machinery of the cell . We cells , Figure 4C , middle right ) . To further demonstrate MLCK involvement , we expressed a dominant - negative tested if either inhibition of Rho kinase ( ROCK ) or MLCK affected the pattern of contractions . ROCK inhibition , MLCK ( dnMLCK ) ( see Experimental Procedures ) ( Figure 4A ) . Similarly to ML - 7 , dnMLCK expression inhibited using the specific inhibitor Y 27623 ( 25 (cid:2) M ) , did not affect the generation of periodic contractions or the phase 2 of spreading ( 28 (cid:4) 14 % of control , n (cid:5) 57 cells ) ( Figure 4B ) . Therefore , MLCK appears to be needed for period ( 22 (cid:4) 4 s , n (cid:5) 111 events , 14 cells ) as observed in DIC experiments , but efficiently inhibited the forma - increased force generated during periodic contractions and enables the cell to rapidly expand to a maximum tion of stress fibers ( Supplemental Figure S3 available on Cell website ) . However , MLCK inhibition using the area before polarization . specific inhibitor ML - 7 ( 10 (cid:2) M ) dramatically reduced the duration or canceled phase 2 of spreading without Periodic Contractions Induced the Periodic Transport of (cid:2) - Actinin and MLCK from the Leading Edge affecting phase 1 ( only 9 (cid:4) 8 % of cells showed a phase 2 , n (cid:5) 67 cells , Figure 4B ) compared to control isotropic to the Base of the Lamellipodium Simultaneous with the interruption / retraction of the spreading cells ( 87 (cid:4) 13 % , n (cid:5) 62 cells , Figure 4B ) , as seen both in DIC ( Figure 4A ) and TIRF experiments leading edge , we observed rearward moving material , visibleaswavesbyDICmicroscopy ( Figure5A ) . Analysis ( Figure 4D ) . Eventually , further spreading occurred , but in contrast to the extension / retraction cycles observed of wave movement revealed that the mean speed ( 74 (cid:4) 15 nm / s , n (cid:5) 46 events , 4 cells ) was similar to the speed in phase 3 or anisotropic spreading , we observed fast protrusions interrupted by cessation of edge activity . of rearward moving FN - coated beads ( (cid:1) 65 nm / s ) . Fur - thermore , the waves reached a distance of 1520 (cid:4) 250 Time - lapse analysis of MEFs spreading by TIRF ( Figures 4C and 4D ) demonstrated that 10 min after the initiation nm from the leading edge ( n (cid:5) 48 events , 4 cells ) when the next contraction was triggered , similar to the lamelli - of spreading , ML - 7 treated cells had a decreased area ( 790 (cid:4) 440 (cid:2) m 2 , n (cid:5) 39 cells , Figure 4D , middle right ) podial width of the MEFs used in our study ( Figure 6C ) . These waves were probably actin structures , since the compared to untreated cells ( 2020 (cid:4) 1000 (cid:2) m 2 , n (cid:5) 27 Cell438 filament waves generated by periodic contractions . The generation of (cid:1) - actinin / MLCK rearward moving waves was distinct from the generation of immobile row pat - terning of integrin / paxillin , supporting the specificity of these observations . Furthermore , no such waves were observed with GFP expressing cells ( Figure 3E ) . Generation of Periodic Contractions Is Not Microtubule - Dependent but Is Linked to the Width of the Actin Meshwork Periodic increases in contractile forces applied by the cell on the ECM may trigger periodic response signals but it is a mystery how the cycle could be timed . In the other case of periodic contractions , cortical oscillations in spreading cells were induced by depolymerization of microtubules ( Pletjushkina et al . , 2001 ) . However , on the contrary to a global cortical oscillation , the contractions reported here are localized and not synchronized all around the spreading cell ( Figure 1 ) . Also , the specific ROCK inhibitor , Y - 27632 , did not suppress generation of localized contractions ( Supplemental Figure S3 avail - able on Cell website ) . In addition , depolymerization of microtubules with 1 mM nocodazole did not suppress Figure 5 . (cid:1) - Actinin and MLCK Waves Travel across the Lamellipo - periodic contractions ( data not shown ) . Thus , the oscil - dium in Concert with Periodic Waves Triggered by Contractions lating signal that controls contractions appears to be ( A ) DIC kymograph of a MEF spreading on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml showing local and very different in nature from the global oscilla - the generation of waves by periodic contractions ( left , arrowhead ) . Time - lapse sequence corresponding to the kymograph depicting tions reported previously . the traveling of waves ( stars ) across the lamellipodia . Note that the The leading lamellipodia in fibroblasts are supported generation of the next wave occurs when the first reaches the back by an extensively branched organization of actin fila - region of the lamellipodium . Left : scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Time ments , termed the dendritic brush that is about 1 (cid:2) m in bar is equal to 30 s . Right : scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Arrows width ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . The mean width of indicate the direction of protrusion . the actin rich lamellipodia for MEFs used in our study ( B – C ) TIRF kymographs of MEFs expressing (cid:1) - actinin - GFP ( B ) and MLCK - GFP ( C ) spreading on FN 10 (cid:2) g / ml ( right ) . The dotted rectan - was about 1500 nm ( Figure 6C ) . At a mean speed of gles in the left depict the regions used to generate the TIRF kymo - 50 – 70 nm / s ( Figures 2 and 5 ) , the time to move from the graphs . Arrowheads indicate waves of (cid:1) - actinin and MLCK - GFP leading edge to the proximal boundary of lamellipodia movingacrossthelamellipodium . SeeSupplementalMovieS5Aand is on the order of 20 – 30 s . If the period between interrup - S5B ( available on Cell website ) to better appreciate the generation tions was determined by the transport time , decreasing of periodic (cid:1) - actinin and MLCK waves and their movement across the width of the lamellipodia should decrease the time the lamellipodium during phase 2 of spreading . Left : scale bars are equal to 5 (cid:2) m . Right : scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Time bars are between interruptions . We modified the actin network equalto30s . Arrowsindicatethedirectionofprotrusion . Acquisition in lamellipodia using low concentrations of cytochalasin rate : (cid:1) - actinin - GFP , 1 frame every 1 to 10 s ; MLCK - GFP , 1 frame D ( CD ) ( 50 nM ) and latrunculin A ( LA ) ( 200 nM ) . At this every 5 to 10 s . concentration , CD preferentially caps the barbed ends , reducing the density of the lamellipodial actin network ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . We also used LA , which actin binding protein (cid:1) - actinin as observed by TIRF dis - sequesters G - actin monomers , under conditions that played the same periodic rearward movement during shifted the actin steady state toward depolymerization phase 2 of spreading ( Figure 5B ) . The mean speed of while not completely blocking motility . LA treatment in - moving (cid:1) - actinin - GFP was 68 (cid:4) 27 nm / s ( n (cid:5) 31 events , duced narrowing of lamellipodia ( Svitkina and Borisy , 4 cells ) , and occurred every 23 (cid:4) 8 s ( n (cid:5) 20 events , 4 1999 ) . Cell edge protrusions analyzed by kymographs cells ) , similar to wave dynamics . Triggering of (cid:1) - actinin of CD - treated MEFs did not show a regular generation movement from the edge started when the previous of interruptions . Instead , scarce interruptions were ob - wave reached a distance of about 1640 (cid:4) 300 nm ( n (cid:5) served , despite a similar net movement of the edge 25 events , 4 cells ) from the leading edge . ( Figure 6B ) . In contrast , LA - treated cells still exhibited Because inhibition of MLCK affects the generation periodic interruptions , however the period between in - of interruption / retraction cycles and MLCK contains an terruptions 18 (cid:4) 5 s ( n (cid:5) 92 events , 6 cells ) was de - actin binding site ( Kamm and Stull , 2001 ) , we studied creased compared to control MEFs 24 (cid:4) 7 s ( Figure its dynamics in the lamellipodia of MEFs transfected 6B ) . Clearly , the structure and dynamics of the actin with MLCK - GFP ( Poperechnaya et al . , 2000 ) using TIRF meshworkaffectedtheinterruptions , andtheperiodcor - ( Figure 5C ) . Interestingly , periodic waves of MLCK were related with lamellipodial width . also observed , having a mean speed of 64 (cid:4) 23 nm / s ( n (cid:5) 25 events , 3 cells ) , occurring every 24 (cid:4) 7 s ( n (cid:5) 16 events , 3 cells ) and reaching 1640 (cid:4) 170 nm from Spreading Cells Regulate the Period of Contractions through Rac / LIMK / Cofilin Pathways the leading edge at the time of the next cycle of MLCK movement ( n (cid:5) 17 events , 3 cells ) . Thus , MLCK waves , To test whether modification of the actin network dy - namics by endogenous proteins altered the period be - like (cid:1) - actinin waves , chronicled the dynamics of actin Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 439 Figure 6 . Rac / LIMK / Cofilin Signaling Pathway Affects the Periodicity of Interruption / Contraction in Spreading Cells ( A ) Visualization of the lamellipodial width in MEFs transfected respectively with (cid:1) - actinin - GFP , (cid:1) - actinin - GFP , and LIMK DK ; (cid:1) - actinin - GFP and cofilin S3A ; and (cid:1) - actinin and RacV12 . Scale bars are equal to 5 (cid:2) m upper and 2 (cid:2) m lower . ( B ) DIC kymographs of a control MEF ( upper left ) , CD - treated MEF ( lower left ) , LA - treated MEF ( upper middle ) , GFP and cofilin S3A - transfected MEF ( lower middle ) , GFP and LIMK DK - transfected MEF ( upper right ) , and GFP and RacV12 - transfected MEF ( lower right ) . See Supplemental Movies S6A ( LA ) , S6B ( cofilin S3A ) , S6C ( LIMK DK ) , and S6D ( RacV12 ) available on Cell website . Scale bars are equal to 2 (cid:2) m . Time bars are equal to 30 s . Arrows indicate the direction of protrusion . ( C ) Distribution of the lamellipodial widths in MEFs transfected respectively with (cid:1) - actinin - GFP ( dark blue ) ; (cid:1) - actinin - GFP and LIMK DK ( pink ) ; (cid:1) - actinin - GFP and cofilin S3A ( yellow ) ; and (cid:1) - actinin and RacV12 ( light blue ) . Note the lamellipodial width decrease in LIMK DK and cofilin S3A - transfectedMEFs , andincreaseinRacV12 - transfectedMEFs , comparedtocontrolMEFs . Lamellipodialwidthdistributionsaresignificantly different between control , RacV12 , and LIMK DK / cofilin S3A ( p (cid:9) 0 . 001 , Bonferroni post hoc test ) , while no significant difference was found between LIMK DK and cofilin S3A . ( D ) Distribution of the contraction periods in control MEFs ( dark blue ) , GFP and LIMK DK - transfected MEFs ( pink ) , GFP and cofilin S3A - transfected MEFs ( yellow ) , and GFP and RacV12 - transfected MEFs ( light blue ) . Note the contraction period decrease in LIMK DK and cofilin S3A - transfected MEFs , and increase in RacV12 - transfected MEFs , compared to control MEFs . The distributions of contraction periods are significantly different between control , RacV12 , and LIMK DK / cofilin S3A ( p (cid:9) 0 . 001 , Bonferroni post hoc test ) while no significant difference was found between LIMK DK and cofilin S3A . ( E ) Linear relationship between the lamellipodial width and the contraction period ( correlation coefficient R 2 (cid:5) 0 . 97 ) . tween contractions , we modified cofilin activity . There cofilin activity in LIMK DK and cofilin S3A transfected cells reduced the mean lamellipodial width respectively is an inverse relationship between the amount of active cofilin and Listeria actin tail lengths in vitro ( Carlier et to 1060 (cid:4) 390 nm ( n (cid:5) 62 cells ) and 930 (cid:4) 380 nm ( n (cid:5) 52 cells ) compared to control MEFs 1470 (cid:4) 370 nm ( n (cid:5) al . , 1997 ; Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , cofilin activation might decrease , whereas , inactivation of cofilin by LIM 40 cells ) , and constitutively active RacV12 increased the lamellipodial width to 1820 (cid:4) 500 nm ( n (cid:5) 50 cells ) . kinase phosphorylation might increase the width of la - mellipodia ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . We ROCK inhibition , which did not affect significantly the period compared to control cells ( 22 (cid:4) 4 s , n (cid:5) 111 activated ADF / cofilin by transfecting MEFs with a domi - nant - negative LIMK1 ( LIMK DK ) or with an active non - events , 14 cells ) , did not affect significantly the lamelli - podialwidth ( 1510 (cid:4) 310nm , n (cid:5) 61cells ) ( Supplemental phosphorylatable mutant of cofilin ( cofilin S3A ) , and inactivated cofilin by transfecting MEFs with a constitu - Figure S3 available on Cell website ) . The relationship be - tween the period and the lamellipodial width is linear ( Fig - tively active Rac GTPase ( RacV12 ) ( Arber et al . , 1998 ) . Enhanced cofilin activity induced a decrease in the pe - ure6E ) andpassesthroughtheoriginwithinexperimental error . Thus , there appears to be no time delay between riod between contractions ( 15 (cid:4) 5 s ) for LIMK DK ( n (cid:5) 138 events , 7 cells ) and cofilin S3A ( n (cid:5) 135 events , 11 contractions and the initiation of the contractile signal movement at the cell edge . cells ) ( Figures 6B and 6D ) . Conversely , RacV12 induced an increase in the period ( 29 (cid:4) 8 s , n (cid:5) 109 events , 13 cells ) ( Figures 6B and 6D ) . Furthermore , decreased and Discussion increased periods were correlated respectively with a narrower and wider lamellipodial width , as measured The periodic interruptions in the edge extension during spreading and migration are linked to an increased con - using (cid:1) - actinin - EGFP ( Figures 6A and 6C ) . Increased Cell440 traction of the lamellipodial F - actin as evidenced by the podia extend in the presence of adhesion - blocking pep - increasedrateofrearwardtransportofFN - coatedbeads tides and over nonadhesive surfaces ( Bailly et al . , 1998 ) . and the periodic formation of integrin / paxillin rows . It However , without effective binding and mechanical sta - appears that periodic contractions are used by the cell bilization , forward movements of the leading edge fold to promote further extension of lamellipodia without filo - back upon themselves , leading to ruffling and no net podia on substrates of adequate rigidity , as shown by increase in the cell - surface contact area . We demon - the reduced spread area after MLCK inhibition and un - strated that phase 1 of fibroblast spreading did not stable lamellipodia on soft substrates . Because adja - involve extensive contractions or adhesion site forma - cent regions of the lamellipodium show contractions tion . However , during phase 2 and migration , productive that are offset in time but have the same period , there extension requires coupling of the actin meshwork as - appears to be local control of the contractions that in - sembly to force generation on integrins , as previously volves slow moving components . Since signals can be suggested ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ; Sheetz et al . , generated at matrix - cytoskeleton binding sites by con - 1998 ) . Force generation is necessary for the accumula - tractile force , it is logical to postulate that the signal tion of talin , paxillin , and vinculin leading to stable inter - could also bind to the actin filaments and be carried action with the actin cytoskeleton ( Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; rearward . MLCK and (cid:1) - actinin are carried from the lead - Giannone et al . , 2003 ) and possibly actin polymerization ing edge to the back of lamellipodia in approximately since vinculin recruits the Arp2 / 3 complex ( DeMali et 25 s , which is the period between contractions . As the al . , 2002 ) . width of the lamellipodium decreases or increases , the Protrusion is powered by forward forces generated perioddecreasesorincreasesproportionally . Therefore , on the membrane while adhesion site formation results our study supports the hypothesis that proteins bound from rearward forces applied on the ECM . Because to the actin locally deliver the signal for increased con - these forces are in opposition , periodic contractions tractility and directed actin assembly . may provide an effective way to couple protrusion with stabilization of the cell edge leading to an increase in Periodic Contractions in the Protrusive Lamellipodia the cell contact area . Observations suggesting that firm May Be Linked to Mechanical Probing adhesion sites form in response to contraction preferen - of the Substrate tially at tips of lamellipodia are : ( 1 ) the leading edge To probe its environment , the cell uses directional actin has high - affinity integrin readily available to form new assembly to extend the membrane ( Pantaloni et al . , adhesion sites ( Kiosses et al . , 2001 ; Nishizaka et al . , 2001 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ; Small et al . , 2002 ) and 2000 ) ; ( 2 ) lamellipodialtipsthatdonotbindtothesurface generates protrusive forces with lamellipodial extension often ruffle , leaving the cell edge at the position it ( Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . The generation of periodic con - reached at the time of the previous periodic contraction ; tractionsrequiresrigidsubstratesandisassociatedwith and ( 3 ) the distance and period between integrin rows stabilizationofprotrudinglamellipodiawithoutfilopodia . corresponds to the generation of periodic contractions . Therefore , we suggest that generation of periodic con - Even lamellipodia with filopodia that do not generate tractions in extended lamellipodia is linked to the me - periodic contractions but instead rounds of protrusion chanical probing of the ECM rigidity by the cell . In such and retraction indicate that protrusion / contraction cy - a model , rigid substrates that promote the generation cles may be a general mechanism to explore the envi - of periodic contractions will induce stabilization of the ronment . protrusive lamellipodia and movement of the cell toward rigid regions ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) . At a molecular level , forces Signals Traveling on Actin Filaments applied on ECM - integrin - actin connections trigger sig - The local response to force on matrix contacts involves nals needed for their stabilization and accumulation of the fast accumulation of focal complex proteins at the focal complex proteins ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ; Galbraith site of force generation and the subsequent transport et al . , 2002 ; Giannone et al . , 2003 ; von Wichert et al . , rearward of the material with the actin cytoskeleton ( i . e . , 2003 ) . If this contractile signal activated by local force FN - coated beads ) ( Galbraith et al . , 2002 ; von Wichert is carried rearward on the actin , then stiffer regions et al . , 2003 ) . If the matrix contact is immobilized ( i . e . , would induce a stronger contractile response . Indeed , FN - coated glass ) , a portion of the actin cytoskeleton soft substrates did not support the generation of peri - proteins will remain with the matrix contact ( integrin , odic contractions and protrusions of the lamellipodia . paxillin ) whereas others will move with the F - actin This positive feedback loop would naturally cause the ( MLCK , (cid:1) - actinin ) . Therefore , it is possible that signaling cell to move toward more rigid matrices ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) . complexes activated by force at localized sites are As an extension of this hypothesis , the surface area of transported radially by actin rearward flow to down - cells spreading on a soft substrate is decreased com - stream targets . Our study supports this concept of cy - pared to a stiff substrate ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) , and MLCK toskeletal transport of bound signaling complexes . inhibition reduced the final area of the spreading cells . First , the fact that adjacent regions of the lamellipod - Therefore , integrin binding to rigid matrices and the gen - ium show contractions that are offset in time but have eration of a local contractile signal can generate a signal the same period strongly favors models where contrac - to direct actin assembly during cell locomotion . tions are controlled by bound complexes . Diffusion in cytoplasm is relatively rapid such that soluble signals , Cycles of Protrusion and Contraction May Link Actin even proteins , could diffuse over tens of microns in the Polymerization to Adhesion Site Formation twenty or more seconds between contractions and blur Extension of cell processes does not require interaction of integrins with the ECM , since filopodia and lamelli - lateral boundaries . In contrast , the radial movements Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 441 Figure 7 . Model of Signaling by Cytoskeletal Transport Schematic drawing depicting how cytoskele - tal transport of a contractile signal generates local , periodic cycles of contraction . ( 1 ) Lamellipodial contraction generates force that activates a force - dependent signal , in - cludingMLCK ( greenellipses ) , boundtoactin at the lamellipodial tip . Note the formation of transient integrin / paxillin adhesion sites at the tip ( blue ) ; the partial dissociation of the actin meshwork creating a wave ( bulges ) that is carried rearward . ( 2 ) Extension resumes after the contraction , since the rate of actin rearward movement becomes inferior to filament assembly rate . The wave of material ( actin , (cid:1) - actinin , MLCK ) containing the contractile signal is trans - ported rearward by actin flow from the tip to the back of the lamellipodium . ( 3 ) The activated signaling complex reaches the back of the lamellipodium , where it now stimulates the activation of the contractile machinery ( myosin II , red ) . Once the contrac - tion is activated , the next cycle begins . of the actin cytoskeleton are confined and could carry tractile activity in a cytoskeleton transport - signaling path - signals that arise from local matrix properties in a ra - way . Specific inhibition of MLCK by ML - 7 or dnMLCK dial fashion . inhibits the generation of periodic contractions . The only Second , the time for transport across lamellipodia knownphysiological substrateforMLCKis myosinregu - seems to control the period of the contraction cycles latory light chain ( RLC ) , and phosphorylation on Ser 19 because several different treatments that alter the width of the myosin II RLC regulates actomyosin contractility of lamellipodia alter the period between contractions . leading to cytoskeleton and adhesion site remodeling Accordingly , alinearrelationshipwasfoundbetweenthe during cell migration ( Kamm and Stull , 2001 ) . In addition , width of the lamellipodia actin network and the period in phase 2of spreading , MLCK - GFP is boundto the lamel - of retraction , whereas the time for diffusion of signals lipodial edge , suggesting that periodic contractions re - depends on the square of the distance . lease a fraction of this MLCK that will be transported Thus , we suggest that actin filaments carry the signal - as periodic waves with actin filaments as observed in ing complexes from the leading edge to the proximal our study . A recent study demonstrated that MLCK is region , asobservedforDICwaves , (cid:1) - actinin , andMLCK , active in lamellipodia ( Chew et al . , 2002 ) . However , the where they locally activate the next round of myosin Ser19 phosphorylated form of myosin II RLC is mostly contraction ( Figure 7 ) . Although , depolymerization of concentratedatthebackofthelamellipodia ( Matsumura F - actin occurs throughout the lamellipodia ( Svitkina and et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore , MLCK activation of myosin II con - Borisy , 1999 ; Watanabe and Mitchison , 2002 ) , at the centrated at the back of the lamellipodia ( Verkhovsky et proximal boundary of lamellipodia , actin filaments are al . , 1995 ) could cause the concerted movement of the extensively dissociated and remodeled , probably re - lamellipodia . leasing the components bound to them ( Pollard and Our study of the periodic contractions of lamellipodia Borisy , 2003 ) . An alternative hypothesis is that enzymes without filopodia in spreading and migrating cells leads at the proximal edge of the lamellipodium activate the us to propose that signal transduction by cytoskeletal release . The same hypotheses can explain the finding transport may be a more general mechanism . Soluble that FN - coated beads bind preferentially at the leading second messengers or signaling enzymes are mostly edge , move rearward with the actin cytoskeleton to the diffusive and cause modification of downstream targets proximal boundary of lamellipodia , and often release in all directions . In contrast , signals that are transported from the membrane at that point ( Nishizaka et al . , 2000 ) . on the cytoskeleton move in a directed fashion and Thus , there is prior evidence of protein transport by can provide a simple mechanism for a positional signal binding at the leading edge , movement with the actin leading to local protrusion and contraction . Thus , cellu - filaments and release at the proximal boundary of the la - lar contacts with even small regions of a given matrix mellipodia . can produce directed movements and responses using myosin and other components that are widely dispersed Is MLCK the Signal ? throughout the cell . This could be an important general In such a complicated process , it is unlikely that MLCK mechanism to convert the rigidity of specific matrices transport alone controls the period of contractions . intosignalsfortissuedifferentiationandmorphologyde - However , the function , location , and dynamics of MLCK are those expected for a protein that would control con - termination . Cell442 Experimental Procedures the edgeof thecell fromthe background . Further analysiswas done using Mathematica ( Wolfram Research , Inc . ) software as described elsewhere ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) . Cell Culture ImmortalizedMEFs ( vonWichertetal . , 2003 ) wereculturedinDMEM TIRF time lapse was performed as described above and digitized as indicated in figure legend . Kymographs were produced and ana - ( Gibco ) with 10 % FBS . One day prior to experiments , cells were sparsely plated to minimize cell - cell interactions prior to replating . lyzed using ImageJ software . Kymographs were generated by put - ting side by side thin ( 10 – 20 pixels ) radial regions of the spreading Transient transfection of plasmids encoding EGFP ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) , paxillin - GFP , (cid:1) - actinin - EGFP ( provided by C . A . Otey , De - cell in a time - lapse sequence . DIC time - lapse sequences were obtained at video rate using the partmentofCellandMolecularPhysiology , UniversityofNorthCaro - lina , Chapel Hill ) , avian long MLCK - EGFP ( Poperechnaya et al . , sameexperimentalsetupdescribedforlasertrapexperiments . Mov - ies were digitized at 3 Hz . The cell edge was determined by a local 2000 ) , integrin (cid:8) 3 - EGFP ( Plancon et al . , 2001 ) , dnMLCK , LIMK DK , cofilin S3A , and RacV12 ( Arber et al . , 1998 ) were performed with contour algorithm ( Do¨bereiner et al . , 1997 ) allowing nanometer spa - tial resolution . Further analysis was done using Mathematica ( Wol - Fugene 6 ( Roche ) . The 220 kDa mouse MLCK was cloned from a mouse AT2 cardiomyocytes ( Blue et al . , 2002 ) and a single point framResearch , Inc . ) softwareasdescribed elsewhere ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) . mutation was introduced at residue 1549 ( K1549A ) . This mutation is predicted by alignment with other ser / thr kinases to have a key role in binding ATP and has been previously shown to inactivate Statistical Analysis MLCK activity thereby rendering it a dominant - negative , kinase - All statistical analyses were performed with a Bonferroni post hoc dead enzyme ( Jin et al . , 2001 ) . test . Linear fits were found using a least squares fit to the data . Materials Acknowledgments Calcein - AM was purchased from Molecular Probes , Inc . Full - length human fibronectin was purchased from Roche . Hexamethyl disila - We are very grateful to Patricia Gallagher and Audrey Minden for zane ( HMDS ) , LA , CD , and nocodazole was purchased from Sigma . providing us with respectively the dnMLCK and cofilin S3A , LIMK ROCKinhibitor ( Y - 27632 ) and MLCKinhibitor ( ML - 7 ) was purchased DK constructs . We thank Ravi Iyengar and Kyle Miller for helpful from Tocris . discussion and for comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by NIH grant GM362 . Coverglass Preparation Coverglasses were acid washed and treated with HMDS , creating Received : July 14 , 2003 a hydrophobic surface preventing nonspecific receptor activation . Revised : November 26 , 2003 This surface was exposed to a 200 (cid:2) l layer of 10 (cid:2) g / ml FN solution Accepted : December 9 , 2003 for 1 hr at 37 (cid:3) C . The uniformity of protein coating was confirmed Published : February 5 , 2004 by observation of Cy - 5 - labeled ECM . The preparation of polyacryl - amide substrates of different rigidity covalently coated with FN was References performed as described previously ( Lo et al . , 2000 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ) . Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynam - Spreading Assays ics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , Cellsweredetachedwithtrypsin / EDTA ( 0 . 05 % for2min ) , thetrypsin 805 – 809 . inactivated with soy bean trypsin inhibitor ( 1 mg / ml in DMEM ) , the Bailly , M . , Yan , L . , Whitesides , G . M . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Segall , cells suspended in serum free condition in DMEM , and incubated for J . E . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of protrusion shape and adhesion to the 30min before plating on coated glass surface . For ML - 7 , Y - 27632 , LA , substratumduringchemotacticresponsesofmammaliancarcinoma CD , and nocodazole experiments , cells were preincubated for 30 cells . Exp . Cell Res . 241 , 285 – 299 . min and during the experiments . When cells were transfected with Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , a plasmid encoding a protein not fused to GFP , GFP was transiently Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , cotransfected to localize transfected cells . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy 509 – 521 . Cells were loaded with 0 . 2 (cid:2) M of Calcein AM for 30 min before Blue , E . K . , Goeckeler , Z . M . , Jin , Y . , Hou , L . , Dixon , S . A . , Herring , trypsinization or transfected with a GFP fusion protein . We built a B . P . , Wysolmerski , R . B . , and Gallagher , P . J . ( 2002 ) . 220 - and 130 - custom - designed prism - based TIRF microscope using an upright kDa MLCKs have distinct tissue distributions and intracellular local - Olympus BX - 50 microscope coupled to the 488 nm excitation light ization patterns . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C451 – C460 . from a Melles Griot argon - ion laser . Cells were visualized respec - Bokel , C . , and Brown , N . H . ( 2002 ) . Integrins in development : moving tively with a 20 (cid:11) and 60 (cid:11) water immersion objectives for Calcein on , responding to , and sticking to the extracellular matrix . Dev . Cell and GFP experiments . A Roper Scientific CoolSnap fx cooled CCD 3 , 311 – 321 . camera recorded 16 bit digital grayscale images from the micro - scope . Cameron , L . A . , Giardini , P . A . , Soo , F . S . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Secrets of actin - based motility revealed by a bacterial pathogen . Laser Trap Experiments Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 110 – 119 . Cells were seeded on ECM coated coverglass and visualized with Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , a 1 . 3 NA 100 (cid:11) plan - neofluar objective on an inverted microscope , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing Axiovert 100 TV , equipped with differential interference contrast factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implica - optics as previously described ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ) . 0 . 64 (cid:2) m silica tion in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . beads ( Bang laboratory ) were coated with FN trimer as described Chew , T . L . , Wolf , W . A . , Gallagher , P . J . , Matsumura , F . , and Chis - previously ( Giannone et al . , 2003 ) . FN - coated beads were sequen - holm , R . L . ( 2002 ) . Afluorescent resonantenergytransfer - basedbio - tially held on the cell surface at the leading edge using a 100 mW sensor reveals transient and regional myosin light chain kinase acti - ( 20 pN / (cid:2) m ) optical - gradient laser trap setup ( Zeiss Axiovert 100TV ) vation in lamella and cleavage furrows . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 543 – 553 . while the cell was spreading . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton link - Image Analysis ages . Cell 88 , 39 – 48 . Individual fluorescent TIRF images of a spreading cell were pro - cessed as described elsewhere ( Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2004 ) with a Cramer , L . P . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1995 ) . Myosin is involved in post - mitotic cell spreading . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 179 – 189 . custom java image segmenter , resulting in a curve differentiating Periodic Contractions of Lamellipodia 443 DeMali , K . A . , Barlow , C . A . , and Burridge , K . ( 2002 ) . Recruitment of Pletjushkina , O . J . , Rajfur , Z . , Pomorski , P . , Oliver , T . N . , Vasiliev , J . M . , and Jacobson , K . A . ( 2001 ) . Induction of cortical oscillations the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : coupling membrane protrusion to matrix adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 881 – 891 . in spreading cells by depolymerization of microtubules . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 48 , 235 – 244 . Do¨bereiner , H . G . , Evans , E . , Kraus , M . , Seifert , U . , and Wortis , M . ( 1997 ) . Mapping vesicle shapes into the phase diagram : a compari - Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . son of experiment and theory . Phys . Rev . E55 , 4458 – 4474 Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Giannone , G . , Do¨bereiner , H . G . , andSheetz , M . P . Poperechnaya , A . , Varlamova , O . , Lin , P . J . , Stull , J . T . , and Bresnick , A . R . ( 2000 ) . Localization and activity of myosin light chain kinase ( 2004 ) . Nanometer analysis of cell spreading on matrix - coated sur - faces reveals two distinct cell states and STEPs . Biophys . J . , in isoforms during the cell cycle . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 697 – 708 . press . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) . The interaction between N - WASP Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Therelation - ship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . 159 , 695 – 705 . Giannone , G . , Jiang , G . , Sutton , D . S . , Critchley , D . R . , and Sheetz , Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ( XAC ) is re - M . P . ( 2003 ) . Talin1 is critical for force - dependent reinforcement of initialintegrin - cytoskeletonbondsbutnottyrosinekinaseactivation . sponsible for the turnover of actin filaments in Listeria monocyto - genes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1323 – 1332 . J . Cell . Biol . 163 , 409 – 419 . Gillespie , P . G . , and Walker , R . G . ( 2001 ) . Molecular basis of mecha - Sawada , Y . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . Force transduction by Triton cytoskeletons . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 609 – 615 . nosensory transduction . Nature 413 , 194 – 202 . Huang , S . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1999 ) . The structural and mechanical Sheetz , M . P . , Wayne , D . B . , and Pearlman , A . L . ( 1992 ) . Extension of filopodiabymotor - dependentactinassembly . CellMotil . Cytoskele - complexity of cell - growth control . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , E131 – E138 . ton 22 , 160 – 169 . Jin , Y . , Atkinson , S . J . , Marrs , J . A . , andGallagher , P . J . ( 2001 ) . Myosin ii light chain phosphorylation regulates membrane localization and Sheetz , M . P . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , andGalbraith , C . G . ( 1998 ) . Cellmigra - tion : regulation of force on extracellular - matrix - integrin complexes . apoptotic signaling of tumor necrosis factor receptor - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 30342 – 30349 . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 51 – 54 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamelli - Kamm , K . E . , and Stull , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Dedicated myosin light chain kinases with diverse cellular functions . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 4527 – podium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . 4530 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and tread - Kiosses , W . B . , Shattil , S . J . , Pampori , N . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Rac recruits high - affinity integrin alphavbeta3 to lamellipodia in en - milling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . dothelial cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 316 – 320 . Lappalainen , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin promotes rapid Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1995 ) . Myosin II filamentassembliesintheactivelamellaoffibroblasts : theirmorpho - actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 – 82 . genesis and role in the formation of actin filament bundles . J . Cell Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Cell move - Biol . 131 , 989 – 1002 . ment is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 . vonWichert , G . , Jiang , G . , Kostic , A . , DeVos , K . , Sap , J . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2003 ) . RPTP - alpha acts as a transducer of mechanical force Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . on alphav / beta3 - integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . J . Cell Biol . 161 , Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using 143 – 153 . pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Substrate flexibility Mandeville , J . T . , Lawson , M . A . , and Maxfield , F . R . ( 1997 ) . Dynamic regulatesgrowthandapoptosisofnormalbutnottransformedcells . imaging of neutrophil migration in three dimensions : mechanical Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1345 – C1350 . interactions between cells and matrix . J . Leukoc . Biol . 61 , 188 – 200 . Watanabe , N . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Single - molecule speckle Matsumura , F . , Ono , S . , Yamakita , Y . , Totsukawa , G . , and Yama - analysis of actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . Science 295 , shiro , S . ( 1998 ) . Specific localization of serine 19 phosphorylated 1083 – 1086 . myosin II during cell locomotion and mitosis of cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 119 – 129 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Na - IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the ture 393 , 809 – 812 . regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 . Mitchison , T . J . , and Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . L . , and Dembo , M . ( 2001 ) . Distinct roles of frontalandrearcell - substrateadhesionsinfibroblastmigration . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 3947 – 3954 . Nishizaka , T . , Shi , Q . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Position - dependent linkages of fibronectin - integrin - cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 692 – 697 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1506 . Parker , K . K . , Brock , A . L . , Brangwynne , C . , Mannix , R . J . , Wang , N . , Ostuni , E . , Geisse , N . A . , Adams , J . C . , Whitesides , G . M . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Directional control of lamellipodia extension by con - straining cell shape and orienting cell tractional forces . FASEB J . 16 , 1195 – 1204 . Plancon , S . , Morel - Kopp , M . C . , Schaffner - Reckinger , E . , Chen , P . , and Kieffer , N . ( 2001 ) . Green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) tagged to the cytoplasmic tail of alphaIIb or beta3 allows the expression of a fully functional integrin alphaIIb ( beta3 ) : effect of beta3GFP on alphaIIb ( beta3 ) ligand binding . Biochem . J . 357 , 529 – 536 .