Signal Transducing Molecules and Glycosyl - phosphatidylinositoMinked Proteins Form a Caveolin - rich Insoluble Complex in MDCK Cells Massimo Sargiacomo , Marius Sudol , * ZhaoLan Tang , and Michael P . Lisanti The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02142 - 1479 ; and * The Rockefeller University , Laboratory of Molecular Oncology , New York 10021 - 6399 Abstract . GPI - linked protein molecules become Triton - insoluble during polarized sorting to the apical cell surface of epithelial cells . These insoluble com - plexes , enriched in cholesterol , glycolipids , and GPI - linked proteins , have been isolated by flotation on su - crose density gradients and are thought to contain the putative GPI - sorting machinery . As the cellular origin and molecular protein components of this complex re - main unknown , we have begun to characterize these low - density insoluble complexes isolated from MDCK cells . We find that these complexes , which represent 0 . 4 - 0 . 8 % of the plasma membrane , ultrastructurally resemble caveolae and are over 150 - fold enriched in a model GPI - anchored protein and caveolin , a caveolar marker protein . However , they exclude many other plasma membrane associated molecules and organelle - specific marker enzymes , suggesting that they repre - sent microdomains of the plasma membrane . In addi - tion to caveolin , these insoluble complexes contain a subset of hydrophobic plasma membrane proteins and cytoplasmicaUy - oriented signaling molecules , includ - ing : ( a ) GTP - binding proteins - both small and hetero - trimeric ; ( b ) annexin N - an apical calcium - regulated phospholipid binding protein with a demonstrated role in exocytic fusion events ; ( c ) c - Yes - an apically local - ized member of the Src family of non - receptor type protein - tyrosine kinases ; and ( d ) an unidentified serine - kinase activity . As we demonstrate that caveolin is both a transmembrane molecule and a major phospho - acceptor component of these complexes , we propose that caveolin could function as a transmem - brahe adaptor molecule that couples luminal GPI - linked proteins with cytoplasmically oriented signaling molecules during GPI - membrane trafficking or GPI - mediated signal transduction events . In addition , our results have implications for understanding v - Src trans - formation and the actions of cholera and pertussis toxins on hetero - trimeric G proteins . I s lieu of a transmembrane peptide anchor , many plasma membrane proteins contain a COOH - terminal glyco - lipid , glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) / as their sole mechanism of attachment ( Cross , 1990 ; Ferguson , 1991 ; Low , 1989 ) . After transfer of GPI to protein in the lu - men of the ER , the attached protein is transported to the cell surface and undergoes cholesterol - dependent clustering in microinvaginations , known as plasmaiemmal vesicles or caveolae ( Anderson et al . , 1992 ; Rothberg et al . , 1990 , 1992 ; Simonescu et al . , 1975 ) . Caveolin , originally identified as a major phosphoprotein in v - Src transformed cells ( Glenney , 1989 ; Glenney and Zokas , 1989 ) , appears to contribute to the characteristic stri - ated cytoplasmic coat of caveolae ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . Dr . Sargiacomo ' s permanent address is the Department of Hematology and Ontology , Inatituto Superiore di Sanita ; Viale Regina Elena , 299 , 00161 Rome , Italy . Direct all correspondence to M . P . Lisanti . Tel . : ( 617 ) 258 - 5225 ; Fax : ( 617 ) 258 - 9872 . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : GPI , glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ; NRPTK , non - receptor type protein - tyrosine kinase ; RSV , Rous sarcoma vi - rus ; VAC , vacuolar apical compartment . Cloning and analysis of the caveolin cDNA predicts an un - usual 30 - 40 amino acid membrane - spanning region ( Glen - hey , 1992 ; Glenney and Soppet , 1992 ; Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) . It has been proposed that this hydrophobic region could form a hairpin structure within the membrane bilayer , allowing both the NH2 - and COOH - terminal domains of caveolin to remain entirely cytoplasmic . Immuno - localiza - tion studies reveal caveolin is present in cell surface caveo - lae , and intracellularly at the level of the TGN ( Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) . As caveolin is present in roughly equal quanti - fies in apically and basolaterally destined transport vesicles , caveolin may shuttle between the two epithelial surface do - mains and the TGN ( Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ; Wandinger - Ness et al . , 1990 ) . In addition to caveolin , glycolipids , the plasma membrane Ca2 + - ATPase and a cell surface IP3 receptor are clustered in caveolae ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Fujimoto , 1993 ; Fujimoto et al . , 1993 ) , suggesting that mul - tiple factors ( cholesterol , glycolipids , and Ca 2 + ) are in - volved in GPI - protein clustering . Clues to the possible function of caveolar localization come from the study of GPI - linked proteins in T cells and polarized epithelial cells . In T cells , cross - linking of GPI - linked proteins with specific antibodies leads to proliferation © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 08 / 789 / 19 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , Number 4 , August 1993 789 - 807 789 ( Robinson et al . , 1989 ; Su et al . , 1991 ) and tyrosine phos - phorylation . Phosphorylation apparently derives from a physical association between cell surface GPI - linked pro - teins and cytoplasmically oriented nonreceptor type pro - tein - tyrosine kinases ( NRPTKs ) , including Lck or Fyn ( Stefanova et al . , 1991 ; Thomas and Samelson , 1992 ) . As both classes of molecules do not span the membrane , it has been postulated that a transmembrane adaptor molecule that recognizes both GPI and NRPTKs would be needed to cou - ple them physically . In polarized epithelial cells , GPI - linked proteins are selec - tively transported to the apical surface and excluded from the basolateral domain ( Lisanti et al . , 1988 , 1990b ) , with GPI acting as a dominant signal for apical transport ( Brown et al . , 1989 ; Lisanti et al . , 1989 ) . Apical recognition of GPI may occur intraceUularly , via the TGN , ( Le Bivic et al . , 1990 ; Lisanti et al . , 1990a ) or at the level of the basolateral mem - brane ( Gilbert et al . , 1991 ; Schell et al . , 1992 ) . The latter route involves basolateral endocytosis and basolateral - to - apical transcytosis of GPI - linked proteins . As glycolipids are apically sorted in epithelial cells , it was postulated that GPI - linked proteins are sorted via co - clustering with glycolipids ( Lisanti and Rodriguez - Boulan , 1990 ) . However , as glyco - lipids and GPI - linked proteins do not span the membrane , we have more recently postulated the existence of a trans - membrane adaptor molecule that recognizes GPI and trans - mits addressing signals to the cytoplasm ( Harman et al . , 1993 ; Lisanti and Rodriguez - Boulan , 1992 ) . In support of both models , GPI - linked proteins become resistant to Triton X - 100 solubilization ( Hooper and Turner , 1988 ) , during apical transport ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . In - solubility begins at the level of the Golgi complex and is thought to reflect a physical association between GPI - linked proteins and the putative apical sorting machinery . GPI - anchored proteins are also Triton insoluble in non - epithelial ceils , indicating the generality of this phenomenon ( Hoessli et al . , 1985 ) . These low - density , Triton - insoluble complexes have been isolated from MDCK cells by flotation on sucrose density gradients and are selectively depleted of phospholipids , but are enriched in cholesterol , sphingomyelin and glycolipids and contain GPI - linked proteins ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . The insolubility of these complexes in Triton X - 100 has been attributed to their high sphingolipid content as sphingolipids are Triton insoluble ( Hagmann and Fishman , 1982 ; Streuli et al . , 1981 ; Yu et al . , 1973 ) . In addition , these complexes are devoid of many well - known polarized transmembrane antigens ( reviewed in Rodriguez - Boulan and PoweU , 1992 ; Garcia et al . , 1993 ) . Although the lipid composition of these complexes has been studied in detail , nothing is known of their cellular origin or non - GPI - linked molecular protein components . We report here that these complexes represent caveolae - enriched plasma membrane domains and contain a subset of hydrophobic membrane proteins and cytoplasmically oriented signalling molecules . The implications of our findings are discussed in relation to models of GPI trafficking and signal transduction . Materials and Methods Materials Sulfo - NHS derivatives were from Pierce ( Rockford , IL ) . Anti - caveolin IgG ( mAb clone 2234 ) was as described ( Glenney , 1989 ; Glermey and Zokas . 1989 ) . Sources of commercially available antibodies were as follows : HSV gD - I ( Dakopatts , Denmark ) ; c - Src , Fyn ( Oncogene Sciences , Manhasset , NY ) ; c - Yes ( Cambridge Research Biochemicals , Chershire , UK ) ; annexins , PLC - , Res - GAP , ezrin ( Biodesign International , Kennebunkport , ME ) and anti - phosphotyrosine , PY - 20 ( Zymed , S . San Francisco , CA ) . A second specific antibody to c - Yes was as described ( Zhao et al . , 1990 ) . Antibodies to human c - Yes were generated against antigens containing the unique NH2 - terminal region of c - Yes , and they do not cross - react with other NRIYI ' Ks ( Cambridge Research Biochernicals ; ( Zhao et al . , 1990 ) ) . Avid - AL was from UniSyn Technologies . Cell Culture MDCK cells were grown for 2 - 3 d at high density in 150 mm dishes in DME supplemented with antibiotics and 10 % FBS ( Rodriguez - Boulan , 1983b ) . For separate access to apical or basolateral membrane domains , MDCK cells were seeded at confluent levels on 24 . 5 - mm tissue culture in - serts ( Transwells , Costar , Inc . , Cambridge , MA ) and harvested after 5 d . gD - I - DAF expressing MDCK cells were derived and cultured as described ( Lisanti et ai . , 1989 ) . Rat - 1 cells were grown in DME supplemented with antibiotics , glutamine and 10 % FBS , while FRT cells were grown in Ham ' s F12 - Coon ' s modified media supplemented with antibiotics , glutamine , and 5 % FBS . Steady - state Metabolic Labeling Cells were incubated 16 - 20 h in 10 mls of Hepes - buffered DME containing 1 / 10 the normal concentration of methionine and cysteine , supplemented with 10 % dialyzed FBS , 0 . 2 % BSA , glutamine , antibiotics , and 100 / ~ Ci / ml Expre35S3SS - label ( Dupont / NEN ) . Metabolically labeled proteins were de - tected after SDS - PAGE by fluorography with sodium salicylate ( Chamber - lain , 1979 ) . Surface Labeling Plasma membrane proteins were surface labeled with the biotinylating re - agent , sulfo - NHS - biotin , as described ( Lisanti et al . , 1988 ; Sargiacomo et al . , 1989 ) . After 10 % SDS - PAGE and transfer to nitrocellulose , bio - tinylated proteins were detected by blotting with iodinated streptavidin and autoradiography . Cells were also surface labeled with a radio - iodinatable probe , sulfo - SHPP , analogous to sulfo - NHS biotin ( Thompson et al . , 1987 ) . To calculate fold - enrichments in low - density complexes relative to total cell lysates , proteins recovered by immunoprecipitation were ex - pressed as specific activities ( cprrd ~ tg total protein ) . For domain - selective labeling , sulfo - NHS - biotin was added only to the apical or basolateral compartment of the filter chamber . Filters were excised from the chamber before lysis and immunoprecipitation , as described previ - ously ( Lisanti et al . , 1988 ; Sargiacomo et al . , 1989 ) . This procedure efficiently labels the basolaterai surface of filter grown cells , as evidenced by the following observations : ( a ) basulateral biotinylation occurs all the way up the level of the tight junction ( Sargiacomo et al . , 1989 ) ; ( b ) the polarity of numerous apical and basolateral markers has been estimated using this procedure and the results agree with those obtained from im - munogold labeling ( Sargiacomo et al . , 1989 ; Le Bivic et al . , 1990 ) ; and ( c ) cell surface proteins expressed in filter - grown non - polarized epithelial cells are equally and efficiently labeled from both the upper ( apical ) and lower ( basolateral ) compartments of the filter chamber ( Lisanti et al . , 1989 ) . Isolation of Low - density , Triton - insoluble Complexes Low - density , Triton - insoluble complexes were prepared by our modifica - tion of a published protocol ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . Briefly , MDCK cell monolayers , grown to confluence on 150 nun dishes ( 5 . 9 x 107 cells ) , are extracted with 2 ml Mes - buffered saline ( MBS ; 25 mM Mes , pH 6 . 5 , 0 . 15 M NaC1 ) containing 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 1 mM PMSE After collec - tion , the extract is homogenized with 10 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer , adjusted to 40 % sucrose , and placed at the bottom of an ultracentrifuge tube . A 5 - 30 % linear sucrose gradient is formed above the lysate ( in MBS , lacking Triton X - 100 ) and centrifuged at 39 , 000 rpms for 16 - 22 h at 4°C in a rotor ( SW41 ; Beckman Instruments , Palo Alto , CA ) . The opaque band ( migrating at (cid:127)10 - 20 % sucrose ) is harvested , diluted with MBS and pelleted in the microfuge . Pellets are snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored frozen at - 80°C . A 150 mm dish of MDCK cells representing 9 - 11 mg protein , yielded 4 - 6 ~ , g of low - density , Triton - insoluble complexes , i . e . , 0 . 05 % of the initial homogenate . Triton - extraction solubilized * 85 % of The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 790 the protein ( 8 . 5 mg ) the majority of which remained in the 40 % sucrose layer , while ' ~ 1 . 5 nag formed an insoluble pellet below the 40 % sucrose . Organelle - specific membrane marker assays were performed by Jolanta Vidugiriene in the laboratory of Anant K . Menon ( The Rockefeller Univer - sity , New York ) as described ( Brada and Dubach , 1984 ; Vidngiriene and Menon , 1993 ) . These assays systems were not affected by the presence or absence of 1 % Triton X - 100 in the initial homogenate . An ER membrane marker protein ( mAb RFD6 ; Dako Corp . , Carpenteria , CA ) was also ex - cluded from these complexes as determined by blotting ( not shown ) . When filter - grown MDCK cells were used to prepare these complexes ( from two 6 - well Transwells per gradient ) , one 100 mm dish of unlabeled MDCK cells was added as a carrier to facilitate efficient recovery of the complexes . Detection of Endogenous GPI - anchored proteins Triton - insoluble complexes were solubilized in TBS containing 1 % Triton X - 114 plus protcase inhibitors ( Lisanti et al . , 1990b ; Lisanti et al . , 1988 ) , followed by incubation at 37°C for 20 rain . This condition effectively solubi - lizes GPI - linked proteins , as described previously ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . After solubilization , extracts were partitioned into detergent - rich and detergent - poor fractions by temperature - induced phase separation . GPI - linked proteins were detected by treatment with PI - specific phospholipase C ( 6 - - 8 U / ml ; from Bacillus thuringiensis ) which releases them from the detergent into the aqueous phase . Our assay conditions were optimized using two exogenous GPI - anchored proteins expressed in MDCK cells and quantitatively convert these over - expressed proteins to soluble forms as as - sayed by immunoprecipitation of fractions before and after PI - PLC treat - ment ( Lisanti et al . , 1991a , b ) . lmmunoprecipitation of Triton - insoluble complexes Triton - insoluble complexes were soluhilized for 45 min on ice with 1 ml of TBS ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 15 M NaCi ) containing 1 % Triton X - 100 , 60 mM octyl - glucoside , and 1 mM PMSE After pre - clearing with protein A - Sepharose , samples were immunoprecipitated with a 1 : 150 dilution anti - gD - I or a 1 : 400 dilution of anti - caveolin pre - bound to protein A - Sepharose . Rabbit anti - mouse IgG was used at a dilution of 1 : 100 pre - coupled to pro - tein A - Sepharose to facilitate immunoprecipitation of mouse antibodies . For calculating fold enrichments , primary anti - bodies were pre - complexed to protein A - Sepharose as described above , however , they were used at a dilution of 1 : 100 to ensure optimal conditions for immunoprecipitation . Electron Microscopy Low - angle Rotary Shadowing . Triton - insoluble complexes ( 5 # g ) were in - cubated for 30 min at 40C in 200 # 1 MBS containing 60 mM octyl - glucoside . Samples were sandwiched between two l - era pieces of freshly cleaved mica . Mica sheets were then separated and placed on the stage of a Denton 502A vacuum evaporator and dried for 15 - 20 min at ' ~ 10 - 5 torr . Samples were shadowed with , ~ 50 cm of platinum - paladium wire wrapped ten times around a tungsten wire at an angle of 4 ° while rotating at 50 - - 60 rpms , and then coated with carbon at an angle of 90 ° . Replicas were re - moved from the mica by floating onto water , and picked up on uncoated 400 - mesh copper grids . Micrographs of random fields were made at 80 kV with an electron microscope ( 1200 CX ; JEOL USA , Peabody , MA ) . Transmission . Pellets were fixed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M Na cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 2 ) for an hour on ice . Samples were then rinsed in 10 % sucrose in 0 . 1 M Na cacodylate buffer , postfixed with 1 % OsO4 in cacodylate buffer and en bloc stained with 1 % aqueous uranyl acetate . Sam - ples were dehydrated in graded ethanol and embedded in polyBed 812 ( Polysciences Inc . , Warrington , PA ) . Thin sections were cut on a Ultracut E ( Reichert JUNG , Vienna ) , stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate , and examined under the Philips 410 TEM . Detection of GTP - binding Proteins GTP - binding proteins were detected by affinity labeling using an oxidation - reduction scheme that covalently couples radio - labeled GTP to the invariant lysine residue within the GTP - binding consensus sequence , NKXD ( Low et al . , 1992 ; Peter et ai . , 1992 ) . Briefly , Triton - insoluble complexes were solubilized for 30 min on ice in MBS containing 60 mM octyi - glucoside . After solubilization , 5 / ~ Ci of c ~ - 32P GTP was added and incubated for 10 rain at 37°C . After binding , oxidation of protein bound nucleotides was ini - tiated by addition of 4 mM NalO4 ( 1 rain at 37 " C ) , followed by reduction with 80 mM NaCNBH3 ( 1 rain at 37 " C ) , and final treatment with 100 mM NaBIG ( 1 h at 4°C ) . Control samples were preincubated with 1 mM cold GTP for 30 min on ice before addition of radio - labeled GTP . Samples not preincubaaxl with cold GTP were adjusted to I mM cold GTP before analy - sis by SDS - PAGE . The ot subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins were detected by immtmo - blotting with specific rabbit polyclonal antibodies ( kind gift of Dr . Allen Spiegel , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ; Schenker et al . , 1991 ) . Antibody specificities were as follows : QL ( Ga q / ll ) ; AS / 7 ( G ~ il , i2 ) ; RM / 10 ( Gas ) ; GO / 6 ( Gao ) ; and EC / 2 ( G , ~ i3 ) . As both Gc , il and G ~ o are not expressed in renal or intestinal epithelial cells ( Ercolani et ai . , 1990 ; Berghe et al . , 1991 ) , antibody AS / 7 is specific for G ~ i2 in these cell types . Immunoblotting Triton - insoluble complexes ( ' ~ 20 / zg ) were solubilized in 150 ~ 1 sample buffer and separated by a preparative mini gel ( 10 % SDS - PAGE ) . After transfer to nitrocellulose , sheets were longitudinally cut into 3 mm strips and transferred to multi - well trays for incubation with a variety of different primary antibodies . Bound primary antibodies were visualized with the ap - propriate alkaline - phosphatase conjugated secondary antibody . Incubation conditions were as described by the manufacturer ( Promega Biotec , Madi - son , WI ) , except we supplemented our blocking solution with 1 % non - fat dry milk ( Carnation ) . Candidate antibodies were initially screened with to - tal cell lysates to ensure that they reacted with a band of the appropriate molecular weight in MDCK cells . Total cell lysates were prepared by scrap - ping a 100 mm dish of confluent MDCK cells into 300 / ~ 1 of sample buffer . Half of this solution was loaded per preparative mini gel and samples were treated as described above . Immunofluorescence Microscopy MDCK cells grown on glass coverslips were washed with PBS + and sub - jected to methanol - acetone fixation ( 5 min methanol , 1 min acetone ) at - 20°C . After fixation , washes , and antibody incubations were done in PBS + containing 0 . 2 % BSA . Bound primary antibodies were visualized with the appropriate rbodamine - conjugated secondary antibody at a dilution of 1 : 200 ( Cappel Laboratories , Malvern , PA ) . In Vitro Kinase Reactions Triton - insoluble complexes ( 5 # g ) or immunoprecipitates were resuspended in 20 / ~ 1 of kinase reaction buffer ( 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , 5 mM MgC12 , I mM MnCI2 ) and the reaction initiated by addition of 10 / ~ Ci 3 , - 3 ~ PATP ( 2 # 1 ) . After incubation for 10 min at 25 " C with intermittent mixing , the reaction was stopped by addition of 20 / ~ 1 2× Laemmli sample buffer and boiling for 2 rain . In certain experiments , samples were pre - incubated for 30 min on ice with genistein at a concentration of 10 or 100 / ~ M ( in kinase reaction buffer ) . A 20 mg / ml stock of genistein was prepared in DMSO and stored frozen at - 20°C . Immunoprecipitation of Phosphorylated Proteins After in vitro phosphorylation of Triton - insoluble complexes with 7 - 32PATE samples were immunoprecipitated with anti - phosphotyrosine antibodies or antibodies to NRPTKs and their substrates . Samples were diluted to 1 ml with lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 5 mM EDTA , 50 mM NaCI , 30 mM sodium pyropbosphate , 50 mM NaF , 100 / zM Na3VO4 , 1 % Triton , and 60 mM octyl - glucoside and extracted for 30 rain on ice before preclearing and immunopreeipitation . Phosphotyrosyl - proteins were eluted from the anti - phosphotyrosine antibody by incubation with 50 mM phenyl - phosphate , dissolved in the above buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors ( Zachary et al . , 1991 ) . Phospho - amino Acid A nalysis In vitro phospborylated proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE and local - ized by autoradiography . The 6 - kD phospboprotein , caveolin , and two phosphoprotein bands corresponding to the c - Yes protein were excised from the gel , digested with trypsin , and subjected to acid hydrolysis ( 6 N HCI at 100 * C for 2 h ) . Hydrolysates were analyzed by one - dimensionai dec - trophoresis in pH 1 . 9 buffer for 1 h and 45 rain ( Boyle et al . , 1991 ; Luo et al . , 1990 ) . Northern Blot Analysis of Caveolin Expression Confluent monolayers from three 150 mm dishes were harvested by tryp - sinization and used to prepare mRNA via oligo ( dT ) - cellulose affinity chro - rnatography ( type III ; Collaborative Biomedical Products , Bedford , MA ) . Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 791 mRNA ( 5 - 10 ~ g ) was separated on formaldebyde - agarose ( 0 . 8 % ) gels , blotted on GeneScreen Plus membranes , UV cross - linked , and probed with the 321Mabeled MDCK caveolin cDNA by standard procedures ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . Hybridization was carried out for 40 h at 60°C . Blots were washed sequentially with 2× SSC ( 10 rain at room temperature ) , 2× SSC / 1 % SDS ( 30 rain ; 60°C ) , and 0 . 1× SSC / 0 . 1 % SDS ( 30 rain at 68°C ) . The fifll - length canine caveolin cDNA was cloned by PCR amplification of an MDCK cDNA library ( gift ofG . Apodacca and K . Mostov , University of California , San Francisco ) using primers to the known sequence ( Kurz - chniia et al . , 1992 ) . PCR products of the expected size ( 0 . 6 kb ) were gel purified , cloned into pBluescript II KS + and subjected to double - stranded sequencing in both directions using Sequenase 2 . 0 . Results Origin and Molecular Protein Composition of MDCK TrRon4nsoluble Complexes Clustering and immobility of cell surface GPI - linked pro - teins is dramatically affected by extracellular pH ( Hannah et al . , 1993 ) . To evaluate whether low pH stabilized low - density Triton - insoluble complexes , we prepared these com - plexes from MDCK cells using slightly acidic ( pH 6 . 5 ) or slightly alkaline ( pH 7 . 5 ) homogenization conditions . As a marker for recovery of these complexes , we used a recom - binant GPI - linked protein ( gD - 1 - DAF ) . Our results indicate that preparation at acidic pH increases the recovery of gD - 1 - DAF in 1Yiton - insoluble complexes by 3 - 5 - fold ( Fig . 1 A ) . As other investigators have used slightly alkaline homogeni - zation conditions ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) , this critical modification should greatly facilitate the preparation of these complexes and the characterization of their protein compo - nents . Acidic pH may act to stabilize the complex , by mimicking the micro - environment of the TGN ( Anderson and Pathak , 1985 ) - the putative sorting site of GPI - linked proteins . As GPI - anchored proteins become insoluble at the level of the early Golgi complex , isolated Triton - insoluble com - plexes may represent Golgi or post - Golgi - derived membra - nous compartments , i . e . , transport vesicles or elements of the plasma membrane . TO test this hypothesis , we prepared Triton - insoluble complexes after surface labeling of MDCK cells with the membrane impermeant probe , sulfo - NHS - biotin ( Fig . 1B ) . After visualization of hiotinylated proteins by blotting with iodinated streptavidin , we find that Triton - insoluble complexes reproducibly contain a discrete set of cell surface proteins of 100 , 95 , 80 , 50 , 42 , 40 , 35 , 22 - 24 , 16 , and 14 kD . To investigate if these proteins are peripheral or integral components of the membrane , we solubilized bio - tinylated Triton - insoluble complexes with the detergent Tri - ton X - 114 by extraction at 37°C . After temperature - induced phase separation with Triton X - 114 , most biotinylated com - ponents of the Triton - insoluble complex partitioned with the detergent - rich phase ( Fig . 1 B ) , consistent with the hypothe - sis that they represent integral plasma membrane compo - nents . Detergent phases were next treated with PI - specific phos - pholipase C , to determine if these hydrophobic proteins rep - resented OPI - linked components . Such treatment releases GPI - linked proteins to the aqueous phase , as it removes the hydrophobic lipid moiety of the GPI anchor . Using this strategy , we find that GPI - linked proteins represent a minor component of these complexes relative to other hydrophobic membrane proteins ( Fig . 1 C ) , consistent with the idea that Figure 1 . MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes contain cell surface proteins . ( A ) Slightly acidic pH enhances the recovery of Triton - insoluble complexes . Complexes were prepared from transfected MDCK cells using acidic or alkaline homogenization conditions and the recovery of gD - I - DAF ( a recombinantly expressed GPI - linked protein ) determined by immunoblotting . Note that recovery was greatly enhanced ( 3 - 5 - fold ) by the use ofpH 6 . 5 buffers . ( B ) Triton - insoluble complexes contain multiple bydrophobic plasma membrane proteins . Complexes were prepared from surface bi - otinylated MDCK cells and the protein components fractionated using the detergent Triton X - 114 . After temperature - induced phase separation , proteins were recovered from the aqueous and detergent phases and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . Biotinylated proteins were de - tected by blotting with [ ' 2Sl ] streptavidin . Most components parti - tion with the detergent phase , indicating hydrophobicity . Two ex - posures are shown . ( C ) GPI - linked molecules represent minor components of Triton - insoluble complexes . After fractionation with Triton X - I14 , detergent phases were collected and incubated in the absence or presence of PI - specific phospholipase C . Released GPI - anchored proteins subsequently partition with the final aque - ous phase . Both detergent and aqueous phase are shown . GPI - linked proteins are released only from PI - PLC - treated samples and represent a minor component of the total biotinylated components . Biotinylated proteins were visualized as above . ( D ) Triton - insolu - ble components derive primarily from the plasma membrane . Complexes were prepared from MDCK cells after biotinylation in Mes - buffered saline in the absence or presence of 0 . 1 % Triton X - lO0 . In permeabillzed cells , essentially the same pattern and ex - tent of labeling is observed as compared as unpermeabilized con - trois . An increase in certain low molecular weight proteins is ob - served ( 35 , 16 , and 14 kD ) , suggesting they may be preferentially intracellular . In the above panels ( B - D ) , an arrow denotes the posi - tion of a 22 - 24 - kD cell surface protein we identified as caveolin in Fig . 4 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 792 GPI - linked proteins represent the " cargo " molecules and the other non - GPI - linked elements represent the more abundant " sorting machineryY We evaluated whether intracellular membrane compo - nents contributed significantly to the composition of these complexes ( not accessible to cell surface labeling ) , by per - forming the biotinylation reaction in MDCK cells permeabi - lized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Fig . 1 D ) . Under these condi - tions , essentially the same labeling pattern and extent of labeling is observed as compared with unpermeabilized con - trol cells , indicating that these complexes derive predomi - nantly from the cell surface . However , an increase in labeling of certain low molecular weight components was observed ( 35 , 16 , and 14 kD ) , suggesting that these molecules may be located preferentially in an intracellular location . To estimate what percentage of the cell surface these low - density insoluble complexes represent , MDCK proteins were surface - labeled with a radio - iodinatable probe , sulfo - SHIP , analogous to sulfo - NHS - biotin . After labeling , com - plexes were prepared and their recovery quantified using a gamma counter . We find that (cid:127)0 . 4 - 0 . 8 % of surface - labeled proteins are recovered in these complexes , indicating that they originate from only a small fraction of the cell surface . In addition , the specific activity of labeled cell - surface pro - teins in these complexes is - - 15 - 20 times greater than in total cell lysates , indicating that these complexes are enriched in a subset of plasma membrane components . Complexes were also prepared after steady - state metabolic labeling . Al - though low - density insoluble complexes represented only ~ 0 . 005 % of the total precipitable counts , they had a specific activity ~ 5 - 7 . 5 - fold higher than total cell lysates , indicating that they were enriched in newly synthesized proteins . These results are consistent with a role for these complexes in bio - synthetic transport . MDCK Triton - insoluble Complexes Behave as Integral Membrane Proteins To investigate further whether the components of Triton - insoluble complexes behave as expected of integral mem - brane proteins , we explored other conditions that might solu - bilize these complexes . Metabolically labeled and surface biotinylated Triton - insoluble complexes were extracted using a variety of buffer compositions , separated into super - natant and pellet fractions by centrifugation and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . The results of these experiments are summa - rized in Table I . We find that Triton - insoluble complexes are resistant to solubilization by chelators , high salt , clathrin - dissociation buffer , detergents such as digitonin and saponin , and alkaline carbonate extraction . These observations in - dependently suggest that the elements of this complex repre - sent integral membrane components , and support our results from Triton X - 114 extraction . We next turned to conditions known to solubilize GPI - anchored proteins ( Hooper and Turner , 1988 ) . Extraction with octyl - glucoside effectively solubilized both cell surface and metabolically labeled samples ( Fig . 2 ) . In contrast , CHAPS extraction preferentially solub ' flized surface compo - nents , while sodium deoxycholate extraction preferentially solubilized metabolically - labeled components . This selec - tive property of CHAPS could be exploited to further dissect the molecular components of these Triton - insoluble com - plexes . As similar differential detergent extractability of Table L Solubilization of MDCK Triton - insoluble Complexes Conditions that do not effect solubilization Acidic pH Mes - buffered saline ( 25 rnM Mes , pH 6 . 5 , 0 . 15 M NaCI ) Buffer alone Buffer plus 5 mM EDTA 1 M NaCI Detergents Triton X - 100 ( 1 % ) Saponin ( 0 . 5 % ) Digitonin ( 0 . 5 % ) Neutral pH Clathrin dissociation buffer ( 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 ) Alkaline pH TBS ( 10 rnM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 15 M NaC1 ) Carbonate extraction ( 100 mM sodium carbonate , pH 11 . 0 ) Conditions that effect solubilization Surface biotinylated Me . s - buffered saline plus detergents Octyl glucoside ( 60 raM ) + + + + CHAPS ( 30 raM ) + + + Na deoxycholate ( 0 . 1 % ) - + + Metabolically labeled GPI - anchored proteins occurs in whole cells ( octyl - gluco - side > CHAPS > deoxycholate ) ( Hooper and Turner , 1988 ) , our data suggest that insolubility of GPI - linked proteins may reflect an association with non - GPI - linked molecular com - ponents of Triton - insoluble complexes . These non - GPI - linked insoluble elements may represent lipids as these com - plexes were solubilized effectively only by detergents that resemble glycolipids ( octyl - glucoside ) and cholesterol ( CHAPS and deoxycholate ) . Triton - insoluble Complexes Represent Caveolin - enriched Membrane Domains To ultrastructurally examine low - density Triton - insoluble complexes , we used the low - angle rotary shadowing tech - nique . Briefly , these complexes were incubated with octyl - glucoside in pH 6 . 5 buffer ( 30 min at 4°C , without vortexing ) to partially dissociate them before layering onto mica sheets and preparation of platinum replicas ( see Materials and Methods ) . These studies reveal 50 - - 100 nm spherical com - plexes , consisting of arrays of particles that are intercon - nected by strands and appeared in concentric rings ( Fig . 3 ) . Shadowing at an angle of 4 ° best demonstrates the presence of the numerous particles , while shadowing at an angle of 8 ° better illustrates the filamentous nature of this material . It is unlikely that the complexes we observe represent an artifact of octyl - glucoside incubation , as they are dispersed by vor - texing during solubilization and are not observed when only the detergent solution was shadowed ( not shown ) . In addi - tion , they are not observed in FRT cells which lack detect - able caveolin expression ( see below ) . As caveolae are of a similar size to the structures we visualized by rotary shadowing and contain a cytoplasmic striated coat structure consisting of four or more concentric strands of particulate material ( Peters et al . , 1985 ; Rothberg Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 793 Figure 2 . Differential solubilization of MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes . Complexes prepared from biotinylated or metabolically labeled MDCK cells were resuspended in 200 # 1 of Mes - buffered saline containing either octyl - glucoside ( 60 mM ) , CHAPS ( 30 mM ) , or sodium deoxycholate ( 0 . 1 % ) ( Table I ) . After 30 rain on ice , with intermittent vortexing , samples were centrifuged at 14 , 000 g for 15 min at 40C . Proteins partitioning with the superna - tant ( S ) were collected by acetone precipitation , pellets ( I ) were directly dissolved in sample buffer , and both fractions analyzed by SDS - PAGE . Extraction with octyl - glucoside best solubilizes both surface labeled and metabolically labeled proteins . In contrast , CHAPS preferentially solubilizes surface components . An arrow denotes the position of a 22 - 24 - kD protein we identified as caveolin in Fig . 4 . et al . , 1992 ) , we suspected that these Triton - insoluble com - plexes may represent isolated caveolae . In support of this hy - pothesis , both caveolae ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Rothberg et al . , 1990 ) and Triton - insoluble complexes ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) concentrate glycolipids , cholesterol , and GPI - linked proteins . To test this hypothesis further , we inves - tigated whether Triton - insoluble complexes contain a 22 - kD caveolar marker protein , namely caveolin . Blots of bio - tinylated Triton - insoluble complexes were re - probed with anti - caveolin IgG ( Fig . 4 A ) . These experiments identify cav - eolin as the major 22 - 24 - kD cell surface component of Triton - insoluble complexes . Similar results were obtained when these complexes were solub ' dized with octyl - glucoside and immunoprecipitated with anti - caveolin IgG ( not shown ) . Biotinylated caveolin represented , x , 10 - 20 % of the total bio - tinylated proteins present in this complex . In accordance with these observations , we find that the cell surface form of caveolin partitions with the detergent - rich phase of Triton - X - 114 ( see Fig . 1 B ) and is insensitive to digestion with PI - PLC ( see Fig . 1 C ) . In addition , cave . olin is resistant to solubilization by all of the conditions listed in Table I and best solubilized by octyl - glucoside and CHAPS ( Fig . 2 ) , be - having as expected of an integral membrane protein . To estimate whether caveolin was enriched in these com - plexes , we surface - labeled MDCK cells with the iodinatable probe , sulfo - SHPP . Caveolin was then immunoprecipitated from total cell lysates and from Triton - insoluble complexes and its relative enrichment compared ( Fig . 5 A ) . In these experiments , we find that caveolin represents , ~ 0 . 18 - 0 . 2 % of the labeled cell surface proteins . In contrast , caveolin represents " , 45 - 20 % of the surface proteins present in Triton - insoluble complexes ( in accordance with our esti - mates from biotinylation ) . When these results are expressed as specific activities ( cpm / # g total protein ) , we find that cav - eolin is dramatically enriched ( ~ 160 - fold ) in these com - plexes as compared to total cell lysates . Similarly , GPI - anchored gD - 1 - DAF represented 0 . 2 % of labeled cell surface proteins and was ' ~ 240 - fold enriched in these complexes . In striking contrast , we find that organelle - specific marker en - zymes are specifically excluded from these insoluble com - plexes ( Fig . 5 B ) . Taken together , these results are consistent with the hypothesis that these complexes consist of caveolae - enriched membrane domains . Similarly , previous reports in - dicate that caveolin exists as a low - density , Triton - insoluble complex ( Glenney , 1989 ) , however , these complexes were not studied further . The membrane topology of caveolin has not yet been ex - perimentally determined . However , based on sequence anal - ysis of the caveolin cDNA , it has been proposed that an un - usual 30 - 40 amino acid hydrophobic region could form a hairpin structure within the membrane , allowing both the NH2 - and COOH - terminal domains of caveolin to assume an entirely cytoplasmic orientation ( Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) . In addition , epitope tagging of the NH2 terminus of caveo - lin reveals its cytoplasmic orientation ( Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) . Taken together with our data that caveolin is accessi - ble from the cell surface , it is likely that caveolin assumes a type II transmembrane orientation with a cytoplasmic NH ~ terminus and an exoplasmic COOH terminus . In ac - cordance with this proposed membrane topology , the puta - tive 44 amino acid caveolin ectodomaln ( residues 135 - 178 ) contains three lysine residues that would be accessible to cell surface biotinylation . Apical / Basolateral Distribution of MDCK Caveolin - rich Insoluble Complexes To determine the polarized distribution of the surface com - ponents of Triton - insoluble complexes , we grew MDCK cells on permeable supports that allow separate access to the apical and basolateral domains . After apical or basolateral biotinylation , we prepared these complexes and visualized their biotinylated proteins by streptavidin blotting ( Fig . 4 B , left ) . Caveolin and other surface - labeled Triton - insoluble components were not restricted to the apical or basolateral surface , but were present mainly in a non - polarized or slightly basolateral ( 65 % ) distribution . A few components also appeared basolateral specific ( 70 and 40 kD ) , while none were confined to the apical domain . As the sorting of The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 794 Figure 3 . Low - angle rotary shadowing of the MDCK Triton - insoluble complex . After incubation with octyl - glucoside , partially dissociated complexes were visualized by platinum replica - rotary shadowing ( see Materials and Methods ) . Note 50 - 100 - nm spherical structures reminiscent of caveolae , consisting of globular components interconnected by strands and arranged in concentric rings . The shadowing angle and bar length are listed for each micrograph . ( A ) 4 ° , 0 . 1 # m ; ( B ) 4 ° , 0 . 05 / ~ m ; ( C ) 80 , 0 . 05 / ~ m . Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 795 Figure 4 . Caveolin is a major cell surface component of Triton - in - soluble complexes . ( A ) Complexes were prepared from surface - labeled MDCK cells . After probing with [ l ' I ] streptavidin , blots were re - probed with anti - caveolin IgG . Bound antibodies were visualized with alkaline phosphatase conjugated secondary anti - bodies . ( B ) Filter - grown MDCK cells were apically or basolater - ally biotinylated and used to prepare Triton - insoluble complexes . Caveolin and other major surface - labeled components appear to be unpolarized , while certain minor components are confined to the basolateral ( 70 and 40 kD ) surface ( / eft ) . This is in striking contrast to total biotinylated proteins obtained from apically or basolater - ally labeled MDCK cells ( right ) . plasma membrane proteins occurs both at the level of the TGN and the cell surface ( Lisanti and Rodriguez - Boulan , 1992 ; Simons and Wandinger - Ness , 1990 ) , the non - polar - ized distribution of the Triton - insoluble complex may reflect the existence of sorting machinery that shuttles between the apical and basolateral domains and the TGN . These results are consistent with the proposed transcytotic role of caveolae in endothelial cells ( Severs , 1988 ; Simonescu et al . , 1975 ) and the observation that caveolae are not confined to the api - cal or basolateral domains of epithelial cells ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . In accordance with our observations , caveolin and many other protein components of transport vesicles are equally Figure 5 . Triton - insoluble complexes represent caveolae - enriched domains . ( . 4 ) Enrich - ment of caveolin and GPI - anchored gD - 1 - DAF . MDCK cells were surface - labeled with the radio - iodinatable probe , sulfo - SHPE Cavcolin and gD - I - DAF in Triton - insoluble complexes and total cell ly - sates were quantitated by im - munoprecipitation and ex - pressed as specific activities ( cpm / # g total protein ) to cal - culate fold enrichments . Our results indicate that both cav - eolin and GPI - anchored gD - I are over 150 - fold enriched in Triton - insoluble complexes . In a typical experiment , we recovered a total of 55 , 000 cpms in Triton - insoluble com - plexes from 7 . 5 × 106 cpms representing total cell surface proteins ( 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 % ) . ( B ) De - pletion of organelle - specific marker enzymes . Triton - insol - uble complexes and total cell lysates were assayed for com - partment - specific membrane markers : plasma membrane ( alkaline phosphodiesterase , non - GPI - linked ) ; Golgi ( man - nosidase II ) ; lysosomal ( 8 - hexosaminidase ) ; and ER ( glucosidase II ) . Specific ac - tivities ( enzyme U / # g total protein ) were used to calculate fold en - richments , Note that all marker enzymes were depleted from the complexes . distributed between isolated apically and basolaterally des - tined TGN transport vesicles , while few are apical or basolateral specific ( Kurzehalia et al . , 1992 ; Wandinger - Ness et al . , 1990 ) . This is in striking contrast to the polar - ized steady - state distribution of the majority of plasma mem - brane proteins expressed in MDCK cells , which assume an apical or basolateral distribution ( Sargiacomo et al . , 1989 ) ( Fig . 4 B , right ) . MDCK Triton - insoluble Complexes Contain Multiple GTP - binding Proteins As hetero - tfimeric and small GTP - binding proteins are in - volved in directing intracellular membrane traffic ( Bomsel and Mostov , 1992 ) , we suspected that GTP - binding proteins would be present in these Triton - insoluble complexes . To ~ icienfly detect GTP - binding activity , we used an oxidation reduction scheme that covalently couples [ a _ 32p ] GTP to the lysine residue within the GTP - binding consensus se - quence , NKXD . An advantage of this method is that it does not rely on the renaturation of G proteins , as in GTP - blotting assays which preferentially detect Ras - related GTP - binding proteins . The specificity of this labeling scheme has been ex - tensively tested using a variety of known GTP - binding pro - teins , both in purified form and complex mixtures ( Low et al . , 1992 ; Peter et al . , 1992 ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 796 Figure 6 . MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes contain small , large and heterotrimeric GTP - binding proteins . ( A ) Affinity labeling of GTP - binding proteins . Complexes were solubilized in Mes - buffered saline containing octyl - glucoside and affinity labeled with [ ¢x - 32P ] GTP . We detect GTP - binding proteins of 85 , 46 , 40 - - 42 , 38 , 25 , and 6 kD that are undetectable in control samples pre - incubated with cold GTP . Two exposures are shown . ( B ) Detection of the c ~ subunits of hetero - trimeric G proteins . Complexes were separated by preparative SDS - PAGE and transferred to nitrocellu - lose . Blots were cut into strips and incubated with antibodies specific for the c ~ subunits of the different subclasses of trimeric G proteins ( see Materials and Methods ) . Bound antibodies were visualized with an alkaiine - phosphatase - conjugated secondary an - tibody . Imrnunoreactive bands of the appropriate molecular weight are seen by blotting with antibodies to : Gqn ~ ( 42 kD ) ; Gt2 ( 40 kD ) , Gs ( 42 and 46 kD ) , and Gi3 ( 41 kD ) . The two Gs bands correspond to alternatively spliced forms of the protein that are resolved by SDS - PAGE . An additional band of 38 kD has been observed previ - ously with antibodies to Gqn ~ ( Schenker et ai . , 1991 ) , and may Using this scheme , we identified a discrete set of GTP - binding proteins of 85 , 46 , 40 - - 42 , 38 , 25 , and 6 kD ( Fig . 6 A ) . We speculate that the 25 - kD protein may represent a member of the Ras - related family of small GTP - binding pro - teins ( , ~ 20 - 30 kD ) , while the 46 , 40 - 42 , and 38 - kD proteins may represent the ot subunits of hetero - trimeric G proteins ( ' ~ 40 - 50 kD ) . In addition , as the 100 - kD microtubule motor protein dynamin 0nvolved in membrane traffic ) has recently been identified as a GTP - binding protein ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1992 ) , it is possible that the 85 - 90 - kD GTP - binding protein we detect is a candidate motor protein . To determine whether the 38 - 46 - kD GTP - binding pro - teins we detect represent the ot subunits of hetero - trimeric G proteins , we screened these complexes by immunoblotting with antibodies that distinguish between the different ot subunit sub - classes ( see Materials and Methods ) . We find that the ~ subunits of Gs ( 42 and 46 kD ) , Gi2 ( 40 kD ) , Gi3 ( 41 kD ) , and Gqm ( 42 kD ) are indeed components of these insoluble complexes and are enriched from 25 - fold in the case of Gs , to 175 - fold for Gi3 - as compared to total cell ly - sates ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . As G ~ is confined to the basolateral membrane , while G ~ 3 is localized to the Golgi complex , and Gs is present in apical , basolateral and Golgi locations ( Er - colani et al . , 1990 ; Berge et al . , 1991 ) , our results suggest that caveolin - rich insoluble complexes may represent caveo - lae or TGN - derived vesicles that shuttle between the Golgi complex and the two surface domains possibly along both endocytic and exocytic routes . Caveolin and c - Yes Are the Major Phosphoproteins of Tn ' ton - insoluble Complexes Two independent lines of evidence suggest that GPI - anchored proteins may interact with NRPTKs : ( a ) In T cells , cross - linking of GPI - linked proteins leads to proliferation and tyrosine phosphorylation via endogenous members of the Src family of NRPTKs ( Stefanova et al . , 1991 ; Thomas and Samelson , 1992 ) ; and ( b ) caveolin , was first identified as a major v - Src substrate in Rous sarcoma virus ( RSV ) transformed cells ( Glenney , 1989 ) . In light of the above findings , we wondered whether MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes contain NRPTKs or their substrates . To test this hypothesis , we screened Triton - insoluble complexes via immunoblotting . All antibodies were first tested against MDCK extracts containing total cell proteins to ensure that the antibodies reacted with an MDCK cell protein of the appropriate size . Results of our antibody screening are shown in Table II , with pertinent positive im - munoblots illustrated in Fig . 7 A . Caveolin and an additional v - Src substrate , i . e . , annexin II ( light and heavy chains ) , are present in these complexes , while other annexins tested and certain tyrosine kinase substrates ( PLC - % Ras - GAP , and ez - rin ) are excluded . Of the NRPTKs known to be expressed in epithelial cells , only c - Yes ( 62 kD ) is present in this com - plex , while c - Src and Fyn were excluded . This result was represent an uncharacterized G protein c ~ subunit . Go is not de - tected as its expression is restricted to brain and neuro - endocrine tissues . ( C ) Enrichment of hetero - trimeric G protein u subunits . Specific activities were estimated as in Fig . 5 A , except MDCK ceils were metabolically labeled for 20 h . Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 797 Table IL Identification of NRPTKs and Tyrosine Kinase Substrates in MDCK Caveolin - rich Insoluble Complexes Associated Immunoreaetivity to Antibody SH domain Molecular weight kinase complexes Polarity ( kD ) Marker protein gD - 1 - DAF - 45 - 50 Non - receptor tyrosine kinases c - Src SH2 / SH3 60 c - Yes SH2 / SH3 62 Fyn SH2 / SH3 60 Annexins I - 35 II , LC - 11 II , HC - 39 IV - 32 Tyrosine kinase substrates PLC - gamma SH2 / SH3 150 Ras - GAP SH2 / SH3 120 Caveolin - 22 - 24 Ezrin - 81 + Ap - ? + Ap - ? EGF - ? - + Ap v - Src / pkc + Ap - - BI EGF / FGF / PDGF - ? v - Src / EGF / PDGF / CSF - 1 - ? v - Src + Ap / BI EGF - Ap All antibodies listed were found to be immunoreaetive with a band of the expected molecular weight in total MDCK cell lysates prepared with SDS - PAGE sample buffer . validated with two independent antibodies to c - Yes . In addi - tion , we estimate that caveolin , c - Yes , and annexin 11 are 50 - - 400 - fold - enriched in low - density - insoluble complexes , relative to total cell lysates ( Fig . 7 B ) . We next performed in vitro phosphorylation reactions with Triton - insoluble complexes . Several groups of phos - phoproteins were detected that fell into four distinct molecu - lar weight ranges : 200 - 85 , 62 - - 45 , 24 - 22 , and 14 - 6 kD ( Fig . 8 A ) . The 62 - - 45 - kD phosphoproteins were most sensitive to inhibition by genistein ( 10 and 100 / ~ M ) , a specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor ( Akiyama et al . , 1987 ) . We later identified these components as c - Yes ( see below ) . We specifically identified caveolin as the 24 - 22 - kD phos - phoprotein component by immunoprecipitation . ( Fig . 8 B ) . Although caveolin was originally identified as a v - Src sub - strate , this is the first demonstration that caveolin can un - dergo phosphorylation in vitro . We were unable to detect a phosphorylated form of annexin II heavy chain by immuno - precipitation with antibodies either directed against the heavy or light chains . This may be related to the presence of phosphatase activity in these complexes , although we in - cluded the appropriate phosphatase inhibitors ( see Materials and Methods ) during immunoprecipitation . Similarly , we identified c - Yes as the 62 - - 45 - kD phos - phoprotein using two independently generated polyclonal antibodies directed against different domains of the amino terminal portion of the human Yes protein ( see Materials and Methods ) . Triton - insoluble complexes were solubilized with octyl - glucoside at high pH , c - Yes immunoprecipitated , and in vitro phosphorylation reactions performed on the im - munoprecipitates ( Fig . 8 C ) . Two major protein bands of 62 kD and 55 kD and two minor bands of 50 and 45 kD were detected in the immune complex kinase assay . The 62 - kD band represents the intact c - Yes protein ; the other protein species represent products of proteolytic degradation . We frequently observe this pattern of c - Yes immunoprecipitation when cell lysates are subjected to multiple steps of fraction - ation , specifically in alkaline conditions . MDCK cells lysed in RIPA buffer ( Brugge and Erickson , 1977 ) and directly precipitated with the anti - c - Yes antibodies show one protein product of 62 kD that is active as a protein tyrosine kinase ( Zhao , Y . - H . , and M . Sudol , unpublished results ) . To evaluate whether tyrosine - specific phosphorylation had occurred , samples were solubilized with octyl - glucoside at high pH with vortexing ( a condition that effectively dissoci - ates these complexes ) and immunoprecipitated with PY 20 IgG ( Fig . 8 D ) . The specificity of immunoprecipitation was demonstrated by competition with phenyl - phosphate . We find that many of the same phosphoproteins seen in total in vitro reactions are immunoprecipitated with anti - phospho - tyrosine IgG and are efficiently competed with phenyl - phosphate . These included the proteins we identified as caveolin and c - Yes , as well as other pbospho - protein compo - nents of 200 - 85 and 6 kD . We performed phospho - amino acid analysis to unequivo - caUy determine the nature of the phosphorylation ( Fig . 8 E ) . Although , c - Yes , caveolin and the 6 - kD substrate all con - tained detectable levels of phospho - tyrosine ( P - Y ) , they were predominantly phosphorylated on serine ( P - S ) . A P - S / P - Y ratio of 5 : 1 was estimated for c - Yes , while a ratio of 10 - 20 : 1 was observed for caveolin and 20 : 1 for the 6 - kD substrate . These observations indicate that this complex contains an unidentified serine - kinase activity , in addition to the c - Yes ki - nase . This is in accordance with the observation that in v - Src transformed cells , cave , olin in vivo phosphorylation corre - sponds to a P - S / P - Y ratio of 10 - 20 : 1 ( Glenney , 1989 ) . Simi - larly , in fibroblasts the c - Yes protein was shown to be phos - phorylated in vivo predominantly on serine and to a lesser degree on tyrosine , whereas in vitro exclusively on tyrosine ( Sudol and Hanafusa , 1986 ) . However , c - Yes precipitated from some hematopoietic cells displays in vitro tyrosine and serine phosphorylation ( Zhao , Y . - H . , and M . Sudol , unpub - lished results ) . From our data , we cannot exclude the possi - bility that the high level of serine phosphorylation of c - Yes and other proteins reflects a functional in vivo interaction with a serine kinase . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 798 Figure 7 . Caveolin , annexin H , and c - Yes are components of MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes . ( A ) Immunoblotting . Complexes were solubilized in sample buffer , separated by preparative SDS - PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose . Blots were cut into strips and in - cubated with a variety of specific antibodies . Bound antibodies were visualized with alkaline - phosphatase conjugated secondary antibodies . Immunoreactive bands of the appropriate molecular weights are seen by blotting with antibodies to gD - 1 - DAF ( 45 - 50 kD ) , cave . olin ( 22 kD ) , c - Yes ( 61 kD ) , annexin II heavy chain ( 39 kD ) , and annexin II light chain ( 11 kD ) . ( B ) Enrichment of caveo - tin , c - yes , and annexin H . Specific activities were calculated as in Fig . 5 A , except MDCK cells were metabolically labeled for 20 h . To visualize the distribution of the proteins we identified as phosphoprotein components of Triton - insoluble com - plexes , we performed indirect immunofluorescence mi - croscopy on MDCK cell monolayers . Immunolocalization revealed differing patterns of cytoplasmic punctate fluores - cence and varying degrees ofjuxta - nuclear staining ( Fig . 9 ) , with caveolin and phosphotyrosine yielding the most similar patterns . These observations indicate that caveolin - rich - insoluble complexes may represent a discrete point of over - lap in the overall cellular distribution of these components . In the case of cave , olin , immunogold labeling studies have previously identified these structures as caveolae at both the level of the plasma membrane and the trans - Golgi network ( Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) . Previous immunolocalization studies indicate that both annexin II ( Gerke and Weber , 1984 ) and c - Yes ( Zhao et ai . , 1990 ) are located beneath the apical plasma membrane in epithelial cells and that annexin II ( Glenney , 1990 ; Emans et al . , 1993 ) is also present in TGN tubulo - vesicular structures . Triton - insoluble Complexes in a Fibroblastic Cell Line To further investigate whether low - density insoluble com - plexes represent caveolae - enfiched membrane domains , we explored their ultrastructure and biochemical composition using a fibroblastic cell line , i . e . Rat - l , as caveolae are better morphologically distinguished in fibroblasts than in epithe - lial cells ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . Rat - 1 complexes were processed for transmission electron microscopy and com - pared with MDCK complexes ( see Fig . 11 A ) . MDCK com - plexes contained 50 - 100 nm vesicular structures , but the majority of membranous structures were 5 - 10 - fold larger in diameter . These membrane sheets contained numerous microinvaginations of the size and shape expected of caveo - lae ( arrowheads ) . In striking contrast , Rat - 1 complexes ap - peared to consist almost exclusively of 50 - 100 nm vesicular structures that resemble plasmalemmal vesicles ( caveolae ) seen in transmission micrographs of whole cells . As the mor - phology of caveolae may vary from predominantly mem - brane micro - invaginations ( in epithelial cells ) to individual or collections of vesicular structures ( in fibroblasts and en - dothelial cells ) ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Severs , 1988 ) , our results correlate well with the expected caveolar morphology in these different cell types . We also compared these com - plexes biocbemically via cell surface labeling , metabolic labeling , GTP - affinity labeling ( not shown ) , and in vitro phosphorylation . We find that the Rat - 1 complexes contain cave . olin and other cell surface proteins , possess GTP - binding proteins and undergo phosphorylation as in MDCK cells ( see below ) . However , Rat - 1 caveolin appeared to mi - grate with a slightly higher apparent molecular weight . These morphological and biochemical results provide fur - ther evidence that these low - density , Triton - insoluble com - plexes represent cavcolar - derived membrane components . An Epithelial Cell Line That Fails to Express Caveolin FRT , a rat thyroid epithelial cell line , is highly polarized and correctly sorts a variety of apical and basolateral transmem - brane antigens as compared with MDCK cells ; however , FRT cells fail to recognize GPI as an apical sorting signal and missort glycolipids to the basolateral domain ( Zurzolo et al . , 1993a , b ) . The putative defect in these cells that alters Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 799 both the polarity of GPI - linked proteins and glyeolipids ( as compared with MDCK ceils ) is unknown . As our current results suggested a role for caveolin in the sorting of GPI - linked proteins in MDCK cells , we examined the expression of caveolin in FRT cells . We used Rat - 1 cells as a positive control to ensure that the anti - caveolin IgG recognize the rat protein product . All three cell lines were metabolically labeled overnight and cell lysates immunopre - cipitated with anti - caveolin IgG . A 22 - 24 - kD species corre - sponding to caveolin was specifically immunoprecipitated from both Rat - 1 and MDCK cells , but was absent from FRT cells ( Fig . 10 A ) . Identical results were obtained when cells were pulsed - labeled ( for 15 or 30 min ) , indicating that a 22 - 24 - kD form of caveolin is not synthesized in FRT cells ( Fig . 10 B ) . The sequence of caveolin is highly conserved , with 86 % amino acid sequence identity from chicken to human ( Glen - ney , 1992 ) . Using the canine caveolin eDNA , we performed Northern analysis on mRNA from all three cell lines ( Fig . 10 C ) . Our results indicate that a 3 - kb transcript of the ex - pected size is present in Rat - 1 and MDCK cells , but undetect - Figure 8 . Caveolin and c - Yes are the two major phosphoprotein components of MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes during in vitro phosphorylation . ( A ) Triton - insoluble complexes possess kinase activity . Complexes were resuspended in kinase reaction buffer and the reaction initiated by the addition of [ ~ / - 32P ] ATP . Reactions were terminated by boiling in sample buffer . Certain samples were pre - incubated with genistein ( 10 and 100 # M ) , a protein - tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Phosphoproteins fall into four molecular weight ranges : 200 - 85 , 62 - - 45 , 24 - 22 , and 14 - 6 kD . The 62 - - 45 - kD spe - cies were most sensitive to inhibition by genistein . These proteins correspond to pbosphorylated forms of c - Yes ( see C below ) . Two exposures are shown . ( B ) Identification of known phosphoproteins . Complexes were in vitro phosphorylated , solubilized at alkaline pH with octyl - glucoside , and immunoprecipitated with antibodies to caveolin and annexin II ( heavy chain or light chain ) . Immuno - precipitation with anti - caveolin identified the 24 - 22 - kD phosphor - ylated species as caveolin . No pbosphorylated bands were im - munoprecipitated with antibodies to annexin II . ( C ) In vitro pbosphorylation of immuno - isolated c - Yes . Complexes were solubi - lized as in B and immunopreeipitated with two different polyclonal antibodies to c - Yes ( sheep anti - c - Yes ; Cambridge Research Bio - chemicals and rabbit anti - c - Yes ; as previously described ( Zhao et al . , 1990 ) ) . After c - Yes immunoisolation , samples were subjected to in vitro phospborylation . Only two major species ( 62 and 55 kD ) and two minor species ( 50 and 45 kD ) undergo phosphorylation . The 62 - kD band represents the intact c - Yes protein , while the other protein species are c - Yes degradation products frequently observed when processing the c - Yes protein in alkaline buffers . Two different supports were also used for binding the different primary antibod - ies : protein A - Sepharose ( PA ) or Avid - AL ( AL ) . In the case of the sheep antibody , rabbit anti - sheep IgG was used as a bridge for coupling to protein A - Sepharose . On the other hand , Avid - AL strongly binds all IgG forms without the need for a secondary anti - body . Note that the mobility of c - Yes is altered by the presence of co - migrating unlabeled rabbit anti - sheep secondary antibodies used to facilitate immunoprecipitation . Experiments in which the primary antibodies were omitted or use of irrelevant IgG demon - strated specificity ( not shown ) . ( D ) Tyrosine - specific pbospboryla - tion occurs . After in vitro phosphorylation , samples were solubi - lized at alkaline pH in buffers containing octyl - glucoside and phosphatase inhibitors and immunoprecipitated with anti - phospho - tyrosine antibodies ( PY - 20 ) . As a control for specificity , certain samples were eluted by treatment with phenylphosphate . Phos - phoproteins that remained bound to protein A - Sepharose were ana - lyzed . The 62 - 45 - kD species and 24 - 22 - kD species correspond to c - Yes and caveolin , respectively ( see B and C ) . Note that the mobil - ity of c - Yes is altered by the presence of co - migrating unlabeled rab - bit anti - mouse secondary antibodies used to facilitate immunopre - cipitation of PY - 20 . ( E ) Phospboamino acid analysis of c - Yes , caveolin and the 6 - kD protein pbosphorylated in an in vitro kinase assay . All three Phospboproteins are phosphorylated predomi - nantly on serine residues and to a lesser degree also on tyrosine . ( P - Y ) Phospbotyrosine ; ( P - T ) phosphothreonine ; ( P - S ) phosphoser - inc . The phosphoamino acids were resolved by one - dimensional electrophoresis on a TLC plate . Visualization of the phosphoamino acid standards was by ninhydrin reaction ( see Materials and Methods ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 800 Figure 9 . Immuno - locaiization of the phosphoprotein components of Triton - insoluble complexes , gD - I - DAF expressing MDCK cells were seeded on glass coverslips and prepared by methanol / acetone fixation for immunostaining . After incubation with primary antibodies , bound antibodies were visualized with rhodamine - conjugated secondary antibody . Primary antibodies were as follows : gD - l , caveolin , anti - phosphotyrosine ( PY ) , annexin II light chain , annexin II heavy chain , and c - Yes . All antibodies tested yield distinct fluorescent dotted pat - terns and peri - nuclear staining , with caveolin and anti - PY appearing most similar . able in FRT cells . In addition , Southern analysis revealed a genomic copy of caveolin in all three cell lines ( not shown ) . One interpretation of these results is that a lack of caveolin mRNA in FRT cells reflects tissue - specific expression of the caveolin gene . In this regard , caveolin is expressed at high levels in heart , skeletal muscle , placenta , and lung , while barely detectable in other tissues ( Glenney , 1989 , 1992 ) . Cells That Fail to Express Caveolin Form Incomplete Triton - insoluble Complexes To further understand the missorting phenotype of FRT cells , we examined the morphology and composition of Triton - insoluble complexes prepared from FRT cells . Ultra - structurally , FRT complexes consisted primarily of 50 - 100 nm vesicular structures , some appearing interconnected or in bunches , as previously observed for caveolae ( Severs , 1988 ) ( Fig . 11 A , inset ) . These morphological observations demonstrate that FRT cells can form Triton - insoluble com - plexes . We next analyzed these complexes biochemically ( Fig . 11 B ) . No cell surface proteins were detected in FRT complexes even on radiographic overexposures . Identical results were obtained when filter - grown FRT cells labeled apically or basolaterally with sulfo - NHS - biotin ( not shown ) , indicating that our results were not due to selective basolateral localization of these complexes . Similarly , we find that FRT complexes are depleted of metabolically la - beled components . However , certain metabolically labeled components can be observed on radiographic over - expo - sures . Note that a metabolically labeled 22 - 24 - kD band we have identified as caveolin in MDCK and Rat - 1 cells is con - spicuously absent from FRT complexes . This is in accor - dance with our observation that FRT cells do not express de - tectable levels of caveolin ( see above ) . We also examined the phospho - protein profile of FRT complexes . Only a 14 - 6 - kD component underwent in vitro phosphorylation , while bands we identified as phosphorylated caveolin and c - Yes were ab - sent from these complexes . In addition , visualization of gently solubilized FRT complexes by low - angle rotary shad - Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 801 owing did not reveal any discernable structures ( not shown ) , in contrast to MDCK cells ( Fig . 3 ) . As caveolin appears to contribute to the cytoplasmic coat of caveolae ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) and is not expressed in FRT cells , these results were not unexpected . Taken together , these results provide supporting evidence that Triton - insoluble complexes normally contain putative components of the GPI protein sorting machinery - as they appear biochemically incomplete in a cell line that fails to express caveolin and selectively missorts GPI - linked pro - teins and glycolipids . These results also suggest that caveolin may be necessary to recruit other components to the complex . Discussion Are Low - density , Triton - insoluble Complexes Caveolae ? Caveolae are present at the cell surface of a wide variety of cells . Glycolipids , cholesterol , GPI - linked proteins , and cav - colin cluster in these micro - invaginations ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Rothberg et al . , 1992 , 1990b ; Severs , 1988 ) and are all resistant to Triton X - 100 extraction ( Glermey and Zokas , 1989 ; Hagmann and Fishman , 1982 ; Hooper and Turner , 1988 ; Streuli et al . , 1981 ; Yu et al . , 1973 ) . Morphologically caveolae appear as 50 - 100 - nm spherical structures , with a striated cytoplasmic coat consisting of concentric rings of globular subunits linked together as strands ( Peters et al . , 1985 ; Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . In addition , caveolae are not restricted to the apical or basolateral domains of endothelial or epithelial ceils ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . Low - density , Triton - insoluble complexes prepared from MDCK cells are enriched in cholesterol and glycolipids , and contain GPI - linked proteins ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ) . In this report , we demonstrate that these complexes : ( a ) mor - phologically appear by low - angle rotary shadowing as 50 - 100 - nm spherical structures , consisting of globular subunits aligned in concentric rings ; ( b ) that they contain caveolin as a major transmembrane phospho - protein component ; ( c ) that similar complexes prepared from the fibroblastic cell line , Rat - I , appear morphologically indistinguishable from authentic caveolae ( plasmaiemmal vesicles ) seen in trans - mission electron micrographs of intact fibroblasts ; and ( d ) caveolin and other components of Triton - insoluble com - plexes are present on both apical and basolateral domains , Figure 10 . FRT cells fail to express detectable levels of caveolin . ( , 4 and B ) Immunoprecipitation . FRT cells were metabolically la - beled either overnight ( , 4 ) or pulsed for 15 min ( B ) . Ceils were ex - tracted first at acidic pH ( 6 . 5 ) in Triton - containing buffers and then re - extracted at alkaline pH ( 8 . 0 ) in octyl - glucoside containing buffers . Both extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti - caveolin antibodies and labeled proteins visualized by fluorography . MDCK cells and Rat - I cells were processed in parallel and served as posi - tive controls . ( S ) Triton - soluble fraction ; ( I ) Triton - insoluble frac - tion . A 22 - 24 - kD species corresponding to immuno - isolated cav - eolin is easily detected both in steady - state or pulse - labeled MDCK and Rat - 1 cells . In striking contrast , FRT cells fail to express detect - able levels of caveolin , even on overexposure of the autoradiograph . ( C ) Northern Blot Analysis . Isolated mRNA from Rata ( 8 - 10 # g ) , FRT ( 8 - 10 # g ) , and MDCK cells ( 5 # g ) was separated using form - aldehyde - agarose gels , transferred to hybridization membranes and probed with the 32P - labeled MDCK caveolin cDNA . A prominent , ' o3 - kb transcript of the expected size of caveolin mRNA was de - tected in Rat - 1 cells and MDCK cells , but was absent from FRT ceils . Note that the probe hybridizes most efficiently with the MDCK species as they are identical . The ethidium - stained agarose gel before transfer is shown below the autoradiogram for compari - son . As expected , a small amount of contaminating rRNA was pres - ent in all the samples . Molecular sizes were derived from ethidium bromide - stained marker RNA . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 802 Figure 11 . Morphological and biochemical com - parison of Triton - insoluble complexes prepared from fibroblastic ( Rat - l ) or epithelial ( MDCK and FRT ) cell lines . ( . 4 ) Morphological . Com - plexes were prepared from Rat - l , MDCK and FRT cells and examined by transmission EM . In the case of Rat - l , studies reveal a preponderance of 50 - 100 nm vesicular structures . Similar 50 - - 100 nm vesicles were observed for MDCK cells , however , larger ( 5 - 10× ) vesicular struc - tures were more numerous ; arrowheads indicate membrane invaginations that are of the same size and shape expected for caveolae . In FRT cells , these complexes consisted predominantly of 50 - 100 nm vesicular structures as seen with Rat - 1 cells and often appeared linked or in bunches ( inset ) . This dendritic appearance has previously been ascribed to caveolae which often appear linked together in bunches ( like clusters of grapes ) . Bar , 0 . 2 / zm . ( B ) Biochemical . Com - plexes were prepared from equivalent cell num - bers of Rat - l , MDCK and FRT . Cells were surface - biotinylated , metabolically labeled , or left unlabeled for in vitro phosphorylation . Note that Rat - 1 and MDCK complexes contain caveo - lin and other cell surface proteins , are easily metabolically labeled , and undergo phosphory - lation . Bands we have identified as caveolin are indicated by arrows . Note that caveolin migrates with a slightly higher molecular mass in Rat - 1 cells . Major differences were observed between FRT complexes and complexes prepared from the other cell lines . These differences may reflect their unusual sorting phenotype . Two exposures of metabolically labeled samples are shown . unlike most MDCK surface proteins which assume a polar - ized distribution . These numerous parallels are striking and lead us to be - lieve that Triton - insoluble complexes represent caveolae - enriched membrane domains . However , further proof will be necessary before low - density , Triton - insoluble complexes ( biochemical ) and caveolae ( morphological ) can be consid - ered interchangeable . Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 803 N - ~ ~ mdogenous heterc - tnmedc non - re0eptor G protein _ ( ~ tyro ~ ne kinue ragud ~ or ~ ®n ~ n ( c - Yes ) Hgure 12 . Diagrammatic representation of the known plasma membrane topology of identified components of the Triton - insoluble complex . The salient features and domain organization of a generic GPI - linked protein , caveolin , a hetero - trimeric G protein , c - Yes , and annexin II are illustrated where known . Note that an - nexin II is actually a hetero - tetramer containing two light and two heavy chains . Both GPI - linked proteins and c - Yes contain lipid modifications for membrane attachment . G - proteins are lipid modified with c ~ subunits containing NH2 - terminal myristoylation , and ~ subunits containing COOH - terminal sites for prenylation ( not to scale ) . Caveolae , Hetero - trimeric G Proteins , and Epithelial Protein Sorting Recent experimental observations indicate a new role for hetero - trimeric G proteins as regulators of the constitutive secretory pathway . Various hetero - trimeric G proteins have been localized to the TGN where their GTPase activity regu - lates vesicle budding and release ( Melancon , 1993 ) . In po - larized epithelial cells , G , is involved in directing apical vesicular traffic , while members of the Gi class are involved in basolateral transport ( Stow et al . , 1991 ; Bomsel and Mostov , 1992 ; Pimplikar and Simons , 1993 ) . In support of these observations , we report here that multiple hetero - trimeric G proteins ( both G , and Gi classes ) are enriched in caveolin - rieh insoluble complexes that form during the api - cal transport of GPI - linked proteins . Our results may also imply an association between caveolae and hetero - trimeric G proteins during signal transduetion . Evidence for the latter association stems from experiments with cholera toxin . The B subunit of cholera toxin binds to a ganglioside and caveolar component , GMt , at the apical surface of intestinal epithelial cells ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ) . As it enters cells via caveolae , its hydrophobic At subunit pierces the membrane and activates ( 3 , via ADP - ribosyl - ation . Activated apical G , must then be transported across the cell to the hasolateral membrane to reach and stimulate adenylate cyclase ( Dominguez et al . , 1987 ) . As caveolae have been long been implicated in transcytosis ( Severs , 1988 ) , transcellular transport of activated Gs could be mediated by caveolae . Caveolar localization of G , would be consistent with our observation that G , is enriched in caveolin - rieh insoluble complexes and the recent observation that caveolin and the / 3 - adrenergic receptor , a G , - coupled receptor , co - localize in caveolae ( Dupree et al . , 1993 ) . Simi - laxly , the B subunit ofpertussis toxin recognizes gangliosides at the apical surface of respiratory epithelium ( Sauldconen et al . , 1992 ) , and inactivates the Gi class of a subunits via ADP - ribosylation . Although the mechanism for pertussis toxin internalization is currently unknown , it is likely to oc - cur via caveolae as tetanus and cholera toxin both recognize gangliosides and are internalized by caveolae ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ) . In light of the above associations , we expect that many G protein coupled receptors will be found to signal through a regulated affiliation with caveolae . Interestingly , activation of G , by cholera toxin stimulates the tumorigenicity of RSV - transformed cells ( Gottesman et al . , 1984 ) . As caveolin was first identified as the major v - Src substrate in RSV - transformed cells ( Glenney , 1989 ) , cave , o - lin or v - Src could interact with activated G , to influence tumorigenicity . GPI Protein Sorting and NRPTKs The c - yes proto - oncogene encodes a 62 - kD N - myristoylated member of the Src family of NRPTKs ( Sudol , 1993 ) . Elevated levels of c - Yes protein are expressed in neural tis - sues , epithelia ( i . e . , kidney , intestine , liver , and lung ) and spermatids ( acrosomes ) ( Sudol and Hanafusa , 1986 ; Zhao et al . , 1990 ) - all polarized cells . In epithelia , c - Yes appears confined to the microvillus border of the apical plasma mem - brane ( Zhao et al . , 1990 ) . Based on this location , it has been suggested that c - Yes might be involved in regulating apical exocytic - endocytic trafficking events ( Sudol , 1990 ) . Our results are consistent with this hypothesis , and suggest that c - Yes may be involved in regulating the intracellular apical recognition of GPI - linked proteins . In addition , c - Yes is often found as a complex with a 38 - kD phosphoprotein ( Grandori et al . , 1991 ) . As the heavy chain of annexin II has a reported molecular mass of 36 - 39 kD , the 38 - kD c - Yes - associated protein could represent annexin II . This is consistent with our observation that annexin II and c - Yes are present in MDCK Triton - insoluble complexes . Caveolin is the major v - Src substrate in RSV - transformed chick embryo fibroblasts and its phosphorylation depends on the membrane association of v - Src via NH2 - terminal myristoylation ( Glenney , 1989 ; Glenney and Zokas , 1989 ) . However , whether caveolin is a substrate for endogenous NRFI ~ remains unknown . It contains five revolutionary conserved cytoplasmic tyrosine residues as potential sites for phosphorylation . Here we show that caveolin undergoes phosphorylation on tyrosine in vitro when present in Triton - insoluble complexes . Given that caveolin is a major v - Src substrate and c - Yes is an active NRPTK present in these com - plexes , we suggest that caveolin may represent an endoge - nous substrate for c - Yes . In addition to being a substrate for c - Yes , caveolin may play the role of an adaptor molecule that communicates extracellular signals from GPI - linked pro - teins to the c - Yes kinase . One of the best examples for such an interaction comes from studies of adaptor molecules , MB - 1 and B29 , that integrate signals from the IgM receptor to Lyn kinase in B cells ( Cambell et al . , 1991 ) . A similar adaptor molecule has been postulated to link CD36 receptor on platelets with Fyn , Lyn , and c - Yes kinases ( Huang et al . , 1991 ) . Future studies will determine whether c - Yes , caveo - lin , and a GPl - linked protein form a functional signal trans - duction complex at the apical surface of epithelia . The annexins represent a growing family of twelve distinct calcium - dependent phospholipid - binding proteins . Each an - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 804 nexin contains a unique NH2 - terminal region and four - to - eight repeated calcium - binding domains . The function of the annexins remains unknown , although different annexins have been shown to possess calcium channel activity , 1 , 2 cyclic inositol - 2 phosphohydrolase activity , are required for the budding of clathrin - coated vesicles , or have been suggested to represent exocytic fusion pores ( Creutz , 1992 ) . Annexin IT exists as a hetero - tetramer as a complex of two 39 - kD heavy chains and two 11 - kD light chains . Light chains bind to the unique NHz - terminal region of the heavy chain and this association is regulated by phosphorylation at sites present with the unique NH2 terminus . This heavy chain re - gion contains phosphorylation sites both for v - Src and pro - tein kinase C . Extensive evidence has been presented that implicates annexin II in the regulation of exocytic fusion events ( Ali et al . , 1989 ; Drust and Creutz , 1988 ; Nakata et al . , 1990 ) . Most studies have explored its association with the calcium - regulated secretion of chromaffin granules . In these studies , annexin IT is localized on the cytoplasmic face of chromaffin granules and beneath the plasma membrane at sites of exocytic fusion . However , in epithelial cells it is lo - cated on the cytoplasmic face of the apical cell surface ( Gerke and Weber , 1984 ) . Given this apical localization , it is interesting that in MDCK cells apical secretion can also be calcium - dependent ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Nelson , 1989 ) . Culture of MDCK cells in low - calcium medium prevents the formation of a mature apical surface as it is retained intracel - lularly as a post - Golgi compartment , termed vacuolar apical compartment ( VAC ) . VACS contain apical antigens ( includ - ing GPI - linked proteins Lisanti et al . , 1990a ) , but exclude basolateral antigens . Exocytosis of VACS occurs within minutes upon return to normal extracellular calcium levels . Rises in intracellular calcium levels are highest at the sites of VAC fusion with the plasma membrane ( Nigam et al . , 1992 ) . Thus , the association of annexin II with Triton - insoluble complexes reported here is consistent with its pro - posed role in exoeytic fusion and further suggests a role in the apical transport of GPI - linked proteins . In support of our observations , an early report demonstrated that annexin II co - fractionates with the GPI - linked protein , 5 ' nucleotidase , in a low - density membrane preparation ( Radke et al . , 1983 ) . However , these results preceded the identification of this pro - tein as a member of the annexin family and the discovery of the GPI anchoring mechanism . In light of the calcium - dependent membrane association of annexins , it is interesting to note that caveolae are thought to be involved in regulation of intracellular calcium stores and as such contain a Ca2÷ - ATPase ( Fujimoto , 1993 ) and a 230 - kD cell surface form of the IP3 receptor ( Fujimoto et al . , 1993 ) . Membrane Protein Sorting as a Form of lntraceUular Signal Transduction Like many cellular membrane compartments , Triton - insol - uble complexes can be visualized as containing three classes of protein components : solely exoplasmic / luminal ( GPI - linked proteins ) , transmembrane ( caveolin and other cell surface components ) , and solely cytoplasmic ( GTP - binding proteins , annexin II , c - Yes , and a serine - kinase activity ) . Given this membrane topology ( Fig . 12 ) , transmembrane protein components could be expected to recognize GPI - linked proteins ( caveolin or another cell surface molecule ) and transfer destination signals to the cytoplasm via their cy - toplasmic tails . These cytoplasmic tall ( s ) could then interact with signal transducing molecules ( GTP - binding proteins or cellular kinases ) , to transmit these destination signals to other proteins involved in vesicular budding , transport , or membrane fusion ( a , mexin 1I ) . This scheme superficially resembles a model for signal transduction , complete with ligand ( GPI ) , receptor ( caveolin and others ) , and cytoplas - mic signal transducing molecules ( G - proteins and cellular kinases / substrates ) . Similarly , others have recently proposed that sorting during membrane trafficking may represent a form of intracellular signal transduction ( Bomsel and Mostov , 1992 ) . Our working hypothesis for GPI sorting agrees with this " signal transduction model " of membrane trafficking . A prediction of this working hypothesis is that a cell surface molecule acts as a transmembrane adaptor molecule , simul - taneously recognizing GPI - anchored proteins and interacting with downstream cytoplasmic addressing molecules . We propose that caveolin could represent this transmembrane adaptor based on several experimental observations : ( a ) cav - eolin spans the membrane and exists as a type II transmem - brane protein ; ( b ) it is part of complex containing GPI - linked molecules and cytoplasmic signaling molecules ; ( c ) it under - goes phosphorylation in the absence of v - Src transformation ; ( d ) it localizes to the TGN - the site of segregation of apical from basolateral proteins ( Kurzchalia et al . , I992 ) ; and ( e ) epithelial cells that fail to express caveolin missort GPI - linked proteins and contain incomplete Triton - insoluble complexes . In conclusion , our findings clarify several seemingly un - related observations regarding GPI - linked proteins . Insolu - bility in non - ionic detergents , caveolar localization , associa - tion with NRPTKs , and apical sorting in epithelial cells , all appear to be different manifestations of the formation of a multi - subunit lipid - protein complex . Further studies will be necessary to elucidate the special relationship between the members of this putative GPI - sorting complex . We thank Harvey Lodish and Monty Krieger for patience , advice , and criti - cal reading of the manuscript , Steve Buratowsld and Lueille D . Fresco for their support , members of the Buratowski , Fink , Lodish , Matsudaira , and Young labs for thoughtful discussions , and Jane Bensel for artwork . We are indebted to a large number of people who generously donated their ex - pertise and reagents : Mark Chafel , Patrieia Reilly , and Ya - Huei Tu for ex - pert EM ; John Glermey for anti - caveolin antibodies ; Jolanta Vidugiriene and Anant K . Menon for performing organdie - specific marker assays ; Al - len Spiegel for antibodies to the , subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins ; Aris Moustakas for Rat - 1 cells ; Gerald Apodacca and Keith Mostov for the MDCK eDNA library ; Martin G . Low for PI - PLC ; and Chiara Zurzolo and Enrique Rodriguez - Boulan for FRT ceils . We also acknowledge Henry Bourne ( University of California , San Francisco ) , lkuo Nishimoto ( Mas - sachusetts General Hospital ) and Walter Silva ( U . Central de Caribe ) for advice on betero - tfimeric G proteins . The Whitehead Fellows program ( to M . P . Lisanti ) is supported by grants from the Lueflle P . Markey Foundation and the W . M . Keck Foun - dation to the Whitehead Institute . M . Sudol was supported by National In - stitutes of Health grants CA 45757 and CA 01605 from the NCI . This work is dedicated to two of my ( M . P . Lisanti ) scientific mentors , Drs . Saul Pusz - kin and Emique Rodriguez - Boulan , both of whom energized and focused my attention on the problem of membrane protein trafficking . Received for publication 30 March 1993 and in revised form 11 June 1993 . Note Added in Proof ' . The serine kinase activity we observe is unaffected by activators or inhibitors of protein kinase A , protein kinase C , or CaM - kinase , suggesting that this activity represents a kinase that is distinct from Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae fi ' om Cultured Cells 805 these classes of well - known protein kinases . In addition , we find that paxil - lin ( another v - Src substrate ) is associated with isolated caveolar membrane domains . References Akiyama , T . , J . Ishida , S . Nakagawa , H . Ogawara , S . Wantanabe , N . Itoh , M . Shibuya , and Y . Fukami . 1987 . Genistein , a specific inhibitor of tyrosine - specific protein kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 5592 - 5595 . Ali , S . M . , M . J . Geisow , and R . D . Burgoyne . 1989 . A role for calpactin in calcium - dependent exocytosis in adrenal chromaffin cells . Nature ( Land . ) . 340 : 313 - 315 . Anderson , R . G . W . , and R . U . Pathak . 1985 . Vesicles and cisternae in the trans - Golgi apparatus of human fibroblasts are acidic compartments . Cell . 40 : 635 - 643 . Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg , and S . W . Lacey . 1992 . Potocytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules by caveolae . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 255 : 410 - 411 . Berghe , N . , N . Nieuwkoop , A . Vaandrager , and H . R . de Jonge . 1991 . Asym - metrical distribution of G - proteins among the apical and basolateral mem - branes of rat enterocytes . Biochem . J . 278 : 565 - 571 . Bomsel , M . , and K . Mostov . 1992 . Role of beterotrimeric G proteins in mem - brane traffic . Mol . Biol . Cell . 3 : 1317 - 1328 . Boyle , W . J . , P . V . Greer , and T . Hunter . 1991 . Phosphopaptide mapping and phospboamino acid analysis by two - dimensional separation on thin - layer cel - inlose plates . Methods Enzymol . 201 : 110 - 149 . Brada , D . , and U . C . Dnhach . 1984 . Isolation of a homogeneous glucosidase II from pig kidney microsomes . Eur . J . Biochem . 141 : 149 - 156 . Brown , D . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell . 68 : 533 - 544 . Brown , D . A . , B . Crise , and J . K . Rose . 1989 . Mechanism of membrane an - chafing affects polarized expression of two proteins in MDCK cells . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 245 : 1499 - 1501 . Brugge , J . S . , and R . L . Erickson . 1977 . Identification of a transformation - specific antigen by an avian sarcoma virus . Nature ( Land . ) . 269 : 346 - 348 . Cambell , K . S . , E . J . Hager , R . J . Priedrich , and J . C . Cambier . 1991 . IgM antigen receptor complex contains pbosphoprotein products of B29 and mb - I genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 3982 - 3986 . Chamberlain , J . P . 1979 . Fluorographic detection of radioactivity in polyacryl - amide gels with the water - soluble flour , sodium salicylate . Anal . Biochem . 98 : 132 - 135 . Crentz , C . E . 1992 . The annexins and exocytosis . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 258 : 924 - 930 . Cross , G . A . M . 1990 . Glycolipid anchoring of plasma membrane proteins . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 1 - 39 . Dominguez , P . , G . Velasco , F . Barros , and P . S . Lazo . 1987 . Intestinal brush border membranes contain regulatory subunits of adenyl cyclase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 6965 - 6969 . Drust , D . S . , and C . E . Creutz . 1988 . Aggregation of chromaffin granules by calpactin at micromolar levels of calcium . Nature ( Land . ) . 331 : 88 - 91 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Caveolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 1597 - 1605 . Emans , N . , J . - P . Gorvel , C . Walter , V . Gerke , R . Kellner , G . Griffiths , and J . Groenberg . 1993 . Annexin II is a major component of fusogenic en - dosomal vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 1357 - 1369 . Ercolani , L . , J . L . Stow , J . Boyle , E . Holtzman , H . Lin , J . R . Grove , and D . A . Ausiello . 1990 . Membrane localization of the pertussis toxin sensitive G - protein subunits od - 2 and cd - 3 and expression of a metaliothionein - cd - 2 fusion gene in LLC - PKx cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 4635 - 4639 . Ferguson , M . A . J . 1991 . Lipid anchors on membrane proteins . Curr . Opin . Struc . Biol . 1 : 522 - 529 . Fujimoto , T . 1993 . Calcium pump of the plasma membrane is localized in cav - eolae . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 1147 - 1157 . Fujimoto , T . , S . Nakade , A . Miyawaki , K . Mikoshiba , and K . Ogawa . 1993 . Localization of inositol 1 , 4 , 5 , - triphosphate receptor - like protein in plas - malemmal caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1507 - 1513 . Garcia , M . , C . Mitre , A . Quaroni , H . Reggio , and A . LeBivic . 1993 . GPl - anchored proteins associate to form microdomalns during their intracellular transport in Caeo - 2 cells . J . Cell Sci . 104 : 1281 - 1290 . Gerke , V . , and K . Weber . 1984 . Identity of p36K phosphorylated upon RSV - transformation with a protein purified from brush borders ; calcium - depen - dent binding to non - erythroid spectrin and F - actin . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 3 : 227 - 233 . Gilbert , T . , A . Le Bivic , A . Quaroni , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1991 . Microtubular organization and its involvement in the biogenetic pathways of plasma membrane proteins in Caco - 2 intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 275 - 288 . Glermey , J . R . 1989 . Tyrosine phospborylation of a 22 kD protein is correlated with transformation with Rous sarcoma virus . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 20163 - 20166 . Glenney , J . R . 1990 . Microinjection of antibodies to the calpactin I light chain in MDBK cells causes precipitation of the cytoskeletal calpactin I complex without affecting the distribution of related proteins . Prog . Clin . Biol . Res . 349 : 135 - 146 . Glenney , J . R . 1992 . The sequence of human caveolin reveals identity with VIP 21 , a component of transport vesicles . FEBS ( Fed . Exp . Biol . Sac . ) Lett . 314 : 45 - 48 . Glanney , J . R . , and L . Znkas . 1989 . Novel tyrosine kinase substrates from Rous sarcoma virus transformed cells are present in the membrane cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2401 - 2408 . Gienney , J . R . , and D . Sapper . 1992 . Sequence and expression of caveolin , a protein component of caveolae plasma membrane domains phosphorylated on tyrosine in RSV - transformed fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 10517 - 10521 . Gottesman , M . , C . Roth , G . Vlahakis , and I . Pastan . 1984 . Cholera toxin treat - ment stimulates tumorigenicity of RSV - transformed cells . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 : 2639 - 2642 . Grandnri , C . , M . Sudol , and H . Hanafusa . 1991 . c - Yes protein kinase is as - sociated with a 38 kD protein in cerebellum . Oncogene . 6 : 1063 - 1066 . Hagrnenn , J . , and P . H . Fishman . 1982 . Detergent extraction of cholera toxin and gangliosides from cultured cells and isolated membranes . Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta . 720 : 181 - 187 . Hannah , L . A . , and M . P . Lisanti , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and M . Edidin . 1993 . Correctly - sorted molecules of a GPI - anchored protein are clustered and im - mobile when they arrive at the apical surface of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 353 - 358 . Hoessli , D . , and E . Rungger - Brandie . 1985 . Association of specific cell - surface glycoproteins with a Triton X - 100 - resistant complex of plasma membrane proteins isolated from T - lymphoma cells . Exp . Cell Res . 156 : 239 - 250 . Hooper , N . M . , and A . J . Turner . 1988 . Ectoenzymes of the kidney microvillar membrane : Differential soinbilization by detergents can predict a GPI mem - brane anchor . Biochem . J . 250 : 865 - 869 . Huang , M . - M . , J . B . Bolen , J . W . Barnwell , S . J . Shattil , and J . S . Brugge . 1991 . Membrane glycoprotein IV ( CD 36 ) is physically associated with the Fyn , Lyn and Yes protein - tyrosine kinases in human platelets . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 7844 - 7848 . Kurzchalia , T . , P . Dupree , R . G . Patton , R . Kellner , H . Virta , M . Lehnert , and K . Simons . 1992 . VIP 21 , A 21 - kD membrane protein is an integral component of trans - Golgi - network - derived transport vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1003 - 1014 . Le Bivic , A . , A . Quaroul , B . Nichols , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Bio - genetic pathways of piasma membrane proteins in Caco - 2 , a human intestinal epithelial cell line . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1351 - 1361 . Lisanti , M . P . , M . Sargiacomo , L . Graeve , A . R . Saltiel , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1988 . Polarized apical distribution of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins in a renal epithelial cell line . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 9557 - 9561 . Lisanti , M . P . , ! . W . Caras , M . A . Davitz , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1989 . A glycopbospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2145 - 2156 . Lisanti , M . P . , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Glycophospholipid membrane anchoring provides clues to the mechanism of protein sorting in polarized epithelial cells . Trends Biochem . Sci . 15 : 113 - 118 . Lisanti , M . P . , I . W . Caras , T . Gilbert , D . Hanzei , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990a . Vectorial apical delivery and slow eodocytosis of a glycolipid - anchored fusion protein in transfected MDCK cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 7419 - 7423 . Lisanti , M . P . , A . Le Bivic , A . R . Saltiel , and E . Rodrignez - Boulan . 1990b . Preferred apical distribution of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) an - cbored proteins : a highly conserved feature of the polarized epithelial cell phenotype . J . Membr . Biol . 113 : 155 - 167 . Lisanti , M . P . , I . W . Caras , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1991a . Fusion proteins containing a minimal GPI - attachment signal are apically expressed in trans - fected MDCK cells . J . Cell Sci . 99 : 637 - 640 . Lisanti , M . P . , M . C . Field , I . W . Caras , A . K . Menon , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1991b . Mannosamine , a novel inhibitor of glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol incorporation into proteins . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 10 : 1969 - 1977 . Lisanti , M . P . , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1992 . Polarized sorting of GPl - linked proteins in epithelia and membrane microdomains , p . 170 - 196 . In GPI Membrane Anchors . M . L . C . d . Almeidia , M . L . C . d . Almeidas , edi - tors . Academic Press , Ltd . , Orlando , FL . 170 - 196 . Low , M . G . 1989 . Glycosyl - phosphattdylinositol : A versatile anchor for cell surface proteins . FASEB ( Fed . Am . Sac . Exp . Biol . ) J . 3 : 1600 - 1608 . Low , A . , H . G . Faulhammer , and M . Sprinzl . 1992 . Affinity labeling of GTP - binding proteins in cellular extracts . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Sac . ) Lett . 303 : 64 - 68 . Luo , K . , T . R . Hurley , and B . M . Sefton . 1990 . Transfer of proteins to mem - branes facilitates both cyanogen bromide cleavage and two - dimensional pro - teolytic mapping . Oncogene . 5 : 921 - 923 . Melancon , P . 1993 . G whizz . Curr . Biol . 3 : 230 - 233 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Orei . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and teta - nus toxins . Nature ( Land . ) . 296 : 651 - 653 . Nakata , T . , K . Sobue , and N . Hirokawa . 1990 . Conforrnational change and lo - calization of calpactin I complex involved in exocytosis as revealed by quick - freeze , deep - etch electron microscopy and immunocytochemistry . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 13 - 25 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 122 , 1993 806 Nigam , S . K . , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and R . B . Silver . 1992 . Changes in intra - cellular calcium during the development of epithelial polarity and junctions . Proc , Natl . Acad . Sci , USA . 89 : 6162 - 6166 . Peter , M . E . , C . Hall , A . Ruhlmann , J . Sancho , and C . Terhorst . 1992 . The T cell receptor zeta chain contains a GTP binding site . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 11 : 933 - 941 . Peters , K . - R . , W . Carley , and G . E . Palade . 1985 . Endothelial plasmalemmal vesicles have a characteristic striped bipolar surface structure . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2233 - 2238 . Pimplikar , S . , and K . Simons . 1993 . Regulation of apical transport in epithelial cells by a G , class of heterotrimeric G protein . Nature florid . ) . 362 : 456 - 458 . Radke , K . , V . C . Carter , P . Moss , P . Dehazya , M . Schfiwa , and G . S . Martin . 1983 . Membrane association of a 36 , 000 - Dalton substrate for tyrosine phos - phorylation in chicken embryo fibroblasts transformed by avian sarcoma viruses . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 1601 - 1611 . Robinson , P . J . , M . Millrain , J . Antoniou , E . Simpson , and A . L . Mellor . 1989 . A glycophospholipid anchor is required for Qa - 2 - mediated T cell acti - vation . Nature ( Lond . ) . 342 : 85 - 87 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . 1983 . Polarized budding of viruses from epithelial cells . Methods Enzymol . 98 : 486 - 501 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , and W . J . Nelson . 1989 . Morphogunesis of the polar - ized epithelial cell phenotype . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 245 : 718 - 725 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , and S . K . Poweil . 1992 . Polarity of epithelial and neu - ronal ceils . Ann . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 : 395 - - 427 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveoiae mem - brane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Cho - lesterol controls the clustering of the glycopbospholipid - anchored membrane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofoiate . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2931 - 2938 . Sambrook , J . , E . Fritsch , and T . Maniatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Labo - ratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , New York . Sargiacomo , M . , M . P . Lisanti , L . Graeve , A . LeBivic , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1989 . Integral and peripheral protein composition of the apical and hasolateral membrane domains in MDCK cells . J . Membr . Biol . 107 : 277 - 286 . Saukkonen , K . , W . Burnette , V . Mar , H . Masure , and E . I . Tuomanen . 1992 . Pertussis toxin has eukaryotic - like carbohydrate recognition domains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 118 - 122 . Schell , M . J . , M . Manrice , B . Stieger , and A . L . Hubbard . 1992 . 5 ' Nucleo - tidase is sorted to the apical domain of hepatocytes via an indirect route . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1173 - 1182 . Severs , N . J . 1988 . Caveolae : static inpocketings of the plasma membrane , dy - namic vesicles or plain artifact . J . Cell Sci . 90 : 341 - 348 . Shenker , A . , P . Goldsmith , C . Unson , and A . M . Spiegel . 1991 . The G protein coupled to the thromboxane A2 receptor in human platelets is a member of the novel Gq family . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 9309 - 9313 . Shpetuer , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1992 . Dynamin is a GTPase stimulated to high levels of activity by mierotuhales . Nature ( Lond . ) . 355 : 733 - 735 . Simonescu , N . , M . Simonescu , and G . E . Palade . 1975 . Permeability of muscle capillaries to small heme - peptides : Evidence for the existence of patent trans - endothelial channels . J . Cell Biol . 64 : 586 - 607 . Simons , K . , and A . Wandinger - Ness . 1990 . Polarized sorting in epithelia . Cell . 62 : 207 - 210 . Stefanova , I . , V . Horejsi , I . J . Ansotegui , W . Knapp , and H . Stockinger . 1991 . GPI - anchored cell surface molecules complexed to protein tyrosine kinases . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 254 : 1016 - 1019 . Stow , J . L . , J . Bruno de Almeida , N . Narula , E . Holtzman , L . Ercolani , and D . A . Ausiello . 1991 . A heterotrimeric G protein , Gai - 3 , on Golgi mem - branes regulates the secretion of heparan sulfate proteoglycan in LLC - PK ~ epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 1113 - 1124 . Streuli , C . H . , B . Pate1 , and D . R . Critchley . 1981 . The cholera toxin receptor ganglioside GM1 remains associated with the Triton X - 100 cytoskeletons of BALB / c - 3T3 cells . Exp . Cell Res . 136 : 247 - 254 . Su , B . , G . L . Waneck , R . A . Flavell , and A . L . Bothwell . 1991 . The GPI - anchor is critical for Ly - 6A / E - mediated T cell activation . J . Cell Biol . 112 : 377 - 384 . Sudol , M , 1990 . Physiological functions of the yes proto - oncogene protein . Exp . Med . ( Tokyo ) . 8 : 94 - 100 . Sudol , M . 1993 . Non - receptor protein tyrosine kinases . In The molecular basis of human cancer . R . Kumar and B . A . Neel , editors . Futura Publishing Com - pany , Mount Kisco , NY . In press . Sudol , M . , and H . Hanafusa . 1986 . Cellular proteins homologous to the viral yes gene product . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 2839 - 2846 . Thomas , P . M . , and L . E . Samelson . 1992 . The GPl - anchored Thy - 1 molecule interacts with the p60 fyn protein tyrosine kinase in T cells . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 12317 - 12322 . Thompson , J . A . , A . L . Lau , and D . D . Cunningham . 1987 . Selective radio - labeling of cell surface proteins to a nigh specific activity . Biochemistry . 26 : 743 - 750 . Vidugiriene , J . , and A . K . Menon . 1993 . Early lipid intermediates in GPI an - chor assembly are synthesized in the ER and located in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the ER membrane bilayer . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 987 - 996 . Wandlnger - Ness , A . , M . K . Bennett , C . Antony , and K . Simons . 1990 . Dis - tinct transport vesicles mediate the delivery of plasma membrane proteins to the apical and basolateral domains of MDCK cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 987 - 1000 . Yu , J . , D . A . Fishman , and T . L . Stock . 1973 . Selective solubilization of pro - teins and phospholipids from red blood cell membranes by non - ionic deter - gents . J . Supramol . Struc . 3 : 233 - 248 . Zachary , I . , J . Sinnett - Smith , and E . Rozengurt . 1991 . Stimulation of tyrosine kinase activity in anti - phosphotyrosine immune complexes of Swiss 3T3 cell lysates occurs rapidly after addition of bombesin , vasopressin and endothelin to intact cells . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 24126 - 24133 . Zhao , Y . - H . , J . G . Krueger , and M . Sudol . 1990 . Expression of cellular - yes protein in mammalian tissues . Oncogene . 5 : 1629 - 1635 . ZurzoIo , C . , M . P . Lisanti , I . W . Caras , L . Nitsch , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1993a . GPI - anehored proteins are preferentially targeted to the hasolateral surface in Fischer rat thyroid epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1031 - 1039 . Zurzolo , C . , W . Van ' t Hof , M . P . Lisatui , I . W . Caras , G . van Meer , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1993b . GPl - anchored proteins and sphingolipids are preferentially targeted to the basolateral membrane in a polarized thyroid ep - ithelial cell line . J . Cellular Biochem . 17C ( Suppl . ) : 24 . Sargiacomo et al . Isolation of Caveolae from Cultured Cells 807