AMASTIGOTES OF TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI SUSTAIN AN INFECTIVE CYCLE IN MAMMALIAN CELLS BY VICTORIA LEY , * NORMA W . ANDREWS , * EDITH S . ROBBINS , I AND VICTOR NUSSENZWEIG * From The Departments of * Pathology and * Cell Biology , New York University Medical Center , New York , New York 10016 Trypanosoma cruzi , the causative agent of Chagas ' disease which affects a large number of individuals in Central and South America , is transmitted to vertebrate hosts by blood - sucking insects . The infective forms of the parasite are the metacyclic trypomastigotes released with the feces ofthe insect . After invading the mammalian host , they penetrate cells , multiply as amastigotes , and transform again into trypomastigotes , which in turn are released into the bloodstream . The majority of acute human cases ofChagas ' disease resolve in a few months but many individuals develop chronic manifestations of a systemic disease . Paradoxically , these individ - uals have very few parasites in circulation or in their tissues , but have severe heart and digestive tract lesions . It is generally assumed that the chronic infection is main - tained by a few tryposmastigotes in the blood that escape the immune response and enter new cells , and that amastigotes are exclusively the replicative intracellular stage of the parasite ( 1 , 2 ) . Here we demonstrate that amastigotes of T . cruzi enter and multiply in cells in vitro and , when injected intraperitoneally , are as infective to mice as trypomastigotes . Volume 168 August 1988 649 - 659 Materials and Methods Parasites . (cid:9) Strain Y of T . cruzi was maintained in monolayers of LLC - MK2 cells in DME containing 2olo FCS medium ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ) at 37 ' C in a 5 % C02 atmosphere ( 3 ) . To obtain recently released trypomastigotes , LLC - MK2 cells were infected with parasites and 4 or 5 d later , were washed to remove free parasites , and were reincubated in fresh medium . Trypomastigotes were collected 4 h later . In vitro extracellularly developed amastigotes were obtained by incubation of recently released trypomastigotes in liver infusion tryptose medium ( LIT ) ' ( 4 ) for 24 , 48 , or 72 h at 37°C in a 5olo C02 atmosphere at a density of 10 ' parasites / ml . LIT medium was pre - pared by heating at 68 ' C for 1 h a solution containing 68 mM NaCl , 5 . 4 mM KCI , 56 mM Na2HPO4 , 11 MM D - glucose , 3 g / liter of liver infusion ( Difco Laboratories Inc . , Detroit , MI ) and 5 g / liter of Bacto Tryptose phosphate broth ( Difco Laboratories , Inc . ) . After cooling , the pH of the medium was adjusted to 7 . 2 and 2 % hemoglobin from SRBC ( Colorado Serum Co . , Denver , CO ) was added . The LIT medium was sterilized by filtration and stored at 40C . The parasites were sedimented by centrifugation ( 1 , 000 g for 5 min ) and further purification This work was supported by the MacArthur Foundation and by the United Nations Development Pro - gram / World BankfWorld Health Organization Special Programme for Research and Training in Trop - ical Diseases . V . Ley is the recipient of a fellowship from the Juan March Foundation . ' Abbreviation used in this paper : LIT , liver infusion tryptose medium . J . Exp . MED . © The Rockefeller University Press - 0022 - 1007 / 88 / 08 / 0649 / 11 $ 2 . 00 (cid:9) 649 6 ) 50 (cid:9) TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI INFECTIVITY OF AMASTIGOTES was achieved by allowing contaminating motile trypomastigotes to accumulate in the super - natant during a subsequent incubation at 370C for 2 h . These trypomastigotes were discarded . The amastigotes developed in LIT medium will be referred to as extracellularly derived amastigotes , and the number of hours of in vitro cultivation will be given in parentheses . Entry into Cells and Determination ofMultiplication Rates . (cid:9) PBMC were isolated from venous blood of a normal human donor by centrifugation in a Ficoll - Hypaque gradient ( Pharmacia Fine Chemicals , Piscataway , NJ ) . Monocytes were further purified by the removal of cells that did not adhere to the bottom of plastic plates ( 24 - well , Falcon Laboratories , Oxnard , CA ) . As seen by transmission electron microscopy , the resulting culture consisted overwhelm - ingly ofmonocytes , with a few contaminating lymphocytes ( not shown ) . The monocytes were then cultured in RPMI 1640 ( Gibco Laboratories ) containing 10 % fresh human serum , pen - icillin and streptomycin ( Gibco Laboratories ) . 6 d later the cultures , each containing tit x 105 cells , were exposed to a suspension of 105 parasites ( amastigotes or trypomastigotes ) per well . After 4 h of incubation ( time zero ) the medium was aspirated , and the wells were care - fully washed with RPMI 1640 to remove free organisms . 3T3 fibroblast cells were irradiated with 4 , 500 rad and plated onto 24 - well plates ( 1 - 5 x 105 cells / well ) . Cells were incubated at 37°C in DME , 10 % FCS for 24 h before adding the parasites . During infections , amastigotes were left in contact with the 3T3 cells for 14 h , then the cultures were washed and incubated with fresh medium at 37°C in a 5 % C02 at - mosphere from 1 to 6 d . To permit intracellular development of the parasites , the washed cells were then incubated for varying periods of time in RPMI 1640 , 10°lo fresh human serum at 37°C in a 5 % C02 atmosphere . At different time points the cells were scraped off the wells and the whole con - tents ( cells + medium ) were centrifuged and processed for parasite DNA determinations . Pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer : 10 mM Tris - HCI , pH 7 . 4 , 10 mM EDTA , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 4 % SDS , containing 200 wg / ml of proteinase K ( Bethesda Research Laboratories , Bethesda , MD ) . After incubation for 1 h at 65 ' C and 3 h at 37 °C , lysates were extracted with phenol / chloroform and the DNA was blotted onto nitrocellulose discs . A T . cruzi - specific DNA probe ( 5 ) was labeled by the random priming method ( 1 - 4 x 109 dpm / kg ) ( 6 ) and hy - bridized for 20 h at 42°C in 50 % formamide , 5 x SSC ( 1 x SSC : 0 . 15 M NaCl , 0 . 015 M sodium citrate ) , 0 . 5 % SDS , and 0 . 2 % cow ' s milk . Filters were washed twice in 2 x SSC , 0 . 5 % SDS at room temperature , then in 0 . 5 x SSC , 0 . 5 % SDS at 68°C , and finally in 0 . 2 x SSC , 0 . 5 % SDS at 68°C . They were then air dried and counted in a scintillation counter . The amount of T . cruzi DNA was calculated from a standard curve made with known amounts of parasites . Standard curves obtained with equal numbers oftrypomastigotes and amastigotes were identical . To determine the proportion of infective parasites in different preparations , the medium and washes were combined , centrifuged and processed for T . cruzi DNA as described above . Percent infectivity was calculated by measuring the number of parasites associated ( A ) and not associated ( B ) with the cells by the formula : ( AIA + B ) x 100 . In the experiment repre - sented in Fig . 3 , 95 % of extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes , 35 % of intracellularly derived amastigotes , and 35 % of trypomastigotes became associated with the monocytes . Intracellularly Derived Amastigotes . (cid:9) Monocyte monolayers were first infected with extracel - lularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes . After45 h , the cells contained only replicating amastigotes bearing Ssp - 4 , a major stage - specific glycoprotein ( 3 , 7 ) . The cultured monocytes were scraped off the plastic culture plates and mechanically disrupted by passing them through a 25 - gauge needle . The parasites were separated from the debris by low - speed centrifugation . Scanning Electron Microscopy . (cid:9) Drops of 10 kl ( 10 ' parasites / ml in PBS ) were placed on 12 - mm round glass coverslips precoated with 10 ug / ml poly - L - lysine ( Miles - Yeda , Rehouet Is - rael ) . After 15 min at VC , the supernatant was aspirated and parasites were fixed with cold 2 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 1 M sucrose in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 . The coverslips were kept at 4 ' C in fixative until processed for scanning electron microscopy , at which time they were rinsed in buffer and processed as described ( 3 ) . Transmission Electron Microscopy . (cid:9) The parasites of the infected cells were pelleted and fixed for 2 h at 4°C with 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 0 . 1 M sucrose . After three 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer rinses the pellets were osmicated in 2 % OS04 LEY ET AL . (cid:9) 651 in the same buffer , dehydrated in ethyl alcohol , and embedded in Epon 812 . Thin sections were picked up on formvar - coated , carbon - stabilized grids , stained with 1 % aqueous uranyl acetate and 2 % lead citrate , and examined in a Philips 300 transmission electron microscope . Escapefrom Endocytic Vacuoles . (cid:9) Human monocytes were cultured as described for 6 d . The cells were exposed for 1 h to a suspension of extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes at ratios of 50 parasites per cell at 37°C in a 5 % C02 atmosphere . Cultures were washed with RPMI to remove free organisms and reincubated for 1 h , 3 h , or 16 h . Then the infected cells were fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde , 0 . 1 M sucrose in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , scraped off the plastic , and processed for transmission electron microscopy as described . Infection ofMice with T . cruzi Parasites . (cid:9) Groups of four BALB / e female mice ( 8 - 12 wk old ) were injected intraperitoneally with 104 , 10 3 , or 102 extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes or with the same number of trypomastigotes . Mice were bled from the tail every day after infection and motile trypomastigotes were counted under the microscope . Results In the initial experiments we compared the infectivity in vitro for cultured human monocytes of tissue culture - derived Y strain trypomastigotes and of extracellularly derived amastigotes . In the preparations ofpurified trypomastigotes and amastigotes used , the cross - contamination was < 1 % , as determined by scanning electron mi - croscopy ( Fig . 1 ) . The extracellularly derived resembled the intracellularly derived amastigotes by scanning ( Fig . 1 , reference 3 ) and transmission electron microscopy ( Fig . 2 ) . To measure the infectivity and the multiplication rates ofthe parasites inside cells , we used a DNA probe specific for T . cruzi ( 5 ) . In several experiments , 85 to 95 % of extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes , but only 10 to 35 , 70 oftrypornastigotes , remained associated with the monocytes after four hours ofincubation ( Fig . 3 ) . Iden - tical results were obtained whether the culture medium contained fresh or heat - inactivated ( 56°C , 1 h ) human serum , suggesting that complement factors are not involved . Following invasion , both amastigotes and trypomastigotes replicated as amastigotes with doubling times of about 10 hours . Trypomastigotes showed a prolonged lag between invasion and the start of DNA duplication , in contrast to amastigotes which commenced replication immediately ( Fig . 3 ) . Trypomastigotes exiting from infected cells were detected in all culture media after 4 to 5 d . The very high infectivity of the extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes was fur - ther demonstrated by limiting dilution experiments . Monocyte monolayers were pre - pared in flat - bottomed 96 - well plates ( Falcon Labware ) . The amastigotes were sus - pended in RPMI 1640 medium at a concentration of 10 parasites / ml , and 200 Itl was delivered to each well . The cultures were incubated for 5 d at 37°C and the wells were examined under the microscope for the presence of free trypomastigotes . These were found in 8517o ofthe wells . This is very close to the expected result ( 86 . 5 % ) , calculated from the Poisson distribution and assuming 100 % infectivity . Taken to - gether , these experiments eliminate the possibility that contamination of amastigotes with trypomastigotes accounted for the infection . The ability of amastigotes to attach to monocytes in vitro did not diminish when they were kept in culture for an additional 48 h . 90 % of such extracellularly derived ( 72 h ) amastigotes became associated with the monocytes after 4 h of incubation , as determined with the DNA probe . After infection , the replication times of the " older " and " younger " amastigotes within the monocyte cytoplasm were the same , that is , 10 h ( not shown ) . However , the number of parasites in the monocyte cultures at the 652 (cid:9) TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI : INFECTIVITY OF AMASTIGOTES FIGURE 1 . Scanning electron micrographs of T . cruzi parasites used for infections : ( A ) trypomastigotes , ( B ) extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes . Bars , 10 gm . end of 5 d was only 50 % of that observed after infection of the cells with identical quantities of extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes . It is possible that halfof the attached " older " parasites did not enter the monocytes or , more likely , that half of these parasites did not survive intracellularly . Onedifference between " younger " and " older " extracellularly derived parasites is the smaller amounts of the stage - specific glycoprotein Ssp - 4 ( 7 ) in the latter , but whether this is the cause of the diminished infectivity is unknown . LEY ET AL . (cid:9) 653 0 F V . O . U Gl qy a 0 C x F 0eo ro x wcv U . l ~ y U ' i . . . A + V m . G Fwv _ y v 0y q V O V V U O C . M O - z : l N F F . ca . ro U O W 0 . 654 (cid:9) TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI - INFECTIVITY OF AMASTIGOTES 1 , 000 100 00 a 0 10 Ez 1 L I (cid:9) i (cid:9) i (cid:9) i (cid:9) i 0 20 40 60 80 Hours After Infection " sin Trypomecligoln lokagllukrAmaeligoro ~ FIGURE 3 . (cid:9) Infectivity andkinetics ofmultiplication of T . cruzi para - sites in human monocytes . Values represent the mean amount of parasite DNAin four wells , andbars the standard deviations . Time zero is the time when the free parasites were removed , that is , after 4 h of incubation with the monocytes . Because it couldbe argued that intracellularly and extracellularly derivedamastigotes are different , we repeated the same experiments with a preparation of intracellularly derived amastigotes . These were suspended in medium and incubated with human monocyte monolayers for 4 h . 30 % ofthem entered the cells and started to replicate without a lag ( Fig . 3 ) , with a doubling time of 10 h . After 4 - 5 d trypomastigotes were found in the culture medium . FIGURE 4 . (cid:9) Human monocytes infected with extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes 1 hafter the entry of the parasites , as seen by transmission electron microscopy . Some amastigotes are in phagocytic vacuoles and some are free in the cytoplasm ( arrows ) . Lysosomes can be seen fused with the membrane of vacuoles containing parasites . Bar , 1 gym . 6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 r irk . Amast Po m e ~ s i03 In1M , per 102 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Time After Infection ( Days ) LEY ET AL . (cid:9) 65 5 FIGURE 5 . (cid:9) Parasitemia in infected mice . Groups offour mice were injected intraperitoneally with 104 , 10 3 , or 102 amasti - gotes ( top panel ) or trypomastigotes ( bottom pano . Parasitemia represents the mean number of motile trypomastigotes per microliter ofblood in four animals , and bars the standard devi - ations . All mice died between 18 and 25 d after infection . Amastigotes also infected nonprofessional phagocytic cells in vitro , albeit with a much lower efficiency . After 14 h of incubation , 2070 of extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes entered 3T3 fibroblasts and these parasites replicated with a dou - bling time of - 12 h ( not shown ) . The ability of theamastigotes to rapidly escape thephagocytic vacuoles was demon - strated by transmission electron microscopy . After 2 h ofincubation with monocytes ( 1 h in the presence of parasites and one additional hour after the removal of those parasites free in the medium ) a few extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes were seen free in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 4 ) while most remained within the vacuoles . The number of free amastigotes increased with the time of incubation , and after 16 h , almost all of them were out of the vacuoles ( not shown ) . Lysosomes fusing with the membranes of vacuoles containing parasites were frequently observed . In many in - stances thevacuoles contained an opaque material , most likely representing lysosomal products ( Fig . 4 ) . To study the in vivo infectivity of the extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes , we inoculated groups of five A / J mice intraperitoneally with either 102 , 103 , or 104 ofthem . Control animals were inoculated with the same number of tissue culture - de - rived trypomastigotes recently released from LLC - MK2 cells . All mice were infected and died 18 - 25 d afterwards , following two peaks of trypomastigote parasitemia on days 7 and 12 ( Fig . 5 ) . Significantly higher numbers of parasites were observed during the second peak of parasitemia in mice inoculated with amastigotes . Discussion We showed here that both extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes and intracel - lularly derived amastigotes of T . cruzi entered human monocytes in vitro , divided with identical replication times ( 10 h ) , and developed into trypomastigotes . The ex - tracellularly derivedamastigotes were identical to theintracellularly derivedamastigotes by several different criteria , that is , the morphology of the bar in their kinetoplasts as shown by transmission electron microscopy ( Figs . 2 and 4 ) , their morphology by scanning electron microscopy ( Fig . 1 ) , and thepresence of an amastigote - specific surface glycoprotein ( Ssp - 4 ) on their cell membranes ( 7 ) . Ssp - 4 expression is maximal 656 (cid:9) TRYPANOSOMA CRUZL INFECTIVITY OF AMASTIGOTES in " young " amastigotes and is progressively shed during their development either intra - or extracellularly ( 7 ) . Greater than 90 % of the extracellularly derived , but only 30 % of the intracellu - larly derived amastigotes were infective for monocytes . Possible reasons for the lower infectivity of the intracellularly derived amastigotes are that they were isolated from cells by a relatively harsh procedure , and were contaminated by cellular materials , which could have affected the viability of the parasites . Extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes also entered anddeveloped within fibro - blasts , cells which are not professional phagocytes . Although their infectivity was in this instance much lower , once they entered the cells the kinetics of intracellular multiplication and transformation into trypomastigotes was similar to that observed during their development in human cultured monocytes . The development patterns of extracellularly derived or intracellularly derived amastigotes within monocytes were similar . Their replication times were identical ( 10 h ) , and there was no apparent lag period before the start of DNA replication , contrasting with the ti20 - h lag seen when trypomastigotes invaded the same cells ( Fig . 3 ) . This lag was also reported by Dvorak and collaborators ( 8 , 9 ) and , at least in part , it must represent the time necessary for the transformation oftrypomastigotes into amastigotes . However , the cellular site where this transformation takes place is unknown . T , cruzi develops in the cytoplasm of host cells ( 10 - 12 ) and the parasite must destroy the membrane of the phagocytic vacuole to escape . As shown here , extracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes have this ability , since they are found in the cytoplasm a few hours after entering cells . Perhaps the induction of the mem - branolytic agents , such as , for example , phospholipases , is stage specific and trypomastigotes first have to transform into amastigotes inside the vacuole before they can escape and start to replicate . Thedevelopmental potential of amastigotes has been amatter ofcontroversy . Vil - lalta and Kierszenbaum ( 13 ) reported that amastigotes from continuous acellular cultures ( in contrast to our recently transformed amastigotes ) were destroyed in the phagocytic vacuoles of cultured human monocytes . Carvalho et al . ( 14 ) and Gut - teridge et al . ( 15 ) showed that amastigotes isolated from the spleen or muscle of mice were not infective to mouse peritoneal macrophages or infective when injected into animals . Umezawa et al . ( 16 ) reported that amastigotes entered mousemacrophages in vitro but did not differentiate into trypomastigotes . There are twopossible expla - nations for thesenegative results . The survival of amastigotes in macrophages prob - ably depends on the degree of activation of the phagocytes ( 17 , 18 ) , and / or the amastigotes used by these investigators might not have been viable intracellularly because they had developed too long in vitro or in vivo . As shown here , only " young " amastigotes are fully infective . Other studies using amastigotes purified from different sources showed that they entered and developed in cells in vitro and in infected mice ( 11 , 19 - 25 ) . However , parasite development in vitro was estimated only by light microscopy , and the propor - tion of infective parasites in the population or their rates of multiplication were not evaluated . Our findings settle the controversy as to whether or not amastigotes themselves can infect mammalian cells , since they showed directly by two independent ex - perimental approaches that 90 % or more ofextracellularly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes LEY ET AL . (cid:9) 657 infected monocytes . Furthermore , these amastigotes were as infective to mice as trypomastigotes were ; the prepatent periods and the number of trypomastigotes in the blood during the first peak of parasitemia were quitesimilar . In fact , the number of trypomastigotes in the blood during the second peak ofparasitemia was significantly higher in mice inoculated with amastigotes . This difference can be explained if , in theanimals infected with trypomastigotes , theimmune response to trypomastigote - specific antigens ( 3 , 26 , 27 ) developed earlier than in mice infected with amastigotes . This is likely because the immune system of the latter animals came in contact with trypomastigotes only after the first intracellular replication cycle . These emerging trypomastigotes would then be less likely to be destroyed by immune mechanisms and the parasitemias would reach higher levels than in mice initially infected with trypomastigotes . On the basis ofthese observations , the possibility of an alternative developmental cycle for T . cruzi within the mammalian host with the participation of infective amastigotes , should be entertained . In vivo , the infective amastigotes could emerge from cells containing either amastigotes or mixtures oftrypomastigotes and amastigotes or , alternatively , originate from the extracellular transformation of trypomastigotes into amastigotes . Blood stage trypomastigotes can transform into amastigotes whether or not they enter cells ( 3 ) and , during the acute stage of the infection , amastigotes and intermediate forms have been found in largenumbers in the circulation ofmice ( 3 ) and also in the extracellular space between heart muscle cells ( 23 ) . Extracellular amastigotes may also be present during the chronic stage of Chagas ' disease . How - ever , at this stage parasites in the blood arevery scarce andthe nonmotile amastigotes would be virtually impossible to detect by light microscopy . Amastigotes are also found in the intermediate host , but little is know about their developmental poten - tial ( 2 ) . The present observations areof relevance to the biology , immunoprophylaxis , and pathology of T . cruzi infections in humans . Since host cells can be invaded by both trypomastigotes and amastigotes , which bear distinct surface antigens , different stages of T . cruzi most likely are able to use different mechanisms for attachment andpenetra - tion into cells . This represents an important survival advantage and could in part explain the remarkably wide range of definitive hosts of this parasite , which infects over 100 mammalian species from several orders , and develops in vivo in macro - phages , as well as in muscle , epithelial , and nervous tissue cells ( 1 , 2 ) . The realiza - tion that different T . cruzi stages may use different strategies for entering cells of the vertebrate host complicates the development of vaccines , and also raises ques - tions regarding the relative importance of the two infective stages in perpetuating the infection leading to the chronic phase of Chagas ' disease . Summary The two main stages of development of the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi found in the vertebrate host are the trypomastigote and the amastigote . It has been generally assumed that only trypomastigotes are capable of entering cells and that amastigotes are the intracellular replicative form of the parasite . We show here that after incubation for 4 h with human monocytes in vitro 90 % or more of extracellu - larly derived ( 24 h ) amastigotes of T . cruzi are taken up by the cells . Within 2 h they escape the phagocytic vacuole and enter the cytoplasm , where they divide and 658 (cid:9) TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI : : INFECTIVITY OF AMASTIGOTES after 4 - 5 d transform into trypomastigotes . Trypomastigotes also invade cultured human monocytes . However , they show a lag of several hours between invasion and the start of DNA duplication , while amastigotes commence replication without an apparent lag . Amastigotes also infect cultured fibroblasts , albeit with lower efficiency . When injected intraperitoneally into mice , amastigotes are as infective as trypomasti - gotes . Based on these results , and on prior findings that amastigotes are found free in the circulation of mice during the acute stage of the disease ( 3 ) , it seems likely that the cellular uptake of amastigotes can initiate an alternative subcycle within the life cycle of this parasite in the mammalian host . Also , because trypomastigotes and amastigotes have diverse surface antigens , they may use different strategies to invade host cells . We thank Dr . Antonio Gonzalez for providing us with the T . cruzi DNA probe ; M . Einstein , J . Culkin , B . Zeitlow , and V . Meyer for technical assistance ; and R . Rose for preparation of the manuscript . Receivedfor publication 3 March 1988 and in revisedform 18 April 1988 . References 1 . Brener , Z . 1973 . Biology of Trypanosoma cruzi . Annu . Rev . Microbial . 27 : 347 . 2 . Souza , W . 1984 . Cell biology of Trypanosoma cruzi . Int . Rev . Cytol . 86 : 197 . 3 . Andrews , N . W . , K . S . Hong , E . S . Robbins , and V . Nussenzweig . 1987 . Stage - specific surface antigens expressed during the morphogenesis of vertebrate forms of Trypanosoma cruzi . Exp . Parasitol . 64 : 474 . 4 . Castellani , O . , L . V . Ribeiro , and J . F . Fernandes . 1967 . Differentiation of Trypanosoma cruzi in culture . J Protozool . 14 : 447 . 5 . Gonzalez , A . , E . Prediger , M . E . Huecas , N . Nogueira , and P . Lizardi . 1984 . Minichromosomal repetitive DNA in Trypanosoma cruzi : its use in a high - sensitivity para - site detection assay . Proc . Natl . Acad Sci . USA . 81 : 3356 . 6 . Feinberg , A . P . , and B . Volgestein . 1983 . A technique for radiolabeling DNA restriction endonuclease fragments to high specific activity . Anal . Biochem . 132 : 6 . 7 . Andrews , N . W . , E . S . Robbins , V . Ley , K . S . Hong , and V . Nussenzweig . 1988 . De - velopmentally regulated , phospholipase C - mediated release of the major surface glyco - protein of amastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi . J . Exp . Med . 167 : 300 . 8 . Dvorak , J . A . , and T P . Hyde . 1973 . Trypanosoma cruzi : interaction with vertebrate cells in vitro . I . Individual host cell - parasite interactions at the cellular and subcellular level . Exp . Parasitol . 34 : 268 . 9 . Crane , M . S . , andJ . A . Dvorak . 1979 . Trypanosoma cruzi : interaction with vertebrate cells . DNA synthesis and growth of intracellular amastigotes and their relationship to host cell DNA synthesis and growth . J . Protozool . 26 : 599 . 10 . Kress , Y . , B . R . Bloom , M . Winner , A . Rowen , and H . Tanowitz . 1975 . Resistance of Trypansoma cruzi to killing by macrophages . Nature ( Land . ) . 257 : 394 . 11 . Nogueira , N . , and Z . Cohn . 1976 . Trypanosoma cruzi : mechanisms of entry and intracel - lular fate in mammalian cells . J . Exp . Med . 143 : 1402 . 12 . Milder , R . V . , and J . Kloetzel . 1980 . The development of Trypanosoma cruzi in macro - phages in vitro . Interaction with lysosomes and host cell fate . Parasitology . 80 : 139 . 13 . Villalta , V . , and F . Kierszenbaum . 1984 . Role of inflammatory cells in Chagas ' disease . II . Interactions of mouse macrophages and human monocytes with intracellular forms of Trypanosoma cruzi : uptake and mechanism of destruction . J . Immunol . 133 : 3338 . LEY ET AL . (cid:9) 659 14 . Carvalho , R . M . G . , M . N . L . Meirelles , W . de Souza , and W Leon . 1981 . Isolation of the intracellular stage of Trypanosoma cruzi . Its interaction with mouse macrophages in vitro . Infect . Immun . 33 : 546 . 15 . Gutteridge , W E . , B . Cover , and M . Gaborak . 1978 . Isolation ofblood and intracellular forms of Trypanosoma cruzi from rats and other rodents and preliminary studies on their metabolism . Parasitology . 76 : 159 . 16 . Umezawa , E . S . , R . V . Milder , and A . Abrahamson . 1985 . Trypanosoma cruzi amastigotes : development in vitro and infectivity in vivo of the forms isolated from spleen and liver . Acta Trop . 42 : 25 . 17 . Nogueira , N . , S . Gordon , and Z . Cohn . 1977 . Trypanosoma cruzi : modification of macro - phage function during infection . J Exp . Med . 146 : 157 . 18 . Nogueira , N . , and Z . Cohn . 1978 . Trypanosoma cruzi : in vitro induction of macrophage microbicidal activity . J Exp . Med . 148 : 288 . 19 . Behebehani , K . 1973 . Developmental cycles of Trypanosoma cruzi ( Chagas , 1909 ) in mouse peritoneal macrophages in vitro . Parasitology . 66 : 343 . 20 . Pan , S . C . 1978 . Trypanosoma cruzi : in vitro interactions between cultured amastigotes and human skin and muscle cells . Exp . Parasitol . 45 : 274 . 21 . Segura , E . L . , E . Subias , M . Esteva , P C . Meckert , A . Bronzina , and R . P . Laguens . 1980 . Caracteristicas de infectividad de tres poblaciones de cultivo de Trypanosoma cruzi . Medicina ( B . Aires ) . 40 : 97 . 22 . Abrahamson , I . A . , A . M . Katzin , and R . V . Milder . 1983 . A method for isolating Trypano - soma cruzi amastigotes from spleen and liver using two - step discontinuous gradient cen - trifugation . J Parasitol . 69 : 437 . 23 . Hudson , L . , D . Snary , andS . J . Morgan . 1984 . Trypanosoma cruzi : continuous cultivation with murine cell lines . Parasitology . 88 : 283 . 24 . McCabe , R . E . , J . S . Remington , and E G . Araujo . 1984 . Mechanisms of invasion and replication of the intracellular stage in Trypanosoma cruzi . Infect . Immun . 46 : 372 . 25 . Carvalho , T . U . , and W . de Souza . 1986 . Infectivity of amastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi . Rev . Inst . Med . Trop . Sao Paulo . 28 : 205 . 26 . Andrews , N . W . , A . M . Katzin , and W . Colli . 1984 . Mapping of surface glycoproteins of Trypanosoma cruzi by two - dimensional electrophoresis : a correlation with the cell inva - sion capacity . Eur . J Biochem . 140 : 599 . 27 . Lanar , D . E . , andJ . E . Manning . 1984 . Major surface proteins and antigens on the different in vivo and in vitro forms of Trypanosoma cruzi . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 11 : 119 .