Cognition , 23 ( 1986 ) 183 - 209 Categories and induction in young children SUSAN A . GELMAN University of Michigan ELLEN M . MARKMAN Stanford University Abstract One of the primary functions of natural kind terms ( e . g . , tiger , gold ) is to support inductive inferences . People expect members of such categories to share important , unforeseen properties , such as internal organs and genetic structure . Moreover , inductions can be made without perceptual support : even when an object does not look much like other members of its category , and even when a property is unobservable . The present work addresses how expec - tations about natural kinds originate . Young children , with their usual reliance on perceptual appearances and only rudimentary scientific knowledge , might not induce new information within natural kind categories . To test this possibi - lity , category membership was pitted against perceptual similarity in an induc - tion task . For example , children had to decide whether a shark is more likely to breathe as a tropical fish does because both are fish , or as a dolphin does because they look alike . By at least age 4 , children can use categories to support inductive inferences even when category membership conflicts with appear - ances . Moreover , these young children have partially separated out properties that support induction within a category ( e . g . , means of breathing ) from those that are in fact determined by perceptual appearances ( such as weight ) . Since * This research was supported in part by NSF Grant BNS - 8300048 to E . Markman , a National Science Foundation predoctoral fellowship to S . Gelman , and a Sloan Cognitive Science grant to Stanford . This paper was partially prepared while Markman was at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences and was supported by NSF Grant BNS - 8206304 and the Spencer Foundation . We would like to thank Irene Miura , Anne Watson O’Reilly , Karen Ravn , and Andrew Renouf for their help in running subjects , and Terry Kit - Fong Au , Eve V . Clark , John H . Flavell , Laura R . Novick , Barbara Tversky , and anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier draft . We are also very grateful to the children , teachers , and parents of the following schools for their cooperation : Abracadabra Day Care , Altos Oaks Day Care , Bing Nursery School , California Children’s Community , California Nursery School , College Terrace Preschool , Community Preschool , Downtown Children’s Center , Foothill Children’s Center , Gavello Glen Preschool , Grace Lutheran Preschool , Montecito School , New Horizons Preschool , Sunflower Nursery School , and Woodside Parents Co - operative Nursery School . Reprint requests should be sent to : Susan A . Gelman , Department of Psychol - ogy , University of Michigan , 3433 Mason Hall , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , U . S . A . OOlO - 0277 / 86 / $ 8 . 60 0 1986 , Elsevier Science Publishers B . V .