Human - Robot Co - Creativity : A Scoping Review Informing a Research Agenda for Human - Robot Co - Creativity with Older Adults Marianne Bossema 1 , 2 , Somaya Ben Allouch 3 , 4 , Aske Plaat 2 and Rob Saunders 2 Abstract —This review is the first step in a long - term research project exploring how social robotics and AI - generated content can contribute to the creative experiences of older adults , with a focus on collaborative drawing and painting . We systematically searched and selected literature on human - robot co - creativity , and analyzed articles to identify methods and strategies for researching co - creative robotics . We found that none of the studies involved older adults , which shows the gap in the literature for this often involved participant group in robotics research . The analyzed literature provides valuable insights into the design of human - robot co - creativity and informs a research agenda to further investigate the topic with older adults . We argue that future research should focus on ecological and developmental perspectives on creativity , on how system behavior can be aligned with the values of older adults , and on the system structures that support this best . I . INTRODUCTION The world’s population is rapidly aging . According to the United Nations , the number of people aged 60 years or older is expected to more than double by 2050 , reaching approximately 2 . 1 billion [ 1 ] . This demographic shift is having significant social , economic , and health implications . In 2019 , the World Health Organization published a review of 900 studies , concluding that creative activities can promote health and well - being and help prevent and slow age - related physical and cognitive decline [ 2 ] . Here , the term ‘creative activities’ is referring to forms of personal , everyday cre - ativity , such as making music , drawing , dancing , or crafts . According to Cohen [ 3 ] , such acts of everyday creativity are fundamental to psychological development and well - being in later life . Creech et al . [ 4 ] present a systematic literature review into creativity and the quality of later life , which highlights the benefits of the collaborative and relational nature of creativity . Co - creativity is also linked to well - being ; Zeilig et al . [ 5 ] suggest that sharing agency in co - creative activities can empower people with dementia . These studies share the view that co - creativity can foster social connections and create a safe space that facilitates involvement and sharing . Social robots are playing a growing role in healthcare and well - being [ 6 ] [ 7 ] . There are few examples , however , of creative robot applications for older adults . Social robots offer unique opportunities to support creativity through as - sistance and social interaction . In addition , technological advancements in generative AI bring new opportunities to 1 Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences , The Netherlands m . bossema @ hva . nl 2 Leiden University , The Netherlands 3 Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences , The Netherlands 4 University of Amsterdam , The Netherlands suggest tailored content in creative collaborations . There are unanswered questions , however , on how to design appro - priate human - robot co - creative systems . A scoping review was conducted , to systematically map the research done in Human - Robot Co - Creativity ( HRCC ) , and to inform a research agenda for HRCC with older adults . We define HRCC as “An interactive system for collaborative creativity between human and robot . It involves the joint effort of two or more embodied and co - present agents , where both take initiative in response to the other ( s ) and contribute to creative outcomes” . This definition is based on the concepts of “Humbots” , as described by Lubart et al . , [ 8 ] and “Mixed - Initiative Creative Interfaces” as introduced by Deterding et al . [ 9 ] . In the next section , we begin by presenting theories related to the value - sensitive design of HRCC for older adults . In Section III , we describe the methodology we used for this scoping review . Based on the analysis of selected articles , we document the results in Section IV , followed by a discussion in Section V . In Section VI we provide a conclusion , leading to a research agenda outlined in Section VII . II . BACKGROUND Investigating the prospective role of social robots in co - creative systems bridges the fields of Human - Robot Interac - tion , Computational Creativity , and Arts & Health . Here , we present theories from these fields in the context of value - sensitive design of HRCC for older adults . A . Creativity and Values of Older Adults Definitions of creativity generally share the common theme that it involves generating something new , valuable , and surprising [ 10 ] . There are different approaches , how - ever , to understanding this complex concept . Gl˘aveanu [ 11 ] takes an ecological perspective , describing creativity as a phenomenon that emerges through interaction in a social and material environment . Kaufman & Beghetto [ 12 ] take a developmental perspective , looking at the individual . Indi - viduals are more likely to be creative when they are given challenging tasks that require new solutions , have a degree of autonomy and control over their work , and can collaborate and communicate effectively with others . Both ecological and developmental perspectives align with the values that older adults attribute to their creative ex - periences . In a Dutch study by Groot et al . [ 13 ] , older participants reported appreciating creative activities for 1 ) offering an environment where they feel safe , accepted , and free , 2 ) promoting personal and artistic growth , and 3 ) a r X i v : 2309 . 07033v2 [ c s . H C ] 15 S e p 2023 Fig . 1 . Values that older adults attribute to creative activities , based on a Dutch nationwide study by Groot et al . [ 13 ] . Figure adapted with permission . enabling meaningful social interactions ( Fig . 1 ) . Based on the study of Groot et al . , Liu et al . [ 14 ] investigate the re - lationship between context , mechanisms , and outcomes , and mention ‘a welcoming environment’ as a consistent under - lying mechanism . Liu et al . [ 14 ] recommend deepening our understanding of environments and affective atmospheres in art activities with older adults . Groot et al . [ 13 ] recommend Participatory Action Design as a research approach to capture the essence of older participants’ creative experiences . In “A Roadmap for Therapeutic Computational Creativ - ity” , Pease et al . [ 15 ] delve into the connection between Computational Creativity and mental health and well - being . The authors discuss the benefits and risks associated with this connection . They also highlight potential opportunities , such as casual creators [ 16 ] . Casual creators prioritize the pleasure of the creative process over the end product and offer enjoyable and easily accessible creative experiences that may be valuable for older adults . This kind of expe - riences may promote “personal and artistic growth” , while contributing to “an atmosphere in which people feel safe , accepted , and free” [ 13 ] . The roadmap also discusses the concept of the ‘third hand’ , a metaphor for the therapist’s role in supporting and encouraging patients’ creative processes , without imposing their own ideas or disrupting the patient’s autonomy [ 17 ] . The researchers recommend collaboration with health professionals , to determine the limitations and possibilities of therapeutic computational creativity [ 18 ] . B . Interaction Design for Computational Creativity Kaufman & Beghetto [ 12 ] mention two main requirements for people to be creative 1 ) a degree of autonomy and control , and 2 ) effective communication with others . These requirements present challenges for the design of co - creative systems . While traditional creativity support tools focus on human control , Gemeinboeck & Saunders [ 19 ] suggest embodied creative agents that share the world with humans , and act autonomously , beyond their creator’s intent . Mixed - Initiative Creative Interfaces [ 9 ] are in between , a form of AI - enabled Creativity Support tools , where both humans and the system can take initiative during creative collaboration . This raises questions , e . g . , on how agency can be shared and how initiative can be negotiated to support both well - being and mutual creativity . The requirement of effective communication also poses interaction design challenges . Bray & Bown [ 20 ] argue that computational creativity systems are often complex and opaque , limiting visibility and clarity of their conceptual models . Understanding may be improved when users can clearly perceive the system’s structure , and develop a mental model of how this structure leads to behavior . This is crucial to facilitate a suitable level of autonomy and control . Dialogues can be expected to contribute to understanding and common ground , either language - based or through creative artifacts . A dialogic approach , as suggested by Bown et al . [ 21 ] , can enable both human and artificial agents ( e . g . social robots ) to actively influence the creative process and products , and adapt to the other’s behavior . Social robots offer unique opportunities for embodied interaction , sharing agency , and ( non - ) verbal communication . They can suggest tailored AI - generated content and support creative exploration . The articles being reviewed shed light on how interaction design challenges may be faced and how solutions may be applied . TABLE I K EYWORDS SEARCHED IN DATABASES Actors Activities Applications Human - machine Co - creativ * Creativ * support Human - computer Creative collaboration Support * creativity Human - robot Art * collaboration Stimulat * creativity Human - AI Collaborative creativity Art therapy Robot * Collaborative art Creativ * Robot * Artificial Intelligence Collaborative drawing AI Collaborative painting Machine Learning Collaborative sketching III . METHOD Six databases were used to conduct the scoping review : ACM , IEEE , Google Scholar , PsycINFO , Pubmed , and Scopus . Keywords were chosen for ‘Actors’ ( e . g . human - robot ) , ‘Activities’ ( e . g . co - creativity ) , and ‘Application’ ( e . g . Creativity Support ) , see Table I . Only conference and journal articles , published in English were included . The search re - sults ( n = 827 ) were collected in February 2023 and imported in Rayyan [ 22 ] , where duplicates ( n = 100 ) were removed , and labels were assigned . Searching and selecting articles was done systematically using PRISMA guidelines [ 23 ] , currently with a single reviewer ( the first author ) . Based on a first screening of titles and abstracts , articles ( n = 432 ) were excluded when they a ) did not involve human subjects in evaluating a robotic system , b ) described a distinctive context ( e . g . , business , innovation , teaching , or product development ) when they were conference workshop calls or proposals , or c ) were found to be duplicates . In a second screening , Fig . 2 . PRISMA flow diagram for the scoping review . papers ( n = 157 ) were removed that did not show evidence of a ‘co - creative agent’ , here defined as a computational actor involved in building shared creative artifacts , in co - presence with one or more human collaborators [ 8 ] . In the last step of the screening , studies that did not involve an embodied intelligent agent were removed ( n = 113 ) . Doing the exclusion selection in separate steps allowed for acquiring a broader view , and offered the opportunity to also keep studies with non - robotic agents in mind . Two papers were added through forward and backward citation searches , and a final set of 27 articles was used for analysis . A . Analysis of Design Research Studies in HRCC are a form of design research , focused on understanding specific interaction design problems . We used the Function - Behavior - Structure ( FBS ) ontology , as described by Gero & Kannengiesser [ 24 ] , for analyzing and comparing this kind of study . The ontology is based on the notion that all designs can be represented in a uniform way , and that design systems can be conceptualized in three on - tological categories . Function ( F ) is about ‘what the system is for’ , Behavior ( B ) covers ‘what it does’ , and Structure ( S ) describes the components and their relationships , or ‘what it consists of’ . In addition , we applied a layered framework for interactions between creative collaborators , proposed by Kantosalo et al . [ 25 ] , to the ‘Behavior’ of co - creative systems into interaction layers of modalities , styles , and strategies to provide a finer - grained view of ‘what a co - creative system does’ . IV . RESULTS The FBS ontology [ 24 ] and Kantosalo’s Interaction Frame - work for Human - Computer Co - Creativity [ 25 ] were used for the analysis of reviewed articles . An overview is presented in Table II . A . Function When looking at the reviewed articles presented in Ta - ble II , we can distinguish four categories based on their research focus : 1 ) Creativity Support 2 ) Creative Collab - oration 3 ) Art Therapy , and 4 ) Artistic Work . Creativity Support forms the largest group , with studies investigating factors of social robot behavior that affect human creativity . Studies of Creative Collaboration explored the interaction dynamics , and how the process of collaboration can be facilitated . In the category of Art Therapy , the focus was on specific therapeutic requirements , and how to design responsive systems for affective and assistive collaborative painting and drawing . In the category of Artistic Work , the focus is on creative encounters between humans and machines , and studies are carried out in the context of the researchers’ own artistic practice , mostly in performances involving the audience . Regarding participants and target groups , we found that studies on Creativity Support involved mostly children , while adults and professional artists and designers participated in the Creative Collaboration studies . In the category of Artistic Work , the artists themselves also played an important role , as well as the audience . B . Behavior : Strategies , Styles , Modalities All studies in the category of Creativity Support propose the strategy of stimulating human creativity , through various social behaviors of a robot . Creativity demonstration was used to stimulate creativity with children ( n = 4 ) and with adults ( n = 1 ) . The robot demonstrated verbal creativity in storytelling applications and figural creativity in a drawing game . It was found that creativity demonstrations and scaf - folding ( e . g . asking questions , prompting , and suggestions ) , as well as the promotion behavior of the robot can con - tribute to higher levels of human creativity . When mirroring or contrasting robot movements were congruent with user input , this positively affected creativity [ 28 ] [ 37 ] . The studies mostly compared conditions of robot behavior , using pre - defined , validated content . For example , in multiple studies the robot demonstrated creativity by selecting pre - defined suggestions with a validated creativity score , dependent on the condition [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 35 ] . In the category of Creative Collaboration , two studies explored expressive robot movements to improve non - verbal communication [ 38 ] [ 40 ] . In the context of collaborative drawing , the effects of direct versus indirect motion paths on collaborative interaction were compared , but the results were inconclusive . The researchers recommend further in - the - field experiments , combining qualitative and quantita - tive methodologies . An arts - led , process - led approach is proposed by Gomez Cubero et al . [ 41 ] , to explore how co - creativity emerges through human - robot dialogue and improvisation . The researchers developed custom tools to support collaborative drawing with an industrial robot and put these into practice . In a study involving designers , a TABLE II R EVIEWED PAPERS , STRUCTURED USING THE FBS ONTOLOGY [ 24 ] AND THE I NTERACTION F RAMEWORK FOR H UMAN - C OMPUTER C O - C REATIVITY [ 25 ] . Function Behavior Structure Interaction layers Focus Participants Domain Strategies Styles Modalities Robots , devices Refs Creativity Support Children Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Demonstrate verbal creativity Game - based Speech , GUI Jibo , tablet [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Children Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Mirror / contrast user input Open - ended TUI Robotic object ( YOLO ) [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Children Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Promotional behavior Open - ended Speech , GUI EMYS , tablet [ 31 ] Children Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Demonstrate verbal creativity Open - ended Speech , GUI Furhat , tablet [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Children Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Scaffold creativity / reflection Open - ended TUI Stuffed animal , physical tools [ 34 ] Children Drawing Stimulate human creativity Embodied presence Game - based Speech , GUI Jibo , tablet [ 26 ] Children Drawing Stimulate human creativity Demonstrate figural creativity Game - based Speech , GUI Jibo , tablet [ 27 ] Children Construction Stimulate human creativity Scaffold creativity / reflection Game - based Speech , GUI Jibo , tablet [ 27 ] Adults Storytelling Stimulate human creativity Demonstrate verbal creativity Game - based Speech , GUI Robovie , display [ 35 ] Adults Drawing Stimulate human creativity Embodied presence Game - based Speech , GUI Nao , tablet [ 36 ] Adults Performance Stimulate human creativity Mirror / contrast user input Open - ended TUI Robotic object , tablet [ 37 ] Creative collaboration Adults Drawing Non - verbal communication Expressive robot movement Open - ended TUI , GUI Cobot , physical tools [ 38 ] Designers Drawing Conceptual sketching Suggesting conceptual shifts Open - ended TUI Drawbot , physical tools [ 39 ] Adults Drawing Non - verbal communication Expressive robot movement Open - ended TUI Cobot , physical tools [ 40 ] Artists Performance Arts - led , process - led Dialogue through improvisation Open - ended TUI , GUI Cobot , tablet , dance floor [ 41 ] Children Drawing Human / machine learning User - specific training data Open - ended TUI Cobot , physical tools [ 42 ] Art Therapy Adults Painting Responsive art approach Express matching emotions Open - ended Speech , TUI Baxter , BMI , physical tools [ 43 ] Adults Painting Balance contingency / artistry Suggesting visual metaphors Open - ended Speech , TUI Baxter , physical tools [ 44 ] Adults Painting Connect to personal art Personalized visual metaphors Open - ended Speech , TUI Baxter , physical tools [ 45 ] Children Drawing Personalization Speech - assisted co - drawing Open - ended Speech , GUI Cobot , tablet [ 46 ] Artistic Work Artist Paint / perform Human - machine symbiosis Mimicry , memory a . o . Open - ended TUI , ambient Cobots a . o . , art installation [ 47 ] Audience Performance Embodied Creative AI Shared creative spaces Open - ended Ambient Robotic objects , art installation [ 48 ] Audience Performance Embodied Creative AI Performance Body Mapping Open - ended Ambient Robotic objects , art installation [ 49 ] Audience Paint / perform Robotic art of audience input Speech - to - AI - art Open - ended Speech , ambient Kuka robot , art installation [ 50 ] mobile robot was introduced for collaborative sketching and generating ideas through ‘conceptual shifts’ [ 39 ] . Using the Sketch - RNN model and the Google Quick , Draw ! API , input sketches were mapped to suggestions with visual and se - mantic similarity . Results showed that the mobile , embodied agent performed better in provoking exploratory thinking and collaborative ideation , compared to a web - based agent . The alignment of human , robot , and machine learning is suggested by Twomey [ 42 ] in a study where the robotic system is trained on audience - specific content in the form of children’s drawings . With Art Therapy , the focus is on investigating how a robot can learn to understand and adapt to the creative and emotional expressions of a human interaction partner . Cooney & Menezes [ 43 ] propose to generate responsive art for emotion regulation , through robot expressions of either matching or positive emotions . Using wireless elec - troencephalography ( EEG ) , brain signals were captured and classified based on Russell’s valence / arousal model , and then translated into visual features for paintings . Affective image databases were used to train the system and Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks ( DC - GANs ) for synthesizing compositions . To balance contingency and artistry , Cooney & Berck [ 44 ] made use of visual metaphors that are responsive to perceived emotions . In a follow - up study , Cooney [ 45 ] proposes metaphors that connect more to emotional artistic expressions . Personalization was also facilitated , through the robot’s open questions , letting users add their own tags to describe the content . Another implementation of personalization is suggested by Shaik et al . [ 46 ] , by letting the system adapt sketches based on verbal feedback and explicit directions from users , which were disabled children . In the category of Artistic Work , Sougwen Chung [ 47 ] explores human - machine symbiosis , studying concepts of mimicry , memory , collectivity , and spectrality . For example , mimicry is explored with the robot mimicking the artists drawing gestures and for memory , the machine learns the artist’s drawing style , with neural nets trained on the artists drawing collection . Saunders & Gemeinboeck [ 48 ] investi - gate how embodied , creative AI can act as a performer by embedding a group of autonomous robots into the walls of a gallery . The robots are programmed as curious agents , driven to explore their world . By punching on the walls and making holes , they make changes to the environment , communicate their presence , and involve the audience . In another study by Saunders & Gemeinboeck [ 49 ] , professional dancers and non - humanlike robots were brought together in co - embodied explorations of forms and movements . Sola et al . [ 50 ] suggest speech - to - AI - art transformations and created an interface that allowed the audience to tell a co - creative system about their dreams . Based on prompts from the input text , the AI - system generated a drawing through latent space navigation using the CLIP model [ 51 ] . The industrial robot arm captured the audience’s stories in a collective painting that hang down into the atrium of a museum as a cascade of Fig . 3 . Per column : 1 ) Jibo , scaffolding creativity in a construction task [ 27 ] ; YOLO , a robot toy for storytelling [ 28 ] ; 2 ) The robot is present , an arts - led , process - led approach for investigating human - robot dialogues in improvisation [ 41 ] ; Cobbie , a drawbot for conceptual sketching with designers [ 39 ] ; 3 ) Baxter robot used in Art Therapy ; The valence / arousal model for expressing matching emotions ; 4 ) Accomplice - Creative robotics and embodied computational creativity [ 48 ] ; Dream Painter - Bridging Audience Interaction , Robotics , and Creative AI [ 50 ] dreams . When looking at game - based versus open - ended inter - action styles , the studies that compared robot behavior in different conditions generally used game - based interaction , e . g . , in drawing and storytelling games . This facilitated experimental control when comparing and measuring the effects of social robot behavior . In other studies , open - ended forms of interaction were used , which allows for investigating processes and dynamics , and contributes to ecological validity when researching creative collaboration . What stands out when looking at the interaction modal - ities used in the four categories , is that speech is mostly used in the categories Creativity Support and Art Therapy . Robot speech is used for demonstrating verbal creativity , and for scaffolding creativity , and prompting creative reflection [ 27 ] [ 34 ] . For art therapy robots , speech is found to be useful as well . It allows complex information to be conveyed , in a familiar and intuitive way , without requiring a person to look away from art - making and possibly lose concentration [ 43 ] . Speech also enables users to give explicit feedback or directions or ask for assistance , as suggested by Shaik et al . [ 46 ] . In the categories Creative Collaboration and Artistic Work , human - machine dialogues are more often based on non - verbal communication such as expressive movement , or through the work itself . With Artistic Work , we see most examples of ambient interfaces , when exploring new forms of human - machine encounters in a spatial setting ( Fig . 3 ) . C . Structure Different types of robots and embodiments were used in the reviewed studies ( Fig . 3 ) . Human - like robots were used in almost all studies in using a Stimulating creativity strategy , combined with a tablet or a computer screen . With the drawing activities in this category , the robot ( Jibo , Nao ) was not drawing physically , but virtually on the tablet , with separate canvases on the same tablet [ 26 ] [ 52 ] [ 36 ] . In studies employing game - based interaction styles , screens were used to present the game world . Alves - Oliveira et al . [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] used a non - anthropomorphic robot object to stimulate cre - ativity in children ; YOLO serves as a toy character in a storytelling game . The robot interacts through lights , colors , and movements , while the shape of the robot set realistic expectations for the robot’s capabilities . In the category of Creative Collaboration , collaborative robot ( cobot ) arms were mostly used , together with physical drawing tools . Physical drawing tools were also used with art therapy robots . The Baxter robot used for art therapy [ 43 ] can be considered a human - like cobot , with two arms and a screen that can display a face and facial expressions , facilitating non - verbal social communication . With Artistic Work , robot arms were used next to custom - made robotic objects , mostly in multi - agent settings . The stage is shared between humans and robots , mostly in performances . In an art installation by Sola et al . [ 50 ] , the industrial robot arm is behind glass , while the audience can communicate with the robot through a speech interface . In Accomplice , Saunders & Gemeinboeck [ 48 ] install robots in their own space behind a wall in a gallery , which they breaking through as they use the wall as their canvas . Saunders & Gemeinboeck [ 49 ] used robotic cubes to explore how human and non - human forms of embodiment can be mapped through movement , and how non - humanlike robotic objects can be perceived as affective agents . Fig . 4 . Values that older adults attributed to their creative activities in a nationwide Dutch study [ 13 ] , connected to robot behaviors suggested in the reviewed studies , with the corresponding categories ( Table II ) . These values ( e . g . meaningful connections ) were attributed in the context of human - human interactions . We suggest to investigate if and how human - robot co - creative interactions can be valuable to older adults as well . We propose this mapping of values and behaviors as part of our research agenda ( Section VII ) . V . DISCUSSION This review has several limitations . An important limi - tation is the fact that the review selection was carried out by a single reviewer , due to time constraints . In addition , there are opportunities to further work out the analysis , for example to explore how machine learning techniques , as part of the structure of a system , align with behavior and function . It turned out that our search results did not include any studies involving the elderly . This shows that future research on HRCC with older adults is important . However , it is also a limitation , as we cannot learn from previous findings in HRCC with the target group . We are planning an extended version of this review , with a search query that does include the target group , f . e . , looking at gerontechnology for creativity support . This allows us to involve more reviewers and to address aspects that have been underexposed so far . VI . CONCLUSION Selected articles were structured using the FBS ontology [ 24 ] and the Interaction Framework for Human - Computer Co - creativity [ 25 ] . The search and selection process ( see Section III ) resulted in a heterogeneous set of studies , describing robotic systems with various functions , behaviors , and structures . A . Function Studies in the categories of Creativity Support and Art Therapy take a developmental perspective , with the goal to a ) stimulate human creativity and b ) support art therapy through responsiveness and personalization . Studies in the categories Creative Collaboration and Artistic Work take an ecological perspective , investigating how creativity emerges through interaction . This is a more process - led approach , involving end users and taking into account the social and material environment . As set out in Section II , both ecolog - ical and developmental perspectives align with values that older adults attribute to their creative experience , and must be taken into account when defining the functions of HRCC for older adults . An important finding regarding participants is that older adults did not engage in any of the reviewed studies . While Cooney & Menezes [ 43 ] thank older adults in their acknowledgments for providing input , they evaluated their system with younger adults . It is not clear why older adults have not yet been involved in HRCC research . Robots and AI - generated content offer opportunities that can be beneficial for this specific target group , which is growing worldwide , and there are specific needs and wishes to be taken into account . That is why we are making a case for investigating HRCC for , and with , the target group of older adults . B . Behavior Evidence shows that robots are capable of demonstrating creativity , and that this social behavior can be designed to stimulate human creativity . Other social behaviors are found to be effective as well , such as mirroring and contrasting user input to promote divergent and convergent thinking . Studies on robots in Art Therapy provide valuable insights into the importance of recognizing , modeling , and synthesizing emotions in drawings and paintings . Here , the emphasis is on tailoring and balancing content to user needs e . g . , using personalized visual metaphors . These ideas on how an art therapy robot could behave as a ‘third hand’ also inform future research in HRCC for older adults . Studies in the category of Creativity Support often used games to structure the interaction , which contributes to experimental control when measuring the effects of robot behavior . However , the majority of studies used open - ended forms of interaction , investigating how dialogues and collaborations develop . The modality of speech is considered an important channel for transparency and effective communication , promoting autonomy and control . This is emphasized in the categories Creativity Support and Art Therapy . Robot speech is used , e . g . , to demonstrate verbal creativity , scaffold creativity , and promote creative reflection . User speech input is suggested as a means for explicit feedback , requesting assistance , and personalizing suggested content . The research projects in the category of Artistic Work place creative robots in spatial settings , sometimes with multiple agents , and letting artists and audiences contribute to a physical shared space that fosters creativity . Both speech and embodied , spatial interactions are of interest for HRCC with older adults , to contribute to an environment where people feel free and safe . C . Structure Results show that in the categories Creativity Support and Art Therapy , mostly human - like robots were used . The robot YOLO is an exception , an abstract robotic object that serves as a toy , while the shape of the robot sets realistic expectations for the robot’s capabilities [ 29 ] . A shared stage for humans and robots , as explored in studies on Artistic Work , could be interesting for older adults as well , when designed as an environment fostering creativity , and where people feel free and safe . VII . RESEARCH AGENDA We propose a participatory , value - sensitive design ap - proach for investigating HRCC with older adults . Older adults must be involved throughout the entire process , in identifying opportunities and requirements , developing HRCC activities , and testing hypotheses in both controlled experiments and in - the - field settings . When investigating the design of the system , we propose considering of the following aspects , aligned with the the FBS framework : Function : Consider both ecological and developmental perspectives on creativity when defining functional requirements for the target group . Behavior : Align values that older adults attribute to creative activities with the opportunities of HRCC ( Fig . 4 ) to investigate how : 1 ) A robot’s social behavior can support and en - hance creative experiences for older adults ; 2 ) AI - generated content can be tailored and respon - sive to specific needs and desires ; and , 3 ) Intuitive dialogues ( verbal , non - verbal , through artifacts ) can support co - creativity . Structure : Investigate what types of robot and devices fit best and provide opportunities for : 1 ) Social interaction with older adults ; 2 ) Creative support and exploration ; and , 3 ) Shared creative experiences and spaces where older adults feel free and safe . ACKNOWLEDGMENT This publication is part of the project ‘Social robotics and generative AI to support and enhance creative experiences for older adults’ , with project number 023 . 019 . 021 of the research program Doctoral Grant for Teachers which is financed by the Dutch Research Council ( NWO ) . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] United Nations , “World population prospects 2022 : Summary of results , ” 2022 . [ 2 ] D . Fancourt and S . Finn , What is the evidence on the role of the arts in improving health and well - being ? A scoping review . World Health Organization . Regional Office for Europe , 2019 . [ 3 ] G . D . Cohen , The Mature Mind : The Positive Power of the Aging Brain . Basic Books ( AZ ) , 2005 . [ 4 ] A . Creech , K . Larouche , M . Generale , and D . Fortier , “Creativity , music , and quality of later life : A systematic review , ” Psychology of Music , p . 0305735620948114 , 2020 . [ 5 ] H . Zeilig , V . Tischler , M . van der Byl Williams , J . West , and S . Strohmaier , “Co - creativity , well - being and agency : A case study analysis of a co - creative arts group for people with dementia , ” Journal of Aging Studies , vol . 49 , pp . 16 – 24 , 2019 . [ 6 ] J . Broekens , M . Heerink , and H . Rosendal , “Assistive social robots in elderly care : A review , ” Gerontechnology , vol . 8 , no . 2 , pp . 94 – 103 , 2009 . [ 7 ] S . B . Allouch and L . van Velsen , “Social robots for elderly care : An inventory of promising use cases and business models . , ” in MIE , pp . 1046 – 1050 , 2020 . [ 8 ] T . Lubart , D . Esposito , A . Gubenko , and C . Houssemand , “Creativity in humans , robots , humbots , ” Creativity , vol . 8 , no . 1 , pp . 23 – 37 , 2021 . [ 9 ] S . Deterding , J . Hook , R . Fiebrink , M . Gillies , J . Gow , M . Akten , G . Smith , A . Liapis , and K . Compton , “Mixed - initiative creative interfaces , ” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 628 – 635 , 2017 . [ 10 ] M . A . Runco and G . J . Jaeger , “The standard definition of creativity , ” Creativity Research Journal , vol . 24 , no . 1 , pp . 92 – 96 , 2012 . [ 11 ] V . P . Gl˘aveanu , “Rewriting the language of creativity : The Five A’s framework , ” Review of General Psychology , vol . 17 , no . 1 , pp . 69 – 81 , 2013 . [ 12 ] J . C . Kaufman and R . A . Beghetto , “Beyond big and little : The Four C model of creativity , ” Review of General Psychology , vol . 13 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 12 , 2009 . [ 13 ] B . Groot , L . de Kock , Y . Liu , C . Dedding , J . Schrijver , T . Teunissen , M . van Hartingsveldt , J . Menderink , Y . Lengams , J . Lindenberg , et al . , “The value of active arts engagement on health and well - being of older adults : A nation - wide participatory study , ” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , vol . 18 , no . 15 , p . 8222 , 2021 . [ 14 ] Y . Liu , B . Groot , L . de Kock , T . Abma , and C . Dedding , “How participatory arts can contribute to Dutch older adults’ wellbeing – revisiting a taxonomy of arts interventions for people with dementia , ” Arts & Health , pp . 1 – 16 , 2022 . [ 15 ] A . Pease , M . Ackerman , N . Pease , and B . McFadden , “A roadmap for therapeutic computational creativity , ” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational Creativity ( M . M . Hed - blom , A . A . Kantosalo , R . Confalonieri , O . Kutz , and T . Veale , eds . ) , pp . 261 – 270 , Association for Computational Creativity ( ACC ) , June 27 – July 1 2022 . [ 16 ] K . Compton and M . Mateas , “Casual creators , ” in Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Computational Creativity , ICCC 2015 , pp . 228 – 235 , 2015 . [ 17 ] E . Kramer , “The art therapist’s third hand : Reflections on art , art therapy , and society at large , ” American Journal of Art Therapy , 1986 . [ 18 ] A . Pease , M . Ackerman , N . Pease , and B . McFadden , “A roadmap for therapeutic computational creativity , ” in Proceedings of the 13th Inter - national Conference on Computational Creativity ( ICCC’22 ) ( M . M . Hedblom , A . A . Kantosalo , R . Confalonieri , O . Kutz , and T . Veale , eds . ) , pp . 261 – 270 , Association for Computational Creativity ( ACC ) , June 27 – July 1 2022 . [ 19 ] P . Gemeinboeck and R . Saunders , “The performance of creative machines , ” in Cultural Robotics : First International Workshop , CR 2015 , Held as Part of IEEE RO - MAN 2015 , Kobe , Japan , August 31 , 2015 . Revised Selected Papers 1 , pp . 159 – 172 , Springer , 2016 . [ 20 ] L . Bray and O . Bown , “Applying core interaction design principles to computational creativity , ” in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Computational Creativity , ICCC 2016 , pp . 93 – 97 , 2016 . [ 21 ] O . Bown , K . Grace , L . Bray , and D . Ventura , “A speculative ex - ploration of the role of dialogue in human - computer co - creation , ” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computational Creativity , ICCC 2020 , pp . 25 – 32 , June 29 – July , 2020 2020 . [ 22 ] M . Ouzzani , H . Hammady , Z . Fedorowicz , and A . Elmagarmid , “Rayyan – a web and mobile app for systematic reviews , ” Systematic Reviews , vol . 5 , pp . 1 – 10 , 2016 . [ 23 ] D . Moher , A . Liberati , J . Tetzlaff , D . G . Altman , and The PRISMA Group , “Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta - analyses : The PRISMA statement , ” Annals of Internal Medicine , vol . 151 , no . 4 , pp . 264 – 269 , 2009 . PMID : 19622511 . [ 24 ] J . S . Gero and U . Kannengiesser , “The Function - Behaviour - Structure ontology of design , ” in An Anthology of Theories and Models of Design : Philosophy , Approaches and Empirical Explorations ( A . Chakrabarti and L . T . M . Blessing , eds . ) , pp . 263 – 283 , London : Springer , 2014 . [ 25 ] A . Kantosalo , P . T . Ravikumar , K . Grace , and T . Takala , “Modalities , styles and strategies : An interaction framework for human - computer co - creativity . , ” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Computational Creativity , ICCC 2020 , pp . 57 – 64 , June 29 – July , 2020 2020 . [ 26 ] S . Ali , T . Moroso , and C . Breazeal , “Can children learn creativity from a social robot ? , ” in Proceedings of the 2019 Creativity and Cognition ( C & C 2019 ) , ( New York , NY , USA ) , pp . 359 – 368 , Association for Computing Machinery , 2019 . [ 27 ] S . Ali , N . Devasia , H . W . Park , and C . Breazeal , “Social robots as creativity eliciting agents , ” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol . 8 , 2021 . [ 28 ] P . Alves - Oliveira , P . Arriaga , M . Cronin , and A . Paiva , “Creativity encounters between children and robots , ” in ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) , pp . 379 – 388 , 2020 . [ 29 ] P . Alves - Oliveira , P . Arriaga , A . Paiva , and G . Hoffman , “Guide to build YOLO , a creativity - stimulating robot for children , ” HardwareX , vol . 6 , 2019 . [ 30 ] P . Alves - Oliveira , S . Gomes , A . Chandak , P . Arriaga , G . Hoffman , and A . Paiva , “Software architecture for YOLO , a creativity - stimulating robot , ” SoftwareX , vol . 11 , 2020 . [ 31 ] M . Elgarf , N . Calvo - Barajas , P . Alves - Oliveira , G . Perugia , G . Castel - lano , C . Peters , and A . Paiva , “’and then what happens ? ’ promoting children’s verbal creativity using a robot , ” in ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI 2022 ) , pp . 71 – 79 , 2022 . [ 32 ] M . Elgarf , S . Zojaji , G . Skantze , and C . Peters , “CreativeBot : A creative storyteller robot to stimulate creativity in children , ” in Pro - ceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Multimodal Inter - action , ICMI ’22 , ( New York , NY , USA ) , p . 540 – 548 , Association for Computing Machinery , 2022 . [ 33 ] M . Elgarf , G . Skantze , and C . Peters , “Once upon a story : Can a creative storyteller robot stimulate creativity in children ? , ” in Proceed - ings of the 21st ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents , IVA 2021 , pp . 60 – 67 , 2021 . [ 34 ] L . J . Hubbard , Y . Chen , E . Colunga , P . Kim , and T . Yeh , “Child - robot interaction to integrate reflective storytelling into creative play , ” in Proceedings of the 2021 Creativity and Cognition ( C & C 2021 ) , ( New York , NY , USA ) , Association for Computing Machinery , 2021 . [ 35 ] P . H . Kahn , T . Kanda , H . Ishiguro , S . Shen , H . E . Gary , and J . H . Ruckert , “Creative collaboration with a social robot , ” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiq - uitous Computing , UbiComp ’14 , ( New York , NY , USA ) , p . 99 – 103 , Association for Computing Machinery , 2014 . [ 36 ] P . Alves - Oliveira , S . Tulli , P . Wilken , R . Merhej , J . Gandum , and A . Paiva , “Sparking creativity with robots : A design perspective , ” in 14th Annual ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction ( HRI ) , Jan . 2019 . [ 37 ] F . Fabiano , H . Pelikan , J . Pingen , J . Zissoldt , A . Catala , and M . The - une , “Designing a co - creative dancing robotic tablet , ” in CEUR Workshop Proceedings , vol . 2160 , 2017 . [ 38 ] D . Hinwood , J . Ireland , E . Jochum , and D . Herath , “A proposed Wizard of OZ architecture for a human - robot collaborative drawing task , ” Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol . 11357 , pp . 35 – 44 , 2018 . [ 39 ] Y . Lin , J . Guo , Y . Chen , C . Yao , and F . Ying , “It is your turn : Collaborative ideation with a co - creativ robot through sketch , ” in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2020 . [ 40 ] J . Pedersen , K . Christensen , D . Herath , and E . Jochum , “I like the way you move : A mixed - methods approach for studying the effects of robot motion on collaborative human robot interaction , ” Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol . 12483 , pp . 73 – 84 , 2020 . [ 41 ] C . Gomez Cubero , M . Pekarik , V . Rizzo , and E . Jochum , “The robot is present : Creative approaches for artistic expression with robots , ” Frontiers in Robotics and AI , vol . 8 , 2021 . [ 42 ] R . Twomey , “Three stage drawing transfer : Collaborative drawing between a Generative Adversarial Network , co - robotic arm , and five - year - old child , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , vol . 5 , no . 4 , 2022 . [ 43 ] M . Cooney and M . Menezes , “Design for an art therapy robot : An explorative review of the theoretical foundations for engaging in emo - tional and creative painting with a robot , ” Multimodal Technologies and Interaction , vol . 2 , no . 3 , 2018 . [ 44 ] M . Cooney and P . Berck , “Designing a robot which paints with a human : Visual metaphors to convey contingency and artistry , ” in ICRA - X Robots Art Program at IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) , Montreal QC , Canada , p . 2 , 2019 . [ 45 ] M . Cooney , “Robot art , in the eye of the beholder ? : Personalized metaphors facilitate communication of emotions and creativity , ” Fron - tiers in Robotics and AI , vol . 8 , 2021 . [ 46 ] S . Shaik , V . Srinivasan , Y . Peng , M . Lee , and N . Davis , “Co - creative robotic arm for differently - abled kids : Speech , sketch inputs and external feedbacks for multiple drawings , ” Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing , vol . 1290 , pp . 998 – 1007 , 2021 . [ 47 ] S . Chung , “Sketching symbiosis : Towards the development of rela - tional systems , ” in The Language of Creative AI : Practices , Aesthetics and Structures , pp . 259 – 276 , Springer , 2022 . [ 48 ] R . Saunders and P . Gemeinboeck , “Accomplice : Creative robotics and embodied computational creativity , ” in Proceedings of AISB 2014 – 50th Annual Convention of the SSAISB , ( London , UK ) , Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and the Simulation of Behaviour , 2014 . [ 49 ] R . Saunders and P . Gemeinboeck , “Performative Body Mapping for designing expressive robots , ” in Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Computational Creativity , ICCC 2018 , pp . 280 – 287 , 2018 . [ 50 ] M . Canet Sola and V . Guljajeva , “Dream Painter : Exploring creative possibilities of AI - aided speech - to - image synthesis in the interactive art context , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , vol . 5 , no . 4 , 2022 . [ 51 ] A . Radford , J . W . Kim , C . Hallacy , A . Ramesh , G . Goh , S . Agarwal , G . Sastry , A . Askell , P . Mishkin , J . Clark , G . Krueger , and I . Sutskever , “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi - sion , ” 2021 . [ 52 ] S . Ali , H . Park , and C . Breazeal , “A social robot’s influence on children’s figural creativity during gameplay , ” International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , vol . 28 , 2021 .