Home > Journals > AIS Journals > THCI > Vol . 1 > Iss . 1 ( 2009 ) The Reader - to - Leader Framework : Motivating Technology - Mediated Social Participation Jennifer Preece , University of Maryland Ben Shneiderman , University of Maryland Abstract Billions of people participate in online social activities . Most users participate as readers of discussion boards , searchers of blog posts , or viewers of photos . A fraction of users become contributors of user - generated content by writing consumer product reviews , uploading travel photos , or expressing political opinions . Some users move beyond such individual efforts to become collaborators , forming tightly connected groups with lively discussions whose outcome might be a Wikipedia article or a carefully edited YouTube video . A small fraction of users becomes leaders , who participate in governance by setting and upholding policies , repairing vandalized materials , or mentoring novices . We analyze these activities and offer the Reader - to - Leader Framework with the goal of helping researchers , designers , and managers understand what motivates technology - mediated social participation . This will enable them to improve interface design and social support for their companies , government agencies , and non - governmental organizations . These improvements could reduce the number of failed projects , while accelerating the application of social media for national priorities such as healthcare , energy sustainability , emergency response , economic development , education , and more . Recommended Citation Preece , Jennifer and Shneiderman , Ben ( 2009 ) " The Reader - to - Leader Framework : Motivating Technology - Mediated Social Participation , " AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction ( 1 ) 1 , pp . 13 - 32 Available at : https : / / aisel . aisnet . org / thci / vol1 / iss1 / 5  Download SHARE AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction I S S N : 1 9 4 4 - 3 9 0 0 Journal Home About this Journal Information For Authors THCI Policy Editorial Board THCI Awards Most Popular Papers Select an issue : All Issues Browse Enter search terms : Search in this journal Advanced Search eLibrary Login FAQ About Home Home | About | FAQ | Editor Login | Accessibility Statement Privacy Copyright If you discover any data inconsistencies , or have any questions with regard to content and / or your AIS membership , please contact us via email . Civic technology is technology ( mainly information technology ) that enables engagement or participation of the public for stronger development , enhancing citizen communications , improving government infrastructure , and generally improving the public good . [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It encompasses civic applications , platforms supporting government bodies , institutions and other software enabling those goals . " The Reader - to - Leader Framework : Motivating Technology - Mediated Social Participation " . 11 / 27 / 2017 01 : 28 : 54 PM UTC . http : / / codeforamerica . org / what - we - do / . The Reader - to - Leader Framework : Motivating Technology - Mediated Social Participation . This paper provides a framework for technology - mediated social participation . Resource URL Billions of people participate in online social activities . Most users participate as readers of discussion boards , searchers of blog posts , or viewers of photos . A fraction of users become contributors of user - generated content by writing consumer product reviews , uploading travel photos , or expressing political opinions . Some users move beyond such individual efforts to become collaborators , forming tightly connected groups with lively discussions whose outcome might be a Wikipedia article or a carefully edited YouTube video . The Reader - to - Leader framework : motivating technology - mediated social participation , AIS Transactions on Human - Computer Interaction , ( 1 ) 1 , 13 - 32 . ↑ Weinberger , H . ( 2010 ) . ECHO : A Layered Model for the Design of a Context - Aware Learning Experience . In : Handbook on Web 2 . 0 , 3 . 0 and X . 0 : Technologies , Business , and Social Applications . San Murugesan ( Ed . ) , Hershey , USA : IGI Global . Retrieved from " https : / / en . wikiversity . org / w / index . php ? title = Learning _ everywhere & oldid = 1566540 " . content The reader - to - leader framework : Motivating technology - mediated social participation