Manchester School of Art Manchester Metropolitan University 02 - 05 September 2019 International Association of Societies of Design Research Conference 2019 DESIGN REVOLUTIONS Copyright © 2019 . Copyright of this paper is the property of the author ( s ) . Permission is granted to reproduce copies of the works for purposes relevant to the IASDR conference , provided that the author ( s ) , source and copyright notice are included on each copy . For other uses , please contact the author ( s ) . Making Ideation Visible : An Early - Design Tool for Designers Cheng , Pei - Jung National Chengchi University , Taipei , Taiwan admufy @ gmail . com We investigated the effect of an idea generating tool , IDEATOR , on the performance of designers during early - design concept development . We also investigated behavioural differences between designers in the fields of graphic , product , and interior design . To investigate their behaviour when using IDEATOR and satisfaction with its core functions , we conducted behavioural observations on , and usability interviews with designers of those three fields . The results indicate that most designers thought IDEATOR to be user - friendly , and found its most useful feature to be the ‘mind map’ . Results were as expected , and they fulfilled the preliminary study ‘creative concept app ( IDEATOR ) ’ requirement . In addition , IDEATOR functions as an effective recording tool for future research on the process of concept ideation . Keywords : design - supporting tool , ideation , IDEATOR , usability interview 1 . Introduction Segers , de Vries , and Achten ( 2005 ) constructed an idea space system to facilitate architects’ design thinking . The system’s word – image connection inspired designers to think creatively , inhabit more perspectives , and thus , enhance their work efficiency . Siangliulue , Chan , Gajos , and Dow ( 2015 ) conducted an online experiment to explore the effects of being offered examples at the right moment . The authors observed that examples provided on demand assisted in the creation of novel ideas . By contrast , examples provided at the wrong moment suppress the generation of ideas . In addition , Ahmed ( 2005 ) observed that 24 % of engineering designers spent most of their time searching for information . Thus , the author asserted that information searches are vital in the design process and developed a method that enabled the designers to index design knowledge . Westerman and Kaur ( 2007 ) examined the retrieval of images from computer databases meant to spark the creative generation of ideas . They propose that creative design tasks require the support through information systems for both convergent and divergent processes . In addition , the use of keywords is integral to finding resources on the Internet . Thus , a ‘keyword’ is an important concept for researchers to understanding design cognition . This study focuses on the connection between keyword cognition and design concepts . Compared with the past designers who used books as a resource , the current designers use 2 the Internet , resulting in a considerable shift in how they find resources . Specifically , in a ‘thinking first’ approach , designers must first identify keywords and require resources to that end . These keywords , necessary for finding the appropriate material , are used in a designer’s visualisation . Designers can thus be inspired by numerous resources on the Internet . Our preliminary research proposed 4 modes of association based on designer behaviour during ideation ( Cheng , 2010 ; Cheng & Yen , 2008 ) . We then developed a creative idea generation tool , ‘IDEATOR’ ( Cheng , 2016 , pp . 89 - 95 ) , to support designers during ideation . The main functions of the ‘IDEATOR’ ( Figure 1 ) underlying designers’ behavioural modes and resource searching needs in the ideation , support a designer’s formulation of concepts by integrating image searches and stimulates design actions by displaying all the images on an image board . Unlike other studies on design thinking support systems , IDEATOR emphasises recording the designers’ word thinking paths and processes ( Function A in Figure 1 ) . It assists designers in their repeated input , access , and storage of information . Our preliminary research results indicate that IDEATOR allows designers to add their own ideation sketches and brief descriptions while recording each concept , which made the results of their idea map similar to a designer’s self - reports . In the process , keywords , ideation sketches , and images serve as a stimulus or as the object of ‘seeing’ in the ‘seeing – moving – seeing’ model ( Schön & Wiggins , 1992 ) . IDEATOR provides designers with copious visual stimulation in idea development ( Functions B and C in Figure 1 ) , which is in accordance with research demonstrating that a designer’s mental imagery can be triggered by an abundance of visual stimuli ( Dorst & Cross , 2001 ; Suwa , Gero , & Purcell , 2000 ; Verstijnem , Hennessey , Leeuwen , Hamel , & Goldschmidt , 1998 ; McGown , Green , & Rodgers , 1998 ; Goldschmidt , 1994 ; Herbert , 1993 ; Schön & Wiggins , 1992 ) . Such mental imagery aids designers in creating new ideas . Nonetheless , most research on design - supporting tools focus only on designers from a single design field . Thus , this study investigates differences between graphic , product , and interior designers . Figure 1 . Three main functions of IDEATOR ( Screenshot sequences from left to right indicate the functions for ‘idea developing - mind map’ , ‘image searching’ , and ‘image comparing’ ) . A . Idea developing B . Image searching C . Image comparing 3 2 . Method We explored how designers of different fields develop ideas with IDEATOR and the effect the app has on their ideation . We collected data using IDEATOR . Specifically , IDEATOR was adapted to record the designers’ idea map , index reference content , concept words of association , and sketch development . Finally , we conducted one - on - one interviews with the designers . We aim to use this data for future revisions of IDEATOR . 2 . 1 . Design Task , Process , and Participants To ensure consistency , designers performed a design task assigned by us . Regardless of their field , all designers had an assigned task for the same café place . Specifically , they were required to design a logo , chair , and bar for a coffee shop named ‘at Café’ . Before the design task was executed , task instructions , pieces of A4 paper for sketching , and an iPad Mini with the IDEATOR app were provided to each designer . Designers were taught how to operate IDEATOR and were informed that their behavioural data will be collected and analysed . The designers were free to work in an environment of their choice and could use the Internet in any way that they pleased . Designers had 1 week to finish the task and were allowed to finish ahead of time . In addition , upon completion of the design task , participants were required to turn off the screen - recording app ( Shou . TV mobile game streaming 0 . 7 . 13 ) on the received iPad and write down the drawing completion time point for each sketch on the paper ( values in Figure 2 ) . Fifteen designers ( 10 male and 5 female ) , with an average of 3 years of experience , were invited to participate . Of them , 5 were graphic designers , 5 product designers , and 5 interior designers . Figure 2 . Idea sketches of participant G5 with time record ( red rectangles show the time record ) 2 . 2 . Usability Interviews After each designer completed the design task , we conducted one - on - one structured interviews on the user - friendliness of the IDEATOR interface , pertaining specifically to the ‘image search’ , ‘mind map’ , ‘sketch pad’ , and ‘image board’ functions . Information from the interviews was used in an inductive analysis . 2 . 3 . Data Analysis For data analysis , each participant ' s IDEATOR data from the mobile device , screen capture recordings , and their developed idea sketches were collected . Video and protocol data analysis was conducted by the researcher and 2 coders , and the internal consistency of the coding results was tested . 4 The study used behaviour - recording software , The Observer XT , to collect and analyse video data . First , the researcher and 2 coders individually marked the change points of the videotaped behaviour of participants according to the behavioural definitions and coding scheme from our previous study ( Cheng , 2016 ) . Subsequently , the 2 coders listed clips that could not be categorised under any behavioural code . Thereafter , the researcher and 2 coders discussed possible revisions to the behavioural definitions and coding scheme . Designers recorded the video data with IDEATOR to record their self - ideation process . Their operational behaviour has a bit different from the behavioural codes used in the previous study because of the app’s revised interface and functions . For example , for sketching behaviour , the behavioural coding in the preliminary study comprised ‘Creating new sketch’ and ‘Continuing to sketch . ’ The collection of research data was provided by designers , but the mobile screen - recording app ( Shou . TV mobile game streaming 0 . 7 . 13 ) was unable to record the designers’ sketching process on paper . Therefore , the sketch behaviour in this study was classified under 2 behavioural codes ‘Sketching on paper ( SOP ) ’ and ‘Drawing on sketch pad ( DOSP ) ’ . Our modified behavioural coding scheme is as follows ( Table 1 ) . There are 3 behavioural modes . The ‘Gathering information ( GA ) ’ mode includes the 3 behaviours of ‘Retrieving information ( RI ) ’ , ‘Referring to relevant information’ , and ‘Referring to the saved data ( RSD ) ’ . The ‘Generating ideas ( GI ) ’ mode includes the 3 behaviours of SOP , DOSP , and ‘Adding a new branch idea ( ANI ) ’ . The ‘Thinking’ mode includes ‘Revising a branch idea ( RBI ) ’ , ‘Highlighting a branch idea ( HBI ) ’ , and ‘Purposeless action ( PA ) ’ . In addition , participants , in their unfamiliarity with the interface , may have performed an ‘Error action’ , an action that belongs to none of the 3 modes . Table 1 Behavioural coding scheme ( revised from the behaviour codes in previous research [ Cheng , 2016 ] ) 5 3 . Results , Discussions and Conclusion To explore whether the effect of IDEATOR on the design process differs by a designer’s field , the data of the graphic , product and interior designers were denoted G1 – G5 , D1 – D5 , and I1 – I5 , respectively . Each designer had a complete set of data comprising screen capture data , hand - drawn sketches , and IDEATOR data . 3 . 1 . Analysis and Comparison of the IDEATOR Operation Records Segment Encoding in 3 Fields of Design According to our analysis using Observer XT , the mean duration of each designer ' s ideation was 1873 s ( or 31 min ) . Video Data on the designers’ interface operations were divided into 767 segments according to the behavioural coding scheme ( Table 1 ) , and the coding results of all the segments are detailed in Table 2 . During ideation , the product designers had the most number of segments ( M ) using IDEATOR ( M = 75 ) , whereas graphic designers used IDEATOR the least ( M = 33 ) . ANI had the most segments ( M = 288 , 37 . 5 % ) coded under it , followed by PA ( M = 127 , 16 . 6 % ) , and RI ( M = 85 , 11 . 1 % ) . The least prevalent types of behaviour were DOSP ( M = 12 , 1 . 6 % ) , followed by SOP ( M = 17 , 2 . 2 % ) . For the interior designers in particular , the RSD behavioural segment was more prevalent , even more so than PA and RI ; DOSP is also more common than SOP . The designers in our study also spend more than a third of their time generating ideas . GI occurred 41 . 3 % of the time , followed by GA , which occurred 21 . 5 % of the time . However , when observing differences between the designers of different fields , graphic and product designers spend most of their time on GI . In particular , graphic designers spend 50 % of their time on GI , whereas product designers spend more than 40 % of their time on GI . However , in the 3 fields , among graphic designers , gathering information ( GA ) behaviour occurred least frequently , whereas among interior designers , the frequency of the ‘gathering information ( GA ) ’ behaviour was highest among the 3 modes . 3 . 2 . Usability Interview Results Participants gave the following feedback during the interview . 1 ) The most user - friendly part of the interface was the ‘interface icon ( ICON ) ’ , followed by the ‘mind map’ ideation model . However , users experienced minor difficulties using the ‘picture searching’ function . 2 ) The most helpful function for concept ideation was the ‘mind map’ . Most of the designers believed that this function aided their management of their own ideation - thinking path . In particular , the image searches integrated with the mind map , so that the concept of the development context could be visualised and then the HBI function so that designers could sort out and classify the thinking path on mind map . 3 ) With the ‘image board’ function , designers recognised that the relevant images could be presented at the same time as a source of inspiration stimulates the designers . Moreover , they found the function of HBI and ‘picture searching’ advantageous . 4 ) IDEATOR’s most notable disadvantage was the flexibility of dragging the mind map . Besides , it was less intuitive for them to see the relevant pictures of each concept immediately on the mind map , Followed by ‘picture searching’ , and most of the designers recognised that as they searched for the relevant pictures , and then copied and saved them , 6 they must return to the search screen before they can copy the second picture , which made the operation less streamlined . Table 2 Encoding of designers’ behaviour segments in 3 fields 3 . 3 . Conclusion This study provided the expected results and fulfilled the preliminary study ‘creative concept app ( IDEATOR ) ’ requirement . In addition , IDEATOR functions as an effective recording tool for future research on concept ideation process . The result shows that GI behaviour in graphic and product designers occurred more frequently than the other 2 types of behaviours . In particular , graphic designers ' GI behaviour accounts for more than half of the total number of occurrences . Furthermore , most designers used IDEATOR thought it was understandable and found its most useful feature to be the mental map . 4 . References Ahmed , S . ( 2005 ) . Encouraging reuse of design knowledge : a method to index knowledge . Design Studies , 26 ( 6 ) , 565 - 592 . Cheng , P . - J . ( 2010 ) . A Study on Designers ' Searching - retrieving Behavior in the Ideation Process , National Yunlin University of Science & Technology , Unpublished doctoral dissertation . Cheng , P . - J . ( 2016 ) . Development of a mobile app for generating creative ideas based on exploring designers ' on - line resource searching and retrieval behavior . Design Studies , Vol . 44C , 74 - 99 . Cheng , P . - J . and J . Yen ( 2008 ) . Study on Searching - retrieving Behaviour in Designers ' Ideation Process . Bulletin of Japanese Society for the Science of Design . Vol . 55 No . 3 , 91 - 98 . Dorst , K . & Cross , N . ( 2001 ) . Creativity in the design process : co evolution of problem - solution , Design Studies , 22 ( 5 ) , 425 - 437 . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1994 ) . On visual design thinking : the vis kids of architecture , Design Studies , 15 ( 2 ) , 159 - 174 . 7 Herbert , D . ( 1993 ) . Architectural and study drawings , New York : John Wiley & Sons Inc . McGown , A . , Green , G . & Rodgers , P . ( 1998 ) . Visible ideas : information patterns of conceptual sketch activity , Design Studies , 19 ( 4 ) , 431 - 453 . Schön , D . A . , & Wiggins , G . ( 1992 ) . Kinds of seeing and their function in designing . Design Studies , 13 ( 2 ) , 135 - 156 . Segers , N . M . , de Vries , B . , & Achten , H . H . ( 2005 ) . Do word graphs stimulate design ? Design Studies , 26 ( 6 ) , 625 - 647 . Siangliulue , P . , Chan , J . , Gajos , K . Z . , & Dow , S . P . ( 2015 ) . Providing Timely Examples Improves the Quantity and Quality of Generated Ideas . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition , Glasgow , United Kingdom . Suwa , M . , Gero , J . & Purcell , T . ( 2000 ) . Unexpected discoveries and S - invention of design requirements : Important vehicles for a design process . Design Studies , 21 ( 6 ) , 539 - 567 . Verstijnem , I . , Hennessey , J . , Leeuwen , C . , Hamel , R . & Goldschmidt , G . ( 1998 ) . Sketching and Design creative discovery , Design Studies , 19 ( 4 ) , 519 - 546 . Westerman , S . J . , & Kaur , S . ( 2007 ) . Supporting creative product / commercial design with computer - based image retrieval . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 14th European conference on Cognitive ergonomics : invent ! explore ! , London , United Kingdom . About the Authors : Cheng , Pei - Jung : is an associate professor , working for the Department of Advertising at National Chengchi University in Taiwan . Her research interest is to explore designers ' cognition and behaviors in ideation . Currently she lead s a DCC Lab to develop a brainstorm - supporting tool . Acknowledgement : The author gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology under Grant No . MOST 106 - 2410 - H - 036 - 003 - MY2 and MOST107 - 2622 - H - 036 - 001 - CC3 . Additional thanks go to the 15 designers who participated in this study , and the two coders , Nian - Chen Cai and Tsai - Ping Chang , who participated in the analytic section . This manuscript was edited by Wallace Academic Editing .