JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 204 No . 5 839 – 856 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201306088 JCB 839 Correspondence to Andrew J . Ewald : aewald2 @ jhmi . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : BCA , bicinchoninic acid ; DE , differentially expressed ; DIC , differential interference contrast ; E - cad , epithelial cadherin ; EMT , epithelial to mesenchymal transition ; GO , gene ontology ; KD , knockdown ; Luc , luciferase ; N - cad , neural cadherin ; OCT , Optimal Cutting Temperature compound ; rtTA , reverse tetracycline transactivator ; SMA , smooth muscle actin ; TEB , terminal end bud ; TEM , transmission electron microscopy ; ZO - 1 , zona occludens 1 . Introduction Metastasis is the primary cause of death in breast cancer , and patient outcomes correlate negatively with the extent of meta - static spread at diagnosis ( Bogenrieder and Herlyn , 2003 ; Polyak , 2010 ) . Metastasis initiates with dissemination , the es - cape of epithelial cancer cells from the primary tumor into the surrounding stroma ( Nguyen et al . , 2009 ) . As dissemination requires loss of epithelial cell – cell junctions , a change in the expression of intercellular adhesion genes could be the initiat - ing event ( Nelson , 2009 ; Polyak and Weinberg , 2009 ) . Two re - lated molecular models for dissemination have been proposed on this basis : genomic loss of cell adhesion genes ( Hirohashi , 1998 ; Bogenrieder and Herlyn , 2003 ; Jeanes et al . , 2008 ) and repression of cell adhesion genes through an epithelial to mes - enchymal transition ( EMT ; Peinado et al . , 2007 ; Yang and Weinberg , 2008 ) . These molecular models converge on the cell adhesion gene Epithelial cadherin ( E - cad ; Cdh1 ) . E - cad is essential for early embryonic development ( Larue et al . , 1994 ) ; E - cad ex - pression is frequently lost in human breast cancer ( Berx et al . , 1996 ) ; and E - cad loss in experimental cancer models acceler - ates metastatic progression ( Derksen et al . , 2006 ; Onder et al . , 2008 ) . However , a gap exists in our understanding of the rela - tionship between the normal role of E - cad in adult tissues and its function during cancer metastasis . Analyses of E - cad’s re - quirement in adult epithelial tissues using Cre - mediated dele - tion ( Boussadia et al . , 2002 ) have revealed highly varied E - cad null phenotypes . Conditional E - cad deletion in the mammary gland results in cell death during lactation ( Boussadia et al . , 2002 ) , whereas conditional E - cad deletion in the skin results in hyperproliferation of some cell types and premature degeneration of others ( Tinkle et al . , 2004 ) . E - cad deletion in these develop - mental contexts is not associated with systemic dissemination . D issemination of epithelial cells is a critical step in metastatic spread . Molecular models of dissemi - nation focus on loss of E - cadherin or repression of cell adhesion through an epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . We sought to define the minimum mo - lecular events necessary to induce dissemination of cells out of primary murine mammary epithelium . Deletion of E - cadherin disrupted epithelial architecture and morphogen - esis but only rarely resulted in dissemination . In contrast , expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist1 induced rapid dissemination of cytokeratin - positive epithelial cells . Twist1 induced dramatic transcriptional changes in extra - cellular compartment and cell – matrix adhesion genes but not in cell – cell adhesion genes . Surprisingly , we observed disseminating cells with membrane - localized E - cadherin and  - catenin , and E - cadherin knockdown strongly inhib - ited Twist1 - induced single cell dissemination . Dissemina - tion can therefore occur with retention of epithelial cell identity . The spread of cancer cells during metastasis could similarly involve activation of an epithelial motility pro - gram without requiring a transition from epithelial to mes - enchymal character . Twist1 - induced dissemination preserves epithelial identity and requires E - cadherin Eliah R . Shamir , 1 , 2 Elisa Pappalardo , 3 Danielle M . Jorgens , 4 Kester Coutinho , 4 Wen - Ting Tsai , 4 Khaled Aziz , 5 , 6 Manfred Auer , 4 Phuoc T . Tran , 5 , 6 Joel S . Bader , 3 and Andrew J . Ewald 1 , 2 1 Department of Cell Biology and 2 Department of Oncology , Center for Cell Dynamics , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21205 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering , High - Throughput Biology Center , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD 21218 4 Life Sciences Division , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , CA 94720 5 Department of Radiation Oncology and 6 Department of Molecular Radiation Sciences , Oncology , and Urology , Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD 21231 © 2014 Shamir et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 840 occludens 1 ( ZO - 1 ) localized in apical puncta ( 58 . 2 % ; Fig . 1 , B , D , E , and E  ) . In contrast , E - cad  organoids either failed to es - tablish simple epithelial architecture ( 66 % ) or transiently estab - lished and then lost simple epithelial architecture ( 33 % ; Fig . 1 , C and D ) . E - cad  organoids had a multilayered organization and lacked morphologically evident lumens ( Fig . 1 , E and F ) . Interestingly , a subset of lateral cell – cell contact surfaces within E - cad  organoids had continuous ZO - 1 staining ( Fig . 1 , F and F  ) . Immunofluorescence ( Fig . 1 F ) and Western blotting ( Fig . 1 G ) confirmed loss of E - cad protein by day 6 in culture . E - cad loss coincided with a reduction in  E - catenin and  - catenin ( Fig . 1 G ) but not with a significant change in neural cadherin ( N - cad ; Fig . S1 , A and B ) . By immunofluorescence ,  E - catenin was absent from most internal cell – cell contact surfaces ( Fig . S1 , C – C  ) . E - cad  cells are excluded from regions of simple epithelial organization but rarely disseminate We next used time - lapse microscopy to observe the cell dy - namics driving loss of simple organization after E - cad dele - tion . We monitored recombined cells using the genetically encoded Cre biosensor mT / mG ( Muzumdar et al . , 2007 ) . With - out Cre activity , all cells in mT / mG mice express a membrane - localized red fluorescent protein . Cre activity excises the red gene and induces heritable expression of a membrane - localized green fluorescent protein . We could thereby distinguish in real - time the behaviors of E - cad + ( red ) versus E - cad  ( green ) cells . Loss of simple epithelial architecture in E - cad  organ - oids correlated with a reduction in luminal volume ( Fig . 1 H and Video 1 ) , consistent with a loss of tight junctions . This tissue - level change was accompanied by a change in E - cad  cell shape from simple columnar to round ( Fig . 1 , H  and H  ) . Round cells shifted internally , inducing a transition from a single to multiple luminal epithelial cell layers ( Fig . 1 , H  and H  , arrowheads ) . We next monitored whether E - cad deletion was suffi - cient to induce dissemination into the ECM . Normal epithe - lial cysts maintain a smooth basal surface with the ECM ( Fig . 2 A ) . Conversely , E - cad  cells accumulated on the basal surface and collectively migrated into Matrigel as single file columns ( Fig . 2 , B , B  , G , and G  ) and as disorganized masses ( Fig . 2 , E , E  , F , and F  ) . Single file migration initi - ated from basally positioned E - cad  cells that rounded up but maintained cell – cell contact ( Fig . 2 C ) . As additional cells changed shape , the initiating cell migrated further into the ECM and led a column of closely connected E - cad  cells . However , despite contact with the ECM and high motility , E - cad  cells rarely disseminated into the matrix . Each organ - oid consists of 300 – 500 cells ; yet , on average , only one cell disseminated from each E - cad  organoid ( n = 206 organoids imaged by time - lapse microscopy across nine biologically independent replicates ) . Most E - cad  cells remained adher - ent to other epithelial cells . The few E - cad  cells that did disseminate were rounded , migrated minimally , and had no detectable membrane protrusions . Nevertheless , transcriptional repression of E - cad by EMT tran - scription factors such as Twist1 remains a central concept in cancer metastasis ( Peinado et al . , 2007 ; Yang and Weinberg , 2008 ) . Twist1 regulates metastasis in a mouse mammary tumor model ( Yang et al . , 2004 ) , and its expression is up - regulated in both invasive lobular and invasive ductal breast cancer ( Yang et al . , 2004 ; Mironchik et al . , 2005 ) . Collectively , previous publications have demonstrated that E - cad functions as an invasion suppressor and that induction of EMT transcription factors can accelerate malignant progression ( Hirohashi , 1998 ; Berx and Van Roy , 2001 ; Bogenrieder and Herlyn , 2003 ; Derksen et al . , 2006 ; Yang and Weinberg , 2008 ; Polyak and Weinberg , 2009 ) . However , human breast tumors typically contain thousands of mutations in both signaling and structural genes ( Wood et al . , 2007 ; Stephens et al . , 2009 ) . These coexisting mutations obscure the contribution of individ - ual genetic events to discrete steps in the metastatic cascade . Specifically , the presence of additional mutations in cancer cell lines has made it difficult to distinguish the individual suffi - ciency of E - cad deletion or Twist1 expression for dissemination . Importantly , dissemination can be induced in developmental con - texts such as neural crest migration , suggesting that its molecu - lar regulation may be distinct from other aspects of neoplasia ( Barrallo - Gimeno and Nieto , 2005 ) . We sought to define the minimum molecular perturbations necessary to induce dissemination of normal mammary epithelial cells . To accomplish these goals , we used a combination of or - ganotypic culture , Cre - lox – based genetic models , inducible ex - pression systems , lentiviral gene knockdown ( KD ) , and time - lapse imaging to test the sufficiency of E - cad deletion or Twist1 expres - sion to induce dissemination in primary mammary epithelium . Our results demonstrate that E - cad is required for simple epithe - lial architecture and branching morphogenesis , but its loss is not associated with significant dissemination in 3D culture or in vivo . In contrast , Twist1 expression induces rapid epithelial dissemina - tion . Moreover , Twist1 - induced dissemination occurs without loss of epithelial gene expression and requires E - cad . Results E - cad is required for simple mammary epithelial architecture We first assayed the acute consequences of E - cad deletion in primary mammary epithelial cells using the “organoid” assay , in which mammary ducts are explanted into 3D ECM ( Matrigel ; Ewald et al . , 2008 ; Fig . 1 A ) . In basal medium without growth factors , normal organoids form polarized cysts ( Ewald et al . , 2008 ; Fig . 1 , A and B ) . We isolated organoids from mice car - rying floxed E - cad alleles ( Boussadia et al . , 2002 ) and a ubiquitously expressed , tamoxifen - inducible Cre recombinase ( Badea et al . , 2003 ; Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl mice ) . Organoids from the same mouse were divided into a control group and an ex - perimental group in which E - cad deletion was induced with 50 nM tamoxifen . Control organoids efficiently formed polarized cysts , with E - cad localized to lateral points of cell – cell contact and zona 841 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . apical to polarized E - cad + cells ( Fig . 2 , D – F ) . The basally posi - tioned E - cad  cells were frequently observed past the cell - derived basement membrane ( laminin 332 immunofluorescence ; Fig . 2 , G and G  ) . E - cad + cells within the same organoid local - ized  - catenin to points of cell – cell contact and were inside the basement membrane ( Fig . 2 , E – G ) . We next sought to identify adhesion systems that could allow epithelial cells to remain adherent despite loss of E - cad and membrane - localized  - catenin . Desmosomes represent a major class of intercellular junctions in mammary epithelial cells ( Bissell and Bilder , 2003 ) . However , E - cad inhibition can E - cad  cells remain adherent despite reductions in multiple classes of intercellular junctions To analyze the effects of mosaic E - cad loss , we used adenovi - rally delivered Cre ( Adeno - Cre ) to induce E - cad deletion in a subset of cells within E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoids ( Fig . 2 D ) . We confirmed that green , Cre + cells stained negative for E - cad pro - tein ( Fig . 2 , E and E  ) and that loss of E - cad was accompanied by loss of  - catenin from the membrane ( Fig . 2 , F and F  ) . In these genetic mosaic organoids , E - cad  cells were observed both basally at the cell – ECM interface and in interior positions Figure 1 . E - cad deletion induced loss of simple epithelial architecture . ( A ) E - cad deletion was induced in half of Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl organoids with tamoxifen . ( B ) Control , E - cad + organoids (  Tam ) formed cysts . ( C ) E - cad  organoids ( + Tam ) failed to form cysts ( 28 / 42 movies across three biological replicates ) or transiently established and then lost lumens ( 14 / 42 movies ) . ( D ) E - cad deletion blocked cyst formation . n , total number of organoids ; r , number of biologi - cal replicates . Error bars indicate SD . * * * , P = 0 . 0004 , two - tailed Student’s t test with equal variance . ( E ) Control organoids formed cysts with enrichment of E - cad and ZO - 1 along apicolateral membranes ( E’ ) . ( F ) E - cad  organoids were multilayered , lacked E - cad immunoreactivity , and displayed abnormal ZO - 1 localization . Arrow indicates rare E - cad + cells . ( G ) By Western blot , E - cad deletion ( + Tam ) resulted in complete loss of E - cad protein and significant reductions in  E - catenin and  - catenin ( see also Fig . S1 , A and B ) . Whole cell lysate samples were loaded for equal protein based on BCA analysis . ( H ) The Cre biosensor mT / mG was used to observe E - cad  cell behaviors by confocal microscopy ( Video 1 ) . Cre + , E - cad  cells ( green ) changed shape , from columnar to round , before shifting apically ( H’ and H’’ , arrowheads ) . Gamma adjustments were performed in E and F to improve image clarity . Bars : ( B and C ) 20 µm ; ( E , F , and H ) 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 842 ( Fig . 1 F ) and ultrastructurally identifiable tight junctions . Com - pared with normal E - cad + epithelium , E - cad  epithelium also had a statistically significant , almost eightfold reduction in des - mosomes ( Fig . 2 I ) . However , we still detected small desmo - somes connecting E - cad  cells , even within single file migration columns ( Fig . 2 , J and J  ) . Collectively , our data reveal that loss of E - cad results in loss of simple epithelial architecture , reductions induce reductions in both desmosomes and tight junctions ( Gumbiner et al . , 1988 ) . We therefore used transmission elec - tron microscopy ( TEM ) to quantify the effect of E - cad loss on intercellular junctions in organoids from E - cad fl / fl and E - cad fl / + littermates . We induced recombination with Adeno - Cre and fo - cused our analysis on basally positioned cells ( Fig . 2 H ) . E - cad  cells typically lacked both punctate ZO - 1 immunoreactivity Figure 2 . E - cad  cells displayed reductions in multiple classes of intercellular junctions . Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / + and Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl organoids were isolated , and widespread recombination was induced with tamoxifen . ( A ) Control organoids ( E - cad + ) maintained a smooth basal epithelial border . ( B ) E - cad  organoids collectively migrated into Matrigel as single file columns ( B’ , red arrowhead ) . ( C ) Basally positioned E - cad  cells ( white arrowhead ) were observed to round up and initiate single file cell columns . ( D ) Adeno - Cre was used to generate genetic mosaic organoids with a mixture of E - cad + and E - cad  cells . ( E and F ) Green , Cre + cells reliably lacked E - cad ( E and E’ ) and  - catenin ( F and F’ ) . ( G ) Basally positioned E - cad  cells were located beyond the basement membrane protein laminin 332 . Arrows in G  indicate a single file column . ( H ) TEM was used to quantify desmosomes in Adeno - Cre – transduced E - cad fl / + ( control ) and E - cad fl / fl organoids . Red outline indicates a representative region used for analysis . ( I ) E - cad  epithelium had significantly fewer desmosomes compared with control E - cad + epithelium . Error bars indicate SD . * * * , P = 0 . 0008 ; two - tailed Student’s t test with equal variance . ( J ) Small desmosomes ( J’ , yellow arrowheads ) were detected connecting cells in single file columns . Gamma adjustments were performed in E and F to improve image clarity . Bars : ( A and B ) 20 µm ; ( C and E – G ) 10 µm ; ( H ) 5 µm ; ( J ) 0 . 5 µm . The black rectangle in the top right corner of J is a region of the image mosaic where no pixels were collected . 843 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . that use FGF2 to induce branching morphogenesis ( Ewald et al . , 2008 ; Fig . 3 A ) . We first induced E - cad deletion in most epithelial cells using Adeno - Cre and monitored effects on branching by time - lapse microscopy . Control E - cad + organoids underwent normal branching morphogenesis ( Fig . 3 B and Video 2 ) . Specifically , they initiated and elongated numerous mammary buds and main - tained a smooth border with the ECM . In contrast , E - cad  or - ganoids did not undergo branching morphogenesis and instead rapidly developed a disorganized and uneven basal epithelial sur - face ( Fig . 3 , C and D ; and Video 2 ) . Cells at the basal ECM bor - der were rounded and displayed extensive , uncoordinated motility ( Fig . 3 C  ) . These cells were Cre biosensor + ( green ) and E - cad  in multiple classes of cell – cell junctions , and both apical and basal exclusion of E - cad  cells from E - cad + simple epithelium . However , E - cad loss was not sufficient for robust single cell dissemination into the 3D ECM . E - cad is required for branching morphogenesis in 3D culture Normal mammary branching morphogenesis begins with a tran - sition from simple to multilayered architecture and a concur - rent reduction in apicobasal polarity and intercellular junctions ( Ewald et al . , 2008 , 2012 ) . Therefore , it was plausible that E - cad  cells could participate in branching morphogenesis . We thus assayed the effects of E - cad deletion under culture conditions Figure 3 . Loss of E - cad inhibited branching morphogenesis and induced epithelial disorganization in 3D culture . ( A ) E - cad + / + ; mT / mG and E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoids were isolated , recombination was induced with Adeno - Cre , and branching morphogenesis was induced with FGF2 . ( B ) E - cad + organoids completed branching morphogenesis ( Video 2 ) . ( C ) E - cad  organoids developed a disorganized basal surface composed of rounded cells ( C’ ; Video 2 ) . ( D ) This disorganized surface morphology was observed in 94 % of E - cad  organoids . n , number of time - lapse movies ; r , number of biological replicates . ( E and F ) Basally positioned cells were green ( Cre + ) , E - cad  ( E ) , and  - catenin  ( F ) . ( G and H ) In genetic mosaic organoids with a mixture of E - cad + and E - cad  cells , E - cad + cells ( red ) were observed to initiate new buds ( arrowheads ; H’ ; Video 3 ) . Bars : ( B and C ) 20 µm ; ( E , F , and H ) 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 844 by myoepithelial cells ( smooth muscle actin + [ SMA ] ; Fig . 4 , H and H  ) . Consistent with our 3D culture data , green , Cre + cells in vivo were validated by antibody staining to lack membrane - localized E - cad ( Fig . S1 , D – F ) and  - catenin ( Fig . S1G ) . We next tested the in vivo consequences of E - cad deletion in polarized mammary epithelium . We isolated and transplanted organoids from Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG mice into cleared mam - mary fat pads , waited 6 wk for mature ductal outgrowths , and induced E - cad deletion by tamoxifen injection ( Fig . 4 I ) . Glands were harvested and analyzed 2 – 6 wk after tamoxifen injection . E - cad  cells ( by immunofluorescence ) were observed apically inside duct lumens ( Fig . 4 , J and J  ) and basally as single cells or disorganized groups on duct surfaces ( Fig . 4 , J and J  ) . Ba - sally positioned E - cad  cells were typically still surrounded by myoepithelial cells . We conclude that E - cad is required in mammary epithelial cells to establish and maintain simple epithelial architecture and to initiate and elongate new buds , both in 3D culture and in vivo . E - cad  cells are viable in both contexts but extrude apically and basally from polarized epithelium and fail to con - tribute to mammary branching morphogenesis in the luminal cell compartment . Twist1 induces robust cell dissemination of otherwise normal primary epithelial cells Our data reveal that E - cad loss is not sufficient for robust cell dissemination in 3D culture or in vivo . This conclusion has implications for our conceptual understanding of EMT , as re - pression of E - cad is considered a core effector of EMT ( Yang et al . , 2004 ; Peinado et al . , 2007 ; Vesuna et al . , 2008 ; Thiery et al . , 2009 ) . The bHLH transcription factor Twist1 has emerged as a candidate regulator of EMT in cancer and is thought to act through regulation of E - cad ( Yang et al . , 2004 ; Vesuna et al . , 2008 ; Yang and Weinberg , 2008 ) . We sought to test the hy - pothesis that acute expression of Twist1 would induce epithe - lial dissemination . We isolated organoids from mice carrying a ubiquitously expressed reverse tetracycline transactivator ( rtTA ) and a Tet - responsive Twist1 allele ( Fig . 5 A , CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 ; Tran et al . , 2012 ) . In basal medium , control organoids main - tained a smooth basal surface ( Fig . 5 B ) . In contrast , Twist1 expression induced rapid dissemination of protrusive , individ - ual cells out of the epithelium as early as 24 h after Twist1 in - duction ( Fig . 5 , C and C  ; and Video 4 ) . We next tested the relationship between branching morphogenesis and dissemi - nation . In FGF2 - containing medium , control organoids branched efficiently ( Fig . 5 D ) . In contrast , Twist1 expression inhibited FGF2 - induced branching morphogenesis in 99 % of organoids and induced robust dissemination in 97 % of organoids ( Fig . 5 , D – F ; and Video 5 ) . In the presence of FGF2 , disseminated cells proliferated to form secondary epithelial sites within the ECM ( Fig . 5 E  ) . Immunofluorescent staining for cell type – specific cytokeratins revealed that both luminal epithelial ( K8 + ) and myoepithelial ( K14 + ) cells disseminated in response to Twist1 induction ( Fig . 5 G ) . Interestingly , both cells within the epithe - lial structure and disseminated cells dislayed nuclear Twist1 by immunofluorescence ( Fig . 3 , E and E  ) and lacked  - catenin at points of cell – cell contact ( Fig . 3 , F and F  ) . We next induced genetic mosaic E - cad deletion and ob - served some normal , smooth epithelial buds emerging from disorganized cell surfaces . We hypothesized that these buds were composed of E - cad + cells that had escaped recombination ( Fig . 3 G ) . Consistent with this model , we observed groups of red , E - cad + cells coalesce and initiate new buds from within large disorganized groups of green , E - cad  cells ( Fig . 3 , H and H  ; and Video 3 ) . Our data demonstrate that E - cad  cells remain motile and adherent but fail to incorporate into epithelial buds . Furthermore , in genetic mosaic mixtures , E - cad + cells can initiate buds from predominantly E - cad  organoids ( Fig . 3 , G and H ) . E - cad  cells are excluded from polarized ducts and the body cell compartment of the terminal end bud ( TEB ) in vivo Our genetic mosaic analysis in 3D culture revealed that E - cad  cells lost simple epithelial architecture and most intercellular junctions but remained adherent to each other . However , the presence of E - cad  cells in an organoid did not prevent the ini - tiation of E - cad + epithelial buds . Accordingly , we predicted that , in vivo , genetic mosaic E - cad deletion would result in exclusion of E - cad  cells from regions of active branching morphogenesis and accumulation of disorganized E - cad  cell groups both api - cally and basally . To test this prediction , we isolated organoids from control E - cad + / + ; mT / mG mice and from E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG mice , induced mosaic recombination with Adeno - Cre , and trans - planted the organoids into contralateral , cleared mammary fat pads of 3 - wk - old NOD / SCID mice ( Fig . 4 , A and D , respectively ) . Glands were harvested and analyzed 6 wk after transplantation . Mammary ducts during puberty are elongated by special - ized epithelial structures known as TEBs ( Williams and Daniel , 1983 ) . TEBs are composed of a single , basally positioned layer of cap cells and multiple , apically positioned body cell layers ( Hinck and Silberstein , 2005 ) . Cap cells give rise to myoepithe - lial lineages , whereas body cells give rise to luminal epithelial lineages . Only body cells express E - cad ( Daniel et al . , 1995 ) . Ductal outgrowths from control , genetic mosaic mT / mG trans - plants had both red and green cells in the body and cap cell re - gions of the TEB ( Fig . 4 , B and B  ) and in the luminal and myoepithelial cell layers of polarized ducts ( Fig . 4 , C and C  ) . In contrast , outgrowths from genetic mosaic E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG transplants displayed a striking exclusion of E - cad  cells from the body cell region of the TEB ( Fig . 4 , E and E  ) and from the luminal layer of ducts ( Fig . 4 , F and F  ) . Myoepithelial cells were red and green in E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG genetic mosaic outgrowths ( Fig . 4 E  , green arrowheads ) , but myoepithelial cells express P - cadherin instead of E - cad ( Daniel et al . , 1995 ) . Despite their exclusion from polarized ducts and body cells , E - cad  cells were observed in vivo at 6 wk after trans - plantation . Groups of E - cad  cells were detected on the basal surfaces of polarized E - cad + ducts in the gland periphery ( Fig . 4 , F and F  ) and on the basal surfaces of polarized E - cad + epithe - lium near the transplantation site ( Fig . 4 , G and G  ) . We also observed small clusters of exclusively E - cad  cells , surrounded 845 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . single cells stopped migrating within 48 h of doxycycline re - moval ( Fig . 6 , B and B  ; and Video 6 ) . In FGF2 - containing me - dium , organoids initiated branching morphogenesis within 70 h of doxycycline removal ( Fig . 6 , C and D ; and Video 7 ) , and dis - seminated single cells were observed reintegrating with the epithe - lial group ( Fig . 6 E ) . Remarkably , by day 7 , the resulting branched structures had normalized epithelial organization , with internal luminal cells and basally positioned myoepithelial cells ( Fig . 6 F ) . We conclude that epithelial cells can rapidly reestablish normal developmental programs , such as branching morphogenesis , when Twist1 expression ceases . immunoreactivity ( Fig . 5 , H and H  ) . The Twist1 + epithelial group displayed abnormal internal localization of myoepithelial cells ( SMA + ) and basement membrane ( laminin 332 ) and cor - responding gaps in basal myoepithelial and basement mem - brane coverage ( Fig . 5 I ) . Epithelial cell behaviors are restored when Twist1 expression is turned off We next tested the consequences of transient expression of Twist1 . We induced Twist1 for 48 h and then turned off Twist1 by removing doxycycline ( Fig . 6 A ) . In basal medium , disseminated Figure 4 . E - cad  cells were excluded from polarized ducts and the body cell compartment of the TEB in vivo . ( A ) Adeno - Cre – transduced mT / mG organ - oids ( E - cad + ) were transplanted into cleared mammary fat pads , and glands were harvested after 6 wk . ( B and C ) Both TEBs ( B ) and polarized ducts ( C ) contained a mixture of red and green cells in the luminal and myoepithelial cell layers . ( D ) Adeno - Cre – transduced E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoids were transplanted into contralateral no . 4 glands . ( E ) E - cad  luminal cells were markedly excluded from the body cell region of the TEB in ductal outgrowths . Arrowheads indicate green cells in the cap cell layer . ( F and G ) E - cad  luminal cells were observed on the basal surfaces of polarized epithelium in the gland periphery ( F ) and near the injection site ( G ) . ( H ) E - cad  cells were also observed in disorganized clusters surrounded by myoepithelial cells ( H’ , SMA + ) . ( I ) Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoids ( E - cad + ) were transplanted into cleared mammary fat pads and allowed to grow out for 6 wk . Tamoxifen was injected to induce E - cad deletion , and glands were harvested after 2 – 6 wk . ( J ) E - cad  cells were observed in the lumens ( J’ ) and on the basal surfaces ( J’’ ) of E - cad + polarized ducts ( nine glands ) . Bars , 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 846 activation of Twist1 , we used a Lox - Stop - Lox - rtTA ( R26 : : LSL - rtTA [ Belteki et al . , 2005 ] ) and varying titers of Adeno - Cre to modulate the fraction of cells capable of activating Twist1 . We again used the mT / mG reporter ( Muzumdar et al . , 2007 ) to distinguish between Cre + rtTA + ( green ) and Cre  rtTA  ( red ) cells . We monitored the resulting genetic mosaic tis - sue for dissemination in our branching morphogenesis assay ( Fig . S2 A ) . Twist1 - induced dissemination is cell autonomous We demonstrated that ubiquitous Twist1 activation induced rapid epithelial dissemination . We next sought to test whether a single Twist1 + cell could escape a mostly Twist1  epithe - lium . We reasoned that Twist1  cells could serve as a barrier to dissemination . Alternatively , Twist1 + cells could induce the dissemination of neighboring Twist1  cells . To achieve mosaic Figure 5 . Twist1 induced robust dissemination of normal epithelial cells . ( A ) Organoids were isolated from CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 mice , and Twist1 was induced in half of the organoids with doxycycline . ( B and C ) In basal medium , control organoids maintained epithelial organization ( B ) , whereas Twist1 expression induced robust dissemination ( C ; Video 4 ) . Disseminating cells ( red arrowheads ) migrated away from the epithelium with extensive protrusions ( C’ ) . ( D and E ) In FGF2 - containing medium , control organoids completed branching morphogenesis ( D ) , whereas Twist1 expression blocked branching and induced robust dissemination ( E ; Video 5 ) . Red arrowheads in E indicate disseminated cells . With FGF2 , disseminated cells proliferated to form secondary epithelial sites ( blue arrows ; E’ ; 6 / 9 biological replicates ) . ( F ) Less than 1 % of Twist1 + organoids branched ( * * * , P = 0 . 0006 , two - tailed Student’s t test with equal variance ) , whereas 97 % disseminated ( * * * * , P = 4 × 10  7 , two - tailed Student’s t test with equal variance ) . n , total number of organoids ; r , number of biological replicates . Error bars indicate SD . ( G ) Both luminal ( K8 + ; red arrows ) and myoepithelial ( K14 + ; green arrows ) cells disseminated . ( H ) Both disseminated single cells and cells within the main epithelial group were Twist1 + . ( I ) Myoepithelial cells ( SMA + ) and basement membrane ( laminin 332 ; arrows ) were inappropriately localized to the organoid interior . Gamma adjustments were performed in H , H  , and I to improve image clarity . Bars : ( B – E ) 20 µm ; ( G – I ) 10 µm . 847 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . Twist1 is sufficient to induce local dissemination in vivo Our 3D culture data predicted that Twist1 would induce epi - thelial dissemination in vivo . To test this prediction , we trans - planted genetic mosaic organoids containing a mixture of red , Twist1  and green , Twist1 + cells into cleared mammary fat pads of 3 - wk - old NOD / SCID mice ( Fig . S2 F ) . Twist1 was induced in culture and maintained in vivo using doxycycline feed . Con - sistent with our 3D culture data , we observed local dissemina - tion of green , Twist1 + cells into the surrounding stroma ( Fig . S2 , G – G  ) . We did not detect dissemination of red , Twist1  cells . Importantly , we observed groups of 10 – 20 green , Twist1 + epi - thelial cells in the stroma ( Fig . S2 , H and H  ) . We hypothesize that these groups represent secondary epithelial sites formed Without doxycycline or Twist1 induction , organoids formed branched structures with a mix of red and green cells ( Fig . S2 B ) . Conversely , Twist1 induction resulted in dissemination of green ( Cre + rtTA + Twist1 + ) cells across a wide range of viral titers , even in organoids in which most cells were Cre  rtTA  Twist1  ( Fig . S2 , C and D ) . Epithelium that was mostly Twist1  had a high fre - quency of branching morphogenesis despite the dissemination of Twist1 + cells ( Fig . S2 E ) . As the fraction of rtTA + Twist1 + cells per organoid increased , we observed a decrease in the per - centage of branching organoids ( Fig . S2 E ) , consistent with the branching inhibition observed in epithelium with constitutive Twist1 expression ( Fig . 5 F ) . We never observed dissemination of red , rtTA  cells , indicating that Twist1 - induced dissemina - tion is cell autonomous . Figure 6 . Organoids recovered epithelial behaviors when Twist1 was turned off . ( A ) Twist1 was transiently activated in CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 epithelium by a 48 - h pulse of doxycycline . ( B ) In basal medium , organoids transiently disseminated , but disseminated cells stopped migrating after doxycycline removal ( arrowheads ; Video 6 ) . ( C – E ) In the presence of FGF2 , organoids initiated new buds after doxycycline removal ( D ) , and disseminated cells reinte - grated with the main organoid ( E ; Video 7 ) . ( F ) Branched organoids displayed normal mammary epithelial organization , with inner luminal epithelial cells ( K8 + ) and outer myoepithelial cells ( K14 + ) . Bars , 20 µm . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 848 to localize E - cad and  - catenin during dissemination . Consis - tent with our Western blot results , E - cad staining appeared weaker in cells expressing Twist1 . However , we observed E - cad and  - catenin localized at points of cell – cell contact in cells before dissemination ( Fig . 7 , I and L ) ; E - cad and  - catenin localized to the rear of recently disseminated cells ( Fig . 7 , J and M ) ; and E - cad and  - catenin localized to the membranes of cells migrating in the ECM ( Fig . 7 , K and N ) . We also observed E - cad  cells in the matrix , consistent with the dissemination of K14 + myoepithelial cells , which would not normally express E - cad . We conclude that Twist1 can induce dissemination of cells with membrane - localized adherens junction proteins . Twist1 induces transcriptional changes in cell – matrix adhesion but does not fundamentally alter epithelial identity We next sought to identify the early transcriptional changes downstream of Twist1 . We isolated organoids from three CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 mice and three rtTA  littermate controls from disseminated Twist1 + cells . We conclude that Twist1 ex - pression is sufficient for epithelial dissemination in 3D culture and in vivo . Twist1 induces dissemination without complete loss of adherens junction components Our genetic analyses revealed that loss of E - cad and expression of Twist1 induced distinct cell behaviors and tissue - level pheno - types . E - cad deletion resulted in loss of polarized epithelial architecture , whereas Twist1 expression induced dissemination of luminal and myoepithelial cells ( Fig . 7 , A – G ) . We next used immunoblotting to compare levels of cell – cell adhesion proteins between normal (  Dox ) and Twist1 - expressing ( + Dox ) tissue . We observed significant reductions in E - cad ,  E - catenin ,  - catenin , and N - cad ( Fig . 7 H and Fig . S3 , A and B ) but detected protein in all cases . This reduction in N - cad is inconsistent with a cadherin switch model in which increases in N - cad levels induce migra - tion ( Nieman et al . , 1999 ) . We next used immunofluorescence Figure 7 . Twist1 induced single cell dissemination despite membrane - localized adherens junction proteins . ( A and B ) E - cad deletion blocks branching and induces epithelial disorganization . ( C ) Rare E - cad  disseminated cells maintain a rounded morphology . ( D and E ) Twist1 expression blocks branching and induces single cell dissemination ( red arrowheads ) . ( F ) Disseminated Twist1 + cells exhibit extensive actin - rich protrusions ( red arrows ) . ( G ) In time - lapse mov - ies , E - cad  cells were only rarely observed to disseminate . In contrast , > 100 cells per Twist1 + organoid were routinely observed to disseminate . n , number of time - lapse movies ; r , number of biological replicates . ( H ) By Western blot , Twist1 expression resulted in reductions in protein levels of E - cad , N - cad ,  E - catenin , and  - catenin ( see also Fig . S3 , A and B ) . Whole cell lysate samples were loaded for equal protein based on BCA analysis . ( I – N ) Membrane - localized E - cad and  - catenin ( arrowheads ) were detected in basally positioned cells protruding into the ECM ( I and L ) , in cells that had just disseminated ( J and M ) , and in disseminated cells migrating through the ECM ( K and N ) . Bars : ( B and E ) 20 µm ; ( C , F , and I – N ) 10 µm . 849 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . up - regulated in human cancers , and may represent novel targets for inhibiting dissemination ( Fig . 9 B and Fig . S5 B ) . E - cad loss blocks single cell dissemination of Twist1 + cells We observed that Twist1 induced dissemination of cells with membrane - localized E - cad and  - catenin and that Twist1 did not affect E - cad RNA levels . It was therefore possible that E - cad was contributing to Twist1 - induced dissemination . Accord - ingly , we tested whether E - cad KD would inhibit single cell dis - semination . We used lentiviral shRNA and puromycin selection to knock down Luciferase ( Luc ) or E - cad in CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 organoids isolated from the same mouse ( Fig . 10 A ) . We confirmed E - cad loss by immunoblotting ( Fig . 10 B ) and used Luc KD organoids as a negative control . Consistent with our E - cad deletion experiments , we observed a tandem reduction in  E - catenin and  - catenin . We next used time - lapse microscopy to quantify dissemi - nation after Twist1 induction in Luc KD and E - cad KD organ - oids . Surprisingly , E - cad KD resulted in a strong inhibition of single cell dissemination ( Fig . 10 , C – F ; and Video 8 ) . Many Twist1 - induced , E - cad KD organoids had no detectable dissem - inated cells ( Fig . 10 E ) . Instead , concurrent Twist1 expression and E - cad KD induced migration of long chains of cells into the ECM ( Fig . 10 , G – G  ; and Video 9 ) . Twist1 - induced , E - cad KD cells retained nuclear Twist1 + protein ( Fig . 10 , H and H  ) , were cytokeratin + ( Fig . 10 , I and I  ) , and were organized in collective groups ( Fig . 10 , H – I  ) . We conclude that Twist1 requires E - cad for efficient single cell dissemination . Discussion Our goal was to define the molecular requirements for dissemi - nation of primary , normal epithelial cells . We used genetic tech - niques to contrast deletion of the cell adhesion gene E - cad with expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist1 . We focused on E - cad as it is frequently mutated in human cancer ( Berx et al . , 1996 ; Hirohashi , 1998 ) , and loss of E - cad can synergize with loss of p53 to promote metastasis ( Derksen et al . , 2006 ) . In our experiments , E - cad deletion throughout the mammary epithe - lium resulted in loss of most intercellular junctions , loss of simple epithelial architecture , and inhibition of branching mor - phogenesis . However , E - cad + cells within genetic mosaic epi - thelium were able to initiate and elongate normal mammary buds in 3D culture and in vivo . The associated E - cad  cells were viable and remained adherent to each other but did not contribute to polarized luminal ducts . Therefore , mammary epi - thelial cells must be able to maintain contact through alternate adhesion systems such as desmosomal cadherins or protocad - herins . We conclude that E - cad is required for normal mam - mary development but that its loss alone is not sufficient for robust dissemination . We next evaluated the consequences of Twist1 expression as Twist1 can regulate multiple aspects of metastasis and is thought to function primarily through E - cad repression ( Yang et al . , 2004 ; Peinado et al . , 2007 ; Vesuna et al . , 2009 ; Tran et al . , 2012 ; Tsai et al . , 2012 ) . Our data reveal that Twist1 expression ( TRE - Twist1 ) , cultured these organoids for 24 h in basal medium , added doxycycline for 48 h , and then extracted RNA during ac - tive dissemination ( Fig . 8 A ) . RNA - seq analysis identified 183 genes that were differentially expressed between control and Twist1 - expressing tissue at genome - wide significance ( P = 2 . 7 × 10  6 ; Table S1 ) . Surprisingly , none of the canonical EMT genes were sig - nificantly differentially expressed at the RNA level , including E - cad ( P = 0 . 35 ) . However , both Snai1 ( P = 3 . 2 × 10  6 ) and Fn1 ( P = 4 . 6 × 10  6 ) were close to genome - wide significance ( Fig . 8 B ) . We next analyzed the expression of 127 genes involved in cell – cell adhesion and intercellular junctions ( Table S2 ) . Of these genes , only five were differentially expressed ( Celsr1 , Cldn2 , Fat4 , Frem2 , and Pcdh18 ) . No classical cadherins , desmosomal cadherins , catenins , or cytokeratins were significantly dysregu - lated at the RNA level . We conclude that Twist1 induces dis - semination without loss of epithelial identity . This observation is consistent with the positive immunoreactivity for cytokeratin , E - cad , and  - catenin protein in disseminated cells . We next analyzed gene ontology ( GO ) slim annotations to characterize biological process ( Fig . 8 C ) , cellular component ( Fig . 8 E ) , and molecular function terms ( Fig . S5A ) associated with our 183 differentially expressed ( DE ) genes ( Ashburner et al . , 2000 ) . Relevant GO biological processes with several DE genes included cell adhesion ( Fig . 8 D ) , transport ( Fig . S4 A ) , cell differentiation ( Fig . S4 B ) , lipid metabolic process ( Fig . S4 C ) , and signal transduction ( Fig . S4 D ) . Of these , the cell adhesion , cell differentiation , and ECM organization GO categories were statistically significantly enriched for DE genes relative to genes overall . Importantly , the DE cell adhesion genes were primarily associated with cell – substrate , not cell – cell , adhesion and with cell migration , cell projections , and ECM organization ( Fig . 8 D ) . We observed significantly more DE genes than expected in GO cellular component categories for extracellular region , extracellu - lar space , and proteinaceous ECM ( Fig . 8 F ) . DE genes were also associated with the cytoplasm ( Fig . S4 E ) , plasma membrane ( Fig . S4 F ) , and nucleus . To complement the GO analysis of DE genes at genome - wide significance , we also performed a more general test of dif - ferential expression . Because we observed discordant expression changes within pathways , we used a joint test of up - and down - regulation by calculating the absolute value of the z - score for differential expression of each gene , followed by a t test for genes within versus outside each pathway . Gene sets from path - way databases ( canonical pathways ) were augmented to include gene lists from the literature ( curated pathways ) . We found eight significant canonical pathways , all related to the cell interface with the extracellular space : focal adhesion , integrins , axon guid - ance , collagen formation , ECM – receptor interactions , and ECM organization ( Fig . 9 A and Table S3 ) . We found 51 significant curated gene sets , 13 of which we characterized as cancer re - lated ( Fig . 9 B and Table S3 ) . Out of 183 DE genes , 33 were as - sociated with at least three cancer - related gene sets ( Fig . 9 B ) . We conclude that our data identify a novel set of genes regulated by Twist1 during dissemination that collectively reprogram the extracellular environment and cell interactions with the ECM . Importantly , some of the DE genes have enzymatic activity , are JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 850 Figure 8 . Twist1 induced changes in genes regulating cell – ECM interactions and the extracellular space . ( A ) RNA - seq was used to compare gene expres - sion 48 h after Twist1 induction in control versus Twist1 + organoids . ( B ) Heat map of canonical EMT genes . Only Twist1 was significantly differentially expressed . Genes are sorted by increasing p - value . ( C – F ) The 183 DE genes were mapped to direct associations with GO Slim biological process ( C ) and cellular component ( E ) terms . Black vertical bars indicate the expected number of DE genes per category . Asterisks specify significantly enriched terms . ( D ) DE genes associated with cell adhesion . ( F ) DE genes associated with extracellular space , extracellular region , and proteinaceous ECM . Genes are sorted by descending fold change in D and F . BP , biological process ; CC , cellular component . 851 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . experiments . However , because our experimental induction of Twist1 was sufficient to induce dissemination , our 183 DE genes are likely particularly important in regulating the transition from adherent to motile epithelial cell phenotypes . The conceptual framework for EMT was developed in re - sponse to classic experiments by Hay and co - workers in which definitive epithelial tissues lost polarity and disseminated as single cells into collagen I gels ( Greenburg and Hay , 1982 ; Hay and Zuk , 1995 ) . The appearance of these cells was most similar to that of embryonic mesenchymal cells , leading to the concept of an EMT . We are observing a similar migration of cells out of an epithelial tissue and into the surrounding ECM . However , we do not observe a loss of epithelial - specific gene expression , and the migratory cells are readily able to reestablish epithelial or - ganization , both spontaneously and after cessation of Twist1 ex - pression . Interestingly , we observed reductions in protein but not RNA levels of E - cad ,  - catenin , and  E - catenin , suggesting posttranslational regulation of adherens junction components after Twist1 induction ( Reynolds , 2007 ) . However , we demon - strated that complete KD of E - cad dramatically inhibited Twist1 - induced single cell dissemination . We speculate that the exact protein levels of E - cad may critically regulate whether Twist1 expression results in single cell dissemination or collective cell migration . Accordingly , our data support the concept of a Twist1 - dependent epithelial migratory program rather than a transition to mesenchymal cell fate or gene expression . Consistent with this framework , Twist1 regulates genes important for interactions with the stromal ECM environment . Our concept of an epithe - lial migratory program also finds support in breast cancer . Human breast tumors can express E - cad in both the primary tumor and in distant metastases ( Kowalski et al . , 2003 ) , and primary breast tumor cells positive for the EMT transcription factor Slug can express high levels of E - cad ( Côme et al . , 2006 ) . Most cancer therapies target the increased proliferation of cancer cells relative to normal tissues and not the cell be - haviors driving invasion , dissemination , and metastasis . Few of these drugs have proven clinical benefit in metastatic breast cancer patients ( Carey , 2010 ) . Twist1 is overexpressed in multi - ple metastatic human cancers and appears to specifically regu - late metastatic cell behaviors in multiple experimental cancer models ( Yang et al . , 2004 ; Morel et al . , 2012 ; Tran et al . , 2012 ; Tsai et al . , 2012 ) . Twist1 therefore represents an attractive conceptual target for developing anti - metastatic therapies . However , it is very difficult to target a transcription factor with small molecule therapeutics . Our observation that Twist1 reg - ulates many proteins in the extracellular compartment sug - gests that there may be essential , druggable effectors down - stream of Twist1 whose repression could inhibit dissemination . Our inducible mouse model revealed that disseminated single cells rapidly cease migration after loss of Twist1 expression , suggesting that interfering with the Twist1 program could be an effective anticancer strategy . We envision our Twist1 - induced dissemination assay as a rapid , reproducible , and scalable plat - form to build a new molecular model for effectors of Twist1 and to identify novel therapeutic compounds to antagonize can - cer invasion and dissemination . is sufficient to induce normal epithelial cells to disseminate out of an epithelium , migrate through the ECM , and establish secondary epithelial sites . Surprisingly , the disseminating cells retained cytokeratin expression , and many displayed membrane - localized E - cad and  - catenin . Transcriptional profiling revealed essentially no changes in the RNA expression of epithelial - specific cadherins , catenins , or keratins . Instead , Twist1 regulated many genes that mediate cell – matrix adhesion or modify the extracellular compartment . Because Twist1 regulates distinct targets depending on its bHLH dimer partner ( Barnes and Firulli , 2009 ) , it is likely that its regulated genes vary in different Figure 9 . Significantly enriched pathways relate to cell – matrix adhesion . Gene set enrichment analysis ( GSEA ) identified eight significant canonical pathways ( A ) , all related to cell – matrix adhesion and ECM organization , and 51 significant curated gene sets , 13 of which were characterized as cancer related ( B ) . The Circos plots depict DE genes associated with each gene set . PID , Pathway Interaction Database . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 852 from The Jackson Laboratory . Mouse husbandry and procedures were all conducted under an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee – approved animal protocol . Isolation and 3D culture of primary mammary epithelial organoids We used mechanical disruption , collagenase / trypsin digestion , and differ - ential centrifugation to purify fragments of primary mammary epithelial ducts , termed organoids , as previously described ( Ewald et al . , 2008 , 2012 ; Nguyen - Ngoc et al . , 2012 ) . In brief , mammary glands were har - vested from mice 8 – 12 wk old , minced with a scalpel , and shaken for 40 min Materials and methods Mouse strains The R26 : : Cre - ER mouse line ( Badea et al . , 2003 ) was a gift from J . Nathans ( Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD ) . The CMV : : rtTA transgenic line was a gift from F . Cong and H . Varmus ( National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD ) . The Twist1 - tetO 7 - luc ( TRE - Twist1 ) transgenic line was previously described ( Tran et al . , 2012 ) . E - cad fl / fl ( Boussadia et al . , 2002 ) , mT / mG ( Muzumdar et al . , 2007 ) , and R26 : : Lox - Stop - Lox - rtTA - IRES - EGFP ( R26 : : LSL - rtTA ; Belteki et al . , 2005 ) mouse lines were acquired Figure 10 . E - cad is required for Twist1 - induced single cell dissemination . ( A ) Organoids from CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 mice were divided into three groups for treatment with lentiviral shRNA against Luc or E - cad ( two clones ) . Puromycin was used to select for transduced cells . Organoids were monitored for dissemination after Twist1 induction . ( B ) E - cad shRNA induced loss of E - cad protein and reductions in  E - catenin and  - catenin . Whole cell lysate samples were loaded for equal protein based on BCA analysis . ( C – E ) In FGF2 - containing medium with doxycycline , E - cad KD organoids disseminated significantly fewer cells than Luc KD organoids ( Video 8 ) . Red arrowheads in C and D indicate disseminated cells . ( F ) Disseminated cells per organoid were quantified from movies after 100 h of Twist1 induction . E - cad KD significantly reduced single cell dissemination . Box - and - whisker plots are drawn with the box extend - ing from the 25th to 75th percentiles and whiskers at the 10th and 90th percentiles . n , number of time - lapse movies ; r , number of biological replicates . P < 0 . 0001 between Luc shRNA and E - cad shRNA # 1 or # 2 ; P = 0 . 014 between E - cad shRNA # 1 and # 2 ( negative binomial generalized estimating equa - tions model ) . ( G ) E - cad KD organoids extended collective chains of cells into the matrix ( orange arrowheads ; Video 9 ; G’ and G’’ ) . ( H and I ) Cells within collective chains stained positive for Twist1 and luminal ( K8 + ) and / or myoepithelial ( K14 + ) cytokeratins . Bars : ( C – E and G ) 20 µm ; ( H and I ) 10 µm . 853 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . Twist1 activation in vivo was maintained with doxycycline feed ( TD . 01306 ; Harlan Laboratories ) . For deletion of E - cad in mature ductal networks , Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoids were transplanted into NOD / SCID mice and allowed to grow for 6 wk . To induce E - cad deletion , we injected tamoxifen i . p . every other day for 5 d ( three total injections ) using a 1 - ml syringe and a 30G1 / 2 needle ( 305106 ; BD ) . Each injection consisted of 100 µl of 10 mg / ml tamoxifen dissolved in sunflower seed oil . Glands were harvested 2 – 6 wk after injection . Differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscopy Time - lapse imaging of mammary organoids was conducted using an LD Plan - Neofluar 20× / 0 . 4 Korr Ph2 objective lens and a Cell Observer sys - tem with an AxioObserver Z1 and an AxioCam MRM camera ( Carl Zeiss ) . In general , we recorded 100 – 200 positions in parallel for 5 – 7 d , with im - ages acquired at 20 - min intervals . Temperature was maintained at 37°C and CO 2 at 5 % . AxioVision ( Carl Zeiss ) was used to acquire and analyze time - lapse movies , place scale bars , and export individual TIFFs . Photo - shop CS5 ( Adobe ) was used to adjust levels on entire images to maximize image clarity . Confocal microscopy Confocal imaging was performed on a spinning - disk confocal microscope ( Solamere Technology Group Inc . ) with an XR / MEGA - 10 S30 camera ( Stanford Photonics , Inc . ) , as previously described ( Ewald et al . , 2011 ; Ewald , 2013 ) . A Fluar 20× / 0 . 75 objective lens ( Carl Zeiss ) was used for intermediate magnification images . An LD C - Apochromat 40× / 1 . 1 W Korr objective lens ( Carl Zeiss ) was used for high magnification single and time - lapse image acquisition , with water and oil used as the imaging medi - ums , respectively . Acquisition of both fixed and time - lapse images was per - formed using a combination of  Manager ( Edelstein et al . , 2010 ) and Piper ( Stanford Photonics , Inc . ) . For time - lapse imaging , images were col - lected at 20 - min intervals for 2 – 4 d , and temperature was maintained at 37°C and CO 2 at 5 % . Imaris ( Bitplane ) was used to analyze time - lapse movies , place scale bars , and export individual TIFFs . Photoshop CS5 was used as needed to adjust levels and gamma for each channel on entire images to maximize image clarity . High - pressure freezing and freeze substitution processing We isolated epithelium from E - cad fl / fl and E - cad fl / + littermates , induced re - combination with Adeno - Cre , and cultured organoids for 5 – 7 d in Matrigel . Embedded organoids were then fixed in 3 % glutaraldehyde to preserve for shipping to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory . There , samples were placed in 1 - mm - wide by 200 - µm - deep aluminum freezing hats and , before freezing , were surrounded with 20 % BSA , used as a cryoprotectant . Sam - ples were then cryoimmobilized using a high - pressure freezer ( HPM - 010 ; Bal - tec , Inc . ) and freeze substituted in 1 % osmium tetroxide and 0 . 1 % uranyl acetate in acetone with 5 % DDH 2 O , as previously described ( McDonald and Webb , 2011 ) . Upon completion of freeze substitution , samples were progressively infiltrated with an epon - Araldite resin ( McDonald and Müller - Reichert , 2002 ) . Polymerization in epon - Araldite resin was performed by flat embedding between two glass slides to allow for precise localization of fea - tures of interest ( Müller - Reichert et al . , 2003 ) . TEM Samples were sectioned into 70 – 100 - nm - thin and 500 - nm - thick sections using an Ultramicrotome ( UC6 ; Leica ) . Sections were then collected onto formvar - coated , rhodium - enforced copper 2 - mm slot grids . The grids were post - stained with 2 % uranyl acetate followed by Reynold’s lead citrate , for 5 min each . The sections were imaged using a Tecnai 12 TEM ( FEI ) , oper - ated between 690× and 11 , 000× at 120 kV under normal conditions . Images were recorded using an Orius SC1000B CCD with Digital Micro - graph 3 software ( Gatan Inc . ) . Serial electron microscopy software was used to collect wide - field montages for overview TEM images of complete organoid cross sections ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) . ImageJ software ( Abramoff et al . , 2004 ) and Photoshop CS4 were used to crop images , place scale bars , and adjust brightness and contrast on entire images , as needed . Desmosome quantification Desmosomes were counted among basally positioned cells in five E - cad fl / fl organoids and four E - cad fl / + organoids imaged by TEM . For each organ - oid , we selected one to four regions of 20 – 30 cells that were no more than two cells deep from the organoid – ECM interface . Regions were free of sin - gle file columns or epithelial buds . For desmosomes located between cells in the second and third layers deep to the surface , we counted the desmo - some but not the third - layer cell . Photoshop CS4 was used to track the des - mosomes and regions used for quantification . at 37°C in collagenase solution : DMEM ( 10565 – 018 ; Gibco ) with 2 mg / ml collagenase ( C2139 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , 2 mg / ml trypsin ( 27250 – 018 ; Gibco ) , 5 % FBS ( F0926 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , 5 µg / ml insulin ( I9278 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 50 µg / ml gentamicin ( 15750 ; Gibco ) . Suspensions were centrifuged at 1 , 250 rcf to remove a floating layer of adipocytes , and pel - lets were treated with 2 U / µl DNase ( D4263 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) to detach or - ganoids from stromal cells . Enzymes and single cells were removed by four quick spins at 1 , 250 rcf such that the final pellet consisted mostly of organ - oids , each containing several hundred cells . Organoids were embedded in 3D Matrigel ( 354230 ; BD ) at 2 – 3 organoids / µl and plated as 100 - µl sus - pensions in 24 - well coverslip - bottomed plates ( 662892 ; Greiner Bio - One ) over a 37°C heating block . Gels were allowed to polymerize for 30 min at 37°C and then cultured in organoid medium : DMEM with 1 % insulin - transferrin - selenium ( 51500 – 056 ; Gibco ) and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin ( P4333 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . Basal organoid medium was used to induce cyst formation , whereas addition of 2 . 5 nM FGF2 ( F0291 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) was used to induce branching morphogenesis . Branching was scored as organ - oids with three or more elongated buds . Cysts were scored as unbranched organoids with lumens detectable by light microscopy . Dissemination was scored as organoids with one or more adjacent single cells that were clearly separated from the epithelial group . Tamoxifen - inducible Cre - mediated deletion in 3D culture Cre activity was induced in Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG epithelium by culturing organoids overnight with 50 nM tamoxifen once embedded in Matrigel . To wash out tamoxifen , samples were rinsed with PBS , incubated in organoid medium for 20 min at 37°C , and then cultured in fresh organoid medium . The tamoxifen - inducible system resulted in Cre activity in almost all cells and did not affect branching morphogenesis in control organoids ( e . g . , Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / + ; mT / mG ) . Adenoviral delivery of Cre recombinase Before embedding in Matrigel , mammary organoids were infected with Adeno - Cre ( 1045 ; Vector Laboratories ) at a ratio of  10 7 PFU per 1 , 000 organoids . Infections were conducted in 50 µl DMEM for 1 – 2 h at 37°C to yield recombination in 50 – 75 % of cells . Percentage of recombination was raised by increasing viral titer or by overnight incubation with virus . Twist1 activation in 3D culture Twist1 expression was induced in 3D Matrigel cultures by supplementing organoid medium with 5 µg / ml doxycycline ( Shanghai RenYoung Pharma - ceutical Co . , Ltd ) . Because doxycycline is labile , medium was replaced every 48 h . To turn Twist1 expression off , doxycycline - containing medium was removed and samples were rinsed with sterile PBS . Samples were then incubated with organoid medium without doxycyline for 20 min at 37°C . This medium was then discarded , samples were rinsed again with PBS , and fresh organoid medium without doxycycline was added back . Mammary fat pad transplantation For transplantation of genetic mosaic E - cad or Twist1 tissue , we isolated or - ganoids , induced recombination with Adeno - Cre , and washed organoids twice with 500 µl DMEM to remove viral particles . For all experiments , or - ganoids were incubated at 37°C overnight in organoid medium with 2 . 5 nM FGF2 in HydroCell 96 - well microplates ( 174907 ; Thermo Fisher Scien - tific ) . For Twist1 experiments , organoid medium was supplemented with 5 µg / ml doxycycline . The next day , organoids were resuspended in a 50 % DMEM / 50 % Matrigel solution at a density of 20 – 40 organoids / µl and stored on ice . We conducted orthotopic transplantation into 3 - wk - old NOD / SCID mice in a sterile hood . In brief , mice were anesthetized with 2 – 2 . 5 % isoflurane and immobilized , and the surgical site was cleaned with ethanol . A 1 - cm incision was made at the midline and a 0 . 5 - cm inci - sion was made from the midline to one hip . The skin was retracted to ex - pose the no . 4 mammary gland . The no . 5 mammary fat pad and the region of the no . 4 mammary fat pad proximal to the lymph node were re - moved . The organoid suspension was loaded into a syringe ( 702RN [ 7636 – 01 ] ; Hamilton ; custom 1 - in needles , 26 gauge ) , and 10 – 20 µl were injected into the cleared no . 4 fat pad . The skin was then locally infiltrated with 5 – 10 µl of 0 . 25 % bupivacaine . The same procedure was repeated for the contralateral mammary gland . For each mouse , we transplanted control organoids ( e . g . , mT / mG ) in one gland and experi - mental organoids ( E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG , Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG , or R26 : : LSL - rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 ; mT / mG ) in the other . The surface of the peritoneum was wet with PBS ( without Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + ) , and wounds were closed with 9 - mm autoclips . Triple antibiotic ointment was applied to the incision site as needed . For Twist1 experiments , i . p . injections of 100 µg doxycycline in PBS ( without Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + ) were also performed at the time of surgery . JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 854 Enzo Life Sciences ) , rabbit anti – N - cad ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; ab18203 ; Abcam ) , mouse anti - Twist1 ( 1 : 500 ; sc - 81417 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , and mouse anti –  - actin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; A2228 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . The N - cad antibody de - tected protein by Western blotting but not by immunofluorescence . Mem - branes were washed three times with TBST for 5 min and incubated with HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 2 , 000 ; Invitrogen ) in blocking buf - fer for 1 h at room temperature . Bands were detected with ECL reagents ( 34075 or 34095 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and membranes were imaged using an imager and software ( Alpha - InnoTec ) . Band intensities acquired under autoexposure were quantified using Fiji . To probe for more than one protein , membranes were incubated with stripping buffer ( 21059 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 30 min at 37°C , washed three times with TBST for 5 min , and reblocked . Primary antibodies used on the same membrane were from different hosts . E - cad KD experiments Approximately 1 , 000 CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 organoids resuspended in 200 µl of basal organoid medium were added to each of four wells of a HydroCell 96 - well microplate . Organoids were allowed to settle for 1 h at 37°C . Lentiviral transduction particles were thawed on ice : ( 1 ) MISSION pLKO . 1 - puro Luciferase shRNA ( 10 6 TU / ml ; SHC007V ; Sigma - Aldrich ) ; ( 2 ) MISSION pLKO . 1 - puro Cdh1 shRNA # 1 ( 10 6 TU / ml ; TRCN0000042578 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) ; ( 3 ) MISSION pLKO . 1 - puro Cdh1 shRNA # 2 ( 10 6 TU / ml ; TRCN0000042581 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . In separate centrifuge tubes , 3 µl of ViroMag R / L nanoparticles ( RL40200 ; OZ Biosciences ) were mixed with 47 µl of lentivirus and incubated at room temperature for 30 min . In three of the organoid wells , 150 µl of medium were carefully removed , and 50 µl of the ViroMag / lentivirus mix were added . Suspensions were mixed well to disperse the organoids and prevent aggregation . The fourth organoid well served as a no - virus , puromycin control to evaluate killing efficiency . The 96 - well plate was incubated on top of a magnetic plate ( MF10000 ; OZ Biosciences ) at 37°C for 1 . 5 h and then taken off the magnet and incu - bated overnight at 37°C . On day 2 ,  70 µl of medium were removed from each well with virus , 200 µl of fresh organoid medium were added , and the suspensions were mixed well to redisperse the organoids . On day 3 ,  200 µl of medium were removed from all wells , and 200 µl of organ - oid medium with 2 . 5 nM FGF2 and 4 µg / ml puromycin were added . Se - lection was performed for 3 d , and the surviving virus - treated organoids were collected for 3D culture and imaged by DIC time - lapse microscopy . In parallel , TRE - Twist1 ( rtTA  ) organoids from littermate controls were treated with lentiviruses and , after selection , used for protein extraction to evaluate E - cad KD efficiency . Time - lapse movies were used to track and count cells that had disseminated by 100 h of Twist1 induction in each of the three treatment groups . A cell was considered disseminated if it had a clear space be - tween itself and the main organoid ( visible ECM ) and was observed to be migrating away persistently . Cells within collective chains that temporarily detached in only a few frames were not counted as disseminated . RNA isolation and sequencing Organoids were isolated from three CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 mice ( “Twist1” ) and three TRE - Twist1 ( rtTA  ; “Control” ) littermates ( all inbred FVB / N ) . For each mouse , organoids were embedded in 3D Matrigel at 3 – 10 organ - oids / µl and plated as six 50 - µl suspensions in a 35 - mm dish . Organoids were cultured in basal organoid medium for 24 h and in basal organoid medium supplemented with 5 µg / ml doxycycline for an additional 48 h . All CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 samples were disseminating at 48 h of Twist1 in - duction , whereas no control samples were disseminating . Total RNA was extracted using 1 ml of TRIzol per dish ( 15596 - 026 ; Life Technologies ) and RNeasy ( QIAGEN ) . With 10 – 100 ng of RNA collected per sample , we generated barcoded NuGen RNA - seq v . 2 libraries and ran paired end , 75 - bp , 50 - cycle sequencing on a HiSeq 2000 ( Johns Hopkins Medical In - stitutions Deep Sequencing and Microarray Core Facility ) . Paired - end , non - strand – specific RNA - seq reads were mapped to the mouse reference genome ( Genomic Reference Consortium build 38 ) using read mapper Bowtie ( Langmead et al . , 2009 ) and splice junction mapper TopHat ( Trapnell et al . , 2009 ) . We achieved a mean of 51 . 4 million uniquely mapped reads per sample and estimated the number of reads mapped to each gene using HTSeq ( Anders , 2010 ) , with gene coordinates from the reference genome Generic Feature Format file . Raw counts were normalized and p - values were calculated for Twist1 versus control differen - tial expression from negative binomial distributions using DESeq ( Anders and Huber , 2010 ) . Based on the number of genes tested , the genome - wide significance level for 0 . 05 family - wise error rate was 2 . 74 × 10  6 , and 183 genes were significant at this level . Sequence data has been uploaded to the Sequence Read Archive ( project accession no . SRP033275 ) . Immunofluorescence Organoids grown in 3D Matrigel were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min , rinsed three times in PBS for 10 min , embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature compound ( OCT ) , and frozen at  80°C . OCT blocks were sectioned at 50 - µm thickness by cryostat at  20°C . Sections were placed on Superfrost Plus Gold microscope slides ( 15 - 188 - 48 ; Fisherbrand ) and stored at  80°C . For antibody staining , samples were thawed at room temperature , rinsed twice in PBS for 10 min to remove OCT , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h , and rinsed twice in PBS for 10 min . Sam - ples were blocked for 1 – 3 h with 10 % FBS / 1 % BSA , incubated with pri - mary antibodies overnight at 4°C in 1 % FBS / 1 % BSA , and rinsed three times in 1 % FBS / 1 % BSA for 15 min . Incubation with secondary antibod - ies was conducted in 1 % FBS / 1 % BSA overnight at 4°C or for 2 h at room temperature . Slides were rinsed three times in PBS for 10 min , mounted with Fluoromount ( F4680 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and sealed with coverslips . F - Actin was stained with Alexa Fluor Phalloidin ( 1 : 100 ; Invitrogen ) , and nuclei were stained with DAPI ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; D3571 ; Invitrogen ) . Immunofluorescence staining for each antibody was performed at least three independent times for a minimum of 10 – 15 organoids . Primary antibodies used were rat anti – E - cad ( 1 : 250 ; 13 - 1900 ; Invitrogen ) , rabbit anti – ZO - 1 ( 1 : 500 ; 40 - 2300 ; Invitrogen ) , rabbit anti –  - catenin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; C2206 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , mouse anti –  E - catenin ( 1 : 100 ; ALX - 804 - 101 ; Enzo Life Sciences ) , rabbit anti – laminin 332 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; gifts of P . Marinkovich , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , and M . Aumailley , University of Cologne , Cologne , Germany ) , rat anti – cytokeratin - 8 ( 1 : 100 ; TROMA - I ; Developmental Studies Hybrid - oma Bank ) , rabbit anti – cytokeratin - 14 ( 1 : 500 ; PRB - 155P ; Covance ) , mouse anti - smooth muscle  - actin ( 1 : 250 ; A5228 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and mouse anti - Twist1 ( 1 : 50 ; sc - 81417 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc . ) . Sec - ondary antibodies used were all Alexa Fluor – conjugated antibodies ( 1 : 200 ; Invitrogen ) . Transplanted no . 4 mammary glands were dissected , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 4 h at room temperature , rinsed three times in PBS for 15 min , and embedded in OCT . OCT blocks were sectioned at 50 – 100 - µm thickness by cryostat with OT at  40°C and CT at  30°C . Samples on slides were stained as above but incubated in primary anti - body for 48 h at 4°C and in secondary antibody for 24 h at 4°C or for 6 – 8 h at room temperature . Protein extraction Lysis buffer for protein extraction was prepared by diluting 10× RIPA buffer ( 20 – 188 ; EMD Millipore ) in ultrapure water and chilling the mixture at 4°C for at least 2 h . Immediately before use , lysis buffer was supplemented with 0 . 1 % SDS , 5 % glycerol , 3 mM EDTA , 1 mM NaF , 1 mM PMSF , 1 . 5 mM NaVO 4 , Aprotinin ( A6279 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and a mini protease inhibitor tablet ( 11836153001 ; Roche ) . Organoids embedded in 3D Matrigel were collected using freshly made PBS / EDTA buffer ( 5 mM , 1 mM NaVO 4 , 1 . 5 mM NaF , and 1 mM PMSF in PBS ) . Medium was aspirated from 3D culture wells , and all wells were rinsed once quickly with 1 ml of cold PBS . Approximately 1 ml of cold PBS / EDTA buffer was used to dissolve two 100 - µl gels . Solutions were transferred to centrifuge tubes and mixed well by pipetting . Tubes were left on a 4°C shaker for 1 h to dissolve the Matri - gel and then centrifuged at 400 rcf for 5 min at 4°C . Supernatants were removed and , if necessary , pellets were washed with additional PBS / EDTA to remove residual Matrigel . After another 5 - min spin , pellets were resus - pended in 100 µl of RIPA lysis buffer , vortexed , and left on ice for 30 – 40 min . Tubes were centrifuged for 10 min at 18 , 400 rcf at 4°C and superna - tants transferred to new centrifuge tubes and stored at  80°C . For lentivi - rus experiments , organoids were collected after 3 - d puromycin selection , washed once with cold PBS to remove trace medium , and resuspended in RIPA lysis buffer as described . Western blotting Whole cell protein lysates were thawed on ice for 20 min , vortexed , and centrifuged for 5 min at 18 , 400 rcf at 4°C . Samples in Laemmli sample buffer ( 161 – 0747 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) and  - mercaptoethanol were heated at 70°C for 10 min and loaded for equal protein based on bicin - choninic acid ( BCA ) analysis ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in 4 – 15 % Mini - PROTEAN TGX precast gels ( 456 – 1084 ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . SDS - PAGE was performed at 40 V for 30 min and 80 V for  90 min until the dye front ran off the gels . Gels were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes ( 45 - 000 - 948 ; GE Healthcare ) at 100 V for 1 h at 4°C . Membranes were blocked with 5 % milk in TBST ( 03 - 500 - 537 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 1 h at room temperature . Primary antibodies were prepared in blocking buffer and added overnight at 4°C . Primary antibodies used were rat anti – E - cad ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; 13 - 1900 ; Invitrogen ) , rabbit anti –  - catenin ( 1 : 2 , 000 ; C2206 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , mouse anti –  E - catenin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; ALX - 804 - 101 ; 855 Dissemination without loss of epithelial identity • Shamir et al . ( P50CA103175 ; to P . T . Tran and A . J . Ewald ) , by a grant from the Safeway Foun - dation for Breast Cancer Research ( to A . J . Ewald ) , by the Avon Foundation for Women ( to A . J . Ewald ) , by the Isaac Morris Hay and Lucille Elizabeth Hay Gradu - ate Fellowship Award ( to E . R . Shamir ) , by funds from the National Institutes of Health / National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( P01 GM051487 ; to M . Auer ) , by the University of California , Berkeley Physical Sciences in Oncology Center ( to M . Auer and D . M . Jorgens ) , by funds from the National Institutes of Health / National Center for Research Resources ( U54RR020839 ; to J . S . Bader ) , and by the Robert J . Kleberg and Helen C . Kleberg Foundation ( to J . S . Bader ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Submitted : 17 June 2013 Accepted : 27 January 2014 References Abramoff , M . D . , P . J . Magalhaes , and S . J . Ram . 2004 . Image processing with ImageJ . Biophotonics International . 11 : 36 – 42 . Anders , S . 2010 . HTSeq : Analysing high - throughput sequencing data with Python . Available at http : / / www - huber . embl . de / users / anders / HTSeq / doc / index . html ( Accessed on December 26 , 2012 ) . Anders , S . , and W . Huber . 2010 . Differential expression analysis for sequence count data . Genome Biol . 11 : R106 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / gb - 2010 - 11 - 10 - r106 Ashburner , M . , C . A . Ball , J . A . Blake , D . Botstein , H . Butler , J . M . Cherry , A . P . Davis , K . Dolinski , S . S . Dwight , J . T . Eppig , et al . 2000 . Gene ontology : tool for the unification of biology . Nat . Genet . 25 : 25 – 29 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 75556 Badea , T . C . , Y . Wang , and J . Nathans . 2003 . A noninvasive genetic / pharmaco - logic strategy for visualizing cell morphology and clonal relationships in the mouse . J . Neurosci . 23 : 2314 – 2322 . Barnes , R . M . , and A . B . Firulli . 2009 . A twist of insight - the role of Twist - family bHLH factors in development . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 53 : 909 – 924 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1387 / ijdb . 082747rb Barrallo - Gimeno , A . , and M . A . Nieto . 2005 . The Snail genes as inducers of cell movement and survival : implications in development and cancer . Development . 132 : 3151 – 3161 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 01907 Belteki , G . , J . Haigh , N . Kabacs , K . Haigh , K . Sison , F . Costantini , J . Whitsett , S . E . Quaggin , and A . Nagy . 2005 . Conditional and inducible transgene expression in mice through the combinatorial use of Cre - mediated re - combination and tetracycline induction . Nucleic Acids Res . 33 : e51 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gni051 Berx , G . , and F . Van Roy . 2001 . The E - cadherin / catenin complex : an important gatekeeper in breast cancer tumorigenesis and malignant progression . Breast Cancer Res . 3 : 289 – 293 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / bcr309 Berx , G . , A . M . Cleton - Jansen , K . Strumane , W . J . de Leeuw , F . Nollet , F . van Roy , and C . Cornelisse . 1996 . E - cadherin is inactivated in a majority of invasive human lobular breast cancers by truncation mutations through - out its extracellular domain . Oncogene . 13 : 1919 – 1925 . Bissell , M . J . , and D . Bilder . 2003 . Polarity determination in breast tissue : desmo - somal adhesion , myoepithelial cells , and laminin 1 . Breast Cancer Res . 5 : 117 – 119 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / bcr579 Bogenrieder , T . , and M . Herlyn . 2003 . Axis of evil : molecular mechanisms of cancer metastasis . Oncogene . 22 : 6524 – 6536 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1206757 Boussadia , O . , S . Kutsch , A . Hierholzer , V . Delmas , and R . Kemler . 2002 . E - cadherin is a survival factor for the lactating mouse mammary gland . Mech . Dev . 115 : 53 – 62 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0925 - 4773 ( 02 ) 00090 - 4 Carey , L . A . 2010 . Through a glass darkly : advances in understanding breast cancer biology , 2000 – 2010 . Clin . Breast Cancer . 10 : 188 – 195 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3816 / CBC . 2010 . n . 026 Côme , C . , F . Magnino , F . Bibeau , P . De Santa Barbara , K . F . Becker , C . Theillet , and P . Savagner . 2006 . Snail and slug play distinct roles during breast carcinoma progression . Clin . Cancer Res . 12 : 5395 – 5402 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 06 - 0478 Daniel , C . W . , P . Strickland , and Y . Friedmann . 1995 . Expression and functional role of E - and P - cadherins in mouse mammary ductal morphogenesis and growth . Dev . Biol . 169 : 511 – 519 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / dbio . 1995 . 1165 Derksen , P . W . , X . Liu , F . Saridin , H . van der Gulden , J . Zevenhoven , B . Evers , J . R . van Beijnum , A . W . Griffioen , J . Vink , P . Krimpenfort , et al . 2006 . Somatic inactivation of E - cadherin and p53 in mice leads to metastatic lobular mam - mary carcinoma through induction of anoikis resistance and angiogenesis . Cancer Cell . 10 : 437 – 449 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2006 . 09 . 013 Edelstein , A . , N . Amodaj , K . Hoover , R . Vale , and N . Stuurman . 2010 . Computer control of microscopes using µManager . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . Chapter 14 : Unit14 . 20 . GO analysis Significant genes were characterized using GO Slim categories for biolog - ical process , cellular component , and molecular function ( Ashburner et al . , 2000 ; GO file downloaded on 9 / 12 / 13 and mapping from 3 / 5 / 13 ) . We first computed the overall fraction of genes that were up - regulated ( f up = 107 / 18 , 260 ) and down - regulated ( f down = 76 / 18 , 260 ) . For each GO term , we then calculated the number of genes n annotated to the category and also among the 18 , 260 genes sequenced . Categories with n < 2 were not considered further . For categories with n ≥ 2 , we conducted separate two - sided tests corresponding to enrichment or depletion based on Poisson distributions for up - regulated ( expected number = f up n ) and down - regulated ( expected number = f down n ) DE genes . For each of the three ontologies , the p - value threshold for 0 . 05 family - wise error rate was set to 0 . 05 / ( 4 × num - ber of categories tested ) . This conservative approach was selected as more computationally convenient than the corresponding Fisher’s exact tests . Pathway - level differential expression To assess pathway - level differential expression , we used gene sets available through MSigDB v4 . 0 ( Subramanian et al . , 2005 ) . The 1 , 320 canonical gene sets within MSigDB are aggregated from major pathway databases : BioCarta , KEGG , Reactome , the Pathway Interaction Database , the Sigma - Aldrich data - base , the Signaling Gateway database , the Signal Transduction KE database , and the SuperArray database . These are then augmented to 4 , 722 curated gene sets by including gene lists from published studies , the L2L gene sets from mammalian microarray studies ( Newman and Weiner , 2005 ) , the MYC Tar - get Gene Database ( Zeller et al . , 2003 ) , and other public resources . For each gene , including genes not differentially expressed at genome - wide signifi - cance , the p - value from DESeq was converted to the equivalent z - score for a two - sided test , with z > 0 for Twist1 > Control and z < 0 for Twist1 < Control . Each pathway was tested using a one - sided Student’s t test of | z | within path - way > | z | outside pathway , corresponding to an increased number of DE genes without regard to direction ( up or down in Twist1 versus Control ) . Signif - icance thresholds for 0 . 05 family - wise error rates at the pathway level were estimated using 500 permutations of gene z - scores , recording the best p - value from each permutation , and taking the 25th - best p - value as the 0 . 05 FWER threshold . The resulting thresholds were 1 . 44 × 10  13 for ca - nonical gene sets and 5 . 31 × 10  19 for curated gene sets . These thresholds are more stringent than a standard Bonferroni correction . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that E - cad deletion results in complete loss of E - cad protein and reduced levels of other adherens junction components in 3D culture and in vivo . Fig . S2 shows that Twist1 - induced dissemination is cell autonomous and occurs in vivo . Fig . S3 shows that Twist1 expression results in reduced levels of adherens junction proteins . Fig . S4 shows heat maps of genes directly associated with relevant GO Slim biological process and cellular component terms . Fig . S5 shows the mapped GO Slim molecular function terms and a heat map of Twist1 - regulated genes with enzymatic activity . Video 1 shows confocal time - lapse imaging of a Cre - ER ; E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoid transition - ing from simple to multilayered organization after E - cad deletion . Video 2 shows DIC time - lapse imaging of representative E - cad + and E - cad  organoids grown in the branching morphogenesis assay . Video 3 shows confocal time - lapse imaging of E - cad + bud initiation in a genetic mosaic E - cad fl / fl ; mT / mG organoid . Videos 4 and 5 show DIC time - lapse imaging of representative CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 organoids grown in basal medium and FGF2 - containing medium , respectively , with and without Twist1 induction . Videos 6 and 7 show DIC time - lapse imaging of a CMV : : rtTA ; TRE - Twist1 organoid grown in basal medium and FGF2 - containing medium , respectively , with transient Twist1 induction . Video 8 shows DIC time - lapse imaging of representative Twist1 - expressing organoids with Luc and E - cad KD . Video 9 shows DIC time - lapse imaging of collective epithelial migration in a Twist1 - expressing , E - cad KD organoid . Table S1 lists all genes sequenced by RNA - seq , sorted by p - value , and the 183 DE genes along with their associated GO Slim terms . Table S2 lists RNA - seq raw counts and p - values for 127 epithelial genes involved in cell – cell adhesion and intercellular junctions . Table S3 lists the significant canonical pathways and curated gene sets identified by gene set enrichment analysis . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201306088 / DC1 . We thank Jen Beck for technical support , Ryan Gray for preliminary experiments , Xian Zhou for statistical support , and the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions Deep Sequencing and Microarray Core Facility for sequencing support . We thank Feng Cong and Harold Varmus for donating the CMV : : rtTA mouse line . This work was supported by a Research Scholar Grant ( RSG - 12 - 141 - 01 - CSM ) from the American Cancer Society ( to A . J . Ewald ) , by a Research Scholar Grant ( RSG - 12 - 196 - 01 - TBG ) from the American Cancer Society ( to P . T . Tran ) , by funds from the National Institutes of Health / National Cancer Institute JCB • VOLUME 204 • NUMBER 5 • 2014 856 Nguyen - Ngoc , K . V . , K . J . Cheung , A . Brenot , E . R . Shamir , R . S . Gray , W . C . Hines , P . Yaswen , Z . Werb , and A . J . Ewald . 2012 . ECM microenviron - ment regulates collective migration and local dissemination in normal and malignant mammary epithelium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E2595 – E2604 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1212834109 Nieman , M . T . , R . S . Prudoff , K . R . Johnson , and M . J . Wheelock . 1999 . N - cadherin promotes motility in human breast cancer cells regardless of their E - cadherin expression . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 631 – 644 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 147 . 3 . 631 Onder , T . T . , P . B . Gupta , S . A . Mani , J . Yang , E . S . Lander , and R . A . Weinberg . 2008 . Loss of E - cadherin promotes metastasis via multiple downstream transcriptional pathways . Cancer Res . 68 : 3645 – 3654 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 2938 Peinado , H . , D . Olmeda , and A . Cano . 2007 . Snail , Zeb and bHLH factors in tumour progression : an alliance against the epithelial phenotype ? Nat . Rev . Cancer . 7 : 415 – 428 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2131 Polyak , K . 2010 . Molecular markers for the diagnosis and management of ductal carcinoma in situ . J . Natl . Cancer Inst . Monogr . 2010 : 210 – 213 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jncimonographs / lgq019 Polyak , K . , and R . A . Weinberg . 2009 . Transitions between epithelial and mes - enchymal states : acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 9 : 265 – 273 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2620 Reynolds , A . B . 2007 . p120 - catenin : Past and present . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1773 : 2 – 7 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2006 . 09 . 019 Stephens , P . J . , D . J . McBride , M . L . Lin , I . Varela , E . D . Pleasance , J . T . Simpson , L . A . Stebbings , C . Leroy , S . Edkins , L . J . Mudie , et al . 2009 . Complex landscapes of somatic rearrangement in human breast cancer genomes . Nature . 462 : 1005 – 1010 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08645 Subramanian , A . , P . Tamayo , V . K . Mootha , S . Mukherjee , B . L . Ebert , M . A . Gillette , A . Paulovich , S . L . Pomeroy , T . R . Golub , E . S . Lander , and J . P . Mesirov . 2005 . Gene set enrichment analysis : a knowledge - based approach for interpreting genome - wide expression profiles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 15545 – 15550 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0506580102 Thiery , J . P . , H . Acloque , R . Y . Huang , and M . A . Nieto . 2009 . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell . 139 : 871 – 890 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 11 . 007 Tinkle , C . L . , T . Lechler , H . A . Pasolli , and E . Fuchs . 2004 . Conditional targeting of E - cadherin in skin : insights into hyperproliferative and degenerative responses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 552 – 557 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0307437100 Tran , P . T . , E . H . Shroff , T . F . Burns , S . Thiyagarajan , S . T . Das , T . Zabuawala , J . Chen , Y . J . Cho , R . Luong , P . Tamayo , et al . 2012 . Twist1 suppresses senescence programs and thereby accelerates and maintains mutant Kras - induced lung tumorigenesis . PLoS Genet . 8 : e1002650 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1002650 Trapnell , C . , L . Pachter , and S . L . Salzberg . 2009 . TopHat : discovering splice junctions with RNA - Seq . Bioinformatics . 25 : 1105 – 1111 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btp120 Tsai , J . H . , J . L . Donaher , D . A . Murphy , S . Chau , and J . Yang . 2012 . Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition is essential for squa - mous cell carcinoma metastasis . Cancer Cell . 22 : 725 – 736 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 09 . 022 Vesuna , F . , P . van Diest , J . H . Chen , and V . Raman . 2008 . Twist is a transcriptional repressor of E - cadherin gene expression in breast cancer . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 367 : 235 – 241 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2007 . 11 . 151 Vesuna , F . , A . Lisok , B . Kimble , and V . Raman . 2009 . Twist modulates breast cancer stem cells by transcriptional regulation of CD24 expression . Neoplasia . 11 : 1318 – 1328 . Williams , J . M . , and C . W . Daniel . 1983 . Mammary ductal elongation : differentia - tion of myoepithelium and basal lamina during branching morphogenesis . Dev . Biol . 97 : 274 – 290 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 83 ) 90086 - 6 Wood , L . D . , D . W . Parsons , S . Jones , J . Lin , T . Sjöblom , R . J . Leary , D . Shen , S . M . Boca , T . Barber , J . Ptak , et al . 2007 . The genomic landscapes of human breast and colorectal cancers . Science . 318 : 1108 – 1113 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1145720 Yang , J . , and R . A . Weinberg . 2008 . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition : at the crossroads of development and tumor metastasis . Dev . Cell . 14 : 818 – 829 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2008 . 05 . 009 Yang , J . , S . A . Mani , J . L . Donaher , S . Ramaswamy , R . A . Itzykson , C . Come , P . Savagner , I . Gitelman , A . Richardson , and R . A . Weinberg . 2004 . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor me - tastasis . Cell . 117 : 927 – 939 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 06 . 006 Zeller , K . I . , A . G . Jegga , B . J . Aronow , K . A . O’Donnell , and C . V . Dang . 2003 . An integrated database of genes responsive to the Myc oncogenic transcrip - tion factor : identification of direct genomic targets . Genome Biol . 4 : R69 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / gb - 2003 - 4 - 10 - r69 Ewald , A . J . 2013 . Practical considerations for long - term time - lapse imaging of epi - thelial morphogenesis in three - dimensional organotypic cultures . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2013 : 100 – 117 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / pdb . top072884 Ewald , A . J . , A . Brenot , M . Duong , B . S . Chan , and Z . Werb . 2008 . Collective epithelial migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell . 14 : 570 – 581 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2008 . 03 . 003 Ewald , A . J . , Z . Werb , and M . Egeblad . 2011 . Dynamic , long - term in vivo imaging of tumor – stroma interactions in mouse models of breast cancer using spinning - disk confocal microscopy . Cold Spring Harb . Protoc . 2011 : pdb . top97 . Ewald , A . J . , R . J . Huebner , H . Palsdottir , J . K . Lee , M . J . Perez , D . M . Jorgens , A . N . Tauscher , K . J . Cheung , Z . Werb , and M . Auer . 2012 . Mammary collective cell migration involves transient loss of epithelial features and individual cell migration within the epithelium . J . Cell Sci . 125 : 2638 – 2654 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 096875 Greenburg , G . , and E . D . Hay . 1982 . Epithelia suspended in collagen gels can lose polarity and express characteristics of migrating mesenchymal cells . J . Cell Biol . 95 : 333 – 339 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 95 . 1 . 333 Gumbiner , B . , B . Stevenson , and A . Grimaldi . 1988 . The role of the cell ad - hesion molecule uvomorulin in the formation and maintenance of the epithelial junctional complex . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 1575 – 1587 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 107 . 4 . 1575 Hay , E . D . , and A . Zuk . 1995 . Transformations between epithelium and mesen - chyme : normal , pathological , and experimentally induced . Am . J . Kidney Dis . 26 : 678 – 690 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0272 - 6386 ( 95 ) 90610 - X Hinck , L . , and G . B . Silberstein . 2005 . Key stages in mammary gland devel - opment : the mammary end bud as a motile organ . Breast Cancer Res . 7 : 245 – 251 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / bcr1331 Hirohashi , S . 1998 . Inactivation of the E - cadherin - mediated cell adhesion sys - tem in human cancers . Am . J . Pathol . 153 : 333 – 339 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0002 - 9440 ( 10 ) 65575 - 7 Jeanes , A . , C . J . Gottardi , and A . S . Yap . 2008 . Cadherins and cancer : how does cadherin dysfunction promote tumor progression ? Oncogene . 27 : 6920 – 6929 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / onc . 2008 . 343 Kowalski , P . J . , M . A . Rubin , and C . G . Kleer . 2003 . E - cadherin expression in pri - mary carcinomas of the breast and its distant metastases . Breast Cancer Res . 5 : R217 – R222 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / bcr651 Langmead , B . , C . Trapnell , M . Pop , and S . L . Salzberg . 2009 . Ultrafast and mem - ory - efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome . Genome Biol . 10 : R25 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / gb - 2009 - 10 - 3 - r25 Larue , L . , M . Ohsugi , J . Hirchenhain , and R . Kemler . 1994 . E - cadherin null mu - tant embryos fail to form a trophectoderm epithelium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 8263 – 8267 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 91 . 17 . 8263 Mastronarde , D . N . 2005 . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J . Struct . Biol . 152 : 36 – 51 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2005 . 07 . 007 McDonald , K . , and T . Müller - Reichert . 2002 . Cryomethods for thin section electron microscopy . Methods Enzymol . 351 : 96 – 123 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 02 ) 51843 - 7 McDonald , K . L . , and R . I . Webb . 2011 . Freeze substitution in 3 hours or less . J . Microsc . 243 : 227 – 233 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2011 . 03526 . x Mironchik , Y . , P . T . Winnard Jr . , F . Vesuna , Y . Kato , F . Wildes , A . P . Pathak , S . Kominsky , D . Artemov , Z . Bhujwalla , P . Van Diest , et al . 2005 . Twist overexpression induces in vivo angiogenesis and correlates with chromo - somal instability in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 65 : 10801 – 10809 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 05 - 0712 Morel , A . P . , G . W . Hinkal , C . Thomas , F . Fauvet , S . Courtois - Cox , A . Wierinckx , M . Devouassoux - Shisheboran , I . Treilleux , A . Tissier , B . Gras , et al . 2012 . EMT inducers catalyze malignant transformation of mammary epithelial cells and drive tumorigenesis towards claudin - low tumors in transgenic mice . PLoS Genet . 8 : e1002723 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1002723 Müller - Reichert , T . , H . Hohenberg , E . T . O’Toole , and K . McDonald . 2003 . Cryoimmobilization and three - dimensional visualization of C . elegans ultrastructure . J . Microsc . 212 : 71 – 80 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2003 . 01250 . x Muzumdar , M . D . , B . Tasic , K . Miyamichi , L . Li , and L . Luo . 2007 . A global double - fluorescent Cre reporter mouse . Genesis . 45 : 593 – 605 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / dvg . 20335 Nelson , W . J . 2009 . Remodeling epithelial cell organization : transitions between front – rear and apical – basal polarity . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 : a000513 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a000513 Newman , J . C . , and A . M . Weiner . 2005 . L2L : a simple tool for discovering the hidden significance in microarray expression data . Genome Biol . 6 : R81 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / gb - 2005 - 6 - 9 - r81 Nguyen , D . X . , P . D . Bos , and J . Massagué . 2009 . Metastasis : from dissemina - tion to organ - specific colonization . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 9 : 274 – 284 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2622