* Academy of Managemenl fleview ZDOZ . Vol . 17 . No . 2 , 185 - 203 . ABSORPTIVE CAPACITY : A REVIEW , RECONCEPTUALIZATION , AND EXTENSION SHAKER A . ZAHRA Georgia State University GERARD GEORGE University of Wisconsin - Madison Researchers have used the absorptive capacity construct to explain various organi - zational phenomena . In this article we review the literature to identify key dimensions of absorptive capacity and offer a reconceptualization of this construct . Building upon the dynamic capabilities view o ( the firm , we distinguish between a firm ' s potential and realized capacity . We then advance a model outlining the conditions when the firm ' s potential and realized capacities can difierentially influence the creation and sustenance of its competitive advantage . In recent years researchers have used absorp - tive capacity ( ACAP ) in their analyses of di - verse , significant , and complex organizational phenomena . The importance of ACAP has been noted across the fields of strategic management ( Lane & Lubatkin . 1998 ; Nahapiet & Ghoshal , 1998 ) , technology management ( Schilling , 1998 ) , international business ( Kedia & Bhagat , 1988 ) , and organizational economics ( Glass & Saggi , 1998 ) . Despite growing use of the construct , the study of ACAP remains difficult because of the ambiguity and diversity of its definitions , com - ponents , antecedents , and outcomes . These is - sues highlight a need for greater clarity about the domain and operationalization of this con - struct ( Joglekar , Bohl , & Hamburg , 1997 ; Matusik & Heeley , 2001 ) . In this article we propose a reconceptualiza - tion oi ACAP as a dynamic capability pertaining to knowledge creation and utilization that en - hances a firm ' s ability to gain and sustain a competitive advantage . Research on the dy - namic capabilities of the firm ( Eisenhardt & Martin , 2000 ; Raff , 2000 ) offers new insights into An earlier , abridged version of this paper was published in the Best Paper Proceedings oi the annual meeting of the Academy of Management ( 2000 ) . in Toronto . We express our gratitude to Bert Cannella and three anonymous AMR re - viewers for their developmental feedback . We thank Pam Barr , Steve Floyd , Mike Hitt , Mike Lubatkin , and Patricia H . Zahra for their comments , which strengthened the manu - script . Gerard George acknowledges the support of the Weinert Center for Entrepreneurship at the University of Wisconsin - Madison . the study of ACAP . Researchers argue that dy - namic capabilities are embedded in organiza - tional processes and are directed toward en - abling organizational change and evolution ( Zott , 2001 ) . These capabilities enable the firm to reconfigure its resource base and adapt to changing market conditions in order to achieve a competitive advantage . Here we suggest that ACAP exists as two sub - sets of potential and realized absorptive capac - ities . Potential capacity comprises knowledge acquisition and assimilation capabilities , and realized capacity centers on knowledge trans - formation and exploitation . Reviewing prior re - search , we observe that most empirical studies show significant relationships between ACAP and innovative output and other outcomes that pertain to creating a competitive advantage . These outcomes reflect a firm ' s realized capac - ity . The potential capacity component , however , has received disproportionately less empirical scrutiny when compared with realized capacity . In this article we posit that potential capacity provides firms with the strategic flexibility and the degrees of freedom to adapt and evolve in high - velocity environments . By doing so , poten - tial capacity allows firms to sustain a competi - tive advantage even in a dynamic industry con - text . We make three contributions to the literature in this article . First , we recognize ACAP as a dynamic capability that influences the nature and sustainability of a firm ' s competitive ad - vantage . This distinction facilitates analysis of IBS 186 Academy of Management Review April ACAP by enabling researchers to explore its different antecedents and consequences . View - ing ACAP as a dynamic capability also makes it amenable to change through managerial ac - tions that effectively redefine and deploy the firm ' s knowledge - based assets ( Floyd & Lane , 2000 ) . Also , we broaden the theoretical interpre - tation of the ACAP construct by presenting it as a dynamic capability that influences the cre - ation of other organizational competencies and provides the firm with multiple sources of com - petitive advantage ( Barney , 1991 ) , thereby im - proving economic performance . Second , we recognize the roles and impor - tance of different components of a firm ' s ACAP , setting the stage for future research on the rela - tionships among these components and their influence on a firm ' s strategic choices . By spec - ifying and examining these dimensions , we clarify the development and evolution of dy - namic capabilities that determine the pathways of organizational change . Third , by identifying conditions under which the components of ACAP create value , we pro - vide some insights into the questions " What drives performance differences within the same industry ? " and " How do firms sustain such dif - ferences over time ? " These issues are central to the analysis of a firm ' s evolution , knowledge management , and development of dynamic ca - pabilities . PAST RESEARCH ON ACAP Researchers have used the ACAP construct to explain organizational phenomena that span multiple levels of analysis by invoking the or - ganizational learning ( Huber , 1991 ; Kim , 1998 ) , industrial economics ( e . g . , Cockburn & Hender - son , 1998 ) , resource - based ( Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ) , and dynamic capabilities ( Mowery , Oxley , & Silverman , 1996 ) perspectives . Table 1 summa - rizes representative empirical studies using ACAP , showing that researchers have studied the effects of ACAP at different levels of analy - sis while adopting multiple measures of this construct . However , it is unclear if these mea - sures converge to capture similar attributes of the same construct , indicating a much - needed dialogue on the definition and dimensions of ACAP . Below we address both these issues . Past research indicates an implicit consensus of the role and outcomes of ACAP as a set of firm abilities to manage knowledge . Yet definitions and operationalizations of this construct vary widely . Some researchers have used the term ACAP without a definition ( e . g . . Glass & Saggi , 1998 ; Keller , 1996 ) , whereas others have invoked the term broadly to indicate a firm ' s receptivity to technological change ( Kedia & Bhagat , 1988 ) or to gauge the ability of a firm to use outside knowledge ( Koza & Lewin , 1998 ) . Analysis of past research reveals three definitions that have dominated the literature on ACAP . These defini - tions converge to some extent but also differ in major ways and highlight different dimensions , as summarized in Table 2 . Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) have offered the most widely cited definition of ACAP , viewing it as the firm ' s ability to value , assimilate , and apply new knowledge . Mowery and Oxley ( 1995 ) offer a second definition of ACAP as a broad set of skills needed to deal with the tacit component of transferred knowledge and the need to modify this imported knowledge . Kim ( 1997a , b , 1998 ) of - fers a third definition of ACAP as the capacity to learn and solve problems . As Table 2 indicates , there is agreement that ACAP is a multidimen - sional construct involving the ability to value , assimilate , and apply knowledge ( Cohen & Levinthal , 1990 ) or is a combination of effort and knowledge bases ( Kim , 1998 ; Mowery & Oxley , 1995 ) . However , as summarized in Table 1 , em - pirical studies do not always capture the rich theoretical arguments and the multidimension - ality of the ACAP construct . To improve future measures , we need to reconceptualize the vari - ous dimensions of ACAP and clearly define each . A RECONCEPTUALIZATION OF ACAP Building upon the research summarized in Ta - bles 1 and 2 , we define ACAP as a set of organ - izational routines and processes by which firms acquire , assimilate , transform , and exploit knowledge to produce a dynamic organizational capability . We believe that these four capabili - ties represent four dimensions of ACAP and play different but complementary roles in ex - plaining how ACAP can influence the organiza - tional outcomes reported in Table 1 . Our defini - tion departs from past research in two ways . First , ACAP is viewed as a dynamic capability embedded in a firm ' s routines and processes , making it possible to analyze the stocks and w uaoU o ra u •5 t 3 S s £ : 0 g w S ll u i t u a l I T3 1 n •3 . 2 S . S I II „ c o s e - 3 , « a a _ S cc w 8 S 2 3 c ^ QI V 6 G m 5 i • = ° B n . u . 9 S - 9 hi 01 •s a O 3 2 B U fill £ o c £ a a e - 5 •s • " I ^ a 5 e i ! - 3 J3 Ol ^ ' o - c S " o . 1 ^ I11 5 i ! § B t - s B S S I S 11 I u 188 Academy of Management Review TABLE 2 Past Conceptualization of ACAP April Definition Dimensions Illustrative Studies The ability to value , assimilate , and apply new knowledge ( Cohen & Levinthal , 1990 ) A broad array of skills , reflecting the need to deal with the tacit components of transferred technology , as well as the frequent need to modify a foreign - sourced technology for domestic applications ( Mowery & Oxley , 1995 ) ACAP requires learning capability and develops problem - solving skills ; learning capability is the capacity to assimilate knowledge—for imitation— < ind problem - solving skills to create new knowledge—for innovation ( Kim , 1998 ) Ability fo value knowledge through past experience and investment Ability to assimilate • based on knowledge characteristics • based on organizational or alliance dyad characteristics • based on technological overlap Ability to apply • based on technological opportunity ( amount ol external relevant knowledge ) • based on appropriability ( ability to protect innovation ) Human capital : • skill level of personnel • trained R & D personnel as percent of population • trained engineering graduates • R & D spending Prior knowledge base ; intensity of effort Boynton , Zmud , & Jacobs ( 1994 ) ; Cohen & Levinthal ( 1989 , 1990 ) ; Cockburn & Henderson ( 1998 ) ; Lane & Lubatkin ( 1998 ) ; Mowery , Oxley , & Silverman ( 1996 ) ; Szulanski ( 1996 ) Glass 8f Saggi ( 1998 ) ; Keller ( 1996 ) ; Kim & Dahlraan ( 1992 ) ; Liu & White ( 1997 ) ; Luo ( 1997 ) ; Mowery 8t Oxley ( 1995 ) ; Veugelers ( 1997 ) Kim ( 1995 , 1997a , b ) ; Matusik & Heeley ( 2001 ) ; Van Wijk , Van den Bosch , & Volberda ( 2001 ) flows of a firm ' s knowledge and relate these variables to the creation and sustainability of competitive advantage . Second , this definition suggests that the four capabilities that make up ACAP are combinative in nature and build upon each other to produce a dynamic organizational capability . It is important to distinguish between capa - bilities and dynamic capabilities in order to ap - preciate the merits of our proposed definition . Winter views a capability as " a high level rou - tine that , together with its implementing input flows , confers upon an organization ' s manage - ment a set of decision options for producing significant outputs of a particular type " ( 2000 : 983 ) . Winter also notes that a capability is re - flected in an activity that produces outputs that clearly matter to the organization ' s survival and prosperity . Examples of capabilities are Dell ' s streamlined production capabilities and Coca - Cola ' s global marketing capabilities . Dynamic capabilities , however , are geared toward effect - ing organizational change ; they are essentially strategic in nature ( Teece , Pisano , & Shuen , 1997 ) and , therefore , define the firm ' s path of evolu - tion and development . Our definition suggests that the four organizational capabilities of knowledge acquisition , assimilation , transfor - mation , and exploitation build on each other to yield ACAP—a dynamic capability that influ - ences the firm ' s ability to create and deploy the knowledge necessary to build other organiza - tional capabilities ( e . g . , marketing , distribution , and production ) . These diverse capabilities give the firm a foundation on which to achieve a competitive advantage that yields superior per - formance ( Barney , 1991 ) . Thus , our definition subsumes the three defi - nitions reported earlier in Table 2 and accounts for all their subcomponents . Mowery and Oxley 2002 Zahra and Gfeorge 189 ( 1995 ) and Kim ( 1998 ) stress the importance of importing new knowledge , which forms the ac - quisition dimension . Cohen and Levinthal ' s ( 1990 ) definition highlights the assimilation and exploitation dimensions . Kim ( 1998 ) suggests that the ability to solve problems comes from modified knowledge , which is the basis for the transformation dimension . In Table 3 we relate each of the four dimensions that compose ACAP to its respective components , roles , and impor - tance . These dimensions are discussed next . Dimensions of ACAP Table 3 highlights four distinct but comple - mentary capabilities that compose a firm ' s ACAP : acquisition , assimilation , transforma - tion , and exploitation . Following Eisenhardt and Martin ( 2000 ) , we argue that although these ca - pabilities have some commonalities across dif - ferent firms and attain equifinality , they are id - iosyncratic in the specific ways firms pursue , develop , and employ them . This variability gives firms a basis to develop different types of competitive advantage . Below we explain each capability and how they are combined to pro - duce a firm ' s ACAP . Acquisition . Acquisition refers to a firm ' s ca - pability to identify and acquire externally gen - erated knowledge that is critical to its opera - tions . Effort expended in knowledge acquisition routines has three attributes that can influence ACAP : intensity , speed , and direction . The inten - sity and speed of a firm ' s efforts to identify and gather knowledge can determine the quality of a firm ' s acquisition capabilities . The greater the effort , the more quickly the firm will build req - uisite capabilities ( Kim , 1997a , b ) . Obviously , there are limits to a firm ' s ability to achieve this speed , because learning cycles cannot be short - ened easily and some of the resources needed to build ACAP are not quickly assembled ( Clark & Fujimoto , 1991 ) . The direction of accumulating knowledge can also influence the paths that the firm follows in obtaining external knowledge . These activities vary in their richness and com - plexity , highlighting a need to have different areas of expertise within a firm to successfully import external technologies ( Rocha , 1997 ) . Assimilation . Assimilation refers to the firm ' s routines and processes that allow it to analyze , process , interpret , and understand the informa - tion obtained from external sources ( Kim , 1997a , b ; Szulanski , 1996 ) . Ideas and discoveries that fall beyond a firm ' s search zone are over - looked because the firm cannot easily compre - hend them ( Cyert & March , 1963 ; Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ) . Externally acquired knowledge may embody heuristics that differ significantly from those used by the firm , delaying compre - hension of the knowledge ( Leonard - Barton , 1995 ) . External knowledge is also context spe - TABLE 3 Dimensions of ACAP : A Reconceptualization of Components and Corresponding Roles Dimensions / Capabilities Components Role and Importance Citations Acquisition Assimilation Transformation Exploitation • Prior investments • Prior knowledge • Intensity • Speed • Direction Understanding • Internalization • Conversion • Use • Implementation • Scope oi search • Perceptual schema • New connections • Speed of learning • Quality of leaming • Inferpretation • Comprehension • Learning • Synergy • Recodification • Bisociation • Core competencies • Harvesting resources Boynton , Zmud , & Jacobs { 1994 ) ; Cohen & Levinthal ( 1990 ) ; Keller ( 1996 ) ; Kim ( 1998 ) ; Lyles & Schwenk ( 1992 ) ; Mowery , Oxley , & Silverman ( 1996 ) ; Van Wijk , Van den Bosch , & Volberda ( 2001 ) ; Veugelers ( 1997 ) Dodgson ( 1993 ) ; Fichman & Kemerer ( 1999 ) ; Kim ( 1998 ) ; Lane & Lubatkin ( 1998 ) ; Szulanski ( 1996 ) Fichman & Kemerer ( 1999 ) ; Koestler ( 1966 ) ; Kim ( 1997b , 1998 ) ; Smith 8f DeGregorio ( in press ) Cohen & Levinthal ( 1990 ) ; Dodgson ( 1993 ) ; Kim ( 1998 ) ; Lane & Lubatkin ( 1998 ) ; Szulanski ( 1996 ) ; Van den Bosch , Volberda , & de Boer ( 1999 ) ; Van Wijk , Van den Bosch , & Volberda ( 2001 ) 190 Academy of Management Review AprU cific . which often prevents outsiders from under - standing or replicating this knowledge ( Szulan - ski , 1996 ) . Comprehension is especially difficult when the value of knowledge depends on the existence of complementary assets that may not be available to the recipient firm ( Teece , 1981 ) . Comprehension , however , promotes knowledge assimilation that allows firms to process and internalize externally generated knowledge . Transformation . Transformation denotes a firm ' s capability to develop and refine the rou - tines that facilitate combining existing knowl - edge and the newly acquired and assimilated knowledge . This is accomplished by adding or deleting knowledge or simply by interpreting the same knowledge in a different manner . Transformation changes the character of knowl - edge through bisociation , which occurs when a situation or idea is perceived in " two self - consistent but incompatible frames of refer - ence " ( Koestler , 1966 : 35 ) . Thus , the ability of firms to recognize two apparently incongruous sets of information and then combine them to arrive at a new schema represents a transfor - mation capability . This capability , which arises from the bisociation process , shapes the entre - preneurial mindset ( McGrath & MacMillan , 2000 ) and fosters entrepreneurial action ( Smith & De - Gregorio , 2002 ) . It yields new insights , facilitates the recognition of opportunities , and , at the same time , alters the way the firm sees Itself and its competitive landscape . It is in these var - ied activities that the genesis of new competen - cies can be found . Research into strategic change highlights the importance of new knowl - edge for reframing the firm ' s definition of the industry and competitive strategy ( e . g . , Chris - tensen , Suarez , & Utterback . 1998 ) . In research in entrepreneurship and the growth of firms , in - cluding new ventures , scholars make a similar claim ( e . g . , Zahra , Ireland , & Hitt , 2000 ) . Recog - nizing the transformation component of ACAP , therefore , helps to open the black box that has dominated prior research on organizational transformation and strategic change . Exploitation . Cohen and Levinthal ' s ( 1990 ) def - inition of ACAP emphasizes the application of knowledge . We build on this insight by incorpo - rating exploitation as a dimension of ACAP . Ex - ploitation as an organizational capability is based on the routines that allow firms to refine , extend , and leverage existing competencies or to create new ones by incorporating acquired and transformed knowledge into its operations . The primary emphasis is on the routines that allow firms to exploit knowledge . Firms may be able to exploit knowledge serendipitously , with - out systematic routines . However , the presence of such routines provides structural , systemic , and procedural mechanisms that allow firms to sustain the exploitation of knowledge over ex - tended periods of time . Exploitation reflects a firm ' s ability to harvest and incorporate knowl - edge into its operations ( Tiemessen , Lane , Cros - san , & Inkpen , 1997 ; Van den Bosch et al . , 1999 ) . It requires retrieving knowledge that has already been created and internalized for use { Lyles & Schwenk , 1992 ) . The outcomes of systematic ex - ploitation routines are the persistent creation of new goods , systems , processes , knowledge , or new organizational forms ( Spender , 1996 ) . Ex - ploitation is evident , for example , in new ven - tures that capture knowledge from their market , competition , and customers , and then in which knowledge is used to create new competencies . Similarly , successful established companies are likely to establish routines that target and de - ploy their knowledge to enhance existing initi - atives or encourage new initiatives within a firm ( Rumelt . 1987 ) . The above discussion clarifies the four dimen - sions of ACAP . We now turn our attention to how these dimensions build upon each other to make ACAP into a coherent dynamic capability that fosters organizational change and evolution . To do so , we posit that acquisition and assimilation capabilities are dimensions of " potential " ca - pacity and that transformation and exploitation capabilities are dimensions of " realized " capac - ity . We suggest that potential and realized ca - pacities are two components of ACAP . Below we discuss their role and importance . , Potential and Realized ACAP Potential ACAP ( PACAP ) makes the firm re - ceptive to acquiring and assimilating external knowledge ( Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ) . It captures Cohen and Levinthal ' s ( 1990 ) description of a firm ' s capability to value and acquire external knowledge but does not guarantee the exploita - tion of this knowledge . Realized ACAP ( RACAP ) is a function of the transformation and exploita - tion capabilities discussed earlier . RACAP re - flects the firm ' s capacity to leverage the knowl - edge that has been absorbed . 2002 Zahra and George 191 PACAP and RACAP have separate but com - plementary roles . Both subsets of ACAP coexist at all times and fulfill a necessary but insuffi - cient condition to improve firm performance . For example , firms cannot possibly exploit knowl - edge without first acquiring it . Similarly , firms can acquire and assimilate knowledge but might not have the capability to transform and exploit the knowledge for profit generation . Therefore , a high PACAP does not necessarily imply enhanced performance . RACAP involves transforming and exploiting the assimilated knowledge by incorporating it into the firm ' s operations , thereby improving its performance . We term the ratio of RACAP to PACAP as the efficiency factor ( TJ ) . The efficiency factor sug - gests that firms vary in their ability to create value from their knowledge base because of variations in their capabilities to transform and exploit knowledge . In firms with a high effi - ciency factor . RACAP approaches PACAP . Given that profits are created primarily through RACAP ( Grant . 1996a , b ) . firms that achieve or maintain a high efficiency factor are positioned to increase their performance . Baker . Miner , and Eesley ( in press ) conclude that firms develop Improvisational learning skills that differ from their innovation execution skills . These authors found that some firms pos - sessed a strong ingenuity to understand com - plex technical problems but were not as effec - tive in translating such knowledge into product innovation strategies . This corroborates the need to distinguish between the capabilities to acquire and assimilate knowledge ( PACAP ) and the capabilities to transform and exploit this knowledge ( RACAP ) and to account for the effi - ciency with which organizations leverage both PACAP and RACAP . The theoretical distinction between PACAP and RACAP is important in evaluating their unique contributions to a firm ' s competitive ad - vantage . First , this distinction helps explain why certain firms are more efficient than others in using ACAP . Despite the importance of PACAP . RACAP is the primary source of perfor - mance improvements . Distinguishing between PACAP and RACAP shows that some firms are inefficient in leveraging their PACAP and there - fore cannot improve performance . It also shows the different ways these two components con - tribute toward building the firm ' s competitive advantage . Second , exogenous and endogenous forces , which we discuss later , may differen - tially influence potential and realized ACAP . in - dicating that different managerial roles are necessary to nurture and harvest these two com - ponents of ACAP . And third , distinguishing be - tween PACAP and RACAP provides a basis for observing and examining the fluid and nonlin - ear paths that organizations may follow in de - veloping their core competencies . Making the distinction between PACAP and RACAP can al - low researchers to study why some firms fail because of changes in the external environ - ments , such as technological lockout or industry shocks ( Bower & Christensen , 1995 ) . while others thrive under the same conditions . A MODEL OF ACAP Here we advance a model that connects the antecedents , moderators , and outcomes of this construct ( Figure 1 ) . This model highlights exter - nal sources of knowledge and experience as key antecedents of ACAP , It also suggests when cer - tain triggers activate ACAP . The discussion in - dicates that both PACAP and RACAP differen - tially contribute to competitive advantage . Antecedents of ACAP External sources and knowledge complemen - tarity . Figure 1 suggests that external knowl - edge sources , in various forms , significantly in - fluence PACAP . Relevant prior knowledge forms the content of a firm ' s ACAP ( Ford . 1996 ; Schill - ing , 1998 ) . External knowledge sources include acquisitions ( Chaudhuri & Tabrizi , 1999 ) ; pur - chasing , through licensing and contractual agreements ( Granstrand & Sjolander , 1990 ) ; and interorganizational relationships , including R & D consortia . alliances , and joint ventures ( Vermeulen & Barkema . 2001 ) . A firm ' s exposure to knowledge within its environment will inilu - ence decision making ( March & Simon . 1993 ) and the development of future capabilities ( McGrath , MacMillan . & Venkataraman , 1995 ) . Van Wijk and colleagues ( 2001 ) confirm that the breadth and depth of knowledge exposure pos - itively influence a firm ' s propensity to explore new and related knowledge . Clearly , firms ac - quire knowledge from different sources in their environment , and the diversity of these sources significantly influences the acquisition and 192 Academy of Management Review April 0 d •Q 0 o d o \ " a d o o n j ^ i on 0 S Ul I - 1 hi a 0 2 Ot •c iI 1 u r e 0 to 0 ) 0 ) o •d " 3 a« S " aS 0 u v u < u •c Ol 2002 Zahra and George 193 assimilation capabilities that constitute their PACAP . Exposure to knowledge per se does not guar - antee that a firm will have higher levels of ACAP ( Matusik , 2000 ) . Exposure to diverse sources does not necessarily lead to PACAP de - velopment , especially If these sources have low knowledge complementarity with the firm . Lofstrom ( 2000 ) reports that knowledge comple - mentarity , defined as the extent to which knowl - edge is related to and at the same time different from the knowledge of contacts in their informa - tion networks , is positively related to a firm ' s learning . This suggests that the diversity of ex - posure and the degree of overlap between the knowledge bases of the external source and the firm can enhance the firm ' s PACAP ( Cock - burn & Henderson , 1998 ; Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ; Matusik & Heeley , 2001 ) . Therefore , we posit the following . Proposifion I : The greater a firm ' s ex - posure to diverse and complementary external sources of knowledge , the greater the opportunity is for the firm to develop its PACAP . Experience . Past experience defines the lo - cus of a firm ' s technological search ( Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ) —firms search for information in areas where they have had past successes ( Christensen , 1998 ; Cyert & March , 1963 ) . By directing knowledge search areas , past expe - rience influences the development of future acquisition capabilities . Firms gain experi - ence through exposure to , impact of , and knowledge of particular skills and capabili - ties ( Hedberg , 1981 ; Herriot , Levinthal , & March , 1985 ) . Experience is the product of en - vironmental scanning ( Fahey , 1999 ) , bench - marking ( Garvin , 1993 ; Stata , 1989 ) , interac - tions with customers ( Nonaka & Takeuchi , 1995 ) , and alliances with other firms ( Lane & Lubatkin , 1998 ) . Some experiences are also gained from learning - by - doing ( Levitt & March , 1988 ; Rosenberg , 1982 ) , which enables the firm to develop new routines ( Nelson & Winter , 1982 ) that influence the locus of a firm ' s future search for knowledge . Experience is also closely connected to or - ganizational memory ( Walsh & Ungson , 1991 ) —the depository of a firm ' s knowledge ( Herriot et al . , 1985 ) . Moorman and Miner ( 1996 ) , for example , conclude that organizational memory is closely related to new product de - velopment and product performance . Conse - quently , these authors posit that memory af - fects new product development by influencing the process by which firms interpret incoming information and act upon it . Similarly , Tripsas and Gavetti ( 2000 ) observe that experience sig - nificantly influences managerial cognition , which eventually determines a firm ' s ability to manage knowledge . Thus , a firm ' s PACAP is a path - dependent capability that is influenced by its past experiences that are internalized as organizational memory . As experience re - flects a firm ' s successes and failures over time ( Nelson & Winter , 1982 ) , it can also signifi - cantly determine how firms acquire and as - similate new knowledge , as well as the locus of their future technological search . An out - come of continued exploration in a firm ' s search zone is a more developed and refined capability to acquire and assimilate external knowledge , which increases PACAP . Proposition 2 : Experience will influ - ence the development of a firm ' s PACAP . Specifically , experience influ - ences the locus of search and the de - velopment of path - dependent capa - bilities of acquisition and assimilation of externally generated knowledge . Activation triggers . As indicated in Figure 1 , we expect activation triggers to moderate the impact of knowledge sources and experience on ACAP development . Triggers are events that encourage or compel a firm to respond to specific internal or external stimuli ( Walsh & Ungson , 1991 ; Winter , 2000 ) . Internal triggers could be in the form of organizational crises , such as performance failure , or important events that redefine a firm ' s strategy ( e . g . , mergers ) . Kim ( 1998 ) illustrates that a crisis , although a negative event , can intensify a firm ' s efforts to achieve and learn new skills and to develop new knowledge that increases ACAP . Crises threaten a firm ' s existence , pos - sibly stimulating learning ( Winter , 2000 ) and leading it to explore , acquire , and internalize external knowledge ( Kim , 1997a ) . External trig - gers are events that may influence the future of the industry in which the firm operates ( Bower & Christensen , 1995 ) . They include rad - ical innovations , technological shifts , emer - 194 Academy of Managemenf fleview April gence of a dominant design , and changes in government policy , among others . Internal and external triggers induce or inten - sify a firm ' s efforts to seek external knowledge ( Huber , 1991 ; Winter , 2000 ) . When triggers are wide in their scope and potential impact or are persistent , firms are likely to seek external knowledge . However , some triggers may require a different type of knowledge that is not avail - able within the firm or is not easily acquired on the market ( Chaudhuri & Tabrizi , 1999 ) . As the intensity of triggers increases , the firm invests heavily in building its ACAP . For instance , a change in the dominant design within an indus - try will compel the firm to expend effort in ac - quiring the information necessary to develop the new technology—a process that will broaden its PACAP . Similarly , Kim ( 1998 ) pro - vides the example of Hyundai ' s creating a sense of crisis as an organizational response to galva - nize the effort and investment necessary to ac - quire knowledge to develop its own innovative lineup of automobiles . Therefore , as the inten - sity of a trigger increases , firms are likely to allocate additional resources needed to develop the capabilities to acquire and assimilate exter - nally generated knowledge . The source of a trigger is likely to influence the locus of technological search ( Doz , Oik , & Ring , 2000 ) . Radical technological shifts encour - age a firm to invest resources in acquiring spe - ciiic information relevant to the new technology , thereby determining the locus of its search and the content of information sought ( Rosenkopf & Nerkar , 2001 ) . The intensity of the trigger will influence a firm ' s investments in developing the capabilities to acquire and assimilate this knowledge , with the intention of exploiting it to improve firm performance or avoiding a techno - logical lockout ( Tegarden , Hatfield , & Echols , 1999 ) . This discussion suggests the following proposition . Proposition 3 : Activation triggers will influence the relationship between ( he source of knowledge and experi - ence and PACAP . Specifically , the source of an activation trigger will in - fluence the Jocus of search for external sources of knowledge while the inten - sity of the trigger will influence the investments in developing the requi - site acquisition and assimilation ca - pabilities . Social Integration Mechanisms and the Efficiency Factor ( i ) ) in ACAP Knowledge exploitation requires the sharing of relevant knowledge among members of the firm ( Spender , 1996 ) in order to promote mutual understanding and comprehension ( Garvin , 1993 ) . Social integration mechanisms can facili - tate the sharing and eventual exploitation of knowledge . Firms do not always foster the effec - tive sharing or integration of knowledge , how - ever . Structural ( Garvin , 1993 ) , cognitive ( Garud & Nayyar , 1994 ) , behavioral ( David , 1985 ) , and political ( Foster , 1986 ) barriers may stifle knowl - edge sharing and integration . Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) suggest that structural , cogni - tive , and relational dimensions of social inter - action also influence the creation of intellectual capital . Social integration contributes to knowledge assimilation , occurring either informally ( e . g . , social networks ) or formally ( e . g . , use of coordi - nators ) . Informal mechanisms are useful in ex - changing ideas , but formal mechanisms have the advantage of being more systematic . Formal social integration facilitates distributing infor - mation within the firm as well as gathering in - terpretations and identifying trends . For exam - ple , Sheremata ( 2000 ) observes that certain organizational structures increase employee in - teraction , promoting problem solving and cre - ative action . Firms that use social integration mechanisms that build such connectedness are therefore positioned to make their employees aware of the types of data that constitute their PACAP . These mechanisms also facilitate the free flow of information ( Sheremata , 2000 ) , al - lowing the firm to transform and exploit this information ( Chaudhuri & Tabrizi , 1999 ) . These observations suggest the following . Proposition 4 : Use of social integration mechanisms reduces the gap between PACAP and RACAP , thereby increas - ing the efficiency factor ( r ) ) . Social in - tegration mechanisms lower the bar - riers to information sharing while increasing the efficiency of assimila - tion and transformation capabilities . - • ) , 2002 Zahra and George 195 ACAP and Sustainable Competitive Advantage One source of intraindustry performance variations lies in the differences in firms ' uti - lization of organizational resources and capa - bilities ( Spender , 1996 ; Teece et al . , 1997 ) . When resources are valuable , rare , inimitable , and nonsubstitutable , they can give the firm a competitive advantage ( Barney , 1991 ) . A firm ' s capability to effectively create , manage , and exploit knowledge is one such critical re - source ( Matusik & Hill , 1998 ) . As a bundle of knowledge - based capabilities , therefore , ACAP can be a source of a firm ' s competitive advantage . While there are many ways a firm can achieve a competitive advantage , two of the most important in dynamic markets are inno - vation and strategic flexibility ( Barney , 1991 ) . The transformation and exploitation capabili - ties that RACAP comprises are likely to influ - ence firm performance through product and process innovation . For instance , Kazanjian , Drazin , and Glynn ( in press ) observe that firms require knowledge leveraging and recombin - ing skills to pursue product line extension or new product development . RACAP includes transformation capabilities , which , through the process of bisociation , help firms to de - velop new perceptual schema or changes to existing processes . Exploitation capabilities take this a step further and convert knowledge into new products ( Kogut & Zander , 1998 ) . Given that RACAP is based on knowledge ex - ploitation ( March , 1991 ) , it enhances perfor - mance ( Liebeskind , 1996 ) and yields a compet - itive advantage . In explaining why firms exhibit performance differences , Eisenhardt and Martin ( 2000 ) note that firms begin their capability development from different starting points . Over time , how - ever , these capabilities converge to an industry standard wherein competitor capabilities are similar in key attributes . This equifinality makes sustaining a competitive advantage dif - ficult , because capabilities may be fungible and easily substituted owing to commonalities in their key attributes . Using a simulation study , Zott ( 2001 ) departs from this conclusion by suggesting that the tim - ing of capability deployment and the differen - tial costs associated with organizational change among firms will sustain performance differ - ences across firms . Similarly , in a study of phar - maceutical firms , Cockburn , Henderson , and Stern ( 2000 ) conclude that although there may be equifinality in capabilities , the key to a compet - itive advantage lies in the firm ' s ability to iden - tify and respond to environmental cues well in advance of performance - oriented payoffs . This indicates that firms may possess similar capa - bilities , but performance differences arise from the different developmental paths firms follow and the timing of deployment of these capabilities . In Proposition 2 we note that the develop - ment of a firm ' s PACAP is path dependent and influenced by its past experience . This path dependence in developing capabilities can determine a firm ' s success or failure . For in - stance , Ahuja and Lampert ( 2001 ) observe that firms may fall into three types of competence traps : familiarity , maturity , and propinquity . Familiarity traps result from an overemphasis on refining and improving existing knowl - edge , preventing the firm from exploring alter - nate knowledge sources and limiting the or - ganization ' s cognitive schemas . Maturity traps result from a need to have reliable and predictable outputs , which can limit knowl - edge exploration , Propinquity ( nearness ) traps reflect a firm ' s disposition to explore knowl - edge in areas closest to its existing expertise , precluding an examination of radical shifts in the industry . These competence traps cause firms to get blindsided by radical innovations that can transform their industry , leading to the firms ' failure ( Christensen , 1997 ; Zajac & Bazerman , 1991 ) . Some scholars have high - lighted the importance of overcoming such competence traps in organizational learning or risk missing the window of opportunity dur - ing industry upheaval ( Tyre & Orlikowski , 1994 ; Winter , 2000 ) . Firms with well - developed capabilities of ac - quisition and assimilation ( PACAP ) are likely to be more adept at continually revamping their knowledge stock by spotting trends in their ex - ternal environment and internalizing this knowledge , thus overcoming some of the com - petence traps discussed above . Being adept has two dimensions : timing and costs . First , a devel - oped PACAP helps firms track changes in their industries more effectively and therefore facili - tates the deployment of necessary capabilities , such as production and technological competen - 196 Academy of Management Review April cies , at the opportune moment . For example . Lei , Hitt , and Bettis ( 1996 ) argue that core competen - cies that are grounded in learning form the ba - sis of sustained competitive advantage . Second , given that capabilities are captured in a firm ' s routines , as the firm gains experience and manages its routines more effectively , the costs associated with capability development decrease over time . A developed PACAP re - duces sunk investments in changing the firm ' s resource positions and operational routines . The costs of change are likely to be low when firms have accumulated adequate knowledge and prior experience with the new knowledge or skill base ( Teece et al . , 1997 ; Zander & Kogut , 1995 ; Zott , 2001 ) . PACAP plays an important role in renewing a firm ' s knowledge base and the skills necessary to compete in changing markets . Firms that are flexible in using their resources and capabili - ties can reconfigure their resource bases to cap - italize upon emerging strategic opportunities ( Raff , 2000 ) . These opportunities may help the firms sustain superior performance because of first mover advantages ( Ferrier , Smith , & Grimm , 1999 ) , responsiveness to customers ( Ma - tusik & Hill , 1998 ) , or other strategic advantages . Thus , the components of ACAP could lead to and sustain a competitive advantage when de - ployed judiciously and in combination with a firm ' s other complementary assets and re - sources . Proposifion 5 ; Firms with well - devel - oped capabilities of knowledge trans - formation and exploitation ( BACAP ) are more likely to achieve a competi - tive advantage through innovation and product development than those with less developed capabilities . Proposition 6 : Firms with well - devel - oped capabilities of knowledge acqui - sition and assimilation ( PACAP ) are more likely to sustain a competitive advantage because of greater flexibil - ity in reconfiguring their resource bases and in effectively timing capa - bility deployment at lower costs than those with less developed capabilities . One factor that can affect a firm ' s sustained competitive advantage is the regime of appro - priability that dominates its industry . Regime of appropriability refers to the institutional and industry dynamics that affect the firm ' s ability to protect the advantages of ( and ben - efit from ) new products or processes ( An - tonelli , 1999 ; Buzzacchi , Colombo , & Mariotti , 1995 ) . When appropriability is low ( i . e . , there is a high level of knowledge spillovers ) , invest - ments in ACAP are likely to be low ( Spence , 1984 ) . These investments might be unwise , be - cause imitation by rivals might be widespread ( Boisot & Griffiths , 1999 ) . However , Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) note that the positive absorp - tion incentive associated with spillovers may be sufficiently strong in some cases to offset the negative appropriability incentive . This indicates that when regimes of appropriability are strong , the payoff from RACAP will be high , because firms can protect their knowl - edge assets and continue to generate profits from such inventions . When strong appropri - ability regimes exist , firms will patent their innovations and protect revenue streams aris - ing from innovations ( Anton & Yao , 2000 ) . These strong regimes imply that imitation is likely to be more difficult because of the in - creased costs incurred by rivals for knowledge replication , leading to performance differ - ences across firms . Under weak regimes of appropriability , dy - namic capabilities may sustain performance differences in the presence of isolating mecha - nisms , defined as idiosyncratic features of a firm ' s management that create impediments to imitation ( Rumelt , 1987 ) . Zott ( 2001 ) notes that barriers to imitation do not serve to create a competitive advantage . He argues instead that these barriers are purely defensive in nature and contribute to sustaining and possibly reinforcing an already existing competitive advantage . One such isolating mechanism is secrecy in routines and processes . A survey of manufac - turing firms by Cohen , Nelson , and Walsh ( 2000 ) shows that some firms prefer secrecy over patenting , which may provide competi - tors with too much information . Inventions of - ten have limited legal protection , because the information disclosure within patents may provide enabling information for other firms to circumvent the process and yet achieve the desired output ( Anton & Yao , 2000 ) . Thus , un - der weak regimes of appropriability , firms are likely to sustain performance differences by 2002 Zahxa and George 197 instituting isolating mechanisms , potentially decreasing knowledge spillovers . Implicit in the definition of ACAP is the no - tion that such capabilities may be socially complex and difficult to imitate ( Teece et al . , 1997 ) . The above discussion suggests that firms can sustain performance differences un - der differing regimes of appropriability when they institute and use isolating mechanisms . In industries with low appropriability re - gimes , firms have to exert more effort into building their ACAP to develop their own in - novation capabilities , rather than depend upon information disclosure and possible knowledge spillovers from other firms . These investments generate positive economic re - turns over the long run by allowing firms to develop breakthrough inventions . Proposifion 7 ; The regime of appropri - ability moderates the relationship be - tween RACAP and sustainable com - petitive advantage , specifically as described below . Proposition 7a : Under strong regimes of appropriahility , there will be a sig - nificant and positive relationship be - tween RACAP and a sustainable com - petitive advantage because of the higher costs associated Tvith imitation . Pioposition 7b : Under weak regimes of appiopriability . there will be a signif - icant and positive relationship be - tween RACAP and a sustainable com - petitive advantage only when fiims protect their knowledge assets and ca - pabilities through isolating mecha - nisms . If not , such a relationship is likely to be weak or nonexistent . FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS Recent research highlights the role of a firm ' s dynamic capabilities as a critical source of its competitive advantage ( Helfat & Raubitschek , 2000 ; Teece et al . , 1997 ; Winter , 2000 ) . Eisenhardt and Martin ( 2000 ) note that dynamic capabilities are essential , but how such capabilities can help firms reconfigure their resources to changing environmental conditions is more important for sustaining a competitive advantage . Other researchers ar - gue that the timing and costs of capability deployment would help firms create and sus - tain performance differences ( Cockburn et al . , 2000 ; Zott , 2001 ) . We contribute to this growing body of literature by unraveling how a firm ' s ACAP could be a primary source of creating and sustaining a competitive advantage— opening the black box of the sustainability of competitive advantage in dynamic markets and thereby extending Eisenhardt and Mar - tin ' s ( 2000 ) work . ACAP provides rich and fruitful avenues for future research . Although researchers have used this construct in previous empirical work , this article provides a foundation for future work using ACAP , based on three primary contribu - tions . First , by reviewing prior research ( Tables 1 and 2 ) and delineating four dimensions , we define and clarify the dimensionality of this complex construct and the dimensions ' respec - tive roles and importance ( Table 3 ) . Second , the distinction between PACAP and RACAP sug - gests that externally acquired knowledge un - dergoes multiple iterative processes before the recipient firm can successfully exploit it to achieve a competitive advantage . Distinguish - ing between PACAP and RACAP is useful as well in explaining success levels with knowl - edge management . Although Cohen and Levinthal ' s ( 1990 ) definition emphasizes the ap - plication of acquired knowledge , past research - ers have overlooked PACAP . Our proposed re - conceptualization corrects this oversight . Also , the introduction of the efficiency factor may pro - vide an explanation of why certain firms that possess the potential do not maximize economic value from knowledge management . Third and iinally , this article makes clear that in past stud - ies researchers fall short by overlooking the con - tingent conditions under which ACAP could lead to a competitive advantage . To remedy this situation , we offer a model ( Figure 1 ) that links the components of ACAP to value creation , high - lighting potential sources , reasons , and condi - tions under which the components of ACAP cre - ate and sustain performance differences across firms , which is a fundamental question in the field . Taken together , these three contributions rep - resent a departure from the prevailing view of ACAP . In Table 4 we contrast the traditional view with our proposed reconceptualization . Clearly , we make key distinctions with regard to 198 Academy of Management fleview TABLE 4 Comparing Conceptualizations of ACAP April Issue Traditional View oi ACAP Reconceptualization of ACAP Definition Dimensions and components Evolution and development Contingent iactors and managerial roles Value creation A firm ' s ability to value , assimilate , and apply information toward commercial ends Emphasis on acquiring and exploiting externally generated knowledge • Multidimensional definition with three dimensions • Operationalized as a single factor component • Dependent on a firm ' s prior knowledge base and skills • Unidirectional and patterned developmental path ( prior knowledge defines firm ' s ability to value , assimilate , and apply information ) • Exogenous ( industry conditions influence firm ' s investment in R & D ) • Managerial roles restricted to environmental scanning and R & D investment Value creation through innovation • ACAP is a set of organizational routines and strategic processes by which firms acquire , assimilate , transform , and exploit knowledge for purpose of value creation • Emphasis on dynamic capabilities geared toward strategic change and flexibility wherein firms create and exploit new knowledge by transforming acquired knowledge • Multidimensional definition with four dimensions • Four dimensions form two distinct components ( potential and realized capacities ) • Dependent on multiple factors , including a firm ' s past experience . knowledge complementarity , and diversity of knowledge sources • Multidirectional and nonpatterned ( fluid ) developmental path ( locus of search is continually redefined ) Multiple exogenous and endogenous contingencies : • Exogenous contingencies ( appropriability , external triggers ) • Endogenous contingencies ( internal triggers , social integration mechanisms ) • Broader managerial roles in influencing knowledge search patterns , activation of organization - al triggers , and transformation of organizational knowledge Value creation differentially derived from the dimensions that comprise the two components : realized capacity allows creation oJ a competitive advantage ; potential capacity provides strategic flexibility to change and reconfigure firm operations , providing means to sustain such performance differences ; presence of efficiency factor between potential and realized capacity ACAP definition , dimensions , evolution and de - velopment , contingent factors and managerial roles , and value creation . A key difference lies in our definition of ACAP as a set of knowledge - based capabilities embedded within the firm ' s routines and strategic processes . We adopt a dynamic view by suggesting that ACAP follows a multidirectional and fluid path , rather than a patterned trajectory of knowledge acquisition and exploitation . We also suggest that past ex - perience , knowledge complementarity , and di - versity of knowledge sources influence PACAP development . However , activation triggers may redefine a firm ' s locus of search , reconfiguring 2002 Zahia and George 199 its PACAP over time and making developmental paths fluid and multidirectional . This proposi - tion moves us one step closer to understanding the sustainability of competitive advantage over time . Table 4 also highlights the influence of con - tingent factors and managerial roles on ACAP development . Although the model highlights exogenous and endogenous variables that may aifect , ^ CAP or the value generated from its exploitation , our discussion has not di - rectly addressed the role of managers in ACAP development . Prior prescriptions of manage - rial roles for developing ACAP have empha - sized environmental scanning and changes in R & D investments ( e . g . , Cohen & Levinthal , 1989 , 1990 ) . However , the proposed definition and model of ACAP offer a more inclusive and broader role of managers in developing ACAP . Viewing ACAP as a dynamic capability sug - gests that it can be formulated and imple - mented with the specific intent to acquire , as - similate , transform , and exploit knowledge . The process of bisociation also suggests that knowledge transformation occurs when man - agers combine two incongruous frames of ref - erence to arrive at new knowledge that can be exploited for generating profits . This discus - sion is consistent with empirical research by Hitt , Bierman , Shimizu , and Kachhar ( 2000 ) , who highlight the importance of having the requisite human capital necessary to harvest and exploit the firm ' s knowledge base—a pro - cess that gives the firm a competitive advan - tage that improves performance . Floyd and Lane ( 2000 ) also discuss the various activities managers at different organizational levels can undertake to exploit the knowledge that resides in the firm ' s operations , aiming to bring about strategic renewal that improves firm performance . Through the definition , dimensions , and model of ACAP advanced in this article , we identify opportunities for future research . First , there is a clear need to capture the indi - vidual capabilities that constitute a firm ' s ACAP . Our review af empirical work indicates that measures have been rudimentary and do not iuUy reflect the richness of the construct { Table 1 ) . Clarifying and describing each di - mension allow future researchers to isolate and capture underlying dimensions . Second , researchers need to recognize the temporal aspects of capability development . As capa - bilities develop over time , examining the ori - gins , timing , and pacing of such development would enrich the literature . Third , researchers modeling ACAP would better serve us if they considered the contingencies and boundary conditions of ACAP development . Although this issue has been partially addressed in past work , we need to further expand our under - standing of this construct . Finally , researchers need to measure and relate the potential and realized capacities to multiple outcomes . Pay - offs from PACAP and RACAP offer interesting combinations to investigate over time , as il - lustrated in studies on capability development at Barnes & Noble ( Raff , 2000 ) or at Hyundai ( Kim , 1998 ) . Future research needs to address the spe - cific operationalization of the capabilities that ACAP comprises . Substantial differences exist among these dimensions , which allow them to coexist and be measured and validated inde - pendently . Table 3 highlights the underlying rationale for each dimension and could be a useful tool to help develop measures . It is im - portant to focus on the routines and processes that organizations use to acquire , assimilate , transform , and exploit knowledge . To comple - ment the focus on underlying capabilities , re - searchers might use additional measures of these dimensions . For example , researchers might employ " years of experience of the R & D department " or " amount of R & D investment " as measures of knowledge acquisition . Assim - ilation can be measured by " the number of cross - firm patent citations " or " the number of citations made in a firm ' s publications to re - search developed in other firms " ( Cockburn & Henderson , 1998 ) . Transformation could be captured as " the number oi new product ideas " or " new research projects initiated " ( Leonard - Barton , 1995 ) . Finally , exploitation could include intermediate outputs , such as " the number of patents , " " new product an - nouncements , " or " length of product development cycle . " The efficiency factor , presented earlier , also provides new opportunities for research . For in - stance , researchers might use survey instru - ments and interview data to capture the four dimensions of ACAP , the magnitude of the effi - ciency ratio , and its effects on future perfor - mance . Archival data can capture historical ac - 200 Academy of Management Review April tivities , whereas survey and interview data can gauge attitudes and ongoing activities . Data collected and analyzed over multiple time hori - zons may also reveal the relative importance of the efficiency factor at different points in time . Firms with high efficiency ratios are also likely to continually renew their operations and enjoy superior performance , especially in knowledge - intensive industries . CONCLUSION Ten years after Cohen and Levinthal ' s intro - duction of the notion of ACAP in the manage - ment literature , it is prudent to redefine and refocus research on this important construct . We hope that this article encourages future re - search on the dimensions and contributions of the construct . It is reassuring that researchers in diverse organizational disciplines have recog - nized the explanatory power ol ACAP , and we hope that their future uses of this concept will show greater recognition of its multiple dimen - sions and their links to creating and sustaining a competitive advantage . REFERENCES Ahuja , G . , & Lampert , C . 2001 . Entrepreneurship in the large corporation : A longitudinal study of how established firms create breakthrough inventions . Strategic Man - agement Journal . 22 : 521 - 544 . Anton , I . J . , & Yao , D . A . 2000 . Little patents and big secrets : Managing intellectual property . Paper presented at the Harvard Business School Strategy Research Conference , New Haven , CT . Antonelli , C . 1999 . The evolution of the industrial organisa - tion of the production of knowledge . Cambridge Journal oi Economics . 23 : 243 - 260 . Baker , T . , Miner , A . , & Eesley , D . In press . Improvising firms : Bricolage , retrospective interpretation and improvisa - tional competencies in the founding process . Research Policy . Barney , J . 1991 . Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage . Journal of Management . 17 : 771 - 792 . Boisot , M . , & Griffiths , D . 1999 . Possession is nine tenths of the law : Managing a firm ' s knowledge base in a regime ol weak appropriability . fnternational Journal of Tech - nology Management . 17 : 662 - 676 . Bower , J . , & Christensen , C . 1995 . Disruptive technologies : Catching the wave . Harvard Business Review . 73 ( 1 ) : 43 - 53 . Boynton , A . , Zmud , R . , & Jacobs , G . 1994 . The Influence oi IT management practice on IT use in large organizations . MIS Quarterly , 18 : 299 - 320 . Buzzacchi , L . . Colombo , M . G . , & Mariotti , S . 1995 . Technology regimes and innovation in services : The case ol the Italian banking industry . Research Policy . 24 : 151 - 168 . Chaudhuri , S . , & Tabrizi , B . 1999 . Capturing the real value in high - tech acquisitions . Harvard Business Review . 77 ( 5 ) ; 123 - 130 . Christensen , C . 1997 . The innovator ' s dilemma : When new technologies cause great firms to fail . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Christensen , C . 1998 . Why great companies lose their way . Across the Board . 35 ( 9 ) : 36 - 41 . Christensen , C , Suarez , F . , & Utterback , J . 1998 . Strategies for survival in fast changing Industries . Management Sci - ence . 44 ( 12 ) : S207 - S220 . Clark , K . B . , & Fujimoto , T . 1991 . Product deveiopment perfor - mance . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Cockburn , I . , & Henderson , R . 1998 . Absorptive capacity , co - authoring behavior , and the organization of research in drug discovery . Journal of Industrial Economics . 46 : 157 - 183 , Cockburn , I . , Henderson , R . , 8f Stern , S . 2000 . Untangling the origins of competitive advantage . Strategic Manage - ment / ournai , 21 : 1123 - 1146 . Cohen , W . M . . & Levinthal , D . A . 1989 . Innovation and learn - ing : The two faces of R & D . Economic Journal , 99 : 569 - 596 . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Adminis - trafive Science Quarterly . 35 : 128 - 152 . Cohen , W . M . . Nelson . R . R . , & Walsh , J . 2000 . Proiecting their intellectual assets : Appropriability conditions and why manufacturing firms patent ( or not ) . Working paper No . 7552 . National Bureau of Economic Research , Cam - bridge , MA . Cyert , R . , & March . J . 1963 . A behavioral theory oi the firm . Englewood Cliffs . NJ : Prentice - Hall . David . P . A . 1985 . Clio and the economics of QWERTY . Amer - ican Economic Review , 75 : 332 - 337 . Dodgson , M , 1993 . Organizational learning : A review of some literature . Organization Studies , 14 : 375 - 394 . Doz . Y . L . , Oik , P . M . , & Ring , P . S . 2000 . Formation processes of R8ED consortia : Which path to take ? Where does it lead ? Strategic Management Journal . 21 : 239 - 266 . Eisenhardt . K . M . , & Martin , J . A . 2000 , Dynamic capabilities : What are they ? Strategic Management Journal . 21 : 1105 - 1121 . Fahey , L . 1999 . Outwitting , outmaneuvering , and outperform - ing competitors . New York : Wiley . Ferrier , W . , Smith , K . A . , 8i Grimm . C . 1999 . The role of com - petitive action in market share erosion and industry dethronement : A study of industry leaders and challeng - ers . Academy of Management Journal , 42 : 372 - 388 . Fichman , R . , & Kemerer , C . 1999 . The illusory diffusion of innovation : An examination ol assimilation gaps . Infor - mation Systems Research , 10 : 255 - 275 . Floyd , S . W . , & Lane , P . J . 2000 . Strategizing throughout the 2002 Zahia and Gfeorge 201 organization : Management role conflict in strategic re - newal . Academy of Management Review . 25 : 154 - 177 . Ford , CP 1996 . A theory of individual creative action in mul - tiple social domains . Academy of Management Review . 21 : 1112 - 1142 . Foster , R . 1986 . The attacker ' s advantage . New York : Summit Books . Garud , R . . & Nayyar , P . 1994 . Transformative capacity : Con - tinual structuring by intertemporal technology transfer . Strategic Management Journal . 15 : 365 - 385 . Garvin , D . 1993 , Building a learning organization . Harvard Business Review . 73 ( 4 ) : 78 - 91 . Glass , A . J . . & Saggi , K . 1998 . International technology trans - fer and the technology gap . Journal oi Development Eco - nomics . 55 : 369 - 398 . Granstrand . O . . & Sjolander , S . 1990 . The acquisition of tech - nology and small firms by large firms . Journal of Eco - nomic Behavior & Organization , 3 : 367 - 386 . Grant . R . M . 1996a . Toward a knowledge - based theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal . 17 : 109 - 122 . Grant , R . M . 1996b . Prospering in dynamically - competitive environments : Organizational capability as knowledge integration . Organizafion Science , 7 : 375 - 387 . Hedberg , B . L . 1981 . How organizations learn and unleam . In P . Nystrom & W . Starbuck ( Eds . ) , Handboot of organiza - tion design , vol . 1 : 1 - 27 . New York : Oxford University Press . Helfat , C . E . , 8f Raubitschek , R . S . 2001 . Product sequencing : Co - evolution oi knowledge , capabilities , and products . Strategic Management Journal . 21 : 961 - 980 . Herriot , S . R . , Levinthal , D . , & March , J . G . 1985 . Learning from experience in organizations . AEA Papers and Proceed - ings . 75 : 298 - 302 . Hitt , M . A . . Bierman . L , Shimizu , K . . & Kochhar , R . 2001 . Direct and moderating effects ol human capital on strategy and performance in professional service firms : A re - source - based perspective . Academy oi Management Journal . 44 : 13 - 28 . Huber , G . 1991 . Organizational learning : The contributing processes and the literature . Organization Science , 2 : 88 - 115 . Joglekar , P . . Bohl , A . H . . & Hamburg . M . 1997 . Comments on " Fortune favors the prepared firm . " Management Sci - ence . 43 : 1455 - 1468 . Kazanjian , R . K . , Drazin , R . , 8E Glynn , M . A . In press . Imple - menting structures for corporate entrepreneurship : A knowledge - based perspective . In M . Hitt , D . Ireland , M . Camp . & D . Sexton ( Eds . ) . Strategic entrepreneurship : Creating an integrated mindset . Oxford : Blackwell . Kedia . B . L . , & Bhagat . R . S . 1988 . Cultural constraints on transfer of technology across nations : Implications for research in international and comparative manage - ment . Academy of Management Review . 13 : 559 - 571 . Keller , W . 1996 . Absorptive capacity : On the creation and acquisition of technology in development . Journal of Developmental Economics , 49 : 199 - 210 . Kim , L . 1995 . Absorptive capacity and industrial growth : A conceptual framework and Korea ' s experience . In B . Koo & D . Perkins ( Eds . ) . Social capability and long term eco - nomic growth : 266 - 287 . London : St . Martin ' s Press . Kim , L . 1997a . The dynamics of Samsung ' s technological learning in semiconductors . Caliiornia Management Re - view , 39 ( 3 ) : 86 - 100 . Kim , L . 1997b . From imitation to innovation : The dynamics oi Korea ' s technological learning . Cambridge , MA : Har - vard Business School Press . Kim , L . 1998 . Crisis construction and organizational learning : Capability building in catching - up at Hyundai Motor . Organizafion Science , 9 : 506 - 521 . Kim . L . , & Dahlman , C , 1992 . Technology policy for industri - alization : An integrative framework and Korea ' s experi - ence . Research Policy . 21 : 437 - 453 . Koestler , A . 1966 . The act oi creation . London ; Hutchinson . Kogut , B . . & Zander , U . 1996 . What do firms do ? Coordination , identity , and learning . Organization Science , 7 : 502 - 518 , Koza . M . P . , 8E Lewin . A . Y . 1998 . The co - evolution of strategic alliances . Organization Science , 9 : 255 - 264 . Lane , P . J . . & Lubatkin , M . 1998 . Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning . Strategic Manage - ment Journal . 19 : 461 - 477 . Lei , D . , Hitt . M . , & Bettis , R . 1996 . Dynamic core competences through meta - learning and strategic context . Journal oi Management , 22 : 549 - 570 . Leonard - Barton , D . 1995 . We ] / springs oi knowledge . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Levitt , B . , & March , ] . 1988 . Organizational learning . Annual Reviews . Inc . , 14 : 319 - 340 . Liebeskind , f . P . 1996 . Knowledge , strategy , and the theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal . 17 : 93 - 107 . Liu , X . . & White , R . S . 1997 . The relative contributions of foreign technology and domestic inputs to innovation in Chinese manufacturing industries . Technovation , 17 : 119 - 125 . Lofstrom , S . M . 2000 . Absorptive capacity in strategic aiJi - ances : Investigating the efiects oi individuals ' social and human capital on inter - iirm learning . Paper presented at the Organization Science Winter Conference , Key - stone , CO . Luo , Y . 1997 . Partner selection and venturing success : The case of joint ventures with lirms in People ' s Republic of China . Organization Science , 8 : 648 - 662 . Lyles , M . A . , & Schwenk . C . R . 1992 . Top management , strat - egy and organizational knowledge structures . Journal of Management Studies , 29 : 155 - 174 . March , J . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organization - al learning . Organization Science , 2 : 71 - 87 . March . J . , & Simon , H . 1993 . Organizations . Oxford : Blackwell . Matusik , S . F . 2000 . Absorptive capacity and firm knowledge : Separating the eifects oi public knowledge , ilexihle firm boundaries , and firm absorptive abilities . Paper pre - 202 Academy of Management Review April sented at the Organization Science Winter Conference , Keystone , CO . Matusik . S . F . . & Heeley . M . 2001 . Absorptive capacity and firm knowledge : Separating the multiple components oi the absorptive capacity construct . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management . Washington , DC . Matusik , S . . & Hill . C . 1998 . The utilization of contingent work , knowledge creation , and competitive advantage . Acad - emy oi Management Review . 23 : 680 - 697 . McGrath , R . G . , & MacMillan , I . C . 2000 . The entrepreneurial mindset . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . McGrath . R . G . , MacMillan , I . C , & Venkataraman , S . 1995 . Defining and developing competence : A strategic pro - cess paradigm . Strategic Management Journal . 16 : 251 - 275 . Moorman , C , & Miner , A . S . 1996 . The impact of organiza - tional memory on new product development . Journal oi Marketing Research , 34 : 91 - 106 . Mowery , D . C , & Oxley , J . E . 1995 . Inward technology transfer and competitiveness : The role of national innovation systems . Cambridge Journal of Economics . 19 : 67 - 93 . Mowery , D . C , Oxley , J . E . . & Silverman . B . S . 1996 . Strategic alliances and interfirm knowledge transfer . Strategic Management Journal . 17 : 77 - 91 . Nahapiet , J . . & Ghoshal . S . 1998 . Social capital , intellectual capital , and the organizational advantage . Academy of Management Review , 23 : 242 - 266 . Nelson , R . , & Winter , S . 1982 . An evoiutionary theory of eco - nomic change . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Nonaka , I . , & Takeuchi , H . l ' 995 . The knowledge - creating company : How Japanese companies create the dynamics oi innovation . New York : Oxford University Press . Raff , D . M . 2000 , Superstores and the evolution of firm capa - bilities in American bookselling . Strategic Management Journal . 21 : 1043 - 1060 . Rocha , F . 1997 , inter - firm technological cooperation : Ei - fects oi absorptive capacity , firm - size and specializa - tion . Discussion paper series No . 9707 , United Nations University . Institute for New Technology . Maastricht . Netherlands . Rosenberg , N . 1982 . Inside the black box : Technology and economics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Rosenkopf . L . . & Nerkar , A . 2001 . Beyond local search : Bound - ary spanning , exploration and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management Journal , 22 : 287 - 306 . Rumelt . R . 1987 . Theory , strategy , and entrepreneurship . In D . J . Teece ( Ed . ) . The competitive challenge : Strategies for industrial innovation and renewal : 137 - 159 . Cam - bridge , MA : Ballinger . Schilling , M . 1998 . Technological lockout : An integrative model oi the economic and strategic factors driving technology success and failure . Academy of Manage - ment Review . 23 : 267 - 284 . Sheremata . W . A . 2000 . Centrifugal and centripetal forces in radical new product development under time pressure . Academy of Management fleview , 25 : 389 - 408 . Smith , K . A . , & DeGregorio , D . D . In press . Bisociation , dis - covery , and entrepreneurial action . In M . Hitt , D . Ireland . M . Camp , & D . Sexton ( Eds ) . Strategic enirepreneurship : Creating an integrated mindset . Oxford : Blackwell . Spence . A . M . 1984 . Cost reduction , competition , and industry performance . Econometrica , 52 : 102 - 122 . Spender . J . - C . 1996 . Making knowledge the basis oi a dy - namic theory of the firm . Strategic Management Journal , 17 : 45 - 62 . Stata , R . 1989 . Organizational learning—the key to manage - ment innovation , SJoan Management Review . 30 ( 3 ) : 63 - 74 . Szulanski . G . 1996 . Exploring internal stickiness : Impedi - ments to the transfer of best practice within the firm . Strategic Management Journal . 17 : 27 - 43 . Teece , D . J . 1981 . The multinational enterprise : Market failure and market power considerations . Sloan Management Review . 22 ( 3 ) ; 3 - 17 . Teece , D . J . , Pisano . G . . & Shuen . A . 1997 . Dynamic capabili - ties and strategic management . Strategic Management Journal . 18 : 509 - 533 . Tegarden , L . F . , Hatfield . D . E . . 8f Echols , A . E . 1999 , Doomed from the start : What is the value of selecting a future dominant design ? Strategic Management Journal . 20 : 495 - 518 , Tiemessen , I . . Lane , H . W . . Crossan , M . , & Inkpen . A . C . 1997 . Knowledge management in international joint ventures . In P . W . Beamish & J . P . Killing ( Eds . ) , Cooperative strat - egies : Worth American perspective : 370 - 399 . San Fran - cisco : New Lexington Press . Tripsas , M . , St Gavetti , G . 2000 . Capabilities , cognition , and inertia : Evidence from digital imaging . Strategic Man - agement Journal . 21 : 1147 - 1162 . Tyre , M . J . , & Orlikowski , M . J , 1994 . Windows of opportunity : Temporal patterns of technological adaptation in or - ganizations . Organization Science , 5 : 98 - 118 , Van den Bosch . F , . Volberda , H . , 8E de Boer , M , 1999 . Coevo - lution of firm absorptive capacity and knowledge envi - ronment : Organizational forms and combinative capa - bilities . Organization Science , 10 : 551 - 568 . Van Wijk , R , , Van den Bosch , F . , & Volberda , H . 2001 , The impact oi knowledge depth and breadth oi absorbed knowledge on levels of exploration and exploitation . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management , Washington , DC . Vermeulen , F , , & Barkema . H . 2001 . Learning through acqui - sitions . Academy oi Management Journal . 44 : 457 - 476 . Veugelers , R . 1997 . Internal R & D expenditures and external technology sourcing . Research Policy . 26 : 303 - 315 . Walsh , J . P . , & Ungson , G . R . 1991 . Organizational memory . Academy oi Management Review , 16 : 57 - 91 , Winter , S , 2000 . The satisficing principle in capability learn - ing . Strategic Management Journal , 21 : 981 - 996 . 2002 Zahra and George 203 Zahra . S . , Ireland , D . . & Hitt , M . 2D0O . International expansion Zander , U . , & Kogut , B . 1995 . Knowledge and the speed of by new venture firms : International diversity , mode of transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities . Or - market entry , technological learning , and performance . ganization Science , 6 : 76 - 92 . Academy of Management / ournai , 43 : 925 - 950 . ^ ott , C , 2001 . Dynamic capabilities and the emergence of Zajac . E . . 8E Bazerman . M . 1991 . Blind spots in industry and intra - indus ( ry dif / erentiai firm periormance . insights competitor analysis . Academy of Management Review . from a simuiation study . Working paper No . 2000 / 86 / ENT , 16 : 37 - 57 . INSEAD , Paris . Shaker A . Zahra is professor of strategy and entrepreneurship in the Department of Management and eCommerce Institute at ] . Mack Robinson College of Business at Georgia State University . His research centers on the dynamics of entrepreneurship in high - technology industries , the role of technology in global industries , and techno - logical learning in global markets . Gerard George is an assistant professor of entrepreneurship and an associate ol the Weinert Center for Entrepreneurship at the University of Wisconsin - Madison . He received his Ph . D . from Virginia Commonwealth University . His research interests include the study of contextual and structural factors affecting innovation and entre - preneurship .