Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules and Actin Filaments Measured from Thermal Fluctuations in Shape Frederick Gittes , Brian Mickey , Jilda Nettleton , and Jonathon Howard Department of Physiology and Biophysics , and Center for Bioengineering , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington 98195 Abstract . Microtubules are long , proteinaceous fila - ments that perform structural functions in eukaryotic cells by defining cellular shape and serving as tracks for intracellular motor proteins . We report the first ac - curate measurements of the flexural rigidity of micro - tubules . By analyzing the thermally driven fluctuations in their shape , we estimated the mean flexural rigidity of taxol - stabilized microtubules to be 2 . 2 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 ( with 6 . 4 % uncertainty ) for seven unlabeled microtu - bules and 2 . 1 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 ( with 4 . 7 % uncertainty ) for eight rhodamine - labeled microtubules . These val - ues are similar to earlier , less precise estimates of mi - crotubule bending stiffness obtained by modeling flagel - lar motion . A similar analysis on seven rhodamine - phalloidin - labeled actin filaments gave a flexural rigid - ity of Z3 x 10 - 26 Nm 2 ( with 6 % uncertainty ) , consis - tent with previously reported results . The flexural rigid - ity of these microtubules corresponds to a persistence length of 5 , 200 # m showing that a microtubule is rigid over cellular dimensions . By contrast , the persistence length of an actin filament is only , , , , 17 . 7 # m , perhaps explaining why actin filaments within cells are usually cross - linked into bundles . The greater flexural rigidity of a microtubule compared to an actin filament mainly derives from the formers larger cross - section . If tubu - lin were homogeneous and isotropic , then the microtu - bule ' s Young ' s modulus would be - 1 . 2 GPa , similar to Plexiglas and rigid plastics . Microtubules are expected to be almost inextensible : the compliance of cells is due primarily to filament bending or sliding between filaments rather than the stretching of the filaments themselves . M ICROTUBUL ~ S are proteinaceous filaments that play a central role in cell physiology . In shape , they are hollow cylinders with extreme outer and inner diameters of , x , 30 and 18 nm , respectively , and with lengths of up to 100 / ~ m or more . The wall of the cylinder is composed of a regular lattice of the heterodimeric protein tubulin ( Amos and Klug , 1974 ; Beese et al . , 1987 ; Chr & ien and Wade , 1991 ) . Microtubules , together with several as - sociated proteins , constitute one of the components of the eu - karyotic cytoskeleton : they form the moving cores of cilia and flagella , they are the tracks along which intraceUular motor proteins move , and they are thought to define the mor - phology of many cells . All these roles are structural : they re - quire that microtubules have sufficient resistance to bending . To determine whether microtubules possess appropriate me - chanical properties for these cellular functions , we have measured the bending stiffness of purified microtubules in vitro . We report here the first direct measurements of the flexural rigidity of microtubules . Theflexural rigidity ( El ) or bend - ing stiffness is the quality that describes a filament ' s resis - tance to bending forces , just as stiffness describes a fila - ment ' s resistance to elongation . For a spring , Hooke ' s law states that force equals stiffness times elongation ; for a thin flexible rod , the analogous " beam equation " ( Feynman et al . , Address correspondence to J . Howard , Department of Physiology and Bio - physics , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98195 . 1964 ) states that at each point along the filament the bending moment ( the torque acting about the point ) equals the flex - ural rigidity times the curvature ( the inverse of the radius of curvature ) . The flexural rigidity of a proteinaceous filament such as a microtubule is completely determined by the prop - erties of the bonds between the atoms within each protein subunit and properties of the bonds which hold the subunits together in the polymer . In principle , one could directly measure the flexural rigid - ity by applying a small , known force to one end of a clamped microtubule and measuring its deflection . But , owing to the small size of the microtubule , such a method is technically difficult . We have chosen , instead , to measure the bending of unconstrained microtubules by thermal forces . Thermal bending has been used previously to measure the flexibility of actin filaments , another component of the cytoskeleton . Nagashima and Asakura ( 1980 ) and Yanagida et al . ( 1984 ) measured the thermal fluctuations of the end - to - end distance of an actin filament ; these fluctuations can be related to the filament ' s flexural rigidity ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1980 ) . Un - fortunately , microtubules are too rigid to display significant fluctuation in their end - to - end distance , so such measure - ments on microtubules are not feasible . Furthermore , such measurements lack a test of internal consistency , which is de - sirable because of the difficulty of distinguishing fluctuations from measurement noise and nonthermal bending . This is crucial for microtubules , which are much stiffer than actin (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 02 / 923 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , Number 4 , February 1993 923 - 934 923 filaments , and which thus display much smaller fluctuations relative to measurement error . Moreover , for microtubules , even very small convective currents cause bending as large as thermal bending , so that again a consistency check is important . Our strategy for measuring the flexural rigidity of micro - tubules was to resolve the thermal bending in a single fila - ment . To do this , we characterized the shape of the filament as the sum of cosine waves ( or modes ) of increasing fre - quency : that is , we performed a Fourier decomposition . Each shape that the filament assumed uniquely defined the amplitude of each of the constituent modes . As the filaments shape fluctuated over time due to thermal motions , the am - plitude of each mode fluctuated , and the variance of the am - plitude of each mode provided an estimate of the flexural ri - gidity of the filament . Because the amplitude of each mode varied independently of that of the other modes , each mode provided an independent estimate of the flexural rigidity . In practice , we could statistically resolve at most only three modes in a given microtubule . This was sufficient , however , to provide a test of internal consistency : for example , we ex - pect convective flow to affect the different modes to different extents , and so consistent measurements between modes makes it unlikely that the observed bending is due to convec - tive currents . As a further check for systematic error , we compared estimates of flexibility between microtubules of different lengths , and as expected found no dependence . Along with our analysis of microtubule flexibility , we per - formed a parallel analysis of the flexural rigidity of actin fila - ments , in which case as many as four independent modes were analyzed per filament . As in the case of microtubules , the estimates of the flexural rigidity were found to be consis - tent between modes , and between filaments of different lengths . The results for actin are in general agreement with those of Nagashima and Asakura ( 1980 ) and Yanagida et al . ( 1984 ) . The mathematical derivations used for the fluctuation analysis are all contained in the Materials and Methods . However , intuitive definitions of all the concepts are con - tained elsewhere so the paper is readable even if the mathe - matical sections are skipped . MO ) . A few microliters of this solution were pipetted onto a clean micro - scope slide , and a clean cover glass was placed on top ; the resulting solution depth of < 3 # m between the surfaces ( measured using the calibrated mi - croscope focusing mechanism ) effectively constrained the microtubules to move in only two dimensions . The edges of the coverslip were sealed with immersion oil to prevent fluid flow due to evaporation ; this was important because even the gentlest flow caused substantial flexure of the microtu - bules . Nonlabeled microtubules with lengths ranging from 24 . 5 to 57 . 2 / ~ m were observed under a dark - field microscope using a 1 . 2 - 1 . 4 numerical - aperture condenser ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) and viewed with a Diastar microscope ( Leica , Buffalo , NY ) . Rhodamine - labeled microtu - bules ( ' - equimolar tetramethylrhodamine - tubulin and non - labeled tubulin ; Hyman et al . , 1991 ) with lengths ranging from 39 . 1 to 63 . 2 ~ m were ob - served by fluorescence microscopy ; in this case , the buffer was augmented with 0A mg / ml glucose oxidase , 0 . 02 mg / ml catalase , 10 mM D - glucose , and 1 % BME ( 2 - mercaptoethanol ) to slow photobleaching ( Kishino and Yanagida , 1988 ) . All experiments were performed at room temperature ( 24 - 26 ~ The temperature of shallow aqueous solutions under the same illumination was directly measured using 50 - / ~ m - diarneter T - type thermocouple wire ( Physitemp Instruments , Inc . , Clifton , NJ ) ; the tem - perature of the filaments under observation was estimated at < 1 " above Materials and Methods Microtubules Microtubules were polymerized from thrice - cycled , phosphoceUulose - purified tubulin ( Weingarten et al . , 1974 ) that was cycled once again before use in order to remove inactive protein ( Hyman et al . , 1991 ) . Tubulin at 2 - 6 mg / ml was polymerized by incubation for 30 - 1 , 0 rnin in 80 mM Pipes , 1 mM EI ~ A , 5 mM MgCI2 , I mM GTP , and 5 % DMSO ( Aldrich Chemi - cal Co . , Milwaukee , WI ) , pH 6 . 85 , with KOH , at 37 ~ The microtubules were stabilized with 10 / ~ M taxol ( Drug Synthesis and Chemistry Branch , Division of Cancer Treatment , National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD ) to prevent depolymerization and were used within a few hours . The struc - ture of these microtubules is similar to those of microtubules polymerized in the absence of DMSO ( Chrdtien and Wade , 1991 ) : in a sample of 51 frozen - hydrated microtubules , 20 % had 13 protofllaments , 69 % had 14 , 8 % had 15 , and 4 % had 16 protofilaments . The average number of protofila - ments was 14 . 0 , different from the 13 protofilaments found in most , but not all , microtubules inside cells . The microtubules were diluted 100 - to 1 , 000 - fold into a solution with final concentrations ofS0 mM Pipes , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM MgC12 , 10 ~ M taxol , and , ' ~ 0 . 4 - 1 . 0 mg / ml casein to prevent mi - crotubules from adhering to the glass surfaces ( unless otherwise indi - cated , all reagents were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , Figure 1 . Video images of a microtubule ( a ) and an actin filament ( b ) undergoing thermal fluctuations in curvature . The filaments were constrained to move in a very shallow experimental chamber : the chamber depth of < 3 t ~ m prevented the microtubule , which had a large fixed curve , from rotating axially . Each picture in the microtubule collage of dark - field images is separated by I0 s . Each picture in the actin - filament collage of fluorescence images is sep - arated by , ' ~ 1 . 5 s . The scale bars represent 10 / ~ m : the microtubule is 28 . 9 / ~ m long , whereas the actin filament is 15 . 5 / ~ m long . The fluorescent image in b fades with time due to photobleaching . Due to evanescent scattering , the image intensity along the microtubule is greatest where the filament is most closely apposed to the lower surface . Note that the high rigidity of the microtubule leads to very small fluctuations in curvature ; while the fluctuations are clear from the video tapes , the reader must tilt the page to see them in this figure . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , t993 924 ambient temperature ; throughout , 25 ~ is the assumed temperature . Im - ages ( Fig . 1 ) were detected with a silicon - intensified - target camera ( Hama - matsu C2400 - 8 ; Barrels and Stout , Bellevue , WA ) and recorded with a 1 / 2 - inch video cassette recorder ( Panasonic AG - 6300 , Proline , Seattle , WA ) . Video prints of taped images were made using a Sony UP 5000 video printer . To record the fluctuating shapes of the microtubules , five to 15 points along the recorded image were digitized from videotape using MEASURE hardware and software ( M . Walsh Electronics , San Dimas , CA ) . The digi - tized images were corrected numerically for field distortion in the camera . From 51 to 113 such sets of data were acquired at intervals of from 5 to 20 s . This sampling interval was so chosen to ensure that shapes at sequen - tial times were uncorrelated ; that is , the sampling time was longer than the relaxation time for any of the modes ( see below ) . Actin Filaments Actin filaments were provided by courtesy of Dr . Mild6s S . Z . Kellermayer and were prepared as described by Pardee and Spudich ( 1982 ) . Actin fila - ments were stabilized against depolymerization with tetramethylrhodamine - isothiocyanate - phalloidin , diluted into buffer ( 25 mM imidazole - HCl , 25 mM KC1 , 4 mM MgC12 , and 1 mM EGTA , titrated with HC1 to pH 7 . 4 ) augmented with 0 . 4 mg / ml glucose oxidase , 0 , 08 mg / mi catalase , 20 mM D - glucose , and 1 % BME ( 2 - mercaptoethanol ) . Additionally , casein was added ( < 0 . 5 mg / ml ) to prevent actin from sticking to the glass . The actin filaments were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Sequential images of an actin filament undergoing thermal fluctuations is shown in Fig . 1 b . The fluctuating shapes of aetin filaments with lengths ranging from 3 . 7 to 22 . 7 ~ m were digitized in the same manner as were the microtubules , and a simi - lar number of sets of data were acquired . A shorter sampling interval of ' ~ 0 . 5 s was used in the case of actin filaments because the fluorescence faded over a few minutes . For the longest actin filaments this sampling time was too short to provide many independent measurements of the lower order , more slowly relaxing modes ( see below ) , but the greater flexibility of the actin filament over the microtubule permitted adequate resolution of higher order modes . Definition of Flexural Rigidity If a thin flexible rod of fixed length L is constrained to bend within a plane ( i . e . , in two dimensions ) , its shape is completely specified by the tangent angle O ( s ) at every point s along the arc length of the rod ( 0 < s < L ) . The curvature at each point ( i . e . , the reciprocal of the radius of curvature ) is d0 / ds . If the bending is slight ( i . e . , the radius of curvature is much greater than the filament diameter as in the cases under study ) , Hooke ' s law applies and the ffexural rigidity , E1 is defined by dU / ds = ~ E1 ( dO / ds - dO ~ 2 ( 1 ) where dU / ds is the bending energy per unit length and 0 ~ is the shape of the relaxed rod in the absence of applied or thermal forces , dU / ds is directly analogous to the energy stored in a spring , U = 1 / 2k ( x - x0 ) 2 where k is the stiffness and x - x0 is the extension beyond the spring ' s nat - ural length , x0 . The total energy of bending of a thin rod in the plane is v = ~ El f ~ ds ( aO / as - dO ~ ~ . ( 2 ) Eqs . t and 2 , and the concept of flexural rigidity apply microscopically to slightly bent linear molecules even if their molecular structure is com - plicated . If the rod is composed of an isotropic elastic substance , E1 can be sepa - rated as the product of the Young ' s modulus , E , and the geometrical moment of inertia , L of the cross - section , 1 = f / y2dA , O ) crOss - section where y is distance in the direction of the curvature ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . For a hollow cylinder of inner radius r ~ and outer radius r0 , ~ r ( ro * - rD . ( 4 ) For the bending of a microtubule or an actin filament , however , the molecu - lar structure is not isotropic , and it is only an approximation to speak of E and I as having independent significance . Decomposition of Filament Shape into Cosine Modes We can express the shape O ( s ) as a superposition of a large number of Fou - rier ~ modes , O ( s ) = O . ( s ) . . an cos . ( 5 ) nffi0 n = 0 Fig . 2 shows an example of such a decomposition for the case of an actin filament . The choice of cosine " modes " in Eq . 5 is somewhat arbitrary , be - cause no boundary conditions have been imposed on O ( s ) . This particular cosine expansion was chosen for computational convenience ; a sine or mixed sine and cosine expansion could equally well have been used . The coefficients , an do not represent the true dynam / ca / mode amplitudes ( see below ) ; nevertheless , the energy of bending U is a simple quadratic sum of these coefficients : U - = ~ E1 ~ ( n - r ' 12 ( an - an ~ 2 . ( 6 ) n = 1 L - ' - J Here , an ~ denotes the amplitude in the absence of applied or thermal forces and is nonzero if the relaxed filament is not absolutely straight . Note that the zero - order mode ( ao ) corresponds to the average orientation of the fila - ment and does not contribute to the bending energy . In equilibrium , the equipartitlon theorem ( Reif , 1965 ) states that each quadratic term in Eq . 6 contributes an average 1 / 2 kT : this implies that for n ~ 1 , var ( an ) = ( ( an - a ~ 2 ) - - kT ( L ) 2 . ( 7 ) EI " nw z The angle brackets denote an average . The lack of cross - terms in U implies that the quantities a ~ - a ~ are uncorrelated for different n . Thus , the varia - tion , or fluctuation , in amplitude of each mode ( n ~ 1 ) provides an indepen - dent estimate of the flexural rigidity . In our experiments , the high rigidity of microtubules allowed reliable measurement of only the first three modes . The lower rigidity of actin filaments allowed measurement of up to the sixth mode ( a ~ ) . Definition of Persistence Length Lp The thermal bending of flexible polymers is commonly discussed in terms of the three - dimensional persistence length / . 1 , = EI / kT , which is the arc length above which the angle O ( s ) becomes uncorrelated in three - dimensional motion . Specifically , ( cosa03 ( s ) ) = exp ( - s / / . . ) , ( 8 ) where Ae3 ( s ) is the three - dimensional angle change over the arc length s ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1980 ) . Note that when the polymer is constrained to a plane , the decay length is doubled : ( cosA0 ( s ) ) = exp ( - s / 2Lp ) , where AO ( s ) is the two - dimensional angle . For slightly flexible rods such as microtubules , the persistence length 4 is much greater than the length of the rod . For actin filaments such as those used in this study , 4 is of the same order of magnitude as the filament length . Using Eq . 7 , the persistence length can be written as L ~ ( 9 ) Lp = nhr2 var ( a ~ ) Numerical Estimation of Filament Shape To find the flexural rigidity E / from Eq . 7 , or the persistence length Lp from Eq . 9 , we used the following numerical procedure to calculate the Fourier coefficients an from a set of digitized two - dimensionnl coordinates taken along the length of the microtubule . N + 1 points , ( Xk , YD , along the length of the curve were digitized . From these points , we derived the length = ( Xk + I - - xk ) 2 + ( Yk + ~ - - Yk ) 2 1 / 2 and tangent angles Ok = tan - t ( Yk + i - yk ) / ( Xk + I - - Xk ) of a set of N segments that connect the points ( Fig . 2 ) . To calculate an = ~ I : ds 0 ( s ) cos { n * rs ~ , ~ TJ ( lO ) which is the Fourier inverse ofEq . 5 for n ; ~ 1 , we used the approximation aa ~ - ~ ~ OkAskcos ( nXsr ~ ia ~ n - - - - 1 . . . . N - l , ill ) t = l ~ , L k 1 , , Gittes et al . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules 925 55 ~ 50 45 i i i a / i 1 ! I ! 25 30 35 x ~ ) 2 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 5 " ~ 1 . 0 0 . 5 d b A / 1 f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . I I I I I 0 4 8 12 16 Arc length , s ( / an ) Figure 2 . Illustration of the methods by which the images were ana - lyzed . ( a ) The digitized ( x , y ) coordinates of 16 points along the length of the actin filament shown in Fig . 1 b , near the time of the first image in that sequence . ( b ) The tangent angle of each of the segments bounded by the digitized points , plotted against total arc - length up to the midpoint of that segment . ( c ) Curves showing the first five of the 14 cosine modes into which the tangent - angle curve has been decomposed . The amplitude of each of the cosines was calculated according to Eq . 11 . In b , the sum of the first five modes is shown as a solid curve ; the sum of all 14 modes would go through each data point . At successive times , the amplitudes of each mode changes as the actin filament shape fluctuates . Because the amplitudes of each mode are statistically independent , the bending energy in each mode will on average be 1 / 2kT , and in theory the variance of the amplitude of each mode provides an inde - pendent estimate of the flexural rigidity of the filament . where N L = E k = l ASk ( 12 ) and $ nid . ASI " 1 - AS2 - t - . . . 4 - ASk - I q - I / 2ASk . ( 13 ) This procedure is summarized in Fig . 2 . In principle , the variance of each of these an values as they fluctuate over time may be used to obtain an inde - pendent estimate of the flexural rigidity , E / , via Eq . 7 . In practice , measure - ment noise prevents resolution of the higher order modes . Errors in Estimating the Mode Amplitudes The experimental estimates of the mode amplitudes obtained via Eq . 11 in - clude errors due to the limited resolution of the microscope and video sys - tem : each measured point along the filament deviates from the actual posi - tion on the filament by a random distance ek ( Fig . 3 ) . This experimental error , which varies from filament to filament depending on the image qual - ity , adds directly to the true variance of the amplitude of each mode and therefore introduces a bias , not just a random error , into the estimate of El . Therefore , to obtain an unbiased estimate of the flexural rigidity , the effect of this experimental error must be estimated for each experiment and sub - tracted from each measured variance . In this section , we derive an approxi - mate expression for the extra variance contributed by the measurement noise : using this expression we are able to estimate the measurement noise for each filament and make the appropriate adjustments . For small curvatures ( the case here ) , the measurement errors ek contrib - ute to each an independently of the numerical value of an itself . To estimate the effect , we can therefore assume that the filament is straight and consider the deviations ek from a straight line ( Fig . 3 ) . As above , let N be the num - ber of segments . For simplicity , we assume all segments have equal length ASo when all the deviations ek are zero ( though in practice the segments had somewhat variable lengths ) . When the ek are nonzero , the / ~ h segment has length and angle ASk - - - - AS0 2 - t - ( ~ k + l - - r 1 / 2 ~ AS0 Ok = tan - l ( s - - 6k ) / AS0 ~ ( ek + l - - ~ k ) / As0 ( 14 ) where the orders Ek 2 and higher have been neglected . It follows from Eq . 11 that the errors lead to Fourier - coefficient amplitudes noise ~ / 2 " an = V ~ k = , ~ ( , k + , - , k ) COS - ~ ( k - 1 / 2 ) ( 15 ) where $ ~ id . . ~ ( k - 1 / 2 ) L / N is the midpoint of the k th segment . Note that any correction to the measured length L ( see below ) will only affect Eq . 15 to higher order in the ~ k . The variance , ( a ~ ~ ~ is now calculated by regrouping the terms on the right - hand side of Eq . 15 in terms of each dis - AS k " (cid:12)9 \ , , , , : . / T : . ~ . . . . . . . . . . ~ : AS o Ek + 1 Figure 3 . Definitions used in the text to discuss the errors in estimat - ing the mode amplitudes . The hypothetically straight curve is shown as a horizontal line . Points are chosen at an equal horizontal spacing ASo along the curve , but with some vertical error ~ k . This results in a nonzero segment angle Ok , and a segment length As greater than As0 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 926 tinct ~ k , then using the fact that the ek ' S are independent , identical random variables , and finally noting that N - I sin2 ( ~ _ k ) = 8 . i = l 2 " < : . > - - + ( 16 ) Thisequation predic ~ how themeasurementerrorcontributes to each an . In other words , we expeetthemeasured var ( an ) to be given by var ( an ) ~ - - ( h ~ ) 2 ~ pp + ~ - ( ~ ) I + ( N - l ) sin2 ( ~ N ) } . ( 17 ) This represents a two - parameter model for comparison with the data where the unknowns are / . I , and ( e ~ . Its form is shown as the solid curves in Fig . 5 , a and b : the contribution to the variance from the thermal fluctuations decreases as n increases ( Fig . 5 , dashed line ) , whereas the contribution from the experimental error increases ( Fig . 5 , dotted fine ) . For each fila - ment , ( t ~ ) was estimated by least - squares curve fitting of var ( aD as a func - tion of n ( SigmaPlot , Jandel Scientific , Corte Madera , CA ) . By rearranging Eq . 17 and employing Eq . 16 for ( a ~ " ~ we obtain a modified form of Eq . 9 that provides an almost unbiased ( see next section ) estimate for the persistence length : 1 = kT = n ~ " 2var ( a , ) ~ Fp ~ ( - L - ) - ( a ~ ) r ~ i " ( 18 ) Error in Estimating the Filament Length Measurement error also leads to an overestimate of the filament length cal - culated by F . x 1 . 12 , and this overestimate will bias slightly the estimate of persistence length obtained by Eq . 18 . Let L ' denote the length as measured via Eqs . 12 , and L denote the true length . From Eqs . 12 and 14 , N N As k 1 I ~ k + t - - Ek ' t2 " l L ' = ~ As ~ + ~ - - ~ 0 ) J " ( 19 ) Averaging this expression over the N + 1 - independent ek , and putting L = NAs0 , we get to lowest order in ( e ~ ) L / L ' ~ 1 - ~ ( 20 ) Aso 2 (cid:12)9 Because we used E in Eq . 18 , Lp is overestimated by a factor ( E / L ) 3 , from the explicit L 2 appearing in F . q . 18 and also from a factor L - In appearing in aD ( F _ Xl . 11 ) . For nonlabeled microtubules in dark - field , the average measurement er - ror ( estimated by least - square fits of E , q . 17 ) was ( e ~ - 0 . 085 # m , whereas the overall average segment length was Aso u 4 . 5 # m , so that from Eq . 20 the relative difference ( L - L ' ) / L ' was only 0 . 04 % and was ignored . For the rhodamine - labeled microtubules the error was smaller . For fluorescent actin filaments , ( e ~ ) ttz was 0 . 126 # m and & So was 1 . 38 # m on average , so the ra - tio ( L - L ' ) / E was 0 . 8 % ; this is discussed further in the Results . Uncertainty in the Measurement of Lp For each mode of each filament , Eq . 18 provides an unbiased measurement of the persistence length . To check that the measurements are consistent from mode to mode and from filament to filament , it is necessary to esti - mate the uncertainty in each measurement of 4 . The quantity var ( a ~ ) which in our case generally dominates Eq . 18 , is expected to be distributed as X2 ; the uncertainty or standard deviation is therefore 8vat ( an ) m stdvar ( an ) m samples = ~ vat ( an ) , ( 21 ) where M is the number of sample values ( Box et al . , 1978 ) . Because the standard deviation in Eq . 21 is proportional to the mean , and because the distribution of the logarithm , lnvar ( an ) , is better approximated by the normal distribution than is vat ( an ) ( Box et al . , 1978 ) , we performed our statistical analysis on lnvar ( an ) and ln ( 4 ) , rather than on aD and / _ ~ . We lack a precise estimate of the uncertainty in the quantity ~ a ~ ~ i ~ . Uncertainty in ( a ~ nOise should include not only the error of the parameter ( e ~ ) obtained by fitting to the model ( Eq . 17 ) , but also the fact that model is inexact . We conservatively assign to ( a ~ ~ an uncertainty equal to its magnitude : 8 ( a ~ ) n ~ = ( a ~ ) n ~ (cid:12)9 ( 22 ) Using these assumptions , and using ln ( x 5 : 6x ) ~ In ( x ) + & / x , we obtain the following uncertainty in In ( Lp ) : ln ( L0 - - - ln ( Lp t ~ * ) + ~ ln ( L v ) = ln ( L ~ ) + M2 - - - - ~ l var ( an ) m ~ , * - - 2 + ( a ~ } nois , , 211 / 2 Var ( an ) nmllurnd - - ( a ~ ) noise ( 23 ) Relaxation Times of Small - Amplitude Hydrodynamic Bending Modes How long does it take for the shape of a filament to change , and do we wait long enough between samples for successive shapes to be independent ? The answer depends on the relaxation times of the dynamical modes . In princi - ple , it is even possible to estimate the flexural rigidity of a filament from these relaxation times . This would provide an independent confirmation of the measurements based on the variances of the amplitudes of the cosine modes . In practice , the exact solution for the dynamics of a polymer is in - tractable , even in two dimensions ( Do(cid:127) and Edwards , 1986 ) . A more serious drawback from an experimental standpoint is that the solution depends on the hydrodynamic drag from the nearby surface that cannot be accurately measured ( Brennen and Winet , 1977 ) . Nevertheless , it is instructive to de - rive an approximate solution for the hydrodynamic modes ( in the limit of very small bending ) so that the order of magnitude of our persistence - length measurements can be confirmed . Our starting point is a relation between the bending moment M ( s ) and the curvature dOMs : E1 80 = M ( s ) ( 24 ) Os ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . This relation is analogous to Hooke ' s law for a spring ( kx = F , , where k is the spring constant , x is the extension , and F is the force ) . We may write the bending momem as an integral of the per - pendicular drag force F(cid:127) = - yr177 where ~ , is the perpendicular drag coefficient per unit length of the molecule and v(cid:127) is the perpendicular velocity , M ( s ) = I L F(cid:127) - s ) ds ' . ( 25 ) Differentiating twice with respect to s , we obtain $ 02M ( s ) = F(cid:127) = - 3 , v(cid:127) = - 7Io 0 - ~ - ~ 0 ( s ' ) ds ' ( 26 ) 882 Ot where in the last equality we have used a small - angle approximation for v(cid:127) Differentiating again and substituting into Eq . 24 we obtain EI ~ - ~ " Y - ~ . ( 27 ) The boundary conditions for an unconstrained filament are that both 8 O ~ 8s and 820 / 882 vanish at s = 0 and s = L , which follow from ( 25 ) from sym - metry under exchange of s for L - s . The differential equation is solved by separation of variables to yield the set of decay modes for On : On ( s , t ) = Ie - t / " sinh a , sin ~ - ~ ( s - L ) + sin an sinh ~ - - ( s - L ) ; n odd cos 2an ~ n cosh ~ L ) , ~ e - ' / ~ cosh ~ n T ( s - L ) + cos - (cid:12)9 n even ( 28 ) Gittes et al . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules 927 where tan c ~ , = ( - 1 ) " tanh c = . ( 29 ) and rn = ~ / L 4 ( 3o ) The solutions ~ n determined by Eq . 29 are closely approximated by the solutions ~ n ~ ( n + 1 / 2 ) ~ , n = 1 , 2 , 3 . . . . . ( 31 ) Z Therefore , the relaxation times r . are approximated by L 1 ' rn ~ ~ L ~ J ' n = 1 , 2 , 3 . . . . . ( 32 ) These dynamic modes are connected to our Fourier analysis as follows : as functions of s , each dynamic mode 8 . in Eq . 28 resembles the function cos ( nxs / L ) in Eq . 5 . Each dynamic mode 0 , also has a time - dependent fac - tor e - t / r . , i . e . , a relaxation time r , . Because relaxation times correspond to correlation times of fluctuations ( by the fluctuation - dissipation theorem ; Landau and Lifshitz , 1980 ) we can use these r , as estimates of correlation times for the fluctuating amplitudes of the modes On and thus , approxi - mately for the fluctuating Fourier amplitudes an . To apply this equation to the microtubules and actin filaments , we use an approximate formula for % the perpendicular drag coefficient per unit length of a cylinder near a surface ( Brennen and Winet , 1977 : " r ~ 4 ~ r ~ / ln ( 2h / r ) , where ~ is the viscosity ( ~ = 0 . 89 x 10 - 3 kg . m - Is - 1 for wa - ter at 25 ~ h is the height of the cylinder axis above the surface ( taken to be 1 # m ) , and r is the hydrodynamic radius of the cylinder . For our lon - gest mierotubule , L is 63 . 2 / Lm , r is - - 15 nm and E1 is 2 . 1 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 ( see Results ) and E , q . 32 gives a relaxation time of rl = 3 . 9 s for the first mode . This time is short enough that we should observe no serial correlation with our sample time of 5 - 20 s , as was in fact the case ( Fig . 4 a ) . In the case of actin filaments , the hydrodynamic radius is , ~ 4 . 5 nm and our final result for E1 is 7 . 3 x 10 - ~ 6 Nm 2 ( see Results ) . For our longest actin fila - ment ( of length 22 . 7 / zm ) this r and E1 give r = 15 s and r2 = 2 . 0 s , show - ing that with our sample time of 0 . 5 - 1 . 0 s , we would expect to find a large serial correlation in the first mode , and a moderate serial correlation in the second mode . This was in fact the case ( Fig . 4 b ) . Results Fluctuations in Curvature of Microtubules We observed the thermal fluctuation in the shape of taxol - stabilized microtubules constrained to move in a shallow ex - perimental chamber with thickness < 3 / ~ m : Fig . 1 a shows a nonlabeled microtubule visualized by dark - field microscopy . The shallow chamber effectively restricted the movements to two dimensions , conferring upon our experiments two ad - vantages : the entire filament was always in the plane of focus , and the analysis of the shape was greatly simplified . Due to structural defects , microtubules are not perfectly straight , but contain fixed bends ( Amos and Amos , 1991b ) such as those seen in Fig . 1 a . Such intrinsic bends were useful because noticeably bent microtubules could not freely ro - tate axially in the depth of the chamber : artifactual fluctua - tions of apparent shape due to such rotations were therefore avoided . Owing to the great rigidity of microtubules , the fluctua - tions in their curvature are much smaller than those of the much - less - rigid actin filaments studied in parallel experi - ments ( Fig . 1 b ) . Although the fluctuations in the microtu - bule of Fig . 1 a are readily apparent on the video tapes , the reader must tilt the page to see shape fluctuations from the photographs . , # d 1D i r a 0 . 6 g , : ' : " 0 . 3 0 . 0 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 6 1 2 ~ . ~ ' ( " , ~ . . . , 3 4 5 6 Mode number , n 7 8 b A 0 O . - 2 O - 3 . . , . ~ 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Mode number , n Figure 4 . The amplitude of each bending mode of ( a ) the microtu - bule shown in Fig . 1 a and ( b ) the actin filament shown in Fig . 1 b . The mode amplitude is plotted as a function of time in each of the subpanels ( the 16 min of data in a excludes an unusable 4 - min lacuna ) . Some times do not have values for the highest modes ( largest n ) because the number of points digitized was variable . Note that the large fixed bend in the microtubule , apparent in Fig . 1 a , shows up as a nonzero mean amplitude in the lowest modes . Information about the flexural rigidity of the filaments is contained in the variance of the mode amplitudes . For both filaments , the lowest modes have a higher variance than the higher modes , whose amplitudes become dominated by experimental noise . The 10 - s sampling interval for the microtubule is sufficiently long that suc - cessive points are uncorrelated . The 0 . 5 - s sampling interval for the actin filament was too short to prevent correlation for the first mode , as can be seen in the first ( n = 1 ) subpanel , but for the higher modes the correlation is negligible . For the microtubule , no statisti - cally significant cross - correlation between the first two modes was measured , as expected by the theory . This rules out the possibility that the variance in these modes is due to microtubule rotation . To measure the tiny fluctuations of the particular microtu - bule in Fig . 1 a , we decomposed the shape of the microtubule into a sum of cosine modes . In a typical measurement , 10 points along the length of this microtubule were digitized , the lengths and tangent angles of the nine segments between these points were calculated , and then the tangent angle was expressed as a sum of eight cosine waves or modes with am - plitudes at ( n = 1 . . . . . 8 ) calculated by Eq . 11 . This pro - cedure is illustrated in Fig . 2 which , for clarity , uses not a microtubule but the more flexible actin filament of Fig . 1 b . Such measurements were repeated at 10 - s intervals for a to - tal of 16 min ; the choice of points along the microtubule and their total number were variable . The amplitude of each of the modes for this microtubule is plotted as a function of time in Fig . 4 a . The time between measurements was sufficiently long that sequentially acquired amplitudes were uncor - related , even for the first mode which is the slowest to change The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 928 ( see Materials and Methods ) . The large value for the mean of a ~ ( , , 00 . 75 # m 1 / 2 ) corresponds to the large fixed bend . The property of interest is not the mean amplitude but the fluctuation about the mean : the vertical width of the clouds of points seen in each of the panels in Fig . 4 a is related to the flexural rigidity of the filament . The variance of each a , about its mean , var ( a , ) , is graphed in Fig . 5 a . Notice that the variance is different for the different modes . If all the variance were due to measurement noise then we would ex - pect the variance to rise monotonically with n as shown in the dotted line . But this is not the case : the variance starts high , then falls to a minimum before rising again . The excess variance at small n ( the lower order modes ) is due to bending caused by thermal motions . For these lower order modes , the thermal fluctuations dominate the variance , while for the high order modes the experimental noise dominates . To re - 0 . 025 ~ > 0 . 020 0 . 015 e . i ~ 0 . 010 E ~ o . oos > 0 . 000 u i i i u i 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Mode number , n A E 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . E 0 . 2 E " 6 0 . 1 $ , ~ > 0 . 0 b i ~ o ~ . . . . . . . . " 1 . . . . . . . . . . . I I I . . . . r - - ' " l - - 2 4 6 8 10 12 Mode number , n Figure 5 . The variance of the Fourier coefficients of each mode plot - ted against mode number for ( a ) the microtubule shown in Fig . 1 a and ( b ) the actin filament shown in Fig . 1 b . The solid curve is the least - squares fit of Eq . 17 to these variances ( with the fit per - formed on the logarithm of the data , as appropriate for analyzing variances of normally distributed quantities ) . The estimated vari - ance due to thermal fluctuations in shape is shown by the dashed line , whereas the estimated variance contributed by experimental noise is shown by the dotted line . Thermal fluctuations dominate the variance of the lower modes , while the experimental noise dominates the variance of the higher - order modes . In b , the lowest mode ( n = 1 ) is not included because strong temporal correlations made its value statistically unreliable . move the experimental - noise contribution from the vari - ance , we modeled the experimental error Eq . 17 and per - formed a least - squares curve fit to the data to estimate its magnitude ( Fig . 5 , dotted curve is experimental noise , and the dashed curve is thermal fluctuation ) . For each mode , the experimental error was subtracted and the flexural rigidity was calculated via Eq . 18 ; only values with a final relative uncertainty of < 50 % were used . In addition to the flexural rigidity we also calculated the persistence length , which is defined as flexural rigidity divided by kZ , where k is Boltzmann ' s constant and Tis abso - lute temperature . The persistence length is a convenient measure of the flexibility because it has a familiar dimension ( / ~ m ) and is directly proportional to flexural rigidity . The in - tuitive meaning of persistent length is the length of filament over which the thermal bending becomes appreciable . The actin filament of Fig . 1 b has a length approximately equal to its persistence length and the fluctuations in curvature are appreciable , whereas the microtubule of Fig . 1 a has a length of < 1 % of its persistence length , and so the thermal bends are only very slight . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules The flexural rigidity ( and persistence length ) measured from seven nonlabeled microtubules and eight rhodamine - labeled microtubules is plotted in Fig . 6 a . The data points , whose standard errors were estimated by Eq . 23 , include the first three modes of two labeled microtubules , the first two modes of four nonlabeled and five labeled microtubules , and the first mode only of the remaining four microtubules . For both the nonlabeled microtubules and the labeled microtubules , the persistence length was independent of the microtubule length as expected . The measured flexural rigidity was consistent over all modes and all microtubules . For the seven nonlabeled microtubules , the weighted mean and standard error ( Fig . 6 , legend ) of the flexural rigidity was 2 . 19 + 0 . 14 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm 2 . The extreme deviation from the mean among the 11 data points was 2 . 3 standard errors ; for 11 trims this is ex - pected with probability P - - 0 . 21 ; these data are consistent with each other and with our estimated uncertainties ( P = 0 . 15 , X 2 with d = 10 ) . The flexural rigidity derived from the seven first - order modes ( 2 . 34 + 0 . 18 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm : ) was not significantly different ( P = 0 . 071 ) from that derived from the four second - order modes ( 1 . 80 + 0 . 24 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm2 ) , yielding no systematic difference between values obtained from the two modes . For the eight rhodamine - labeled microtubules , the mean and standard error were 2 . 12 + 0 . 10 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm 2 and again there is no significant deviation of individual mode values from the mean ( P = 0 . 17 , X 2 with d = 16 ) . Furthermore , the flexural rigidities derived from the eight first - order modes ( 2 . 12 + 0 . 12 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm2 ) , the seven second - order modes ( 2 . 33 + 0 . 20 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm2 ) ; the two third - order modes ( 1 . 57 + 0 . 26 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm 2 ) were not significantly different ( P = 0 . 064 ) . Because there was no significant difference in flexural ri - gidity between the nonlabeled and labeled microtubules , we combined the data to obtain an overall mean of 2 . 15 (cid:141) 10 - 23 Nm 2 ( Fig . 6 a , horizontal line ) with a relative uncer - tainty of 3 . 8 % . This corresponds to a persistence length of 5 , 200 + 200 / ~ m . Gittes et al . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules 929 E E O n 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 60 50 40 E : : : L 30 d ~ , 20 15 10 a . 8 a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I l ~ 2 I 1 , ~ . . . . . . . . . ~ 2 . . . . . . . . . . ' t ~ _ 123 3 u u 12 12 , 3 - - 1 , 2 1 , 2 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I I I I I I I I I 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 b Microtubule length , L ( / lm ) i - 4 . 5 4 . 0 3 . 5 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 5 1 . 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 7 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . u 12 J . & _ _ 0 5 10 15 20 25 Actin filament length , L ( # m ) As noted above , the overall estimate obtained from the first modes and the overall estimate obtained from the second modes were statistically indistinguishable . Our estimated uncertainties were consistent with the distribution of the data ( P = 0 . 12 , X 2 with d = 27 ) . Individually , among the 11 E first mode - second mode pairs , we found only one case ( L = z 44 . 8 / zm ) in which the first and second modes gave c , significantly different rigidities ( P = 0 . 040 , 11 trials ) . Ex - cluding this point did not significantly change the weighted mean , and so we retained it . We do not consider this one value to seriously cast doubt on our assumption that the ( 2 ) - r _ different modes estimate the same quantity . We also per - formed a X 2 analysis and found that at the 95 % confidence _ ~ level , the variation in flexural rigidity of the population of " microtubules is ~ 10 % or smaller . Thus , there is no evidence that we are sampling from a heterogeneous population . % - g _ t ~ x Figure 6 . The flexural rigidity ( right - hand scale ) and persistence length ( left - hand scale ) are plotted against filament length L for ( a ) 15 microtubules and ( b ) seven actin filaments . In both cases , results from different modes of the same filament are separated slightly along the horizontal axis for visibility , and the mode numbers ( n values ) are indicated above or below the point . In a , the open sym - bols correspond to rhodamine - labeled microtubules , whereas the closed symbols correspond to nonlabeled microtubules . Note that the vertical scale , is a logarithmic one ( appropriate for analyzing variances of normally distributed data ) which makes the standard errors of each measurement more nearly equal . The horizontal line in a is the mean of the measurements ( weighted by the standard er - rors , with the calculation performed on the logarithms of the data ) . It corresponds to a flexural rigidity of 2 . 15 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 , and a persistence length of 5 , 200 # m . Because the individual measure - ments do not significantly deviate from the weighted mean , there is no evidence that we are sampling from a heterogeneous popula - tion of microtubules . In b , the lowest mode ( n = 1 ) of the actin fila - ment of length 8 . 1 # m gives a value significantly lower than the population average of the other filaments . The horizontal line is the weighted mean of all the modes from the other actin filaments . It corresponds to a flexural rigidity of 7 . 29 x 10 - 26 Nm 2 , and a per - sistence length of 17 . 7 # m . Flexural Rigidity of Actin Filaments A similar analysis was performed for seven rhodamine - phalloidin - labeled actin filaments . The much greater flexi - bility of the actin filament leads to large fluctuations in shape ( Fig . 1 b ) . These large shape fluctuations obscure any possi - ble intrinsic bends the actin filaments may have . Fig . 4 b shows the mode amplitudes of the particular actin filament in Fig . 1 b ; it is apparent that serial correlations exist in the first mode . These correlations make the estimate of flexural rigidity from this mode unreliable . Good estimates from the next three modes of this particular filament were obtained from the variances plotted in Fig . 5 b . The flexural rigidity and persistence length of seven actin filaments were calculated as described above for microtu - bules , and are plotted against filament length in Fig . 6 b . As in the case of microtubules , the persistence lengths deduced from different modes were consistent with each other , and independent of actin filament length as expected . The ex - treme deviation among the 15 values for flexural rigidity was 4 . 0 standard errors below the mean , occurring in the first mode of the filament of length 8 . 1 # m . This is a highly significant deviation ( P < 0 . 01 ) . We conclude from this outly - ing value that the flexural rigidity of our filaments is variable . If we exclude this actin filament , the weighted mean and standard error for the flexural rigidity is 7 . 29 + 0 . 44 x 10 - 26 Nm 2 , and the persistence length is 17 . 7 + 1 . 1 / ~ m . Evaluation of Sources of Error When fluctuation analysis is used as a measurement method , particular attention must be paid to experimental errors : ex - perimental errors add to the true variance and therefore in - troduce bias or systematic error , not just imprecision or ran - dom error . To check for systematic errors , we performed three general tests : ( a ) Were the amplitudes of different modes uncorrelated ? ( b ) Did different modes give consistent estimates for flexural rigidity ? ( c ) Were the flexural rigidities of different microtubules the same and independent of microtubule length ? In all three cases , the answer was yes , as expected if no systematic errors were present . We now evaluate the effects of specific sources of error on the mea - surements . ( a ) The most serious noise is due to the random error as - sociated with the digitization of the images - measurement er - ror . The error arises from the limited resolution of the micro - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 930 scope and video apparatus . We modeled this source of variance , estimated its magnitude for each filament ( Fig . 5 ) , and subtracted it from the measured variances . Because this variance contributed generally < 5 % to the variance of the first mode , any residual systematic error arising from this source is certainly < 10 % of the mean . ( b ) The measurement error also leads to an overestimation of the true length of the filament and therefore an overestima - tion of the persistence length . As discussed after Eq . 20 , the bias is negligible for the microtubule measurements , but for the actin filaments the length may be overestimated by as much as , ~ 0 . 8 % , leading to an error in flexural rigidity of up to ' x , 2 . 5 % . A second effect leads to a small underestima - tion of the filament length : by partitioning the filament into finite - sized straight - line segments the derived length will be slightly underestimated due to slight bends within the seg - ments . Because the segments were chosen to be much shorter than the persistence lengths ( < 10 # m for the microtu - bules and < 2 # m for the actin filaments ) , this error will affect the flexural rigidity by < 1 % . ( c ) The nonzero depth of the experimental chamber leads to two types of errors . The smaller is due to the fact that the filament can tilt slightly in and out of the plane of focus ; we actually observed and measured the projection of the fila - ment onto the focal plane . Because the persistence length of the microtubules is much greater than the microtubule lengths , little bending occurs in the plane orthogonal to the focal plane , and so the measured length underestimates on average the true length by 1 / 4 ( h / L ) 2 where h is the depth of the chamber . For a chamber depth of " , , 2 # m and microtu - bule lengths of > 20 # m , this effect is smaller than that of ( b ) above . For the shortest actin filament the length might be un - derestimated by as much as 7 % , and the flexurai rigidity un - derestimated by as much as 23 % . The effect on the longer filaments is much smaller . A potentially large error introduced by a nonzero chamber depth is the artifactual variance caused by free axial rotation of intrinsically bent microtubules . Although the effect is negligible for the actin filaments because their shape fluctua - tions are much larger than their intrinsic bends , this effect may lead to an underestimate of the true flexural rigidity of microtubules . There are two reasons for thinking that this effect is small . First , such rotation is expected to introduce correlation between the Fourier amplitudes of the modes ; no significant correlation was found . Second , the magnitude of the effect depends on the intrinsic shape of the filament via the mean Fourier coefficients a , ~ in general these varied from mode to mode and from filament to filament , yet all modes and all filaments gave consistent values for the flex - ural rigidity . ( d ) Another conceivable source of error is torsion : even when intrinsic bends prevent free rotation of microtubules , local twisting of fixed bends may mimic planar bending when viewed from above . However , for elastic rods , the tor - sional rigidity must be of the same order of magnitude as the flexurat rigidity ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) ; from this , one finds that over lengths much smaller than the persistence length , the angle of thermal twisting must be very small , and the projection of a rotating bend would hardly change its cur - vature at all . ( e ) Convective currents in the chamber can cause microtu - bules to bend , especially if they become attached at one point on the surface . This is one reason why our initial mea - surements of flexural rigidity on microtubules ( Gittes et al . , 1992 ) were 40 % smaller than those reported here . In these earlier measurements , the microtubules showed some slight drift . To circumvent this problem , we used immersion oil to seal all the chambers used in this study ; under these condi - tions there was little if any drift . As in the case ( c ) , convec - tive currents are likely to introduce correlations and to affect different modes and different microtubules to different degrees , and no such effects were observed . ( f ) The final potential artifact is the possibility that all we are measuring is the fluctuation due to a small number of weak spots along the microtubule that completely dominate the microtubule ' s compliance : in this case the deduced flex - ural rigidity would not correspond to a fundamental prop - erty of the microtubule ' s structure . If there existed a small number of such weak spots , their position along the microtu - bule and their number per microtubule is expected to be quite variable . Thus we would expect that different modes would display different apparent rigidity , and that the flexural rigidity would vary widely from microtubule to microtubule . That this was not the case argues strongly against this possi - bility . None of the considerations ( b ) through ( f ) should affect our estimate of rnicrotubule rigidity appreciably . In the case of actin filaments , both ( b ) and ( c ) may introduce appreciable biases ; nevertheless , because these biases are still estimated to be substantially smaller than the experimental uncer - taint - y , we have not attempted to modify our results to com - pensate for them . Discussion By analyzing their thermally driven fluctuations in curva - ture , we have measured the flexural rigidity , El , of taxol - stabilized microtubules to be 2 . 15 + 0 . 08 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 . The systematic error is likely to be < 10 % . This flexural ri - gidity corresponds to a persistence length of 5 , 200 # m . Be - cause the microtubules used in this study had protofilament numbers ranging from 13 to 16 ( the most common being 14 69 % and 13 20 % ; S . Ray , E . Meyhffer , R . Milligan , and J . Howard , submitted for publication ) , it may at first seem surprising that we found no evidence that the microtubule population used for this study was heterogeneous . But de - creasing the diameter of a microtubule by reducing the protofilament number from 14 to 13 is expected to decrease the flexural rigidity by only about 20 % ( - ~ 1 - 13 / 14 3 from Eq . 4 ; the exponent is 3 rather than 4 because the microtu - bule wall remains the same thickness ) . This difference is within the experimental error associated with each microtu - bule . Given the distribution of protofilament munbers , we expect the coefficient of variation of rigidity of the microtu - bule population to be 0 . 11 , too small to be resolved in our data ( see Results ) . We should mention earlier studies by Yamazaki et al . ( 1982 ) and Mizushima - Sugano et al . ( 1983 ) who attempted to measure the persistence length of microtubules assembled from microtubule proteins ( tubulin plus microtubule - associated proteins ) . They estimated the persistence length from measurements of the end - to - end distance . We believe that their values of 79 + 30 # m and 73 , 5 + 8 . 6 # m , nearly two orders of magnitude smaller than ours , are gross un - Gittes et al . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules 931 derestimates due to measurement error . In the first study the variance of their end - to - end distance was independent of the microtubule length , and their persistence length increased linearly with microtubule length ; both findings are expected if the variance of the measurement noise is much greater than that originating from thermal fluctuations . In the second study , outlying data points , probably corresponding to in - trinsically bent microtubules , may have biased their mea - surement . Our measurement of the flexural rigidity of a microtubule is consistent with indirect estimates derived from intact flagella . Computer modeling of the bending of Ciona sper - matozoa yielded an estimate of 10 - 23 Nm ~ with an uncer - tainty of " at least a factor of 2 " for the flexural rigidity of the cellular microtubules found in the terminal filament of this flagellum ( Omoto and Brokaw , 1982 ) . The flexural rigidity of live echinoderm spermatozoa was directly measured using calibrated glass needles ( Okuno and Hiramoto , 1979 ) : the flexural rigidity of the immotile , most - relaxed flagella ranged from 3 to 7 x 10 - 22 NmL This agrees with our measurements if three assumptions are made : the nine dou - blet microtubules in the " 9 + 2 " array each have two to three times the stiffness of a single microtubule ( the central " 2 " are singlet microtubules ) ; the microtubules are free to slide with respect to each other ; and the microtubules dominate the bending stiffness of the relaxed flagellum . Thus , our results lend support to these assumptions . The similarity between our direct measurements of microtubule flexural rigidity , and indirect measurements ob - tained from flagellar microtubules in vivo argues that the particular in vitro conditions used for the microtubules in this study - the buffer solution , the taxol used for preventing depolymerization , and the absence of microtubule - associated proteins - do not radically affect the stiffness of the polymer . However , it is possible that microtubule - stabilizing factors such as taxol and microtubule - associated proteins do affect the flexural rigidity . Indeed , preliminary measurements of microtubules in the absence of taxol gave a persistence length between 700 and 1 , 500 # m ( 12 data points ; Mickey , B . , E Gittes , and J . Howard , unpublished observations ) , showing that these unstable microtubules may be less stiff than taxol - stabilized ones . The flexural rigidity provides an estimate of the load - bearing capacity of microtubules . Our value corresponds to a persistence length of 5 . 2 mm , much longer than either the microtubules used in this study or the microtubules found in cells . This is consistent with microtubules playing a struc - tural role in defining cell morphology , since microtubules are clearly stable to thermal deformation over cellular dimensions . As an example , our result means ( using , e . g . , Eq . 2 ) that - - 8 kT of work is required to bend a 10 - # m microtubule through an angle of 10 ~ Another corollary is that a 10 - / ~ m microtubule free to pivot about its end points has a critical buckling force , Fc = r2EI / L 2 ( Feyuman et al . , 1964 ) , of ' ~ 2 pN , which is of the order of magnitude of the force thought to be exerted by a single motor protein , such as dynein ( Kamimura and Takahashi , 1981 ) or myosin ( Bag - shaw , 1982 ; Kishino and Yanagida , 1988 ) . The 24 - nm spac - ing between dynein arms in ciliary axonemes is easily small enough to prevent buckling of the intervening filament . Knowledge of the flexural rigidity of microtubules permits the estimation of the force exerted by microtubule - based mo - tor proteins in vivo and in vitro . Aist and Bayles ( 1991 ) ob - served buckling of a 7 . 6 - / zm - long mitotic spindle of the fungus Nectria haematococca during anaphase B . With our value for the flexural rigidity ( corrected for 13 protofila - ments ) , this implies a force of > 3 . 0 pN per microtubule . The force generated by dynein heads in the axoneme can be estimated from the shape of beating spermatozoa . The calcu - lation is somewhat involved because of the complicated geometry of the axoneme . We assume the following : the center - to - center spacing of adjacent doublets is 60 nm ( Amos and Amos , 1991a ) , the average center - to - center spac - ing projected onto the plane of bending is w = ( 2 / w ) 60 nm = 38 nm ( Brokaw , 1975 ) , the average spacing of the heads along one doublet is d = 6 nm ( 24 nm for both the outer and inner arms , each arm containing two heads ; Amos and Amos , 1991a ) , the beat amplitude is 4 . 7 # m , the beat wave - length measured along the flagellum is 30 # m ( Ciona ; Brokaw , 1966 ) , and the flexural rigidity of each doublet is E1 = 5 x 10 - 23 Nm 2 as suggested by the discussion above . We model the dynein activation as an alternating pattern with a fraction n = 0 . 5 of heads active , with all heads active in one half of the axonemal section and none active on the other . We have derived an expression F = ( Eld / nw ) 020 / Os 2 relating force per head F to the rate of curvature change 020 / Os 2 a calculation yields a force per active head of F = 0 . 6 pN . This calculation ignores any passive shear forces between doublets as well as viscous forces acting on the swimming axoneme ; it has been calculated that an addi - tional force of (cid:127)0 . 18 pN per active head would be required to overcome the viscous force ( Brokaw , 1975 ; counting inner - arm dynein heads ) . Our estimated force agrees quite closely with the ~ 1 pN force measured from telescoping flagella ( Kamimura and Takahashi , 1981 ) . As a third exam - ple , we estimate the force exerted by kinesin to buckle microtubules in vitro . Amos and Amos ( 1991b ) observed a microtubule moving across a kinesin - coated surface become stuck at its leading end : the motors at rear produced sufficient force to buckle a 3 - # m section of the microtubule . Because the microtubule segments at each end of the buckle were constrained not to pivot , the buckling force is four times higher than it would be if the ends were free to pivot ( Landau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) , and the force exerted by the kinesin motors must exceed 96 pN . Brokaw ( 1986 ) deduced comparable forces generated by unspecified motor proteins by using a computer model of the bending of microtubules in squid axoplasm . Because the number of motors is not known , it is not possible to deduce the force per motor . On a microscopic level , our measurement of E / does ac - curately reflect the longitudinal compliance of the microtu - bule lattice . However , we know nothing about the spatial dis - tribution of this compliance within and between the tubulin dimers . Only if the microtubule wall can be described as an elastic continuum do E and I have separate physical mean - ings . If we make the gross assumption that the microtubule wall is isotropic , our measured value of flexural rigidity im - plies a Young ' s modulus , E , of ~ 1 . 2 GPa . ( This estimate uses Eq . 4 to calculate I and assumes that the inner radius corre - sponds to the " contact radius " measured by Chr6tien and Wade 1991 to be 11 . 48 um for a 14 - protofilament microtu - bule and that the wall thickness is 2 . 7 rim , which gives the correct microtubule mass per unit length . ) This value for Young ' s modulus is similar to rigid plastics such as polypro - pylene or Plexiglas . For actin filaments , we found the flexural rigidity to be The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 932 variable ; our best estimate is E1 = 7 . 29 + 0 . 44 (cid:141) 10 - 26 Nm 2 , where an aberrant value of E1 = 3 . 57 : : 0 . 54 (cid:141) 10 - 2 ~ Nm 2 was excluded . Our measured value for the flexural ri - gidity of an actin filament corresponds to a persistence length of 17 . 7 5 : 1 . 1 # m . These results are in general agree - ment with previous estimates . Nagashima and Asakura ( 1980 ) measured the fluctuation in end - to - end distance and the decay length expressed in Eq . 8 ; from both measure - ments performed on actin filaments decorated with myosin and observed by dark - field microscopy in the absence of phalloidin they obtained a persistence length of 12 + 1 # m , which increased to 21 + 2 / zm when tropomyosin was pres - ent . We note that this paper contains an erroneous relation - ship between persistence length and flexural rigidity : we traced this error to Eq . 38 of Harris and Hearst ( 1966 ) in which the " 3 " should be replaced by " 2 " because there are only 2 degrees of freedom for the angle of a line segment . Yanagida et al . ( 1984 ) measured the persistence length of phaUoidin - labeled actin filaments to be 15 . 6 / zm ( with no un - certainty reported ) ; decoration by myosin had no consistent effect . Comparison of our results to the earlier studies shows that it is unlikely that the binding of phalloidin drastically al - tered the flexural rigidity of the filaments . Unlike microtubules , the cross - section through an actin filament deviates significantly from radial symmetry ( Holmes et al . , 1990 ) . Therefore the measured value of E1 corre - sponds to the geometric mean of the flexural rigidities mea - sured along the two principal axes of the cross - section ( Lan - dau and Lifshitz , 1986 ) . If we model the cross - section of the actin filament as an ellipse with major and minor radii of 3 and 2 nm , respectively ( sufficient to incorporate all the pro - tein mass of the filament ) , and make the gross assumption that the filament is isotropic , we deduce a Young ' s modulus of 2 . 6 GPa . Hence , actin filaments are * 300 times less resis - tant to bending than microtubules only because they are thin - ner and not because actin is more compliant than tubulin . The tubular shape of the microtubule is an economical way to make a rigid structure with a minimum of protein mass : even though the mass per unit length ofa microtubule is only , , ol0 - fold higher than that of an actin filament , the microtu - bule is more than 100 times more resistant to bending . The superior flexural rigidity of microtubules accounts for the observations that microtubules often appear as independent structural elements , whereas actin filaments usually appear in cross - linked bundles such as microvilli , stereocilia , stress fibers and sarcomeres , or in cross - linked networks such as the cell cortex and terminal web . The Young ' s moduli for actin and tubulin are similar to the Young ' s moduli of several other proteinaceous filaments deduced from macroscopic measurements ( Wainwright et al . , 1976 ) : 5 - 10 GPa for silk ( in Bombyx mori ) , 4 GPa for keratin ( in wool ) , and 0 - 2 . 5 GPa for collagen ( in rat - tail ten - don , where stiffness depends on the strain ) . These Young ' s moduli are thousands of times greater than the Young ' s moduli of rubber - like proteins such as elastin , resilin , and abductin ( ~ 0 . 6 MPa ) . It is perhaps not surprising that microtubules and actin filaments have Young ' s moduli , which are similar to those of the above tensile proteins ; be - cause the principal function of both actin and tubulin is struc - tural , there has probably been evolutionary pressure on both proteins to maximize their mechanical rigidity . Even though the Young ' s moduli of microtubules and actin filaments are only likely to be correct to within an order of magnitude , we can nevertheless draw some strong conclu - sions regarding the compliance of cells . Dennerll et al . ( 1988 , 1989 ) used calibrated glass needles to measure the longitudinal stiffnesses ( spring constants ) of neurites from PC - 12 cells and chick dorsal root ganglion cells grown in culture . The mean stiffness was 240 ~ Nm - ~ for PC - 12 cells with neurites of average length ~ 100 / ~ m . Similar results were obtained for the dorsal root ganglion cells . Each section through a neurite probably contains 10 or more microtubules ( Bass et al . , 1987 ) , and perhaps as many actin filaments . The question arises : Is the neurite stiffness compatible with the predicted stiffness of the microtubules and actin filaments ? The surprising answer is no : the cytoskeletal filaments are much stiffer than the neurite ! The stiffness ( EA / L ) of a single microtubule with length ( L ) 100 / ~ m , Young ' s modulus ( E ) 1 . 2 GPa , and cross - sectional area ( A ) 190 nm ~ is 2 . 3 mNm - ~ , whereas the stiffness of a single , 100 - / zm - long ac - tin filament is 470 # Nm - ~ ( E = 2 . 6 GPa , A = 18 nm2 ) . Thus a single actin filament and a single microtubule are , respectively , two and 10 times stiffer than the entire neurite . This implies that the compliance ( the inverse of stiffness ) of the cytoskeletal filaments is negligible compared to the com - pliance of the neurite : in order to accommodate strain , the actin filaments and microtubules cannot be continuous throughout the length of the neurite , and sliding must occur between these filaments . This conclusion is reinforced by the observation that the neurites can be elongated by up to 16 % : this is likely to be an order of magnitude greater than the breaking strain of actin filaments ( Kishino and Yanagida , 1988 ) or microtubules . The compliance must originate in other neurite material ; if proteins crosslink the cytoskeletal polymers , then these proteins must be highly compliant compared to the cytoskeletai filaments themselves . If neu - ronal axons in vivo are of similar stiffness to neurites in cul - ture , there is no reason to postulate that neurofilaments , members of the family of intermediate filament proteins which comprise the third component of cytoskeleton , serve purely mechanical roles : the presence of actin filaments and microtubules is expected to provide the axon with ample me - chanical rigidity . In conclusion , we have measured the bending stiffness of taxol - stabilized microtubules and phalloidin - stabilized actin filaments . We believe that this information provides a foun - dation for the understanding of the dynamic structure of eu - karyotic cells . We hope to use knowledge of the flexural ri - gidity of the cytoskeletal filaments to deduce the force exerted by motor proteins in vitro , and to understand the forces exerted in vivo that result in changes of cell shape . We thank Sung Back for technical assistance ; Drs . W . Almers , E . Mey - h6fer , and S . Ray ; and A . Hunt , E . Munro , and S . Back for providing help - ful comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health ( AR40593 ) to J . Howard . Work was performed while J . Howard was a Pew Scholar in the Biomedical Sciences , an Alfred P . Sloan Research Fellow , and was a recipient of the Fondation pour l ' Etude du Syst ~ me Ner - veux ( FESN ) Fellowship on Sensory Transduction . F . Gittes was sup - ported by National Institutes of Health Molecular Biophysics Training Grant GM - 08268 . Received for publication 16 July 1992 and in revised form 12 October 1992 . Gittes et al . Flexural Rigidity of Microtubules 933 Reference5 Aist , J . R . , and C . J . Bayles . 1991 . Detection of spindle pushing forces in vivo during anaphase B in the fungus Nectria haematococca . CellMotil . Cytoskel - eton . 19 : 18 - 24 . Amos , L . A . , and W . B . Amos , 1991a . Molecules of the Cytoskeleton . Guil - ford Press , New York . 253 pp . Amos , L . A . , and W . B . Amos . 1991b . The bending of sliding microtubules imaged by confocal light microscopy and negative stain electron microscopy . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 14 : 95 - 101 . Amos , L . A . , and A . Klug . 1974 . Arrangement of subunits in flagellar microtu - bules . J . Cell Sci . 14 : 523 - 549 . Bagshaw , C . R . 1982 . Muscle Contraction . Chapman and Hall , London . Baas , P . W . , L . A . White , and S . R . Heidemann . 1987 . Microtubule polarity reversal accompanies regrowth of amputated neurites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 5272 - 5276 . Beese , L . , G . Stubbs , and C . Cohen . 1987 . Microtubule structure at 18A reso - lution . J . Mol . Biol . 194 : 257 - 264 . Box , G . E . P . , W . G . Hunter , and J . S . Hunter . 1978 . Statistics for Experiment - ers . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , New York . 653 pp . Brennen , C . , and H . Winet . 1977 . Fluid mechanics of propulsion by cilia and flagella . Annu . Rev . Fluid Mech . 9 : 339 - 398 . Brokaw , C . J . 1966 . Effects of increased viscosity on the movements of some invertebrate spermatozoa . J . Exp . Biol . 45 : 113 - 139 . Brokaw , C . J . 1975 . Cross - bridge behavior in a sliding filament model for fla - gella . In Molecules and Cell Movement . S . Inou6 and R . E . Stepbens , edi - tors . Raven Press , New York . 165 - 179 . Brokaw , C . J . 1986 . Computer simulation of bend propagation by axoplasmic microtubules . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 6 : 347 - 353 . Chr ~ tien , D . , and R . H . Wade . 1991 . New data on the microtubule surface lat - tice . BioL Cell . 71 : 161 - 174 . Dennerll , T . J . , H . C . Joshi , R . E . Buxbaum , and S . R . Heidemann . 1988 . Ten - sion and compression in the cytoskeleton of PC - 12 neurites II : quantitative measurements . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 665 - 674 . Dennerll , T . J . , P . Lamoureux , R . E . Buxbanm , and S . R . Heidemann . 1989 . The cytomechanics of axonal elongation and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 3073 - 3083 . Doi , M . , and S . F . Edwards . 1986 . The Theory of Polymer Dynamics . Claren - don Press , Oxford . Feynman , R . P . , R . B . Leighton , and M . Sands . 1964 . The Feynman Lectures on Physics . Vol . I1 . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Gittes , F . , B . Mickey , and J . Howard . 1992 . The flexural rigidity of microtu - bules measured from fluctuations of curvature . Biophys . J . 62 : A27 . Harris , R . A . , and J . E . Hearst . 1966 . On polymer dynamics . J . Chem . Phys . 44 : 2595 - 2609 . Holmes , K . C . , D . Popp , W . Geghard , and W . Kabsch . 1990 . Atomic model of the actin filament . Nature ( Lond . ) . 347 : 44 - 49 . Hymen , A . , D . Drechsel , D . Kellogg , S . Salser , K . Sawin , P . Steffen , L . Wor - deman , and T . Mitchison . 1991 . Preparation of modified tubniins . Methods Enzymol . 196 : 478 - 485 . Kamimura , S . , and K . Takahashi . 1981 . Direct measurement of the force of microtubule sliding in flagella . Nature ( Lond . ) . 293 : 566 - 568 . Kishino , A . , and T . Yanaglda . 1988 . Force measurements by micromanipula - tion of a single actin filament by glass needles . Nature ( Lond . ) . 334 : 74 - 76 . Landau , L . D . , and E . M . Lifshitz . 1980 . Statistical Physics . 3rd ed . , Part I . Pergamon Press , Oxford . 544 pp . Landau , L . D . , and E . M . Lifshitz . 1986 . Theory of Elasticity , 3rd ed . Perga - mon Press , Oxford . 187 pp . Mizushima - Sugano , J . , T . Maeda , and T . Miki - Noumura . 1983 . Flexural rigid - ity of singlet microtubules estimated from statistical analysis of their contour lengths and end - to - end distances . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 755 : 257 - 262 . Nagashima , H . , and S . Asakura . 1980 . Dark - field microscopic study of the flex - ibility of F - actin complexes , J . Idol . Biol . 136 : 169 - 182 . Okuno , M . , and Y . Hiramoto . 1979 . Direct measurements of the stiffness of echinoderm sperm flagella . J . Exp . Biol . 79 : 235 - 243 . Omoto , C . K . , and C . J . Brokaw . 1982 . Structure and behaviour of the sperm terminal filament . J . Cell Sci . 58 : 385 - - 409 . Pardee , J . D . , and J . A . Spudich . 1982 . Purification of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol . 85 : 164 - 181 . Reif , F . 1965 . Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics . McGraw - Hill , New York . Wainwright , S . A . , W . D . Biggs , J , D . Currey , and J . M . Gosline . 1976 . Me - chanical Design in Organisms . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Weingarten , M . D . , M . M . Suter , D . R . Littman , and M . W . Kirschner . 1974 . Properties of the depolymerization products of microtubules from mam - malian brain . Biochemistry . 13 : 5529 - 5537 . Yamazaki , S . , T . Maeda , and T . Miki - Noumura . 1982 . Flexural rigidity of sin - glet microtubules estimated from statistical analysis of fluctuating images . In Biological Functions of Microtubules and Related Structures . H . Sakai , H . Mohri , and G . G . Borisy , editors . Academic Press , New York . 41 - 48 . Yanagida , T . , M . Nakase , K . Nishiyama , and F . Oosawa . 1984 . Direct obser - vations of motion of single F - actin filaments in the presence of myosin . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 307 : 58 - 60 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 934