Participatory Action Research - A guide for community - based organizations - January 2003 Ruth Armstrong , MBA rutharmstrong @ vision - mangagement . ca www . vision - management . ca BASED ON THE ACTION RESEARCH CARRIED OUT AT PARTICIPATION HOUSE SUPPORT SERVICES LONDON AND AREA Table of Contents page Introduction 1 Participatory Action Research 3 Deciding to do PAR 4 Designing a PAR Project 6 Carrying out a PAR Project 9 Communicating the Results of a PAR Project 13 Evaluation 14 Summary 15 References 16 Implementation Tools : Appendix A – PAR Steering Committee : Terms of Reference Appendix B – Confidentiality Appendix C – Sample of Sources of Evidence from PH Process Appendix D – Face Sheet Appendix E – Guidelines for Open - Ended Interviews Appendix F – Themes – Focus of Interviews Appendix G – Questionnaire to Guide Stories Appendix H – Focus Groups Appendix I – Evaluation of PAR’s Impact Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 1 INTRODUCTION Why was this guide written ? Participation House Support Services London and Area ( PH ) embarked on a voluntary self - initiated project to evaluate the impact of their mission and principles of service on the individuals they support . The Quality Outcomes for People Committee , a committee established by the Board of Directors , considered a number of approaches before deciding on a Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) approach to evaluation . PAR has since been embedded into PH’s organizational processes for purposes of evaluation , accountability and internal benchmarking of service excellence . This guide was originally conceived : • to provide Participation House ( PH ) with a tool to continue to evaluate their programs in a practical , credible way . The Quality Outcomes for People Committee then decided to share their experiences and PAR methodology with other community - based organizations in the hopes of contributing knowledge to the larger field . This guide is the resulting product that offers : • to share the lessons learned at Participation House with other nonprofit service agencies ; • to provide a practical guide for agencies who wish to use this evaluation approach ; • to describe an evaluation approach that is particularly relevant to , and focused on , the nonprofit community - based sector ; • to document an evaluation approach that responds to pressures of accountability , simplicity and responsiveness . “The effectiveness and sustainability of organizations is directly related to their ability to learn from their own experience . – Community Development Resource Association Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 2 Who is this guide for ? • This guide was primarily written for PH’s Board and Staff so they can continue to evaluate their programs . • This guide can be useful to nonprofit community - based service organizations with limited funds to design and implement meaningful evaluations . The PAR method of evaluation has been adapted to the needs of these organizations so that accountability and continuous improvement can take place . This method is particularly suited to evaluations that benefit from being qualitative , responsive and participative . This method combines quantitative and qualitative methods to achieve both action and research results . • This guide can be useful to sister organizations and funders in suggesting an evaluation method that is both practical and effective . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 3 PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH What is it ? Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) is a research method that is qualitative , quantitative and participative . It has as its twin goals the achievement of both action and research in the same evaluation method . Participants ( eg . individuals receiving service and family members ) are involved in collecting and interpreting data . The data can be a combination of quantitative and qualitative indicators . This combination strengthens the qualitative data , provides a deeper understanding of the quantitative data and leads to action more directly . Participatory Action Research has a number of characteristics : • Participative – clients , staff , board and other stakeholders are involved as partners in the research process ; • Qualitative – it focuses more on descriptions than numbers ; • Reflective – critical reflection on the process and outcomes are important features of the process ; • Responsive – it is able to respond to the emerging issues of a situation which can lead to action ; • Emergent and cyclical – the process takes places gradually over a number of cycles so that interpretations of data can be tested , challenged and refined . Why is it useful ? • In some community or agency settings it may be difficult to use traditional evaluation - experimental - research methods . • To achieve both understanding ( research ) and action requires responsiveness to the situation and the people involved . • Some questions and methods to answer these questions are imprecise in the social / human service sectors . PAR enables participants and researchers to learn from experiences and move towards a better understanding of elusive matters . • The cyclic process of including planning , review and learning allows the collected data to be used critically for understanding and action . • The quality of the evidence can be continually improved by using many sources of data collection . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 4 DECIDING TO DO PAR How to prepare To Begin • Research is the systematic collection and analysis of information . Research begins with a question : What is it that we want to know ? How can we tell that what we are doing is having an impact ? Do we have the information we need to make decisions and take action ? • We need to clarify the question we want to ask . Participation House asked the question : Are we fulfilling our promise ( mission , quality outcomes ) and obligations ( principles of service ) to the people we support ? • The decision to launch an evaluation process follows . This decision is usually made at the board and / or at senior management levels . • Once the decision is made , put a structure in place to oversee the process and report to the Board . Whom to involve A Steering Committee • Organize a committee , reporting to the Board of Directors , who will participate in and oversee the design , implementation , analysis and results of the PAR project ( see Appendix A for sample terms of reference ) . PH named their committee Quality Outcomes for People Committee to reinforce the focus of their evaluation and accountability . • Bring together a variety of people with different skills and interests as well as a commitment to the organization . Committee members should include board , community and senior staff . • Engage an external consultant to lend expertise , credibility and neutrality to the process . The consultant will guide the project and produce the resulting report . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 5 Participants in the Research Partnership • Identify who will be participating in the research . At PH the Committee identified the people they support as the focus of the evaluation . Family and staff assisted 1 as required . All became partners in the research . • Consider involving neighbours , community members ( stores , banks , community centres ) and agencies as part of your research . • Ensure that the selection of participants is random ( especially in large organizations ) and / or unbiased to avoid skewing the results . PH used a combination of : inviting people to volunteer to participate in the project ; ensuring participants came from different homes and family situations ; and including individuals with various capacities to communicate verbally . The selection process was reviewed by the external consultant and approved by the Board . PH hopes to engage most , if not all , individuals and families in this process over the next few years . Steps in Preparing for PAR 1 . Think about what you want to learn . 2 . Decide how you can answer your questions . 3 . Decide what you need to proceed . 4 . Decide who should be involved in the evaluation . 5 . Estimate the cost of doing the evaluation . 6 . Develop a time frame and critical path . 7 . Decide what to do with the findings . 1 Some staff and family members helped by facilitating the communication between the individual ( particularly those who were nonverbal ) and consultant . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 6 DESIGNING A PAR PROJECT How to develop a design • The design outlines : the kind of information to collect and why ; how to collect the information ; and from whom ( consider random selection ) to collect the information . • The design sets the framework for defining what the process is , how individuals participate in it and how the pieces fit together . • Principles of design : - collect the same type of information from everyone ; - respect the organization’s rules of confidentiality ( see Appendix B ) ; - involve the Steering Committee and others in critical discussion and reflection ; - form conclusions based on data ; - recognize the knowledge and experience of those people who direct and do the work as well as those who are the users ( eg . people who are supported and their families ) ; - ensure the process is fair and perceived as fair to participants ; - recognize that although any question can be asked , the participants must be connected to the issue – eg . consumers , staff , community members and others may be primary or secondary participants in the process depending on the question raised ; - ensure the evaluation is useful to the people who are delivering the services and governing the organization ; - use a constructive approach to answer why and how well the organization / program / service is succeeding in doing what it has set out to do , where it is falling short and how it can improve . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 7 Steps in the PAR process Steps * in Participatory Action Research * adapted from Yoland Wadsworth 2 . Raise a question 3 . Plan to seek answers 4 . Engage in “fieldwork” 1 . Stop and reflect 5 . Reflect and analyze 6 . Think of new actions 7 . Act and Implement Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 8 Each of the steps identified is connected to PH’s process and experiences . Steps The PH Experience 1 . Stop and reflect on current actions and practices . 2 . Raise a question . 3 . Plan to seek answers to the question ( s ) – start a process of questioning and reflecting by involving others who could and should be involved . 4 . Engage in “fieldwork” . Design the “fieldwork” in ways that are accessible to the participants in the research - eg . use stories , cameras / videos , observations , drawings . 5 . Reflect and analyze – develop deeper understandings and more useful theories about what you are evaluating in order to produce new knowledge that can improve action and / or practice . 6 . Think of new actions and further areas of research – changing your actions becomes part of the evaluation / research process . Then another cycle of research begins . 7 . Act on and implement the findings . 1 . PH reflected on whether it was achieving its mission and values . 2 . Are we succeeding at implementing our Principles of Service ? 3 . The Quality Outcomes for People Committee began this process and designed the PAR project . 4 . An external consultant with the assistance of Committee and Board members conducted interactive interviews and documented what people thought and knew about the questions raised . PH used stories and observations and collected some of the information . 5 . PH’s Quality Outcomes for People Committee did much of this reflection with the guidance of the consultant . 6 . Some operational changes were made as soon as awareness was raised . The Committee made recommendations to the Board . 7 . An Implementation Committee was established by the Board to recommend implementation strategies . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 9 CARRYING OUT A PAR PROJECT Pilot Test It is generally useful to conduct a smaller version , i . e . pilot test , of the PAR Project before implementing the project . The Steering Committee can then refine and improve its methods before implementing the full project . Identifying Multiple Sources of Data Multiple sources of data ensure a more accurate evaluation . 1 . Define the question and the outcomes you are looking for . 2 . Identify the indicators of success in achieving the outcomes . 3 . Identify multiple sources of evidence that could be collected to answer the question raised ( see Appendix C for a useful chart ) . Data Collection Tools A number of data collection tools are available . Some of these tools can be found in the appendices identified . • Face Sheet ( Appendix D ) • Open - ended interviews ( Appendix E ) and Themes ( Appendix F ) • Questionnaires to guide stories ( Appendix G ) • Case studies – i . e . descriptions of existing situations • Focus groups ( Appendix H ) • Observations • Surveys • Individual Service Agreements ( ISA ) and Person Centred Plans ( PCP ) • Staff logs • Complaints • Inventories • Statistics ( examples include : staff turnover , number of vans , length of stay in home , individuals with / without family members , number of days in hospital ) • Results of other research evaluation processes and surveys already conducted • Accreditation • Reports and audits Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 10 Collecting Data • Develop a plan for collecting data with preferred tools ( see above ) , identifying participants and developing a schedule . Consider a combination of methodologies – eg . individual interviews , focus groups , statistical data – to evaluate processes and outcomes . • Implement the plan . • Document the results in a report . Analyzing the Data • Review the documented results with the Steering Committee . • Reflect on the interpretation and meaning of the results . • Identify and analyze patterns . • Draw conclusions in answer to the original questions . • Raise areas for further study – identify other data to be collected . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 11 Analyzing the Data – a PH illustration • Issues raised during the interview phase were compared wherever possible with actual quantitative data in a chart ( see below ) : Issue Raised & Perceptions Data • Staff Turnover - Some family members expressed concern about staff turnover . Maternity leaves and internal movement by staff from one home to another is perceived as turnover by family members . • The trend indicates a higher percentage of turnover over the last couple of years : - 1999 : 34 out of 140 staff left – 24 % - 2001 : 50 out of 160 staff left – 31 % • Turnover analysis indicates the reasons to be : - 42 % going to full time employment ( eg . Board of Education ) - 18 % not passing probation - . 08 % ended their summer job - . 06 % moved out of town - . 08 % did not return from maternity leave - 18 % left for other reasons • Analysis of length of service : Years of service Part time Full time Total over 10 2 17 19 7 - 10 11 6 17 5 - 7 7 3 10 3 - 5 29 7 36 1 - 3 43 6 49 less than 1 59 1 60 151 40 191 • At times the issues raised were supported by perceptions rather than data . • Staff turnover was a case in point : - Some family members perceived a high turnover rate in their son / daughter / sibling’s home . - When examined more closely “turnover” presented itself as a complex issue with several facets : Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 12 1 . PH’s growth created opportunities for internal staff movement – staff did not “turnover” at the agency level although they may have moved from one home to another . 2 . Some “turnover” is inevitable when it is a temporary summer student . 3 . Maternity leaves create another type of “temporary turnover” . . 4 . Staff who work primarily weekends and evenings often apply for positions offering day shifts . 5 . Family members may have unrealistic expectations of what “reasonable” turnover represents . 6 . Some turnover is important in order to keep staff and agency fresh . - The Committee reflected on this issue and identified some actions that could be taken in response to family members’ concerns : 1 . Hold transfer interviews with staff to understand why they moved to another part of the organization ( better pay , full time vs . part - time employment , better hours , etc . ) . Develop strategies in response to findings . 2 . Develop strategies to better meet the individual’s and family member’s needs for consistency in relationships . 3 . Modify expectations by introducing staff in different ways – eg . “This is Mary , a summer student , who will be with us for only two months” . 4 . Communicate findings to individuals and family members to align perceptions with reality . Moving forward • Make recommendations to the Board ( the sponsoring group ) . • Identify new actions and / or areas of research . • Evaluate the process and improve methods of evaluation . • Evaluate the impact / outcomes of the PAR process . • Start the cycle again . Accountability • Include a process the Board could use to implement the recommendations . • Identify a communications plan for the Board to report the results of the process to the interested constituencies . • Identify a process and time line for evaluating the impact of the PAR process . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 13 COMMUNICATING THE RESULTS OF A PAR PROJECT Whom to send the report ( or a summary ) to • Submit to Board for approval and action ; • Share report with management and staff ; • Distribute to participants in process ; • Share with funders ; • Share with interested groups and sister agencies ; • Identify others . What to include in the report • Decide on how the results will be reported . Consider who it is for , what you want to tell them and what they need to know . • Agree on an outline of the report including : - executive summary , - introduction and background , - evaluation methodology , - analysis of results , - conclusion and recommendations , - appendices of interview questions , data collected , committee members and other relevant information . Keeping track of recommended actions • Develop an action plan for the Board based on the PAR results . This level of detail helps the Board take the required steps to implement the recommendations . • Communicate the Board’s next steps to participants . • Commit to reporting on progress made on the action plans – i . e . being accountable . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 14 EVALUATION What to evaluate To close the loop on the PAR process , evaluate both the process and the outcome . Process : How well did the process and methodology work in achieving your evaluation goals ? Outcome : What positive impact or change in services / organization have you seen as a result of the process ? How to evaluate Process : The Steering Committee can reflect on and analyze the process by engaging in a focused discussion of the positive and negative aspects of the process . The conclusions and lessons learned will inform the next PAR process . Outcome : The Board , with the help of the Steering Committee , can compare changes made with the recommendations for action . Once a baseline has been established the Board , staff and other stakeholders can monitor improvements or deterioration in the initial situation . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 15 SUMMARY The lessons learned by PH as a result of engaging in Participatory Action Research are offered here to inform those who will be using this approach . 1 . Data a ) Try to include , collect and analyze as much quantitative data that is already available . Incorporate the data into the PAR process . b ) Identify quantitative data that could be useful for more in depth research and understanding . Often the need for specific data emerges during the PAR process . c ) Try to compare and / or contrast the qualitative with the quantitative data . d ) Continue to zoom in on the layers of information as if “peeling an onion” . 2 . Confidentiality and Safety a ) Ensure that participants have confidential and safe ways to express their views . b ) Consider offering choices such as : - speaking to consultant or Committee member in private ; - leaving a stamped , addressed envelope and form to be sent in anonymously or with identification . 3 . Action a ) Respond as soon as possible to the information and insights you acquire – you don’t have to wait for the final report before taking action . b ) Include accounts of any actions taken during the process in the final report . 4 . Accountability a ) Include clear practical recommendations for Board to respond and take action in the final report . b ) Develop an implementation plan to assist the Board in its meaningful response to the research . c ) Identify the constituencies that should receive a summary report . Follow up to ensure the summary is distributed . 5 . Follow Up and Evaluation a ) Identify the next round of the continuous PAR process . b ) Schedule an evaluation ( see Appendix I ) of the impact of the PAR process including a review of which recommendations were implemented . Participatory Action R e search A guide for community - based organizations Participation House Support Services London and Area Page 16 REFERENCES Dick , B . ( 1997 ) Qualitative evaluation for program improvement , Resource Papers in Action Research Ellis , Diana et al . ( 1990 ) Keeping on Track : An evaluation Guide for Community Groups , Women’s Research Centre , Vancouver Hart , E . and Bond , M . ( 1995 ) Action - Research for Health and Social Care , Open University Press McGill , I . and Beatty , L . ( 1995 ) Action Learning : a guide for professional management and educational development , Kogan Page Newman , Judith ( 2000 ) Action research : A brief overview , Forum : Qualitative Social Research Wadsworth , Yoland ( 1998 ) What is Participatory Action Research ? , Action Research International A - 1 PAR Steering Committee : Terms of Reference - SAMPLE - Purpose : To design , implement and oversee a participatory action research project that considers a particular question . The PAR Steering Committee will be comprised of board , staff and community members . The Committee will meet regularly with the PAR consultant in order to : 1 . Raise and discuss matters regarding the design and use of information gathering for the project . 2 . Monitor the overall process and modify if necessary . 3 . Review the data and findings of the process . Analyze and discuss the implications . 4 . Be the official information link between the Board and the consultant and between the Board and community . 5 . Report to the Board on a regular basis . The PAR Steering Committee will be responsible for making recommendations to the Board based on the results of the process . In addition , the Committee will outline an implementation plan for the Board to consider when it approves the recommendations . The PAR Steering Committee will engage the community as appropriate to the PAR process . The PAR Steering Committee recognizes that part of the research process is to influence change . APPENDIX A B - 1 Confidentiality • Confidentiality in evaluation and research is important and discussions about protecting confidentiality should be taken very seriously . Keeping information confidential is a measure of respect for participants and is especially important if your group wants to use the evaluation findings for ongoing action and improving services . Assure people that they won’t suffer any consequences if they choose not to answer your questions . Also assure them you will respect their confidentiality . Protect the confidentiality of your participants at all times during and after the evaluation process . If you promise anyone confidentiality , you must always protect it . • If participants name places , people and things about themselves that will identify them , you must remove or alter those details when you write the final report . Sometimes the naming of people , services or facts is relevant to the evaluation . In these cases be sure to check first with the people involved . It may be proper to allow identification of the services , although you may wish to delete references to actual staff . • Decide on the method you want to use to code your participants . There are a number of options . You can give them made - up names or use numbers , letters , or a combination of numbers and letters . Write their code name / number next to their actual name on the master list and from that point on , use the code to identify the interview or any documentation related to that person . Make a habit of referring to the participants by the code even if you remember who they are . • As you locate participants , develop a master list with their name , code , address and phone number on it . Keep the number of people who have access to the master list to an absolute minimum . • When the evaluation process is complete , you may wish to include a list of demographics about the informants as an appendix . The items used in the demographics are usually collected on a face sheet ( see Appendix D ) at the time of , or prior to , the interview . APPENDIX B C - 1 ANALYSIS Sample of Sources of Evidence from PH Process The analysis is presented in chart form matching Principles of Service ( the question that was raised for evaluation ) with Indicators and with Evidence of desirable outcomes – i . e . Principles of Service . 1 . Focal Principle : “We believe that consumers have the right to participate in determining services to meet their needs” . Note : The principles were divided into a series of outcomes . Principles of Service / Outcomes Indicators Evidence 1 . 1 . Participation in determining services • consumers are asked for their preferences by staff • consultation and planning with individual , family , friends , external advocates , internal staff ( in above order of priority ) • interviews x 10 - individuals and family members confirmed participation • Person Centred Plan ( PCP ) • Staff Logs 1 . 2 . Services meet needs as defined by consumers within PH mandate • matching goals to outcomes • joint problem - solving • open communication • interviews x 10 - confirmed this principle • activity calendars / visuals • Person Centred Plans ( PCP ) • Individual Service Agreements ( ISA ) 1 . 3 . Consumers have rights • consumers know their rights • mechanism exists / used to complain and appeal • consumers educated • individuals noted their ability to go to or complain to staff and family members • family members felt comfortable going to or complaining to staff and senior managers APPENDIX C C - 2 2 . Aspects of other Principles Principles of Service / Outcomes Indicators Evidence 2 . 1 . Independent decision - making • consumers are self - directed and make choices – personal preferences ( involvement of family , friends , external advocates , internal staff ) • interviews x 10 • PCP • Staff Logs • activity calendars and binder • room and home décor 2 . 2 . Participation in community life • contacts with different individuals • exposure to different settings • interviews x 10 indicated daily exposure to stores , jobs , banks , malls , church , friends , volunteering , theatre , baseball , etc . 2 . 3 . Strengthen family of choice relationships to provide support and advocacy • contacts with family members • involvement in hiring and evaluating staff • support from senior staff • awareness of rights • 1 out of 10 people was without any family connection • 7 out of 10 people had family members present for the interviews who were very involved in planning 2 . 4 . Interdependent , mutually supportive and responsible community – individual has equal opportunities to be a community member • welcoming community response • community affected in positive way • participation in community life • area for further research – community interviews and stories 2 . 5 . Enriched environment • participation in physical , educational and recreational environments • comparison with institutional environment • options for individual choice were present • observation of physical surroundings : home décor , personal touches , individual’s photos , crafts everywhere • participation in daily living activities in small groups or pairs 2 . 6 . Services evaluated • formal process of evaluation • consumers have opportunity to give input • knowledge of how to contact senior manager and board members • Ministry compliance procedures • ISAs • PAR process D - 1 Face Sheet - SAMPLE - A face sheet can be used to collect descriptive information to complement the interview guide , themes or questionnaire . Make sure , however , that you know why you are asking for information – i . e . How is it going to help the evaluation ? Code Name : Interviewer ( s ) : Place of Interview : Time : Start : Finish : Why chosen ( if relevant ) : Interest in PAR project : Number of years receiving service : Age group : History ( important highlights – eg . lived in institution for 20 years , no immediate family ) : Other : APPENDIX D E - 1 Guidelines for Open - Ended Interviews Before you start 1 . Make arrangements to interview the participants . 2 . When requesting the interview , say how much time you think the interview will take . Be sure the person knows that if he or she chooses not to be involved , it will not affect the service s / he receives in any way . 3 . Plan to have the guides for interviews , themes and questionnaire close at hand so you can refer to them comfortably . Review the guides beforehand so you are familiar with the questions . When you are writing the final notes include the question you actually asked with each response . During the interview it is more efficient simply to write the number or letter of the question beside the response rather than writing out the whole question . Any question you’ve asked in addition to those in the guides must be recorded and included in the final write - up . 4 . Do not use a tape recorder . The process of writing / typing encourages you , the interviewer , to pay close attention to what is being said and stops you from going off on tangents . 5 . Decide on the code name or number to be used for each interview , to preserve the anonymity of the people interviewed . As you begin 1 . Introduce the project and yourself . You may use a handout – a brief written description – as a basis for introduction . 2 . Affirm the confidentiality of the interview – explain how you will protect confidentiality . 3 . At the start of the interview describe briefly what kinds of topics will be covered in the interview itself . APPENDIX E E - 2 4 . Ask the participant to tell you the necessary data for the face sheet which accompanies each interview . Depending on the project , the face sheet data will include some or all of the following : age , geographic area participant lives in , education , history , family , number of years receiving service . Sometimes filling out the face sheet before you begin the actual interview helps to loosen things up . However some interviewers feel more comfortable asking these kinds of questions at the close of the interview after trust has been established . 5 . Tell participants that you will be writing notes in the interview . 6 . Remember to focus on descriptions – the interview is a way for the participants to tell their stories . During the interview 1 . Try to write the participant’s actual words as much as possible . Writing in the first person helps , i . e . using “I” not “she” or “he” . 2 . The interview is a conversation , so relate to the participant in that way . Listen carefully . Go where the participant leads but be disciplined so you don’t go off on tangents – or stay off for very long . This means at times you may have to say , “That’s an interesting point but let’s get back to…” 3 . If participants seem uncomfortable , try to discover the sources of discomfort . Is it your manner or do they misunderstand the project . Perhaps participants feel that what they want to say is not acceptable . Make it clear that there are no right or wrong statements . 4 . Don’t worry about silence . Wait for the participant to decide what to say . Often what comes after the silence is very significant 5 . It is important that participants focus on their own experience . If they are talking about everyone else but themselves , try interjecting , “How do you feel about that ? ” or “What did you do ? ” 6 . Draw out the information by using more questions and asking for clarification . You can say , “Could you tell me more about that ? ” or “What do you mean ? ” Sometimes it is helpful to use your own knowledge to assist with a question , for example , “Some people say…” or “Some people have experienced…” E - 3 7 . If participants do not want to discuss a certain topic or question , do not push . Instead try to find out why they don’t want to talk about it and record this in your notes . Reassure them that it’s OK to pass on a question . 8 . At the close of the interview ask participants how they feel . Depending on the topic , interviews can be upsetting . At the very least participants may feel vulnerable at having shared so much information . 9 . Tell participants that they can get in touch with you if they think of anything else to add . Thank participants for their time , for the information , and for agreeing to be interviewed . After the interview 1 . Summarize and type up your interview notes as soon as possible after the interview , preferably on the same day . The longer you wait the more likely you are to forget . 2 . Write a thank - you note to the participants . Adapted from : “Keeping on Track – An Evaluation Guide for Community Groups” – Ellis , Diana et . al . 1990 . F - 1 Themes – Focus of Interviews Build a list of key topics or themes that you will be following . Try to cover all those topics or themes in the interview with each person . Gather the participants’ thoughts , knowledge and experience of how the theme areas have been affected by the agency’s services or activities . For example : • health needs • other needs ( social / economic / spiritual ) • access to professional care • housing • support networks ( friends , family ) • transportation • shopping • recreation • nutrition • community interaction • other APPENDIX F G - 1 Questionnaire to Guide Stories Focus of Interviews Example : Are we meeting the principle : Question Guide 1 . Place : a ) How long have you lived here ? b ) What do you like about living here ? c ) What is it about your neighbourhood that makes it special ? d ) What could be improved in your home ? 2 . People : a ) Who are the people that you know and spend time with ( eg . family members , staff , community ) ? b ) What is special about each of these people ? c ) How long have you known them ? d ) Where did you meet them ? 3 . Activities : a ) What are your favourite memories of having a good time ? b ) What do you do with the people you know ? With staff ? c ) What do you do by yourself ? d ) What do you do well that many people don’t know about ? e ) What do you do in the community ? f ) How do you decide what you’re going to do every day ? g ) Do you get help in planning your activities ? If yes , from whom ? APPENDIX G We believe that consumers have the right to participate in determining services to meet their needs . G - 2 4 . Complaints : a ) What makes you feel sad , mad or frustrated ? b ) What do you do , and who do you go to , to solve any problems ? c ) What do you do when you don’t like something a staff person did ? 5 . Future : a ) What are some of the things you would like to do if you could ? b ) What is stopping you from being able to do these things ? c ) What help do you need , and from whom , to do what you want to ? 6 . What advice would you give the agency if it had $ 500 , 000 to spend to improve its services ? 7 . Is there anything else you want to tell us ? 8 . If you think of anything else that you want to share , please send it to us in this stamped , addressed envelope . H - 1 Focus Groups Characteristics • The use of focus groups has been gaining in popularity over the recent past . Focus groups are used as a qualitative way to acquire a comprehensive understanding of a particular issue . • Focus groups are an applied research method useful for exploration and discovery . • Focus groups are group interviews . They are a way of listening to people and learning from them . • Each focus group generally has six to ten participants with similar interests and / or backgrounds . • Focus groups generally take 1 ½ to 2 hours . • A facilitator guides the group interview using a specific set of questions to focus the discussion . • Recruiting participants is time - consuming but must be done carefully to ensure the “right” mix of group members . • Choosing a comfortable environment is an important aspect of this method – i . e . comfortable chairs , well lighted , adequate space , beverages and snacks , etc . • Focus groups are useful in gaining insight into the feelings of people who would be most affected by issues or proposed changes . Questions • Asking the right questions can yield information useful to analysis . • When designing interview questions for focus groups consider these guidelines : - Use open - ended questions . - Avoid questions that can be answered by “yes” or “no” . - Use “think back” questions which take people back to their own experiences . - Use different types of questions . - Focus the questions . APPENDIX H H - 2 Facilitator • The role of facilitator is a critical one . The facilitator must have good interpersonal skills and personal qualities as well as being a good listener , non - judgemental and adaptable . • The facilitator sets the context of the focus group by : - explaining the purpose of the focus group ; - setting the ground rules to assist individual participation ; - reassuring participants about the voluntary and confidential nature of their participation ; - stating the purpose of note - taking and recording • often an ice breaker is used to help everyone get acquainted . Recording the Discussion • Several techniques can be used to record the discussion : - video recording , - audio recoding , - manual or laptop note taking , - flip chart recording , - multiple methods Summarizing and Analyzing • Once the notes have been summarized , conclusions can be drawn in conjunction with other research results . I - 1 Evaluation of PAR’s Impact Continual reflection and learning is key to ensuring a successful organization . Once your agency has completed its PAR project , allow six to twelve months before reflecting on whether there have been any changes as a result . This reflection or evaluation process should be a simple one . In essence it asks questions based on the results of the PAR process . Some sample questions for reflection are : 1 . Has the Board and / or Senior Management implemented the recommendations emerging from the PAR process ? - Why or why not ? 2 . What actions and / or changes have we seen in the areas that were identified by the participants in the process ? 3 . What quantitative data have we begun to collect as a result of the PAR process ? 4 . Has the PAR process been embedded in how we evaluate our services ? - Why or why not ? The Board and Senior Management should take the lead in establishing an organizational culture of reflecting on the results and processes of its actions and commitments . APPENDIX I