ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 98 / 04 / 85 / 15 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , Number 1 , April 6 , 1998 85 – 99 http : / / www . jcb . org 85 Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae John R . Henley , * Eugene W . A . Krueger , § Barbara J . Oswald , § and Mark A . McNiven * ‡ § * Department of Molecular Neuroscience , ‡ Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , and § Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 Abstract . The dynamins comprise an expanding family of ubiquitously expressed 100 - kD GTPases that have been implicated in severing clathrin - coated pits during receptor - mediated endocytosis . Currently , it is unclear whether the different dynamin isoforms perform re - dundant functions or participate in distinct endocytic processes . To define the function of dynamin II in mammalian epithelial cells , we have generated and characterized peptide - specific antibodies to domains that either are unique to this isoform or conserved within the dynamin family . When microinjected into cultured hepatocytes these affinity - purified antibodies inhibited clathrin - mediated endocytosis and induced the formation of long plasmalemmal invaginations with attached clathrin - coated pits . In addition , clusters of distinct , nonclathrin - coated , flask - shaped invagina - tions resembling caveolae accumulated at the plasma membrane of antibody - injected cells . In support of this , caveola - mediated endocytosis of labeled cholera toxin B was inhibited in antibody - injected hepatocytes . Using immunoisolation techniques an anti - dynamin antibody isolated caveolar membranes directly from a hepato - cyte postnuclear membrane fraction . Finally , double la - bel immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a striking colocalization between dynamin and the caveolar coat protein caveolin . Thus , functional in vivo studies as well as ultrastructural and biochemical analyses indicate that dynamin mediates both clathrin - dependent en - docytosis and the internalization of caveolae in mam - malian cells . E ukaryotic cells internalize plasma membrane , sur - face receptors , and small molecules via several dis - tinct endocytic processes ( reviewed in Anderson et al . , 1992 ; Anderson , 1993 c ; Goldstein et al . , 1985 ; Watts and Marsh , 1992 ; van Deurs et al . , 1993 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 1994 ; Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ) . The most charac - terized process is receptor - or clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis ( Anderson et al . , 1977 ; Goldstein et al . , 1979 ) , which uses a clathrin and adaptor protein complex to sequester receptors and associated ligands into 100 – 150 - nm - diam coated pits at the plasma membrane ( reviewed in Gold - stein et al . , 1985 ; Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) . Recently , a more enigmatic endocytic process has been studied whereby cells internalize certain glycosylphosphatidyli - nositol ( GPI ) 1 - linked proteins , albumin , bacterial toxins , class I human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) , viruses , and small proteins ( e . g . , Huet et al . , 1980 ; Kartenbeck , et al . , 1989 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Predescu et al . , 1994 , 1997 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1994 , 1996 ; Smart et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Stang et al . , 1997 ) . This pathway , which is clearly distinct from clathrin - mediated endocytosis , relies on flask - shaped , nonclathrin - coated , 50 – 85 - nm - diam plasmalemmal vesicles called caveolae ( e . g . , Palade , G . E . 1953 . J . Appl . Physics . 24 : 1424 ( Abstr . ) ; Palade and Bruns , 1968 ; Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Yamada , 1955 ) . The molecular mechanisms by which these distinct plasmalemmal invaginations are severed to produce en - docytic vesicles both require GTP hydrolysis , yet remain largely undefined ( Carter et al . , 1993 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Whereas the dynamins have been implicated in the scission of clathrin - coated vesicles from the plasma mem - brane ( Takei et al . , 1995 ; reviewed in De Camilli et al . , 1995 ) , it is unknown how caveolae and noncoated plas - malemmal invaginations detach to form free endocytic vesicles . The dynamins are a multigene family of large ( 100 - kD ) GTPases that were originally identified in the brain ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) and , more recently , have been implicated in endocytosis ( reviewed in De Camilli et al . , 1995 ; Robinson et al . , 1994 ; Urrutia et al . , 1997 ; Warnock and Schmid , 1996 ) . Seminal studies on the paralytic shibire ts1 mutants of Drosophila melanogaster ( Grigliatti et al . , 1973 ) , which express a temperature - sensitive mutation in the GTP - binding domain of the fly dynamin ( Chen et al . , 1991 ; van der Bliek and Meyerowitz , 1991 ) , revealed dra - matic ultrastructural alterations of the plasma membrane in both neuronal and epithelial cells ( reviewed in Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) . At the restrictive temperature , nerve termi - Please address all correspondence to Mark A . McNiven , Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN 55905 . Tel . : ( 507 ) 284 - 0683 . Fax : ( 507 ) 284 - 0762 . E - mail : mcniven . mark @ mayo . edu 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : Dyn1 / 2 / 3 , dynamin I / II / III ; GPI , glyco - sylphosphatidylinositol ; HLA , human leukocyte antigen ; pIgA - R , poly - meric IgA receptor . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 86 nals of paralyzed flies are depleted of synaptic vesicles and accumulate short , nonclathrin - coated , “collared” pits at the plasma membrane , consistent with a defect in the en - docytic retrieval of synaptic vesicle membrane ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1989 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 a ; Poodry and Edgar , 1979 ) . In contrast , epithelial cells of paralyzed flies contain numerous long plasmalemmal invaginations at - tached to clathrin - coated pits , suggesting an impairment of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Kessel et al . , 1989 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 b ) . These obser - vations are supported by more recent studies on mamma - lian cells overexpressing a mutant dynamin , in which clath - rin - mediated endocytosis is impaired ( Herskovitz et al . , 1993 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ; Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) , leading to the formation of long plasmalemmal invagina - tions that are similar to those observed in epithelial cells from the shibire ts1 mutants ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Further characterization of these transfected cells showed that fluid - phase endocytosis is not inhibited ( Herskovitz et al . , 1994 ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) but upregulated over time , pos - sibly to compensate for the inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1995 ) . This change in fluid - phase endocytosis is particularly surprising when com - pared with cells of the shibire ts1 mutants , in which both clathrin - mediated endocytosis and fluid - phase endocytosis are inhibited at the restrictive temperature ( Kessel et al . , 1989 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 a , b ) . Thus , it is currently un - clear whether the dynamins participate solely in one or several endocytic processes . It has been hypothesized that multiple dynamin isoforms may perform a variety of en - docytic functions ( Artalejo et al . , 1995 ; Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) . Three distinct dynamin genes have been identified in mammals . Dynamin I ( Dyn1 ) is expressed exclusively in neurons ( Obar et al . , 1990 ) , dynamin II ( Dyn2 ) is found in all tissues ( Cook et al . , 1994 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) , and dy - namin III ( Dyn3 ) is restricted to the testis , the brain , the lung , and the heart ( Cao , H . , and M . A . McNiven , manu - script in preparation ; Cook et al . , 1996 ; Nakata et al . , 1993 ) . Each dynamin gene encodes four or more alterna - tively spliced isoforms ( reviewed in Robinson et al . , 1994 ; Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , all cells coexpress at least four Dyn2 isoforms , and neurons may express 12 or more dis - tinct dynamins . Additional unidentified dynamin family members are likely to exist as well . It is unclear if the dif - ferent dynamin gene products perform redundant func - tions or participate in distinct endocytic processes . To date , the important studies on cultured mammalian cells have overexpressed a mutant Dyn1 isoform in epithelial cells that do not normally express Dyn1 but rather four isoforms of Dyn2 ( Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Herskovitz et al . , 1993 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) . Therefore , the resulting phenotype that is observed in these cells may provide only a partial view of the cellular processes in which the endog - enous dynamins are involved . The focus of this study was to extend the observations described above and define the function of a single dy - namin family member in mammalian epithelial cells . To this end , we generated antibodies to peptides representing a conserved domain of the dynamin family and to a second region that is specific to the ubiquitously expressed Dyn2 . Our goal was to test the effects of these affinity - purified antibodies on distinct endocytic processes and plasmalem - mal morphology when injected into cultured mammalian epithelial cells . We found that two of these anti - dynamin antibodies inhibited the cellular uptake of fluorescent transferrin conjugates and induced the formation of long clathrin - coated invaginations from the plasma membrane , consistent with the shibire ts1 phenotype and the observa - tions from epithelial cells overexpressing a mutant Dyn1 isoform . In addition to these long clathrin - coated mem - branes in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells , we ob - served numerous , nonclathrin - coated , flask - shaped struc - tures resembling caveolae that accumulated at the plasma membrane . The density of these plasmalemmal invagina - tions was increased significantly in the anti - dynamin anti - body - injected cells compared with controls . Strikingly , these caveolar profiles frequently formed large , aberrant , grape - like clusters that extended deep within the cytoplasm . To determine if these structures represented a perturbation of normal caveolar function , we showed that the internaliza - tion of fluorescein - labeled cholera toxin B ( FITC - cholera toxin B ) , which normally is mediated by caveolae , was in - hibited in anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . Electron microscopy confirmed that HRP - labeled cholera toxin B ( HRP - cholera toxin B ) remained concentrated in plas - malemmal caveolae in these inhibited cells and did not gain access to cytoplasmic organelles . To verify that dy - namin associates with caveolae , an anti - dynamin antibody was used to immunoisolate caveolar membranes from a subcellular postnuclear membrane fraction . In addition , double label immunofluorescence microscopy of cultured hepatocytes revealed a significant overlap between dy - namin and caveolin . These results demonstrate that Dyn2 participates in an additional endocytic process that is dis - tinct from clathrin - mediated endocytosis and provide in - sight into the molecular mechanisms governing the GTP - mediated internalization of caveolae . Materials and Methods Cell Culture A normal mouse hepatocyte cell line ( BNL CL . 2 ; Patek et al . , 1978 ) from American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) was maintained in DME containing 4 . 5 g / liter glucose and 10 % FBS ( GIBCO BRL , Gaith - ersburg , MD ) . These nonpolarized cells make albumin but , unlike hepato - cytes in situ , express high levels of caveolin and only trace amounts of the polymeric IgA receptor ( pIgA - R ; data not shown , but see Fig . 9 ) . Cells were grown in plastic culture flasks for biochemical analyses , on acid - washed coverglasses for fluorescence microscopy , and on carbon - coated and glow - discharged gridded coverglasses ( Bellco Glass , Inc . , Vineland , NJ ) for electron microscopy . Antibodies and Reagents Polyclonal anti - peptide antibodies to dynamin were generated in rabbits and affinity purified as described previously ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . The anti - Pan61 and anti - Pan65 antibodies were made to peptide se - quences representing amino acids 262 – 292 and 223 – 249 of Dyn1 , respec - tively ( see Fig . 1 a ) , which are conserved among the known mammalian dynamin isoforms ( Cook et al . , 1994 ; Nakata et al . , 1993 ; Obar et al . , 1990 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) . The anti - Dyn2T antibody was raised against a peptide sequence representing amino acids 761 – 785 of Dyn2 ( see Fig . 1 a ) , which is unique to the four Dyn2 isoforms , sharing only 20 – 26 % identity with the other dynamin gene products ( Cook et al . , 1994 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) . The polyclonal isoform - specific anti - Dyn1 , anti - kinesin , and anti – pIgA - R antibodies have been described ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . Monoclonal anti - caveolin antibodies were purchased from Transduction Laboratories ( Lexington , KY ) and Zymed Laboratories , Inc . ( South San Francisco , Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 87 CA ) . A polyclonal antibody to the (cid:98) 1 subunit of the Na + / K + ATPase was from Upstate Biotechnology Inc . ( Lake Placid , NY ) , as was a goat anti – rabbit IgG Fc antibody . Secondary goat anti – rabbit and goat anti – mouse IgG antibodies linked to HRP were from Tago , Inc . ( Burlingame , CA ) . Fluorescein - and Texas red – labeled dextrans ( 3 kD , lysine fixable ) , fluo - rescent conjugates of human transferrin , and Cascade blue hydrazide ( di - lithium salt ) were from Molecular Probes , Inc . ( Eugene , OR ) , as were the SlowFade and ProLong antifade reagents . A monoclonal antibody to (cid:97) - adaptin as well as FITC – and HRP – cholera toxin B were from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) . Subcellular Fractionation , Immunoprecipitation , Immunoisolation , and Western Blot Analysis Livers were isolated from male Sprague Dawley rats ( Harlan Sprague Dawley Inc . , Indianapolis , IN ) and homogenized at 2 , 800 rpm with a Pot - ter - Elvehjem type homogenizer after adding 3 vol of 4 (cid:56) C Buffer A ( 10 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 2 , 25 mM sucrose , and 10 mM EGTA ) containing protease inhibitors ( 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride , 100 (cid:109) g / ml soybean trypsin inhibitor , 10 (cid:109) g / ml leupeptin , 10 (cid:109) g / ml p - toluenesulfonyl - L - argi - nine methyl ester , and 5 (cid:109) g / ml pepstatin A ) . The homogenate was centri - fuged 15 min at 13 , 000 g then 1 h at 100 , 000 g , and the supernatant was collected as the cytosolic fraction . This cytosolic fraction was subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis . For immunoprecipitations , brains from male Sprague Dawley rats were homogenized as described above in 4 vol of 4 (cid:56) C RIPA buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 5 % deoxycho - late , and 0 . 1 % SDS ) containing protease inhibitors . The homogenate was centrifuged as above and the supernatant collected as the clarified extract . Appropriate antibodies ( 5 (cid:109) g ) were incubated with 1 - ml fractions ( 15 – 25 mg ) of the clarified extracts , and then preswollen protein A beads ( 5 mg ) were added before a second incubation . Incubations were 2 – 12 h at 4 (cid:56) C with rotation . Beads and immune complexes were collected by centrifug - ing 3 min at 7 , 000 g and then rinsed 4 (cid:51) 5 min with the starting buffer be - fore being subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis . Immunoisolations were done as reviewed by Howell et al . ( 1989 ) . To prepare the starting membrane fraction , confluent cultures of hepatocytes ( (cid:122) 600 cm 2 ) were scraped into 4 (cid:56) C buffer A containing protease inhibitors and homogenized by sonication . The homogenate was centrifuged 10 min at 1 , 000 g to obtain a postnuclear supernatant that then was centrifuged 1 h at 100 , 000 g to collect the pellet as the postnuclear membrane fraction . This postnuclear membrane fraction was resuspended gently in PBS - FBS ( 8 . 1 mM NaHPO 4 , 1 . 2 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 2 , 138 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 2 mM EDTA , 0 . 9 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , and 5 % FBS ) . Affinity - puri - fied anti - Pan61 antibody , or the anti – pIgA - R antibody as a control , were linked to Dynabeads M - 500 Subcellular superparamagnetic beads ( Dynal , Inc . , Lake Success , NY ) as described previously ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . The appropriate antibody - coated beads ( 10 mg ) and 0 . 5 – 2 . 0 mg of the starting membrane fractions were incubated (cid:122) 8 h at 4 (cid:56) C with rotation in 1 ml of PBS - FBS . The beads and any bound membranes then were col - lected with a magnet , rinsed three times with PBS - FBS , and subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis . The protein concentration of each cellular extract was determined us - ing bicinchoninic acid , as per instructions from the manufacturer ( Pierce Chemical Co . , Rockford , IL ) . For Western blot analysis , cellular protein extracts and immune complexes were reduced in sample buffer ( 62 . 5 mM Tris , pH 6 . 8 , 5 % glycerol , 4 % (cid:98) - mercaptoethanol , 2 % SDS , and 4 (cid:109) g / ml bromophenol blue ) , separated by discontinuous SDS - PAGE ( Laemmli , 1970 ) and electrophoretically transferred to polyvinyldifluoridine filters ( Towbin et al . , 1979 ) . Filters containing transferred proteins were incu - bated with appropriate primary antibodies ( 0 . 5 – 1 (cid:109) g / ml ) and then HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 0 . 5 – 1 (cid:109) g / ml ) , as reported previously ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . Reactive bands were visualized by exposing the filters to autoradiographic film ( Eastman Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) after using enhanced chemiluminescence detection reagents ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , IL ) as per instructions from the manufacturer . Developed autoradiographs were subjected to densitometric analysis us - ing a Bio - Rad imaging densitometer ( Model GS - 700 ) and Molecular Ana - lyst software ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) . Microinjections Microinjections were done on a 37 (cid:56) C microscope stage and cells were al - lowed to recover 2 – 6 h before subsequent manipulations . Cells were pres - sure injected using an IM - 200 microinjector system ( Narishige USA , Inc . , Greenvale , NY ) and microneedles that were pulled from thin - wall ( 1 . 0 - mm outer diam ; 0 . 78 - mm inner diam ) borosilicate tubing ( with filament ) using a Flaming / Brown P - 97 micropipette puller ( Sutter Instrument Co . , No - vato , CA ) . Injected antibodies were purified anti - Pan65 , anti - Dyn2T , or irrelevant anti - kinesin antibodies that were dialyzed and concentrated ( 2 – 15 mg / ml ) in microinjection buffer ( 10 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 2 , and 75 mM KCl ) using 30 - kD molecular mass cut off Nanosep Microconcentrators ( Pall Filtron Corp . , Northborough , MA ) . For additional control injec - tions , the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies were heat inactivated by incubating 5 min at 100 (cid:56) C . Cascade blue hydrazide ( 2 . 5 mM ) or fluores - cent dextran conjugates ( 400 (cid:109) M ) were added to all microinjection solu - tions . This served as an indicator for successful microinjections and en - abled injected cells to be identified readily by fluorescence microscopy after functional assays were performed . For experiments where electron microscopy would be used , it was necessary to inject every cell within a particular square ( 1 mm 2 ) of the gridded coverglass . In some of these ex - periments colloidal gold ( 5 - nm diam ) was included in the injection solu - tion to identify injected cells by electron microscopy . Functional Assays As a measure of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , the cellular internaliza - tion of rhodamine - , fluorescein - , or Texas red – labeled transferrin was as - sayed . First , cells were rinsed with 37 (cid:56) C HBSS ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) and incubated in DME containing 2 % defatted BSA ( DME - BSA ) to remove unlabeled transferrin . Cells then were incubated 15 min at 37 (cid:56) C in DME - BSA containing 5 (cid:109) g / ml of an appropriate fluorescent transferrin conjugate to allow internalization . Finally , cells were rinsed twice with 4 (cid:56) C DME - BSA ( adjusted to pH 3 . 5 with acetic acid ) and four times with HBSS to re - move surface labeling and then processed for fluorescence microscopy . To assay caveola - mediated endocytosis , the internalization of FITC – or HRP – cholera toxin B was monitored by fluorescence or electron micros - copy , respectively . Cells were rinsed with HBSS and incubated in DME - BSA as above , then chilled to 4 (cid:56) C and incubated 15 min in DME - BSA containing 4 (cid:109) g / ml FITC – or HRP – cholera toxin B . Labeled cells were rinsed four times with 4 (cid:56) C HBSS to remove unbound toxin . These cells then were incubated (cid:122) 2 . 5 h in DME - BSA at 37 (cid:56) C to allow internalization and appropriately fixed . For double labeling experiments , 5 (cid:109) g / ml Texas red – labeled transferrin was included during the last 15 min of the 2 . 5 h in - ternalization incubation at 37 (cid:56) C before rinsing the cells as in the assay for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Fluorescence Microscopy Labeled cells were rinsed briefly with 37 (cid:56) C PBS ( 8 . 1 mM NaHPO 4 , 1 . 2 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 7 . 2 , 138 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 0 . 9 mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) , submerged in 37 (cid:56) C fixative ( 100 mM Pipes , pH 6 . 95 , 3 mM MgSO 4 , 1 mM EGTA , and 2 . 5 % formaldehyde ) and incubated 20 min at room temperature . For indirect immunocytochemistry , fixed cells were perme - abilized with PBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and then incubated with antibodies as described ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . Cells were rinsed three times with PBS and once with distilled water , then they were mounted in SlowFade or ProLong antifade reagents . Digital images were acquired using an intensified charged coupled device camera ( XC - 77 ; Hamamatsu Photonics K . K . , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) or a cooled charged coupled device camera ( SenSys ; Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) attached to a Zeiss Axiovert 35 microscope that was equipped with a mercury arc ( 50 or 100 W ) . A laser scanning confocal microscope ( LSM - 410 ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) also was used . Acquired images were manipulated with Image - 1 and Metamorph software ( Universal Imaging Corp . , West Chester , PA ) then stored on a computer hard drive . Alternatively , photographic images were recorded on Kodak film ( Ektachrome , 400 ASA or Tmax , 3200 ASA ) using a 35 - mm camera attached to the microscope , and the images were digitized using a Sprint - Scan 35 slide scanner ( CS - 2700 ; Polaroid Corp . , Cambridge , MA ) and Adobe Photoshop software ( Adobe Photosystems , Inc . , Mountain View , CA ) . Electron Microscopy For conventional electron microscopy , cells were rinsed with 37 (cid:56) C PBS , submerged in 37 (cid:56) C primary fixative ( 100 mM cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , 60 mM sucrose , 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ) and incubated 1 h at room temperature . Cells then were incubated 1 h at room temperature in 1 % osmium tetrox - ide . Fixed cells subsequently were incubated 1 h at room temperature in 1 % uranyl acetate , dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol , and embed - ded in Quetol 651 ( Ted Pella , Inc . , Redding , CA ) . To make the plasma The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 88 membrane electron dense , 1 mg / ml ruthenium red was included in the pri - mary fixative and in the 1 % osmium tetroxide solution , and cells were os - micated an additional 2 h . For the cytochemical detection of HRP , cells were rinsed , incubated 30 min in the fixative ( 100 mM cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM sucrose , 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ) and then reacted with 1 mg / ml diami - nobenzidine and 0 . 012 % hydrogen peroxide for 15 min . Cells then were rinsed , incubated 1 h in 1 % osmium tetroxide and 1 . 5 % potassium ferricy - anide and processed for electron microscopy as above . After the embedding , the carbon interface enabled the underlying grid - ded coverglass to be separated readily from the embedded cells , leaving an imprint of the grid on the block face . This allowed the block face to be trimmed so that only the 1 - mm 2 square containing the injected cells re - mained . Thin sections ( 0 . 09 – 0 . 1 (cid:109) m ) were cut parallel to the ventral sur - face of the cells using a diamond knife ( Diatome U . S . , Fort Washington , PA ) and an Ultracut E microtome ( Reichert - Jung , Wien , Austria ) . Sec - tions were collected on copper grids , post - stained with lead citrate and viewed at (cid:122) 60 kV with a JEOL 1200 transmission electron microscope ( JEOL USA , Peabody , MA ) . Quantitative and Statistical Analyses All quantitation and stereology were done in a blinded fashion using stan - dard techniques . The results presented ( see Figs . 3 and 7 ; Tables I and II ) are averages of data sets that were obtained by at least two of the authors who conducted these experiments in parallel . Quantitation of plasmalem - mal invaginations and the surface density of caveolae was performed on electron micrographs of entire cell profiles . Micrographs were printed at a magnification of 4 , 000 – 12 , 000 . To quantify the amount of invaginated plasma membrane , an overlay grid was used to count the number of points falling on ruthenium red – stained membranes relative to the number of points within the confines of the cell . A hand held magnifier ( 3 (cid:51) ) aided in the identification of internal ruthenium red – stained membranes . Caveolae were defined by morphological criteria as plasmalemmal vesicles between 50 and 80 nm in diameter that lacked any obvious cytoplasmic coats . To determine the surface density of caveolae , we counted the number of ru - thenium red – stained caveolae per cell that were within 50 nm of the plasma membrane . The perimeter of each cell then was traced on a digitiz - ing pad and converted to micrometers using an NIH Image 1 software package ( National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD ) . From these val - ues we calculated the number of caveolae / (cid:109) m / cell . Results from the stud - ies are expressed as the median (cid:54) SEM for each data set . Significance lev - els were determined by the Wilcoxin rank sum statistical analysis , as described in the footnotes to Tables I and II . For quantitation of the functional assays by fluorescence microscopy , injected hepatocytes were identified by the distinctive fluorescence of the injectate . The injected cells then were scored as uninhibited when the flu - orescence of the appropriate ligand was detected within the fixed cell or , alternatively , they were scored as inhibited when internal fluorescence could not be detected . Results from these experiments were expressed as the percentage of injected cells that were uninhibited and are presented as the mean of observations made on (cid:46) 45 cells for each solution injected , as de - scribed in the figure legends . Results Characterization of Anti - dynamin Antibodies In this study we have used peptide - specific antibodies to define the function of Dyn2 in vivo . Fig . 1 a shows a sche - matic representation of Dyn2 and the regions and peptide sequences to which three different polyclonal antibodies were made . The regions designated Pan61 and Pan65 are located within the NH 2 - terminal enzymatic domain that is conserved among all of the known dynamin isoforms , yet are distinct from other GTP - binding proteins . The third region , Dyn2T , is within the proline - rich COOH - terminal tail and is unique to Dyn2 . For control experiments , we used an antibody to the microtubule - based motor enzyme kinesin ( Vale et al . , 1985 ) that shares some sequence ho - mology to dynamin within the nucleotide - binding domain ( Obar et al . , 1990 ) . Each of the anti - dynamin antibodies Figure 1 . Characterization of dynamin - specific antibodies . ( a ) Diagram depicting the portions of dynamin to which anti - peptide antibodies were made . Two regions ( Pan61 and Pan65 ) are lo - cated within the NH 2 - terminal “head” domain near the last of three GTP - binding elements ( black boxes ) and are conserved among the different dynamin isoforms . A third region ( Dyn2T ) is located within the proline - rich COOH - terminal “tail” domain ( PRO , shaded region ) and is unique to Dyn2 . The location of the pleckstrin homology domain is indicated ( PH , striped box ) . ( b ) Antibodies to the Pan61 , Pan65 , and Dyn2T peptides react with dynamin specifically by Western blot analysis . A cytosolic frac - tion was prepared from rat liver and then subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis using the anti - Pan61 ( lane 1 ) , anti - Pan65 ( lane 2 ) , and anti - Dyn2T ( lane 3 ) antibodies , or poly - clonal antibodies that are specific for Dyn1 ( lane 4 ) and kinesin ( lane 5 ) as controls . A prominent dynamin band at (cid:122) 100 kD ( ar - row ) was detected with the anti - Pan61 , anti - Pan65 , and anti - Dyn2T antibodies but not with the anti - Dyn1 antibody , since Dyn1 is not expressed in epithelial tissues . The anti - kinesin anti - body recognized a characteristic (cid:122) 120 - kD band . The positions of molecular mass standards are on the left . ( c ) The anti - Pan61 and anti - Pan65 antibodies immunoprecipitate both Dyn1 and Dyn2 from rat brain , whereas the anti - Dyn2T antibody is specific for Dyn2 . Dynamin was immunoprecipitated from a crude brain ho - mogenate ( lane 1 ) using affinity - purified anti - Pan61 ( lane 2 ) , anti - Pan65 ( lane 3 ) , and anti - Dyn2T ( lane 4 ) antibodies . Control immunoprecipitates were obtained with the anti - kinesin antibody ( lane 5 ) . The starting brain homogenate and subsequent immune complexes were subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot anal - ysis with either a Dyn1 - specific antibody ( top ) or the anti - Dyn2T antibody ( bottom ) . Both Dyn1 and Dyn2 precipitated with the anti - Pan61 and anti - Pan65 antibodies , whereas the anti - Dyn2T antibody precipitated Dyn2 specifically , with only trace amounts of Dyn1 detected . Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 89 heat - inactivated antibodies and an anti - kinesin antibody as controls . Because dynamin has been implicated in clath - rin - mediated endocytosis , we first assayed whether in - jected cells could internalize rhodamine - labeled transfer - rin ( rhodamine - transferrin ) . This ligand is endocytosed by a clathrin - mediated pathway ( Hopkins and Trowbridge , 1983 ; Sager et al . , 1984 ) and has been used previously to assess the function of dynamin ( Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ) . As shown in Fig . 2 , cells injected with the heat - inactivated antibodies endocytosed rhodamine - transferrin , as did the adjacent uninjected cells . Cells injected with the anti - kinesin antibody also internalized the fluo - rescent ligand ( data not shown , but see Fig . 3 ) . In contrast , clathrin - mediated endocytosis was inhibited in cells that were injected with the native affinity - purified anti - Dyn2T antibody as assessed by the lack of internal rhodamine - transferrin fluorescence . Identical results were obtained in cells that were injected with the anti - Pan65 antibody . The effects of these antibody injections on clathrin - mediated endocytosis were quantitated by determining the percent - age of injected cells that internalized rhodamine - transferrin ( Fig . 3 ) . As expected , we found that 77 – 90 % of the control anti - kinesin and heat - inactivated antibody injected cells en - docytosed fluorescent transferrin conjugates . In contrast , only 8 – 16 % of the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibody - injected cells internalized the ligand , consistent with a greater than fourfold decrease in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Next we analyzed the ultrastructure of antibody - injected cells by electron microscopy to test for aberrations in plas - malemmal morphology . To discriminate between internal - ized vesicles and those associated with the plasma mem - brane , we processed cells for electron microscopy using ruthenium red in the primary and secondary fixations . This electron - dense dye stains the outer leaflet of the Figure 2 . Microinjected anti - dynamin antibodies inhibit the internalization of rhodamine - transferrin in cultured hepa - tocytes . Fluorescence assay for clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis in living cells . Cultured hepatocytes were coinjected with FITC – dextran as a marker and either heat - inac - tivated ( top ) or native anti - Dyn2T antibodies ( bottom ) . After a 2 – 4 - h recovery period , the cells were incubated 15 min at 37 (cid:56) C in DME - BSA containing 5 (cid:109) g / ml rhodamine - transferrin then rinsed and processed for fluorescence microscopy . The phase – con - trast micrographs show an antibody - containing micro - needle used to inject 2 – 3 cells in each field ( outlined ) . The corresponding fluorescence micrographs show the green fluorescence of the dextran , indicating injected cells , and the red fluorescence of the internalized rhodamine - transferrin . The control - injected hepatocytes endocytosed the ligand as did the uninjected cells , whereas the anti - Dyn2T antibody - injected cells did not . Similar inhibition was found in the anti - Pan65 antibody - injected cells ( not shown ) . Bar , 10 (cid:109) m . recognized a prominent band at (cid:122) 100 kD by Western blot analysis of a rat liver cytosolic fraction ( Fig . 1 b ) and com - plete lysates of cultured murine hepatocytes and human skin fibroblasts ( data not shown ) . Although an (cid:122) 87 kD - band also was detected with the anti - Pan65 antibody in some preparations , the anti - Dyn2T antibody was specific for dynamin and did not cross react with unrelated pro - teins ( Fig . 1 b and data not shown ) . The dynamin band was not detected with a previously characterized antibody that is specific for Dyn1 ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) , since Dyn1 is not expressed in epithelial cells ( Fig . 1 b ; Cook et al . , 1994 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) . Finally , the control anti - kine - sin antibody recognized a characteristic (cid:122) 120 kD - band , but not the dynamin band ( Fig . 1 b ) . To test for isoform specificity , these antibodies were used to immunoprecipitate dynamin from the brain , a tis - sue that expresses all of the known dynamin isoforms . The immune complexes were subjected to SDS - PAGE and Western blot analysis with the purified isoform - specific antibody to Dyn1 and the anti - Dyn2T antibody . As ex - pected , the anti - Pan61 and anti - Pan65 antibodies each co - precipitated Dyn1 and Dyn2 , whereas the anti - Dyn2T an - tibody recognized Dyn2 predominantly and precipitated only trace amounts of Dyn1 ( Fig . 1 c ) . Based on these re - sults , the antibody reagents used in this study are pre - dicted to provide specific tools to test the function of dy - namin in vivo . Antibodies to Dynamin Inhibit Clathrin - mediated Endocytosis To directly test the function of dynamin in endocytic pro - cesses , we injected cultured murine hepatocytes with the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies or the respective The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 90 plasma membrane and any continuous invaginations at the time of fixation ( Jollie and Triche , 1971 ) . We observed nu - merous , long , ruthenium red – stained , plasmalemmal in - vaginations in the anti - Pan65 ( data not shown ) and anti - Dyn2T antibody - injected cells ( Fig . 4 ) similar to those seen in the shibire ts1 mutant cells at the restrictive temper - ature ( Kessell et al . , 1989 ) and mammalian cells overex - pressing a mutant dynamin ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Densely stained , clathrin - coated pits frequently were associated with these plasmalemmal invaginations , consistent with a defect in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Plasmalemmal in - vaginations that formed in control and anti - dynamin anti - body - injected cells were quantitated by determining the percentage of the cell volume that contained ruthenium red – labeled membranes . Significantly , the amount of in - vaginated plasma membrane increased about twofold in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells over that found in cells that were injected with the heat - inactivated anti - bodies ( Table I ) . These results confirm that Dyn2 specifi - cally plays a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and demonstrate that the function of Dyn2 can be inhibited ef - fectively in living cells through the microinjection of the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies . Distinct Endocytic Structures Accumulate in Anti - dynamin Antibody - injected Cells In addition to the long clathrin - coated pits that formed in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells , we observed many smaller 65 – 75 - nm - diam plasmalemmal invaginations that did not have clathrin coats , but closely resembled ca - veolae ( Fig . 5 ) . Caveolae ( “small caves” ) are specializa - tions of the plasma membrane that are found in many dif - ferent cells types ( reviewed in Anderson , 1993 b ; Lisanti et al . , 1994 ; Parton , 1996 ; Severs , 1988 ) . These plasmalemmal vesicles were described first by conventional transmission Figure 3 . Quantitated inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis in anti - dynamin antibody - injected hepatocytes . The clathrin - mediated endocytosis of rhodamine - and Texas red – labeled transferrin is reduced greater than fourfold in cells injected with the anti - dynamin antibodies over that in control - injected cells . Hepatocytes were injected with the anti - kinesin ( (cid:97) Kin ; n (cid:53) 78 ) and heat - inactivated ( HI Ab ; n (cid:53) 271 ) antibodies as controls or the anti - Pan65 ( (cid:97) Pan65 ; n (cid:53) 135 ) and anti - Dyn2T ( (cid:97) Dyn2T ; n (cid:53) 457 ) antibodies . Cells then were incubated with rhodamine - or Texas red – transferrin , fixed , and then processed for fluorescence microscopy as in Fig . 2 . For each condition the number of in - jected cells that internalized the transferrin conjugate ( those con - taining red fluorescence ) was counted and expressed as a per - centage of the sum of injected cells . Figure 4 . Microinjected anti - dynamin antibodies induce the ac - cumulation of long clathrin - coated pits . Electron micrographs showing the long plasmalemmal invaginations and associated coated pits ( arrows ) that form in anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . Hepatocytes were injected with the anti - Dyn2T antibody as in Fig . 2 and then processed for electron microscopy with ruthe - nium red included in the fixatives to stain the surface membranes . ( a ) The densely stained structures , although deep within the cyto - plasm near the nucleus ( N ) , are continuous with the plasma mem - brane ( PM ) . A nonclathrin - coated bud that is connected to a plasmalemmal invagination also can be seen ( arrowhead ) . The outlined area is shown at higher magnification in b . ( b – d ) The bristle - like clathrin coat can readily be seen on the distended re - gions , or buds , of long plasmalemmal invaginations . Similar in - vaginations were found when the anti - Pan65 antibody was in - jected , but not in cells that were injected with the control solutions ( not shown ) . Bars : ( a ) 0 . 3 (cid:109) m ; ( b – d ) 0 . 05 (cid:109) m . Table I . Relative Internal Volume of Ruthenium Red – labeled Plasmalemmal Invaginations in Antibody - injected Hepatocytes Injectedantibody Surface invaginations * ( percent cell volume ) Range ( percent cell volume ) n Increase over control ( - fold ) HI Ab 0 . 50 (cid:54) 0 . 14 0 – 2 . 62 23 1 . 0 (cid:97) Dyn Ab 0 . 98 (cid:54) 0 . 20 ‡ 0 – 5 . 09 34 2 . 0 Hepatocytes were injected with heat - inactivated antibodies as controls ( HI Ab ) or anti - dynamin antibodies ( (cid:97) Dyn Ab ; anti - Pan65 , n (cid:53) 27 and anti - Dyn2T , n (cid:53) 7 ) , then fixed and processed for electron microscopy using ruthenium red to stain the plasma membranes as in Fig . 4 . The relative internal volume of ruthenium red – labeled plas - malemmal invaginations was determined with a grid overlay on electron micrographs of complete cell profiles ( n ) . * Values are median relative volumes (cid:54) SEM . ‡ Using the Wilcoxin rank sum analysis this value is significantly different from the control value ( P (cid:44) 0 . 02 ; two - tailed test ) , whereas the values from individual data sets were not sig - nificantly different from each other . Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 91 electron microscopy based on their characteristic ultra - structure ; they are 50 – 85 nm in diameter , flask - shaped , and have no obvious cytoplasmic coats ( Palade , G . E . 1953 . J . Appl . Physics . 24 : 1424 ( Abstr . ) ; Palade and Bruns , 1968 ; Yamada , 1955 ) . Although the precise cellular function of caveolae remains undefined , they have been implicated in the internalization of specific ligands , including cholera toxin ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) , GPI - anchored proteins ( Par - ton et al . , 1994 ; Smart et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) , albumin ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) , small proteins ( Predescu et al . , 1994 , 1997 ) , HLA antigens ( Huet et al . , 1980 ) , and SV40 ( Kartenbeck et al . , 1989 ; Stang et al . , 1997 ) . The scission of these plas - malemmal vesicles from the plasma membrane during ca - veola - mediated endocytosis is dependent upon GTP hy - drolysis ( Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Although single caveolar profiles were found normally in uninjected and control - injected cells ( data not shown , but see Fig . 8 ) , many of the caveolar profiles observed in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells were comprised of 3 – 8 vesicles arranged as complex clusters ( Fig . 5 a ) or long chains ( Fig . 5 b ) . These large clusters and chains , which appear to be groups of scission - incompetent caveolae , rarely were seen in unin - jected cells or in cells that were injected with the control solutions . Whereas many of these complex structures were linked directly to the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 , a and b ) , others were resolved deep within the cytoplasm ( Fig . 5 c ) . Such structures may represent plasmalemmal invagina - tions that extend in and out of the plane of section or truly may be internal endocytic or secretory compartments . To discriminate between these possibilities , we again used ru - thenium red to stain the surface membranes as was done for examining the clathrin - coated pits shown in Fig . 4 . From this staining we could resolve many darkly stained clusters of caveolae both at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 , d and e ) and deeper within the cytoplasm ( Fig . 5 d ) . We quantitated the density of caveolar invaginations at the plasma membrane and found a greater than twofold in - crease from 0 . 93 per (cid:109) m in control - injected cells to 2 . 18 per (cid:109) m in cells that were injected with the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies ( Table II ) . Anti - dynamin Antibodies Inhibit Caveola - mediated Uptake of Labeled Cholera Toxin B The significantly increased density of plasmalemmal cave - Figure 5 . Accumulation of distinct endocytic structures in cultured hepatocytes in - jected with anti - dynamin an - tibodies . ( a – c ) Electron mi - crographs show typical membrane invaginations found at the surface of cells that were injected with the Dyn2 - specific anti - Dyn2T antibody . Numerous bud - ding profiles ( small arrows ) lacking clathrin coats and re - sembling caveolae were found at the plasma mem - brane ( a and b ) . Long “chains” of vesicles sepa - rated by constrictions ( ar - rowheads ) also were found attached to the plasma mem - brane ( b ) . In addition , clus - ters of multiple vesicular pro - files were observed deeper within the cell ( c , large ar - rows ) . Similar structures were found in the anti - Pan65 antibody - injected cells but not in the control - injected cells . ( d and e ) Electron mi - crographs of anti - Dyn2T ( d ) and anti - Pan65 ( e ) antibody - injected cells that were fixed and stained with ruthenium red as in Fig . 4 . Dark vesicles reveal both surface ( small ar - rows ) and deep ( large ar - rows ) membrane invagina - tions that are continuous with the plasma membrane . Bars , 0 . 15 (cid:109) m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 92 olae in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells ( see Table II ) is consistent with Dyn2 directly mediating the scission of caveolae at the plasma membrane . An alternative ex - planation is that a caveola - mediated endocytic pathway was upregulated in these injected cells in response to in - hibiting the function of Dyn2 . This possibility is supported by the findings of Damke et al . ( 1995 ) , who showed there was an increase of fluid - phase endocytosis in cultured cells overexpressing a mutant Dyn1 . To test whether caveola - mediated endocytosis was inhibited or upregulated in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells , we used an assay to follow in vivo the internalization of FITC – cholera toxin B . FITC – cholera toxin B has been used previously as a tool to study caveola - based endocytic pathways ( Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . This toxin binds to specific GM 1 glycosphin - golipids at the surface of multiple cell types ( Critchley et al . , 1982 ; reviewed in Fishman , 1982 b ) , where it is seques - tered and internalized by nonclathrin - coated pits and vesi - cles that have been identified as caveolae ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ) . The toxin then is transported to endosomes and accumulates intracellularly within perinuclear cytoplasmic compartments ( Joseph et al . , 1979 ; Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Parton , 1994 ; Sandvig et al . , 1996 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ) . Cultured hepatocytes were injected with the native anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies , and heat - inactivated antibodies or an anti - kinesin antibody were injected as controls . Cells then were labeled with FITC – cholera toxin B for 15 min at 4 (cid:56) C . The unbound toxin conjugate was rinsed away , and af - ter a 2 . 5 - h incubation at 37 (cid:56) C to allow the ligand to be - come internalized , the cells were fixed and viewed by fluo - rescence microscopy . To observe distinct endocytic pathways , some cells also were incubated with Texas red – labeled transferrin ( Texas red – transferrin ) during the last 15 min of the 2 . 5 - h incubation . As shown in Fig . 6 , FITC – cholera toxin B fluorescence was sequestered into brightly labeled cytoplasmic vesicles and perinuclear compartments of both control - injected and uninjected cells . In contrast , FITC – cholera toxin B was restricted to the plasma membrane of cells that were injected with the anti - dynamin antibodies Table II . Surface Density of Caveolae in Antibody - injected Hepatocytes Injectedantibody Caveola density * Range n Total surface membrane Fold increase per (cid:109) m caveolae per (cid:109) m (cid:109) m HI Ab 0 . 93 (cid:54) 0 . 28 0 . 33 – 4 . 46 23 295 . 7 1 . 0 (cid:97) Dyn Ab 2 . 18 (cid:54) 0 . 30 ‡ 0 . 74 – 7 . 91 34 307 . 2 2 . 3 Hepatocytes were injected with heat - inactivated antibodies as controls ( HI Ab ) or the anti - dynamin antibodies ( (cid:97) Dyn Ab ; anti - Pan65 , n (cid:53) 27 and anti - Dyn2T , n (cid:53) 7 ) then fixed and processed for electron microscopy using ruthenium red to stain the plasma membranes as in Fig . 5 , d and e . The surface density of caveolae in antibody - injected hepatocytes was determined from electron micrographs of complete cell profiles ( n ) for each set of injections . * Values are expressed as the median density (cid:54) SEM . ‡ Using the Wilcoxin rank sum analysis this value differs significantly from the control value ( P (cid:44) 0 . 001 ; two - tailed test ) . Figure 6 . Microinjected anti - dynamin antibodies inhibit the internalization of FITC – cholera toxin B in living cells . Fluorescence micrographs of cultured hepatocytes injected with purified antibodies to kinesin ( a – c ) as a control , or the anti - Pan65 ( d – f ) and anti - Dyn2T ( g – i ) antibodies . Cascade blue hydrazide was included in the antibody so - lutions to identify injected cells ( a , d , and g ) . Injected cells were incubated with FITC – cholera toxin B ( FITC - CTB ) at 4 (cid:56) C to allow binding , then rinsed and incubated in toxin - free medium for 2 h at 37 (cid:56) C to allow internaliza - tion . Cells were incubated an additional 30 min at 37 (cid:56) C in the absence ( b , e , and h ) or presence ( c , f , and i ) of Texas red – transferrin ( TR - Tfn ) then fixed for fluorescence mi - croscopy as in Fig . 2 . Aster - isks mark injected cells . ( a – c ) In the control anti - kinesin antibody - injected cells and in the adjacent uninjected cells bright perinuclear green fluorescence ( arrows ) and noticeably dark nuclei in - dicate that caveola - mediated endocytosis of FITC – cholera toxin B has occurred . Likewise , the punctate red fluorescence in the double - labeled cells indicates that clathrin - mediated endocytosis of Texas red – transferrin was normal . In these cells the yellow fluorescence in - dicates a morphological overlap of the two ligands , most likely within endosomal compartments . ( d – i ) Cells that were injected with the anti - dynamin antibodies have little internal fluorescence when compared with the adjacent uninjected cells , indicating that the en - docytic uptake of both FITC – cholera toxin B and Texas red – transferrin was inhibited . Bar , 10 (cid:109) m . Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 93 and did not accumulate intracellularly . These results are consistent with those of Schnitzer et al . ( 1996 ) , who found a similar intracellular distribution of endocytosed FITC – cholera toxin B in control cells that was disrupted in perfo - rated cells which were pretreated with GTP - (cid:103) S . The anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells also were devoid of internal Texas red – transferrin fluorescence , which indicates that both the internalization of caveolae and clathrin - mediated endocytosis were inhibited and demonstrates that Dyn2 participates in distinct endocytic processes in the same cell ( Fig . 6 ) . Control experiments where uninjected cells first were depleted of postassium for 2 . 5 h to inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Larkin et al . , 1983 , 1985 ) before the assays support the existence of these two distinct en - docytic pathways in the cultured hepatocytes : FITC – chol - era toxin B still was internalized normally , whereas Texas red – transferrin was not ( data not shown ) . The percentage of antibody - injected cells that internal - ized FITC – cholera toxin B was calculated to measure ca - veola - mediated endocytosis . Fig . 7 demonstrates that al - though (cid:122) 88 % of the anti - kinesin and heat - inactivated antibody - injected cells internalized FITC – cholera toxin B , this percentage dropped significantly to (cid:44) 20 % of the cells that were injected with the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T an - tibodies . Thus , caveola - mediated endocytosis is reduced greater than fourfold in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . To support these findings , we examined the antibody - injected cells by electron microscopy after labeling them with HRP – cholera toxin B . First , cultured hepatocytes were injected with the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T anti - bodies or heat - inactivated antibodies as a control . Then cells were incubated with HRP – cholera toxin B as in the fluorescence assay , fixed , and processed for the cytochem - ical detection of peroxidase . The typical localization of in - ternalized HRP – cholera toxin B in hepatocytes injected with a heat - inactivated antibody is illustrated in Fig . 8 a . By electron microscopy , peroxidase labeling was present in numerous endosomal structures , elements of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the nuclear envelope , with negligible staining of the plasma membrane . A similar lo - calization was found in the uninjected cells ( data not shown ) . This internal distribution of the toxin conjugate is consistent with numerous reports from others using multi - ple cell types ( Joseph et al . , 1979 ; Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ; Sandvig et al . , 1996 ) . In contrast , cells injected with the anti - Pan65 ( Fig . 8 b ) and anti - Dyn2T ( data not shown ) antibodies did not contain internal peroxidase reaction product . Instead , HRP – chol - era toxin B labeling remained at the plasma membrane where it was concentrated in nonclathrin - coated caveolar profiles and grape - like caveolar clusters ( Fig . 8 , c and d ) . Little , if any labeling was detected in the endosomes , the endoplasmic reticulum , or the nuclear envelope . Thus , the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells were able to seques - ter HRP – cholera toxin B within plasmalemmal caveolae but were unable to complete the internalization process . These ultrastructural studies support the earlier fluores - cence assay ( see Figs . 6 and 7 ) and morphological observa - tions ( see Fig . 5 and Table II ) , confirming that Dyn2 par - ticipates in the caveola - mediated endocytosis of cholera toxin B . Dynamin Associates with Caveolae To verify that dynamin was present on caveolar mem - branes , we first performed immunoisolation experiments using the anti - Pan61 antibody and a control polyclonal an - tibody to the pIgA - R ( Henley and McNiven , 1996 ) . Anti - bodies were linked to paramagnetic beads and then incu - bated with a postnuclear membrane fraction that was obtained from the same cultured murine hepatocytes used throughout this study . Immunobeads and bound mem - branes were collected with a magnet , rinsed , and then sub - jected to SDS - PAGE and quantitative Western blot analy - sis using antibodies to the caveolar membrane protein caveolin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) , the integral plasmalemmal Na (cid:49) / K (cid:49) ATPase ( Shyjan and Sev - enson , 1989 ) , or the (cid:97) subunit of the AP - 2 adaptor com - plex . Fig . 9 illustrates that caveolin is expressed in the cul - tured hepatocytes and was detected readily in the starting postnuclear membrane fraction ( Fig . 9 , a , top and b , lane 1 ) . Significantly , the material isolated with the anti - Pan61 antibody contained substantial caveolin immunoreactivity , indicating that dynamin associates with caveolar mem - branes ( Fig . 9 , a , top and b , lane 2 ) . This association was prominent , since the anti - Pan61 antibody depleted most of the caveolin that was present in the starting membrane fraction ( Fig . 9 , a , top and b , lane 3 ) . In contrast , caveolar membranes were not isolated by the control anti – pIgA - R antibody since only trace amounts of caveolin were found in this immunoisolated fraction ( Fig . 9 a , top and b , lane 4 ) Figure 7 . Quantitated inhibition of caveola - mediated endocyto - sis in anti - dynamin antibody - injected hepatocytes . Caveola - medi - ated endocytosis of FITC – cholera toxin B is reduced greater than fourfold in cells injected with the anti - dynamin antibodies over that in the control - injected cells . Hepatocytes were injected with anti - kinesin ( (cid:97) Kin ; n (cid:53) 277 ) and heat - inactivated ( HI Ab ; n (cid:53) 93 ) antibodies as controls or the anti - Pan65 ( (cid:97) Pan65 ; n (cid:53) 46 ) and anti - Dyn2T ( (cid:97) Dyn2T ; n (cid:53) 184 ) antibodies . Cells then were la - beled with FITC – cholera toxin B , fixed and processed for fluo - rescence microscopy as in Fig . 6 . As described in Fig . 6 , the crite - ria for counting a cell positive for internal FITC – cholera toxin B was the presence of perinuclear green fluorescence and a dark nucleus ( or nuclear “ghost” ) . For each condition the number of injected cells that internalized the toxin conjugate was counted and expressed as a percentage of the total . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 94 and , as expected , most of the caveolin immunoreactivity remained in the fraction that did not bind to this antibody ( Fig . 9 , a , top and b , lane 5 ) . Also significant is the finding that neither the Na (cid:49) / K (cid:49) ATPase nor the AP - 2 adaptor complex were enriched in the anti - Pan61 immunoisolated fraction compared with the anti – pIgA - R immunoisolated fraction . This indicates that the caveolar membranes were isolated directly and not by an indirect interaction with the plasma membrane or clathrin - coated pits ( Fig . 9 a , middle and bottom ) . Immunoisolations done using a postnuclear membrane fraction from cultured human fibroblasts gave similar results , indicating that the association of dynamin with caveolae is not unique to the hepatocyte cell line used in this study ( data not shown ) . To complement the immunoisolation experiments de - scribed above , double label immunofluorescence micros - copy of cultured hepatocytes was performed . Fixed cells were processed for indirect immunocytochemistry using a monoclonal anti - caveolin antibody to label caveolae and the polyclonal anti - Pan61 antibody to localize the endoge - nous dynamin . Representative micrographs obtained by confocal laser scanning microscopy are shown in Fig . 10 Figure 8 . Anti - dynamin antibodies prevent the caveola - mediated endocytosis of HRP – cholera toxin B , as confirmed by electron microscopy . Electron micrographs show hepatocytes that were injected with either a heat - inactivated antibody as a control ( a ) or the anti - Pan65 antibody ( b – d ) . After the injections , cells were incubated with HRP – cholera toxin B as in Fig . 6 , fixed , then pro - cessed for diaminobenzidine cytochemistry and electron micros - copy . ( a ) A control - injected cell showing the internal electron - dense peroxidase reaction product that is sequestered largely within elements of the rough endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and the nuclear envelope ( NE ) , with little remaining at the plasma membrane ( PM ) . ( b – d ) Cells injected with the native anti - Pan65 antibody have little , if any HRP – cholera toxin B labeling of the endosomes , the endoplasmic reticulum , and the nuclear enve - lope , with most of the peroxidase reaction product residing on the plasma membrane or in numerous caveolae ( arrows ) and grape - like caveolar clusters . Similar observations were made in cells injected with the anti - Dyn2T antibody ( not shown ) . Bars : ( a ) 0 . 5 (cid:109) m ; ( b – d ) 0 . 2 (cid:109) m . Figure 9 . A dynamin anti - body immunoisolates caveo - lar membranes . Representa - tive immunoblots ( a ) and densitometric analysis ( b ) showing that caveolar mem - branes can be immunoiso - lated with an anti - dynamin antibody . ( a ) A starting post - nuclear membrane fraction was prepared from cultured murine hepatocytes ( lane 1 ) , and fractions were immu - noisolated with the anti - Pan61 ( lane 2 ) and control anti – pIgA - R ( lane 4 ) anti - bodies linked to paramag - netic beads . Immunoisolated fractions were collected with a magnet , whereas material that did not bind to the anti - Pan61 ( lane 3 ) and control anti – pIgA - R ( lane 5 ) anti - bodies was pelleted by cen - trifugation and collected as the nonbound fractions . Frac - tions then were subjected to SDS - PAGE and quantita - tive Western blot analysis us - ing antibodies to the caveolar membrane coat protein cave - olin ( top ) ; the Na + / K + ATPase as a plasmalemmal marker ( middle ) ; and (cid:97) - adaptin , a marker for AP - 2 / clathrin coats at the plasma membrane ( bot - tom ) . Caveolin is enriched substantially in the immunoisolated fraction obtained with the anti - Pan61 antibody over that found in the fraction obtained with the control antibody , whereas the plasmalemmal Na + / K + ATPase and the AP - 2 adaptor complex are not . Similar results were found from experiments done on cultured human fibroblast membrane fractions ( data not shown ) . ( b ) Quantitation of the ca - veolin immunoreactivity that was detected in each of the frac - tions described above . Western blots were subjected to densito - metric analysis and the relative intensity of the caveolin band in each fraction was normalized to the starting membrane fraction , which was set at 100 % . Quantitation was done on blots from at least two experiments , with similar results ( not shown ) . Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 95 and demonstrate the significant overlap of the two staining patterns . Although some of the caveolin and dynamin la - beling remains separate , a striking colocalization on pe - ripheral vesicles indicates that a population of caveolae is positive for dynamin . The dynamin immunoreactivity that is distinct from the caveolin labeling most likely represents a localization to clathrin - coated membranes , since double labeling with antibodies to dynamin and clathrin reveals a significant colocalization ( data not shown ; but see Jones et al . , 1998 ) . These results are consistent with the biochem - ical data presented in Fig . 9 and support the body of evi - dence indicating that dynamin mediates the scission of ca - veolae from the plasma membrane in addition to its role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Discussion In this study we tested the function of Dyn2 in vivo by mi - croinjecting specific inhibitory antibodies into cultured murine hepatocytes . Using a functional assay and ultra - structural analysis , we demonstrated that cells injected with anti - dynamin antibodies did not internalize fluores - cent conjugates of transferrin but rather accumulated long plasmalemmal invaginations with attached coated pits . These observations confirm that Dyn2 regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis in epithelial cells and are consistent with the shibire ts1 phenotype ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 b ; Kessel et al . , 1989 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ) and the re - ports of others using transfected cells overexpressing a mutant dynamin ( Herskovitz et al . , 1993 ; van der Bliek et al . , 1993 ; Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) . Furthermore , these results demonstrate that this technique inhibits the function of the Dyn2 isoforms in living cells . By electron microscopy we observed , in addition to the clathrin - coated endocytic membranes , numerous plasmalemmal specializations re - sembling caveolae that also accumulated in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . These plasmalemmal ves - icles are distinct from clathrin - coated pits because they lack “bristle - like” coats , are 65 – 75 nm in diameter , and they have a characteristic omega or flask shape . Func - tional assays using FITC and HRP conjugates of cholera toxin B , a GM 1 glycosphingolipid - binding ligand that is in - ternalized via a caveola - mediated process ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) , show that cholera toxin B internalization was inhib - ited dramatically in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . Instead of accumulating within intracellular com - partments as occurred in the control - injected cells , the toxin remained concentrated within complex caveolar in - vaginations at the surface of the anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . In addition , immunoisolation experiments and double label immunofluorescence microscopy showed that dynamin associates with caveolae directly in cultured hepatocytes . These results provide important evidence that Dyn2 mediates the internalization of caveolae . Fur - thermore , this study suggests that Dyn2 supports the scis - sion of distinct endocytic vesicles within mammalian cells . Figure 10 . Dynamin localizes to caveolae in cultured hepa - tocytes . Fluorescence micro - graphs representing laser scanning confocal micros - copy of cultured hepatocytes that were double labeled with a monoclonal anti - cave - olin antibody ( a and c ) as a marker for caveolae and the polyclonal anti - Pan61 anti - body ( b and d ) to label the endogenous dynamin . Two separate fields of cells are shown ( top and bottom ) . A significant number of vesicu - lar structures are labeled with both antibodies ( arrows and outlined areas ) , indicating a colocalization of dynamin and caveolin . A similar stain - ing pattern was obtained with the anti - Pan65 antibody but not in controls where pri - mary antibodies were omit - ted ( not shown ) . Bars , 8 . 0 (cid:109) m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 96 Specificity of the Anti - dynamin Antibodies Used in This Study This investigation used distinct anti - dynamin antibodies to inhibit the function of Dyn2 in living cells . To increase the probability of a specific functional inhibition , we used af - finity - purified anti - peptide antibodies that were made to two distinct regions of Dyn2 . The anti - Pan61 and anti - Pan65 antibodies are to an NH 2 - terminal domain that is conserved among the dynamin family , whereas the anti - Dyn2T antibody is to a COOH - terminal region that is unique to Dyn2 ( Cook et al . , 1994 ; Sontag et al . , 1994 ) . Each of the antibodies recognized a prominent (cid:122) 100 - kD dynamin band by Western blot analysis . We view these an - tibodies as remarkably sensitive and specific considering that dynamin is expressed in the liver at low levels . Indeed , few antibodies to date are able to recognize endogenous dynamin in nonneuronal cells , which is why dynamin once was considered to be brain - specific ( Nakata et al . , 1991 ; Scaife and Margolis , 1990 ) . Of the protein sequences that are listed in the Genbank and Swiss - Prot databases , Dyn1 is the most similar to Dyn2 , sharing 26 – 42 % identity within the tail region to which the anti - Dyn2T antibody was made . Significantly , the anti - Dyn2T antibody immu - noprecipitated only trace amounts of Dyn1 from the brain , and , therefore , most likely interacts exclusively with Dyn2 when injected into cultured hepatocytes . Importantly , in this study similar results were obtained with either of the native anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies but not with antibodies that were heat inactivated before injection to control for artifacts resulting from the injection procedure or from incomplete dialysis of the antibody solutions . In addition , we injected an irrelevant antibody to the vesicle - associated enzyme kinesin at a similar concentration as the anti - dynamin antibodies to control for nonspecific effects of injected antibodies . Whereas the anti - Pan61 antibody was very efficient at immunoisolating caveolar membranes from a starting postnuclear membrane fraction , the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies were not . Future detailed biochemical studies will address whether the epitopes recognized by the anti - Pan65 and anti - Dyn2T antibodies are masked by interactions between the dynamin isoforms and target pro - teins or membranes . Importantly , however , immunofluo - rescence microscopy with the anti - Pan65 antibody gave a punctate labeling pattern that overlapped significantly with the caveolin labeling , similar to the anti - Pan61 anti - body ( data not shown , but see Fig . 10 ) . Role of Dyn2 in Distinct Endocytic Processes In this report we provide morphological evidence that in - dicates distinct endocytic structures accumulate in anti - dynamin antibody - injected cells . The long clathrin - coated invaginations identified by electron microscopy are char - acteristic of an inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 b ; Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Kes - sel et al . , 1989 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1990 ; Shupliakov et al . , 1997 ) . However , the marked accumulation of aberrant clusters of nonclathrin - coated , 65 – 75 - nm - diam plasmalem - mal vesicles resembling complexes of caveolae , and the dramatic increase in the surface density of caveolae are consistent with defective severing of these endocytic or - ganelles from the plasma membrane ( Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Caveolae contain a cytoplasmic coat that is not re - solved readily by conventional transmission electron mi - croscopy but can be detected by high resolution scanning electron microscopy or rapid freezing techniques ( Peters et al . , 1985 ; Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . The integral membrane protein caveolin , also known as VIP21 ( Glenney and Zo - kas , 1989 ; Glenney and Soppet , 1992 ; Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ) , is a component of this cytoplasmic coat ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ) and is necessary and suffi - cient for the de novo generation of caveolae ( Chung , K . N . , P . C . Elwood , and J . E . Heuser . 1996 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 7 : 277 a . ( Abstr . ) ; Fra et al . , 1995 ) . This coat likely is responsible for generating the force for curvature of the plasma membrane and imparting the characteristic flask shape and 50 – 85 nm diam to caveolar buds . This study demon - strates that a functional dynamin isoform then is necessary for the scission of these plasmalemmal invaginations to form free internalized caveolae . Identifying other compo - nents of a “scission complex” that may coassociate with Dyn2 and caveolar membranes will be of great interest for future studies . Until recently , it was presumed that caveolae were per - manent fixtures of the plasma membrane ( Bundgaard et al . , 1979 ; Frøkjaer - Jensen et al . , 1988 ; reviewed in Severs , 1988 ; van Deurs et al . , 1993 ) . This feature made the func - tion of caveolae difficult to predict , although a role in the uptake of small molecules , or potocytosis , has been de - scribed ( reviewed in Anderson , 1993 c ) . Others have hy - pothesized a role in cellular signal transduction ( reviewed in Anderson , 1993 a , b ; Lisanti et al . , 1994 ) and calcium ho - meostasis ( Fujimoto , 1993 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1995 b ) . Re - cently , several studies have provided persuasive evidence that caveolae actively sequester and internalize specific lipids , proteins , and associated ligands through an en - docytic process ( reviewed in Lamaze and Schmid , 1995 ; Parton and Simons , 1995 ) . Certain glycosphingolipids , in - cluding GM 1 gangliosides , are enriched in vitro in nonionic detergent - resistant membrane fractions that are similar to isolated caveolar fractions ( e . g . , Brown and Rose , 1992 ; Dupree et al . , 1993 ; Fiedler et al . , 1993 ; Kurzchalia et al . , 1992 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1995 a ) . Many other studies have re - ported that the B subunit of cholera toxin , which specifi - cally binds to GM 1 gangliosides , is concentrated and inter - nalized via nonclathrin - coated pits and vesicles that are distinct from those that are associated with clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , Parton ( 1994 ) convincingly showed that cholera toxin is internal - ized via a caveola - mediated process but is not enriched in clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . In support of this , we found that inhibiting clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cul - tured hepatocytes by potassium depletion did not prevent the internalization of a fluorescent cholera toxin B conju - gate ( data not shown ) . These distinct endocytic pathways have different kinetics , with clathrin - mediated endocytosis occurring fourfold faster than internalization by caveolae ( e . g . , Fishman , 1982 a ; Tran et al . , 1987 ) . The protein phos - phatase inhibitor okadaic acid stimulates caveola - mediated endocytosis , but inhibits the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) . Furthermore , the sterol - binding agent filipin has no affect on clathrin - mediated endocyto - Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 97 sis yet inhibits the internalization of caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) . Finally , activators of protein kinase C , which do not inhibit clathrin - mediated endocytosis , prevent the for - mation of caveolar invaginations ( Smart et al . , 1994 , 1995 ) . GTP hydrolysis is necessary for the severing of caveolar invaginations to produce discrete endocytic vesicles that are detached from the plasma membrane ( Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , the internalization of caveolae in this respect is analogous to clathrin - mediated endocytosis , which uses the cytoplasmic coat protein clathrin to form invaginations of a characteristic size and relies on a GTP - dependent scis - sion event to form discrete coated vesicles from the plasma membrane ( Carter et al . , 1993 ; reviewed in Robinson , 1994 ) . Here we have shown that these two distinct pathways use the large GTPase dynamin to regulate the formation of free endocytic vesicles from specialized invaginations of the plasma membrane . The functional experiments described here , in which the microinjected anti - dynamin antibodies inhibited the cellu - lar uptake of cholera toxin B conjugates , provide strong support for the morphological data showing an accumula - tion of caveolae in these cells . Together , these results indi - cate that Dyn2 participates in caveola - mediated endocyto - sis . Our results are consistent with the observations of others who have shown that cholera toxin B is endocy - tosed via caveolae and trafficked to endosomes ( Monte - sano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ) ; the Golgi apparatus ( Joseph et al . , 1979 ; Sandvig et al . , 1994 ) ; and , under certain conditions , elements of the endoplasmic reticulum ( Sandvig et al . , 1996 ) . Although in the latter study thapsigargin was used to induce movement to this compartment , the cultured hepatocytes used in this study apparently transport substantial amounts of the conju - gated toxin back to the endoplasmic reticulum and the nuclear envelope during a 2 . 5 - h incubation . This caveola - mediated endocytosis was much slower than clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In uninjected and control - injected cells , incubations of 1 – 2 h were required to accumulate the cholera toxin B conjugates intracellularly , whereas only 5 – 15 min were necessary to internalize the fluorescent conjugates of transferrin . Regardless , both of these en - docytic processes were inhibited equally by the injected anti - dynamin antibodies . Electron microscopy revealed that in the anti - dynamin antibody - injected hepatocytes , HRP – cholera toxin B was concentrated in caveolar pro - files at the plasma membrane . Because the cultured hepa - tocytes used in this study express caveolin , we are confident in identifying these small plasmalemmal invaginations as caveolae . In support of this , we have shown that the anti - Pan61 antibody immunoisolates caveolin - containing mem - branes directly and not by an indirect association with the plasma membrane . Furthermore , using this same antibody and an anti - caveolin antibody we have performed double label immunofluorescence microscopy of cultured hepato - cytes to show that dynamin localizes to caveolae . Thus , we have concluded that anti - dynamin antibodies inhibit cave - ola - mediated processes based on multiple criteria : first , the characteristic shape and size of the accumulated struc - tures ; second , the fact that toxin - containing invaginations are not clathrin - coated and that toxin conjugates are inter - nalized normally when clathrin - mediated endocytosis is inhibited by potassium depletion ; third , the distinct time frame in which ligands for clathrin - mediated and caveola - mediated pathways are internalized ; fourth , results from the immunoisolation experiments and double label immu - nofluorescence microscopy that indicate that dynamin as - sociates directly with caveolae ; and fifth , and most impor - tantly , the numerous careful studies published by others demonstrating the internalization of cholera toxin by cave - olae ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Tran et al . , 1987 ; Parton , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ) . Finally , our results are consis - tent with those of Schnitzer and coworkers ( Oh et al . , 1998 ) , who have used an in vitro assay to demonstrate that a dynamin - depleted cytosolic fraction does not support the severing of caveolae from isolated plasma membrane fractions until additional exogenous dynamin is added back to the assay . Before this study , the answer to whether dynamin par - ticipated in endocytic pathways other than clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis was not clear ( see Artalejo et al . , 1995 ; Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) . Observations from cells of the shibire ts1 mutants indicate that fluid - phase endocytosis is completely inhibited at the restrictive temperature ( Kessel et al . , 1989 ; Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 a , b ) . Studies of trans - fected epithelial cells overexpressing a mutant Dyn1 iso - form , however , have indicated that dynamin functions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis specifically and not in other forms of fluid - phase endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Herskovitz et al . , 1993 ) . In fact , fluid - phase endocy - tosis actually was upregulated in these cells in response to the inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1995 ) . Significantly , like the shibire gene mutation , we have found that the anti - dynamin antibodies used in this study inhibit fluid - phase endocytosis in mammalian cells ( Henley , J . R . , and M . A . McNiven , manuscript in preparation ) in addition to their effect on clathrin - and ca - veola - mediated endocytosis . Because of alternative splic - ing of the mRNA , Dyn2 is expressed as at least four isoen - zymes in epithelial cells ; therefore , it is possible that the microinjected anti - dynamin antibodies are inhibiting dy - namin isoforms that an overexpressed mutant Dyn1 iso - form would not . Certainly , defining the precise dynamin isoforms which participate in these distinct endocytic pro - cesses will prove interesting . We thank Dr . Anthony Windebank and Dr . Peter Wollen for help with statistical analyses and Dr . David Zacharias for critical comments on the manuscript . We also are grateful to Dr . Jan Schnitzer for sharing unpub - lished results . J . R . Henley is the recipient of an American Liver Foundation Student Research Fellowship . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants to M . A . McNiven . Received for publication 8 July 1997 and in revised form 1 December 1997 . References Anderson , R . G . W . 1993 a . Caveolae : where incoming and outgoing messengers meet . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 90 : 10909 – 10913 . Anderson , R . G . W . 1993 b . Plasmalemmal caveolae and GPI - anchored mem - brane proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 : 647 – 652 . Anderson , R . G . W . 1993 c . Potocytosis of small molecules and ions by caveolae . Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 69 – 72 . Anderson , R . G . W . , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1977 . Role of the coated endocytic vesicle in the uptake of receptor bound low density lipoprotein in human fibroblasts . Cell . 10 : 351 – 364 . Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg , and S . W . Lacey . 1992 . Poto - cytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules by caveolae . Science . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 141 , 1998 98 255 : 410 – 411 . Artalejo , C . R . , J . R . Henley , M . A . McNiven , and H . C . Palfrey . 1995 . Rapid en - docytosis coupled to exocytosis in adrenal chromaffin cells involves Ca 2 (cid:49) , GTP and dynamin but not clathrin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 8328 – 8332 . Brown , D . A . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to gly - colipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell . 68 : 533 – 544 . Bundgaard , M . , J . Frøkjaer - Jensen , and C . Crone . 1979 . Endothelial plasma - lemmal vesicles as elements in a system of branching invaginations from the cell surface . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 76 : 6439 – 6442 . Carter , L . L . , T . E . Redelmeier , L . A . Woollenweber , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Multiple GTP - binding proteins participate in clathrin - coated vesicle - medi - ated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 37 – 45 . Chen , M . S . , R . A . Obar , C . C . Schroeder , T . W . Austin , C . A . Poodry , S . C . Wads - worth , and R . B . Vallee . 1991 . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shi - bire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature . 351 : 583 – 586 . Cook , T . A . , R . Urrutia , and M . A . McNiven . 1994 . Identification of dynamin 2 , an isoform ubiquitously expressed in rat tissues . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 644 – 648 . Cook , T . , K . Mesa , and R . Urrutia . 1996 . Three dynamin - encoding genes are differentially expressed in developing rat brain . J . Neurochem . 67 : 927 – 931 . Critchley , D . R . , C . H . Streuli , S . Kellie , and B . Patel . 1982 . Characterization of the cholera toxin receptor on BALB / c 3T3 cells as a ganglioside similar to , or identical with , ganglioside GM1 . No evidence for galactoproteins with re - ceptor activity . Biochem . J . 204 : 209 – 219 . Damke , H . , T . Baba , D . E . Warnock , and S . L . Schmid . 1994 . Induction of mu - tant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 915 – 934 . Damke , H . , T . Baba , A . M . van der Bliek , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Clathrin - inde - pendent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensi - tive mutant of dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 69 – 80 . De Camilli , P . , K . Takei , and P . S . McPherson . 1995 . The function of dynamin in endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 5 : 559 – 565 . Dupree , P . , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Ca - veolae and sorting in the trans - Golgi network of epithelial cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 1597 – 1605 . Fiedler , K . , T . Kobayashi , T . V . Kurzchalia , and K . Simons . 1993 . Glycosphin - golipid - enriched detergent - insoluble complexes in protein sorting in epithe - lial cells . Biochemistry . 32 : 6365 – 6373 . Fishman , P . H . 1982 a . Internalization and degradation of cholera toxin by cul - tured cells : relationship to toxin action . J . Cell Biol . 93 : 860 – 865 . Fishman , P . H . 1982 b . Role of membrane gangliosides in the binding and action of bacterial toxins . J . Membr . Biol . 69 : 85 – 97 . Fra , A . M . , E . Williamson , K . Simons , and R . G . Parton . 1995 . De novo forma - tion of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VIP21 - caveolin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 8655 – 8659 . Frøkjaer - Jensen , J . , R . C . Wagner , S . B . Andrews , P . Hagman , and T . S . Reese . 1988 . Three - dimensional organization of the plasmalemmal vesicular system in directly frozen capillaries of the rete mirabile in the swim bladder of the eel . Cell Tissue Res . 254 : 17 – 24 . Fujimoto , T . 1993 . Calcium pump of the plasma membrane is localized in cave - olae . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 1147 – 1157 . Glenney , J . R . , and L . Zokas . 1989 . Novel tyrosine kinase substructures from Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells are present in the membrane skeleton . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2401 – 2408 . Glenney , J . R . , and D . Soppet . 1992 . Sequence and expression of caveolin , a protein component of caveolae plasma membrane domains phosphorylated on tyrosine in Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 10517 – 10521 . Goldstein , J . L . , R . G . W . Anderson , and M . S . Brown . 1979 . Coated pits , coated vesicles and receptor mediated endocytosis . Nature . 297 : 678 – 685 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis : concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 – 39 . Grigliatti , T . A . , L . Hall , R . Rosenbluth , and D . T . Suzuki . 1973 . Temperature - sensitive mutations in Drosophila melanogaster XV : a selection of immobile adults . Mol . Gen . Genet . 120 : 107 – 114 . Henley , J . R . , and M . A . McNiven . 1996 . Association of a dynamin - like protein with the Golgi apparatus in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 133 : 761 – 775 . Herskovits , J . S . , C . C . Burgess , R . A . Obar , and R . B . Vallee . 1993 . Effects of mu - tant rat dynamin on endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 565 – 578 . Hopkins , C . R . , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1983 . Internalization and processing of transferrin and the transferrin receptor in human carcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 508 – 521 . Howell , K . E . , R . Schmid , J . Ugelstad , and J . Gruenberg . 1989 . Immunoisolation using magnetic solid supports : subcellular fractionation for cell - free func - tional studies . In Methods in Cell Biology . A . M . Tartakoff , editor . Academic Press , San Diego , CA . 265 – 292 . Huet , C . , J . F . Ash , and S . J . Singer . 1980 . The antibody - induced clustering and endocytosis of HLA antigens on cultured human fibroblasts . Cell . 21 : 429 – 438 . Jollie , W . P . , and T . J . Triche . 1971 . Ruthenium labeling of micropinocytotic ac - tivity in the rat visceral yolk - sac placenta . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 35 : 541 – 553 . Jones , S . M . , K . E . Howell , J . R . Henley , H . Cao , and M . A . McNiven . 1998 . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi net - work . Science . 279 : 573 – 577 . Joseph , K . C . , A . Stieber , and N . K . Gonatas . 1979 . Endocytosis of cholera toxin in GERL - like structures of murine neuroblastoma cells pretreated with GM1 ganglioside . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 543 – 554 . Kartenbeck , J . , H . Stukenbrok , and A . Helenius . 1989 . Endocytosis of simian virus 40 into the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2721 – 2729 . Kessell , I . , B . D . Holst , and T . F . Roth . 1989 . Membranous intermediates in en - docytosis are labile , as shown in a temperature - sensitive mutant . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 4968 – 4972 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1989 . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible block - age of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 : 3844 – 3860 . Koenig , J . H . , and K . Ikeda . 1990 . Transformational process of the endosomal compartment in nephrocytes of Drosophila melanogaster . Cell Tissue Res . 262 : 233 – 244 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983 a . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J . Neurobiol . 14 : 207 – 225 . Kosaka , T . , and K . Ikeda . 1983 b . Reversible blockage of membrane retrieval and endocytosis in the garland cell of the temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster , shibire ts1 . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 499 – 507 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , P . Dupree , R . G . Parton , R . Kellner , H . Virta , M . Lehnert , and K . Simons . 1992 . VIP21 , a 21 - kD membrane protein is an integral com - ponent of trans - Golgi network – derived transport vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1003 – 1014 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T 4 . Nature . 227 : 680 – 685 . Larkin , J . M . , M . S . Brown , J . L . Goldstein , and R . G . Anderson . 1983 . Depletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - medi - ated endocytosis in fibroblasts . Cell . 33 : 273 – 285 . Larkin , J . M . , W . C . Donzell , and R . G . Anderson . 1985 . Modulation of intracel - lular potassium and ATP : effects on coated pit function in fibroblasts and hepatocytes . J . Cell . Physiol . 124 : 372 – 378 . Lamaze , C . , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . The emergence of clathrin - independent pi - nocytic pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 : 573 – 580 . Lisanti , M . P . , P . E . Scherer , Z . - L . Tang , and M . Sargiacomo . 1994 . Caveolae , ca - veolin and caveolin - rich membrane domains : a signalling hypothesis . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 231 – 235 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Orci . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and teta - nus toxins . Nature . 296 : 651 – 653 . Nakata , T . , A . Iwamoto , Y . Noda , R . Takemura , H . Yoshikura , and N . Hi - rokawa . 1991 . Predominant and developmentally regulated expression of dy - namin in neurons . Neuron . 7 : 461 – 469 . Nakata , T . , R . Takemura , and N . Hirokawa . 1993 . A novel member of the dy - namin family of GTP - binding proteins is expressed specifically in the testis . J . Cell Sci . 105 : 1 – 5 . Obar , R . A . , C . A . Collins , J . A . Hammarback , H . S . Shpetner , and R . B . Vallee . 1990 . Molecular cloning of the microtubule - associated mechanochemical en - zyme dynamin reveals homology with a new family of GTP - binding proteins . Nature . 347 : 256 – 261 . Oh , P . , D . P . McIntosh , and J . E . Schnitzer . 1998 . Dynamin at the neck caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 101 – 114 . Palade , G . E . , and R . R . Bruns . 1968 . Structural modulation of plasmalemmal vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 37 : 633 – 649 . Parton , R . G . 1994 . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM 1 is concen - trated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 : 155 – 166 . Parton , R . G . 1996 . Caveolae and caveolins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 : 542 – 548 . Parton , R . G . , and K . Simons . 1995 . Digging into caveolae . Science . 269 : 1398 – 1399 . Parton , R . G . , B . Joggerst , and K . Simons . 1994 . Regulated internalization of ca - veolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1199 – 1215 . Patek , P . Q . , J . L . Collins , and M . Cohn . 1978 . Transformed cell lines susceptible or resistant to in vivo surveillance against tumorigenesis . Nature . 276 : 510 – 511 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 – 171 . Peters , K . - R . , W . Carley , and G . E . Palade . 1985 . Endothelial plasmalemmal vesicles have a characteristic striped bipolar surface structure . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2233 – 2238 . Poodry , C . A . , and L . Edgar . 1979 . Reversible alteration in the neuromuscular junctions of Drosophila melanogaster bearing a temperature - sensitive muta - tion , shibire . J . Cell Biol . 81 : 520 – 527 . Predescu , D . , R . Horvat , S . Predescu , and G . E . Palade . 1994 . Transcytosis in the continuous endothelium of the myocardial microvasculature is inhibited by N - ethylmaleimide . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 3014 – 3018 . Predescu , S . A , D . N . Predescu , and G . E . Palade . 1997 . Plasmalemmal vesicles function as transcytotic carriers for small proteins in the continuous endo - thelium . Am . J . Physiol . 41 : 937 – 949 . Robinson , M . S . 1994 . The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocyto - sis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 : 538 – 544 . Robinson , P . J . , J . - P . Liu , K . A . Powell , E . M . Fykse , and T . C . Südhof . 1994 . Phosphorylation of dynamin I and synaptic - vesicle recycling . Trends Neuro - sci . 17 : 348 – 353 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . - S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae mem - Henley et al . Dynamin - mediated Internalization of Caveolae 99 brane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 – 682 . Sager , P . R . , P . A . Brown , and R . D . Berlin . 1984 . Analysis of transferrin recy - cling in mitotic and interphase HeLa cells by quantitative fluorescence mi - croscopy . Cell . 39 : 275 – 282 . Sandvig , K . , M . Ryd , O . Garred , E . Schweda , P . K . Holm , and B . van Deurs . 1994 . Retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the ER of both Shiga toxin and the nontoxic Shiga B - fragment is regulated by butyric acid and cAMP . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 53 – 64 . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1994 . Endocytosis without clathrin . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 275 – 277 . Sandvig , K . , O . Garred , and B . van Deurs . 1996 . Thapsigargin - induced trans - port of cholera toxin to the endoplasmic reticulum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 93 : 12339 – 12343 . Scaife , R . , and R . L . Margolis . 1990 . Biochemical and immunochemical analysis of rat brain dynamin interaction with microtubules and organelles in vivo and in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 3023 – 3033 . Schnitzer , J . E . , P . Oh , E . Pinney , and J . Allard . 1994 . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocy - tosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1217 – 1232 . Schnitzer , J . E . , D . P . McIntosh , A . M . Dvorak , J . Liu , and P . Oh . 1995 a . Separa - tion of caveolae from associated microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins . Science . 269 : 1435 – 1439 . Schnitzer , J . E . , P . Oh , B . S . Jacobson , and A . M . Dvorak . 1995 b . Caveolae from luminal plasmalemma of rat lung endothelium : microdomains enriched in caveolin , Ca ( 2 (cid:49) ) - ATPase , and inositol trisphosphate receptor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 92 : 1759 – 1763 . Schnitzer , J . E . , P . Oh , and D . P . McIntosh . 1996 . Role of GTP hydrolysis in fis - sion of caveolae directly from plasma membranes . Science . 274 : 239 – 242 . Severs , N . J . 1988 . Caveolae : static inpocketings of the plasma membrane , dy - namic vesicles or plain artifact ? J . Cell Sci . 90 : 341 – 348 . Shpetner , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1989 . Identification of dynamin , a novel mech - anochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell . 59 : 421 – 432 . Shupliakov , O . , P . Low , D . Grabs , H . Gad , H . Chen , C . David , K . Takei , P . De Camilli , and L . Brodin . 1997 . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by dis - ruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science . 276 : 259 – 263 . Shyjan , A . W . , and R . Levenson . 1989 . Antisera specific for the alpha 1 , alpha 2 , alpha 3 , and beta subunits of the Na , K - ATPase : differential expression of al - pha and beta subunits in rat tissue membranes . Biochemistry . 28 : 4531 – 4535 . Smart , E . J . , D . C . Foster , Y . - S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1994 . Protein kinase C activators inhibit receptor - mediated potocytosis by pre - venting internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 307 – 313 . Smart , E . J . , Y . - S . Ying , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1995 . Hormonal regulation of caveolae internalization . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 929 – 938 . Sontag , J . - M . , E . M . Fykse , Y . Ushkaryov , J . - P . Liu , P . J . Robinson , and T . C . Südhof . 1994 . Differential expression and regulation of multiple dynamins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 4547 – 4554 . Stang , E . , J . Kartenbeck , and R . G . Parton . 1997 . Major histocompatibility com - plex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 47 – 57 . Takei , K . , P . S . McPherson , S . L . Schmid , and P . De Camilli . 1995 . Tubular mem - brane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - (cid:103) S in nerve terminals . Nature . 374 : 186 – 190 . Towbin , H . , T . Staehelin , and J . Gordon . 1979 . Electrophoretic transfer of pro - teins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets : procedure and some applications . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 76 : 4350 – 4354 . Tran , D . , J . L . Carpentier , F . Sawano , P . Gorden , and L . Orci . 1987 . Ligands in - ternalized through coated or noncoated invaginations follow a common in - tracellular pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 7957 – 7961 . Urrutia , R . , J . R . Henley , T . Cook , and M . A . McNiven . 1997 . The dynamins : Redundant or distinct functions for an expanding family of related GTP - ases ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 377 – 384 . Vale , R . D . , T . S . Reese , and M . P . Sheetz . 1985 . Identification of a novel force - generating protein , kinesin , involved in microtubule - based motility . Cell . 42 : 39 – 50 . van der Bliek , A . M . , and E . M . Meyerowitz . 1991 . Dynamin - like protein en - coded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Na - ture . 351 : 411 – 414 . van der Bliek , . A . M . , T . E . Redelmeier , H . Damke , E . J . Tisdale , E . M . Mey - erowitz , and S . L . Schmid . 1993 . Mutations in human dynamin block an inter - mediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 : 553 – 563 . van Deurs , N . , P . K . Holm , K . Sandvig , and S . H . Hansen . 1993 . Are caveolae in - volved in endocytosis ? Trends Cell Biol . 3 : 241 – 249 . Warnock , D . E . , and S . L . Schmid . 1996 . Dynamin GTPase , a force - generating molecular switch . BioEssays . 18 : 885 – 893 . Watts , C . , and M . Marsh . 1992 . Endocytosis : what goes in and how . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 1 – 8 . Yamada , E . 1955 . The fine structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 : 445 – 458 .