Computational Modeling of Coupled Interactions of Fluid Membranes with Embedded Filaments Basant Lal Sharma a , Luigi E . Perotti b , Sanjay Dharmavaram c , ∗ a Department of Mechanical Engineering , Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur , Kanpur , 208016 UP , India b Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , University of Central Florida , 12760 Pegasus Drive , Orlando , FL 32816 c Mathematics Department , Bucknell University , Lewisburg , PA 17837 Abstract In this work , we present a computational formulation based on continuum mechanics to study the interaction of fluid membranes embedded with semiflexible filaments . This is motivated by systems in membrane biology , such as cytoskeletal networks and protein filaments aiding the cell fission process . We model the membrane as a fluid shell via the Helfrich - Canham energy and the filament as a one - dimensional Cosserat continuum . We assume the filament to be tethered to the surface of the membrane in a way that it is allowed to float on the surface freely . The novel filament - membrane coupling , which is anticipated to yield interesting physics , also gives rise to unique computational challenges , which we address in this work . We present validation results and apply the formulation to certain problems inspired by cellular biology . Keywords : Cosserat rod model , Helfrich - Canham model , ESCRT machinery , Cell fission , Fluid membranes , membrane - rod interactions , Membrane mechanics Introduction Many cellular processes involve the interaction between cell membranes with filamen - tous structures . For instance , most cells contain a cytoskeleton which is a dynamic network of protein filaments crisscrossing the cell’s cytoplasm and the cell membrane . The cytoskeleton not only provides structural rigidity to the cell but also plays a vital role in the cell’s signaling pathways through the transport of cargo - filled vesicles . In most eukaryotic cells , a vital component of the cytoskeleton is the cortex , a network of semiflexible actin filaments coating the underside of the cell membrane [ 1 ] , which ∗ Corresponding author Email address : sd045 @ bucknell . edu ( Sanjay Dharmavaram ) Preprint submitted to Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering August 24 , 2023 a r X i v : 2308 . 12104v1 [ m a t h . NA ] 2 3 A ug 2023 gives cells their characteristic shape and rigidity . It also plays a vital role in cell mo - bility and cell mechanics . Fig . 1 ( a ) ( courtesy [ 2 ] ) shows a schematic of actin filaments tethered to the membrane with membrane - bound proteins , such as glycophorin and band - 3 - ankyrin . The motivation for the present work comes from this as first example of such structures found in cellular biology . A second example , where the interaction of the cell membrane with embedded fila - ments is relevant , refers to the events during the formation of lipid vesicles [ 3 , 4 ] . The latter play an important role in the transport and sequestration of biochemical cargo from cells . Vesicle formation is typically initiated by a collection of protein complexes , collectively called the ESCRT - III ( Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Trans - port ) machinery . Key components of this complex are protein monomers that adhere to the cell membrane and polymerize into filaments ( approximately 17nm thick ) [ 3 ] . The filaments proceed to form a helical constricting bundle , which causes the formation of a bud and eventually cleaves it into a spherical vesicle . The exact mechanism by which the helical filament induces curvature in the membrane is poorly understood [ 5 ] . Some studies have shown that the filaments form a flat spiral on lipid membranes and suddenly undergo a buckling instability into a helical state [ 5 , 6 ] . The present work is the first step in this direction that prescribes one way to model this . A third example to motivate our work is the mechanics of cell division aided by the formation of an actomyosin ring [ 7 ] . During cytokinesis ( the cell fission process ) , a contractile ring made up of polymerized protein complexes ( composed of actin and myosin II ) forms at the equatorial position between the two daughter cells , shown schematically in Fig . 1 ( b ) ( courtesy [ 7 ] ) . Aided by ATP , the myosin motor proteins move along the actin filaments and begin constricting the ring [ 8 ] . Understanding the mechanics of cytokinesis has implications in synthetic biology – an emerging interdis - ciplinary area encompassing biology , material science , and engineering aimed to design synthetic biological systems . The challenges encountered in replicating cytokinesis in a synthetic cell are discussed in a recent review article [ 9 ] . In particular , it is noted that in such a system , anchoring the actomyosin ring along the equatorial position of the cell is not an easy task , as upon myosin activation , the ring slips along the membrane . Understanding the mechanics of membrane - filament interaction can potentially shed light on the mechanisms for controlling this process . A common theme in the three examples , briefly described above , is the mechanical coupling between the lipid membrane and the embedded protein filaments . The goal of this work is to propose a computational framework based on continuum mechanics for understanding the coupled interaction of fluid membranes with embedded semiflexible filaments . Structure of Lipid Membranes and Protein Filaments Lipid membranes are made up of lipid molecules arranged in a bilayer structure . The hydrophobic tails of the molecules are embedded on the inner side of the bilayer , and the 2 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 : ( a ) Schematic showing actin filament anchored on the membrane through membrane - bound proteins , courtesy Fig . 1B from [ 2 ] . ( b ) Schematic showing a contractile actomyosin forming along the mid - plane , courtesy Fig . 3B [ 7 ] . polar heads are exposed to the aqueous cytoplasm . Within each layer , the molecules can freely move , thus rendering a fluid - like behavior to the membrane , similar to a soap film . Unlike the latter , the membrane resists bending as doing so exposes the hydrophobic tails to the aqueous environment of the cytoplasm . This “in - plane” fluidity of the membrane ascribes unique mechanical properties to the membrane . Often , membrane - bound proteins float on the surface and play a key role in various cellular processes . Most biological filaments at the cellular level are polymers of proteins . They can range in diameter from 7nm ( e . g . , actin filaments ) to 25nm ( e . g . , microtubules ) . Protein filaments are critical to the proper functioning of the cell . They perform a variety of roles , from providing structural support to acting as highways for material transport . Since protein monomers that constitute a filament are chiral molecules , the filament inherits an overall twisted chiral structure [ 10 ] . From a mechanistic viewpoint , they behave as semiflexible filaments which resist extension , bending , and twisting . The Cosserat rod model is a versatile framework for a continuum description of filaments [ 11 ] . Twist - bend coupling in actin filaments [ 12 , 13 ] and chirality of the filament can be easily incorporated within this description ; however , in the present work , we do not investigate the latter aspect of filaments for simplicity . As a consequence of the in - plane fluidity of the membrane , the filaments may be con - sidered to be floating on the surface . The schematic shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) illustrates this idea . Even though the filaments are anchored on the membrane with the membrane - bound proteins , the latter are freely floating on the surface . In fact , it is a unique feature of the model systems considered in this work that the filaments can freely drift on the surface without encountering any resistance . 3 State - of - the - art in Modeling Current approaches in modeling this class of systems can be broadly classified into two types : ( 1 ) molecular dynamics simulations and ( 2 ) continuum models . Molecular dynamics studies such as [ 14 ] have used fully atomistic simulations to model the ESCRT - membrane interactions , but such models are computationally extremely intensive , and only relatively small systems can be simulated . A slightly more coarse - grained approach where the filament is modeled as a set of beads connected by strings has been proposed in [ 15 ] . A two - component coarse - grained molecular dynamic ap - proach to study the coupled mechanics of membrane and its cytoskeletal network in red blood cells has been proposed in [ 16 ] . In this method , the lipid molecules , actin proteins and band - 3 anchor proteins ( c . f . , Fig . 1 ( a ) ) are each modeled as a “particle” with specific position and orientation - dependent interactions . The drawback of this method is the preponderance of phenomenological constants , as fitting parameters , for the interactions in order to get meaningful results . Continuum models so far have been limited to modeling cytoskeletal networks . In the works of Boey , Discher , et al . [ 17 , 18 ] , the cytoskeletal network of erythrocytes ( red blood cells ) is modeled as a network of Hookean springs . While their work only considered flat membranes and neglected the underlying lipid membrane , a more re - alistic mechanical description of erythrocytes has been considered in [ 19 , 20 ] . In this latter study , the lipid membrane and the cytoskeletal network are each represented by a triangular mesh . Equilibrium configurations are determined using dissipative par - ticle dynamics . A crucial modeling assumption in this work is that the nodes of two meshes are identified . While this may be sufficient for cytoskeletal networks , it is not straightforward to generalize the methodology to the other biological systems noted above . In this work , we explore the mechanics of membrane and filament coupling through a continuum model for both structures . Outline This paper is organized as follows . In Sec . 1 we present the mathematical formulation for the system – a fluid membrane embedded with a filament . We follow a variational approach and postulate an energy functional that combines the Helfrich - Canhman model [ 21 , 22 ] for the lipid membrane with a Cosserat rod model [ 23 , 24 ] for the protein filament . The fact that the filament is embedded , yet floating on the fluid membrane , causes computational challenges which we discuss and address in Sec . 2 . We present the weak form of the energy functional in Sec . 3 . In Sec . 4 we compute equilibrium configurations of the system by discretizing the weak form of the functional . We use the Loop subdivision finite element methods [ 25 , 26 ] to discretize the membrane and Hermite cubic finite elements for the filament . We present validation studies to test the accuracy of our model and consider some applications . We conclude by pointing out the prospects and limitations of our approach in Sec . 5 . 4 Notation We follow the standard notation in mathematics and mechanics [ 27 ] . The set of real numbers is denoted by R whereas the three dimensional Euclidean space is denoted by R 3 , which is equipped with the standard inner - product denoted with a dot , i . e . , a · b for given a , b ∈ R 3 . We use boldface font to represent the vectors and tensors . The second order tensor a ⊗ b , for given a , b ∈ R 3 , defined as a linear transformation from R 3 to R 3 such that ( a ⊗ b ) [ x ] = a ( b · x ) for all x ∈ R 3 . We denote the transpose of a tensor in a way that A T represents the transpose of A ( defined so that ( a ⊗ b ) T = b ⊗ a ) . Sometimes for brevity , and for emphasis on other occasions , we abuse the notation and alternate between a comma notation and an explicit form , i . e . , f , x ( x , y ) = ∂ x f ( x , y ) = ∂∂x f ( x , y ) , f , xy = ∂ xy f ( x , y ) = ∂ 2 ∂y∂x f ( x , y ) , etc . The square brackets , in general , denote the linear action of an operator ( say the gradient of a function , the first variation of functional , etc ) , which is mostly clear from the context with an exception of the use of similar notation for a closed interval of the real line . 1 . Formulation of the Model In this work , we model the membrane as a fluid shell with a spherical reference con - figuration . While working with appropriate dimensional variables , we assume that the reference configuration of the membrane is a unit sphere S 2 . The filament is modeled as a special Cosserat rod which is assumed to be embedded on the surface of the mem - brane . Due to the in - plane fluidity of the membrane , it is a natural assumption that the filament is allowed to float freely on the surface ; in particular , the filament applies reaction forces only in the direction normal to the surface . Our focus in this work is the computation of various equilibrium configurations ( statics ) of such a membrane - filament system , and , therefore , we do not consider any viscous forces exerted by the membrane on the filament . A schematic for the fluid shell - filament system is shown in Fig . 2 . 1 . 1 . Lipid membrane : Helfrich - Canham Model We model the membranes’ stored energy due to elastic bending via the Helfrich - Canham energy functional [ 21 , 22 ] . An important feature of this form of energy is that it naturally incorporates the in - plane fluidity of membranes . From a microscopic viewpoint , the fluidity in lipid membranes arises because of the disordered arrangement of the hydrophobic tails of the lipid molecules . The lipids molecules are free to move around along the surface of the membrane and experience very little shear force in this process . A consequence of in - plane fluidity of the membrane is the lack of a well - defined reference configuration for the membrane . In this work , we use the term reference configuration of the shell to denote any convenient parametrization of the surface . We denote f : S 2 → ω ⊂ R 3 5 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 : Schematic showing ( a ) reference and ( b ) deformed configurations of the membrane - rod system . Director in the reference and deformed configuration are shown as arrows . to be the deformation map for current configuration of the shell ( the deformed surface ω ) . Schematics for the reference and deformed configuration are shown in Fig . 2 ( a ) and ( b ) . Let X : = ( X 1 , X 2 ) ∈ R 2 denote a chosen ( local ) parametrization for the reference unit sphere S 2 . The Helfrich - Canham energy functional [ 28 , 21 ] is given by : E Helf ( f ) = (cid:90) ω (cid:0) c ( H − C 0 ) 2 + c g K (cid:1) da , ( 1 ) where H and K are the mean and Gaussian curvatures of ω , while c and c g are their respective bending stiffnesses ; also , C 0 is the preferred curvature of the membrane , and da is the area measure on ω . The explicit dependence of the energy on the deformation map f is shown by the term in parentheses on the left side of the above equation . For closed surfaces ( i . e . , without a boundary ) , by virtue of the Gauss - Bonnet theorem [ 29 ] , the Gaussian curvature term ( the second term in ( 1 ) ) integrates to a topologi - cal constant . Thus , this term does not play a role in our work as we only consider topologically same ( spherical ) configurations . Additionally , since the area modulus of lipid membranes is significantly larger than the bending moduli , we assume area incompressibility and impose the following total area constraint : (cid:90) ω da = 4 π , ( 2 ) where the right side of the equation is the surface area of the reference spherical state ( the unit sphere S 2 ) . Note that ( 2 ) is a global constraint on the surface area of ω . While it is conventional in continuum mechanics to model incompressibility by fixing the area strain at every point on the surface to unity [ 22 ] , such a local incompressibil - ity constraint is not convenient for numerical computations , especially with the finite element methods , as it leads to a mixed formulation . For topologically spherical mem - 6 branes ( the only ones considered in this work ) , the two formulations have been shown to be equivalent [ 30 ] as far as equilibria and their stability is concerned . We assume further that the membrane supports an internal osmotic pressure p , so that the total free energy of the membrane is given by E m ( f ) = E Helf ( f ) − pV , ( 3 ) where V is the volume enclosed by ω ( cf . , ( 1 ) ) . 1 . 2 . Filament : Special Cosserat Rod We model the rod ( a term which we use interchangeably with ‘filament’ ) using the framework of special theory of Cosserat [ 24 ] in which the rod’s center curve is described by r ( S ) . Here , S ∈ [ 0 , L ] denotes the ( referential ) arclength parameter with L being the reference length of the rod ( measured in dimensions of the radius of the membrane ) . Thus , r : [ 0 , L ] → R 3 . The rod cross - section is spanned by two directors d 1 ( S ) and d 2 ( S ) , and we assume that there are three ( orthonormal and oriented ) directors { d 1 ( S ) , d 2 ( S ) , d 3 ( S ) } . In the reference configuration , the center curve and the directors are described by R ( S ) , { D 1 ( S ) , D 2 ( S ) , D 3 ( S ) } ( orthonormal and oriented ) . Note that S satisfies the condition ∥ R ′ ( S ) ∥ ≡ 1 . In Fig . 2 , the directors in the reference and deformed configurations are represented by arrows . The directors , d i , i ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 } , form an orthonormal and oriented basis ( same statement for D i , i ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 } ) ; in particular , d 1 · ( d 2 × d 3 ) = + 1 . This assumption is the characteristic of the special Cosserat rod model and it is a reasonable assumption for thin biological filaments where cross - sectional shear can be neglected . Thus , we can map the current directors to reference directors ( both parametrized by S ) , in other words associate the cross - section in the deformed configuration , via a rotation tensor Q ( S ) = 3 (cid:88) i = 1 d i ( S ) ⊗ D i ( S ) . Note that Q : [ 0 , L ] → Orth + . Here Orth + denotes the set of rotations in three dimensions . That is , d i ( S ) = Q ( S ) D i ( S ) , for i = 1 , 2 , 3 and S ∈ [ 0 , L ] . ( 4 ) The strain measures for the rod are given by the derivatives of r and Q . We define ν i ( S ) : = r ′ ( S ) · d i ( S ) , i = 1 , 2 , 3 for S ∈ [ 0 , L ] , ( 5 ) 7 where ν 1 ( S ) and ν 2 ( S ) are the shear strains at the cross - section S , and ν 3 ( S ) the stretch along the rod at S . The bending and twisting strains in the rod are related to the derivative of the directors : d ′ i ( S ) = κ ( S ) × d i ( S ) + Q ( S ) D ′ i ( S ) , i = 1 , 2 , 3 for S ∈ [ 0 , L ] , ( 6 ) where κ is an axial vector defined by κ : = axial ( Q ′ Q T ) = (cid:80) 3 i = 1 κ i d i . In general , prime refers to differentiation with respect to S . The quantities κ 1 and κ 2 can be interpreted as bending strains in the rod ( of the center curve ) , while κ 3 as the twisting strain of the cross - section about the center curve . Note that the second term on the right - hand side of ( 6 ) is relevant if the reference configuration of the rod is curved . Since D 1 , D 2 , D 3 form an orthonormal basis of R 3 , we may assume without loss of generality that D ′ i ( S ) = 3 (cid:88) j = 1 α ij ( S ) D j ( S ) , i = 1 , 2 , 3 , ( 7 ) for prescribed functions α ij , which depend on the curvatures of the reference configu - ration of the rod . Orthonormality of the directors , naturally , implies that α ij = − α ji , and in particular , α ii = 0 , for i , j ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 } . In this work , we treat α ij as constants ; in this case , these parameters can be related to the Frenet – Serret parameters of the reference curve . For example , for a rod with a circular reference state , without loss of generality , we assume that its reference state lies on the xy plane , that is R ( S ) = L 2 π ( i cos S + j sin S ) , ( 8 ) with D 1 ( S ) = ( i cos S + j sin S ) , ( 9a ) D 2 ( S ) = k , ( 9b ) D 3 ( S ) = ( − i sin S + j cos S ) . ( 9c ) Thus , D ′ 1 ( S ) = D 3 , D ′ 2 ( S ) = 0 , D ′ 3 = − D 1 , which yields α 13 = − α 31 = 1 , α 12 = α 21 = α 32 = α 23 = 0 . Plugging ( 7 ) into ( 6 ) , and using ( 4 ) , we obtain d ′ i = κ × d i + 3 (cid:88) j = 1 α ij d j , i = 1 , 2 , 3 . ( 10 ) Using the orthonormality of the directors , the previous equation gives us the following 8 equations for the bending and twisting strains : κ 1 = d ′ 2 · d 3 − α 23 = − ( d ′ 3 · d 2 − α 32 ) , ( 11a ) κ 2 = d ′ 3 · d 1 − α 31 = − ( d ′ 1 · d 3 − α 13 ) , ( 11b ) κ 3 = d ′ 1 · d 2 − α 12 = − ( d ′ 2 · d 1 − α 21 ) . ( 11c ) In the framework of hyperelastic materials , the strain variables ( 5 ) and ( 11 ) can be used to postulate a general constitutive law [ 24 ] , E rod ( r , Q ) = (cid:90) L 0 W ( ν 1 , ν 2 , ν 3 , κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 ) dS . ( 12 ) The explicit form for W depends on considerations of material symmetry for the rod . Note that in ( 12 ) , the dependence of E rod on r and Q reflects the dependence of energy on the two kinematic variables of the rod model . In this work , we assume that the rod is unshearable which is a reasonable assumption for thin filaments . Accordingly , we set ν 1 = ν 2 ≡ 0 . ( 13 ) To keep the discussion simple , we assume an isotropic and compressible constitutive law for the rod with the following form : E rod = (cid:90) L 0 D 2 ( ν 3 − 1 ) 2 + E 2 ( κ 21 + κ 22 + κ 23 ) dS , ( 14 ) where D is the elastic modulus of the rod , and E is the bending modulus . Note that E can also be interpreted as the twisting modulus as it is also the coefficient of the twisting strain κ 3 . Even though we restrict ourselves to an isotropic constitutive law , our formulation is general enough to accommodate more realistic models for chiral filaments ( e . g . , hemitropic constitutive law [ 31 ] ) . While it may seem necessary to enforce the constraints ( 13 ) either using Lagrange multipliers or a penalty term , we find that this is not needed in the scheme we describe below . 2 . Computational Challenges Our goal is to compute the equilibrium configurations associated with the energy ( cf . , ( 3 ) and ( 14 ) ) : E ( f , r , Q ) = E m ( f ) + E rod ( r , Q ) , ( 15 ) subject to the constraints ( 2 ) and ( 13 ) . For emphasis , in the above equation , we show the explicit dependence on the various degrees - of - freedom ( f , r , Q ) in parentheses . Recall that due to ( 4 ) , Q can be interchanged with the three directors d i , i = 1 , 2 , 3 . 9 We encounter two main computational challenges as we try to find the critical points of ( 15 ) . 1 . Membrane - rod coupling : Since the rod remains tethered to the surface of the membrane , enforcing this embedding condition naively entails imposing a point - wise constraint : ∥ r ( S ) − f ( X 1 , X 2 ) ∥ = 0 , ( 16 ) where the norm is the Euclidean norm in R 3 ; thus there exits a tuplet ( X 1 , X 2 ) corresponding to given S such that this condition holds . Point - wise constraints such as the one above are computationally cumbersome to impose . 2 . Membrane fluidity : Applying mesh - based computational methods to fluid membranes is often plagued with extreme mesh distortion and the presence of zero - energy modes [ 32 , 33 ] . These stem from the in - plane fluidity of the consti - tutive law . A variety of numerical schemes have been proposed to address this issue [ 33 , 32 , 34 , 35 , 31 ] which either add in - plane viscosity ( there by changing the constitutive law ) or restrict the parametrization of the surface . In a recent work we proposed a gauge - fixing approach [ 36 , 37 ] for fluid membranes that cir - cumvents this issue without changing the constitutive law . Here , we extend this procedure in the presence of the embedded filaments . 2 . 1 . Coupling the Rod with the Membrane The requirement ( 16 ) that the rod remains embedded on the surface of the membrane implies that the shape of the membrane and that of the rod are inextricably coupled . As per our assumption the lipid molecules are in a fluid state and can freely move around and across the rod . As shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) , typically , the biofilaments are tethered to the membrane surface through membrane embedded proteins . We approximate this effect by assuming that the rod is embedded over the surface , so that the material points on the membrane surface can flow past the rod . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 : ( a ) Schematic showing a Lagrangian description of the rod on S 2 in terms of spherical coordinates θ ( S ) : = ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) . ( b ) Schematic showing the current configuration of the rod written in terms of f ◦ θ . 10 Instead of a cumbersome constraint such as ( 16 ) , we employ a Lagrangian scheme to parametrize the deformed configuration of the rod . This idea has been inspired by our recent work on membrane - protein interaction [ 38 , 37 ] . We introduce θ : [ 0 , L ] → S 2 that parametrizes the deformed position of the rod onto a reference sphere S 2 . Instead of treating r ( S ) as the degree - of - freedom to describe the kinematics of the rod at a given point S ∈ [ 0 , L ] , we treat θ ( S ) as the degree - of - freedom . For topologically spherical membranes , any choice of spherical coordinates is a natural way to parametrize S 2 . Thus , the compatibility condition , r ( S ) = f ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , ( 17 ) automatically ensures ( 16 ) , that is the rod remains embedded on the surface . Note that the right side of the previous equation can be , more abstractly , written as ( f ◦ θ ) ( S ) . For the simplicity of notation , in above and in the rest of paper , we identify θ with ( θ 1 , θ 2 ) , the spherical coordinates . A schematic showing the rod on the deformed configuration and its “pull - back” on a reference sphere is shown in Fig . 3 . The pull - back on the reference sphere is explicitly given by : R p ( S ) = sin θ 1 ( S ) cos θ 2 ( S ) i + sin θ 1 ( S ) sin θ 2 ( S ) j + cos θ 1 ( S ) k . Note that R p is not the reference configuration of the rod . It is simply a parametriza - tion of the deformed configuration of the rod on a fictitious unit sphere . While ( 17 ) couples the rod’s center curve to the membrane , additional conditions need to be specified to couple the rod’s cross - section to the surface . In this work , this is done by mapping suitably the directors in deformed configuration to the normal vector field of the deformed surface . Without such additional conditions , the problem is ill - posed , for instance , this is so when the cross - section of rod is allowed to twist about the center curve without changing the shape of the latter . While many possible couplings are possible , we choose a natural scheme that is partly motivated by the biological example shown in Fig . 1 ( a ) . It is clear from this figure that , to a reasonable approximation , the membrane - bound protein connecting the filament to the membrane remains normal to the surface . We approximate this effect by demanding that the unit normal to the surface and a director , say d 1 , are parallel ( aligned ) . That is , d 1 ( S ) = n ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , ( 18 ) for all S ∈ [ 0 , L ] . The compatibility conditions ( 17 ) and ( 18 ) are sufficient to determine the other direc - 11 tors . Since the rod is assumed unshearable , it follows from ( 5 ) ( for i = 3 ) that d 3 ( S ) = f , α ( θ ) θ α ′ ( S ) ν 3 ( S ) , ( 19 ) for all S ∈ [ 0 , L ] , where the numerator is obtained by differentiating ( 17 ) . In ( 19 ) , as later in the text , we employ Einstein’s summation convention over the repeated index α . Henceforth , a summation is implied over repeated Greek indices . Moreover , the orthonormality of directors implies d 2 ( S ) = d 3 ( S ) × d 1 ( S ) , ( 20 ) for all S ∈ [ 0 , L ] . As a consequence of this and the compatibility equations ( 18 ) and ( 19 ) , Q is no longer a kinematic degree - of - freedom of the rod which is independent of the membrane . As a result of the above assumptions coupling the rod to membrane , ( 15 ) can be reduced to the form : E ( f , θ ) = E m ( f ) + E rod ( f ◦ θ ) , ( 21 ) subject to the constraint ( 2 ) . Note that due to ( 18 ) , ( 19 ) , and ( 20 ) , the unshearability constraints ( 13 ) are automatically satisfied . 2 . 2 . Redundancy in Equilibrium Equations and Gauge Fixing We now show that as a consequence of in - plane fluidity of the membrane , the Euler - Lagrange equations , i . e . , first - variation of the energy , is underdetermined . In particular , we show that if the equilibrium equations of the rod hold , then the components of the equilibrium equation tangential to the membrane automatically vanish . Following the convention of the calculus of variation , for a small parameter ϵ , let us perturb the degrees of freedom as follows : f ( X ) (cid:55)→ f + ϵ ( v ( X ) + w ( X ) n ( X ) ) , ( 22 ) where v : = v α f , α is a ( smooth ) tangential vector field to the surface ω , w n defines a smooth normal vector field on ω . The perturbation in f is denoted as ϵ η , where we define η : = v + w n . Similarly , we perturb the degrees of freedom associated with the rod : θ ( S ) (cid:55)→ θ ( S ) + ϵ ξ ( S ) , ( 23 ) for all S ∈ [ 0 , L ] where ξ is a smooth vector field along the rod . Since θ is the pull - back of the position vector of the rod and is defined on S 2 , so is ξ . Thus , ξ = ξ α R p , α , ( 24 ) for some scalar functions ξ α , α ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The perturbed configurations of the membrane 12 surface and the rod are shown schematically in Fig . 4 ( a ) and ( b ) . Note that quantities such as f , v , n , etc . , are defined on the surface S 2 and are therefore functions of X . On the other hand , the position vector of the rod’s center curve depends on S . At this point , recall the compatibility relation r ( S ) = ( f ◦ θ ) ( S ) , c . f . , ( 17 ) . For clarity and convenience , we introduce the following hat notation . For any vector field q : S 2 → R 3 , we define ˆ q : [ 0 , L ] → R 3 as ˆ q : = q ◦ θ . ( 25 ) For the gradient of q , e . g . , q , α , we assume the notation that ˆ q , α = q , α ◦ θ ; we employ a similar notation for higher order derivatives . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 4 : ( a ) Solid curve on the sphere represents the Lagrangian description of the rod and the dotted curve is the perturbed configuration . ( b ) Perturbed configuration of the deformed surface is shown in the shaded region ( enclosed in the dotted curve ) . The perturbed current configuration of the rod is shown in the dashed curve . The two perturbations introduced above , c . f . , ( 22 ) and ( 23 ) , induce the following per - turbation in the position of the rod : r ( S ) = ˆ f ( S ) = f ( θ ( S ) ) (cid:55)→ f ( θ ( S ) + ϵ ξ ( S ) ) + ϵ ( v + w n ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12) θ + ϵ ξ . ( 26 ) We expand the first term on the right hand side using Taylor’s theorem and retain terms up to first order in ϵ . Thus , we obtain ˆ f (cid:55)→ ˆ f + ϵ (cid:16) ( ξ α + ˆ v α ) ˆ f , α + ˆ w ˆ n (cid:17) + o ( ϵ ) , ( 27 ) where the first term in the outer parentheses above is the component representation of ( ∇ ˆ f ) T [ ξ ] + ˆ v . Noting that r ( S ) = ˆ f ( S ) , we see from ( 27 ) that the perturbation in the rod’s deformation map has two contributions . One from the perturbation of the surface ( terms involving ˆ v and ˆ w in ( 27 ) ) and second from the perturbation in the Lagrangian description of the rod ( term involving ξ α ) . For convenience , we denote the perturbation term—second term in ( 27 ) —by δ r in Fig . 4 ( b ) . 13 We introduce the following notation for the perturbations in the membrane and rod energies : δ ⊥ E m [ w ] : = d dϵ E m ( f + ϵw n ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ϵ = 0 , ( 28a ) δ ⊥ E rod [ w ] : = d dϵ E rod ( ˆ f + ϵ ˆ w ˆ n ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ϵ = 0 , ( 28b ) δ ∥ E m [ v ] : = d dϵ E m ( f + ϵ v ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ϵ = 0 , ( 28c ) δ ∥ E rod [ q 1 , q 2 ] : = d dϵ E rod ( ˆ f + ϵ ( q 1 ˆ f , 1 + q 2 ˆ f , 2 ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ϵ = 0 , ( 28d ) where δ ∥ E m , etc . are linear operators of their arguments ( indicated in brackets ) . Note that δ ⊥ and δ | | denote variations due to perturbations normal and tangential ( respec - tively ) to the membrane . To derive the Euler - Lagrange equations , we set the first variation of ( 21 ) , due to the perturbations ( 22 ) and ( 27 ) , to zero . That is , d dϵ E (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ϵ = 0 = ( δ ⊥ E m + δ ⊥ E rod ) [ w ] + ( δ ∥ E m + δ ∥ E rod ) [ v 1 , v 2 ] + δ ∥ E rod [ ξ 1 , ξ 2 ] = 0 . ( 29 ) Since the perturbations ( enclosed in square brackets ) are independent ( and arbitrary ) , we obtain the following : ( δ ⊥ E m + δ ⊥ E rod ) [ w ] = 0 , ( 30a ) ( δ ∥ E m + δ ∥ E rod ) [ v 1 , v 2 ] = 0 , ( 30b ) δ ∥ E rod [ ξ 1 , ξ 2 ] = 0 . ( 30c ) Here , ( 30a ) can be interpreted as the normal component of the momemtum balance for the membrane , ( 30b ) as the tangential component of the momentum balance , and ( 30c ) as the rod’s momentum balance . It is a well - known fact [ 39 , 40 , 36 ] that the tangential variation of the Helfrich - Canham energy is identically zero . That is , δ ∥ E m [ v ] ≡ 0 , for all tangential perturbations v , and on any configuration defined by the deformation map f . Thus , if ( 30c ) holds , then ( 30b ) is trivially zero . Thus , we do not obtain any new condition for the tangential equilibrium equation for the membrane . In other words , the equilibrium condition for the membrane is underdetermined . 2 . 2 . 1 . The Gauge - fixing Procedure We now address the second computational challenge mentioned at the beginning of this section . A strategy to circumvent problems arising from membrane’s in - plane fluidity 14 has been presented in recent works [ 36 , 37 ] through a procedure termed gauge - fixing . While these earlier work considered only a fluid membrane , here we demonstrate that the procedure can be employed for the membrane - rod system . Note that the crucial ingredients for this argument are that ( 1 ) the surface has a spherical topology , and ( 2 ) the rod floats on the membrane . We emphasize that the gauge - fixing procedure is not the main contribution of the paper . We discuss it simply to convince the reader that the inclusion of a rod in the system , in the manner described above , does not preclude the gauge - fixing procedure that was developed solely for fluid membranes . As we noted above , the equilibrium equations for the membrane are underdetermined . The main idea of gauge - fixing is to supplement the equilibrium equations of the mem - brane with another constraining equation . A classical example of this procedure is in potential - theoretic formulation of electrodynamics . Since vector and scalar potentials cannot be uniquely determined , extra - conditions called gauge conditions are imposed on the potentials ( e . g . , Coulomb gauge that sets the divergence of the vector potential to be zero ) . For the Helfrich model on topologically spherical surfaces , a recently de - veloped procedure has been presented in [ 36 ] . A detailed justification of this procedure has been provided in this reference . Below , we only discuss the procedure from an application viewpoint . We supplement the total energy of the system with the harmonic map energy , defined by E HM ( f ) = (cid:90) ω 1 2 g αβ h αβ da , ( 31 ) where g αβ ( α , β = 1 , 2 ) are the ( contravariant ) components of the metric tensor of the deformed surface ω , and h αβ are the ( covariant ) components of the metric tensor of in a chosen parametrization of the reference surface S 2 . Note that h αβ is fixed for a given parametrization of S 2 ( see [ 36 ] for an example involving spherical coordinates ) . On the other hand g αβ can be computed in terms of the deformation map via : g αβ = f , α · f , β , α , β ∈ { 1 , 2 } , ( 32 ) where the commas represent partial derivatives with respect to X 1 and X 2 . Thus , the required equilibria are computed as critical points of the new functional : ˜ E ( f , θ ) = E m ( f ) + E rod ( f ◦ θ ) + E HM ( f ) . ( 33 ) We term this the gauge - fixed formulation . A nontrivial feature of the gauge - fixing procedure is that adding the harmonic energy ( 31 ) does not alter the constitutive law of the fluid membrane . This is despite the fact that E HM depends on the deformation map of the surface . It can be shown [ 36 , 37 ] that the Euler - Lagrange operator corresponding to E HM only contributes in the direction tangential to the surface ( see Theorem 3 , Appendix D of [ 36 ] ) . The first 15 variation of ( 33 ) therefore supplements the already established conditions ( 30 ) with the additional condition δ | | E HM [ v 1 , v 2 ] = 0 . Thus , we do not modify the physics of the problem event though we supplement the total energy with ( 31 ) . Other established methods [ 33 , 32 , 34 ] modify the constitutive law by adding additional terms to the energy . Typically , viscous terms that penalize in - plane motions are added to the energy and the equilibrium configurations are computed by iteratively decreasing the effect of the added terms . Since the gauge - fixed formulation does not require this iterative step , our computations are significantly faster . One notable feature of the gauge - fixing procedure presented above is that adding E HM is not sufficient to constrain all the tangential degrees of freedom . That is , the tan - gential equilibrium equations are still underdetermined . We have shown in [ 36 ] that the null space of the linearized Harmonic Map equation ( i . e . , δ | | E HM [ v 1 , v 2 ] = 0 ) is six - dimensional and the null vectors can be generated by M¨obius group of transformations . The six linearly independent modes can be visualized as the rigid translational and ro - tational modes of the sphere [ 41 ] . We fix the translational modes via the “zero - mass” constraint [ 36 ] : (cid:90) ω R ( X 1 , X 2 ) da = 0 , ( 34 ) where R ( X 1 , X 2 ) is a parametrization of the reference sphere . While the three rota - tional modes could be fixed by imposing additional “landmark constraints” [ 42 ] , for the results presented below , we found that this was not necessary . The minimization procedure was able to find reliable solutions without any additional constraints . 3 . First Variation and Weak Form In this section we derive the weak - form for the gauge - fixed formulation , cf . ( 33 ) , sub - jected to constraint ( 2 ) and ( 34 ) . We begin by setting the notation and recalling basic facts about differential geometry that we use to derive the weak form . The tangent space of ω at X ( parametrized by X 1 and X 2 ) is spanned by the basis a α : = f , α = ∂ f ∂X α ∈ R 3 , α ∈ { 1 , 2 } . ( 35 ) The components of the metric tensor of ω are given by g αβ = a α · a β , where dot represents the Euclidean inner product of vectors in R 3 . We denote the dual basis vectors superscripts , i . e . , a α : = g αβ a β , where g αβ are the contravariant components of the metric tensor . It follows that the 16 unit normal field to ω is given by n = a 1 × a 2 √ g , where we have used the identity √ g = ∥ a 1 × a 2 ∥ . The components of the second fundamental form of ω are b αβ = − n , α · a β = n · a α , β . The Mean and Gaussian curvatures are given by H = 1 2 b αα = − 1 2 a α · n , α , K = det ( b αβ ) , ( 36 ) where , following the standard convention , the tensor indices are lowered or raised by multiplying using the metric tensor g αβ or its inverse g αβ , respectively . To derive the weak form of the gauge - fixed functional ( 33 ) , we compute its variation δ ˜ E with respect to the variations ( 22 ) and ( 23 ) . Equilibrium configurations are obtained by the first - variation condition : δ ˜ E = δ E + δ E HM + δ E rod = 0 , ( 37 ) subject to constraints ( 2 ) and ( 34 ) . It can be shown ( see [ 32 , 36 , 37 ] for details ) that : δ E m = (cid:90) S 2 (cid:18) n α · δ a α + m α · δ n , α − 1 3 pV n · η (cid:19) JdA , ( 38 ) δ E HM = 1 2 (cid:90) S 2 h αβ (cid:16) − 2 g αγ a β + g αβ a γ (cid:17) · η , γ J dA , ( 39 ) where J = √ g / √ h with h being the determinant of h αβ , η is the variation in the surface ( see note following ( 22 ) ) , and n α = ( κ ( H − C 0 ) + 2 κ g H ) g αβ n , β + ( κ ( H − C 0 ) 2 + κ g ( K − b νβ a β · n , ν ) ) a α − 1 3 pV ( ( f · n ) a α − ( f · a α ) n ) , ( 40 ) m α = (cid:0) − κ ( H − C 0 ) δ αβ + κ g ( b αβ − 2 Hδ αβ ) (cid:1) a β , ( 41 ) where δ αβ is the Kronecker delta , and the variations appearing in the above equations are given by [ 33 ] δ a α = η , α , ( 42 ) δ n , α = − ( a β , α ⊗ n + a β ⊗ n , α ) · η , β − ( a β ⊗ n ) · η , βα . ( 43 ) 17 The first variation of E rod is given by δ E rod = (cid:90) L 0 D ( ν 3 − 1 ) δν 3 + E 3 (cid:88) i = 1 κ i δκ i dS , ( 44 ) where the explicit formulas for δν 3 , δκ i ( i = 1 , 2 , 3 ) in terms of η and ξ are provided in the Appendix B ; see Propositions 1 - 5 . Anticipating the key numerical computations , we conclude this section with the following remark . Remark . It has been noted in [ 37 ] that computing equilibria of ˜ E using its weak form ( 37 ) is not always feasible with a gradient - descent based minimization solver . This is because E HM does not need to be positive , and so a minimizer of ˜ E need not be that of E . Thus , the gauge - fixing procedure potentially could transform local minima into saddle points and local maxima . Note that they continue to remain critical points . To deal with this issue in computations , we instead minimize the following functional : ˆ E : = E m + E rod + λ g ( E HM ) 2 + µ 1 (cid:16) (cid:90) S 2 J dA − 4 π (cid:17) 2 + µ 2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:90) S 2 R ( X 1 , X 2 ) J dA (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 2 , ( 45 ) where λ g can be interpreted as a penalty parameter that controls the strength of the harmonic map energy . As can be seen in the last two terms of ( 45 ) , we enforce the constraints ( 2 ) and ( 34 ) through penalty constraints with parameters µ 1 and µ 2 . The associated weak form is given by : δ E m + δ E rod + ( 2 λ g E HM ) δ E HM + λ 1 (cid:90) S 2 a α · η α J dA + λ 2 (cid:90) S 2 R ( X 1 , X 2 ) a α · η α J dA = 0 , ( 46 ) where λ 1 = 2 µ 1 ( (cid:82) S 2 J dA − 4 π ) and λ 2 = 2 µ 2 (cid:82) S 2 R J dA . Note that we have used δJ = J a α · η α to obtain the last two terms of ( 46 ) while the variations δ E m , δ E rod , and δ E HM are given by ( 38 ) , ( 44 ) , and ( 39 ) , respectively . 4 . Numerical Results 4 . 1 . Finite Element Discretization We employ a Ritz - Galerkin projection scheme to discretize the energy ( 45 ) and its weak form ( 46 ) . Since our system is a combination of two distinct continuua—a shell and a rod—we use two different finite elements to discretize them . We use a Loop subdivision finite element [ 26 ] for the fluid shell and a Hermite cubic element for the rod . The Loop subdivision finite element approach has been effectively applied to solid and fluid shells [ 26 , 33 , 32 , 36 , 37 ] . While there are a variety of finite elements available for thin shells , we use the Loop subdivision method scheme as it is relatively straight - forward and only uses the positional degrees - of - freedom for the mesh . In this method , the surface is discretized into triangles , and the deformation map f is interpolated 18 on each triangular element using bivariate quartic box - splines , expressed in terms of the barycentric coordinates of the element . The method guarantees C 1 continuity across elements which is required for discretizing E . The trade - off with using only the nodal degrees of freedom is that unlike traditional finite elements that have test / shape functions supported only on the element , in the Loop shell scheme , the functions ( box - splines ) are supported on the first ring of neighbors around a given element . Explicit implementation details on this method can be found in [ 26 , 33 , 32 ] . In what follows , we denote N surface as the number of nodes of the mesh . Each node contains three degrees - of - freedom for the x - , y - , and z - components of the deformation map . The relevant degrees of freedom for the rod are θ 1 ( S ) and θ 2 ( S ) . The anchoring con - ditions for the rod ( 17 ) and ( 18 ) means that the directors of the rod are automatically determined from the deformation map f , θ 1 ( S ) , and θ 2 ( S ) . Since the bending and twisting energy of the rod depends on the second derivative of r , and hence that of θ α ( S ) ( α ∈ { 1 , 2 } ) , we use Hermite cubic elements to discretize the rod . We discretize the reference arc length of the rod S ∈ [ 0 , L ] into N rod nodes . For each node and for each α ∈ { 1 , 2 } , we have two degrees - of - freedom corresponding to the Hermite cubic elements . The rod’s energy ( E rod ) and first variation ( δ E rod ) depend on ˆ f ( S ) , cf . , ( 25 ) . We compute the discretized integrals using a three - point Gaussian quadrature . To evaluate ˆ f at the quadrature points , we have to compute the shape functions of the Loop subdivision element at ( θ 1 , θ 2 ) . We first use a search algorithm developed in our earlier work [ 37 ] to determine the corresponding element of the surface mesh and then use quasi - Newton solver to determine the corresponding barycentric coordinates of the quadrature point in the element . We present computational results obtained using the discretization discussed above . We use a gradient - based L - BFGS minimization routine [ 43 ] to minimize ( 45 ) . Unless otherwise stated , the minimization routine was called with a randomized initial configu - ration . We set the penalty parameters ( cf . , ( 45 ) ) to be µ 1 = µ 2 = 10 3 and the preferred curvature C 0 = 0 . We limit our work to spherical topologies . As a consequence of the Gauss - Bonnet theorem , the term involving c g in ( 1 ) is a constant and thus does not affect the equilibrium configuration . The parameter λ g appears as a penalty parameter for the harmonic map energy in ( 45 ) . A small value for λ g can cause mesh distortion ( similar to the ones noted in [ 33 ] ) , while a large value can slow down convergence . In the results presented below , we choose its value ( by experimentation ) so as to aid convergence . A value of λ g = 50 worked for most cases . 4 . 2 . Verification and Validation In this section , we validate our computational formulation with two studies : a conver - gence test and a benchmark study . Fig . 5 summarizes our results from the convergence study . In the central plot , we have presented the equilibrium state’s total ( discretized ) energy ˆ E ( normalized by a factor of 10 6 ) on the y - axis versus ( logarithm of ) N surface on the x - axis , for four different 19 discretizations of the surface mesh . We used N surface = 212 , 642 , 2562 , 10242 with D = 100 , E = 1 , p = 10 , N rod = 31 , and c = 5 . The reference configuration for the rod was chosen to be a circular state with L = π ( and α 31 = − 1 , α 32 = 0 ; see ( 9 ) ) . Note the convergence in the energy as we increase the degrees - of - freedom . The corresponding equilibrium solutions are shown as insets . Figure 5 : Convergence of discretized energy ˆ E versus number of nodes in the Loop surface mesh N surface . The mesh in the equilibrium deformed configuration is also shown corresponding to the selected cases . In our second validation study , we compare the results obtained using our computa - tional formulation with a semi - analytical benchmark problem of “line tension” induced deformation in the membrane as considered by Das et al in [ 44 ] . In their work , the authors considered spherical lipid membranes , parts of which can exist in two different fluid phases . The boundary between the two phases ( which is a closed curve ) creates a line tension which causes the formation of a neck . In Sec . 5 . 1 of [ 44 ] , the authors provide expressions for a special case , where the two phases have the same material properties and the phase boundary lies on the equatorial plane . Here , we approximate this result by modeling the filament as a flexible string with a large elastic modulus D = 100 ( incapable of supporting bending , i . e . , E = 0 ) compared to the bending mod - ulus of the membrane c = 1 . In this scenario the mechanics of rod is essentially that of a rubber band , thus approximating the effect of line tension . The filament is further constrained to lie on the equatorial plane by setting θ 1 ( S ) = π / 2 in the L - BFGS solver . The membrane is pressurized from the inside with a relatively large pressure p = 1000 ( compared to c = 1 ) . In [ 44 ] , a perturbation expansion for the solution in terms of the small parameter ϵ : = 1 / √ p has be obtained . More specifically , the authors provide the following relationship between the line tension in the string ( σ ) , as a function of the neck radius ( r ∗ ) : σ = σ 0 + ϵσ 1 , ( 47 ) 20 where σ 0 = ( r ∗ − r ∗ 3 ) √ 2 − r ∗ 2 , σ 1 = ( − 0 . 98517 + 3 . 36358 r ∗ − 2 . 15325 r ∗ 2 + 0 . 84090 r ∗ 3 − 0 . 93567 r ∗ 4 ) , ( 48 ) and r ∗ is the neck radius . We compute the tension in the filament using the following equation σ = D p ( ¯ ν 3 − 1 ) , ( 49 ) where ¯ ν 3 is the average ν 3 in along the filament . Comparison between the numerical results and the semi - analytical results is shown in Fig . 6 . The dotted curve is the perturbation solution for σ as a function of the neck radius r ∗ computed with ( 47 ) and ( 48 ) . The scatter circular markers correspond to the solutions computed using the proposed finite element formulation for various reference configurations of the rod , which we set to be a circle with length between L / 2 π = 0 . 08 to 0 . 7 . Note that due to high internal pressure and extensiblity of the rod , we find that L / 2 π ̸ = r ∗ . Figure 6 : Numerical simulations versus perturbation theory solutions as a function of r ∗ . From left to right the numerical simulations corresponding to the circular markers are obtained for L / 2 π = { 0 . 08 , 0 . 095 , 0 . 10 , 0 . 12 , 0 . 14 , 0 . 16 , 0 . 17 , 0 . 19 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 225 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 275 , 0 . 3 , 0 . 35 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 } . In - serts are not necessarily to scale . 4 . 3 . Applications We now apply the framework , developed thus far , to three applications . 21 In the first application , we consider a straight rod , i . e . , whose reference configuration is flat , embedded on the surface of a spherical membrane . We represent this schematically in the inset at the top left corner of Fig . 7 . For a straight rod , it follows from ( 7 ) that α 31 = α 32 = 0 . The same figure shows the equilibrium configurations when length L = π as we vary the membrane stiffness ( c ) . Observe that when c is large , it is more energetically favorable for the rod to undergo bending as it remains embedded on the membrane and the configuration is close to being spherical . As c is decreased , the rod straightens out and the configuration becomes progressively more bean - shaped . For these simulations , we set D = 20 , E = 2 , and p = 0 . Figure 7 : Equilibrium configurations of a straight ( in the reference configuration ) rod with length L = π on a spherical membrane as a function of membrane bending stiffness c from high ( left ) to low ( right ) . The deformed rod is represented in yellow while the membrane surface is colored by its Gaussian curvature . As a second application , we next consider a rod whose reference configuration is a circular ring as represented schematically in the inset in Fig . 8 . Note that the ring freely floats on the surface of the membrane . In this simulation , the length of the rod is set to be greater than the circumference of the unit sphere ( L = 2 . 6 π > 2 π ) . If the bending stiffness of the membrane is large ( compared to that of the rod ) , the rod undergoes buckling , while the membrane continues to remain almost spherical . This configuration is shown in Fig . 8 ( left ) where c = 3 . 0 . The rod’s configuration can be visualized as the seam of a baseball , as seen in the figure . For smaller membrane stiffness ( e . g , c = 0 . 1925 as shown in Fig . 8 , right ) , a “pancake” configuration is favored . In this configuration , the rod remains circular and close to its referential configuration , but the membrane undergoes large deformation . For these simulations , we have used D = 20 , E = 1 , p = 0 . In our third application , we explore the coupling between membrane bending and rod twisting . We consider a rod with a circular referential configuration with L = π 22 Figure 8 : Coupling between membrane and rod bending . If the bending stiffness of the membrane is large , the rod buckles ( achieving a configuration that recalls the seam of a baseball ) while the membrane configuration remains close to spherical ( left , c = 3 . 0 ) . As the membrane bending stiffness decreases , the rod maintains its circular ( close to reference ) configuration while the membrane tends toward a “pancake” configuration ( right , c = 0 . 1975 ) . In both cases , the membrane deformed config - urations are rendered with an opaque and semi - transparent surface to clearly show the rod deformed configuration on the entire membrane . For these simulations , we set D = 20 , E = 1 , p = 0 . embedded on the membrane , see the schematic inset at the top left corner of Fig . 9 . The referential director D 1 points radially outward in the plane of the ring , cf . , ( 9 ) ( a ) . We fix c = 1 , D = 10 , and p = 0 . As we increase rod bending / twisting stiffness , E , the bud at the top end of the membrane becomes more prominent , see Fig . 9 . This behavior can be understood as follows . For small values of E , the twisting in the rod is more predominant compared to bending in the membrane . This can be seen in the first two figures at the left end of Fig . 9 where the director d 1 of the deformed state ( shown as the black arrow ) is not in the plane of the ring . As E increases , the bending in the membrane becomes prominent and at the same time the rod does not twist as much . Note that for large E , the director d 1 is close to pointing radially outward in the plane of the ring . We used N rod = 31 and N surface = 2562 for these simulations . Figure 9 : Coupling between membrane bending and rod twisting : as the rod stiffness E increases from left to right , the rod ‘deforms’ the membrane to maintain its director d 1 in the horizontal reference configuration . In this example , the membrane bending stiffness c = 1 and the rod stretching modulus D = 10 . The black arrow depicts the normal to the membrane surface at the rod contact location and hence the rod director d 1 . 23 5 . Discussion and Conclusions In this work , we propose a computational strategy to understand the coupled mechanics of a semiflexible filament embedded , yet freely floating , on a fluid membrane . We model the membrane and the filament as continua and use a variational approach to compute equilibrium configurations of the system . The requirement that the filament remains embedded poses computational challenges that we address in this work . We do this by using a Lagrangian approach where the rod is parametrized by functions θ 1 ( S ) and θ 2 ( S ) on the reference sphere with S as referential arclength parameter . The two functions together give the spherical coordinates of a material point of the rod . Since the membrane is a fluid shell , the reference sphere used to parametrize the membrane is not necessarily the reference configuration of the membrane . This is because the in - plane fluidity precludes any canonical in - plane reference configuration . This lack of a reference configuration also causes computational issues . We adapt our earlier work , in particular the technique called gauge - fixing [ 36 ] , to the present problem . We present the details of the gauge - fixed formulation and derive the weak form of the Euler - Lagrange equations , cf . ( 46 ) . Using a combination of Loop subdivision finite element method ( for the membrane ) and Hermite cubic elements ( for the rod ) , we dis - cretize the formulation . We compute equilibrium states of using L - BFGS minimization solver . We perform a convergence test and validate the formulation on a benchmark problem [ 44 ] for which semi - analytical solution is available . We also apply the method to study the behavior of a straight rod and a circular ring on the membrane . The focus of this work is to present a continuum framework to understand the cou - pled interaction between membranes and rods . In this work , we do not undertake an exhaustive study of such systems . Rather we limit ourselves to a linear isotropic constitutive model for rod . It is well known that protein filaments have a chirality and a hemitropic constitute law [ 45 , 46 ] would be a more realistic description for rods . Adapting our formulation for such constitutive laws is straightforward nevertheless . Also we have limited our discussion to a system consisting of a single filament . Re - alistic modeling of the cortex of a cell - membrane requires a collection of cross - linked network of filaments . The cortex is a dynamic network where the junctions between the filaments are constantly changing . Modeling such systems is not difficult . One needs to add all the bending energies of the filaments and postulate some framework to add or remove crosslinkers . We mention here some limitations of our formulation . Extending the gauge - fixing pro - cedure to other topologies is not obvious . As discussed in [ 36 ] , the procedure crucially relies on the existence of conformal diffeomorphism between a topologically spherical surface and the unit sphere , which is guaranteed by the Riemann - Roch theorem ; see Theorem 1 [ 36 ] . It is still an open problem if the gauge - fixing procedure can be gen - eralized to other topologies . It is possible to circumvent the gauge - fixing procedure under certain scenarios . For example , if the deformed configuration can be described 24 in terms of the height from some reference flat plane , i . e . , the Monge representation , then a gauge - fixing procedure is not necessary . Even in spherical topologies , a radial graph representation for the deformation has been used [ 35 ] to compute equilibrium configuration on fluid membranes , however such a description would not be able to capture asymmetrically budded shapes , e . g . , Fig . 9 . In many biological systems , the cell membrane can exist in multiple fluid phases . It has long been conjectured that the in - homogeneity of lipids creates raft - like structures ( raft hypothesis ) that various membrane proteins selectively bind to , thereby playing an essential role in signaling and protein transport . The boundary between the different phases can presumably bind filaments . Since the model presented above assumes that the rod freely floats on the surface of the membrane , localizing them to be at the phase boundary is not possible . If the phase boundary is known a prior , then one approach to model such a system is discussed in [ 47 ] . Acknowledgments The part of the work of BLS during January 2023 was partially supported by a grant from the Simons Foundation . BLS would like to thank the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences , Cambridge , for support and hospitality during January - June 2023 when a part of writing this manuscript was undertaken and was supported by EPSRC grant no EP / R014604 / 1 . References [ 1 ] K . J . Chalut , E . K . Paluch , The actin cortex : a bridge between cell shape and function , Developmental cell 38 ( 2016 ) 571 – 573 . [ 2 ] Y . - H . Tang , L . Lu , H . Li , C . Evangelinos , L . Grinberg , V . Sachdeva , G . E . Kar - niadakis , Openrbc : A fast simulator of red blood cells at protein resolution , Biophysical journal 112 ( 2017 ) 2030 – 2037 . [ 3 ] J . Guizetti , L . Schermelleh , J . M¨antler , S . Maar , I . Poser , H . Leonhardt , T . M¨uller - Reichert , D . W . Gerlich , Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of escrt - iii – dependent filaments , Science 331 ( 2011 ) 1616 – 1620 . [ 4 ] M . Akamatsu , R . Vasan , D . Serwas , M . A . Ferrin , P . Rangamani , D . G . Drubin , Principles of self - organization and load adaptation by the actin cytoskeleton during clathrin - mediated endocytosis , Elife 9 ( 2020 ) e49840 . [ 5 ] J . McCullough , W . I . Sundquist , Membrane remodeling : Escrt - III filaments as molecular garrotes , Current Biology 30 ( 2020 ) R1425 – R1428 . [ 6 ] N . Chiaruttini , L . Redondo - Morata , A . Colom , F . Humbert , M . Lenz , S . Scheur - ing , A . Roux , Relaxation of loaded escrt - III spiral springs drives membrane de - formation , Cell 163 ( 2015 ) 866 – 879 . 25 [ 7 ] T . H . Cheffings , N . J . Burroughs , M . K . Balasubramanian , Actomyosin ring formation and tension generation in eukaryotic cytokinesis , Current Biology 26 ( 2016 ) R719 – R737 . [ 8 ] B . O’Shaughnessy , S . Thiyagarajan , Mechanisms of contractile ring tension pro - duction and constriction , Biophysical Reviews 10 ( 2018 ) 1667 – 1681 . [ 9 ] L . Baldauf , L . Van Buren , F . Fanalista , G . H . Koenderink , Actomyosin - driven division of a synthetic cell , ACS Synthetic Biology 11 ( 2022 ) 3120 – 3133 . [ 10 ] K . C . Holmes , D . Popp , W . Gebhard , W . Kabsch , Atomic model of the actin filament , Nature 347 ( 1990 ) 44 – 49 . [ 11 ] C . Floyd , H . Ni , R . S . Gunaratne , R . Erban , G . A . Papoian , On stretching , bending , shearing , and twisting of actin filaments i : Variational models , Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 18 ( 2022 ) 4865 – 4878 . [ 12 ] M . Enrique , J . Roland , B . R . McCullough , L . Blanchoin , J . - L . Martiel , Origin of twist - bend coupling in actin filaments , Biophysical journal 99 ( 2010 ) 1852 – 1860 . [ 13 ] J . P . Bibeau , N . G . Pandit , S . Gray , N . Shatery Nejad , C . V . Sindelar , W . Cao , E . M . De La Cruz , Twist response of actin filaments , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 ( 2023 ) e2208536120 . [ 14 ] T . Mandal , W . Lough , S . E . Spagnolie , A . Audhya , Q . Cui , Molecular simula - tion of mechanical properties and membrane activities of the escrt - iii complexes , Biophysical Journal 118 ( 2020 ) 1333 – 1343 . [ 15 ] L . Harker - Kirschneck , B . Baum , A . ˇSari´c , Changes in escrt - iii filament geometry drive membrane remodelling and fission in silico , BMC biology 17 ( 2019 ) 1 – 8 . [ 16 ] H . Li , G . Lykotrafitis , Two - component coarse - grained molecular - dynamics model for the human erythrocyte membrane , Biophysical journal 102 ( 2012 ) 75 – 84 . [ 17 ] S . K . Boey , D . H . Boal , D . E . Discher , Simulations of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton at large deformation . i . microscopic models , Biophysical Journal 75 ( 1998 ) 1573 – 1583 . [ 18 ] D . E . Discher , D . H . Boal , S . K . Boey , Simulations of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton at large deformation . ii . micropipette aspiration , Biophysical Journal 75 ( 1998 ) 1584 – 1597 . [ 19 ] Z . Peng , X . Li , I . V . Pivkin , M . Dao , G . E . Karniadakis , S . Suresh , Lipid bilayer and cytoskeletal interactions in a red blood cell , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 ( 2013 ) 13356 – 13361 . 26 [ 20 ] P . Rangamani , G . Y . Xiong , R . Iyengar , Multiscale modeling of cell shape from the actin cytoskeleton , Progress in molecular biology and translational science 123 ( 2014 ) 143 – 167 . [ 21 ] W . Helfrich , Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments , Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturforschung C 28 ( 1973 ) 693 – 703 . [ 22 ] J . Jenkins , Static equilibrium of configurations of a model red blood cell mem - brane , Biophysical Journal 13 ( 1973 ) 926 – 939 . [ 23 ] E . M . P . Cosserat , F . Cosserat , Th´eorie des corps d´eformables , A . Hermann et fils , 1909 . [ 24 ] S . S . Antman , Problems in nonlinear elasticity , Nonlinear Problems of Elasticity ( 2005 ) 513 – 584 . [ 25 ] C . Loop , Smooth Subdivision Surfaces Based on Triangles , Ph . D . thesis , The University of Utah , 1987 . URL : https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / publication / smooth - subdivision - surfaces - based - on - triangles / . [ 26 ] F . Cirak , M . Ortiz , P . Schr¨oder , Subdivision surfaces : a new paradigm for thin - shell finite - element analysis , International Journal for Numerical Methods in En - gineering 47 ( 2000 ) 2039 – 2072 . [ 27 ] M . E . Gurtin , An introduction to continuum mechanics , Academic press , 1982 . [ 28 ] P . B . Canham , The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red blood cell , Journal of theoretical biology 26 ( 1970 ) 61 – 81 . [ 29 ] M . P . d . Carmo , Riemannian geometry , Birkh¨auser , 1992 . [ 30 ] S . Dharmavaram , T . J . Healey , On the equivalence of local and global area - constraint formulations for lipid bilayer vesicles , Zeitschrift f¨ur angewandte Math - ematik und Physik 66 ( 2015 ) 2843 – 2854 . [ 31 ] T . J . Healey , S . Dharmavaram , Symmetry - breaking global bifurcation in a surface continuum phase - field model for lipid bilayer vesicles , SIAM Journal on Mathe - matical Analysis 49 ( 2017 ) 1027 – 1059 . [ 32 ] L . Ma , W . S . Klug , Viscous regularization and r - adaptive remeshing for finite element analysis of lipid membrane mechanics , Journal of Computational Physics 227 ( 2008 ) 5816 – 5835 . [ 33 ] F . Feng , W . S . Klug , Finite element modeling of lipid bilayer membranes , Journal of Computational Physics 220 ( 2006 ) 394 – 408 . 27 [ 34 ] C . M . Elliott , B . Stinner , Computation of two - phase biomembranes with phase dependent material parameters using surface finite elements , Commun . Comput . Phys 13 ( 2013 ) 325 – 36 . [ 35 ] S . Zhao , T . Healey , Q . Li , Direct computation of two - phase icosahedral equilibria of lipid bilayer vesicles , Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 314 ( 2017 ) 164 – 179 . [ 36 ] S . Dharmavaram , A gauge - fixing procedure for spherical fluid membranes and application to computations , Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and En - gineering 381 ( 2021 ) 113849 . [ 37 ] S . Dharmavaram , X . Wan , L . E . Perotti , A lagrangian thin - shell finite element method for interacting particles on fluid membranes , Membranes 12 ( 2022 ) 960 . [ 38 ] S . Dharmavaram , L . E . Perotti , A lagrangian formulation for interacting par - ticles on a deformable medium , Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 364 ( 2020 ) 112949 . [ 39 ] R . Capovilla , J . Guven , J . Santiago , Deformations of the geometry of lipid vesicles , Journal of Physics A : Mathematical and General 36 ( 2003 ) 6281 . [ 40 ] D . Steigmann , E . Baesu , R . E . Rudd , J . Belak , M . McElfresh , On the variational theory of cell - membrane equilibria , Interfaces and Free Boundaries 5 ( 2003 ) 357 – 366 . [ 41 ] D . N . Arnold , J . Rogness , M¨obius transformations revealed , Notes of the AMS 55 ( 2008 ) 1226 – 1231 . [ 42 ] X . Gu , Y . Wang , T . F . Chan , P . M . Thompson , S . - T . Yau , Genus zero surface conformal mapping and application to brain sufrace mapping , IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 23 ( 2004 ) 1 – 8 . [ 43 ] C . Zhu , R . H . Byrd , P . Lu , J . Nocedal , Algorithm 778 : L - bfgs - b : Fortran sub - routines for large - scale bound - constrained optimization , ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software ( TOMS ) 23 ( 1997 ) 550 – 560 . [ 44 ] S . L . Das , J . T . Jenkins , A higher - order boundary layer analysis for lipid vesicles with two fluid domains , Journal of Fluid Mechanics 597 ( 2008 ) 429 . [ 45 ] T . Healey , C . Papadopoulos , Bifurcation of hemitropic elastic rods under axial thrust , Quarterly of Applied Mathematics 71 ( 2013 ) 729 – 753 . [ 46 ] S . P . Pradhan , P . Saxena , Buckling of chiral rods due to coupled axial and rota - tional growth , Mathematics and Mechanics of Solids 26 ( 2021 ) 1675 – 1700 . [ 47 ] A . Agrawal , D . J . Steigmann , Boundary - value problems in the theory of lipid membranes , Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics 21 ( 2009 ) 57 – 82 . 28 Appendix A . Stretching and Bending Strains In this section , we express the stretching and bending strains explicitly in terms of the center curve of the rod ( i . e . r ) . The expressions we derive are used in this work to derive the first variations of these quantities and eventually used to compute the weak form in Sec . 3 . Recall that , since ν 3 ( S ) = ∥ r ′ ( S ) ∥ , we have ν 3 ( S ) = ∥ d r dS ( S ) ∥ = ∥ θ α ′ ( S ) f , α ( θ α ( S ) ) ∥ , ( A . 1 ) where the second equality follows from differentiating ( 17 ) . Differentiating ( 19 ) , we obtain d ′ 3 ( S ) = r ′′ ( S ) ν 3 − r ′ ( S ) ν 23 ∥ r ′ ( S ) ∥ ′ , ( A . 2 ) where ∥ r ′ ( S ) ∥ ′ = ν ′ 3 ( S ) . Plugging in the previous equation in ( 11b ) , using ( 18 ) , we obtain κ 2 ( S ) = d ′ 3 ( S ) · d 1 ( S ) − α 31 = 1 ν 3 ( S ) r ′′ ( S ) · n ( θ α ( S ) ) − α 31 , ( A . 3 ) where we have used r ′ ( S ) · d 1 ( S ) = 0 to eliminate the second term in ( A . 2 ) . Similarly , it follows by differentiating ( 18 ) and using ( 19 ) , ( 20 ) , ( 11c ) that κ 3 = d ′ 1 · d 2 − α 12 = θ ′ α n , α · (cid:16) r ′ ν 3 × n (cid:17) − α 12 , ( A . 4 ) where we have used d ′ 1 = n , α θ α ′ ( obtained by differentiating ( 18 ) ) in the second equal - ity . Finally , using ( c . f . , ( 11a ) ) κ 1 = − ( d ′ 3 · d 2 − α 32 ) κ 1 = − 1 ν 3 r ′′ · d 2 + α 32 = − 1 ν 3 r ′′ · (cid:16) r ′ ν 3 × n (cid:17) + α 32 , ( A . 5 ) where we have used r ′ ( S ) · d 2 = 0 and ( 18 ) and ( 20 ) . Appendix B . Derivation of First Variation of Strains In this section , we derive explicit expressions for the variations δν 3 , δκ 1 , δκ 2 , and δκ 3 which are used in weak form ( 46 ) . Note that quantities such as f , η , a µ , etc . , are defined on the surface Ω and are therefore functions of ( X 1 , X 2 ) . We recall the hat notation for evaluation of these 29 quantities along the curve ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) ( see Sec . 2 . 2 ) . In particular , ˆ f ( S ) = f ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , ˆ f , α ( S ) = f , α ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , etc . , ( B . 1 ) and , in a similar manner , for the variation η : ˆ η ( S ) = η ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , ˆ η , α ( S ) = η , α ( θ 1 ( S ) , θ 2 ( S ) ) , etc . ( B . 2 ) Note that the variation in the position of the center curve of the rod has two contribu - tions : variation of the underlying substrate and variation in the reference configuration of the rod . That is , δ r ( S ) = ˆ η ( S ) + ˆ f , α ( S ) ξ α ( S ) . ( B . 3 ) We drop explicit presence of S in the following while writing various expressions . Dif - ferentiating the previous equation , we obtain ( δ r ) ′ = (cid:16) ˆ η , α θ α ′ + ˆ f , αβ θ β ′ ξ α + ˆ f , α ξ α ′ (cid:17) , ( B . 4 ) and differentiating it again , we get ( δ r ) ′′ = (cid:16) ˆ η , αβ θ ′ α θ β ′ + ˆ η , α θ ′′ α + ˆ f , αβγ θ ′ β θ ′ γ ξ α + ˆ f , αβ θ ′′ β ξ α + 2ˆ f , αβ θ ′ β ξ α ′ + ˆ f , α ξ α ′′ (cid:17) . ( B . 5 ) The variations in the directors are as follows : δ d 1 = δ ˆ n = δ s ˆ n + ˆ n , α ξ α = − ( ˆ a µ ⊗ ˆ n ) · ˆ η , µ + ˆ n , α ξ α , ( B . 6 ) δ d 2 = δ ( d 3 × ˆ n ) = δ d 3 × ˆ n + d 3 × δ ˆ n , ( B . 7 ) δ d 3 = δ r ′ ν 3 − r ′ ν 23 δν 3 , ( B . 8 ) where we have used the surface variation of the normal , δ s ˆ n : = − ( ˆ a µ ⊗ ˆ n ) · ˆ η , µ , in ( B . 6 ) ( see ( 27 ) of [ 36 ] for details ) . We note the following results for the variations . Proposition 1 . δν 3 = r ′ ν 3 · (cid:16) ˆ η , α θ α ′ + ˆ f , αβ θ β ′ ξ α + ˆ f , α ξ α ′ (cid:17) ( B . 9 ) Proof . This directly follows from taking the variation of ν 3 = √ r ′ · r ′ . That is , δν 3 = δ √ r ′ · r ′ = 1 ∥ r ′ ∥ r ′ · δ r ′ = r ′ ∥ r ′ ∥ · (cid:16) η ( θ α ( φ ) ) + ˆ f , α ξ α (cid:17) ′ , where ( B . 9 ) follows from using ν 3 = ∥ r ′ ∥ and by differentiating the terms in the round 30 brackets . Proposition 2 . δκ 2 = 1 ν 3 (cid:110) ( δ r ) ′′ · ˆ n + r ′′ · δ ˆ n − ( κ 2 + α 31 ) δν 3 (cid:111) , ( B . 10 ) where δν 3 is given by ( B . 9 ) , ( δ r ) ′′ and δ ˆ n are given by ( B . 5 ) and ( B . 6 ) , respectively . Proof . Taking the variation of ( A . 3 ) , we obtain δκ 2 = 1 ν 3 (cid:16) ( δ r ) ′′ · ˆ n + r ′′ · δ ˆ n (cid:17) − r ′′ · ˆ n 1 ν 23 δν 3 . ( B . 11 ) Using the expression for κ 2 as given in ( A . 3 ) into the last term of ( B . 11 ) , we obtain δκ 2 = 1 ν 3 (cid:110) ( δ r ) ′′ · ˆ n + r ′′ · δ ˆ n − ( κ 2 + α 31 ) δν 3 (cid:111) . ( B . 12 ) Proposition 3 . δκ 1 = − 1 ν 3 (cid:110) ( δ r ) ′′ · d 2 + r ′′ · δ d 2 + ( κ 1 − α 32 ) δν 3 (cid:111) , ( B . 13 ) Proof . Taking the variation of ( A . 5 ) , we obtain δκ 1 = − 1 ν 3 (cid:16) ( δ r ) ′′ · d 2 + r ′′ · δ d 2 (cid:17) + r ′′ · d 2 1 ν 23 δν 3 . ( B . 14 ) Using the expression for κ 1 as given in ( A . 5 ) into the last term of ( B . 14 ) , we obtain δκ 1 = − 1 ν 3 (cid:110) ( δ r ) ′′ · d 2 + r ′′ · δ d 2 + ( κ 1 − α 32 ) δν 3 (cid:111) . ( B . 15 ) Proposition 4 . δ ˆ n , α = − ( ˆ f µ , α ⊗ ˆ n + ˆ f µ ⊗ ˆ n , α ) · ˆ η , µ − ( ˆ f µ ⊗ ˆ n ) · ˆ η , µα + ˆ n , αβ ξ β , ( B . 16 ) 31 Proof . Recall from ( 43 ) that δ n , α = − ( a β , α ⊗ n + a β ⊗ n , α ) · η , β − ( a β ⊗ n ) · η , βα . ( B . 17 ) It then follows that δ ˆ n , α = − ( ˆ f µ , α ⊗ ˆ n + ˆ f µ ⊗ ˆ n , α ) · ˆ η , µ − ( ˆ f µ ⊗ ˆ n ) · ˆ η , µα + ˆ n , αβ ξ β , ( B . 18 ) where the last term arises due to the variation in θ . Proposition 5 . δκ 3 = d 2 · δ ˆ n , α θ α ′ + d 2 · ˆ n , α ξ α ′ + θ α ′ ˆ n , α · δ d 2 , ( B . 19 ) where δ ˆ n , α is computed according to Prop . 4 . Proof . Taking the variation of ( A . 4 ) , we obtain δκ 3 = δ ( d ′ 1 ) · d 2 + d ′ 1 · δ d 2 = δ ( ˆ n , α θ α ′ ) · d 2 + δ d 2 · ˆ n , α θ α ′ , ( B . 20 ) where we have used the identity d ′ 1 = ˆ n , α θ α ′ to obtain the second inequality . Next , expanding the variation of the term in the round bracket , we obtain δκ 3 = ( δ ˆ n , α θ α ′ ( S ) + ˆ n , α ξ α ′ ) · d 2 + ˆ n , α θ α ′ ( S ) · δ d 2 ( B . 21 ) 32