Book Reviews STEVEN SHAPIN and SIMON SCHAFFER , Leviathan and the air - pump . Hobbes , Boyle , and the experimental life . Including a translation of Thomas Hobbes , Dialogus physicus de natura aeris , by Simon Schaffer , Princeton University Press , 1985 , 8vo , pp . xiv , 440 , illus . , £43 . 00 . In his History ofthe Royal Society of London , published in 1667 as an explanation and defence of men who spent their time weighing the air and anatomizing beetles , Thomas Sprat threw out many striking analogies between contemporary politics and the activities he defended . The Society fitted perfectly with the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance supposed to characterize the Restoration : it forbade discussion of politics or religion ; it limited dissent to matters about which agreement could be reached ; it stuck to matters of fact ; it promoted industry , sobriety , good judgment , and balance ; it opposed enthusiasts , dogmatists , radicals , and sinners . Shapin and Schaffer have dilated and developed Sprat ' s analogies and metaphors with the persistence and prolixity of the Society ' s cynosure , Robert Boyle . Their argument may be distilled as follows . Boyle wished to set aside a " social space " ( the term is theirs ) for the cultivation of experimental philosophy ; he also wanted to demonstrate to society at large how civic and religious dissent might be managed peacefully and productively ; in fact , he wanted both , for , as Shapin and Schaffer claim , " solutions to the problem of knowledge are solutions to the problem of social order " ( p . 332 ) . They discern three " technologies " in Boyle ' s effort to establish his " experimental language " ( p . 49 ) , his " disciplined collective social structure " ( p . 78 ) , his " space . . . so securely bounded that dispute could occur safely within [ it ] " ( p . 303 ) , his " experimental form of life " ( p . 314 ) . The technologies were : the material , that is , experimental apparatus , of which the air - pump was the exemplar ; the literary , or wordy descriptions of experiments performed , of the witnesses present and their reliability , and of the machines themselves ; and the social , or rules of engagement in philosophical debate , the pre - eminence of the matter of fact , and the down - grading or exclusion ofconjectures or theories about the causes and principles of certified phenomena . Withall , the experimental philosopher must be modest , open and flexible : " Till a man is sure he is infallible " , Boyle wrote , " it is not fit for him to be unalterable . " These " technologies " drew fire from the plentiful furnace of Thomas Hobbes , whom Shapin and Schaffer use as a detector ofthe aspects of Boyle ' s programme offensive to contemporaries who differed from him politically . Hobbes pointed out that the material technology leaked ; that the literary technology , at least in respect of the testimony of witnesses , had no force ( " no infinite number of grave and learned men " make certainty , " but authority " ) ; and that the social technology misconstrued the nature of knowledge . By making the matter of fact , and not the underlying principle , the main object of investigation , one forfeits the chance at truth and certainty and has no reliable way to exclude serious and dangerous error . Boyle and his precious air - pump would be an ongoing peril as long as experimental philosophers waffled over the nature of the " vacuum " . Hobbes knew from principle that a true void space , being immaterial , could not be ; others not so guided , like the noisy Cambridge philosopher Henry More , and the demonstrator of witches , Joseph Glanvil , admitted the void , and imagined that Boyle ' s experiments proved the existence of spaces for angels and spirits to play in . Hobbes ' s dogmatism in natural philosophy was of a piece with his concept of the State . In philosophy , the force of reason , working from sure principles in the style ofEuclidean geometry , must compel assent ; " who is so stupid " , he asked , " as both to mistake in geometry , and also to persist in it , when another detects his error to him ? " In the State , the King ' s authority should prevail over all dissent and dissenters in both civil and religious matters . Just here , loose talk about vacuums threatened the peace . For priests would set up as experts on the immaterial , and construct an independent base of power on the strength of their pseudo - knowledge , as they had in the past ; and so bring about subversions and rebellions . The method of creating and certifying knowledge , and the problem of establishing social order , forced Boyle and Hobbes to sharply 256 Book Reviews different conceptions of the relationship between organized religion and natural philosophy , as well as to conflicting evaluations of the relation between knowledge and fact . Shapin and Schaffer have directed attention to a capital problem in the historiography of early modern science : the creation ofa sustained practice of experimental natural philosophy . It is not a new problem . To go back no further than 1971 , Joseph Ben - David then emphasized that the success of what he indiscriminately called " scientists " in obtaining social acceptance for their claims to knowledge and thereby a role in society needed explanation ; and he dated the first full - dress staging of the role to Restoration England . Shapin and Schaffer have gone far beyond Ben - David in the detail of their reading ofthe texts and in the intricacy of their argument . They show that Boyle and his group shouldered a burden of proof when they claimed that the matter offact should be the basis oftheir science and their ethics . It was the old question ofthe hierarchy of knowledge : natural philosophy and its practitioners had a place in the schools , and hence in society ; to challenge them - not necessarily to replace them - required mobilization of more than a few bits of contrived experience interpreted as contradictory to traditional ideas . In this last connection Shapin and Schaffer ' s representation of Boyle ' s group as assertive and expansive , as missionaries of the model method for all social transactions , rings false . They write ( p . 340 ) : " The experimentalists ' task was to show others that their problems could be solved if they came to the experimental philosopher and to the space he occupied in Restoration culture . " But , as they also emphasize , it was just these problems - social problems - that the Royal Society excluded from its " space " . Their claim that , because Boyle and his followers advocated application of the results of their investigations to the support of religion , " their laboratories acquired a sacred status " ( p . 319 ) , should also be put down to over - enthusiasm . The enthusiasts provide much information of value even to those who may doubt the reach of their analogy between politics and natural philosophy . Their concept of literary and social technologies in the practice of experimental science deserves refinement and extension . Their account of the difficulties Boyle ' s contemporaries experienced in reproducing his experiments and even in making air - pumps deserves study by all historians of science . Assent to new experimental findings requires their replication , or at least a belief in the practicability of replication ; but repetition and confirmation , always problematic to some degree , become suspect where the technology involved is new or exotic , or when only a single machine capable of producing the new effects exists , or when copies of the competent machine can only be made to work by people who had practised on the original . These problems were not peculiar to the seventeenth century : the difficulties of replication , the unique machine , and the need for immediate experience with it to reproduce it , recur in modern particle physics . And finally , among the parts of Leviathan and the air - pump of utility apart from interpretation , is Schaffer ' s translation of Hobbes ' s response to Boyle , the Dialogusphysicus of 1661 and 1668 , presented in English for the first time . On the debit side , Leviathan has swollen so large that , as is usual with books on British natural philosophy , it has no room for relevant parallels from Europe . That is a pity . The Society ' s policy against conjecturing about causes , which Hooke wished to raise to the status of a by - law , also informed the practice of the Florentine Accademia del Cimento ; and Boyle ' s second technology , the witnessing of experiments by trustworthy observers , was common procedure in Florence , at Athanasius Kircher ' s " museum " at the Collegio Romano in Rome , in the various groups that anticipated the Paris Academy of Sciences , and elsewhere . This is not to impugn the reasons Shapin and Schaffer bring to explain the practices of the Royal Society of London , but to suggest that what was peculiar to the British case can only be discovered by comparing it with parallel happenings on the Continent . Shapin and Schaffer convey their intricate story and lesson clearly apart from a little jargon that does not always translate easily . They conduct us through " social spaces " ; " disciplinary spaces " ; " physical space " ; " abstract space " , where " virtual witnesses " , i . e . readers of Boyle ' s books , " could effectively be mobilized " ( p . 336 ) ; and , of course through space void of air . This spissitude bamboozles even its creators . " For Hobbes " , they write , " the rejection of vacuum was the elimination of a space within which dissension could take place " ( p . 109 ) . J . L . Heilbron University of California , Berkeley 257