Why Is Classical Theory Classical ? R . W . Connell The American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 102 , No . 6 . ( May , 1997 ) , pp . 1511 - 1557 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0002 - 9602 % 28199705 % 29102 % 3A6 % 3C1511 % 3AWICTC % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - W The American Journal of Sociology is currently published by The University of Chicago Press . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / ucpress . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long - term preservation and access to leading academic journals and scholarly literature from around the world . The Archive is supported by libraries , scholarly societies , publishers , and foundations . It is an initiative of JSTOR , a not - for - profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take advantage of advances in technology . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Thu Aug 30 13 : 42 : 46 2007 Why Is Classical Theory Classical ? ' R . W . Connell University of Sydney The familiar canon embodies an untenable foundation story of great men theorizing European modernity . Sociology actually emerged from a broad cultural dynamic in which tensions of liberalism and empire were central . Global expansion and colonization gave sociol - ogy its main conceptual framework and much of its data , key prob - lems , and methods . After early - 20th - century crisis , a profoundly re - constructed American discipline emerged , centered on difference and disorder within the metropole . The retrospective creation of a " classical " canon solved certain cultural dilemmas for this enterprise and generated a discipline - defining pedagogy , at the price of nar - rowing sociology ' s intellectual scope and concealing much of its his - tory . FOUNDATION STORIES In any recent introductory sociology textbook , whether written in the United States ( Calhoun , Light , and Keller 1994 ) or on the other side of the world ( Waters and Crook 1993 ) , there will almost certainly be , in the first few pages , a discussion of founding fathers , focused on Karl Marx , mile Durkheim , and Max Weber . The introductory chapter will proba - bly , though not certainly , also mention Auguste Comte , Herbert Spencer , and Georg Simmel . It will sometimes mention members of a second team : Ferdinand Tonnies , Friedrich Engels , Vilfredo Pareto , William Graham Sumner , Charles H . Cooley , and G . H . Mead . In the view normally presented to undergraduates , these founding fa - thers created sociology in response to dramatic changes in European soci - ety : the industrial revolution , class conflict , secularization , alienation , and the modern state . " It was above all a science of the new industrial society " Work for this article was supported by research funds from the University of Califor - nia , Santa Cruz , and the University of Sydney . I am grateful for research assistance from John Fisher and advice from Pam Benton , Craig Calhoun , Wally Goldfrank , Barbara Laslett , James O ' Connor , Jennifer Platt , Daniel Schulman , Andy Szasz , Bar - rie Thorne , students in my " classical theory " classes , and AJS reviewers . Direct corre - spondence to R . W . Connell , Faculty of Education A35 , University of Sydney , Sydney NSW 2006 , Australia . O 1997 by The University of Chicago . All rights reserved . 0002 - 9602 / 97 / 10206 - 0001 $ 01 . 50 AJS Volume 102 Number 6 ( May 1997 ) : 15 11 - 57 15 11 American Journal of Sociology ( Bottomore [ I9621 1987 , p . 7 ) . This view is repeated in more sophisticated form in advanced training . American graduate programs in sociology nor - mally have courses ( often required courses ) in which students are intro - duced to " classical theory " and make a close study of certain texts written by Marx , Durkheim , and Weber . This curriculum , in turn , is backed by a disciplinary history in which sociologists account for their origins in virtually the same terms . For in - stance Swingewood ' s Short History of Sociological Thought ( 1991 ) , a reli - able and well - regarded British text , presents a three - part narrative : " Foundations " ( leading up to Comte and Marx ) , " Classical Sociology " ( centering on Durkheim , Weber , and Marx ) , and " Modern Sociology . " Similarly , according to Miinch ( 1994 , 1 : ix ) in Germany , the " classical pe - riod . . . was the time when the founding fathers set the framework of sociolog [ ical ] theory . " Sociologists take this account of their origins seriously . The classical texts are widely cited , and it is not uncommon for research papers , mono - graphs , or treatises to identify themselves as having a Marxist , Durk - heimian , or Weberian approach ( e . g . , Wallace 1994 ) . A star - studded re - view of the field , Social Theory Today , began with a ringing declaration of " the centrality of the classics " ( Alexander 1987 ) . In the 1990s , commen - tary on classical texts remains a major genre of theory , even for those who think the process of interpretation should have an end ( Turner 1993 ) . To others , the genre is open - ended and can acquire new layers . One can go back in time and read Durkheim through the lens of Aristotle ( Challenger 1994 ) or come forward and read Durkheim through the lens of post - post - structuralism ( Lehmann 1993 ) . Unfamiliar texts of Weber can be read ( Drysdale 1996 ) , or familiar ones reread ( Kalberg 1996 ) . It is not just through direct commentary that the classical texts affect the discipline . As symbols of " what is most distinctively sociological " ( Sug - arman 1968 , p . 84 ) , they influence what kind of discussion counts as socio - logical theory , what theoretical language sociologists are to speak in , and what problems are most worth speaking about . It is now well recognized ( Seidman 1994 ) that the idea of classical theory embodies a " canon , " in the sense used by literary theory ( Guillory 1995 ) : a privileged set of texts , whose interpretation and reinterpretation defines a field . Critique of the canon has begun , and a search is under way for improvements . The journal Sociological Theory has been running a series , Neglected Theorists . Undergraduate textbooks are beginning a kind of affirmative action , adding W . E . B . Du Bois ( Macionis 1993 ) or Jane Addams ( Thio 1992 ) to the familiar list of founders . These responses are welcome as a modest broadening in ideas of the past . They do little to change the way of using the past that is embedded in the concept of " classical theory " and the pedagogy of classical texts . Classical Theory Nor have they altered sociologists ' general view of the structure of the discipline ' s history : a foundational moment arising from the internal transformation of European society ; discipline - defining texts written by a small group of brilliant authors ; a direct line of descent from them to us . There are two troubling anomalies , however , about this story . First , though classical theory has great prestige in principle , much of sociological research ignores it in practice . The bulk of quantitative sociology , as well as most ethnographic and life - history research , proceeds without reference to canonical theory or the problems it defines . The gap has led some com - mentators ( e . g . , Chafetz 1993 ) to argue in vehement terms that the classi - cal canon is now irrelevant and others to argue that it performs mainly a symbolic function , providing " rituals of solidarity " for the profession of sociology ( Stinchcombe 1982 ) . Second , sociologists in the " classical period " themselves did not believe this origin story . When Franklin H . Giddings ( 1896 ) , the first professor of sociology at Columbia University , published The Principles of Sociology , he named as the founding father - Adam Smith . Victor Branford ( 1904 ) , expounding " the founders of sociology " to a meeting in London , treated as the central figure - Condorcet . Durkheim ' s and Weber ' s academic con - temporaries did not see them as giants and often disregarded Marx . Turn - of - the - century sociology had no list of classics in the modern sense . Writers expounding the new science would commonly refer to Comte as the inventor of the term , to Charles Darwin as the key figure in , the theory of evolution , and then to any of a wide range of figures in the intellectual landscape of evolutionary speculation . Witness the account of the discipline in the second edition of Lester F . Ward ' s Dynamic Sociology . At the time of the first edition in 1883 , Ward observed , the term " sociology " had not been in popular use . But in the intervening decade a series of brilliant scientific contributions had estab - lished sociology as a popular concept . There were now research journals , university courses , and societies , and sociology " bids fair to become the leading science of the twentieth century , as biology has been that of the nineteenth " ( Ward 1897 , p . viii ) . Ward listed 37 notable contributors to the new science . The list included Durkheim and Tonnies but not Marx ( nor Weber , who had published little that was recognizable as " sociology " at this date , when the discipline was already institutionalized and interna - tional ) . The list of notables became a common feature in the textbooks of sociol - ogy that multiplied in the United States from the 1890s , Giddings ' s Princi - ples being one of the first . ( Ward had included Giddings in his list , and Giddings politely included Ward in his . ) The famous " Green Bible " of the Chicago school , Robert E . Park and Ernest W . Burgess ' s ( [ I9211 1924 , American Journal of Sociology p . 57 ) Introduction to the Science of Sociology , listed 23 " representative works in systematic sociology . " Simmel and Durkheim were among them but not Marx , Weber , or Pareto . Only one work by Weber was mentioned in this 1 , 000 - page volume , only in the notes , and Weber was given less attention than Walker , Wallace , Wheeler , Wittenmyer , Woods , or Worms . Clarence M . Case ' s Outlines of Introductory Sociology ( 1924 ) brushed aside Marx , mentioned Durkheim three times ( disparagingly ) , completely ignored Weber , and included - in what was also a 1 , 000 - page reader in sociology - no text from any of the three . As late as the 1920s , then , there was no sense that certain texts were discipline - defining " classics " demanding special study . Rather , there was a sense of a broad , almost impersonal , advance of scientific knowledge with the notables being simply leading members of the pioneering crew . Sociologists accepted the view , articulated early in the history of the disci - pline by Charles Letourneau ( 1881 , p . vi ) , that " the commencement of any science , however simple , is always a collective work . It requires the con - stant labour of many patient workmen . " This suggests an encyclopedic , rather than a canonical , view of the new science by its practitioners . Encyclopedism was certainly the note struck by interwar academic commentators other than Talcott Parsons . Pitirim A . Sorokin , expounding European thought to North Americans , took a broad view of who should be included in Contemporary Sociological The - ories ( 1928 ) . Pareto , Durkheim , Marx , and Weber were there , along with Le Play , Bruhnes , Galton , Coste , Gumplowicz , Petrajitzsky , and many more . Even more sweeping was the view from Howard Becker and Harry E . Barnes ' s Social Thought from Lore to Science ( 1938 ) . The members of the modern canon were certainly here - along with literally hundreds of other theorists and researchers , carefully abstracted and classified by na - tionality , date , and school . It was only in the following generation that the idea of a classical period and the short list of classical authors and canonical texts took hold . The process is strikingly documented in Platt ' s ( 1995 ) important study of the American reception of Durkheim ' s Rules of Sociological Method . Platt shows , by a detailed examination of both textbook references and special - ist studies , that Durkheim had only a modest presence in early American sociological thought . He was a known contemporary , but the Rules served mainly as a punching bag for arguments about the importance of the indi - vidual . The proportion of introductory texts that discussed Durkheim fell after his death to a low point in the 1930s . It then rose spectacularly , reaching nearly 90 % in the 1960s . The stunning reversal of Durkheim ' s reputation began in the late 1930s and consolidated in the 1950s . The Rules became a must - read classic , for the first time , half a century after it was published . Classical Theory Detailed studies of this kind immediately confront us with the larger question , Why did a canon come into existence at all ? Why does sociology now have the configuration of constructed memories known as " classical theory " ? Psychoanalysis aside , sociology is the only one of the social sci - ences to take such an intense interest in the writings of a small group of putative founding fathers . Political scientists remember Niccolh Machia - velli and James Bryce , psychologists sometimes discuss Wilhelm Wundt and Sigmund Freud , educationists remember John Amos Comenius and often read John Dewey , some economists still read Adam Smith and Da - vid Ricardo , and historians honor - though they do not often read - Jules Michelet and Leopold von Ranke . None of these disciplines , however , shares sociology ' s identity - defining focus on a small group of classical the - orists nor its pedagogy of canonical texts . To understand why this is so and what the classical canon means for modern sociology , it is not sufficient to deconstruct the canon and show its artifactual character . Nor is it sufficient to trace the waxing and waning " influence " of particular theorists , though these are useful steps along the way . The question concerns the structure of sociological thought as a whole . Accordingly we must examine the history of sociology as a collec - tive product - the shared concerns , assumptions , and practices making up the discipline at various times - and the shape given to that history by the changing social forces that constructed the discipline . SOCIOLOGY , GLOBAL DIFFERENCE , AND EMPIRE Sociology as a teaching discipline and a discourse in the public arena was constructed at a particular time and place : the final two decades of the 19th century and the first decade of the 20th century , in the great cities and university towns of France , the United States , Britain , Germany , and , a little later , Russia . The conventional foundation story interprets these places as the locale of a process of modernization , or capitalist industrialization , internal to European and North American society . In this view - well illustrated by Nisbet ' s ( 1967 ) formula of " the two revolutions , " industrial and demo - cratic , and by Giddens ' s ( 1989 ) formula of industrialization and urban - ism - sociology arose from the experience of modernity . It was an attempt to interpret the new society being brought into being . Even the revisionist historiography of Therborn ( 1976 ) , Seidman ( 1983 ) , Lepenies ( 1988 ) , and Ross ( 1991 ) maintains this internalist focus . The main difficulty with this view is that it does not square with the most relevant evidence - the texts that sociologists at the time were writ - ing and reading . This evidence is unfamiliar because of the canon itself . Most sociologists today do not read early sociological texts except the ca - American Journal of Sociology nonical ones . However surprising it may now seem , most general treatises or textbooks of sociology , up to the First World War , did not have a great deal to say about the modernization or the contemporary structure of the society the authors lived in . Their main interest was elsewhere . Giddings ' s Readings in Descriptive and Historical Sociology ( 1906 ) , typical in this respect , ranged from polyandry in Ceylon via matrilineal survivals among the Tartars to the mining camps of California . It was so little focused on modernity that it took as its reading on " sovereignty " a medieval rendering of the legend of King Arthur . The evidence of college textbooks needs not correspond to the research focus of sociology , but on this topic too , we have abundant evidence , col - lected by no less a figure than Durkheim . Between 1898 and 1913 , Durk - heim and his hardworking collaborators produced 12 issues of LtAnne ' e sociologique , an extraordinarily detailed international survey of each year ' s publications in or relevant to sociology . In these issues , nearly 2 , 400 reviews were published . ' Modern industrial society was certainly in - cluded : the journal published reviews on the American worker , the Euro - pean middle class , technology in German industries , books by Beatrice and Sidney Webb , by Werner Sombart , by Charles Booth on London pov - erty , even a work by J . Ramsay MacDonald , later Labour prime minister of Britain . But works focused on the recent or contemporary societies of Europe and North America made up only a minority of the content of L ' Anne ' e sociologique - about 28 % of the reviews . Even fewer were fo - cused on " the new industrial society , " since the reviews on Europe in - cluded treatises on peasant folktales , witchcraft in Scotland , crime in As - turias , and the measurements of skulls . The bulk of the research material of sociology , as Durkheim and his colleagues documented it , did not concern modernity . Twice as many of the reviews concerned ancient and medieval societies , colonial or remote societies , or global surveys of human history . Studies of holy war in an - cient Israel , Malay magic , Buddhist India , technical points of Roman law , medieval vengeance , Aboriginal kinship in central Australia , and the legal systems of primitive societies were more characteristic of " sociology " as seen in LtAnne ' e sociologique than studies of new technology or bureau - cracy . The pattern is exactly that of textbooks like Giddings ' s ( 1906 ) . The enormous spectrum of human history that the sociologists took as their domain was organized by a central idea : difference between the I have counted only reviews in large type , whatever their length , not the brief notices in small type in the early issues nor the listings of titles without reviews . The reviews concerning WesternINorthern Europe and modern North America increase with time : they average 24 % of all reviews in the first six issues , 28 % in the next five issues , and 32 % in the bumper issue in the year before the war . Classical Theory civilization of the metropole and an Other whose main feature was its primitiveness . I will call this the idea of " global difference . " Presented in many different forms , this contrast pervades the sociology of the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Together with the idea of " progress " from the primitive to the advanced ( discussed below ) , it is both the key assumption of sociological research and the major object of sociological theory . The idea of global difference was often conveyed by a discussion of " origins . " In this genre of writing , sociologists would posit an original state of society ( or some aspect of society , such as law , morality , or marriage ) , then speculate on the process of evolution that must have led forward from there . The bulk of the three volumes of Spencer ' s Principles of Soci - ology ( [ 1874 - 771 1893 - 96 ) , was spent in telling such a story for every type of institution that Spencer could identify : domestic institutions , political institutions , ecclesiastical institutions , and so forth . Spencer proceeded as if the proof of social evolution was not complete without an evolutionary narrative , from origins to the contemporary form , for each and every case . ( This was a much more important feature of his theorizing than the " soci - ety as organism " analogy for which he is now mostly remembered . ) The formula of development from a primitive origin to an advanced form was widespread in Victorian biological and social thought ( Burrow 1966 ) . Sociologists simply applied a logic that their audience would take for granted . The same architecture is found in works as well known as Durkheim ' s Division of Labor in Society ( [ I8931 1964 ) and as obscure as Fairbanks ' s Introduction to Sociology ( [ I8961 1901 ) . In none of these works was the idea of an " origin " taken as a concrete historical question . It could have been . Knowledge of early societies was growing dramatically in these decades . Troy , Mycenae , and Knossos were excavated , Flinders Petrie systematized the archaeology of Egypt , the first evidence of Sumerian culture was uncovered at Lagash and Nippur ( Stiebing 1993 ) . But sociology was not interested in where and when a particular originating event occurred . This insouciance was not confined to origins . Treatise after treatise offered surveys of social evolution or contrasts of primitive and advanced institutions , with only the slightest reference to when the major changes actually happened . Time functioned in sociological thought mainly as a sign of global difference . What was early could be taken to be Other . Durkheim did not have to find a precise time in the past for " segmentary societies " ; they existed in his own day . In a move characteristic of sociol - ogy at the time , Durkheim used the example of the Kabyle of Algeria as well as the ancient Hebrews and made no conceptual distinction between the cases . He knew about the Hebrews because the ancient texts were in his library . How did he know about Kabylia ? Because the French had conquered Algeria earlier in the century , and at the time Durkheim wrote , American Journal of Sociology the French colonists were engaged in evicting the local population from the best land ( Bennoune 1988 ) . Given the recent history of violent con - quest , peasant rebellion , and debate over colonization , no French intellec - tual could fail to know something about the Kabyle . For the curious , the social life of France ' s North African subjects was being documented in great detail by a series of private and official inquiries ( Burke 1980 ) . This was far from being the only French adventure into the world of the primitive Other . In the dozen years before Division of Labor was pub - lished , the armies of the French republic had moved out from Algeria to conquer Tunisia , had fought a war in Indochina , conquered Annam and Tonkin ( modern Vietnam ) , and seized control of Laos and Cambodia , and had established a protectorate over Madagascar . Under the Berlin Treaty of 1885 , French trading posts in central and western Africa became the basis of a whole new empire . As Durkheim was writing and publishing the Division of Labor and The Rules of Sociological Method , French colonial armies were engaged in a spectacular series of campaigns against the Mus - lim regimes of inland north and west Africa , which produced vast con - quests from the Atlantic almost to the Nile . Impressive as this growth was , it was only part of a larger process . The British Empire , also a maritime empire with a preindustrial history , similarly gained a new dynamism and grew to vast size in the 19th century ( Cain and Hopkins 1993 ) . Imperial expansion went overland as well as overseas . The 13 - colony United States became one of the most dynamic imperial powers throughout the 19th century , with about 80 years of over - land conquest and settlement ( the " westward expansion " ) , followed by a shorter period of overseas conquest . The tsarist overland conquests , begun in earlier centuries , were extended in the Far East and Central Asia . In the later part of the 19th century , they were consolidated by Russian settle - ment . Prussia ' s expansion as an imperial power began with conquest within Europe - in the process , setting up a relationship between domi - nant and conquered races in the East that became the subject of the young Weber ' s first sociological research ( Weber [ I8941 1989 ) . German overseas colonies in Africa and the Pacific followed the formation of the Reich in 1871 . By the time the global system of rival empires reached its violent crisis in the Great War of 1914 - 18 , a world - historical change had been accomplished - the creation of a world - embracing social order . In this light , the time and place where the discipline of sociology was created take a new significance . The locales were the urban and cultural centers of the major imperial powers at the high tide of modern imperial - ism . They were the " metropole , " in the useful French term , to the larger colonial world . The intellectuals who created sociology were very much aware of this . One of the major tasks of sociological research - and of L ' Anne ' e sociologique as a record of sociological knowledge - was to Classical Theory gather up the information yielded by the colonizing powers ' encounter with the colonized world . The idea of global difference was not invented by European and North American intellectuals . It was given to them by the process of economic and colonial expansion , inscribed in the social structure of the empires that the North Atlantic powers constructed . The birth of sociology cannot be understood by internalist models , then , because it crucially involves the structure of world society . It can only be understood in geopolitical terms . Since Kiernan ' s ( [ I9691 1986 ) remarkable survey , The Lords of Human Kind , historians have begun to grasp the immense impact that the global expansion of North Atlantic power had on popular culture ( MacDonald 1994 ) and intellectual life ( Asad 1973 ; Said 1993 ) in the metropole , as well as in the colonies . It would be astonishing if the new science of society had escaped the impact of the greatest social change in the world at the time . In fact , the relationship was intimate . Sociology was formed within the culture of imperialism and embodied a cultural response to the colo - nized world . This fact is crucial in understanding the content and method of sociology as well as the discipline ' s cultural significance . THE CONTENT AND METHOD OF SOCIOLOGY The Concept of Progress As the civilized Todd ( 1918 , p . vii ) remarked ( the first , and perhaps still the only , professor of sociology to introduce Japanese cherry - blossom paintings into a discussion of social theory ) : " From Comte onward sociolo - gists have pretty generally agreed that the only justification for a Science of Society is its contributions to a workable theory of progress . " At the inaugural meeting of the American Sociological Society , Ward ' s ( 1907 ) presidential address announced that sociology was a science that " has gone farther even than physics , " since the basic law of social evolution had been discovered along with its explanation . As Comte had argued , sociology itself embodied intellectual progress , its place " definitely fixed " ( Ward 1907 ) at the summit of the hierarchy of sciences . John Stuart Mill ( [ I8431 1891 , p . 596 ) , the sharpest mind among all whose idea of social science was shaped by Comte , had cautioned against equating historical change with improvement . Few of the sociologists took heed . Spencer ' s first social theory , in Social Statics ( [ I8501 1954 ) , made moral improvement the touchstone of analysis of " the social state . " Both the teaching enterprise of sociology departments ( as documented in text - books such as Giddings ' s Principles [ I8961 or Fairbanks ' s Introduction [ 1901 ] ) , and the popular expositions of the new science ( such as Spencer ' s Study of Sociology [ ( 1873 ) 18871 or Benjamin Kidd ' s Social Evolution [ 1898 ] ) , centered on the moral , intellectual , and material improvement of American Journal of Sociology society . Discovering and expounding laws of progress was the core of what sociology meant in those two generations . There was , however , a shift of meaning within the concept of progress . In Comte ' s writings , the idea of progress , while extremely generalized , mostly had to do with the ancient - medieval - modern sequence within Western culture that was the common property of European intellectuals , worked up in different forms by Hegel and Marx . ( In some passages in Comte ' s SystBme de politique positive [ ( 1851 - 54 ) 1875 - 771 Western Eu - rope is clearly also the locale for the transition to sociolatry , the religion of the final stage of human progress . ) Sociological critiques of Comte in the next generation rejected the arbitrariness of his system and demanded an empirical base for the concept of progress . This was the common ground between Spencer and Letourneau , and it is a fact of the greatest significance that both turned to the ethnographical dividend of empire as their main source of sociological data . Spencer ' s Principles of Sociology documented its evolutionary stories from the writ - ings of European travelers , missionaries , settlers , and colonial officials , as well as historians . Spencer ' s reference list for " Political Institutions , " for instance , ranged from the journals of the American explorers , Lewis and Clark , through the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and Thirty - Three Years in Tasmania and Victoria , to that riveting work , A Phrenolo - gist among the Todas . Letourneau ' s Sociology , Based upon Ethnography , while setting the facts out in a finer grid , was very similar in its sources . For instance , discussing the condition of women , Letourneau ( 1881 , pp . 182 - 83 ) , in two pages , cites social facts from China , Cochin China ( Viet - nam ) , Burma , India , Afghanistan , Africa , ancient Rome , and Arabia - apart from the last two , a roll call of British and French colonial expansion in the 19th century . By the time sociology was being institutionalized in the final decade of the 19th century , the central proof of progress , and therefore the main intellectual ground on which the discipline rested , was the contrast of metropole and colonial Other . Sociologists did not debate the reality of this contrast ; they debated how it should be interpreted - whether through physical evolution from lower to higher human types or through an evolu - tion of mind and social forms and whether competition or cooperation was the motor of progress . In this context , Durkheim ' s Division of Labor was no founding text . It was a late intervention in a long - running debate . Durkheim quarreled with Comte and Spencer about how to explain the evolution of society , and he drastically reformulated the relation between social change and morality . Yet he did so by offering new " laws " within the same problematic , not by establishing a new framework . The concern with progress was not a " value " separable from the science ; it was constitutive of sociological knowledge . The arguments of Ward , Classical Theory Du Bois , L . T . Hobhouse , Durkheim , Spencer , and Comte himself are absurd if one does not presuppose the reality of progress . It was as an account of progress that " sociology " spread to colonized peoples and others beyond the metropole . Spencer ' s sociology , for instance , was being de - bated in India well before the turn of the century ( Chatterjee 1986 ) and , in translation , became a significant influence on the intellectuals of Meiji Japan ( Tominaga 1994 ) and the Chinese republican movement ( Grieder 1981 ) . Even Du Bois ( [ I9041 1978 , p . 54 ) presented his research program on the American Negro community within the framework of progress , as a study of " the evolution of a vast group of men from simpler primitive conditions to higher more complex civilization . " Race and Gender The topics addressed by the new discipline also reveal its underlying con - nection with empire . Internalist accounts of classical sociology emphasize class , alienation , and industrialization and pay little attention to such top - ics as race , gender , and sexuality . " Race , " for instance , was not one of the " unit - ideas of sociology " recognized by Nisbet ( 1967 ) and does not even appear in the index of Swingewood ' s Short History or Miinch ' s Sociologi - cal Theory . But a social science based on the social relations of empire must deal with race , and a social science concerned with evolutionary progress and hierarchies of populations must deal with gender and sexu - ality . It is , then , an important fact that race , gender , and sexuality were core issues in sociology . When Du Bois ( [ 1950 ] 1978 , p . 281 ) proposed in 1901 that the color line was " the problem of the twentieth century , " he was saying nothing unusual for the time . The first " sociology " published in the United States , in the 1850s , was a defense of slave society in the South ( Ross 1991 , p . 32 ) . After slavery was abolished , the wider colonial world remained as the object of sociological knowledge and was persistently interpreted in terms of race . Letourneau ' s ( 1881 , pp . 5 - 6 ) " ethnography " meant a science of racial differences , and his Sociology opened with an enumeration of the human races : the black man , " whose brain is small " ; the yellow man , whose brain " is better shaped " ; and the white man , who has " ascended a few degrees higher in the organic hierarchy " and whose " brain is developed . " Spencer did not go so far but still displayed a genial contempt for the " primitive " races . Ward ( 1897 ) was confident that global race conflict re - flected the superiority of the European races and that universal progress was dependent on their universal triumph . The extermination of other races was possible ; at best , they could join the march of progress on the Europeans ' terms . The Canadian author of Sociology Applied to Practical American Journal of Sociology Politics ( Crozier 1911 ) was blunter . To him , sociology proved that race mixing was a " crime " that would lead to the degeneracy of the white races ' culture . The solution was political : form a party of evolution and prevent miscegenation . Here sociology reflected , in the most direct way , the social relations of imperialism . Racial hierarchies were the characteristic outcome of North Atlantic world power , the rule over indigenous peoples , and the creation of plantation economies and colonies of settlement . This is not to say that all sociologists were racists , though some certainly were . Others , Du Bois and Durkheim among them , suffered from racism . The point is , rather , that racial hierarchy on a world scale was a perception built into the con - cept of " progress " and a central part of what sociology was thought to be about : " It is evident that , despite the greater consideration now shown for the rights of the lower races , there can be no question as to the absolute ascendancy in the world today of the Western peoples and of Western civilisation " ( Kidd 1898 , p . 316 ) . Nor was there any question about the importance of gender and sexual - ity . Comte in his Systbme gave considerable prominence to the position of women , and his famous conflict with Mill included sharp differences over the subjection of women . When Spencer came to write the substan - tive part of The Principles of Sociology , the very first set of institutions he addressed was the " domestic . " By this he meant what we now call " gender " issues : kinship , family , and the status of women . Letourneau treated marriage and the family before property , and at greater length . He dealt with sexuality ( " the genesic need " ) near the start of Sociology , with an impressive absence of Victorian delicacy - menstruation , infanti - cide , prostitution , promiscuity , and sodomy were all on the agenda . In the next generation , Ward devoted the longest chapter of Pure Soci - ology ( 1903 ) to developing a sociology of sex and gender , under the rubric of the " Phylogenetic Forces . " The longest coherent argument in Gemein - schaft and Gesellschaft ( Tonnies [ I8871 1955 , pp . 174 - 91 ) was devoted to gender difference . Much of Sumner ' s Folkways ( [ I9061 1934 ) was about gender arrangements and sexual customs , the more startling the better . William I . Thomas ( 1907 ) published a whole book about sex and gender , and his work on these topics was duly reviewed in L ' Anne ' e sociologique . Some of this interest can be explained on internalist lines . Ward was certainly influenced by American feminism . Spencer had begun as a parti - san of feminism , though he rapidly retreated ( Paxton 1991 ) . The Study of Sociology included an essay arguing the physical and mental inferiority of women , who , because of their commitment of energy to childbearing , stopped evolving earlier than men . The way gender and sexual issues were taken up in sociology , however , was very much affected by evolutionary concerns and the issues of empire . Classical Theory In the imperial context , racial and sexual issues were not separate . The interplay between them was most powerful in the colonies , and its vehe - mence is hard to grasp for those unfamiliar with the history of empire . In the later 19th century , the expansion of the North Atlantic powers was accompanied by a growing fear of miscegenation , a hardening color line , contempt of the colonizers for the sexuality or masculinity of the colonized ( Sinha 1995 ) , and fears of racial swamping that gave rise to panics about the " yellow peril , " pogroms against the Chinese in the United States and Australia , and racist immigration policies . Echoes are heard even in the most abstract texts from the metropole . Giddings ( 1896 , p . xiii ) , expound - ing his theme of " consciousness of kind , " remarked that " living creatures do not commonly mate with individuals of other than their own species , " and his first example was " white men do not usually marry black women . " These concerns underlie the discipline ' s interest in eugenics . This pseu - doscience of controlled evolution by selective breeding of humans was then regarded as a reputable and even important part of sociology . Francis Galton , the leading advocate of eugenics , was carefully evaluated by Durkheim in The Division of labor . Galton ' s ( 1904 ) work was published in the American Journal of Sociology , noticed in L ' Anne ' e sociologique , and , in due course , reprinted in Park and Burgess ' s ( 1924 ) famous text - book . Method : The Imperial Gaze and Grand Ethnography The most striking feature of sociological method was its bold abstraction . Comte offered cultural " laws " of vast scope , and the inaugural meeting of the American Sociological Society , 60 years later , was still celebrating tremendous " laws " of social evolution . As far away as the colonial boom city of Melbourne , we find an evolutionary social scientist formulating broad generalizations about archaic and modern society ( Hearn 1878 ) . Durkheim ( [ I8951 1964 , p . 139 ) argued convincingly that this approach was the basis of the whole enterprise : " Comparative sociology is not a particular branch of sociology ; it is sociology itself , insofar as it ceases to be purely descriptive and aspires to account for facts . " The comparative method meant assembling examples of the particular social " species " un - der study and examining their variations . For all Durkheim ' s criticisms of Spencer , that was exactly what Spencer ' s Principles of Sociology had done . Comparative method rested on a one - way flow of information , a capac - ity to examine a range of societies from the outside , and an ability to move freely from one society to another - features that all map the relation of colonial domination . Letourneau ( 1881 , p . 15 ) expressed the sociological point of view in a striking image : " Let us imagine an observer placed American Journal of Sociology somewhere high up in air above our terrestrial equator , far enough from the globe on which we live to take in a whole hemisphere at one glance , and yet close enough to distinguish with the aid , if need be , of a magni - fying - glass , the continents and the seas , the great ranges of mountains , the white frozen tops of the polar regions , etc . etc . " Sociology had limited interest in " ethnography " in the modern sense , the detailed description of a whole way of life . Witness the marginalization of Du Bois , whose Philadelphia Negro ( 1899 ) was perhaps the finest eth - nography of the day . ( The much greater attention given Chicago ethno - graphies from the 1920s is part of the argument below . ) Rather , it was the structure of empire as a whole that provided the basis of sociological knowledge . Sociology ' s comparative method embodied the imperial gaze on the world . This is seen most fully in surveys such as Spencer ' s Descriptive Sociol - ogy and the collective project of the Anne ' e sociologique . Perhaps the most striking was Hobhouse , Wheeler , and Ginsberg ' s Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peoples ( 1915 ) , an attempt to overcome the unsystematic use of data in theories of social evolution by providing a statistical base for comparative sociology . Hobhouse and his colleagues surveyed the whole world , collecting information on more than 500 societ - ies . They classified societies by grade of economic development and tried to establish correlations of development with institutional patterns of law , government , family , war , and social hierarchy . These surveys are virtually forgotten now , but the imperial gaze can also be found in more familiar texts . Sumner ' s Folkways , published in 1906 , is his last major work and perhaps the most influential book written by an American in the " classical " period . It sought to " put together all that we have learned from anthropology and ethnography about primitive men and primitive society " ( Sumner 1934 , p . 2 ) . The whole world and the whole of history was the field of Sumner ' s gaze . Take an entirely typical passage : In Molembo a pestilence broke out soon after a Portuguese had died there . After that the natives took all possible measures not to allow any white man to die in their country . On the Nicobar islands some natives who had just begun to make pottery died . The art was given up and never again at - tempted . White men gave to one Bushman in a kraal a stick ornamented with buttons as a symbol of authority . The recipient died leaving the stick to his son . The son soon died . Then the Bushmen brought back the stick lest all should die . Until recently no building of incombustible materials could be built in any big town of the central province of Madagascar , on account of some ancient prejudice . A party of Eskimos met with no game . ( Sumner 1934 , p . 25 ) Classical Theory Few cases delayed the author for more than two sentences . As this passage shows , for Sumner , the force of the argument did not lie in the depth of his ethnographic understanding . It was provided by the assemblage itself , the synoptic view of human affairs from a great height . Durkheim ' s ( 1964 , pp . 174 - 77 ) own use of the comparative method , for instance , in his analysis of transition from the horde to segmental societies , has been mentioned above . The imperial gaze can also be observed in Weber , in those late works where he was deliberately setting out to write sociology . In the manuscripts collected after his death and published as Economy and Society , Weber ( [ I9221 1978 ) had sometimes used the method of " ideal - types " with which the canon associates him . But more often he used the same procedure as Durkheim and Sumner , comparing actual social forms . The Kategorienlehre of part 1 set up the categories of theory in such a way as to require transhistorical content . In the studies of part 2 , Weber swept across continents and civilizations in vast compar - ative analyses of economic forms , authority , religious groups , states , mu - sic , cities , and so forth . As Tenbruck ( [ I9751 1989 ) has suggested that the religious sociology provides whatever thematic unity there is in Weber ' s work , I will take an example from the chapter , " Religious Groups " : Normally , the god of a locality and his cultic association reach fullest devel - opment on the foundation of the city as a separate political association with corporate rights , independent of the court and the person of the ruler . Con - sequently , such a full development of the local god is not found in India , the Far East , or Iran , and occurred only in limited measure in northern Europe , in the form of the tribal god . On the other hand , outside the sphere of autonomous cities this development occurred in Egypt , as early as the stage of zoolatric religion , in the interest of apportioning districts . From the city - states , local deities spread to confederacies such as those of the Israel - ites , Aetolians , etc . ( Weber 1978 , pp . 414 - 15 ) The obvious risk in such a sweeping use of comparative method is inco - herence . The problem could be overcome with a variation of the com - parative method whose dramatic quality produced some of the best - remembered " classical " texts . This approach might be called " grand eth - nography , " in contrast with the close - focus fieldwork of Franz Boas , Du Bois , or the French specialists on Algeria and Morocco . Spencer pioneered it , with the broad contrast ( in part 5 of Principles of Sociology ) of " the militant type of society " oriented toward war , and " the industrial type of society " oriented toward peaceful production . But Spencer saw these two types of society existing at the same time - he feared , indeed , the tendency of empire to foster militarism in his own day . The more usual style of grand ethnography was built on the idea of global difference . It presented holistic accounts of the societies found at the origin American Journal of Sociology and the end of progress , on the understanding that " in all its leading char - acteristics - political , legal , religious , economic - archaic society presents a complete contrast to that in which we live " ( Hearn 1878 , p . 4 ) . The famous contrast of gemeinschaft and gesellschaft is grand ethnog - raphy in this sense , identifying polar states of society . Tonnies reached back to Henry Sumner Maine ' s account of Indian society in expounding gemeinschaft , came forward to expound the state as an association charac - teristic of gesellschaft . Durkheim ' s Division of Labor was a more rigorous grand ethnography , specifying the basis of the contrast in the division of labor and more systematically following out its ramifications at a given point in social evolution . It is not surprising that L ' Anne ' e sociologique took a persistent interest in attempts to distinguish primitive from modern law , in German theories of Naturvolker and their distinction from Kul - tuwolker , and in attempts to formulate the nature of primitive religion . Grand ethnography was the artistic climax of Comtean sociology , the literary form taken by the theory of progress as the rhetoric of the " struggle for existence " was bypassed . It replaced Spencer ' s shapeless vision of his - tory with a well - defined succession of social types . SOCIOLOGY IN THE POLITICAL CULTURE OF EMPIRE The late - 19th - and early - 20th - century world had several groups of intel - lectuals grappling with the analysis of society . The mobilization of Euro - pean and American workers had produced an intellectual ferment , leading to Mikhail Bakunin ' s analysis of religion and the state , Marx ' s formula - tion of the structure of the capitalist economy , Ferdinand Lassalle ' s strat - egy of mass organization , Fabian socialism , and Georges Sorel ' s revolu - tionary syndicalism . The mobilization of women around the franchise , married women ' s property rights , temperance , and women ' s wages and working conditions had produced another ferment . Feminist ideas were articulated by intellectuals from John Stuart Mill to Henrik Ibsen , Susan B . Anthony , the Pankhursts , Clara Zetkin , Olive Schreiner , and Marianne Weber . The claim that Harriet Martineau was the " first woman sociolo - gist " ( Hoecker - Drysdale 1992 ) is anachronistic , but the story of Marti - neau - novelist , political economist , translator of Comte , travel writer , and reformer - should alert us to the complexity of the milieu in which sociology arose . Beyond the metropole , there were many intellectuals in these decades who looked at modernity from the standpoint of non - European cultures and at Europeans from the standpoint of the colonized . Changes in culture and social life were central issues to writers as diverse as Jamal ad - Din al - Afghani in the Islamic Middle East ( Ghamari - Tabrizi 1994 ) , Bankim - Classical Theory chandra Chatterjee ( 1986 ) in Bengal , and revolutionary activists such as Sun Yat - sen ( [ I9271 1975 ) in China . From this range of groups , a range of discourses about society emerged , of which " sociology " was only one . The anarchist Bakunin ( [ I8731 1973 ) , developing critiques of Comte on one side and Marx on the other , recog - nized at an astonishingly early stage that a " science of society " might ratio - nalize the interests of a particular group ( an insight that launched a long debate about intellectuals and the " new class " ) . Following Bakunin ' s lead , we should consider the specific social location in which sociology devel - oped and the cultural issues to which it was a response . Sociology as a collective practice - that is to say , a set of institutions , a pedagogy , and a genre of writing - developed in a specific social location : among the men of the liberal bourgeoisie in the metropole . Those who wrote sociology were a mixture of engineers and doctors , academics , jour - nalists , clerics , and a few who ( like Weber after his breakdown ) could live on their family capital . This is not to say that the sociologists were , generally speaking , either rich or apologists for the rich . Ross ( 1991 ) points to the social distance between the academic makers of American sociology and the capitalist entrepreneurs of American industrialization . Weber was a fierce critic of the ruling class of the German Reich , and Durkheim was no friend of the French aristocracy . Nevertheless , they were beneficiaries of both class and gender hierarchies . Most lived modest bourgeois lives , supported by the domestic labor of women in patriarchal households . Their social interests were well captured by Comte ' s celebrated slogan , " Order and Progress . " Men of this sort began to discuss " the social science , " as Mill called it , from the 1850s on , in a diffuse movement to apply scientific thinking to society and to promote moral improvement . The successful Association for the Promotion of Social Science was set up in London as early as 185 7 ( Burrow 1966 ) , soon copied in Boston ( and thus the remote ancestor of the American Sociological Association of today ) . The same movement pro - duced a heavily moralized " social science " curriculum in American col - leges from the 1860s ( Bernard and Bernard [ I9431 1965 ) . Individual at - tempts to synthesize the facts of primitive life and social progress ( such as Edward Tylor ' s Primitive Culture [ 1873 ] ) counterpointed attempts to establish societies and institutes to formulate a science of man . The latter , in France , gave rise to the first chair to be named " sociology " - to which Letourneau was appointed in 1885 ( Clark 1973 ) . In the 1890s " social science " curricula in American colleges , already fissuring , began to be replaced by more self - consciously scientific courses called " sociology . " Their claim to scientificity was closely connected with the shift to comparative method and imperial gaze discussed above . Hence American Journal of Sociology the world - spanning content of the first generation of sociology textbooks . Named sociology departments were established , undergraduate courses multiplied , and a market for textbooks rapidly developed ( Morgan 1983 ) . This was the historical moment registered in Ward ' s discussion of the foundation , mentioned above . Europe was a little slower to set up depart - ments of sociology but quicker with associations and journals . By the outbreak of the Great War , sociological societies , journals of sociology , and university courses in sociology were established institutions in most countries of the metropole . International links were built up , for instance , through RenC Worms ' s Institut International de Sociologie , launched in 1893 , through visits both ways across the North Atlantic and through the journals . These provided a practical basis for sociology to develop as an international ( more strictly , intermetropolitan ) cultural for - mation . Histories that emphasize the distinctness of national traditions ( e . g . , Levine 1995 ) underestimate the extent to which scholars of the period were oriented to an international academic milieu and conceived of " soci - ology " as a universal science . Even a minor figure such as Stuckenberg ( 1903 ) , the author of a now - forgotten evolutionary sociology , traveled from Boston to Berlin , Paris , and London collecting his materials and became well informed about the state of sociology on both sides of the Atlantic . Overlapping the academic initiatives , and at first more important , was a genre of popular sociological writing . A text like Kidd ' s Social Evolution could be a considerable best - seller . Within four years of its publication in 1894 , this book had gone through 14 printings in England and had Ameri - can , German , Swedish , French , Russian , and Italian editions . Sociological thought first circulated as part of the uplifting and informa - tive literature avidly consumed by the new educated reading public . The same public , in the English - speaking countries , read novelists like Charles Dickens and George Eliot , cultural critics like John Ruskin and Matthew Arnold , and scientists like Thomas H . Huxley . Sociology circulated through the same channels as these writers . Thus , Spencer ' s The Study of Sociology ( [ I8731 1887 ) was first published in installments in maga - zines - the Contemporary Review in Britain and Popular Science Monthly in America . It was then issued in book form in a new popular education collection called the International Scientific Series . Spencer ' s Principles of Sociology , an integral part of the vast survey of human knowledge that he called the " synthetic philosophy , " was first issued in installments to subscribers , the first volume coming out in 10 parts over three years , as it was being written . The relationship between writers and readers was far from what socio - logical writing later became - the issuing of self - contained , impersonal re - Classical Theory search reports to an abstract , professional audience . Lepenies ( 1988 ) has suggested that European sociology was culturally positioned " between lit - erature and science , " but that exaggerates the contrast . Science too at this time was ethically and politically charged . Darwin , for instance , long hesi - tated to publish his work on evolution because he knew its religious and political consequences ( Desmond and Moore 1992 ) . Sociologists were ex - pected as scientists to provide moral and political teaching . Their teaching especially addressed the dilemma that was inescapable for men of the liberal bourgeoisie : the tension between material privilege and reforming principle . Nineteenth - century liberalism was , of course , a complex movement . It was not necessarily egalitarian and was often at odds with radical and democratic movements . But in liberal struggles against the ancien regime , commitments were forged that Hobhouse rousingly summarized in his Liberalism ( 1911 ) : civil liberty and the rule of law , fiscal liberty , personal liberty , social liberty , economic liberty , domestic liberty , local , racial , and national liberty , international liberty , political liberty , and popular sover - eignty . These remained culturally powerful beliefs in the public addressed by sociology . These commitments were challenged by the class and gender inequali - ties of the metropole . The former is already recognized in discussions of the history of sociology ( e . g . , Therborn 1976 ) ; the latter is increasingly recognized in feminist revisions of that history ( e . g . , Deegan 1988 ; Leh - mann 1994 ) . What is still to be recognized is that liberal commitments were even more severely challenged by empire . Concepts of liberty , rights , and independence were plainly , repeatedly , and brutally violated by what the North Atlantic states were doing all over the world to the colonized . The language I use is not overdramatized . Imperial expansion through this period was continuous and violent . It aroused resistance from the colonized , from the Little Big Horn to Zululand . It aroused protest from intellectuals in the colonies and the metropole . Contemporaries like the Anglican Bishop Colenso in South Africa ( Guy 1983 ) , the Australian histo - rian G . W . Rusden , and the American journalist Park ( whose indictment of Belgian rule in the Congo [ Lyman 19921 is a striking prelude to his later career in Chicago sociology ) denounced the murderous treatment of indigenous peoples . As Rusden ( 1 908 , 2 : 16 1 ) said , It is not to be supposed that all colonists were accomplices in , or even knew of , the atrocities which were rife ; nor were all offenders of like character . Some destroyed every native they met . Some with compunction ( and in self - defence , as they persuaded themselves ) kept guard on their property , and took life but rarely . At some stations in the interior there were but few ser - American Journal of Sociology vants , convicts or freedmen , and they were without moral restraint or sup - port from a master . In all districts the first capture of a black woman , or the first shot fired at a black man , led to retaliation by the blacks , and thence to indiscriminate slaughter . Hobhouse ( 1904 , p . 56 ) , consistent with his progressive liberalism , was a vehement critic of the ideology of imperialism , which he denounced as an amalgam of " the dream of conquest , the vanity of racial domination , and the greed of commercial gain . " It is a familiar historical point that empire created political difficulties for liberalism : witness Gladstone ' s conscience - stricken wrestling with Egyptian and Irish issues . Empire also created cultural and intellectual difficulties ( Semmel 1993 ) . Sociology , the science of progress that claimed the world as its province and that used so extensively the data of empire , was positioned squarely in this contradiction . And it offered a resolution . Sociology displaced imperial power over the colonized into an abstract space of difference . The comparative method and grand ethnography de - leted the actual practice of colonialism from the world of empire . We do not find passages like the one just quoted from Rusden in Durkheim ' s account of segmentary societies , nor is the violent pressure of the Western powers on China throughout the 19th century part of Weber ' s compara - tive sociology of Chinese and Western culture . The relation between the imperial powers and the conquered was most directly addressed by the Darwinian wing of Comtean sociology ( Spencer , Sumner , Ward , Hobhouse , Kidd , and fringe figures like John B . Crozier ) . They addressed it by constructing a fiction of " social evolution " that natu - ralized global difference . It is no wonder that Spencer became immensely influential in the colonies of settlement , where the idea of the evolutionary superiority of the settlers and their institutions replaced missionary reli - gion as the main justification of empire . This was despite the fact that Spencer was personally opposed to impe - rial conquest . In Spencer ' s ( 1887 , p . 2 12 ) writing , we do find sharp denun - ciation of " the diabolical cruelties committed by the invading Europeans " in America , the South Seas , and elsewhere . Like Gladstone - with whom he discussed the question - Spencer saw forcible conquest as a sign of militarism . But he had no such objection to peaceable settlement and eco - nomic competition . In the same passages , it is clear he regarded the colo - nized as " inferior races , " likely to lose out in evolutionary competition ( Spencer 1887 , p . 212 ; Duncan 1908 , p . 224 ) . Even Hobhouse ( 1911 , p . 43 ) , in full flight expounding the principles of liberalism , blurred them in the case of empire by wondering if the black races were capable of self - rule . In other writers , there was no distance at all between naturalizing prog - ress and justifying empire . The climax of Kidd ' s Social Evolution , quoted Classical Theory above on the subject of race , was a justification for rule over the tropical regions of the world - now languishing under the maladministration of " the black and coloured racesn - by the more progressive peoples of Euro - pean extraction . Kidd ' s reconciliation of imperial rule , with his belief that natural selection inherently tended toward more religious and ethical con - duct , epitomizes the ideological work done by sociology . After reviewing the advantages brought by the British to India , Kidd ( 1898 , pp . 324 - 25 ) judiciously considered the case of northern Africa and concluded , " The work undertaken by France in Algeria and Tunis , although it has differed in many important respects from that performed by Great Britain in In - dia , and although it has been undoubtedly more directly inspired by the thought of immediate benefit to French interests , has been on the whole , it must be frankly confessed , work done in the cause of civilisation in general . " The resolution that sociology offered to the dilemmas of liberalism claimed the status of science . Mill and Comte had insisted programmati - cally that sociology must promulgate " laws . " This task was accepted by both academic and popular writers in sociology . Legitimacy for " laws of progress " was provided by the prestige of geology and evolutionary biol - ogy . Accordingly , treatises on sociology often expounded organic evolution and might even start with the evolution of the stars and the solar system ( e . g . , Ward 1897 ) . This conception of " laws of progress " enabled sociology to conflate the problems of empire with the problems of the metropole . The " social sci - ence " of the 1860s and 1870s embraced the social tensions of the metropole as ethical and practical problems . Investigations such as Booth ' s ( 1902 ) Life and Labour of the People in London were more likely to be called " statistics " than " sociology . " Nevertheless questions of poverty , class struggle , and social amelioration - " the social question " in the terminology of the day - certainly came on the agenda of the sociological societies and journals in the 1890s and 1900s . In cities such as London , Chicago , and Paris , there was significant contact and overlap between academic sociolo - gists , Fabian socialists , feminists , progressive liberals , religious and ethical reformers , and social workers ( Besnard 1983 ; Deegan 1988 ) . What " the social science " contributed to " the social question " was an interpretation of the metropole ' s problems in the light of an overarching theory of progress . The best - known example now is Durkheim ' s concep - tion of anomie as a pathological consequence of the division of labor . A more characteristic example then was the discussion of socialism found in many treatises of sociology . The universal approach of the sociologists was to evaluate the goals of the workers ' movement in terms of their own model of evolutionary progress - whether the conclusion was cautious en - dorsement of ethical socialism ( as by Hobhouse , Durkheim , and Albion American Journal of Sociology W . Small ) or robust rejection , as by Spencer or this one from Sumner ( 1963 , p . 97 ) : " The sound student of sociology can hold out to mankind , as individuals or as a race , only one hope of better and happier living . That hope lies in an enhancement of the industrial virtues and of the moral forces which thence arise . . . . The socialist or philanthropist who nourishes them [ i . e . , fools who insist on living in slums , etc . ] in their situa - tion and saves them from the distress of it is only cultivating the distress which he pretends to cure . " The force of this argument lies in Sumner ' s widely shared conviction that the general laws governing social progress , established by evolutionary sociology , operate with rigor in the metropole as elsewhere . THE CRISIS OF SOCIOLOGY War and Progress In Pure Sociology : A Treatise on the O ~ figin and Sporztaneous Develop - ment of Society , Ward ( 1903 , pp . 450 - 51 ) offered as proof of progress the fact that atrocities were scarcely possible in modern society . Just 13 years later , the British army lost 50 , 000 young men killed or wounded on a single day at the opening of the Battle of the Somme . The Great War marked a crisis of the old imperialism and triggered major shifts in global power . The European empires began to fissure , with the independence of Ireland and the dismemberment of the Hapsburg Empire . The French , British , and American systems continued to expand by taking over former Turkish and German territories and increasing their economic penetration of China and Latin America . The United States emerged as the leading industrial power . The 1940s saw a second crisis of imperialism , with the Japanese offensive against Western power in Asia , the independence of India from the British and Indonesia from the Dutch , and the Vietnamese war of liberation against the French . So - viet power reconstituted the old tsarist empire but supported the break - up of other empires and stood as a challenge to global capitalism . By mid 20th century , the United States had become the leading international investor , the dominant military power , and the center of mass cornmuni - cations and an emerging world commercial culture . These changes decisively altered the conditions of existence for sociol - ogy as a collective enterprise - beginning with the Great War itself , which precipitated a disciplinary crisis . The war tore apart the intellectual com - munity of sociologists that had been developing around the North Atlan - tic . Some , like Hobhouse , were horrified by the fighting ; others became belligerent . Durkheim and Giddings became vehement anti - German pro - pagandists ; Small at Chicago broke with his German contacts , clashing with Simmel in particular ( Bannister 1987 ) . Weber went into the army , Classical Theory as did a number of the younger members of the Anne ' e sociologique group , some of whom were killed . After serving for a while with the rank of captain , Weber threw himself into political projects to overcome the inter - nal weaknesses of the German state . The young German Sociological Soci - ety liquidated itself when war broke out and donated its money to a fund for German war propaganda in neutral countries ( Liebersohn 1988 ) - ironically , exactly the work that Durkheim undertook on the other side . For all that , the more important impact was at the level of ideas . The course of social evolution had generally been understood as the growth of reason and civilized conduct : " Objectively viewed , progress is an in - creasing intercourse , a multiplication of relationships , an advance in mate - rial well - being , a growth of population , and an evolution of rational con - duct . It is a final display in the grand metamorphosis of universal evolution " ( Giddings 1896 , p . 359 ) . When brutal and protracted war in Europe made this an untenable view of civilization - as the experience of the frontier came home to the metropole - more than just a hypothesis had to be revised . The foundation of sociology7s worldview was ruptured . It was no longer possible to take " progress " unproblematically as the real - ity to be studied , the object of knowledge . " Cheap optimism , " as Hobhouse ( 1915 ) realized during the war , was now forbidden by history . Comtean language was too well entrenched to be immediately abandoned , but in books written after the war , evocations of progress tail off quite soon . The Park and Burgess " Green Bible , " first issued in 192 1 , was on the cusp of this change . It ended with a chapter defending the concept of progress , but the chapter was a defense against acknowledged criticism , and none too confident at that . The war might not have had such an impact if the concept of progress were not already under challenge . A broader cultural crisis was devel - oping in early - 20th - century Europe , marked by sharp breaks in the visual arts , physics , music , and psychology . What Berger ( 1974 ) has called " the moment of cubism " was also the moment of Albert Einstein , Freud , and Arnold Schoenberg . When Pareto in the Treatise of General Sociology ( [ I9161 1935 ) denounced " sentimental ethics " as a basis for sociology and demanded a harsher realism , he was distancing himself from what he already saw as the pseudoscience of Comte and Spencer and from his own earlier liberalism . That the framework of sociology created in the 19th century had reached its limits was indicated , finally , by institutional stagnation . British sociology entered a fallow period after the war , with Hobhouse retreating into metaphysics , while the intellectual excitement of the new ethnogra - phy was channeled off into a separate discipline , " anthropology , " under the leadership of Bronislaw Malinowski and A . R . Radcliffe - Brown . Durkheim7s close - knit group dispersed . Though some of its members con - American Journal of Sociology tinued to have distinguished individual careers , French sociology as a col - lective enterprise languished ( Karady 1983 ) . Out in the colonies , an attempt to institutionalize Comtean sociology in the Australian university system ( Anderson 1912 ) came to nothing . The first chair of sociology in that country was not filled until 1959 . In South Africa , imperial sociology made its little - known final bow . As the racial hierarchy created by conquest hardened , it was a sociologist , Geoffrey CronjC ( 1947 ) , who produced the intellectual blueprint for the apartheid regime . Alternatives The decade around 1920 may thus be understood as the historical moment when the project of Comte , Spencer , Letourneau , and their successors had irretrievably broken down . It is clear that there was more than one possi - ble replacement . One possibility grew out of the cultural crisis developing in the central European intelligentsia . A measure of the depth of this crisis was Oswald Spengler ' s Decline of the West ( [ 1918 - 221 1932 ) , which was enormously influential in the 1920s . Like Pareto , Spengler rejected the concept of so - cial evolution ; unlike Pareto , he was also acutely conscious of the imperial gaze . Spengler offered a scathing criticism of the Eurocentrism of Euro - pean intellectuals and their view of human history . He saw European imperial expansion as the " murder " of other cultures , such as the Aztec / Maya culture in Central America , and thus treated contemporary imperi - alism not as the triumph of light but as a sign of the Last Days , evidence of decline . The break with the framework of progress could hardly be more complete . The project of a critical sociology of culture was taken up by Sorokin , leading eventually to the immense , cloudy generalities of Social and Cul - tural Dynamics ( 1937 - 41 ) . In Weimar Germany , from different starting points , Max Scheler and Karl Mannheim converged on a " sociology of knowledge , ' ' the object of fierce controversy for a short period . Mannheim ( [ I9351 1940 ) in exile , like the scholars of the Frankfurt school , began to develop a synthesis of Freudian psychoanalysis with structural sociology to explain the catastrophe of fascism . A synthesis of phenomenology with sociology was proposed by Alfred Schutz ( [ I9321 1972 ) in Austria ; a social theory grounded in idealist philosophy was proposed by Giovanni Gentile in Italy ( Bellamy 1987 ) . The revolutionary movements of metropole and colony also gave rise to possible sociologies . In Russia , the Bolshevik leader Nikolai Bukharin ( [ I9251 1965 ) produced " a system of sociology " as ambitious as anything in the capitalist world at that time . Much better remembered are the social Classical Theory theories of the Italian revolutionary Antonio Gramsci , who developed in the 1920s and 1930s not only the famous analyses of intellectuals and hegemony , but also theories of socioeconomic change that have influenced current discussions of postmodernity ( Harvey 1990 ) . Du Bois ( 1968 ) , hav - ing left academic sociology for civil rights activism , connected race issues in the metropole with movements in the colonial world and , increasingly , with the structure of global capitalism . None of these initiatives , however , produced an institutionalized re - placement for the old sociology . The principal reason was not their intel - lectual calibre - this work includes the most sophisticated social theory in the first half of the 20th century . It was , rather , the balance of global power and the growth of totalitarianism in Europe out of the same cul - tural and political crisis that had crippled sociology . Bukharin was purged and then killed under Stalin . Gramsci was arrested under Mussolini and died after years in prison . Sorokin fled the Bolsheviks ; Mannheim , Schutz , and the Frankfurt school fled the fascists . Gentile became a minister under Mussolini but was killed during the overthrow of the Fascist regime , and his influence died with it . Colonial dominance in Africa remained un - shaken , and Du Bois , returning to academia in the 1930s , found no audi - ence for his internationalist views . The Epistemological Break : A Practical Sociology of the Metropole There was only one place where academic sociology flourished between 1920 and 1950 : in the new metropole , the United States . But here the discipline was transformed . The United States was the arena of a change so fundamental that it can be regarded , to use Louis Althusser ' s expres - sion , as an epistemological break ( Althusser and Balibar 1970 ) . 3 In the academic space created by the late - 19th - century sociologists , a new enter - prise arose . It bore the same name but had a different object of knowledge , a new set of methods and applications , a revised definition of the disci - pline , a new audience , and - eventually - a new view of its history . The new object of knowledge was society and , especially , social differ - ence and social disorder within the metropole . Nineteenth - century sociol - ogy had some concern with these issues , as already noted , but had intellec - tually subordinated them to the conceptions of global difference and evolutionary progress . In the 1920s and 1930s , the internal problems of the society of the metropole became the intellectual center of sociology . 1 emphasize that this was an epistemological break , not an abrupt institutional change ; the transition took a couple of decades . Comtean texts could still be produced after the Great War ( e . g . , Case 1924 ) . But the sociology centered on concepts of prog - ress was visibly in retreat by then and had almost vanished by the 1930s . American Journal of Sociology Familiar markers of this shift are the prominence of the Chicago school ' s urban research and the growth of specializations within sociology - many of them defined by a social problem or an administrative apparatus of the society of the metropole . The custom of organizing American Sociological Society meetings in specialized subdivisions along these lines began in 192 1 . In terms of method , where the old sociology had focused on difference between the metropole and the primitive , the new sociology focused on difference within the metropole . This can be seen clearly in the increas - ingly influential statistical techniques , from early measures of correlation through attitude scaling in the interwar decades to the formalization of " latent structure analysis " by Lazarsfeld at midcentury . The new quanti - tative procedures had as their logical basis the idea of difference within a population . Their main applications were to surveys and official statistics collected within metropole countries , principally the United States ( East - hope 1974 ) . It is familiar that the 1920s and 1930s saw a flowering of empirical research on the social life of American towns , cities , and suburbs . There was great inventiveness in method , from the statistics of difference through urban ethnography to the first fusion of psychoanalysis with field sociology ( Dollard 1937 ) . Sociological empiricism was not new - as shown above , Letourneau , Spencer , and Sumner had put great energy into assem - bling facts - but the new empiricism had immeasurably superior tech - niques and new intentions . The Chicago school did not just do urban ethnography . It set up a comprehensive system of surveillance for Ameri - ca ' s second largest , and most turbulent , city ( Smith and White 1929 ) . In this , as in many other sociological projects , the intention was defined by an increasingly popular term , " social control . " The rapid development of sociology in this direction was made possible by corporate and government funding , begun before World War I but greatly accelerated in the 1920s . Ross ( 1991 , p . 402 ) gives the impressive total of $ 41 million of Rockefeller money going to American social science and social work between 1922 and 1929 . ( Twenty years earlier , Du Bois had been unable to raise $ 5 , 000 a year for his Atlanta research . ) A high point was reached when the national government set up the Committee on Recent Social Trends , with William Fielding Ogburn , a president of the American Sociological Society and its leading advocate of empiricism , as director of research . As research expertise rose , however , the conception of the discipline narrowed . R . M . MacIver ( 1937 , p , vii ) , a successor to Giddings at Colum - bia , opened his textbook Society by acknowledging a crisis in the defini - tion of the subject : " Abundant controversy has arisen over the question whether there is at all a subject deserving to be named sociology , whether Classical Theory if there is , it is a science , whether in that event it is a generic or a specific science , and so forth . " The only secure institutional base available for soci - ology at this time , the American university , provided an organizational definition that contradicted the Comtean vision of " the social science . " Sociology could survive in the American university not as a metascience but as one department among a range of social science departments , dis - tinguished from history , political science , economics , and psychology only by its special focus of interest . The intellectual difficulty , for a discipline whose earlier claims had been so vast , was to define what that special focus was . " Social relations " ( MacIver 1937 ) , " groups , " forms of associa - tion , and human relations ( Hiller 1933 ) , " the social process " ( Reuter and Hart 1933 ) - no formulation was very convincing , and none became gen - erally accepted . Bannister ' s ( 1987 ) absorbing history of sociological scientism in the United States in this period shows that the empiricist triumph failed to produce an intellectual program for sociology . The empiricists themselves fell apart in bitter faction fighting , which racked the American Sociologi - cal Society in the 1930s . Sorokin ( 1928 , p . 757 ) , an acid critic of the empiri - cists , remarked at the end of his survey of Contemporary Sociological The - ories that " the whole field reminds one of a half - wild national forest rather than a carefully planned garden . " The technocratic vision articulated by some empiricists ( e . g . , Smith and White 1929 ) lost credibility as funding dried up in the 1930s . The new sociology started life as the old sociology died , with a severe deficit of legitimacy . MAKING THE CANON In this conceptual vacuum - as Hinkle ( 1994 , p . 339 ) aptly describes the situation after the collapse of evolutionism - the formation of the classical canon began . The process lasted a generation . It was the work of many hands , and the canon makers were far from harmonious - two of the most prominent being Parsons and C . Wright Mills . Over this period , neverthe - less , a series of projects and debates converged on a new understanding of sociology ' s history . Intellectually , the process of canon making has two sides : the creation of a canonical point of view and the selection of particu - lar founding fathers . Interwoven with both is a practical enterprise , the dissemination and pedagogy of " classical " texts . Though the point is difficult to document , I would suggest that a condi - tion for these changes was a change in sociology ' s audience . The late - Victorian liberal reading public was no more . However , the enormous wealth being accumulated in the rising world power , the United States , made possible , for the first time in history , a mass higher education system . Here sociology expanded treme : ic ' ously as a teaching enterprise in the American Journal of Sociology three decades after World War I1 ( Turner and Turner 1990 ) . A mass audi - ence of students required a teacher training program . The expanding graduate sociology programs , which did this job , became central to sociol - ogy ' s professional self - definition . It was in this milieu , and at this juncture , that the pedagogy of classical texts developed . The Canonical View The emerging vision of sociology ' s history identified a foundational mo - ment , " that brilliant age in which the foundations of the discipline were laid " ( Bottomore and Nisbet 1978 , p . x ) . It was characterized by the texts of a small group of key figures : " There are four men , however , whom everyone in sociology , regardless of his special emphasis , bias , or bent , will probably accept as the central figures in the development of modern sociology " ( Inkeles 1964 , p . 3 ) . Few sociologists will miss the echo of Parsons ' s Structure of Social Ac - tion ( 1937 ) . Parsons was not the only , nor even the first , American theorist to address the intellectual disintegration of sociology ( Turner and Turner 1990 , pp . 7 1 - 73 ) , but there is no denying the genius of his solution . Parsons purged the discipline ' s history , acknowledging the collapse of the Comt - ean agenda ( " Spencer is dead " ; 1937 , p . 3 ) . He took the empirical problem of postcrisis sociology , difference and disorder in the metropole , and made it the theoretical center of sociology ( the Hobbesian " problem of order " ; 1937 , p . 89 ) . He even made this the basis of the discipline ' s definitione4 Parsons solved the problem of where sociology fitted by inverting the aca - demic division of labor : the sociological conception of action became the basis for legislating the places of the other " sciences of action . " Parsons was no historian and did not claim to be writing the history of sociology . His project was to construct the logical bases of the science . But his reconstruction of the " emergence " of the action model in the theo - retical logic of Alfred Marshall , Pareto , Weber , and Durkheim was under - standably read as an origin narrative , and this story , as Camic ( 1989 ) has shown in an important article , became a means of legislating for the disci - pline . Parsons himself gave a strong lead toward this reading by his vigor - ous championing of Weber as a key figure for sociology . Parsons not only issued two volumes of translation but published extended commentary , and Weber was still the undisputed star of Theories of Society , the book of readings that Parsons and his collaborators issued in 1961 . The Structure of Social Action was not an overnight success ; it became In Parsons ' s ( 1937 , p . 768 ) matchless prose , sociology is " the science which attempts to develop an analytical theory of social action systems in so far as these systems can be understood in terms of the property of common - value integration . " Classical Theory more important as Parsons ' s influence in American sociology grew over the following 20 years . The canonical view had to be established against other accounts of sociology . A residual version of the interwar encyclope - dic view can still be found in some introductory textbooks after World War I1 ( e . g . , Murray 1947 ) and in such a substantial review as Nicholas S . Timasheff ' s Sociological Theory ( [ I9551 1967 ) . There also survived from the 1920s an American - centered empiricism , which saw early socio - logical theory as a bad dream from which the discipline had been awak - ened by the kiss of science ( e . g . , Lundberg , Schrag , and Larsen 1958 ) . Parsons ' s vision , however , acquired powerful and unexpected allies . Sociology as social criticism could also yield a canonical view . In his very widely read Sociological Imagination , Mills ( 1959 ) constructed a compos - ite image of " the classic social analyst " ( his examples include Marx , Durk - heim , and Weber , as well as Spencer , Mannheim , Thorstein Veblen , and others ) , which he held up as a model of how sociology ought to be done . " Classical sociology " to Mills was a style of work , not a period - though there was a definite sense that it was more practiced in the past and that the present was a period of decline . Mills ( 1960 ) soon turned the concept into a textbook , defining " the classic tradition " in a rather freewheeling way but including readings from all major figures in the emerging canon . The canonical view was also reinforced by theorists wishing to establish a problem or a field as a central issue . Robert K . Merton ' s ( [ I9491 1957 ) account of anomie helped establish Durkheim as classic . Lewis A . Coser ( 1956 ) performed a like office for Simmel as founder of a theory of conflict . Not only functionalism but also the critique of functionalism fed into the canonical reading of history . An opposition between " conflict theory " and " consensus theory , " symbolized by the classics Simmel and Marx versus Durkheim , became a textbook clichC ( e . g . , Broom , Selznick , and Darroch 1981 ) . The translation of the main texts incorporated into the canon was ac - complished by 1950 ( see below ) . Of course not all texts that are translated get recognized as classics - Leopold von Wiese ( 1932 ) , for instance , was translated but is now forgotten in Anglophone sociology . The mark of canonization is the development of a genre of commentary and exposition . Levine ( 1995 , p . 63 ) aptly remarks of the 1960s and 1970s that " fresh trans - lations , editions , and secondary analyses of classic authors became one of the faster - growing industries within sociology . " Indeed the rush had be - gun earlier . Long commentaries on Weber appeared with the translations in the 1940s ( Gerth and Mills 1946 ) , and Parsons made an exposition of Weber the centerpiece of the first edition of his Essays in Sociological Theory ( 1949 ) . Reinhard Bendix ' s very widely read Max Weber : An Intel - lectual Portrait was issued in 1960 . Coser ' s Functions of Social Consict ( 1956 ) was in large part a commentary on Simmel . Elaborate symposia American Journal of Sociology on Simmel and Durkheim , edited by Wolff ( Simmel ' s translator ) , were published as books in 1959 and 1960 , respectively . Platt ( 1995 ) traces a literature of commentary on Durkheim beginning in the late 1930s and picking up steam after midcentury . In 1958 - 59 , centenary celebrations of Durkheim and Simmel appeared in both the American Journal of Sociol - ogy and the American Sociological Review . As this genre developed , American interest both stimulated and was reinforced by European writing . The process is well illustrated by a Brit - ish text , John Rex ' s Key Problems of Sociological Theory ( 1961 ) . Rex ' s main points of departure were Durkheim and Weber as read in America . Rex had studied Parsons , and though he took more interest in class strug - gle - and therefore Marx - than the functionalists did , the new construc - tion of canonical theory was the basis of his reasoning . American interest even helped to create a Weber revival in German sociology " after a period of inattention to its classical past , " as Liischen ( 1994 , p . 11 ) delicately puts it . The German sociologists got round to a celebration of Weber at their national conference in 1964 . This year also saw the revision and wider circulation , in paperback , of Winckelmann ' s great edition of Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft ( Weber 1964 ) . The sophisticated historical scholarship that has followed ( Tribe 1989 ) has steadily undermined the " Weber " of Parsons , Mills , and Bendix , with little effect so far on sociological theory . By the early 1960s , a quarter century after Parsons ' s Structure of Social Action , the canonical view was firmly established in American sociology . It was not the only view of the discipline ' s history available , but it was by now hegemonic . When Alvin W . Gouldner delivered his famous " anti - Minotaur " address to the Society for the Study of Social Problems in 1961 , he could simply assume that all his audience regarded Weber as a central figure in the discipline . Gouldner ( 1973 ) could thus make points about sociology in general by criticizing a canonical text . Translators and commentators saw themselves as providing a vital re - source for contemporary sociology . On the face of it , the resource was intellectual , a set of ideas and methods . But something more was involved . Here I would call attention to the language of canon making : the imagery of the " golden age in sociology " ( Nisbet 1967 ) , when " giants " ( Smelser 1967 ) walked the earth . The hagiographical language continued in evoca - tions of " that brilliant age " ( Bottomore and Nisbet 1978 ) , in a book series called Masters of Social Theory , and in the textbook evocations of " pio - neers " ( McNall 197 1 ) and " Founding Fathers " ( Inkeles 1964 ) - terms with strong emotional overtones in the United States especially . Such language indicates that emotional labor is being done ( Hochschild 1983 ) . The construction of the canon provided not only an intellectual but also a symbolic solution to the internal disintegration and cultural Classical Theory marginalization that had overtaken sociology before the midcentury . In - heritors of a golden age , bearers of the insights of great thinkers , sociolo - gists had weight in the world - in their own eyes and , increasingly , in the eyes of students . The Choice of Fathers Like Parsons , Inkeles in the textbook quoted above had a list of four great men - but not the same four . Inkeles listed Comte , Spencer , Durkheim , and Weber . It is an important fact ( confirming the symbolic and emotional work done by the canon ) that a canonical view of sociology could be shared by people who disagreed about which particular fathers had done the founding . Parsons ' s attitude , that is to say , was more influential than his precise arguments . Some of his choices were accepted . Merton reinforced the in - terest in Durkheim ; Gerth and Mills reinforced the interest in Weber . Each could be read as creator of a systematic conception of sociology , a key need of the academic discipline at the time . More , each as founder could do ideological work for sociology in the Cold War context : Durk - heim as theorist of social solidarity , Weber as refuter of Marx . Platt ( 1995 ) rightly observes the complexity of influences behind the choice of particu - lar founding fathers : broad historical circumstance , particular academic entrepreneurs or departments , affinity with current trends in the profes - sion . These factors seem to have worked for Weber and Durkheim but against Parsons ' s other nominee , Pareto . Though Pareto was even more eligible as a systematist , his irony and pessimism were perhaps too obtru - sive for his texts to work as " foundations " for the revived discipline . Pareto survives as a name among the founding fathers , but his writings are not routinely studied in the pedagogy of classical texts . The complexities are greatest , and the changes most dramatic , in the case of Ma . rx . To Parsons in The Structure of Social Action , he was part of the background , essentially a minor utilitarian , and in Theories of Soci - ety he received less attention than Mead , Pareto , or Freud . To Merton ( 1957 ) in Social Theory and Social Structure , Marx was no more impor - tant . Some American textbooks of sociology in the 1940s and 1950s got along without any attention to Marx at all . When Marx did get attention , students might well wonder why ; Bierstedt ( 1963 , pp . 544 - 45 ) for instance presented him as an author of " vast oversimplification , " " excessive , dog - matic , and radical . " But Marx was , of course , the founding father of modern social science from the point of view of orthodox socialism . However debauched the Stalinist version had become , Marxism remained an intellectual force in American Journal of Sociology global culture . It was the point of departure in the sociology of class even for non - Marxists like Ralf Dahrendorf ( 1957 ) and Stanislaw Ossowski ( 1963 ) . In the United States , Marx was a significant presence to the neo - conservative theorists of the Cold War era . Thus to Daniel Bell ( 1960 ) , Marx was a major theorist of alienation as well as the ancestor of Soviet communism . A progressive American sociologist could find in Marxism an important resource ; in best canon - making style , Mills issued a collection of Marxist texts , with commentary , in 1962 . However Marx did not become a full - fledged member of the sociological canon until the dramatic expansion of sociology in the 1960s and the radi - calization of university students . Sociology ' s new audience made its needs known . The " radical sociology " proposed by the student movement cen - tered on Marx and Marxists ( Horowitz 1971 ) . From the other side , study - ing Marx provided a way for academic sociologists to talk to their new audience about social struggle and transformation . In 1965 , the American Sociological Association annual meeting included a plenary session tell - ingly named " A Re - Evaluation of Karl Marx . " Marx assumed a more prominent place in accounts of the history of sociological theory ( Bot - tomore and Nisbet 1978 ) and appeared with increasing frequency in text - books for undergraduates . The account of the formation of sociology was revised , in new editions of established textbooks , to give more prominence to Marx ( cf . Bottomore 1962 , 1987 ) . By the late 1970s , he figured in some introductory texts as " the first great radical sociologist " ( Sherman and Wood 1979 , p . 7 ) . The canonization of Marx required a change in content for sociology but not a change in the conception of theory . The established pedagogy of classical texts was readily adapted . Marx ' s writings had long been available in translation because of their importance to socialism . They could now be positioned in opposition to a " consensus " position , or an " elitist " position , or a " micro " position , in retrospective constructions of sociological traditions ( Nisbet 1967 ; Collins 1994 ) . New editions and selec - tions of Marx ' s writings appeared , and a sociological literature of com - mentary multiplied . The grouping of Marx , Durkheim , and Weber was , thus , a late develop - ment in the construction of the canon . Durkheim and Weber were the survivors of the canon - making enterprise of Parsons ' s generation , Marx was grafted on in the next generation , and others fell by the wayside . The trio appears in the role of the founding fathers in elementary textbooks in the 1970s ( McGee 1977 ) . In theoretical sociology , a considerable effort of secondary interpretation tried to make sense of the Marx - Durkheim - Weber grouping , in the work of Giddens ( 1971 ) , Alexander ( 1982 - 83 ) , Seidman ( 1983 ) , and others . Classical Theory Dissemination In Victorian scholarship it had been assumed that an English - speaking academic could read the major European languages , plus two dead ones . But for the study of a set of texts to become a teaching routine in American universities , translation was essential . Accordingly , the process of transla - tion is an important index of the formation of a canon . Translation of sociological books became a systematic process in the 1930s , aided by the emigration of European scholars to North America . The young Parsons , after visiting Heidelberg and negotiating with Mari - anne Weber , translated Max Weber ' s Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism ; the product appeared in 1930 . Von Wiese ' s Systematic Sociol - ogy ( trans . by H . P . Bieke ) appeared in 1932 . English versions of Durk - heim ' s Division of Labor in Society ( trans . by G . Simpson ) appeared in 1933 , The Rules of Sociological Method ( trans . by S . A . Solovay and J . H . Mueller ) in 1938 . Pareto ' s Trattato di sociologia generale , curiously renamed The Mind and Society , was published in translation in 1935 , Tonnies ' s Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft - renamed Fundamental Con - cepts of Sociology - in 1940 . In 1946 Gerth and Mills issued their influen - tial selection from the second part of Weber ' s Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft , and in 1947 Parsons issued his translation of the first part . Passages from Simmel had been available in translation from the 1920s , but a larger selection was translated by K . H . Wolff in 1950 . The translations were received in the United States with less than uni - versal rapture ( Hinkle 1994 ) . Yet they provided the essential basis for the pedagogy of " classics " to become established in American graduate education . As this pedagogy became systematized , books of readings in sociological theory , with extracts from the classical texts , appeared . Coser and Rosenberg ( 1957 ) edited one of the first , noting that with the rediscov - ery of Weber , Durkheim , and Simmel , American sociology had produced a " renaissance of sociological theory . " Books of readings made it possible to teach an abbreviated version of the canon in undergraduate courses : Dennis H . Wrong and Harry L . Gracey ( 1972 ) claimed to have pioneered this at the introductory level . " Classical theory " courses appeared in un - dergraduate as well as graduate lists . Thus a canonical point of view be - came available from start to finish of higher education in sociology . What was available , in due course , became required : thus the Graduate Record Examination in sociology demands a familiarity with canonical authors ( ETS 1987 ) . Thus , through the pedagogy of classics , the canon became part of the constitution of sociology as a force in American higher educa - tion . The effect was not confined to the United States . In the postwar de - American Journal of Sociology cades , a liberal intelligentsia was reconstituted internationally , based in growing higher education systems and the new culture industries . This was done under American hegemony , in the context of Cold War politics and U . S . investment abroad . American foundations once again were ac - tive players in the process ( Berman 1983 ) . Academic sociology followed the general pattern . In most countries that could afford to have sociology at all , the disci - pline was created or remade in the 1950s and 1960s on the basis of research techniques , research problems , and theoretical languages , not to mention textbooks and instructors , imported from the United States ( e . g . , Japan , Tominaga [ 1994 ] ; Australia , Baldock and Lally [ 1974 ] ; Scandinavia , Al - lardt [ 1994 ] ) . Maus ' s ( 1962 , p . 165 ) well - known Short History of Sociol - ogy , written in the mid - 1950s , acknowledges " the dominating position American sociology occupies in the world todayn - a comment the more revealing because written from a German point of view . With the reconstructed discipline came its reconstructed foundation story and the developing canon of classical texts . Sociology students from Nigeria to New Zealand found themselves studying the canonical texts as the basic definition of " theory . " Sociologists in the most remote parts of the world began to define themselves in the categories of the canon . A survey of Australian and New Zealand sociologists in the early 1970s re - ported that , of those who identified themselves as members of a school , " three named symbolic interactionism , two functionalism , three Marxist , three Weberian sociology , and another three emphasised the ideas of Durkheim . . . . It is interesting that only four respondents mentioned mod - ern sociologists as having influenced their work " ( Baldock and Lally 1974 , pp . 279 - 80 ) . Thus world sociology arrived at the situation described in the opening paragraphs of this article . In a sense , the canon on a world scale did what it had already done in the United States : providing a symbolic focus , a shared language , and some kind of identity , for academics and students in sociology . Though many local variations have developed , the same ac - cent of canon making can be heard in evocations of " Max Weber , the Living Classic " ( Kasler [ I9941 in Germany ) , the " classical mainstream pro - gram " ( Boudon [ I9941 in France ) , and " one of sociology ' s few true classics " ( Kalberg [ I9961 in the United States ) . REFLECTIONS In his article on " the centrality of the classics , " Alexander ( 1987 ) observed that classical theory performs an integrative function for the discipline . This is undoubtedly true but not very helpful unless we also know why the need for integration arose . Classical Theory I have argued that the classical canon in sociology was created , mainly in the United States , as part of an effort at reconstruction after the collapse of the first European - American project of sociology ; that the idea of " clas - sical theory " replaced earlier and very different accounts of the making of sociology ; and that this whole course of events can only be understood in the framework of global history , especially the history of imperialism . If this is broadly correct , it has implications for contemporary thinking about theory , beyond the calls for a more inclusive canon . The circumstances in which the canon was created produced a striking disjunction in academic sociology between " theory " and " research . " The creation of the canon followed an extremely creative period of empirical research . The canon provides broad symbolic legitimation for the disci - pline , but none of the elected fathers actually motivates the empirical ac - tivities of post - 1920 sociology at all well . Despite the designation of " meth - odological classics , " the main line of modern research methods does not run through Marx , Durkheim , Weber , Pareto , or Simmel . The teaching of the canon in American graduate education did , never - theless , consolidate the ideology of professionalism in sociology that the empiricists of the 1920s struggled to establish . As Stinchcombe ( 1982 ) ob - served , reference to the classics has become a badge of membership in a professional community . But that membership comes complete with the patterns of hegemony inscribed in the canon . It thus becomes important to consider not only which writers are included and excluded , but also which problems . This is particularly important in relation to the formative issue of em - pire . The making of the canon deleted the discourse of imperialism from sociology . Those Comtean notables whose texts had most explicitly con - cerned the primitive , the concept of progress , racial hierarchies , and gen - der and population issues failed to be canonized . ( " Spencer is dead . " ) Those texts of canonized authors that most clearly bore the mark of em - pire , such as L ' Anne ' e sociologique , Durkheim ' s ( [ I9121 1995 ) The Elemen - tary Forms of the Religious Life , or Weber ' s inaugural lecture " The Na - tional State and Economic Policy " ( [ I8951 1989 ) , were the least likely to be used in the pedagogy of " classics . " This had the desirable effect of deleting open racism from the disci - pline ' s theoretical core . It had the undesirable effect of excusing most soci - ologists from thinking about global society at all . Ironically the major attempt to reverse this , " world - systems theory , " has been institutionally defined as a new specialization . Gender , sexuality , and race relations , which were core issues for evolu - tionary sociology , were pushed to the margins in the process of canon formation . Nisbet ' s ( 1967 ) list of the " unit - ideas of sociology " ( community , authority , status , the sacred , alienation ) was a travesty of history but not American Journal of Sociology a bad map of the narrowed territory left after the canon making . Recent critiques of the patriarchal subtext of classical theory ( Sydie 1987 ; Seidler 1994 ) , which analyze 19th - century texts as if the foundation story were true , miss this larger effect . The continuing influence of the canon in de - fining what counts is one of the main reasons why gender and race , though now institutionally important for American sociology ( as shown by affir - mative action programs or the sections of the ASA ) , have still not reestab - lished themselves as central concerns of sociological theory . A definition of subject matter can have this effect only if it carries au - thority ; the style of theory making associated with the canon is also impor - tant . We might recall that " canon " in English originally meant a rule or edict of the Church . " Classical theory " is a package that not only exagger - ates the importance of a few great men but in the same gesture excludes or discredits the noncanonical . The sociologists of the late 19th century , to do them justice , were not like this . They had a sense of adventure , a skepticism about authority , and a breadth of interest , which we could still do with . It follows that no repair job on the canon will meet contemporary intel - lectual needs ; a revised pseudohistory of founding fathers ( e . g . , Turner 1993 ) does not help . But throwing away the discipline ' s history ( Chafetz 1993 ) is no answer either . This would leave us with the consequences of history and no grasp of their causes . What we need instead of " classical theory " is better history - sociologi - cal history - and an inclusive way of doing theory . Sociology can be intro - duced to students not as a story of " great men " but as a practice shaped by the social relations that made it possible . The full range of intellectuals who produced " theories of society " can be recovered for this history , in - cluding the feminists , anarchists , and colonials who were erased from the canonical story . The exclusions constructing the discipline can become part of the discipline ' s self - knowledge . The argument of this article suggests that a vital step - though perhaps the most difficult - is to abandon the internalist history of sociology and recover the global context that Victorian sociology , in its own way , ad - dressed . This means including in the process of theory formation the intel - lectuals of the colonized world as well as the metropole - not , however , by revising the story of " great men " to include Ibn Khaldun among the classics . Rather , it is a matter of studying the rich analysis of the world in which sociology was constructed that came from outside the metropole , ranging from Islamic and Chinese debates about modernity to Indian and African critiques of empire . This is not utopian ; it has been done in the past . While Durkheim and his colleagues built the imperial gaze into their sociology , other French social scientists engaged intellectuals of the Is - Classical Theory lamic world in dialogue about modernity , colonialism , and culture ( Burke 1980 ) . The history of the discipline is richer than we normally assume . For their part , Marx , Durkheim , and Weber will still be present in this history . They will be present in realistic contexts and proportions , not as shadowy giants at the limit of vision . APPENDIX Sources for Views of " Origins " and Incorporation of the Canon into Sociology Teaching This article ' s argument about accounts of origins and the crystallization of a classical canon in sociology teaching is based on ( a ) the programmatic statements and debates about classics and their teaching cited in the main bibliography ; ( b ) an examination of current course descriptions in 30 U . S . graduate programs , reproduced in Career Guidance Foundation ( 1995 ) ; ( c ) a study of accounts of the history of sociology in English - language textbooks of introductory sociology and sociological theory . A list of the texts examined for this purpose follows . The period covered is 1896 - 1996 , with a concentration on the last 50 years , tracing the arrival of the canon in textbook sociology . As anyone using such material will know , the boundaries of what is a " textbook " are blurred , and it is sometimes diffi - cult to tell when a new edition should count as a separate book . Where more than one edition was consulted , I have listed the earliest . Aron , Raymond . 1968 - 70 . Main Currents in Sociological Thought , 2 vols . Harmonds - worth : Penguin . Babbie , Earl . 1988 . The Sociological Spirit : Critical Essays in a Critical Science . Belmont , Calif . : Wadsworth . Baldridge , J . Victor . 1975 . Sociology : A Critical Approach to Power , Conflict , and Change . New York : Wiley . Berger , Peter L . 1966 . Invitation to Sociology : A Humanistic Perspective . Harmonds - worth : Penguin . Berger , Peter , and Brigitte Berger . 1975 . Sociology : A Biographical Approach , 2d ed . New York : Basic Books . Bertrand , Alvin L . 1967 . Basic Sociology : An Introduction to Theory and Method . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . Bierstedt , Robert . 1963 . The Social Order : An Introduction to Sociology , 2d ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Biesanz , John , and Mavis Biesanz . 1969 . Introduction to Sociology . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Bilton , Tony , et al . 1987 . Introductory Sociology , 2d ed . London : Macmillan Educa - tion . Blackmar , Frank W . 1905 . The Elements of Sociology . New York : Macmillan . Boguslaw , Robert , and George R . Vickers . 1977 . Prologue to Sociology . Santa Monica , Calif . : Goodyear . Bottomore , T . B . 1962 . Sociology : A Guide to Problems and Literature . London : George Allen & Unwin . American Journal of Sociology BouglC , C . , and J . Raffault . 1930 . Eliments de sociologie : Textes choisis et ordonne ' s , 2d ed . Paris : Alcan . Broom , Leonard , and Philip Selznick . 1958 . Sociology : A Text with Adapted Readings . Evanston , Ill . : Row , Peterson . Broom , Leonard , Charles M . Bonjean , and Dorothy H . Broom . 1990 . Sociology : A Core Text with Adapted Readings . Belmont , Calif . : Wadsworth . Browne , Ken . 1992 . An Introduction to Sociology . Cambridge : Polity . Bryjak , George J . , and Michael P . Soroka . 1993 . Sociology : Cultural Diversity in a Changing World , 2d ed . Boston : Allyn & Bacon . Burchard , Max N . 1967 . Sociology . Iowa City , Iowa : Sernoll . Calhoun , Craig , Donald Light , and Suzanne Keller . 1994 . Sociology , 6th ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Carver , Thomas Nixon . 1905 . Sociology and Social Progress : A Handbook for Stu - dents of Sociology . Boston : Ginn . Case , Clarence Marsh , ed . 1924 . Outlines of Introductory Sociology : A Textbook of Readings in Social Science . New York : Harcourt , Brace . Chinoy , Ely . 1967 . Society : An Introduction to Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Random House . Collins , Randall . 1985 . Three Sociological Traditions . New York : Oxford University Press . , 1994 . Four Sociological Traditions . New York : Oxford University Press . Conklin , John E . 1987 . Sociology : An Introduction , 2d ed . New York : Macmillan . Coser , Lewis A , , and Bernard Rosenberg , eds . 1957 . Sociological Theory : A Book of Readings . New York : Macmillan . Coulson , Margaret A . , and Carol Riddell . 1970 . Approaching Sociology : A Critical Introduction . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Court , Catherine . 1987 . Basic Concepts in Sociology . London : CheckmateIArnold . Cuber , John F . 1955 . Sociology : A Synopsis of Principles , 3d ed . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . Cuff , E . C . , and G . C . F . Payne , eds . 1979 . Perspectives in Sociology . London : Allen & Unwin . Curtis , Jack H . , John A . Coleman , and Ralph Lane , Jr . 1967 . Sociology : An Introduc - tion . Milwaukee : Bruce . DeFleur , Melvin L . , William V . D ' Antonio , and Lois B . DeFleur . 1971 . Sociology : Man in Society . Glenview , Ill . : Scott , Foresman . Denisoff , R . Serge , and Ralph Wahrman . 1975 . An Introduction to Sociology . New York : Macmillan . Dobriner , William M . 1969 . Social Structures and Systems : A Sociological Overview . Pacific Palisades , Calif . : Goodyear . Doob , Christopher B . 1991 . Sociology : An Introduction , 3d ed . New York : Holt , Rine - hart & Winston . Douglas , Jack D . , ed . 1973 . Introduction to Sociology : Situations and Structures . New York : Free Press . Duverger , Maurice . 1964 . Introduction to the Social Sciences , with Special Reference to their Methods . London : Allen & Unwin . Eshleman , J . Ross , Barbara G . Cashion , and Laurence A . Basirico . 1993 . Sociology : An Introduction , 4th ed . New York : HarperCollins . Evans , R . T . 1923 . Aspects of the Study of Society . London : Hodder & Stoughton . Fairbanks , Arthur . 1901 . Introduction to Sociology , 7th ed . New York : Scribner . Farley , John E . 1992 . Sociology , 2d ed . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice Hall . Fernandez , Ronald , and Leo Barrile . 1979 . The Promise of Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Ferrante , Joan . 1992 . Sociology : A Global Persfiective . Belmont , Calif . : International Thomson . Classical Theory Fichter , Joseph H . 1957 . Sociology . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Findlay , J . J . 1920 . An Introduction to Sociology , for Social Workers and General Readers . Manchester and London : Manchester University Press & Longmans Green . Giddens , Anthony . 1989 . Sociology . Cambridge : Polity Press . Giddings , Franklin Henry . 1896 . The Principles of Sociology : An Analysis of the Phe - nomena of Association and of Social Organization . New York : Macmillan . . 1906 . Readings in Descriptive and Historical Sociology . New York : Mac - millan . Gillin , John Lewis , and John Philip Gillin . 1948 . Cultural Sociology : A Revision of " An Introduction to Sociology . " New York : Macmillan . Giner , Salvador . 1972 . Sociology . London : Martin Robertson . Ginsberg , Morris . 1934 . Sociology . London : Oxford University Press . Goldthorpe , J . E . 1974 . An Introduction to Sociology . Cambridge : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Gouldner , Alvin W . , and Helen P . Gouldner . 1963 . Modern Sociology : An Introduc - tion to the Study of Human Interaction . London : Hart - Davis . Green , Arnold W . 1968 . Sociology : An Analysis of Life in Modern Society , 5th ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Hankins , Frank Hamilton . 1928 . An Introduction to the Study of Society : An Outline of Primary Factors and Fundamental Institutions . New York : Macmillan . Hansen , Donald A . 1976 . An Invitation to Critical Sociology : Involvement , Criticism , Exploration . New York : Free Press . Haralambos , Michael . 1980 . Sociology : Themes and Perspectives . Slough : University Tutorial Press . Hart , Hornell . 1927 . The Science of Social Relations : An Introduction to Sociology . New York : Holt . Hayes , Edward Carey . 1916 . Introduction to the Study of Sociology . New York : Ap - pleton . Henslin , James M . 1975 . Introducing Sociology : Towards Understanding Life in Soci - ety . New York : Free Press . Hess , Beth B . , Elizabeth W . Markson , and Peter J . Stein . 1991 . Sociology , 4th ed . New York : Macmillan . Hiller , E . T . 1933 . Principles of Sociology . New York : Harper & Bros . Himes , Joseph S . 1968 . The Study of Sociology : An Introduction . Glenview , 111 . : Scott , Foresman . Hodges , Harold M . , Jr . 1971 . Con $ ict and Consensus : An Introduction to Sociology . New York : Harper & Row . Horowitz , David , ed . 197 1 . Radical Sociology : An Introduction . San Francisco : Can - field . Horton , Paul B . , and Chester L . Hunt . 1964 . Sociology . New York : McGraw - Hill . Hunt , Chester L . , et al . 1954 . Sociology in the Philippine Setting . Manila : Alemar ' s . Inkeles , Alex . 1964 . What Is Sociology ? An Introduction to the Discipline and Profes - sion . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Jagtenberg , Tom , and Phillip D ' Alton . 1992 . Four Dimensional Social Space : Class , Gender , Ethnicity , and Nature . A Reader in Australian Social Sciences , 2d ed . Sydney : HarperEducational . Johnson , Doyle P . 1986 . Sociological Theory : Classical Founders and Contemporary Perspectives , 2d ed . New York : Macmillan . Johnson , Harry M . 1961 . Sociology : A Systematic Introduction . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . King , David C . , and Marvin R . Koller . 1975 . Foundations of Sociology . San Francisco : Rinehart . American Journal of Sociology Kirkpatrick , Edwin A . 1916 . Fundamentals of Sociology : With Special Emphasis upon Community and Educational Problems . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . Knuttila , Murray . 1993 . Sociology Revisited : Basic Concepts and Perspectives . To - ronto : McClelland & Stewart . Koenig , Samuel . 1957 . Sociology : An Introduction to the Science of Society . New York : Barnes & Noble . Kornblum , William , and Carolyn D . Smith . 1991 . Sociology in a Changing World , 2d ed . Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Lee , Alfred McClung . 1946 . New Outline of the Principles of Sociology . New York : Barnes & Noble . Lenski , Gerhard . 1970 . Human Societies : A Macrolevel Introduction to Sociology . New York : McGraw - Hill . Lundberg , George A , , Clarence C . Schrag , and Otto N . Larsen . 1958 . Sociology , rev . ed . New York : Harper . Macionis , John J . 1989 . Sociology , 2d ed . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice Hall . MacIver , R . M . 1937 . Society : A Textbook of Sociology . New York : Farrar & Rinehart . Macrae , Donald . [ 1950 ? ] . Sociology . Nottingham : International University Society . Mannheim , Karl . 1957 . Systematic Sociology : An Introduction to the Science of Soci - ety , edited by J . S . Eros and W . A . C . Stewart . New York : Grove . McGee , Reece , ed . 1977 . Sociology : An Introduction . Hinsdale , 111 . : Dryden . McKee , James B . 1969 . Introduction to Sociology . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Win - ston . McNall , Scott G . 197 1 . The Sociological Experience : A Modern Introduction to Soci - ology , 2d ed . Boston : Little , Brown . Mills , C . Wright . 1960 . Images of Man : The Classic Tradition in Sociological Thinking . New York : Braziller . Mitchell , G . Duncan . 1959 . Sociology : The Study of Social Systems . London : Univer - sity Tutorial Press . Murray , Raymond W . 1947 . Introductory Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Crofts . Nisbet , Robert . 1970 . The Social Bond : An Introduction to the Study of Society . New York : Knopf . Nobbs , Jack , Robert Hine , and Margaret E . Flemming . 1975 . Sociology . London : Macmillan Education . Park , Robert E . , and Ernest W . Burgess . 1924 . Introduction to the Science of Sociol - ogy , 2d ed . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Parsons , Talcott , Edward Shils , Kaspar D . Naegele , and Jesse R . Pitts , eds . 1961 . Theories of Society : Foundations of Modern Sociological Theory . New York : Free Press . Phillips , Bernard S . 1969 . Sociology : Social Structure and Change . Toronto : Collier - Macmillan . Popenoe , David . 1971 . Sociology . New York : Appleton Century Crofts . Reuter , E . B . , and C . W . Hart . 1933 . Introduction to Sociology . New York : McGraw - Hill . Robertson , Ian . 1987 . Sociology , 3d ed . New York : Worth . Rose , Arnold M . 1967 . Sociology : The Study of Human Relations , 2d ed . New York : Knopf . Rose , Jerry D . 1971 . Introduction to Sociology . Chicago : Rand McNally . Rose , Peter I . , ed . 1967 . The Study of Society : An Integrated Anthology . New York : Random House . Ross , Edward Alsworth . 1938 . Principles of Sociology , 3d ed . New York : Appleton - Century . Sargent , Margaret . 1983 . Sociology for Australians . Melbourne : Longman Cheshire . Schaefer , Richard T . , and Robert P . Lamm . 1986 . Sociology : A Brief Introduction , 2d ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Classical Theory Selfe , D . L . 1975 . Sociology : An Introductory Course . London : Nelson . Sergeant , Graham . 1971 . A Textbook of Sociology . London : Macmillan . Sherman , Howard J . , and James L . Wood . 1979 . Sociology : Traditional and Radical Perspectives . New York : Harper & Row . Smelser , Neil J . , ed . 1967 . Sociology : An Introduction . New York : Wiley . Sprott , W . J . H . 1949 . Sociology . London : Hutchinson . Stark , Rodney . 1987 . Sociology , 2d ed . Belmont , Calif . : International Thomson . Stark , Rodney , et al . 1973 . Society Today , 2d ed . Del Mar , Calif . : CRM Books . Stewart , Elbert W . 1978 . Sociology : The Human Science . New York : McGraw - Hill . Sugarman , Barry . 1968 . Sociology . London : Heinemann . Thio , Alex . 1992 . Sociology : An Introduction . New York : Harper & Row . Tischler , Henry L . 1993 . Introduction to Sociology , 4th ed . Fort Worth , Tex . : Har - court . Waters , Malcolm , and Rodney Crook . 1993 . Sociology One : Principles of Sociological Analysis for Australians , 3d ed . Melbourne : Longman Cheshire . Wilkins , Elizabeth J . 1976 . An Introduction to Sociology , 2d ed . London : Macdon - ald & Evans . Wilson , Logan , and William L . Kolb . 1949 . Sociological Analysis : An Introductory Text and Case Book . New York : Harcourt Brace & World . Worsley , Peter , ed . 1970 . Introducing Sociology . Harmondsworth : Penguin . Wrong , Dennis H . , and Harry L . Gracey . 1972 . Readings in Introductory Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Macmillan . Young , Kimball , and Raymond W . Mack . 1962 . Sociology and Social Life , 2d ed . New York : American Book . REFERENCES Alexander , Jeffrey C . 1982 - 83 . Theoretical Logic in Sociology , vols . 2 - 3 . Berkeley and Los Angeles : University of California Press . . 1987 . " The Centrality of the Classics . " Pp . 11 - 57 in Social Theory Today , edited by Anthony Giddens and Jonathan H . Turner . Cambridge : Polity Press . Allardt , Erik . 1994 . " Scandinavian Sociology and Its European Roots and Elements . " Pp . 119 - 40 in Sociology in Europe , edited by Birgitta Nedelmann and Piotr Sztompka . Berlin : Walter de Gruyter . Althusser , Louis , and Etienne Balibar . 1970 . Reading Capital , translated by B . Brew - ster . London : New Left Books Anderson , Francis . 1912 . Sociology in Australia : A Plea for Its Teaching . Sydney : Angus & Robertson . Asad , Talal , ed . 1973 . Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter . New York : Humani - ties Press . Bakunin , Mikhail . ( 1873 ) 1973 . " Statism and Anarchy [ extract ] . " Pp . 325 - 50 in Ba - kunin on Anarchy , edited by Sam Dolgoff . London : Allen & Unwin . Baldock , Cora V . , and Jim Lally . 1974 . Sociology in Australia and New Zealand : Theory and Methods . Westport , Conn . : Greenwood . Bannister , Robert . 1987 . Sociology and Scientism : The American Quest for Objectiv - ity , 1880 - 1940 . Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press . Becker , Howard , and Harry E . Barnes . 1938 . Social Thought from Lore to Science . Boston : Heath . Bell , Daniel . 1960 . The End of Ideology . Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press . Bellamy , Richard . 1987 . Modern Italian Social Theory . Cambridge : Polity Press . Bendix , Reinhard . 1960 . Max Weber , an Intellectual Portrait . New York : Doubleday . Bennoune , Mahfoud . 1988 . The Making of Contemporary Algeria , 1830 - 1987 . Cam - bridge : Cambridge University Press . American Journal of Sociology Berger , John . 1974 . " The Moment of Cubism . " Pp . 133 - 62 in The Look of Things . New York : Viking . Berman , Edward H . 1983 . The Infiuence of the Carnegie , Ford , and Rockefeller Foundations on American Foreign Policy . Albany : State University of New York Press . Bernard , L . L . , and Jessie Bernard . ( 1943 ) 1965 . Origins of American Sociology : The Social Science Movement in the United States . New York : Russell & Russell . Besnard , Philippe , ed . 1983 . The Sociological Domain : The Durkheimians and the Founding of French Sociology . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Bierstedt , Robert . 1963 . The Social Order : An Introduction to Sociology , 2d ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Booth , Charles . 1902 . Life and Labour of the People in London . Vol . 7 , Summary . London : Macmillan . Bottomore , Tom . ( 1962 ) 1987 . Sociology : A Guide to Problems and Literature , 3d ed . London : Allen & Unwin . Bottomore , Tom , and Robert Nisbet , eds . 1978 . A History of Sociological Analysis . London : Heinemann . Boudon , Raymond . 1994 . " European Sociology : The Identity Lost ? " Pp . 27 - 44 in So - ciology in Europe , edited by Birgitta Nedelmann and Piotr Sztompka . Berlin : Wal - ter de Gruyter . Branford , Victor . 1904 . " The Founders of Sociology . " American Journal of Sociology 10 ( 1 ) : 94 - 126 . Broom , Leonard , Philip Selznick , and Dorothy Broom Darroch . 1981 . Sociology , 7th ed . New York : Harper & Row . Bukharin , Nikolai . ( 1925 ) 1965 . Historical Materialism : A System of Sociology . New York : Russell & Russell . Burke , Edmund , 111 . 1980 . " The French Tradition of the Sociology of Islam . " Pp . 73 - 88 in Islamic Studies : A Tradition and Its Transformation , edited by Malcolm Kerr . Santa Monica , Calif . : Undena University Press . Burrow , J . W . 1966 . Evolution and Society : A Study in Victorian Social Theory . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cain , P . J . , and A . G . Hopkins . 1993 . British Imperialism : Innovation and Expansion , 1688 - 1914 . New York : Longman . Calhoun , Craig , Donald Light , and Suzanne Keller . 1994 . Sociology , 6th ed . New York : McGraw - Hill . Camic , Charles . 1989 . " Structure after SO Years : The Anatomy of a Charter . " Ameri - can Journal of Sociology 95 ( 1 ) : 38 - 107 . Case , Clarence Marsh . 1924 . Outlines of Introductory Sociology : A Textbook of Read - ings in Social Science . New York : Harcourt , Brace . Chafetz , Janet S . 1993 . " Sociological Theory : A Case of Multiple Personality Disor - der . " Perspectives 6 ( 1 ) : 1 - 2 . Challenger , Douglas F . 1994 . Durkheim through the Lens of Aristotle . Lanham , Md . : Rowman & Littlefield . Chatterjee , Bankimchandra . 1986 . Sociological Essays , translated and edited by S . N . Mukherjee and Marian Maddern . Calcutta : Rddhi - India . Career Guidance Foundation . 1995 . College Catalog Collection , 1995 - 96 ( microfiche ) , San Diego : Career Guidance Foundation . Clark , Terry Nichols . 1973 . Prophets and Patrons : The French University and the Emergence of the Social Sciences . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . Collins , Randall . 1994 . Four Sociological Traditions . New York : Oxford University Press . Comte , Auguste . ( 1851 - 54 ) 1875 - 77 . System of Positive Polity , or , Treatise on Sociol - ogy ( Systkme de politique positive ) , 4 vols . London : Longmans , Green . Classical Theory Coser , Lewis A . 1956 . The Functions of Social ConJEict . Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press . Coser , Lewis A , , and Bernard Rosenberg , eds . 1957 . Sociological Theory : A Book of Readings . New York : Macmillan . CronjC , Geoffrey . 1947 . Regvertigte rasse - apartheid . Stellenbosch : Christen - studen - tever - enigingmaatskappy van Suid - Afrika . Crozier , John B . 1911 . Sociology Applied to Practical Politics . London : Longmans Green . Dahrendorf , Ralf . ( 1957 ) 1959 . Class and Class ConJEict in Industrial Society . Stan - ford , Calif . : Stanford University Press . Deegan , Mary Jo . 1988 . Jane Addams and the Men of the Chicago School , 1892 - 1918 . New Brunswick , N . J . : Transaction Books . Desmond , Adrian , and James Moore . 1992 . Dawin . London : Penguin . Dollard , John . 1937 . Caste and Class in a Southern Town . New Haven , Conn . : Yale University Press . Drysdale , John . 1996 . " How Are Social - Scientific Concepts Formed ? A Reconstruction of Max Weber ' s Theory of Concept Formation . " Sociological Theory 14 ( 1 ) : 71 - 88 . Du Bois , W . E . B . 1899 . The Philadelphia Negro : A Social Study . Philadelphia : Uni - versity of Philadelphia . . ( 1904 ) 1978 . " The Atlanta Conferences . " Pp . 53 - 60 in On Sociology and the Black Community . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . . ( 1950 ) 1978 . " The Problem of the Twentieth Century Is the Problem of the Color Line . " Pp . 281 - 89 in On Sociology and the Black Community . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . . 1968 . Autobiography . [ New York ] : International Publishers . Duncan , David . 1908 . The Life and Letters of Herbert Spencer . London : Methuen . Durkheim , Emile . ( 1893 ) 1964 . The Division of Labor in Society , translated by G . Simpson . New York : Free Press . . ( 1895 ) 1964 . The Rules of Sociological Method , translated by A . Solovay and J . H . Mueller . Glencoe , 111 . : Free Press . , ed . 1898 - 1913 . L ' Anne ' e sociologique . vols . 1 - 12 . Paris : Alcan . . ( 1912 ) 1995 . The Elementary Forms of Religious Life , translated by Karen Fields . New York : Free Press . Easthope , Gary . 1974 . A History of Social Research Methods . London : Longman . ETS ( Educational Testing Service ) . 1987 . Practicing to Take the GRE Sociology Test . Princeton , N . J . : ETS & Warner . Fairbanks , Arthur . ( 1896 ) 1901 . Introduction to Sociology , 7th ed . New York : Scribner . Galton , Francis . 1904 . " Eugenics : Its Definition , Scope , and Aims . " American Journal of Sociology 10 ( 1 ) : 1 - 25 . Gerth , H . H . , and C . Wright Mills , trans . and eds . 1946 . From Max Weber : Essays in Sociology . New York : Oxford University Press . Ghamari - Tabrizi , Behrooz . 1994 . " Islam , Orientalism , and Science . " Master ' s thesis . University of California , Santa Cruz , Board of Studies in Sociology . Giddens , Anthony . 1971 . Capitalism and Modern Social Theory . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press . . 1989 . Sociology . Cambridge : Polity Press . Giddings , Franklin Henry . 1896 . The Principles of Sociology . New York : Macmillan . . 1906 . Readings in Descriptive and Historical Sociology . New York : Mac - millan . Gouldner , Alvin W . 1973 . For Sociology . London : Allen Lane . Grieder , Jerome . 1981 . Intellectuals and the State in Modern China : A Narrative His - tory . New York : Free Press . Guillory , John . 1995 . " Canon . " Pp . 233 - 49 in Critical Terms for Literary Study , 2d American Journal of Sociology ed . Edited by Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Guy , Jeff . 1983 . The Heretic : A Study of the Life of John William Colenso , 1814 - 1883 . Johannesburg : Ravan Press . Harvey , David . 1990 . The Condition of Postmodernity . Oxford : Blackwell . Hearn , William Edward . 1878 . The Aryan Household , Its Structure and Its Develop - ment : An Introduction to Comparative Jurisprudence . Melbourne : George Rob - ertson . Hiller , E . T . 1933 . Principles of Sociology . New York : Harper & Bros . Hinkle , Roscoe C . 1994 . Developments in American Sociological Theory , 1915 - 1950 . Albany : State University of New York Press . Hobhouse , L . T . 1904 . Democracy and Reaction . London : Fisher Unwin . . 1911 . Liberalism . London : Williams & Norgate . . 1915 . The World in Conj2ict . London : Fisher Unwin . Hobhouse , L . T . , G . C . Wheeler , and M . Ginsberg . 1915 . The Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peoples . London : Chapman & Hall . Hochschild , Arlie Russell . 1983 . The Managed Heart . Berkeley and Los Angeles : Uni - versity of California Press . Hoecker - Drysdale , Susan . 1992 . Harriet Martineau : First Woman Sociologist . New York : St . Martin ' s Press . Horowitz , David , ed . 197 1 . Radical Sociology : An Introduction . San Francisco : Can - field . Inkeles , Alex . 1964 . What Is Sociology ? Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Kalberg , Stephen . 1996 . " On the Neglect of Weber ' s Protestant Ethic as a Theoretical Treatise : Demarcating the Parameters of Postwar American Sociological Theory . " Sociological Theory 14 ( 1 ) : 49 - 70 . Karady , Victor . 1983 . " The Durkheimians in Academe : A Reconsideration . " Pp . 71 - 89 in The Sociological Domain , edited by Philippe Besnard . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Kasler , Dirk . 1994 . " Max Weber : The Living Classic . " Soziologie 3 : S114 - S126 . Kidd , Benjamin . 1898 . Social Evolution , 3d ed . London : Macmillan . Kiernan , V . G . ( 1969 ) 1986 . The Lords of Human Kind : Black Man , Yellow Man , and White Man in an Age of Empire . New York : Columbia University Press . Lehmann , Jennifer . 1993 . Deconstructing Durkheim : A Post - Poststructuralist Cri - tique . New York : Routledge . . 1994 . Durkheim and Women . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press . Lepenies , Wolf . 1988 . Between Literature and Science : The Rise of Sociology . Cam - bridge : Cambridge University Press . Letourneau , Charles . 1881 . Sociology , Based upon Ethnography . London : Chapman & Hall . Levine , Donald N . 1995 . Visions of the Sociological Tradition . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Liebersohn , Harry . 1988 . Fate and Utopia in German Sociology , 1870 - 1923 . Cam - bridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Lundberg , George A . , Clarence C . Schrag , and Otto N . Larsen . 1958 . Sociology , rev . ed . New York : Harper & Row . Liischen , Giinther . 1994 . " 25 Years of German Sociology after World War 11 : Institu - tionalization and Theory . " Soziologie 3 : Sll - S32 . Lyman , Stanford M . 1992 . Militarism , Imperialism , and Racial Accommodation : An Analysis and Interpretation of the Early Writings of Robert E . Park . Fayetteville : University of Arkansas Press . MacDonald , Robert H . 1994 . The Language of Empire : Myths and Metaphors of Popu - lar Imperialism , 1880 - 1918 . Manchester : Manchester University Press . Macionis , John J . 1993 . Sociology , 4th ed . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Classical Theory MacIver , R . M . 1937 . Society . New York : Farrar & Rinehart . Mannheim , Karl . ( 1935 ) 1940 . Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Maus , Heinz . 1962 . A Short History of Sociology . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . McGee , Reece , ed . 1977 . Sociology . Hinsdale , Ill . : Dryden Press . McNall , Scott G . 1971 . The Sociological Experience , 2d ed . Boston : Little , Brown . Merton , Robert K . ( 1949 ) 1957 . Social Theory and Social Structure , 2d ed . Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press . Mill , John Stuart . ( 1843 ) 1891 . A System of Logic , Ratiocinative and Inductive , peo - ple ' s ed . London : Longmans , Green . Mills , C . Wright . 1959 . The Sociological Imagination . New York : Oxford University Press . . 1960 . Images of Man : The Classic Tradition in Sociological Thinking . New York : Braziller . Morgan , J . Graham . 1983 . " Courses and Texts in Sociology . " Journal of the History of Sociology 5 ( 1 ) : 42 - 65 . Miinch , Richard . 1994 . Sociological Theory . Vol . 1 , From the 1850s to the 1920s . Chi - cago : Nelson - Hall . Murray , Raymond W . 1947 . Introductory Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Crofts . Nisbet , Robert A . 1967 . The Sociological Tradition . London : Heinemann . Ossowski , Stanislaw . 1963 . Class Structure in the Social Consciousness . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Pareto , Vilfredo . ( 1916 ) 1935 . The Mind and Society : A Treatise on General Sociology . New York : Harcourt Brace . Park , Robert E . , and Ernest W . Burgess . ( 1921 ) 1924 . Introduction to the Science of Sociology . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Parsons , Talcott . 1937 . The Structure of Social Action . New York : McGraw - Hill . . 1949 . Essays in Sociological Theory Pure and Applied . Glencoe , Ill . : Free Press . Parsons , Talcott , Edward Shils , Kaspar D . Naegele , and Jesse R . Pitts , eds . 1961 . Theories of Society : Foundations of Modem Sociological Theory . New York : Free Press . Paxton , Nancy L . 1991 . George Eliot and Herbert Spencer : Feminism , Evolutionism , and the Reconstruction of Gender . Princeton , N . J . : Princeton University Press . Platt , Jennifer . 1995 . " The United States Reception of Durkheim ' s The Rules of Socio - logical Method . " Sociological Perspectives 38 : 77 - 105 . Reuter , E . B . , and C . W . Hart . 1933 . Introduction to Sociology . New York : McGraw - Hill . Rex , John . 1961 . Key Problems of Sociological Theory . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Ross , Dorothy . 1991 . The Origins of American Social Science . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Rusden , G . W . 1908 . History of Australia : From Pre - historic Times to the Federal Convention of 1897 , 2d ed . Melbourne : Charles Stuart . Said , Edward W . 1993 . Culture and Imperialism . New York : Vintage . Schutz , Alfred . ( 1932 ) 1972 . The Phenomenology of the Social World . London : Heine - mann . Seidler , Victor J . 1994 . Unreasonable Men : Masculinity and Social Theory . London : Routledge . Seidman , Steven . 1983 . Liberalism and the Origins of European Social Theory . Berke - ley and Los Angeles : University of California Press . . 1994 . Contested Knowledge : Social Theory in the Postmodern Era . Cam - bridge , Mass . : Blackwell . Semmel , Bernard . 1993 . The Liberal Ideal and the Demons of Empire : Theories of American Journal of Sociology Imperialism from Adam Smith to Lenin . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . Sherman , Howard J . , and James L . Wood . 1979 . Sociology : Traditional and Radical Perspectives . New York : Harper & Row . Sinha , Mrinalini . 1995 . Colonial Masculinity . Manchester : Manchester University Press . Smelser , Neil J . , ed . 1967 . Sociology . New York : Wiley . Smith , T . V . , and Leonard D . White , eds . 1929 . Chicago : An Experiment in Social Science Research . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Sorokin , Pitirim A . 1928 . Contemporary Sociological Theories . New York : Harper & Bros . . 1937 - 41 . Social and Cultural Dynamics . New York : American Book . Spencer , Herbert . ( 1850 ) 1954 . Social Statics . New York : Robert Schalkenbach Foun - dation . . ( 1873 ) 1887 . The Study of Sociology , 13th ed . London : Kegan Paul , Trench . . ( 1874 - 77 ) 1893 - 96 . The Principles of Sociology , 3 vols . New York : Appleton . Spengler , Oswald . ( 1918 - 22 ) 1932 . The Decline of the West . London : Allen & Unwin . Stiebing , William H . 1993 . Uncovering the Past : A History of Archaeology . Buffalo , N . Y . : Prometheus Books . Stinchcombe , Arthur L . 1982 . " Should Sociologists Forget Their Mothers and Fa - thers ? " American Sociologist 17 ( 1 ) : 2 - 1 1 . Stuckenberg , J . H . W . 1903 . Sociology : The Science of Human Society . New York : Putnam . Sugarman , Barry . 1968 . Sociology . London : Heinemann . Sumner , William Graham . ( 1906 ) 1934 . Folkways : A Study of the Sociological Impor - tance of Usages , Manners , Customs , Mores , and Morals . Boston : Ginn . . 1963 . Social Daminism : Selected Essays , edited by Stow Persons . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall . Sun Yat - sen . ( 1927 ) 1975 . San Min Chu I : The Three Principles of the People . New York : Da Capo Press . Swingewood , Alan . 1991 . A Short History of Sociological Thought , 2d ed . New York : St . Martin ' s Press . Sydie , R . A . 1987 . Natural Women , Cultured Men : A Feminist Perspective on Socio - logical Theory . Milton Keynes : Open University Press . Tenbruck , Friedrich H . ( 1975 ) 1989 . " The Problem of Thematic Unity in the Works of Max Weber . " Pp . 42 - 84 in Reading Weber , edited by Keith Tribe . London : Routledge . Therborn , Goran . 1976 . Science , Class , and Society . London : New Left Books . Thio , Alex . 1992 . Sociology : An Introduction , 3d ed . New York : Harper & Row . Thomas , William I . 1907 . Sex and Society . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Timasheff , Nicholas S . 1967 . Sociological Theory : Its Nature and Growth , 3d ed . New York : Random House . Todd , Arthur James . 1918 . Theories of Social Progress : A Critical Study of the At - tempts to Fornulate the Conditions of Human Advance . New York : Macmillan . Tominaga , Ken ' ichi . 1994 . " European Sociology and the Modernisation of Japan . " Pp . 191 - 2 12 in Sociology in Europe , edited by Birgitta Nedelmann and Piotr Sztompka . Berlin : Walter de Gruyter . Tonnies , Ferdinand . ( 1887 ) 1955 . Community and Association ( Gemeinschaft und Ge - sellschaft ) , translated by Charles P . Loomis . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Tribe , Keith , ed . 1989 . Reading Weber . London : Routledge . Turner , Jonathan H . 1993 . Classical Sociological Theory : A Positivist ' s Perspective . Chicago : Nelson - Hall . Turner , Stephen P . , and Jonathan H . Turner . 1990 . The Impossible Science : An Insti - tutional Analysis of American Sociology . Newbury Park , Calif . : Sage . Classical Theory Tylor , Edward B . 1873 . Primitive Culture : Researches into the Development of My - thology , Philosophy , Religion , Language , Art , and Custom , 2d ed . London : Murray . Wallace , Walter L . 1994 . A Weberian Theory of Human Society : Structure and Evolu - tion . New Brunswick , N . J . : Rutgers University Press . Ward , Lester F . 1897 . Dynamic Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Appleton . . 1903 . Pure Sociology . New York : Macmillan . . 1907 . ' ' The Establishment of Sociology . " American Journal of Sociology 12 ( 5 ) : 581 - 87 . Waters , Malcolm , and Rodney Crook . 1993 . Sociology One : Principles of Sociological Analysis for Australians , 3d ed . Melbourne : Longman Cheshire . Weber , Max . ( 1894 ) 1989 . " Developmental Tendencies in the Situation of East Elbian Rural Labourers . " Pp . 158 - 87 in Reading Weber , edited by Keith Tribe . London : Routledge . . ( 1895 ) 1989 . " The National State and Economic Policy . " Pp . 188 - 209 in Read - ing Weber , edited by Keith Tribe . London : Routledge . . ( 1922 ) 1964 . Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft : Gmndrisse der verstehende Soziolo - gie , edited by Johannes Winckelmann . Koln : Kiepenheuer & Witsch . . ( 1922 ) 1978 . Economy and Society , edited by G . Roth and C . Wittich . Berke - ley : University of California Press . Wiese , Leopold von . 1932 . Systematic Sociology , translated by Howard P . Becker . New York : Wiley . Wolff , Kurt H . , ed . 1959 . Georg Simmel , 1858 - 1918 . Columbus : Ohio State University Press . , ed . 1960 . mile Durkheim , 1858 - 1917 . Columbus : Ohio State University Press . Wrong , Dennis H . , and Harry L . Gracey . 1972 . Readings in Introductory Sociology , 2d ed . New York : Macmillan .