T . Yamaguchi ( Ed . ) : PAKM 2008 , LNAI 5345 , pp . 232 – 243 , 2008 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 Ontology - Based Expertise Finding Maryam Fazel - Zarandi 1 and Eric Yu 2 1 Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto , Canada mfazel @ cs . toronto . edu 2 Faculty of Information Sciences , University of Toronto , Canada yu @ fis . utoronto . ca Abstract . To accomplish knowledge intensive tasks , people in organizations must be able to find the knowledge or information needed to solve complex problems . For this , people often rely on their past experiences , explicit docu - ments , and others who have the needed expertise . Knowledge Management Systems that enhance and facilitate the process of finding the right expert in an organization have gained much attention in recent years . This paper explores the potential benefits and challenges of using ontologies for improving existing systems . A modeling technique from requirements engineering is used to evalu - ate the proposed system and analyze the impact it would have on the goals of the stakeholders . This paper also discusses the organizational settings required for the successful deployment of the system in practice . Keywords : Expertise Finding Systems , Ontologies , Agent - Oriented Modeling . 1 Introduction To accomplish knowledge intensive tasks , people in organizations must be able to find the knowledge or information needed to solve complex problems . In addition to relying on their own memory , past experiences , and information and knowledge stored in impersonal sources such as databases , people usually rely heavily on others with knowledge and information [ 1 ] . Finding an expert to acquire information or to learn from , however , might not be an easy task for many reasons . Expertise is highly dynamic [ 15 ] , difficult to qualify [ 9 ] , and varying in level [ 9 ] . It is also difficult to validate other people’s expertise [ 15 ] and to distinguish a good expert from a bad one . Furthermore , due to the complexity of some problems , the assistance of multiple experts may be required [ 9 ] . The difficulty of locating experts increases in larger and more geographically distributed organizations [ 16 ] . In order to augment and assist the process of locating expertise within an organiza - tion , the study and development of special Knowledge Management Systems that sug - gest people who have some expertise in a given area , has received the attention of both researchers and organizations . The resulting recommender systems typically rely on individuals to provide accurate and comprehensive profiles of their competences and experiences [ 2 ] , but some also use mechanisms to automatically discover up - to - date expertise information from secondary sources such as documents and forums [ 16 ] . In a review of these systems in [ 16 ] , however , problems related to heterogeneous informa - tion sources , expertise analysis support , and interoperability were identified . Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 233 The common solution to the problems related to heterogeneous information sources and interoperability is to formally specify the meaning of the terminology of each system and to define a mapping between these terminologies . In other words , using ontologies to provide a shared common understanding of the structure of information among systems and software agents [ 11 ] . In addition , because of their powerful knowl - edge representation formalism and associated inference mechanisms [ 12 ] , ontologies can also be incorporated to address problems related to expertise analysis support . Taking these facts into account , it would seem natural to expect that Expertise Find - ing Systems ( EFS ) can benefit from the use of ontologies . However , there are various potential difficulties and challenges associated with the use of ontologies that may cause the system to fail . In this paper , we are interested in investigating the circum - stances under which an ontology - based EFS might or might not work . More specifi - cally , we want to systematically explore and analyze how ontologies might be used in EFS , before creating a prototype and conducting case - studies . For this , we use a mod - eling technique from requirements engineering to evaluate the proposed ontology - based EFS and analyze the impact that it would have on the goals of the stakeholders . The organization of this paper is as follows : Section 2 briefly presents the role that ontologies can play in Expertise Finding Systems . Section 3 is concerned with knowl - edge management analysis and discusses knowledge processes and knowledge mar - kets between individuals and presents an analysis of the technology supported by goal models developed using the i * notation . The required organizational settings for a successful deployment of the technology are also elaborated on in this section . Fi - nally , Section 4 concludes the paper . 2 Role of Ontologies An ontology is a formal description of a set of objects , concepts , and other entities that are assumed to exist in a domain of interest along with their properties and relationships that hold among them [ 4 ] and the constraints that exist over them . On - tologies provide a shared common understanding of information among people or software agents [ 3 ] and enable the reuse of domain knowledge [ 5 ] . They can be used to capture and represent data semantics and by assuming deductive capability as pro - vided by an inference engine , ontologies provide the means for deduction and auto - mated reasoning in order to generate further knowledge [ 3 ] ( i . e . , knowledge that is not explicitly known but that can be deducted based on the general knowledge of the domain ) . In addition , ontologies can also be used for information integration , i . e . , the merging of information from different sources despite differing conceptual and con - textual representations [ 11 ] . In the context of expertise finding , different types of ontologies may prove to be beneficial for different purposes . A domain ( expertise ) ontology which would capture and represent the terminology and concepts used in the domain is of central impor - tance . For example , EFS use different evidences as indicators of expertise [ 16 ] , some of which include self declarations of expertise and artifacts created by experts [ 9 ] . A domain ontology can be used to automatically annotate existing information resources and to perform automated reasoning to improve the indicator detection and extraction mechanisms . Also , since sources can possibly be physically distributed across the 234 M . Fazel - Zarandi and E . Yu organization and stored in different formats , domain ontologies can be used to auto - mate information integration . Furthermore , for self declarations of expertise , domain ontologies can be used to structure the different characteristics of users and their rela - tionships , as well as help the users in specifying their goals and competences . Another useful ontology is the organization ontology [ 3 ] which formalizes the or - ganizational structure and can be used to infer expertise based on the roles that the agents play and the communications that occur among them . The knowledge prove - nance and trust ontologies presented in [ 8 ] are other examples of ontologies which can improve expertise finding . These ontologies can be used to formally define the semantics of information sources , information dependencies , relationships between information sources and experts , and trust relationships to improve expertise recogni - tion and extraction . In order to have a successful system , it is essential to take into account the potential difficulties and challenges in using formal ontologies for EFS . Developing a domain ontology that is agreed upon by the members of the organization is often a difficult task ( for example , a term may have several widely accepted definitions or none at all ) . Achieving interoperability between different systems and integrating information from different sources are other highly challenging issues . Incompatibilities may arise due to different vocabularies and differences in the expressiveness power of the on - tologies ( or simply terminologies ) used for different systems . This is usually rooted in the fact that different engineering teams and domain experts are involved in creating different systems . These issues are the focus of many on - going studies in the ontology engineering literature . Once the required ontologies are developed and the desired level of interoperability is achieved , it is important to acknowledge that the ontologies should be incorporated in the daily activities and used for performing workflows . Otherwise , they will decay over time and would not be able to keep up with the dynamic nature of organizations . Specifications for ontologies often need to be changed to reflect changes in the real world ; therefore , ontologies have to be maintained and modified frequently , and the maintenance process needs to be viewed as an organizational process [ 13 ] . A group of knowledge engineers should be responsible for ontology maintenance , and a set of rules for making changes to the ontologies must be present . When making changes to an ontology , ontology versioning must be taken seriously , and the impact of the changes to the overall architecture must be considered . Otherwise , changes may result in incompatibilities between different system components , and also may change the semantics of the data . Having to rely on a group of knowledge engineers for mainte - nance is by itself another potential difficulty . Keeping the benefits and difficulties of using ontologies for improving EFS in mind , the question that is now raised is that under what circumstances would an on - tology - based expertise finding system actually work and be effective in practice ? One way to go about answering this question is to construct a prototype and conduct case - studies . However , we are more interested to see if it is possible to find a solution to this question by conducting a systematic analysis of the expertise finding problem . The final goal of such an analysis would be the determination of a set of steps for systematically guiding the design of EFS . The next section presents our attempts at answering this question using an agent - oriented modeling method . Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 235 3 KM Analysis Using Agent - Oriented Modeling The knowledge management analysis in this section will help in better understanding the role that an ontology - based EFS can play in an organization . Some of the ques - tions we intend to address include : Under which conditions can the ontology - based EFS fail ? , and How does failure affect the goals of corresponding stakeholders ? To answer these questions , an agent - oriented modeling approach is used , in which the EFS can be regarded to represent an “intentional actor” [ 14 ] – intentional because it pursues assigned goals , and actor because it can exhibit active behavior to a certain extent . The benefits of using this approach are [ 14 ] : 1 ) Making intentions of EFS explicit aids in reasoning and arguing about it ; 2 ) Reasoning about the EFS allows for the evaluation of different degrees of goal satisfaction among different actors , thus takes situational context of knowledge transfer into account ; and 3 ) By making rela - tions between different actors’ goals and the EFS explicit , the how and why the EFS works or fails can be made visible . For the construction of agent - oriented models , the i * framework [ 17 ] was chosen in this paper . This framework allows for clear and simple representation of actors’ goals and dependencies among them by means of strategic dependency ( SD ) and strategic rationale ( SR ) models . In addition , i * also gives the ability to reason about modeled goals by means of goal evaluation algorithms [ 6 ] . In i * , actors are repre - sented as agents , roles or positions and the framework has the ability to model com - mon concepts such as goals , softgoals , tasks and resources . SD models consist of a set of nodes representing actors and depict goal , task , resource and softgoal dependencies between them . SR models contain goals , tasks , resources and softgoals of specific actors that are related to each other through task - decomposition and means - ends links . Fig . 1 shows some of the elements of the i * framework and their corresponding graphical representations . See [ 17 ] for a more comprehensive background information about the i * framework . Fig . 1 . Selected elements of the i * framework Let us illustrate a simple example . Fig . 2 depicts a simplified SR model of the high - level goals , processes , and intentional dependencies of the roles of expertise seeker and provider . As can be seen in the figure , the expertise provider has the top level goals of Keep the job and Get promotion . In order to achieve the former goal s / he needs to Finish his / her own required functions on time . Satisfying management can also have a positive impact on both of the top level goals and to achieve this goal the ex - pertise provider needs to Help expertise seekers in addition to Finish his / her own required 236 M . Fazel - Zarandi and E . Yu functions . The expertise seeker , on the other hand , depends on the expertise provider to provide him / her with the required information or knowledge and / or teach him / her the required skills needed for completing a project . Note that the means - ends link is used to indicate that the goal of Help expertise seeker can be achieved by Provide information or Teach expertise seeker . Fig . 2 . Simplified model of intentional relationships between expertise seeker and provider In the following subsections , we first analyze the expertise finding problem in a general setting using the i * modeling notation . Then , we add the EFS to the model and analyze the impact it would have on the goals of the stakeholders . Finally , we look at the development and maintenance of the ontologies for EFS and analyze the interactions of ontology engineers with other stakeholders . 3 . 1 Expertise Finding without EFS To model and analyze the expertise finding problem we make use of existing studies on information and expertise seeking . In [ 10 ] , McDonald and Ackerman report that participants in a medium - sized software firm use complex , iterative behaviors to minimize the number of possible expertise sources , while at the same time , provide a high possibility of garnering the necessary expertise [ 10 ] . They distinguished two steps in finding expertise within organizations : 1 ) Expertise identification : the prob - lem of knowing what information or special skills other individuals have , and 2 ) Expertise selection : the problem of appropriately choosing among people with the required expertise . Other studies also support this distinction . For example , the study by Cross and Borgatti [ 1 ] revealed that in addition to expertise seeker’s awareness of a potential source’s expertise , other factors such as timely access to the source , a degree of safety in the relationship , and willingness of an expertise provider to cognitively engage in problem solving , all play an important part in determining whom the expertise seeker chooses to go to . Other criteria for not selecting an expert include cultural differences , language problems , or a lack of experience in a related but necessary discipline [ 10 ] . Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 237 Fig . 3 shows a SR model of the high - level goals , processes , and intentional de - pendencies of the roles of expertise seeker and provider and existing IT systems . For simplicity , other goals and tasks of these roles which are not related to expertise seek - ing and providing are omitted from the figure . For example , the Finish a project on time goal of the expertise seeker may involve finding information from explicit sources , but since this is not related to expertise finding , it is not shown in the figure . Expertise Seeker Experience from previous interactions Information Sources Social networking S o m e + Expertise Provider Gain reputation H e l p H e l p Not to be bothered too much Future reciprocity S o m e - H e l p Provide information Teach expertise seekers Perform the tasks D H e l p Identify experts Select experts Tacit knowledge Search existing documents Gain benefit and learn from others’ questions H e l p H e l p D Knowledge about how to perform the tasks Knowledge about the issue under question Legend D H e l p Create new documents D D Get to know experts and learn about their expertise S o m e + S o m e + Get promotion H e l p Achieve personal satisfaction A nd A nd Existing IT System Help expertise seekers D M a k e Keep the job Finish a project on time S o m e + D D Keep the job Satisfy management Finish his own required functions Obtain required information or knowledge from others Get experts to perform the tasks D Fig . 3 . Intentional relationships between expertise seeker and provider using the i * notation . For simplicity dependums are omitted . As can be seen in the model , the Obtain required information or knowledge from others goal of the expertise seeker is decomposed into two tasks : Identifying experts and Select - ing experts . The former task is further decomposed into Searching existing documents , Social networking , and using Experiences from previous interactions . The expertise selec - tion task is performed by Social networking and using pervious experiences . The model in Fig . 3 can also help in better understanding the knowledge market that may exist in an organization between expertise seekers and providers . The exper - tise seeker depends on the expert to provide him / her with adequate information or knowledge , teach necessary skills , or perform a task that the seeker is incapable of performing on his / her own . On the other hand , the expertise provider would want to Keep his / her job and Satisfy management in order to Get a promotion . Gaining reputation would also be helpful in Getting promotions , in addition to reducing the chances of being laid off and thus keeping the job . This goal can be ( partially ) achieved by help - ing expertise seekers . However , this task ( Help expertise seekers ) has a negative contri - bution to the goal of Not to be bothered too much which helps to get his / her own work done on time . Therefore , if the expertise provider is reputable enough , has a heavy 238 M . Fazel - Zarandi and E . Yu workload , or even in case of competition between members , s / he may not be moti - vated or willing to provide sufficient information , teach , or perform a task for the expertise seeker . Of course , there could also be personal satisfaction in helping others which could motivate the expertise provider to help the seeker . Considering the goals of the expertise provider , therefore , it is possible to see the importance of introducing proper incentives to encourage individuals to share their knowledge with others . De - pending on the culture of the organization , incentives can include individual recogni - tion , status upgrades , or even monetary prizes . An organization may also have IT systems and technology - oriented interfaces that actors depend on for their daily tasks . These may include search and retrieval tools , storage mechanisms , and technologies for communication and collaboration such as groupware and Wiki . The technologies , on the other hand , depend on the expertise seeker and provider ( amongst others ) to contribute contents to the systems . Thus , human actors and IT systems can also have knowledge relationships , although the knowledge market between them would depend on the embedded knowledge and adjusted settings provided by the developers and maintainers . 3 . 2 EFS – Benefits and Pitfalls for Various Stakeholders In this section , the analysis of the capabilities and functionalities of EFS is presented . The key requirements of an EFS , as pointed out in [ 9 ] , typically include the ability to identify experts , classify the type and level of expertise , validate the breadth and depth of expertise , and recommend experts . Based on this and the material presented in the previous sections , the functionalities and goals of the EFS are shown in Fig . 4 without the consideration of the knowledge management needs that it can fulfill in an organization . Fig . 4 . Goals , capabilities , and functionalities of the EFS technology Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 239 Expertise Seeker Experience from previous interactions Information Sources Social networking S o m e + Expertise Provider Gain reputation M a k e H e l p H e l p H e l p Not to be bothered too much Future reciprocity S o m e - H e l p Provide information Teach expertise seekers Perform the tasks D H e l p Identify experts Select experts to learn from Tacit knowledge Search existing documents Gain benefit and learn from others’ questions H e l p H e l p Knowledge about how to perform the tasks Knowledge about the issue under question Legend H e l p D Create new documents Get to know experts and learn about their expertise S o m e + S o m e + Get promotion H e l p Achieve personal satisfaction A nd A nd Help expertise seekers D M a k e Keep the job Finish a project on time S o m e + D D EFS Reliable recommendation Improve and facilitate expert finding Classify the type and level of expertise Validate the breadth and depth of expertise Recommend experts S o m e + S o m e + Rank experts Receive query Identify experts User profiles Information Sources Feedback from interactions Structure content H e l p S o m e + Shared Ontologies Use existing artifacts to determine expertise Use user profiles to determine expertise H e l p A nd A nd A nd Determine expertise Create and maintain user profile Knowledge about one’s expertise and competences New task Query EFS D D D D Provide feedback about interactions H e l p D D D New softgoal Keep the job Satisfy management Finish his own required functions Obtain required information or knowledge from others Get experts to perform the tasks Future need Fig . 5 . Interactions of expertise seeker and provider with the EFS The EFS should be able to interact and work with other existing IT systems in an organization in order to be more effective . For automatic detection of user expertise , the system depends on other IT systems to provide it with information sources that can be indexed and parsed to extract expertise . Such information sources may include documents generated by users , past projects individuals worked on , and contents of emails , forums , and bulletin boards . In order to analyze the roles and knowledge processes required to make EFS suc - cessful in an organization , the interactions of the expertise seeker and provider with the EFS are illustrated in Fig . 5 . This model expresses the tasks that the roles expect the EFS to do , as well as the required tasks that need to be performed by expertise seeker and provider in order to make the EFS successful . As can be seen in Fig . 5 , the introduction of the technology introduces some new tasks ( shown with oval around them ) for the expertise seeker and provider to do . For example , the new task of “Create and maintain user profiles” which is added to the responsibilities of the expertise provider and also “Query EFS” which is created for 240 M . Fazel - Zarandi and E . Yu the expertise seeker would not have existed before . However , the new task of “Pro - vide feedback about interactions” may have existed before and done somewhat infor - mally , but with the introduction of the new technology its nature changes . Now that the EFS is conceptualized as an agent and strategic dependencies are made explicit , it is possible to do goal evaluation to see if stakeholder goals are achieved and to determine the viability of the proposed solution . For example , the goal evaluation algorithm of [ 6 ] can be used . This algorithm assigns qualitative evaluation labels to the elements of the i * model according to a six point scale that range from satisfied , partially satisfied , conflict , unknown , partially denied to denied . The algorithm starts by assigning initial evaluation values and then continues by propagating these initial values through the network of actors using a combination of guidelines and human judgment [ 14 ] . By conducting these kinds of analysis , it is possible to identify criteria for success and effects of failure of the EFS . When , for example , the expertise provider does not perform the Create and maintain user profile task , then depending on whether s / he performs one or more of the other tasks satisfying Help expertise seekers or not 1 , this may or may not result in the propagation of the negative effect to Help expertise seekers , and in return have an effect on Satisfy management and Get promotion goals . However , this initial assignment would result in denying the resource dependency User Profiles and in return result in denying the Use profiles to determine expertise task of the EFS . Now if the ontologies are prop - erly maintained and the resource dependency Information sources is satisfied , then this would have a positive impact on Use existing artifacts to determine expertise and would stop the negative impact of the denial of Use profiles to determine expertise to propagate any further . However , if the ontology engineers fail to Maintain Ontologies , then the resource dependency Shared Ontologies is denied . This in turn would have a significant negative impact on the ability of the EFS to identify and recommend experts and would prevent it from achieving its goal Improve and facilitate expert finding . On the other hand , if the expertise seeker fails to Provide feedback , in addition to having a negative impact on his / her own goal Future need , this action denies the re - source dependency Feedback from interactions . This in turn has a negative impact on Validate the breadth and depth of expertise task of the EFS , and this negative impact propagates to the root and finally prevents the EFS from achieving its goal Improve and facilitate expert finding . In addition , the assignment of denied to the resource de - pendency Feedback from interactions , would also have a negative impact on the Gain reputation goal of the expertise provider . Thus , expertise seekers should be motivated to use the system and provide feedback . The ease of use , simplicity , and familiarity of the system , trust in that content is up - to - date , and the accuracy of expertise identifica - tion , are all factors that encourage the use of the system . Promoting the use of the system through the use of offline and online communications that highlight the fea - tures of the system can also be effective in encouraging individuals to use the EFS . 3 . 3 Role of Ontology Engineers The shared ontologies ( see Fig . 4 ) that are to be used to improve the EFS depend on ontology engineers to create and maintain them . This is an additional role that is 1 The means - ends relationship will take the maximum value of its children with satisfied being the highest value and denied being the lowest value . Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 241 needed if the system is to benefit from the use of ontologies . These engineers rely on domain experts , end - users , and management to provide them with the knowledge about the domain and existing standards that are used within the organization . They may also require the specifications of exiting IT systems and their information sources in order to create ontologies that are compatible with those systems . These knowledge dependencies , along with high level goals , capabilities , and responsibili - ties of ontology engineers are shown in Fig . 6 . In this model we can see the important role that tacit knowledge about the domain plays in the design of high quality shared ontologies . Of course , depending on the expertise domain , the amount and quality of the tacit knowledge that is required to be transferred to ontology engineers varies . In situations where there is an ongoing need for interactions with various actors to gain the required knowledge , the development of the ontology may not be successful . Actors may not be motivated enough to trans - fer their knowledge , especially since what they would be gaining in return may seem vague and non - immediate . To create a standard ontology , thus , it is important that the contributing actors have a positive attitude towards the ontology . In dynamic environments , the maintenance of ontologies may become an important concern . The changes may occur due to changes in the environment the system is operating in or changes to the requirements of the users . To have a successful and up - to - date system , the necessary changes should be applied to the ontologies frequently . Ontology engineers depend on domain experts , end - users , and management to inform them of the new requirements and possible changes in the environment . These actors should be aware of the importance of ontology maintenance and its implications for the whole system . Having a trained team of individuals in the organization can im - prove and facilitate the maintenance process . Create Ontology Domain Experts Gather existing ontologies for reuse Gain knowledge about the domain and existing standards Shared Ontologies D Existing IT System Ontology Engineer Knowledge about the domain , existing standards , and requirements Management Gather standard terminology Address and solve incompatibilities Create Ontology D D Maintain Ontology Discover changes Analyze the effect of changes on ontologies Apply changes and check consistency Document changes D D D D Users D Knowledge about different methodologies Rules for making changes Specification of existing IT systems and information sources D D D Use ontology design tools Ontology Design Tools D D Fig . 6 . Goals , capabilities , and responsibilities of Ontology Engineers 242 M . Fazel - Zarandi and E . Yu As already mentioned , designing large ontologies and insuring their consistency is an extremely complex and knowledge intensive task . Ontology engineers depend on ontology design tools for the creation and maintenance of ontologies . These tools typically use reasoners or theorem provers to provide feedback to the user about the logical implications of their design such as highlighting inconsistencies and redun - dancies [ 7 ] . If the ontology maintenance is to be partly supported by individuals within the organization , then it is necessary for these actors to become familiar with these tools . It is important to note that if the ontologies are designed as modular as possible – i . e . , if the ontology is divided into an upper level which rarely changes and an organic lower level that can be modified and changed by individuals – then ontol - ogy maintenance becomes more manageable . 4 Conclusions The most important contribution of this paper is the analysis of the expertise finding problem in a general setting using the i * modeling notation . This method allows for the systematic modeling of EFS and its effects on the goals of the stakeholders . Based on the findings , apart from the benefits and challenges of incorporating ontologies in systems , the social and organizational factors , such as having positive attitude towards the ontology , interactions between different actors , and having a trained team of indi - viduals responsible for ontology maintenance , are important for the successful de - ployment of an EFS . The role of the executive leadership in the application of these findings is critical . They can help motivate users to participate , establish realistic expectations , commu - nicate progress and successes , and overcome barriers . They can encourage a culture of mutual support and knowledge sharing , and help change corporate culture from being competitive to being cooperative . Future work will focus on the design and development of new systems based on the analysis in this study and the evaluation of these systems in real world settings . Acknowledgements . The authors gratefully acknowledge the constructive comments and helpful advice of Professor Mark S . Fox . References 1 . Cross , R . , Borgatti , S . P . : The Ties that Share : Relational Characteristics that Facilitate In - formation Seeking . In : Huysman , M . H . , Wulf , V . ( eds . ) Social Capital and Information Technology , pp . 137 – 161 . MIT Press , Cambridge ( 2004 ) 2 . Earl , M . : Knowledge Management Strategies : Toward a Taxonomy . Journal of Manage - ment Information Systems 18 ( 1 ) , 215 – 233 ( Summer 2001 ) 3 . Fox , M . S . , Barbuceanu , M . , Gruninger , M . , Lin , J . : An Organization Ontology for Enter - prise Modelling . In : Prietula , M . , Carley , K . , Gasser , L . ( eds . ) Simulating Organizations : Computational Models of Institutions and Groups , pp . 131 – 152 . AAAI / MIT Press , Menlo Park ( 1997 ) 4 . Gruber , T . R . : Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Shar - ing , in KSL 93 - 04 , Knowledge Systems Laboratory , Stanford University ( 1993 ) Ontology - Based Expertise Finding 243 5 . Guarino , N . : Formal Ontology and Information Systems . In : Proceedings of FOIS 1998 , Trento , Italy , pp . 3 – 15 ( 1998 ) 6 . Horkoff , J . : Using i * Models for Evaluation , Master’s Thesis , University of Toronto , To - ronto , Canada ( 2006 ) , http : / / www . cs . utoronto . ca / ~ jenhork / MScThesis / Thesis . pdf 7 . Horrocks , I . : Semantic Web : The Story So Far . In : Proceedings of the 2007 International Cross - Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility ( W4A ) , vol . 225 , pp . 120 – 125 . ACM Press , New York ( 2007 ) 8 . Huang , J . : Knowledge Provenance : An Approach to Modeling and Maintaining the Evolu - tion and Validity of Knowledge , PhD Thesis , Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , University of Toronto , Canada ( 2008 ) , https : / / tspace . library . utoronto . ca / bitstream / 1807 / 11112 / 1 / Huang _ Jingwei _ PhD _ Thesis . 2007 - 12 . pdf 9 . Maybury , M . T . : Expert Finding Systems , MITRE Technical Report , Bedford , MA ( 2006 ) 10 . McDonald , D . W . , Ackerman , M . S . : Just Talk to Me : A Field Study of Expertise Location . In : Proceedings of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW 1998 ) , Seattle , WA ( 1998 ) 11 . Noy , N . , McGuiness , D . L . : Ontology Development 101 : A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology , Stanford Knowledge Systems Laboratory Technical Report ( 2001 ) 12 . Razmerita , L . , Angehrn , A . , Maedche , A . : Ontology - based User Modeling for Knowledge Management Systems . In : User Modeling 2003 , Pennsylvania , pp . 213 – 217 ( 2003 ) 13 . Staab , S . , Studer , R . , Schnurr , H . P . , Sure , Y . : Knowledge Processes and Ontologies . IEEE Intelligent Systems ( 2001 ) 14 . Strohmaier , M . , Yu , E . , Horkoff , J . , Aranda , J . , Easterbrook , S . : Analyzing Knowledge Transfer Effectiveness – An Agent - Oriented Modeling Approach . In : Proceedings of the 40 th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS 2007 ) . IEEE Computer Society , HI ( 2007 ) 15 . Vennesland , A . : Finding and Mapping Expertise Automatically Using Corporate Data , M . Sc . Thesis , Department of Computer and Information Science , Norwegian University of Science and Technology ( 2007 ) 16 . Yimam - Seid , D . , Kobsa , A . : Expert finding Systems for Organizations : Problem and Do - main Analysis and the DEMOIR Approach . Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce 13 ( 1 ) ( 2003 ) 17 . Yu , E . : Modeling Strategic Relationships for Process Reengineering , PhD thesis , Depart - ment of Computer Science , University of Toronto , Canada ( 1995 ) , http : / / portal . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 922590