REVIEW PAPER The emergence of ECM mechanics and cytoskeletal tension as important regulators of cell function Shelly R . Peyton Æ Cyrus M . Ghajar Æ Chirag B . Khatiwala Æ Andrew J . Putnam Received : 10 July 2006 / Accepted : 26 October 2006 / Published online : 12 May 2007 (cid:1) Humana Press Inc . 2007 Abstract The ability to harvest and maintain viable cells from mammalian tissues represented a critical advance in biomedical research , enabling individual cells to be cultured and studied in molecular detail . However , in these traditional cultures , cells are grown on rigid glass or polystyrene substrates , the mechanical properties of which often do not match those of the in vivo tissue from which the cells were originally derived . This mechanical mismatch likely contributes to abrupt changes in cellular phenotype . In fact , it has been proposed that mechanical changes in the cellular microenvironment may alone be responsible for driv - ing speciﬁc cellular behaviors . Recent multidisciplinary efforts from basic scientists and engineers have begun to address this hypothesis more explicitly by probing the effects of ECM mechanics on cell and tissue function . Understanding the consequences of such mechanical changes is physiologically relevant in the context of a number of tissues in which altered mechanics may either correlate with or play an important role in the onset of pathology . Examples include changes in the compliance of blood vessels associated with atherosclerosis and intimal hyperplasia , as well as changes in the mechanical properties of developing tumors . Compelling evidence from 2 - D in vitro model systems has shown that substrate mechanical properties induce changes in cell shape , migration , proliferation , and differentiation , but it remains to be seen whether or not these same effects translate to 3 - D systems or in vivo . Furthermore , the molecular ‘‘mechanotransduction’’ mechanisms by which cells respond to changes in ECM mechanics remain unclear . Here , we provide some historical context for this emerging area of research , and discuss recent evidence that regulation of cytoskeletal tension by changes in ECM mechanics ( either directly or indirectly ) may provide a critical switch that controls cell function . Keywords Extracellular matrix (cid:1) Mechanotransduction (cid:1) Cytoskeleton (cid:1) RhoA Introduction In the late 19th century , Julius Wolff ﬁrst proposed the idea that bone is deposited and resorbed in response to mechanical stress [ 197 ] . This fundamental premise motivated numerous mathematical incarnations of Wolff’s Law , and has had a long history of importance in orthopedics . Unknowingly to him , Wolff would also have a huge impact on the ﬁeld of tissue engineering into the 21st century , as witnessed by extensive research focused on the development of bioreactors capable of applying mechanical forces to engineered tissues , particularly those designed for musculoskeletal and cardiovascular applications [ 158 ] . However , emerging experimental evidence also suggests that the intrinsic mechanical properties of the cellular micro - environment can inﬂuence cell function both in vitro S . R . Peyton (cid:1) C . B . Khatiwala (cid:1) A . J . Putnam Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science , The Henry Samueli School of Engineering , University of California , Irvine , CA 92697 - 2715 , USA C . M . Ghajar (cid:1) A . J . Putnam ( & ) Department of Biomedical Engineering , The Henry Samueli School of Engineering , University of California , 3107 Natural Sciences II , Irvine , CA 92697 - 2715 , USA e - mail : aputnam @ uci . edu Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 DOI 10 . 1007 / s12013 - 007 - 0004 - y and perhaps in vivo , suggesting that Wolff’s Law may be extended more generally to the development of tissues throughout the body . A better understanding of the role of mechanics , and the molecular mechanisms by which cells sense mechanical cues , is critical to translating tissue engi - neering from an empirical science to a rigorous engi - neering discipline , potentially enabling the elucidation of predictive design criteria for synthetic biomaterials designed to mimic the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Clinically , tissue engineering is motivated by the high cost of treating patients with organ or tissue failure , which accounts for approximately 50 % of the total annual health care costs in the US [ 112 ] . Surgical therapies for the treatment of these problems include organ / tissue transplantation or the use of completely synthetic devices ( heart valves , ex vivo dialysis , etc . ) , but the limited availability of transplantable tissues and the inability of completely synthetic prostheses to adapt , remodel , and fully restore function limit these approaches . The ﬁeld of tissue engineering holds enormous potential to revolutionize the ﬁeld of medi - cine in the long run by providing replacement tissues for the human body , but may have an even greater impact in the short - term by providing relevant tissue - speciﬁc model systems in which to study cell physiology and / or pathology . The interest in tissue engineering of late is staggering , with global publications rising from about 200 in 1999 to more than a 1 , 000 in 2003 ( European Molecular Biology Organization Reports , 2004 ) . Despite signiﬁcant research progress in the realm of tissue engineering over the past two decades , functional engineered tissues of any substantial size have not been realized . Translating advances in tissue engineering from bench to bedside requires overcoming many hurdles ( For review , see [ 99 ] ) . One hurdle relates to controlling cell , and thus tissue , behavior to create functional engineered tissues . It is increasingly clear that a variety of inputs must be provided with precise spatial and temporal control in order to control cellular pheno - type . These inputs can be in the form of soluble chemokines ( e . g . , growth factors ) , signals from neigh - boring cells , cues from insoluble proteins that mediate cellular adhesion to the ECM , and physical or struc - tural properties inherent to the ECM . With respect to these latter ECM - derived cues , others and we have hypothesized that the bi - directional , reciprocal inter - actions between cells and the ECM in which they reside constitute a critical control element . This hypothesis is supported by extensive recent evidence suggesting an instructional role for ECM mechanics in driving cell behavior and tissue development . This review will focus on this hypothesis in greater detail , discussing some of the recent evidence high - lighting the ECM’s mechanical role in regulating cell adhesion , spreading , and migration . We also discuss the relevance of ECM mechanics to tissue function and both normal and pathological development . The mechanisms by which intrinsic ECM mechanics inﬂu - ence cell and tissue behavior remain unclear , but are likely similar to mechanotransduction mechanisms by which cells respond to applied mechanical forces . Here we focus on the idea that changing matrix mechanics inﬂuences myosin - driven , actin - mediated contractility , through either a biophysical disruption of a presump - tive force balance between the cell and ECM or via biochemical changes in cell signaling . Finally , given the apparent importance of ECM mechanics on cell fate , we summarize the natural protein and synthetic poly - mer - based systems that are currently in use to study ECM mechanical inﬂuences on cell behavior , and dis - cuss the particular systems that can be translated to address this question in 3 - D . Mechanical regulation of cell adhesion , spreading , and migration Among the earliest evidence indicating the importance of mechanical interactions between cells and the matrix came in the form of pioneering work from Harris and colleagues , who showed that cell - generated tractional forces induce the formation of wrinkles in thin silastic substrates [ 81 ] . Although provocative , these did not make a signiﬁcant impact in the literature until 1997 when Wang and colleagues showed that the migration of NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts depends on ECM stiffness [ 144 ] . Using substrates with tunable mechan - ical properties covalently functionalized with a mono - layer of matrix protein , they demonstrated that ﬁbroblasts preferentially migrate from a soft surface to a stiff surface . They created two polyacrylamide hy - drogels of different rigidities side - by - side , creating a sharp interface between soft and stiff . Cells that sensed this boundary preferentially migrated onto the stiffer surface . The widespread appeal of Wang’s studies to the ﬁeld of mechanobiology was his use of ECM - functionalized polyacrylamide gels , familiar to arguably every lab conducting cell and molecular biology research for use in protein separations , as the underlying cell adhesion substrate . Intuitive to all of us who have performed polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , changing the relative amounts of acrylamide and bisacrylamide inﬂuences the gels’ mechanical properties in a Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 301 straightforward manner . Wang’s studies with these substrates led to the identiﬁcation of a new form of directed cell migration , called durotaxis or mechano - taxis , in which compliance gradients ( analogous to chemotactic or haptotactic gradients ) dictate the direction of cell movement [ 120 ] . Subsequent studies by other investigators using micropatterned polyacryl - amide substrates conﬁrmed this form of directional migration , showing that NIH 3T3s and endothelial cells preferentially accumulate and persist on stiff regions after several days of culture [ 73 ] . Further , elegant studies using photopolymerized polyacrylamide gels to create radial gradients in compliance have shown that smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) sense smooth , subtle gradients in mechanical compliance [ 198 ] . Exploiting these ﬁndings has already led to the development of two bioengineered devices designed to harness this new form of directional migration [ 25 , 202 ] , and may yield additional applications in wound healing and regenerative medicine . Extensive studies of cell spreading and morphology using polyacrylamide substrates have revealed that the control of cell spreading and morphology by ECM mechanics depends heavily on cell type . Endothelial cells [ 201 ] and chondrocytes [ 67 ] have been docu - mented to abruptly change their spread area with increasing stiffness , whereas neutrophils do not [ 201 ] . On the other hand , the extent of SMC spreading depends on both ECM mechanics and ligand density in a biphasic fashion [ 53 ] . This biphasic dependence was also observed in cell migration studies ( Fig . 1 ) . Spe - ciﬁcally , both aortic SMCs and pre - osteoblastic MC3T3 - E1 cells achieved maximum migration speeds in vitro on ‘‘optimally stiff’’ substrates , although the exact values were cell - type dependent [ 100 , 148 ] . This observed biphasic dependence on ECM rigidity bears striking resemblance to the regulation of migration speed by cell - ECM adhesivity predicted by modeling and veriﬁed experimentally a number of years ago [ 47 , 141 ] . Not surprisingly then , the value of the opti - mal stiffness at which cell speed was maximized could be shifted by varying the concentration of ECM pro - tein covalently attached to the substrate [ 100 , 148 ] , suggesting a strong interplay between ECM chemistry and mechanics in the regulation of cell migration . These data imply a tradeoff between substratum ad - hesivity ( the availability of cell – matrix adhesions ) and stiffness ( the elasticity of the substrate ) in regulating cell speed . On substrates with high ligand availability , cell speed reaches a maximum on softer substrates , while on substrates with lower ligand density a maxi - mum cell speed requires a stiffer substrate . Computa - tional modeling of 3 - D cell migration by Zaman et al . predicted a similar orthogonality between ECM chemistry and mechanics [ 203 ] . In support of this computational prediction , experimental evidence Fig . 1 Cell motility depends on ECM rigidity in a biphasic manner . ( A ) In 2 - D culture , SMCs reach a maximum migration speed on substrates of intermediate stiffness . The value of this intermediate stiffness shifts to softer substrates as ligand density is increased . The solid curve shows migration speed on a polyacrylamide gel with 0 . 8 l g / cm 2 ﬁbronectin , and the dashed curve represents a concentration of 8 . 0 l g / cm 2 . Asterisks denote statistical signiﬁcance from the maximum migration speed on respective ﬁbronectin concentration ( Figure adapted with per - mission from [ 148 ] ) . ( B ) In 3 - D cultures , computational models predict cell motility similarly depends on the balance of cell – ECM attachment ( ligand density , given as an order of magnitude estimate in [ M ] ) and ECM stiffness . Cells on soft substrates require more attachment points to generate sufﬁcient traction to pull the cell body forward and migrate . In contrast , cells on stiffer substrates and / or substrates that are highly adhesive generate a large amount of internal traction , making it difﬁcult for cells to retract their rear edge , therefore reducing their migration speed . ( Figure adapted with permission from [ 203 ] ) 302 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 supporting a role for ECM mechanics in 3 - D tumor cell migration was also recently published by these same investigators [ 204 ] . Speciﬁcally , 3 - D cell migration as - says in which Matrigel density , ﬁbronectin concentra - tion , and integrin adhesiveness were systematically varied revealed that the speed with which DU - 145 carcinoma cells migrate depends on a delicate balanc - ing act between cell - based tractional and adhesive forces . In agreement with our earlier 2 - D studies using polyacrylamide substrates , these studies reported that 3 - D cell migration speeds depend on Matrigel con - centration ( and in turn , ECM mechanical properties ) in a biphasic fashion . However , when cell adhesiveness was reduced using an integrin - blocking antibody , the maximum migration speed shifted to softer substrates , apparently contradicting the ﬁnding on 2 - D substrates that maximal migration speeds can be achieved despite reduced adhesiveness so long as substrate stiffness is increased to compensate [ 148 ] . However , as discussed later in this review , manipulating Matrigel density simultaneously inﬂuences adhesive ligand density , proteolytic sensitivity , and porosity , which in turn may account for this apparent contradiction . Clearly there are rich opportunities for future studies to address the mechanisms underlying these distinct differences be - tween 2 - D and 3 - D migration and the correlation with ECM mechanics . Nevertheless , despite this and other compelling evidence from polyacrylamide substrates indicating that ECM mechanics inﬂuence cell spreading and motility , it has been argued that changing the cross - linking density of polyacrylamide gels alters the surface properties of the gels . This may inﬂuence the relative surface hydrophilicity of gels possessing different moduli values , which may , in turn , affect the covalent coupling or physical presentation of full - length pro - teins on the acrylamide surfaces . As a result , observed differences in cells cultured on polyacrylamide gels of different mechanical properties may be due to the indirect changes in ligand presentation . Our own ﬁndings suggest that changing cross - linking density does not signiﬁcantly alter the covalent coupling of ECM proteins [ 100 , 148 ] , but we acknowledge that more extensive surface characterization is needed to rule out this possibility . However , perhaps even more convincing is the ever - increasing number of studies with a wide variety of cell types ( from neurons to osteoblasts ) , some of which exploit mechanically tun - able systems other than polyacrylamide , all which converge to the same idea : virtually all mammalian cells are mechanosensitive . We refer the reader to some excellent recent reviews for additional insights regarding this universal conclusion [ 48 , 68 , 91 ] . The impact of ECM mechanics on cell phenotype and tissue development While there is now extensive evidence that the 2 - D spreading and motility of many different cell types are inﬂuenced by ECM mechanics in vitro , the relevance of these observations for cell function and tissue development in vivo is just beginning to be elucidated . Morphogenesis requires the coordination of commu - nities of cells and proper cell differentiation , and the chemical role of the ECM in regulating these is well - documented [ 1 ] . Predicted by the premise of Wolff’s Law , the importance of mechanical forces on tissue development has increasingly become recognized over the past two decades , and it is now widely believed that the application of external forces to tissues inﬂuences both morphogenesis and homeostasis . This is intuitive for cardiovascular and musculoskeletal tissues , which experience dynamic mechanical loading in vivo . As a result , the development of bioreactor systems capable of applying physiologic loads has become a major focus of tissue engineering research . Engineers have devel - oped in vitro systems to apply mechanical strain to engineered bone [ 171 ] , cartilage [ 42 ] , and skeletal muscle [ 152 ] , and have contributed to our under - standing of the responses of endothelial cells to phys - iologic shear stresses [ 169 ] . A great deal of work has also focused on the response of vascular SMCs and tissues to static [ 153 ] and cyclic mechanical strain [ 177 ] in an effort to mimic the forces experienced by these cells that result from the pulsatile nature of blood ﬂow . Differentiated SMCs in normal arteries are con - tractile , and do not respond to growth signals under normal in vivo conditions . When removed from the body and placed in 2 - D cell culture , these cells revert from their contractile ( differentiated ) phenotype to a synthetic ( proliferative ) phenotype , typically seen during vasculogenesis . This transition is inﬂuenced in culture by ECM composition , soluble factors , and mechanical stress [ 179 , 180 ] . Using two - dimensional cell culture systems capable of applying uniaxial or equibiaxial strain , it has been shown that the transition of SMCs from the synthetic to the contractile pheno - type can be transiently induced by removal of serum components or via mechanical strain [ 160 , 195 ] . Similar results have also been reported with 3 - D engineered smooth muscle tissues [ 94 , 101 ] . This phenotypic con - version depends on the chemical identity of the ECM , as does the phenotypic response of engineered smooth muscle tissues subjected in vitro to physiologic levels of strain [ 101 , 102 , 134 , 178 ] . In general terms , these ﬁndings imply that mechanical forces play a homeo - static role in maintaining the differentiated SMC Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 303 phenotype . This argument is further supported by re - cent evidence obtained using engineered smooth muscle tissue models , which indicate that SMCs take on an osteoblast - like phenotype in the absence of cyclic mechanical strain by increasing expression of several bone - associated genes in a manner that mimics ectopic calciﬁcation [ 134 ] . Thus , while it is clear that SMCs and numerous other cell types respond to applied load , the in vitro studies using polyacrylamide described in the previous section also suggest that nearly all cells are responsive to the intrinsic mechanical properties of their micro - environment . In vivo , the static mechanical properties of tissues vary greatly from one tissue to another . For example , soft neurological tissues ( e . g . , brain ) possess an equilibrium modulus on the order of 1 kPa , whereas hard connective tissue ( e . g . , bone ) can have moduli values in excess of 1 MPa [ 64 ] . Do these different mechanical properties actively instruct cells ? The ﬁrst insights into this question came in the late 1980s , when the differentiated phenotype of epithelial cells in vitro was obtained in a soft , deformable 3 - D matrix , but not on a rigid glass substratum with comparable ligand density [ 139 ] . More recently , it has been suggested that cells will adopt tissue - speciﬁc fates when cultured on or within surfaces possessing mechanical properties that mimic their native in vivo environment , a hypothesis that makes intuitive teleological sense . Perhaps the best evidence supporting this hypothesis comes from Discher and colleagues , who ﬁrst showed that multi - nucleated skeletal muscle myotubes form striated actin and myosin ﬁlaments indicative of their optimal dif - ferentiation on compliant surfaces whose mechanical properties approximate the equilibrium modulus of native skeletal muscle ( ~ 12 kPa ) [ 54 ] . Recently , more compelling data from this same group have shown that matrix mechanical properties can direct the fate of bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells , with soft matrices that mimic brain supporting neurogene - sis , stiffer matrices that mimic muscle supporting myogenesis , and rigid matrices that approach the stiffness of a collagenous osteoid microenvironment conducting osteogenesis [ 55 ] . Importantly , this latter study also showed that reprogramming of these lin - eages via the addition of soluble factors is possible if the culture duration is short ( ~ 1 week ) . However , after several weeks in culture , the cells commit to the line - age speciﬁed by the mechanical properties of the sub - strate . Extending this theme , we recently reported that SMCs regulate the expression and organization of calponin and caldesmon , two contractile markers indicative of SMC differentiation , as a function of substrate mechanics [ 149 ] , and that osteoblastic pro - genitor cells deposit mineralized matrix to an increas - ing degree as ECM rigidity is increased ( Fig . 2 ) [ 100 ] . In general , tissue morphogenesis in vitro appears to be regulated by ECM compliance in the same fashion , with evidence that ﬁbroblasts , kidney cells , and heart explants all form tissue - like structures on soft sub - strates but tend to migrate away from each other and spread out into non - tissue like structures on stiffer surfaces , just as they do on polystyrene tissue culture dishes [ 77 ] . The ECM’s inﬂuence on capillary morphoegenesis is another area in which we and other investigators are interested [ 43 ] . Whether forming through the differ - entiation of precursor cells ( vasculogenesis ) or sprouting from an existing vascular network ( angio - genesis ) , the processes by which endothelial cells ( ECs ) assemble into functional tubes within a 3 - D environ - ment have implications in developmental processes and numerous pathologies [ 26 ] . While great progress has been made in identifying the key chemical medi - ators governing this phenomenon [ 95 ] , Ingber and Folkman were the ﬁrst to propose a critical role for ECM mechanics on EC differentiation into tubular Fig . 2 Mineral deposition is regulated by polyacrylamide stiff - ness in pre - osteoblastic cells . These data show that MC3T3 - E1 cells , a mouse pre - osteoblastic cell line , deposit increasing amounts of hydroxyapatite - based mineral as substrate stiffness is increased ( left - to - right ) . Mineral deposits were detected using Von Kossa staining and appear as focal black spots . ( Scale bar , 100 l m . ) ( Figure adapted with permission from [ 100 ] ) 304 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 networks [ 88 , 92 ] . This work built on earlier 2 - D studies demonstrating that while rigid substrates resisted cell - generated forces and encouraged cell spreading , more malleable substrates facilitated cell - rounding [ 93 ] . Ingber and Folkman made the correla - tion to EC differentiation based on matrix density ; by culturing capillary ECs on a rigid substrate , they were able to induce rapid tube formation by coating the cell culture plates with intermediate concentrations of ei - ther ﬁbronectin or collagen type IV . High protein density led to cell spreading while low ECM density resulted in less attachment ( and hence apoptosis ) and decreased cell – cell contact , which is necessary for tube formation to occur [ 92 ] . The role of substrate mechanics has also been more explicitly investigated by culturing human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVEC ) on ﬁbrin hydrogels of varying physico - chemical properties . These studies showed that HU - VECs only form tube - like structures on ﬁbrin gels of very low density ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) , while bovine retinal endothelial cells required a far more dense substrate to form capillary - like structures ( 8 . 0 mg / ml ) [ 183 ] . These results suggest that the native microenvironment of a particular EC is a determinant in its behavior . Similar studies using ECM - modiﬁed polyacrylamide gels , which allow the separation of ECM ligand density and mechanics , demonstrated that keeping the adhesive ligand density constant while increasing the stiffness of the substrate was sufﬁcient to drive HUVECs away from a tube - like phenotype and toward a proliferative phenotype [ 45 ] . Studies that more appropriately mimic the 3 - D microenvironment experienced by cells in vivo have just begun to explore the effect of matrix mechanical properties on capillary morphogenesis . Nehls and Herrmann created a system in which microcarrier beads coated with ECs are embedded within ﬁbrin gels . By varying the physicochemical properties of the matrix via pH changes , they demonstrated that rela - tively rigid gels supported uncoordinated EC migration while the malleable gels , polymerized at higher pH , supported formation of microvessels [ 130 ] . Subsequent studies have supported the notion that increasing ﬁbrin gel stiffness , either by increasing cross - linking density via Factor XIII [ 182 ] or by increasing ﬁbrinogen con - centration [ 69 ] results in reduced capillary network formation , respectively ( Fig . 3 ) . Others have used collagen to determine whether ﬂoating gels are better able to support capillary morphogenesis than con - strained gels . While mechanically constrained collagen gels led to a slightly lower length of the capillary - like structures that formed , the constrained gels demon - strated signiﬁcantly higher average lumen area , which was attributed to the inability of ECs to remodel and contract these matrices vs . their ﬂoating counterparts [ 170 ] . Collagen hydrogels have also been used to demonstrate that neighboring colonies of ECs produce tractional stresses that remodel the ﬁbrillar network and cause directional sprouting of neighboring colonies toward each other [ 110 ] . Similar studies using ﬂoating vs . attached 3 - D gels have shown that ﬁbroblast proliferation depends on gel contraction in part due to changes in the activity of the PDGF receptor , sug - gesting cross - talk between substrate mechanics and growth factor signaling [ 117 ] . Alteration of ECM mechanics in pathophysiology In addition to the evidence that ECM mechanics inﬂuence cell function and tissue development in vitro , new correlations between mechanics and pathophysi - ology are being identiﬁed . This is perhaps most clear in the context of cardiovascular disease , but new insights regarding the role of ECM mechanics in tumorigenesis and metastasis are also emerging . Fig . 3 Fibrin gel density regulates endothelial sprouting in 3 - D . In an in vitro model of capillary morphogenesis , endothelial cells ( ECs ) seeded onto dextran microcarrier beads are cultured within 3 - D ﬁbrin gels of increasing density ( 2 . 5 , 5 , and 10 mg / ml from left - to - right ) . After 14 days of culture , these data show that the extent of EC differentiation into capillary - like tubes decreases with increasing ﬁbrin concentration . However , because increasing ﬁbrin concentration simultaneously stiffens the matrix , changes its porosity ( and hence proteolytic sensitivity ) , and alters the adhesive ligand density , the isolated effects of these parameters are not easily studied in this system . ( Scale bar 500 l m ) . ( Data similar to that in [ 69 ] . ) Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 305 Cardiovascular disease Cardiovascular disease accounts for an estimated $ 330 billion in health care costs each year , afﬂicts 61 . 8 million Americans , and will account for nearly 1 . 5 million deaths in the US this year alone ( Source : AHA Annual Report ) . In a variety of cardiovascular pathologies , such as hypertrophy , hypertension , and atherosclerosis , the mechanical properties of blood vessels and small arteries may be dramatically altered . However , it remains to be seen whether or not these mechanical alterations are solely a downstream con - sequence of earlier causal events , or whether or not they can actively contribute to the onset of pathology . Some evidence in support of this latter possibility comes from the observation that hypertensive condi - tions , which effectively increase the ‘‘zero stress state’’ ( the residual intrinsic stress in the absence of blood pressure ) , induce the phenotypic transition in SMCs , characterized by a decrease in the expression of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain isoforms , a - actin , h - caldesmon , and calponin [ 2 , 4 , 116 ] . Hypertensive tissues respond , in part , by remodeling their ECM in response to the altered mechanical load , as evidenced by changes in elastin deposition [ 98 ] . In this context , we hypothesize that normal ECM compliance is critical in the maintenance of healthy vasculature , and that small changes in the local mechanical environment of an otherwise healthy artery provide a set of signals instructing SMCs to switch from their contractile phenotype to a synthetic phenotype . These SMCs then act more like ﬁbroblasts , adopting a proliferative phenotype that is also capable of migrating from the media to the intima , and which correlates with upregulation of ﬁbronectin and Type I collagen expression while downregulating the produc - tion of elastin ( Fig . 4 ) . All of these events ( prolifera - tion , migration , and misregulated ECM remodeling ) may then contribute to intimal hyperplasia , perhaps exacerbating the original hypertensive pathology triggered by earlier molecular events . Tumorigenesis and metastasis It has been proposed that cancer cells undergo a series of six physiological changes as they progress toward an increasingly malignant phenotype : self - sufﬁciency through autocrine signaling , insensitivity to growth inhibitory signals , disregard of apoptosis cues , unin - hibited replication , sustained angiogenesis , and , lastly , enhanced invasiveness and ability to metastasize [ 80 ] . Accompanying these changes are alterations to the ECM that essentially ‘‘dedifferentiate’’ the surround - ing tissue . While the great majority of cancer research has focused on the aforementioned hallmarks and the differences in signaling and gene expression within cancer cells that cause these changes , the insoluble cues conferred by the altered ECM to the tumor and other cells within the tumor stroma are also critical . The fact that tumor microenvironments possess an often radically altered ECM is an underappreciated concept from the perspective of basic scientists . How - ever , this concept is likely much more intuitive to cli - nicians who routinely detect tumors through palpation . Likewise , numerous imaging modalities used to identify tumors are often based on structural alterations Fig . 4 Changes in vessel wall mechanics may inﬂuence the onset or severity of cardiovascular pathologies . In an atherosclerotic vessel , the intrinsic mechanical properties of the vessel wall ( indicative of the zero stress state ) are often dramatically altered due to changes in cholesterol deposition , shear stress , and / or changes in blood pressure . These mechanical cues may alter SMC phenotype in diseased vessels in one or more of the following three ways ( from left - to - right ) , ( 1 ) by stimulating the migration of SMCs from the medial to the intimal layer ; ( 2 ) by inducing the hyperproliferation ( or hypertrophy ) of SMCs within the intimal layer ; ( 3 ) by triggering alterations in ECM synthesis and remodeling by SMCs in the intimal layer . These pathological responses may exacerbate the formation of atherosclerotic plaques or contribute to arterial restenosis following angioplasty . ( Figure adapted with permission from [ 39 ] . ) 306 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 in the tumor microenvironment . The concentration of matrix components is drastically increased in the tumor stroma [ 19 ] , and the ratio of components are also af - fected by tumor - induced vascular permeability causing increased deposition of ﬁbrin throughout the extra - cellular space [ 50 ] . The immediate implications are multi - fold . First , the elastic modulus of tumor tissue is greatly increased while matrix porosity is decreased , reducing the interstitial mobility of higher molecular weight molecules [ 131 ] . Second , shrinking of the interstitial space could create a slower out - ﬂux of tu - mor - and stroma - generated ligands from the microen - vironment , resulting in increased local concentrations [ 142 ] . Third , localized ﬁbrosis could trigger a response among stromal ﬁbroblasts to further enhance angio - genesis and perpetuate this cycle [ 96 ] . Still , much of the current research has treated the ECM as a passive bystander , focusing on how proteinase ( especially members of the matrix metalloproteinase , MMP , family ) secretion by tumor cells functions to remodel the matrix . However , given the lack of clinical success experienced by MMP - targeting drugs in halting late - stage cancer invasion and metastasis [ 51 ] , it is clear that other avenues must be explored . Bissell and colleagues were among the ﬁrst to rec - ognize the instructive importance of 3 - D ECM as a regulator of tumor formation and growth . They dem - onstrated that culturing breast epithelial cells in Ma - trigel resulted in growth arrest and differentiation into spherical colonies , with protein expression patterns indicative of polarized structures . In contrast , culturing carcinomas in these gels resulted in reverse - polarized or unpolarized structures that would not assume a quiescient state [ 146 ] . This system was later exploited to demonstrate stark differences in b 1 - integrin expression in the normal and malignant cell types , a difference that led to the signiﬁcant ﬁnding that b 1 / b 4 surface expression ratio essentially modulated pheno - type ; inhibiting intergrin b 1 in malignant cultures re - verted these cells to a nearly normal phenotype , while inhibiting b 4 in normal cells disrupted their morpho - genesis [ 193 ] . Integrin blocking in malignant cells was also found to reduce overexpression of EGF receptor levels , indicating a coupling of these signaling path - ways that was not previously observed in 2 - D [ 192 ] . While these studies explored how cell – matrix interactions affected the differentiation of normal and malignant breast epithelial cells , the explicit role played by matrix mechanics in these phenomena has only recently been addressed by two seminal papers . First , Wozniak et al . examined how breast epithelial cell differentiation is mediated by the physical prop - erties of 3 - D collagen gels [ 199 ] . Speciﬁcally , while breast epithelial cells would differentiate into polarized duct - like structures in ﬂoating collagen gels , they would not form these structures in constrained gels , instead assuming a proliferative phenotype . Increasing collagen concentration over a narrow range in the ﬂoating gels also inhibited tubulogenesis . Second , Paszek et al . systematically measured the stiffness of malignant breast tissue in transgenic mice and com - pared it to normal tissue . They found that normal breast tissue was extremely soft , whereas the micro - environment surrounding tumor and the tumor itself was signiﬁcantly stiffer [ 143 ] . Whether matrix stiffening actively causes cancer is uncertain , as is the precise mechanism by which cancer cells sense stiffening within the tumor stroma . However , as the circum - stantial evidence continues to mount , the notion of the ECM as a passive bystander in tumor pathogenesis is fading . The result may possibly be a new class of cancer drugs focused on disrupting the mechanosensing portion of cell circuitry . Mechanisms underlying cell responses to mechanical stress Despite the observational evidence that ECM mechanics can control cell fate , the underlying mech - anisms by which this occurs remain under debate . As a result , the study of mechanotransduction , the process by which cells and tissues sense and respond to mechanical changes in their environment , has attracted a great deal of attention in the past decade . Ultimately , mechanotransduction involves a cascade of events that eventually converts a mechanical signal into an inte - grated cellular response [ 30 , 88 , 168 ] . It is generally well - accepted that a preferred pathway for mechano - transduction involves integrins , a class of heterodi - meric cell surface receptors responsible for the adhesive interactions between cells and the ECM . Integrins form a direct physical linkage between the ECM and the cytoskeleton , and also activate bio - chemical signaling networks by nucleating signaling proteins on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma mem - brane [ 70 , 86 , 165 ] . Given this integrated biochemical and biomechanical role for integrins , two dominant paradigms have emerged to explain the responses of cells to changes in the mechanical microenvironment . The ﬁrst paradigm is based on the fact that integrins mediate a bi - directional , reciprocal , and dynamic force balance between cells and the ECM . The second paradigm suggests that changes in the mechanics of the ECM trigger a cascade of soluble signaling events initiated from the adhesion sites . Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 307 The force balance paradigm : outside - in transduction On one hand , the force balance paradigm implies that externally applied mechanical forces can be directly transduced from the ECM to the underlying cytoskel - eton , imparting changes in cytoskeletal assembly and organization [ 87 ] . This idea , pioneered by Ingber and colleagues , is based on models of tensegrity architec - ture ﬁrst put forth by Fuller [ 63 , 87 , 186 ] . Applied to cells , the concept of tensegrity suggests the cytoskele - ton exists in a state of pre - stress that provides a homeostatic balance of forces between the cell and its surroundings [ 87 , 89 , 90 ] . ( The implications of pre - stress are discussed in more depth later in this section . ) Externally applied mechanical forces directly trans - duced to the underlying cytoskeleton via integrins would be super - imposed on this pre - existing homeo - static balance , and thereby change the assembly and organization of cytoskeletal elements to compensate [ 35 ] . These changes in ﬁlament assembly may then directly or indirectly alter cellular gene expression by inﬂuencing a variety of signaling pathways [ 30 , 85 ] . Consistent with this paradigm , changes in microtubule assembly occur in SMCs subjected to step - changes in applied strain on the time - scale of minutes [ 153 , 155 ] . In response to the much faster dynamic forces gener - ated by actin – myosin contraction in beating cardio - myocytes , microtubules undergo periodic buckling and unbuckling consistent with the idea that they are under compression [ 18 ] . There is also evidence that applied strain changes the size of focal adhesions [ 16 ] as well their dynamic growth [ 11 , 133 ] , which may ultimately control cell function [ 65 ] . Results from these and other studies have led to the development of predictive models regarding adhesion formation [ 167 ] and cell strengthening and organization [ 17 ] in response to mechanical stresses . Often over - looked in critiques of the tensegrity concept is the active role of the ECM in the pre - existing force balance . This issue was recently ad - dressed in an elegant study that measured the elastic recoil of actin stress ﬁbers upon laser incision [ 111 ] . Inhibiting myosin - generated tension in the cytoskele - ton slowed the recoil of the ﬁbers . Furthermore , on stiff substrates , disruption of multiple stress ﬁbers did not result in appreciable changes in cell shape . How - ever , on soft substrates , disruption of single ﬁbers in - duced signiﬁcant changes in cell shape and produced ECM retraction many microns away form the original laser incision . These data show that a rigid ECM is stiff enough to bear the increased load that results from severing the stress ﬁbers , whereas a compliant ECM is not . Importantly , these studies strengthen the idea that the cytoskeleton – integrin – ECM linkage provides a physical continuum for the reciprocal transmission of mechanical information . How might the force balance paradigm explain the data described earlier showing that cell motility is regulated by ECM mechanics in a biphasic fashion ? Force balance arguments imply that cells tune the magnitude of tractional stresses generated by myosin motors moving on actin ﬁlaments based , in part , on the rigidity of the ECM . Cells adhering to soft substrates would be unable to generate sufﬁcient tractional forces to propel the cell forward . On the other hand , cells adhering to rigid substrates would generate so much tractional stress that they would be incapable of movement , locked in a state of cellular ‘‘rigor mortis’’ characterized by a high degree of actin ﬁlaments and large , robust focal adhesions , both of which would need to be remodeled to yield locomotion . On substrates of intermediate stiffness , the state of actin - mediated traction is optimized in such a way that motility itself is optimized . In support of this model , it has been shown that agents that disrupt actin contractility retard cell motility on substrates of intermediate stiffness [ 148 ] . Several prior studies regarding substrate compliance in 2 - D have noted the large , well - deﬁned focal adhe - sion structures in many different cell types anchored to stiff substrates , in contrast to the small , ill - deﬁned adhesions in cells on softer substrates [ 53 , 100 , 144 , 145 , 148 ] ( Fig . 5 ) . The amount of force generated by these adhesive contacts has been directly measured using traction force microscopy , a powerful technique in which the displacement of ﬂuorescent microbeads embedded within polyacyrlamide substrates is used in conjunction with a computational algorithm to derive the maximum likelihood estimate of traction stresses [ 128 ] . Therefore , this technique allows determination of traction stress maps in cells cultured on compliant substrates . However , measurements of the amount of force generated by different types of adhesion struc - tures have been contradictory . There is some evidence that tractional forces generated by small , nascent cell adhesions in lamellipodia are in fact greater than those generated by larger , more mature adhesions [ 14 , 129 ] . However , other studies have shown that smaller focal complexes formed at the leading edge of a motile cell exert smaller forces than focal adhesions [ 66 ] . Nevertheless , it is clear that the force generating capacity of the cell is highly dependent on the mechanical properties of the ECM , and that tension in the actin cytoskeleton provides an important feedback signal governing cell motility . Within this theoretical framework , studies measuring cell motility as a 308 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 function of substrate adhesiveness or ECM mechanics can now be uniﬁed under the umbrella of actin con - tractility , a parameter that can be tuned in one of three ways to optimize motility : ( 1 ) by manipulating the strength of each integrin – ECM interaction ; ( 2 ) by changing the total number of interactions ; and ( 3 ) by selecting a substrate with an optimal stiffness capable of maximally supporting migration speed . The force balance paradigm : inside - out transduction On the other hand , the reciprocal dynamic nature of the proposed force balance also implies that cell - gen - erated forces can be transmitted across integrins to the supporting ECM . A striking example comes from the aforementioned work of Harris and colleagues who showed that cells cultured on thin silicon rubber sub - strates visibly wrinkle the substrate as a result of cell - based tractional forces [ 81 ] . The physical cytoskeleton – integrin – ECM continuum , and the ECM’s ability to resist cell - based tractional forces in particular , also appear to be critical factors in controlling cell shape which , for a number of cell types , is essential to regu - late the balance between cell growth , differentiation , and death [ 29 , 45 , 59 , 92 , 127 ] . Cell - based forces are also involved in ECM remodeling , which can further modify the mechanical context in which cells reside [ 30 , 31 , 33 , 65 , 79 ] . In smooth muscle , bone , and other connective tissues , cells remodel their ECM in re - sponse to altered mechanical loading [ 31 – 33 , 98 ] . Furthermore , the extent to which ﬁbronectin can be bundled into ﬁbrils is actin - mediated and depends on ECM stiffness [ 79 ] . Pharmacologic agents that disrupt actin - based contractility disrupt the proper assembly of ﬁbronectin [ 205 ] , lending further support to the idea that alterations in the dynamic balance of forces between the cytoskeleton and the ECM are important during normal and pathologic tissue development [ 85 , 88 ] . Extending the force balance paradigm to 3 - D matrices in order to predictably control cell fate in environments that more closely mimic those found in vivo remains a sizable challenge . Actin polymeri - zation and focal adhesion formation are entirely dif - ferent in 3 - D compared to 2 - D [ 40 ] , and assessing the degree of actin contractility is not as straightforward . There is clearly a need for the 3 - D equivalent of traction force microscopy . Macroscopic methods to measure cell - based tractional forces in 3 - D collagen gels have shown the deformation of the surrounding matrix depends on the initial concentration of the collagen [ 75 ] . In agreement with the force balance predictions , this suggests that the amount of tractional stress generated by the cells depend on the contractile resistance of the ECM . However , more direct mea - surements of contractile force per ﬁbroblast showed no dependence on the stiffness of collagen - GAG con - structs in which they were cultured , even though the contractile displacement of the matrices still increased with matrix compliance [ 60 ] . In our opinion , these ﬁndings are not contradictory to simple force - balance models , but instead reﬂect the cell’s attempt to achieve ‘‘tensional homeostasis’’ by maintaining a constant Fig . 5 Changes in ECM mechanics inﬂuence actin cytoskeletal assembly . The ability of cells to form actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , indicative of an overall increase in contractility , increases as ECM rigidity is increased from left - to - right . In these data , MC3T3 - E1 pre - osteoblastic cells cultured on stiffer substrates show an increase in F - actin ( top row ) and focal adhesions ( denoted by vinculin staining , bottom row ) . Images are 100 · with 10 l g / ml collagen functionalized to surface of polyacrylamide gels . ( Data similar to that in [ 148 ] . ) Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 309 level of force consistent with the state of cellular pre - stress . To maintain tensional homeostasis in a compli - ant matrix , more of the resistance from the actin - mediated contractility must be provided by the microtubules or other compression - resistant materials . Maintaining a constant force in a stiffer 3 - D matrix could be achieved with reduced load on the microtu - bules . The force balance paradigm : cytoskeletal pre - stress The evidence summarized thus far depicts a strong link between substrate stiffness and cell - generated con - tractility . As brieﬂy mentioned earlier , the idea that a cell exists in a pre - existing force balance between the cytoskeleton and the ECM is consistent with the tensegrity - based hypothesis . This implies that the cytoskeleton maintains a certain degree of prestress , which acts as a determinant of its initial stiffness and assures that the cell will respond immediately when mechanically perturbed ( For review , see [ 72 ] ) . The magnitude of this cytoskeletal pre - stress governs the amount of traction a cell can apply to the ECM [ 151 ] , as well as the relative stiffness of the cell itself [ 191 ] as revealed by elegant experimental measurements using magnetic twisting cytometry [ 186 ] . Altering this pre - stress by modulating actomyosin contractility pharma - cologically has also been shown to alter both cell mechanical properties [ 188 ] and cell traction [ 191 ] , reinforcing the idea that a discrete structural connec - tion between the cytoskeleton and ECM provides a preferred path for the transmission of mechanical information ( both outside - in and inside - out ) . More - over , both the microtubule and intermediate ﬁlaments seem to have a role in determining cell pre - stress , as disruption of the microtubule network increases cell traction signiﬁcantly [ 176 ] , and intermediate ﬁlaments regulate the cellular response to twisting and shear ( for review , see [ 189 ] ) . Collectively , all of these data are predicted by mathematical models of tensegrity [ 174 , 175 ] . These models also predict that mechanical forces can be propagated over long distances via cytoskeletal pre - stress [ 190 ] , even to the nucleus , a concept for which there is now convincing experimental evidence [ 83 , 121 ] . Furthermore , the distance at which these cytoskeletal forces can be propagated within a cyto - plasm is tightly regulated by cell pre - stress , shown via the application of contractile and relaxing agents [ 84 ] . Other experimental evidence has shown that twist - ing integrin receptors using RGD - coated magnetic beads induces endothelin - 1 gene expression in endo - thelial cells , and that this response can be blocked by disrupting tension in the actin network [ 27 ] . For a more thorough treatment of the proposed mechanisms by which changes in cytoskeletal pre - stress may dictate cell function , either directly or indirectly , we refer the reader to an excellent set of companion articles pub - lished in 2003 [ 89 , 90 ] . The signaling paradigm Besides the direct physical connection , there is also compelling evidence that applied mechanical forces trigger changes in cellular biochemistry likely derived from the cluster of signaling molecules at focal adhe - sion sites [ 28 , 168 ] or from ion ﬂuxes via mechano - sensitive ion channels [ 12 , 49 , 181 ] . In the case of focal adhesion signaling , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) has been shown to be mechanosensitive in numerous studies [ 100 , 114 , 200 ] . Its activation is believed to initiate by changes in integrin clustering and the sub - sequent recruitment of structural proteins ( such as tensin , a - actinin , talin , and vinculin ) , which together form an immature focal complex . The maturation of these complexes to more well - deﬁned and fully devel - oped focal adhesion structures is dependent on the cell’s ability to apply force to the nascent adhesions [ 11 , 66 ] . This is turn coincides with a cascade of intracellular signals from FAK to numerous targets , including integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) , Src , PI3 - K , PKC , PTP - PEST , p130Cas , and paxillin , among others ( For review , see [ 147 ] ) . These FAK - initiated signals trigger a diverse array of cellular responses ( such as membrane protrusion , adhesion , migration , cell cycle progression , and even differentiation ) by linking to other downstream effectors , including the Rho - family GTPases and the Ras - MEK - ERK pathway ( For reviews , see [ 194 , 200 ] ) . On compliant polyacrylamide substrates , the me - chanotactic migration of ﬁbroblasts depends on FAK activation , as FAK - null cells showed a reduction in cell speed and directional persistence [ 187 ] . In pre - osteo - blastic MC3T3 - E1 cells , FAK phosphorylation also increases as ECM rigidity increases , coinciding with an increase in mineral deposition [ 100 ] . Due to FAK’s association with integrins , it may be especially critical in transducing mechanical cues to other downstream signaling molecules . One such candidate molecule is Src , a known target of FAK . A seminal study using optical tweezers showed Src’s involvement in regulat - ing adhesion strength in response to applied forces [ 35 , 58 ] . A more recent study using optical tweezers and a FRET - based reporter showed Src is activated locally in response to an applied force , and that waves of Src activity can propagate over long distances inside the cell [ 185 ] . Other studies have shown that applying 310 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 mechanical loads to smooth muscle tissue increases ERK 1 / 2 and FAK phosphorylation alongside Src activation [ 115 ] . Stretching of smooth muscle also in - creases inﬂux of calcium and sodium , which contributes to these signaling responses [ 116 , 137 ] . Phosphoryla - tion of PDGF [ 117 ] and ERK [ 61 ] have also been shown to be required for ﬁbroblast - mediated contrac - tion of 3 - D collagen gels . The addition of TGF - b to these matrices increased contraction , suggesting that soluble biochemical signals can synergize with bio - physical changes in ECM to yield a coordinated cel - lular response [ 74 , 184 ] . Despite evidence supporting both the purely bio - chemical signaling and force - balance models , it is more likely that these paradigms are not mutually exclusive and that there is some form of integration or cross - talk . How then might force - induced changes in cellular biochemistry be linked with changes in the biophysical properties of the cytoskeleton ? RhoA as a mechano - sensitive switch linking cytoskeletal tension and cell function One likely candidate that repeatedly emerges as an integrator of cellular biochemistry and biophysics is RhoA , a small GTPase whose activation enhances ac - tin contractility by stimulating the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions [ 78 ] . Part of the larger Ras superfamily , the Rho - family GTPases ( which include Rac1 , Cdc42 , RhoA , B , C , and other isoforms ) have been widely implicated in integrin - mediated signaling [ 37 , 159 , 166 ] and in the control of cell migration [ 57 , 78 , 196 ] . RhoA in particular plays a critical role in the assembly of actin stress ﬁbers in response to various soluble stimuli , including serum , growth factors , lyso - phosphatidic acid ( LPA ) [ 34 , 36 , 135 ] , and to insoluble adhesion ligands such as ﬁbronectin [ 13 , 159 ] . A deﬁnitive connection between cell contractility and Rho - family GTPases has been elucidated over the past decade . Increased contractility following depoly - merization of microtubules using various pharmaco - logical agents ( e . g . , nocodazole and colchicine ) was ﬁrst shown to occur in 1989 [ 41 ] . This increased con - tractility was later shown to be the result of greater myosin light chain phosphorylation [ 108 ] mediated via activation of RhoA [ 56 , 119 ] . RhoA’s inﬂuence on actin contractility is mediated in part by one of its downstream effectors ( Rho - associated protein kinase , or ROCK ) . ROCK in turn regulates the phosphoryla - tion of myosin light chain , and therefore the interaction between actin and myosin II that contributes to actin - mediated contractility in numerous cell types [ 7 ] . Other studies have demonstrated that RhoA is required for the selective stabilization of microtubules [ 38 ] via a mechanism that involves another down - stream effector , the Diaphanous - related formin , mDia [ 140 ] . The activity of RhoA has also been shown to be downregulated by Src’s kinase activity , which stimu - lates the activity of p190RhoGAP , a GTPase - activat - ing protein that inactivates RhoA [ 9 , 10 ] . Thus , RhoA potentially provides an essential mechano - sensitive link integrating the force - induced changes in bio - chemical signaling with biophysical changes in the cytoskeleton . Countless recent studies have implicated the Rho GTPases in the cellular response to mechanical stress and the maintenance of tensional homeostasis [ 3 , 8 , 97 , 125 , 136 , 154 ] ( For review , see [ 5 ] ) . There is also con - vincing data from two studies supporting a role for RhoA in cell fate , one of which shows that RhoA regulates the switch between adipogenesis and myo - genesis [ 172 ] and one which shows that osteogenic commitment also relies on RhoA [ 126 ] . The latter of these two studies used a micropatterning approach to conﬁne cell shape , and found that mesenchymal stem cells constrained to small adhesive islands adopted an adipogenic fate , while those permitted to spread over much larger islands were pushed toward an osteogenic fate [ 126 ] . The osteogenic fate could be rescued in unspread cells by expressing constitutively active RhoA ; likewise , the osteogenic fate could be subverted in spread cells by expressing dominant - negative RhoA . Agents that disrupted actin - mediated contractility also inhibited osteogenic differentiation in spread cells , suggesting that RhoA’s effects appeared not to be mediated by its activity per se , but rather its effects on cytoskeletal tension . Given that manipulating ECM mechanics similarly regulates cytoskeletal tension , others and we are working to address the hypothesis that tuning substrate compliance can control stem cell fates . This concept is shown schematically in Fig . 6 . Further evidence supporting a critical role for RhoA - mediated tension in the control of cell fate comes from the aforementioned studies of Wozniak et al . [ 199 ] and Paszek et al . [ 143 ] regarding tumori - genesis . In both studies , misregulation of contractility mediated by RhoA - ROCK signaling correlated with changes in cell proliferation and morphology induced by altering ECM mechanics . This is particularly inter - esting given that some Rho GTPases are overexpres - sed in human tumors [ 62 ] . Another recent study showed that the regulation of histone acetylation by cell adhesion to the ECM is mediated by intracellular contractility [ 104 ] . In particular , suspended gastric carcinoma cells showed increased levels of acetylation Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 311 when held in suspension relative to the levels in cells attached to ﬁbronectin . Treatment of cells with tri - chostatin A signiﬁcantly increased histone acetylation in suspended , but not ﬁbronectin - adherent , cells . Inhibition of either myosin light chain kinase or ROCK decreased both the basal and trichostin A - stimulated levels of acetylation . Excitingly , this suggests a possible link between cytoskeletal tension and gene expression . Finally , evidence that RhoA is required for proper ﬁbronectin assembly in ﬁbroblasts [ 206 ] , and that pharmacologic agents that disrupt actin - based con - tractility disrupt the proper assembly of ﬁbronectin [ 205 ] , suggest that RhoA and its effects on cytoskeletal tension provide critical closure to the feedback loop between ECM mechanics and both normal and path - ologic tissue development . Addressing the role of ECM mechanics using biomaterials Recent efforts to decipher the role of the ECM in determining cell and tissue function have exploited several natural and synthetic biomaterials to create ECM analogs . Using such systems requires increased multidisciplinary collaborations between engineers or physical scientists , who often focus on synthesis and characterization of these materials , and the biological scientists who use them as in vitro cellular environ - ments . In the context of tissue engineering , a healthy debate continues on whether to use naturally derived polymers ( those directly taken from animal tissue ) or completely synthetic systems ( engineered from the ground - up ) as ECM analogs [ 113 ] . In the case of nat - ural polymers , nearly all cell types can be immediately and directly used on or within these materials , since they contain native functionalities to bind integrins . Synthetic ECM analogs , on the other hand , either support cell adhesion indirectly ( through the passive adsorption of adhesive proteins ) or must be chemically modiﬁed to contain speciﬁc adhesive peptides or pro - teins . Both naturally derived and synthetic materials have been used to address the impact of ECM mechanics on cell function . Type - I collagen is one of the most popular naturally derived materials used to study the effects of ECM mechanics on cell function . Collagen contains multiple cell - binding domains for cells , including multiple RGD Fig . 6 Hypothetical model predicting the ability of ECM chemistry and mechanics to direct cell fate . A cell residing in an ECM with baseline levels of adhesivity ( number and / or availability of attachment points ) and rigidity ( stiffness of the surrounding matrix ) is depicted in the center of the schematic . In response to increased adhesivity or rigidity ( top ) , cell - generated tractional stress is increased either by actin cables pulling with the same amount force against a larger number of cell – ECM adhesions , or by increasing the amount of force generated by the actin ﬁbers at each adhesion . This is triggered by , or correlates with , changes in the activity of RhoA . On the other hand , when adhesivity or rigidity is decreased , RhoA activity decreases as does cell - generated tractional forces . We propose that these alterations in RhoA and cytoskeletal tension induced by chemical and mechanical cues present in the ECM may ultimately inﬂuence cell phenotype 312 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 sites [ 15 ] that were originally identiﬁed in ﬁbronectin [ 150 ] and which also exist in many other adhesive proteins [ 138 , 156 , 164 ] . RGD has been shown to bind a 2 b 1 and a v b 3 integrins in osteoblasts [ 162 ] , but it is unclear if this sequence is available for cell binding in collagen - I , or instead is cryptic and only exposed under certain conditions [ 44 ] . Furthermore , collagen - I ( like most ECM proteins ) contains numerous other sequences that may synergize with RGD to provide integrin - binding speciﬁcity . These sequences include DGEA , which can engage a 2 b 1 integrin [ 173 ] , and GFOGER ( and similar - GER analogs ) , which prefer - entially engages a 1 b 1 and a 2 b 1 integrins [ 103 , 106 , 107 , 161 ] . Nevertheless , collagen - I will readily form gels when heated to 37 (cid:2) C , making it easy to create 3 - D tissue constructs at physiological conditions . Naturally derived ﬁbrin gels are also attractive materials for studies on ECM mechanics , particularly in the context of angiogenesis [ 69 ] . Fibrin , the major structural pro - tein of the provisional wound - healing matrix , is derived from the proteolytic cleavage of ﬁbrinogen by throm - bin . Another alternative widely used to create 3 - D cultures is Matrigel , originally derived from the stro - mal matrix of Engelbreth - Holm - Swarm ( EHS ) tumors [ 105 ] . Since its primary constituents include laminin , collagen IV , hepain sulfate proteoglycancs , and ent - actin , it is well - suited as a basement membrane analog . However , Matrigel’s properties are difﬁcult to pre - dictably control due to the fact that it remains a poorly deﬁned material . The mechanical properties of all of these native biopolymer gels can be tuned by simply increasing the overall concentration of the protein ; however , this also increases the ligand density , as the two variables can - not be decoupled . As alluded to earlier , one way to manipulate the mechanical environment using these naturally derived biopolymers is to selectively detach , or ﬂoat , the gels and compare the results to gels of the same composition that remain anchored to the culture dish . Anchorage to the substrate provides a physical restraint to cell - based tractional forces at the edges of the construct . However , it is difﬁcult to determine how far this mechanical effect propagates through the construct and whether cells in the center of the gel can sense these changes in anchorage . In addition , although the elastic moduli ( a material property ) of these ﬂoating vs . attached constructs remains constant , their effective stiffness may differ dramatically due to chan - ges in anchorage . Thus it may be difﬁcult to isolate the effects of gel mechanics from those of the surrounding rigid substrate . Given the limitations of native biopolymer gels , numerous investigators are exploring strategies to engineer synthetic ECM analogs in which the chemical and mechanical properties can be independently tuned . Such systems would enable ECM mechanical proper - ties to be systematically varied in order to study their isolated inﬂuence on cell behavior . Polyacrylamide substrates remain the standard for 2 - D culture studies focused on mechanobiology . Their attraction is due to the ease with which their mechanical properties can be manipulated , and the relatively simple chemistry used to functionalize them with cell adhesive ligands [ 144 ] . However , polyacrylamide gels are not conducive to long - term 3 - D studies in vitro , nor in vivo , due to the fact that they are not biodegradable and may retain some neurotoxicity associated with unpolymerized acrylamide . Similar arguments about 3 - D transference and toxicity also limit the use of polydimethyl siloxane ( PDMS ) , a polymer popular for micropatterning and microﬂuidics [ 20 , 29 ] that has also been used for 2 - D studies on substrate mechanics [ 73 ] . Alginate ( a linear polysaccharide derived from seaweed ) has also been used for its mechanically tunable properties and its ability to be functionalized with bioactive peptide se - quences [ 163 ] . The drawback to this system is that most methods for gel formation involve the use of calcium cross - linking . Since calcium is a ubiquitous second messenger and ( among other things ) regulates smooth muscle cell contraction by directly binding to calmod - ulin , efforts to introduce alternative cross - linking schemes are needed to use alginate in this fashion [ 109 ] . As an alternative to these other systems , hydrogels based on poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PEG ) have more recently been exploited for mechanobiology studies [ 149 ] . PEG gels have been widely used and charac - terized as synthetic ECM analogs for tissue engineer - ing applications [ 21 , 22 , 24 , 52 , 122 , 123 ] . The incorporation of acrylate end groups on PEG allows cross - linking and the formation of hydrogels by UV photo - polymerization [ 132 ] . Numerous studies have shown that cells can be encapsulated in 3 - D within photopolymerized PEG gels with high viability , indi - cating that the short exposure ( ~ 1 min ) to UV light does not adversely affect the cells [ 118 ] . Furthermore , controlling the amount of acrylated PEG monomers represents a practical approach to controlling the mechanical properties of PEG hydrogels . In addition , the same hydrophilic characteristics of PEG that allow it to form hydrogels also account for its resistance to protein adsorption . Therefore , PEG gels provide a blank slate template upon which key functionalities of native ECM can be conferred . The covalent attachment of speciﬁc cell adhesion peptides into PEG hydrogels allows cell – ECM inter - Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 313 actions to be controlled [ 82 ] , and thereby permits decoupling adhesion site density from gel mechanical properties . PEG gels have been used to study the inﬂuence of substrate mechanics in both 2 - D and 3 - D for neurons [ 76 ] , smooth muscle cells [ 122 , 149 ] , and chondrocytes [ 22 ] . However , because the tightly cross - linked gels have a very small pore size ( on the order of a few nanonmeters ) , the inclusion of cross - links sensi - tive to proteolysis [ 6 , 46 , 124 , 157 ] or hydrolysis [ 23 ] will be necessary to extend studies of ECM mechanics to the 3 - D environment . Inclusion of peptides sensitive to cell - secreted proteases ( MMPs and plasmin ) into these gels has already provided an ideal system in which to study 3 - D cell migration , enabling compari - sons between proteolytically and non - enzymatically mediated migratory mechanisms [ 71 , 157 ] . Conclusions The inﬂuence of ECM mechanics on cell behavior and tissue development is robust , with evidence that the adhesion , spreading , and migration of several cell types are all affected by substrate compliance in 2 - D and 3 - D . Here we have highlighted evidence suggesting that changes in ECM mechanics exert their inﬂuence on cells by tuning the degree of tension in the actin cytoskeleton , either directly by maintaining a balance of forces or indirectly through intracellular signaling mechanisms . In turn , this tension switch appears to be a critical regulatory signal governing cell fate and thereby inﬂuencing both normal ( e . g . , osteogenesis , capillary morphogenesis ) and pathological ( e . g . , car - diovascular disease and cancer ) tissue development . Future efforts to attain a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which cells sense and respond to mechanical cues through the use of well - deﬁned synthetic ECM analogs will perhaps one day enhance efforts in regenerative medicine and in the treatment of numerous diseases . Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge ﬁnan - cial support from the National Institutes of Health ( NIDCR : DE - 016117 ) and the American Heart Association ( Western States Afﬁliate : 0465111Y ) to A . J . P . and fellowships from the Achievement Rewards for College Scientists ( ARCS ) Founda - tion to S . R . P . and C . M . G . References 1 . Adams , J . C . , & Watt , F . M . ( 1993 ) . Regulation of devel - opment and differentiation by the extracellular matrix . Development , 117 ( 4 ) , 1183 – 1198 . 2 . Aikawa , M . , Kim , H . S . , Kuro - o , M . , Manabe , I . , Watanabe , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Yazaki , Y . , & Nagai , R . ( 1995 ) . Phe - notypic modulation of smooth muscle cells during pro - gression of human atherosclerosis as determined by altered expression of myosin heavy chain isoforms . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 748 , 578 – 585 . 3 . Aikawa , R . , Komuro , I . , Yamazaki , T . , Zou , Y . , Kudoh , S . , Zhu , W . , Kadowaki , T . , & Yazaki , Y . ( 1999 ) . Rho family small G proteins play critical roles in mechanical stress - induced hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes . Cir - culation Research , 84 ( 4 ) , 458 – 466 . 4 . Aikawa , M . , Sakomura , Y . , Ueda , M . , Kimura , K . , Manabe , I . , Ishiwata , S . , Komiyama , N . , Yamaguchi , H . , Yazaki , Y . , & Nagai , R . ( 1997 ) . Redifferentiation of smooth muscle cells after coronary angioplasty determined via myosin heavy chain expression . Circulation , 96 ( 1 ) , 82 – 90 . 5 . Alenghat , F . J . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Mechanotransduc - tion : All signals point to cytoskeleton , matrix , and integrins . Science STKE , 2002 ( 119 ) , PE6 . 6 . Almany , L . , & Seliktar , D . ( 2005 ) . Biosynthetic hydrogel scaffolds made from ﬁbrinogen and polyethylene glycol for 3D cell cultures . Biomaterials , 26 ( 15 ) , 2467 – 2477 . 7 . Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Nakamura , N . , Matsuura , Y . , & Kaibuchi , K . ( 1997 ) . For - mation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions enhanced by Rho - kinase . Science , 275 ( 5304 ) , 1308 – 1311 . 8 . Aoki , H . , Izumo , S . , & Sadoshima , J . ( 1998 ) . Angiotensin II activates RhoA in cardiac myocytes : A critical role of RhoA in angiotensin II - induced premyoﬁbril formation . Circulation Research , 82 ( 6 ) , 666 – 676 . 9 . Arthur , W . T . , & Burridge , K . ( 2001 ) . RhoA inactivation by p190RhoGAP regulates cell spreading and migration by promoting membrane protrusion and polarity . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 12 ( 9 ) , 2711 – 2720 . 10 . Arthur , W . T . , Petch , L . A . , & Burridge , K . ( 2000 ) . Integrin engagement suppresses RhoA activity via a c - Src - depen - dent mechanism . Current Biology , 10 ( 12 ) , 719 – 722 . 11 . Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Riveline , D . , Goichberg , P . , Tzur , G . , Sabanay , I . , Mahalu , D . , Safran , S . , Bershad - sky , A . , Addadi , L . , & Geiger , B . ( 2001 ) . Force and focal adhesion assembly : A close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature Cell Biology , 3 ( 5 ) , 466 – 472 . 12 . Banes , A . J . , Tsuzaki , M . , Yamamoto , J . , Fischer , T . , Brigman , B . , Brown , T . , & Miller , L . ( 1995 ) . Mechanore - ception at the cellular level : The detection , interpretation , and diversity of responses to mechanical signals . Biochem - istry and Cell Biology , 73 ( 7 – 8 ) , 349 – 365 . 13 . Barry , S . T . , Flinn , H . M . , Humphries , M . J . , Critchley , D . R . , & Ridley , A . J . ( 1997 ) . Requirement for Rho in in - tegrin signalling . Cell Adhesion and Communication , 4 ( 6 ) , 387 – 398 . 14 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , Kaverina , I . , Small , J . V . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2001 ) . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating ﬁbroblasts . Journal of Cell Biology , 153 ( 4 ) , 881 – 888 . 15 . Bernard , M . P . , Myers , J . C . , Chu , M . L . , Ramirez , F . , Eikenberry , E . F . , & Prockop , D . J . ( 1983 ) . Structure of a cDNA for the pro alpha 2 chain of human type I procol - lagen . Comparison with chick cDNA for pro alpha 2 ( I ) . identiﬁes structurally conserved features of the protein and the gene . Biochemistry , 22 ( 5 ) , 1139 – 1145 . 16 . Bershadsky , A . D . , Balaban , N . Q . , & Geiger , B . ( 2003 ) . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 19 , 677 – 695 . 314 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 17 . Bischofs , I . B . , & Schwarz , U . S . ( 2003 ) . Cell organization in soft media due to active mechanosensing . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100 ( 16 ) , 9274 – 9279 . 18 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Mackintosh , F . C . , Kumar , S . , Geisse , N . A . , Talbot , J . , Mahadevan , L . , Parker , K . K . , Ingber , D . E . , & Weitz , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Microtubules can bear enhanced compressive loads in living cells because of lateral reinforcement . Journal of Cell Biology , 173 ( 5 ) , 733 – 741 . 19 . Brown , E . , McKee , T . , diTomaso , E . , Pluen , A . , Seed , B . , Boucher , Y . , & Jain , R . K . ( 2003 ) . Dynamic imaging of collagen and its modulation in tumors in vivo using second - harmonic generation . Nature Medicine , 9 ( 6 ) , 796 – 800 . 20 . Brown , X . Q . , Ookawa , K . , & Wong , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . Evalua - tion of polydimethylsiloxane scaffolds with physiologically - relevant elastic moduli : Interplay of substrate mechanics and surface chemistry effects on vascular smooth muscle cell response . Biomaterials , 26 ( 16 ) , 3123 – 3129 . 21 . Bryant , S . J . , & Anseth , K . S . ( 2002 ) . Hydrogel properties inﬂuence ECM production by chondrocytes photoencapsu - lated in poly ( ethylene glycol ) hydrogels . Journal of Bio - medical Material Research , 59 ( 1 ) , 63 – 72 . 22 . Bryant , S . J . , & Anseth , K . S . ( 2003 ) . Controlling the spatial distribution of ECM components in degradable PEG hy - drogels for tissue engineering cartilage . Journal of Bio - medical Material Research A , 64 ( 1 ) , 70 – 79 . 23 . Bryant , S . J . , Bender , R . J . , Durand , K . L . , & Anseth , K . S . ( 2004 ) . Encapsulating chondrocytes in degrading PEG hydrogels with high modulus : Engineering gel structural changes to facilitate cartilaginous tissue production . Bio - technology and Bioengineering , 86 ( 7 ) , 747 – 755 . 24 . Burdick , J . A . , & Anseth , K . S . ( 2002 ) . Photoencapsulation of osteoblasts in injectable RGD - modiﬁed PEG hydrogels for bone tissue engineering . Biomaterials , 23 ( 22 ) , 4315 – 4323 . 25 . Burdick , J . A . , Khademhosseini , A . , & Langer , R . ( 2004 ) . Fabrication of gradient hydrogels using a microﬂuidics / photopolymerization process . Langmuir , 20 ( 13 ) , 5153 – 5156 . 26 . Carmeliet , P . ( 2003 ) . Angiogenesis in health and disease . Nature Medicine , 9 ( 6 ) , 653 – 660 . 27 . Chen , J . , Fabry , B . , Schiffrin , E . L . , & Wang , N . ( 2001 ) . Twisting integrin receptors increases endothelin - 1 gene expression in endothelial cells . American Journal of Physi - ology Cell Physiology , 280 ( 6 ) , C1475 – C1484 . 28 . Chen , K . D . , Li , Y . S . , Kim , M . , Li , S . , Yuan , S . , Chien , S . , & Shyy , J . Y . ( 1999 ) . Mechanotransduction in response to shear stress . Roles of receptor tyrosine kinases , integrins , and Shc . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 274 ( 26 ) , 18393 – 18400 . 29 . Chen , C . S . , Mrksich , M . , Huang , S . , Whitesides , G . M . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Geometric control of cell life and death . Science , 276 ( 5317 ) , 1425 – 1428 . 30 . Chicurel , M . E . , Chen , C . S . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1998 ) . Cel - lular control lies in the balance of forces . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 10 ( 2 ) , 232 – 239 . 31 . Chiquet , M . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of extracellular matrix gene expression by mechanical stress . Matrix Biology , 18 ( 5 ) , 417 – 426 . 32 . Chiquet , M . , Matthisson , M . , Koch , M . , Tannheimer , M . , & Chiquet - Ehrismann , R . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of extracel - lular matrix synthesis by mechanical stress . Biochemistry and Cell Biology , 74 ( 6 ) , 737 – 744 . 33 . Chiquet , M . , Renedo , A . S . , Huber , F . , & Fluck , M . ( 2003 ) . How do ﬁbroblasts translate mechanical signals into chan - ges in extracellular matrix production ? Matrix Biology , 22 ( 1 ) , 73 – 80 . 34 . Chong , L . D . , Traynor - Kaplan , A . , Bokoch , G . M . , & Schwartz , M . A . ( 1994 ) . The small GTP - binding protein Rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in mammalian cells . Cell , 79 ( 3 ) , 507 – 513 . 35 . Choquet , D . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , & Sheetz , M . P . ( 1997 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity causes strengthening of inte - grin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell , 88 ( 1 ) , 39 – 48 . 36 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , Burridge , K . ( 1996 ) . Rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Journal of Cell Biology , 133 ( 6 ) , 1403 – 1415 . 37 . Clark , E . A . , King , W . G . , Brugge , J . S . , Symons , M . , & Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Integrin - mediated signals regulated by members of the rho family of GTPases . Journal of Cell Biology , 142 ( 2 ) , 573 – 586 . 38 . Cook , T . A . , Nagasaki , T . , & Gundersen , G . G . ( 1998 ) . Rho guanosine triphosphatase mediates the selective stabiliza - tion of microtubules induced by lysophosphatidic acid . Journal of Cell Biology , 141 ( 1 ) , 175 – 185 . 39 . Cotran , R . S . , Kumar , V . , & Collins , T . ( 1999 ) Robbins pathologic basis of disease ( 6th ed . ) . Philadelphia : W . B . Saunders , p . 1425 . 40 . Cukierman , E . , Pankov , R . , Stevens , D . R . , & Yamada , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Taking cell - matrix adhesions to the third dimension . Science , 294 ( 5547 ) , 1708 – 1712 . 41 . Danowski , B . A . ( 1989 ) . Fibroblast contractility and actin organization are stimulated by microtubule inhibitors . Journal of Cell Science , 93 ( Pt 2 ) , 255 – 266 . 42 . Darling , E . M . , & Athanasiou , K . A . ( 2003 ) . Articular car - tilage bioreactors and bioprocesses . Tissue Engineering , 9 ( 1 ) , 9 – 26 . 43 . Davis , G . E . , Bayless , K . J . , & Mavila , A . ( 2002 ) . Molecular basis of endothelial cell morphogenesis in three - dimen - sional extracellular matrices . Anatomical Record , 268 ( 3 ) , 252 – 275 . 44 . Dedhar , S . , Ruoslahti , E . , & Pierschbacher , M . D . ( 1987 ) . A cell surface receptor complex for collagen type I recog - nizes the Arg - Gly - Asp sequence . Journal of Cell Biology , 104 ( 3 ) , 585 – 593 . 45 . Deroanne , C . F . , Lapiere , C . M . , & Nusgens , B . V . ( 2001 ) . In vitro tubulogenesis of endothelial cells by relaxation of the coupling extracellular matrix - cytoskeleton . Cardiovas - cular Research , 49 ( 3 ) , 647 – 658 . 46 . Dikovsky , D . , Bianco - Peled , H . , & Seliktar , D . ( 2006 ) . The effect of structural alterations of PEG - ﬁbrinogen hydrogel scaffolds on 3 - D cellular morphology and cellular migra - tion . Biomaterials , 27 ( 8 ) , 1496 – 1506 . 47 . DiMilla , P . A . , Stone , J . A . , Quinn , J . A . , Albelda , S . M . , & Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Maximal migration of hu - man smooth muscle cells on ﬁbronectin and type IV colla - gen occurs at an intermediate attachment strength . Journal of Cell Biology , 122 ( 3 ) , 729 – 737 . 48 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2005 ) . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science , 310 ( 5751 ) , 1139 – 1143 . 49 . Duncan , R . L . ( 1995 ) . Transduction of mechanical strain in bone . ASGSB Bulletin , 8 ( 2 ) , 49 – 62 . 50 . Dvorak , H . F . , Senger , D . R . , & Dvorak , A . M . ( 1983 ) . Fibrin as a component of the tumor stroma : Origins and biological signiﬁcance . Cancer Metastasis Reviews , 2 ( 1 ) , 41 – 73 . 51 . Egeblad , M . , & Werb , Z . ( 2002 ) . New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression . Nature Reviews Cancer , 2 ( 3 ) , 161 – 174 . 52 . Elisseeff , J . , Anseth , K . , Sims , D . , McIntosh , W . , Randolph , M . , & Langer , R . ( 1999 ) . Transdermal photopolymerization Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 315 for minimally invasive implantation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 96 ( 6 ) , 3104 – 3107 . 53 . Engler , A . , Bacakova , L . , Newman , C . , Hategan , A . , Grifﬁn , M . , & Discher , D . ( 2004 ) . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophysical Journal , 86 ( 1 Pt 1 ) , 617 – 628 . 54 . Engler , A . J . , Grifﬁn , M . A . , Sen , S . , Bonnemann , C . G . , Sweeney , H . L . , & Discher , D . E . ( 2004 ) . Myotubes differ - entiate optimally on substrates with tissue - like stiffness : Pathological implications for soft or stiff microenviron - ments . Journal of Cell Biology , 166 ( 6 ) , 877 – 887 . 55 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . , & Discher , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speciﬁca - tion . Cell , 126 ( 4 ) , 677 – 689 . 56 . Enomoto , T . ( 1996 ) . Microtubule disruption induces the formation of actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions in cul - tured cells : Possible involvement of the rho signal cascade . Cell Structure and Function , 21 ( 5 ) , 317 – 326 . 57 . Etienne - Manneville , S . , & Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Rho GTPases in cell biology . Nature , 420 ( 6916 ) , 629 – 635 . 58 . Felsenfeld , D . P . , Schwartzberg , P . L . , Venegas , A . , Tse , R . , & Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Selective regulation of integrin – cytoskeleton interactions by the tyrosine kinase Src . Nature Cell Biology , 1 ( 4 ) , 200 – 206 . 59 . Folkman , J . , & Moscona , A . ( 1978 ) . Role of cell shape in growth control . Nature , 273 ( 5661 ) , 345 – 349 . 60 . Freyman , T . M . , Yannas , I . V . , Yokoo , R . , & Gibson , L . J . ( 2002 ) . Fibroblast contractile force is independent of the stiffness which resists the contraction . Experimental Cell Research , 272 ( 2 ) , 153 – 162 . 61 . Fringer , J . , & Grinnell , F . ( 2001 ) . Fibroblast quiescence in ﬂoating or released collagen matrices : Contribution of the ERK signaling pathway and actin cytoskeletal organization . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 276 ( 33 ) , 31047 – 31052 . 62 . Fritz , G . , Just , I . , & Kaina , B . ( 1999 ) . Rho GTPases are over - expressed in human tumors . International Journal of Cancer , 81 ( 5 ) , 682 – 687 . 63 . Fuller , B . ( 1961 ) . Tensegrity . Portfolio Artnews Annual , 4 , 112 – 127 . 64 . Fung , Y . C . ( 1993 ) . Biomechanics : Mechanical properties of living tissues ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Springer - Verlag , p 568 . 65 . Galbraith , C . G . , & Sheetz , M . P . ( 1998 ) . Forces on adhesive contacts affect cell function . Current Opinion in Cell Biol - ogy , 10 ( 5 ) , 566 – 571 . 66 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . , & Sheetz , M . P . ( 2002 ) . The relationship between force and focal complex devel - opment . Journal of Cell Biology , 159 ( 4 ) , 695 – 705 . 67 . Genes , N . G . , Rowley , J . A . , Mooney , D . J . , & Bonassar , L . J . ( 2004 ) . Effect of substrate mechanics on chondrocyte adhesion to modiﬁed alginate surfaces . Archives of Bio - chemistry and Biophysics , 422 ( 2 ) , 161 – 167 . 68 . Georges , P . C . , & Janmey , P . A . ( 2005 ) . Cell type - speciﬁc response to growth on soft materials . Journal of Applied Physiology , 98 ( 4 ) , 1547 – 1553 . 69 . Ghajar , C . M . , Blevins , K . S . , Hughes , C . C . W . , George , S . C . , & Putnam , A . J . ( 2006 ) . Mesenchymal stem cells enhance angiogenesis in mechanically viable prevascular - ized tissues via early MMP upregulation . Tissue Engineer - ing , 12 ( 10 ) , 2875 – 2888 . 70 . Giancotti , F . G . , & Ruoslahti , E . ( 1999 ) . Integrin signaling . Science , 285 ( 5430 ) , 1028 – 1032 . 71 . Gobin , A . S . , & West , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Cell migration through deﬁned , synthetic ECM analogs . FASEB Journal , 16 ( 7 ) , 751 – 753 . 72 . Goldmann , W . H . ( 2002 ) . Mechanical aspects of cell shape regulation and signaling . Cell Biology International , 26 ( 4 ) , 313 – 317 . 73 . Gray , D . S . , Tien , J . , & Chen , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Repositioning of cells by mechanotaxis on surfaces with micropatterned Young’s modulus . Journal of Biomedical Materials Research A , 66 ( 3 ) , 605 – 614 . 74 . Grinnell , F . ( 2000 ) . Fibroblast - collagen - matrix contraction : Growth - factor signalling and mechanical loading . Trends in Cell Biology , 10 ( 9 ) , 362 – 365 . 75 . Grinnell , F . ( 2003 ) . Fibroblast biology in three - dimensional collagen matrices . Trends in Cell Biology , 13 ( 5 ) , 264 – 269 . 76 . Gunn , J . W . , Turner , S . D . , & Mann , B . K . ( 2005 ) . Adhesive and mechanical properties of hydrogels inﬂuence neurite extension . Journal of Biomedical Materials Research A , 72 ( 1 ) , 91 – 97 . 77 . Guo , W . H . , Frey , M . T . , Burnham , N . A . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2006 ) . Substrate rigidity regulates the formation and maintenance of tissues . Biophysical Journal , 90 ( 6 ) , 2213 – 2220 . 78 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science , 279 ( 5350 ) , 509 – 514 . 79 . Halliday , N . L . , & Tomasek , J . J . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix inﬂuence ﬁbronectin ﬁbril assembly in vitro . Experimental Cell Research , 217 ( 1 ) , 109 – 117 . 80 . Hanahan , D . , & Weinberg , R . A . ( 2000 ) . The hallmarks of cancer . Cell , 100 ( 1 ) , 57 – 70 . 81 . Harris , A . K . , Wild , P . , & Stopak , D . ( 1980 ) . Silicone rubber substrata : A new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science , 208 ( 4440 ) , 177 – 179 . 82 . Hern , D . L . , & Hubbell , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Incorporation of adhesion peptides into nonadhesive hydrogels useful for tissue resurfacing . Journal of Biomedical Material Research , 39 ( 2 ) , 266 – 276 . 83 . Hu , S . , Chen , J . , Butler , J . P . , & Wang , N . ( 2005 ) . Pre - stress mediates force propagation into the nucleus . Bio - chemical and Biophysical Research Communication , 329 ( 2 ) , 423 – 428 . 84 . Hu , S . , & Wang , N . ( 2006 ) . Control of stress propagation in the cytoplasm by prestress and loading frequency . Molecu - lar and Cellular Biomechanics , 3 ( 2 ) , 49 – 60 . 85 . Huang , S . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1999 ) . The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nature Cell Biology , 1 ( 5 ) , E131 – E138 . 86 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Integrins : Bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell , 110 ( 6 ) , 673 – 687 . 87 . Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Tensegrity : The architectural basis of cellular mechanotransduction . Annual Review of Physiol - ogy , 59 , 575 – 599 . 88 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Mechanical signaling and the cellular response to extracellular matrix in angiogenesis and car - diovascular physiology . Circulation Research , 91 ( 10 ) , 877 – 887 . 89 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Tensegrity II . How structural networks inﬂuence cellular information processing networks . Journal of Cell Science , 116 ( Pt 8 ) , 1397 – 1408 . 90 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Tensegrity I . Cell structure and hier - archical systems biology . Journal of Cell Science , 116 ( Pt 7 ) , 1157 – 1173 . 91 . Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Cellular mechanotransduction : Putting all the pieces together again . FASEB Journal , 20 ( 7 ) , 811 – 827 . 92 . Ingber , D . E . , & Folkman , J . ( 1989 ) . Mechanochemical switching between growth and differentiation during ﬁbro - blast growth factor - stimulated angiogenesis in vitro : role of 316 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 extracellular matrix . Journal of Cell Biology , 109 ( 1 ) , 317 – 330 . 93 . Ingber , D . E . , Madri , J . A . , & Jamieson , J . D . ( 1985 ) . Neoplastic disorganization of pancreatic epithelial cell - cell relations . Role of basement membrane . American Journal of Pathology , 121 ( 2 ) , 248 – 260 . 94 . Isenberg , B . C . , & Tranquillo , R . T . ( 2003 ) . Long - term cyclic distention enhances the mechanical properties of collagen - based media - equivalents . Annals of Biomedical Engineering , 31 ( 8 ) , 937 – 949 . 95 . Jain , R . K . ( 2003 ) . Molecular regulation of vessel matura - tion . Nature Medicine , 9 ( 6 ) , 685 – 693 . 96 . Kalluri , R . , & Zeisberg , M . ( 2006 ) . Fibroblasts in cancer . Nature Reviews Cancer , 6 ( 5 ) , 392 – 401 . 97 . Katsumi , A . , Milanini , J . , Kiosses , W . B . , del Pozo , M . A . , Kaunas , R . , Chien , S . , Hahn , K . M . , & Schwartz , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Effects of cell tension on the small GTPase Rac . Journal of Cell Biology , 158 ( 1 ) , 153 – 164 . 98 . Keeley , F . W . , & Bartoszewicz , L . A . ( 1995 ) . Elastin in systemic and pulmonary hypertension . Ciba Foundation Symposium , 192 , 259 – 273 ; discussion 273 – 278 . 99 . Khademhosseini , A . , Langer , R . , Borenstein , J . , & Vacanti , J . P . ( 2006 ) . Microscale technologies for tissue engineering and biology . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences of the United States of America , 103 ( 8 ) , 2480 – 2487 . 100 . Khatiwala , C . B . , Peyton , S . R . , & Putnam , A . J . ( 2006 ) . Intrinsic mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix affect the behavior of pre - osteoblastic MC3T3 - E1 cells . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 290 ( 6 ) , C1640 – C1650 . 101 . Kim , B . S . , Nikolovski , J . , Bonadio , J . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 1999 ) . Cyclic mechanical strain regulates the development of engineered smooth muscle tissue . Nature Biotechnology , 17 ( 10 ) , 979 – 983 . 102 . Kim , B . S . , Nikolovski , J . , Bonadio , J . , Smiley , E . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 1999 ) . Engineered smooth muscle tissues : Regulating cell phenotype with the scaffold . Experimental Cell Research , 251 ( 2 ) , 318 – 328 . 103 . Kim , J . K . , Xu , Y . , Xu , X . , Keene , D . R . , Gurusiddappa , S . , Liang , X . , Wary , K . K . , & Hook , M . ( 2005 ) . A novel binding site in collagen type III for integrins alpha1beta1 and al - pha2beta1 . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 280 ( 37 ) , 32512 – 32520 . 104 . Kim , Y . B . , Yu , J . , Lee , S . Y . , Lee , M . S . , Ko , S . G . , Ye , S . K . , Jong , H . S . , Kim , T . Y . , Bang , Y . J . , & Lee , J . W . ( 2005 ) . Cell adhesion status - dependent histone acetylation is regulated through intracellular contractility - related sig - naling activities . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 280 ( 31 ) , 28357 – 28364 . 105 . Kleinman , H . K . , & Martin , G . R . ( 2005 ) . Matrigel : Base - ment membrane matrix with biological activity . Seminars in Cancer Biology , 15 ( 5 ) , 378 – 386 . 106 . Knight , C . G . , Morton , L . F . , Onley , D . J . , Peachey , A . R . , Messent , A . J . , Smethurst , P . A . , Tuckwell , D . S . , Farndale , R . W . , & Barnes , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Identiﬁcation in collagen type I of an integrin alpha2 beta1 - binding site containing an essential GER sequence . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 273 ( 50 ) , 33287 – 33294 . 107 . Knight , C . G . , Morton , L . F . , Peachey , A . R . , Tuckwell , D . S . , Farndale , R . W . , & Barnes , M . J . ( 2000 ) . The colla - gen - binding A - domains of integrins alpha ( 1 ) beta ( 1 ) and alpha ( 2 ) beta ( 1 ) recognize the same speciﬁc amino acid sequence , GFOGER , in native ( triple - helical ) collagens . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 275 ( 1 ) , 35 – 40 . 108 . Kolodney , M . S . , & Elson , E . L . ( 1995 ) . Contraction due to microtubule disruption is associated with increased phosphorylation of myosin regulatory light chain . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 92 ( 22 ) , 10252 – 10256 . 109 . Kong , H . J . , Wong , E . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Indepen - dent control of rigidity and toughness of polymeric hydro - gels . Macromolecules , 36 ( 12 ) , 4582 – 4588 . 110 . Korff , T . , & Augustin , H . G . ( 1999 ) . Tensional forces in ﬁbrillar extracellular matrices control directional capillary sprouting . Journal of Cell Science , 112 ( Pt 19 ) , 3249 – 3258 . 111 . Kumar , S . , Maxwell , I . Z . , Heisterkamp , A . , Polte , T . R . , Lele , T . P . , Salanga , M . , Mazur , E . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Viscoelastic retraction of single living stress ﬁbers and its impact on cell shape , cytoskeletal organization , and extra - cellular matrix mechanics . Biophysical Journal , 90 ( 10 ) , 3762 – 3773 . 112 . Langer , R . , & Vacanti , J . P . ( 1993 ) . Tissue engineering . Science , 260 ( 5110 ) , 920 – 926 . 113 . Lee , K . Y . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 2001 ) . Hydrogels for tissue engineering . Chemical Reviews , 101 ( 7 ) , 1869 – 1879 . 114 . Lehoux , S . , Esposito , B . , Merval , R . , & Tedgui , A . ( 2005 ) . Differential regulation of vascular focal adhesion kinase by steady stretch and pulsatility . Circulation , 111 ( 5 ) , 643 – 649 . 115 . Lehoux , S . , & Tedgui , A . ( 1998 ) . Signal transduction of mechanical stresses in the vascular wall . Hypertension , 32 ( 2 ) , 338 – 345 . 116 . Li , C . , & Xu , Q . ( 2000 ) . Mechanical stress - initiated signal transductions in vascular smooth muscle cells . Cell Signal , 12 ( 7 ) , 435 – 445 . 117 . Lin , Y . C . , Ho , C . H . , & Grinnell , F . ( 1998 ) . Decreased PDGF receptor kinase activity in ﬁbroblasts contracting stressed collagen matrices . Experimental Cell Research , 240 ( 2 ) , 377 – 387 . 118 . Liu , V . A . , & Bhatia , S . N . ( 2002 ) . Three - dimensional photopatterning of hydrogels containing living cells . Bio - medical Microdevices , 4 ( 4 ) , 257 – 266 . 119 . Liu , B . P . , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , & Burridge , K . ( 1998 ) . Microtubule depolymerization induces stress ﬁbers , focal adhesions , and DNA synthesis via the GTP - binding protein Rho . Cell Adhesion and Communication , 5 ( 4 ) , 249 – 255 . 120 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophysical Journal , 79 ( 1 ) , 144 – 152 . 121 . Maniotis , A . J . , Chen , C . S . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1997 ) . Demonstration of mechanical connections between inte - grins , cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , and nucleoplasm that stabi - lize nuclear structure . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 94 ( 3 ) , 849 – 854 . 122 . Mann , B . K . , Gobin , A . S . , Tsai , A . T . , Schmedlen , R . H . , & West , J . L . ( 2001 ) . Smooth muscle cell growth in photopo - lymerized hydrogels with cell adhesive and proteolytically degradable domains : synthetic ECM analogs for tissue engineering . Biomaterials , 22 ( 22 ) , 3045 – 3051 . 123 . Mann , B . K . , & West , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Cell adhesion peptides alter smooth muscle cell adhesion , proliferation , migration , and matrix protein synthesis on modiﬁed surfaces and in polymer scaffolds . Journal of Biomedical Material Research , 60 ( 1 ) , 86 – 93 . 124 . Martens , P . J . , Bryant , S . J . , & Anseth , K . S . ( 2003 ) . Tai - loring the degradation of hydrogels formed from multivinyl poly ( ethylene glycol ) and poly ( vinyl alcohol ) macromers for cartilage tissue engineering . Biomacromolecules , 4 ( 2 ) , 283 – 292 . 125 . Matthews , B . D . , Overby , D . R . , Mannix , R . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2006 ) . Cellular adaptation to mechanical stress : Role Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 317 of integrins , Rho , cytoskeletal tension and mechanosensi - tive ion channels . Journal of Cell Science , 119 ( Pt 3 ) , 508 – 518 . 126 . McBeath , R . , Pirone , D . M . , Nelson , C . M . , Bhadriraju , K . , & Chen , C . S . ( 2004 ) . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Develop - mental Cell , 6 ( 4 ) , 483 – 495 . 127 . Mooney , D . , Hansen , L . , Vacanti , J . , Langer , R . , Farmer , S . , & Ingber , D . ( 1992 ) . Switching from differentiation to growth in hepatocytes : Control by extracellular matrix . Journal of Cell Physiology , 151 ( 3 ) , 497 – 505 . 128 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . , & Dembo , M . ( 2001 ) . Traction force microscopy of migrating normal and H - ras transformed 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Biophysical Journal , 80 ( 4 ) , 1744 – 1757 . 129 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . L . , & Dembo , M . ( 2001 ) . Distinct roles of frontal and rear cell - substrate adhesions in ﬁbro - blast migration . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 12 ( 12 ) , 3947 – 3954 . 130 . Nehls , V . , & Herrmann , R . ( 1996 ) . The conﬁguration of ﬁbrin clots determines capillary morphogenesis and endo - thelial cell migration . Microvascular Research , 51 ( 3 ) , 347 – 364 . 131 . Netti , P . A . , Berk , D . A . , Swartz , M . A . , Grodzinsky , A . J . , & Jain , R . K . ( 2000 ) . Role of extracellular matrix assembly in interstitial transport in solid tumors . Cancer Research , 60 ( 9 ) , 2497 – 2503 . 132 . Nguyen , K . T . , & West , J . L . ( 2002 ) . Photopolymerizable hydrogels for tissue engineering applications . Biomaterials , 23 ( 22 ) , 4307 – 4314 . 133 . Nicolas , A . , Geiger , B . , & Safran , S . A . ( 2004 ) . Cell mechanosensitivity controls the anisotropy of focal adhe - sions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 101 ( 34 ) , 12520 – 12525 . 134 . Nikolovski , J . , Kim , B . S . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Cyclic strain inhibits switching of smooth muscle cells to an osteoblast - like phenotype . FASEB Journal , 17 , 455 – 457 . 135 . Nobes , C . D . , & Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell , 81 ( 1 ) , 53 – 62 . 136 . Numaguchi , K . , Eguchi , S . , Yamakawa , T . , Motley , E . D . , & Inagami , T . ( 1999 ) . Mechanotransduction of rat aortic vas - cular smooth muscle cells requires RhoA and intact actin ﬁlaments . Circulation Research , 85 ( 1 ) , 5 – 11 . 137 . Ogut , O . , & Brozovich , F . V . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of force in vascular smooth muscle . Journal of Molecular Cellular Cardiology , 35 ( 4 ) , 347 – 355 . 138 . Oldberg , A . , Franzen , A . , & Heinegard , D . ( 1986 ) . Cloning and sequence analysis of rat bone sialoprotein ( osteopon - tin ) . cDNA reveals an Arg - Gly - Asp cell - binding sequence . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 83 ( 23 ) , 8819 – 8823 . 139 . Opas , M . ( 1989 ) . Expression of the differentiated pheno - type by epithelial cells in vitro is regulated by both bio - chemistry and mechanics of the substratum . Developmental Biology , 131 ( 2 ) , 281 – 293 . 140 . Palazzo , A . F . , Cook , T . A . , Alberts , A . S . , & Gundersen , G . G . ( 2001 ) . mDia mediates Rho - regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules . Nature Cell Biology , 3 ( 8 ) , 723 – 729 . 141 . Palecek , S . P . , Loftus , J . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Lauffen - burger , D . A . , & Horwitz , A . F . ( 1997 ) . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature , 385 ( 6616 ) , 537 – 540 . 142 . Paszek , M . J . , & Weaver , V . M . ( 2004 ) . The tension mounts : mechanics meets morphogenesis and malignancy . Journal of Mammary Gland Biology and Neoplasia , 9 ( 4 ) , 325 – 342 . 143 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , Hammer , D . A . , & Weaver , V . M . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell , 8 ( 3 ) , 241 – 254 . 144 . Pelham , R . J . Jr . , & Wang , Y . ( 1997 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 94 ( 25 ) , 13661 – 13665 . 145 . Pelham , R . J . Jr . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 1998 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by the mechanical prop - erties of the substrate . Biological Bulletin , 194 ( 3 ) , 348 – 349 ; discussion 349 – 350 . 146 . Petersen , O . W . , Ronnov - Jessen , L . , Howlett , A . R . , & Bissell , M . J . ( 1992 ) . Interaction with basement mem - brane serves to rapidly distinguish growth and differentia - tion pattern of normal and malignant human breast epithelial cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 89 ( 19 ) , 9064 – 9068 . 147 . Petit , V . , & Thiery , J . P . ( 2000 ) . Focal adhesions : Structure and dynamics . Biologie Cellulaire , 92 ( 7 ) , 477 – 494 . 148 . Peyton , S . R . , & Putnam , A . J . ( 2005 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity governs smooth muscle cell motility in a biphasic fashion . Journal of Cell Physiology , 204 ( 1 ) , 198 – 209 . 149 . Peyton , S . R . , Raub , C . B . , Keschrumrus , V . P . , & Putnam , A . J . ( 2006 ) . The use of poly ( ethylene glycol ) hydrogels to investigate the impact of ECM chemistry and mechanics on smooth muscle cells . Biomaterials , 27 ( 28 ) , 4881 – 4893 . 150 . Pierschbacher , M . D . , Ruoslahti , E . , Sundelin , J . , Lind , P . , & Peterson , P . A . ( 1982 ) . The cell attachment domain of ﬁbronectin . Determination of the primary structure . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 257 ( 16 ) , 9593 – 9597 . 151 . Polte , T . R . , Eichler , G . S . , Wang , N . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2004 ) . Extracellular matrix controls myosin light chain phosphorylation and cell contractility through modulation of cell shape and cytoskeletal prestress . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 286 ( 3 ) , C518 – C528 . 152 . Powell , C . A . , Smiley , B . L . , Mills , J . , & Vandenburgh , H . H . ( 2002 ) . Mechanical stimulation improves tissue - engineered human skeletal muscle . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 283 ( 5 ) , C1557 – C1565 . 153 . Putnam , A . J . , Cunningham , J . J . , Dennis , R . G . , Linder - man , J . J . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Microtubule assembly is regulated by externally applied strain in cultured smooth muscle cells . Journal of Cell Science , 111 ( Pt 22 ) , 3379 – 3387 . 154 . Putnam , A . J . , Cunningham , J . J . , Pillemer , B . B . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 2003 ) . External mechanical strain regulates membrane targeting of Rho GTPases by controlling microtubule assembly . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 284 ( 3 ) , C627 – C639 . 155 . Putnam , A . J . , Schultz , K . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 2001 ) . Control of microtubule assembly by extracellular matrix and exter - nally applied strain . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 280 ( 3 ) , C556 – C564 . 156 . Pytela , R . , Pierschbacher , M . D . , Argraves , S . , Suzuki , S . , & Ruoslahti , E . ( 1987 ) . Arginine - glycine - aspartic acid adhe - sion receptors . Methods Enzymology , 144 , 475 – 489 . 157 . Raeber , G . P . , Lutolf , M . P . , & Hubbell , J . A . ( 2005 ) . Molecularly engineered PEG hydrogels : A novel model system for proteolytically mediated cell migration . Bio - physical Journal , 89 ( 2 ) , 1374 – 1388 . 318 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 158 . Ratcliffe , A . , & Niklason , L . E . ( 2002 ) . Bioreactors and bioprocessing for tissue engineering . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 961 , 210 – 215 . 159 . Ren , X . D . , Kiosses , W . B . , & Schwartz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton . EMBO Journal , 18 ( 3 ) , 578 – 585 . 160 . Reusch , P . , Wagdy , H . , Reusch , R . , Wilson , E . , & Ives , H . E . ( 1996 ) . Mechanical strain increases smooth muscle and decreases nonmuscle myosin expression in rat vascular smooth muscle cells . Circulation Research , 79 ( 5 ) , 1046 – 1053 . 161 . Reyes , C . D . , & Garcia , A . J . ( 2004 ) . Alpha2beta1 integrin - speciﬁc collagen - mimetic surfaces supporting osteoblastic differentiation . Journal of Biomedical Materials Research A , 69 ( 4 ) , 591 – 600 . 162 . Rezania , A . , & Healy , K . E . ( 1999 ) . Integrin subunits responsible for adhesion of human osteoblast - like cells to biomimetic peptide surfaces . Journal of Orthopedic Research , 17 ( 4 ) , 615 – 623 . 163 . Rowley , J . A . , Madlambayan , G . , & Mooney , D . J . ( 1999 ) . Alginate hydrogels as synthetic extracellular matrix mate - rials . Biomaterials , 20 ( 1 ) , 45 – 53 . 164 . Ruoslahti , E . , & Pierschbacher , M . D . ( 1987 ) . New per - spectives in cell adhesion : RGD and integrins . Science , 238 ( 4826 ) , 491 – 497 . 165 . Sastry , S . K . , & Burridge , K . ( 2000 ) . Focal adhesions : A nexus for intracellular signaling and cytoskeletal dynamics . Experimental Cell Research , 261 ( 1 ) , 25 – 36 . 166 . Schoenwaelder , S . M . , & Burridge , K . ( 1999 ) . Bidirectional signaling between the cytoskeleton and integrins . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 11 ( 2 ) , 274 – 286 . 167 . Shemesh , T . , Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . D . , & Kozlov , M . M . ( 2005 ) . Focal adhesions as mechanosensors : A physical mechanism . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 ( 35 ) , 12383 – 12388 . 168 . Shyy , J . Y . , & Chien , S . ( 1997 ) . Role of integrins in cellular responses to mechanical stress and adhesion . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 9 ( 5 ) , 707 – 713 . 169 . Shyy , J . Y . , & Chien , S . ( 2002 ) . Role of integrins in endo - thelial mechanosensing of shear stress . Circulation Research , 91 ( 9 ) , 769 – 775 . 170 . Sieminski , A . L . , Hebbel , R . P . , & Gooch , K . J . ( 2004 ) . The relative magnitudes of endothelial force generation and matrix stiffness modulate capillary morphogenesis in vitro . Experimental Cell Research , 297 ( 2 ) , 574 – 584 . 171 . Sikavitsas , V . I . , Temenoff , J . S . , & Mikos , A . G . ( 2001 ) . Biomaterials and bone mechanotransduction . Biomaterials , 22 ( 19 ) , 2581 – 2593 . 172 . Sordella , R . , Jiang , W . , Chen , G . C . , Curto , M . , & Settle - man , J . ( 2003 ) . Modulation of Rho GTPase signaling reg - ulates a switch between adipogenesis and myogenesis . Cell , 113 ( 2 ) , 147 – 158 . 173 . Staatz , W . D . , Fok , K . F . , Zutter , M . M . , Adams , S . P . , Rodriguez , B . A . , & Santoro , S . A . ( 1991 ) . Identiﬁcation of a tetrapeptide recognition sequence for the alpha 2 beta 1 integrin in collagen . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 266 ( 12 ) , 7363 – 7367 . 174 . Stamenovic , D . , Fredberg , J . J . , Wang , N . , Butler , J . P . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1996 ) . A microstructural approach to cyto - skeletal mechanics based on tensegrity . Journal of Theo - retical Biology , 181 ( 2 ) , 125 – 136 . 175 . Stamenovic , D . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2002 ) . Models of cyto - skeletal mechanics of adherent cells . Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology , 1 ( 1 ) , 95 – 108 . 176 . Stamenovic , D . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Chen , J . , & Wang , N . ( 2002 ) . Cell prestress . II . Contribution of microtubules . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 282 ( 3 ) , C617 – C624 . 177 . Stegemann , J . P . , Hong , H . , & Nerem , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical , biochemical , and extracellular matrix effects on vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype . Journal of Applied Physiology , 98 ( 6 ) , 2321 – 2327 . 178 . Stegemann , J . P . , & Nerem , R . M . ( 2003 ) . Phenotype modulation in vascular tissue engineering using biochemical and mechanical stimulation . Annals of Biomedical Engi - neering , 31 ( 4 ) , 391 – 402 . 179 . Thyberg , J . ( 1998 ) . Phenotypic modulation of smooth muscle cells during formation of neointimal thickenings following vascular injury . Histology and Histopathology , 13 ( 3 ) , 871 – 891 . 180 . Thyberg , J . , Blomgren , K . , Hedin , U . , & Dryjski , M . ( 1995 ) . Phenotypic modulation of smooth muscle cells during the formation of neointimal thickenings in the rat carotid artery after balloon injury : an electron - microscopic and stereolo - gical study . Cell Tissue Research , 281 ( 3 ) , 421 – 433 . 181 . Turner , C . H . , & Pavalko , F . M . ( 1998 ) . Mechanotrans - duction and functional response of the skeleton to physical stress : The mechanisms and mechanics of bone adaptation . Journal of Orthopedic Science , 3 ( 6 ) , 346 – 355 . 182 . Urech , L . , Bittermann , A . G . , Hubbell , J . A . , & Hall , H . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical properties , proteolytic degradability and biological modiﬁcations affect angiogenic process extension into native and modiﬁed ﬁbrin matrices in vitro . Biomate - rials , 26 ( 12 ) , 1369 – 1379 . 183 . Vailhe , B . , Lecomte , M . , Wiernsperger , N . , & Tranqui , L . ( 1998 ) . The formation of tubular structures by endothelial cells is under the control of ﬁbrinolysis and mechanical factors . Angiogenesis , 2 ( 4 ) , 331 – 344 . 184 . Walker , G . A . , Masters , K . S . , Shah , D . N . , Anseth , K . S . , & Leinwand , L . A . ( 2004 ) . Valvular myoﬁbroblast activation by transforming growth factor - beta : Implications for path - ological extracellular matrix remodeling in heart valve dis - ease . Circulation Research , 95 ( 3 ) , 253 – 260 . 185 . Wang , Y . , Botvinick , E . L . , Zhao , Y . , Berns , M . W . , Usami , S . , Tsien , R . Y . , & Chien , S . ( 2005 ) . Visualizing the mechanical activation of Src . Nature , 434 ( 7036 ) , 1040 – 1045 . 186 . Wang , N . , Butler , J . P . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 1993 ) . Mechano - transduction across the cell surface and through the cyto - skeleton . Science , 260 ( 5111 ) , 1124 – 1127 . 187 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , Hanks , S . K . , & Wang , Y . ( 2001 ) . Focal adhesion kinase is involved in mechanosensing during ﬁbroblast migration . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 98 ( 20 ) , 11295 – 11300 . 188 . Wang , N . , Naruse , K . , Stamenovic , D . , Fredberg , J . J . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Polte , T . , Mannix , R . , & Ingber , D . E . ( 2001 ) . Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 98 ( 14 ) , 7765 – 7770 . 189 . Wang , N . , & Stamenovic , D . ( 2002 ) . Mechanics of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility , 23 ( 5 – 6 ) , 535 – 540 . 190 . Wang , N . , & Suo , Z . ( 2005 ) . Long - distance propagation of forces in a cell . Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communication , 328 ( 4 ) , 1133 – 1138 . 191 . Wang , N . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Chen , J . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Butler , J . P . , Fredberg , J . J . , & Stamenovic , D . ( 2002 ) . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320 319 in adherent contractile cells . American Journal of Physiology Cell Physiology , 282 ( 3 ) , C606 – C616 . 192 . Wang , F . , Weaver , V . M . , Petersen , O . W . , Larabell , C . A . , Dedhar , S . , Briand , P . , Lupu , R . , & Bissell , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Reciprocal interactions between beta1 - integrin and epi - dermal growth factor receptor in three - dimensional base - ment membrane breast cultures : a different perspective in epithelial biology . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 95 ( 25 ) , 14821 – 14826 . 193 . Weaver , V . M . , Petersen , O . W . , Wang , F . , Larabell , C . A . , Briand , P . , Damsky , C . , & Bissell , M . J . ( 1997 ) . Reversion of the malignant phenotype of human breast cells in three - dimensional culture and in vivo by integrin blocking anti - bodies . Journal of Cell Biology , 137 ( 1 ) , 231 – 245 . 194 . Wehrle - Haller , B . , & Imhof , B . ( 2002 ) . The inner lives of focal adhesions . Trends in Cell Biology , 12 ( 8 ) , 382 – 389 . 195 . Wilson , E . , Sudhir , K . & Ives , H . E . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical strain of rat vascular smooth muscle cells is sensed by spe - ciﬁc extracellular matrix / integrin interactions . Journal of Clinical Investigation , 96 ( 5 ) , 2364 – 2372 . 196 . Wittmann , T . , & Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2001 ) . Cell motility : Can Rho GTPases and microtubules point the way ? . Journal of Cell Science , 114 ( Pt 21 ) , 3795 – 3803 . 197 . Wolff , J . ( 1992 ) . Das Gasetz der Transformation der Kno - chen . Berlin : Verlag August Hirschwald . 198 . Wong , J . Y . , Velasco , A . , Rajagopalan , P . , & Pham , Q . ( 2003 ) . Directed movement of vascular smooth muscle cells on gradient - compliant hydrogels . Langmuir , 19 ( 5 ) , 1908 – 1913 . 199 . Wozniak , M . A . , Desai , R . , Solski , P . A . , Der , C . J . , & Keely , P . J . ( 2003 ) . ROCK - generated contractility regulates breast epithelial cell differentiation in response to the physical properties of a three - dimensional collagen matrix . Journal of Cell Biology , 163 ( 3 ) , 583 – 595 . 200 . Wozniak , M . A . , Modzelewska , K . , Kwong , L . , & Keely , P . J . ( 2004 ) . Focal adhesion regulation of cell behavior . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta , 1692 ( 2 – 3 ) , 103 – 119 . 201 . Yeung , T . , Georges , P . C . , Flanagan , L . A . , Marg , B . , Ortiz , M . , Funaki , M . , Zahir , N . , Ming , W . , Weaver , V . , & Janmey , P . A . ( 2005 ) . Effects of substrate stiffness on cell mor - phology , cytoskeletal structure , and adhesion . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 60 ( 1 ) , 24 – 34 . 202 . Zaari , N . , Rajagopalan , P . , Kim , S . K . , Engler , A . J . , & Wong , J . Y . ( 2004 ) . Photopolymerization in microﬂuidic gradient generators : Microscale control of substrate com - pliance to manipulate cell response . Advanced Materials , 16 ( 23 – 24 ) , 2133 . 203 . Zaman , M . H . , Kamm , R . D . , Matsudaira , P . , & Lauffen - burger , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Computational model for cell migra - tion in three - dimensional matrices . Biophysical Journal , 89 ( 2 ) , 1389 – 1397 . 204 . Zaman , M . H . , Trapani , L . M . , Siemeski , A . , Mackellar , D . , Gong , H . , Kamm , R . D . , Wells , A . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , & Matsudaira , P . ( 2006 ) . Migration of tumor cells in 3D matrices is governed by matrix stiffness along with cell - matrix adhesion and proteolysis . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 103 ( 29 ) , 10889 – 10894 . 205 . Zhang , Q . , Magnusson , M . K . , & Mosher , D . F . ( 1997 ) . Lysophosphatidic acid and microtubule - destabilizing agents stimulate ﬁbronectin matrix assembly through Rho - depen - dent actin stress ﬁber formation and cell contraction . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 8 ( 8 ) , 1415 – 1425 . 206 . Zhong , C . , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , Brown , J . , Shaub , A . , Belkin , A . M . , & Burridge , K . ( 1998 ) . Rho - mediated contractility exposes a cryptic site in ﬁbronectin and induces ﬁbronectin matrix assembly . Journal of Cell Biology , 141 ( 2 ) , 539 – 551 . 320 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2007 ) 47 : 300 – 320